
JOHN SEARLE

Continuum Contemporary American Thinkers
The Continuum Contemporary American Thinkers series offers concise and accessi-
ble introductions to the most important and influential thinkers at work in philosophy 
today. Designed specifically to meet the needs of students and readers encountering 
these thinkers for the first time, these informative books provide a coherent overview 
and analysis of each thinker’s vital contribution to the field of philosophy. The 
series is the ideal companion to the study of these most inspiring and challenging of 
thinkers
Daniel Dennett, David L. Thompson 
Hilary Putnam, Lance P. Hickey 
Saul Kripke, Arif Ahmed

JOHN SEARLE
JOSHUA RUST

Continuum International Publishing Group
The Tower Building 
80 Maiden Lane
11 York Road 
Suite 704
London SE1 7NX 
New York NY 10038
www.continuumbooks.com
© Joshua Rust 2009
All rights reserved.  No part of this publication may be reproduced or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, 
including photocopying, recording, or any information storage or retrieval 
system, without prior permission in writing from the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
ISBN: HB: 978-0-8264-9751-2
 
PB: 978-0-8264-9752-9
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Rust, Joshua.
John Searle / Joshua Rust.
p. cm.
ISBN-13: 978-0-8264-9751-2 (HB)
ISBN-10: 0-8264-9751-9 (HB)
ISBN-13: 978-0-8264-9752-9 (pbk.)
ISBN-10: 0-8264-9752-7 (pbk.)
1. Searle, John R. I. Title.
B1649.S264R87 2009
191–dc22
2009005987
Typeset by Newgen Imaging Systems Pvt Ltd, Chennai, India
Printed and bound in Great Britain by MPG Books Ltd, 
Bodmin, Cornwall

For my mother, father, Dan, and Jon

This page intentionally left blank 

vii
CONTENTS
Acknowledgments 
ix
Introduction 
1
1. Fundamental Ontology: External Realism and 
Scientific Naturalism 
3
External Realism 
5
Scientific Naturalism 
8
Conceptual Relativity and Searle’s Scientific Naturalism 
11
2. Consciousness and Materialist Theories of Mind  
15
Searle’s Foil: Materialist Theories of Mind 
16
Searle’s Critiques of Materialist Theories of Mind 
18
Searle’s Answer to the Mind-Body Problem: 
Biological Naturalism 
26
3. Intentional Mental States 
32
An Imperfect Analogy: Intentional Content as a Model 
33
Psychological Modes 
36
Extending the Theory 
41
4. Reason and Action 
46
Three Senses of the Word “Because” 
47
Anscombe on the Force of the “Becausec” 
48
Davidson on the Force of the “Becausee” 
50
Searle’s Account of Action in Intentionality 
51
Searle’s Account of Action in Rationality in Action 
54
Freedom and Scientific Naturalism: The Ontological 
Question 
64

viii
CONTENTS
5. From Acts to Speech Acts: The Intention to Communicate  
66
Two Conceptions of Meaning: Speech Acts and 
the Communication-Intention Theorists 
67
What Distinguishes Speech Acts from Other 
Kinds of Action? Introduction to the Illocutionary 
Intentions 
73
The First Illocutionary Condition of a Speech Act 
74
The Second Illocutionary Condition of a Speech Act 
78
The Third Illocutionary Condition of a Speech Act 
78
Searle’s Gricean Model of Illocutionary Acts: Summary 
81
6. From Sounds to Words: The Intention to Represent  
83
Austin and Searle on Speech Acts 
83
Perlocutionary Intentions and the Sincerity Condition 
89
From Sounds to Words: The Bridge from the Speaker’s 
Illocutionary Intention to the Hearer’s Understanding 
94
A Taxonomy of Speech Acts 
100
7. On the Meaning of Meaning: Critical Remarks  
107
A New Conception of Meaning 
107
Is Searle’s Original Criticism of Grice Compelling? 
113
Is Searle’s Criticism of Searle Compelling? 
116
8. The Construction of Social Reality  
119
Acts That Achieve Their Aims by Conventional Means 
119
Institutional Facts 
121
The Creation of Institutional Facts 
131
On the Codifiability of Deontic Powers: A Criticism 
134
9. Topics Concerning Institutional Reality: Reasons, 
Language, Politics, and the Background  
136
Desire-Independent Reasons for Action 
136
Institutional Reality, Language, and Normativity 
138
Institutional and Political Reality 
143
The Background 
144
Notes 
154
Bibliography 
167
Index 
171

ix
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Thanks to those who students participated in my seminar on John 
Searle at Stetson University in the fall of 2008. Special thanks to my 
colleagues at Stetson, Ronald Hall and Susan Peppers-Bates, and to 
those who helped me edit the manuscript, including Kim Bowen and 
especially Marijana Weiner.
Joshua Rust, Stetson University

This page intentionally left blank 

1
INTRODUCTION
Philosopher David Papineau writes of John R. Searle, “Whenever he 
is faced with a conflict between common sense and arcane philo-
sophical doctrine, he backs common sense every time.”1 While com-
mon sense would have us take science seriously, for Searle that 
commitment must be reconciled with an equally profound commit-
ment to, for example, the reality of our mental lives or the experience 
of our acting freely. Searle challenges, with the zeal of a journali-
stic muckraker, those philosophers who would deny these mundane 
features of our lived experience. His prose is scrappy and clear, 
pulsing with intellectual joy. In the introduction to Intentionality, 
Searle writes, “Where questions of style and exposition are concerned 
I try to follow a simple maxim: if you can’t say it clearly you don’t 
understand it yourself.”2 His defense of common sense is coupled 
with a no-nonsense approach to the exhibition and resolution of 
philosophical quandaries.
Searle was born in Denver, Colorado, in 1932 to a mother who was 
a medical doctor and a father who was an electrical engineer. He 
attended an experimental John Dewey High School in New York 
before graduating from Shorewood High School in Wisconsin. As a 
college student he attended the University of Wisconsin before pur-
suing a graduate degree at Oxford, where he studied with John Aus-
tin, Peter Strawson, and Jim Urmson. Over the course of his seven 
years at Oxford he received both his B. A. and Ph. D. in philosophy. 
He met his wife, Dagmar, in Austin’s office, while he was a research 
lecturer at Christ College. In 1959, it was Austin who helped him get 
an assistant professorship at the University of California at Berkeley. 
Today he is the Mills Professor of Philosophy of Mind and Language 
at that same institution.
The breadth of John Searle’s corpus is astonishing. Any treatment 
of his output faces the challenge of bringing a varied set of topics 

INTRODUCTION
2
under a coherent narrative. To date, overviews of Searle’s work tend 
to track his intellectual development—beginning with the philoso-
phy of language, moving to the philosophy of mind, and concluding 
with his investigation into institutional reality. This sequence is shaped 
by factors besides that of intellectual perspicuity, including Searle’s 
responsiveness to a changing philosophical climate. 
However, this book proceeds conceptually,3 rather than chronolo-
gically, beginning with an investigation into the most general features 
of Searle’s ontological and methodological commitments.
Chapter 1 outlines Searle’s metaphysical framework. There is 
one world, independent of us, consisting of particles in fields of 
force. A philosophical question typically concerns the status of facts 
that are not easily reconcilable with this basic ontology: subjective 
qualitative experience, intentional mental states, actions, rationality, 
freedom, language, and social reality. Searle’s questions, at least as 
articulated in the latter half of his career,4 are roughly those asked by 
Scientific Naturalists—metaphysicians working in the twilight of the 
linguistic turn.
What distinguishes Searle from many of his intellectual peers, 
then, are the answers he gives to these questions, the methods by 
which he generates these answers, and their broad scope. The key-
stone of Searle’s philosophical program lies in the notion of inten-
tionality. Searle’s central task involves reconciling mind with body; 
he has to show that intentionality is not at odds with his ontological 
commitment to Scientific Naturalism. Chapters 2 and 3 review this 
attempt.
Once a naturalized notion of intentionality is in hand, Searle is in 
a position to resolve a number of otherwise pressing philosophical 
problems. Chapter 4 looks at the way his notion of intentionality can 
be used to distinguish action from mere behavior. Similarly, Chapters 
5, 6, and 7 display the way in which Searle leverages certain pro-
perties of an intentional state to helpfully account for speech actions, 
without collapsing the latter into mere actions, or cases of natural 
meaning, or blind causal processes. Finally Chapters 8 and 9 show 
how speech acts are a special case of institutional phenomena in 
general. Thus, the explanatory strategies employed in accounting 
for meaning can be generalized to account for a variety of socially 
constructed facts.
While this text is primarily exegetical, some critical assessment of 
Searle’s views can be found in the final three chapters.

3
CHAPTER 1
FUNDAMENTAL ONTOLOGY: EXTERNAL 
REALISM AND SCIENTIFIC NATURALISM
Bumping around in the world as we do, we develop certain expectations 
about how things work. After not having eaten for several hours, 
I expect to be hungry. I expect no cross traffic when the signal is 
green. Upon picking up a ringing phone, I expect there to be some-
one on the line. These expectations are based on real, but not indeli-
ble patterns; they are, moreover, entrenched, so that their violation 
might prompt genuine surprise and puzzlement. I have not eaten in 
eight hours—why am I not hungry? Did the other driver not see the 
red light? Why did the phone ring? 
These expectations develop quite naturally as a person comes to 
have more and more experience with the world. But other expecta-
tions become entrenched as the result of systematic inquiry. Chem-
ists recently discovered that the limestone blocks which constitute the 
Pyramids at Giza exhibit surprising chemical structures: observed 
traces of rapid chemical reaction, in place of natural crystallization, 
are incomprehensible if the stones were quarried (given the chemical 
theories that account for the development of these stones).1 No natu-
ral limestone has been discovered that exhibits the microproperties 
found in at least some of the blocks that compose the pyramids; they 
contain, for example, an unusual amount of silicon. These particular 
blocks also uniformly exhibit a higher mass on one side and air bub-
bles near the other. What explains these anomalies? A background 
theory, and the expectations it implies, are conditions against which 
requests for explanation gain traction.2 If these blocks were poured 
from a limestone concrete solution, rather than quarried, these pro-
perties are explicable. This study concludes that many of the pyramid’s 

JOHN SEARLE
4
blocks appear, not to be cut, but formed from a kind of limestone 
cement.
Philosophers, including Searle, are likewise in the business of both 
recognizing and resolving puzzles. Philosophical puzzles are expla-
natory puzzles, and so imply a background theory against which 
certain phenomena come to appear as anomalous. If chemical and 
geological theories give rise to puzzlement concerning the microstr-
ucture of certain blocks found in the Giza pyramids, Searle wonders 
how certain phenomena—including meaning and consciousness—
are likewise compatible with the findings of science. Searle opens his 
book, The Construction of Social Reality, with a general claim about 
the kinds of philosophical problems that interest him.
We live in exactly one world, not two or three or seventeen. As 
far as we currently know, the most fundamental features of that 
world are as described by physics, chemistry, and the other natural 
sciences. But the existence of phenomena that are not in any obvi-
ous way physical or chemical gives rise to puzzlement. How, for 
example, can there be states of consciousness or meaningful 
speech acts as parts of the physical world? Many of the philo-
sophical problems that most interest me have to do with how the 
various parts of the world relate to each other—how does it all 
hang together?—and much of my work in philosophy has been 
addressed to these questions.3 
Just as an absence of crystallization in certain limestone blocks defies 
expectations codified in chemical theory, the philosophical puzzles 
that interest Searle gain traction against his strong endorsement of a 
scientific metaphysics. The chemists did not conclude that these 
anomalous chemical configurations falsify chemical theory; rather, 
they told a story about how these traces could be rendered com-
patible with our current scientific theories. The story is that the 
blocks were poured, not quarried. Chemical theory is part of the 
theoretical base against which scientific problems are identified. 
This base consists of a set of theories or paradigms that embody a 
shared set of empirical expectations. Similarly, to Searle’s eye, the 
presence of language and consciousness seems prima facie incompa-
tible with the world as construed by the natural sciences. And Searle, 
like the chemists, wants to tell a story about how one can endorse 

FUNDAMENTAL ONTOLOGY
5
the scientific outlook while simultaneously accounting for these 
philosophical anomalies. In short, he wants to explain how it all 
hangs together. 
EXTERNAL REALISM
We access the world by way of mental representation—visual percep-
tion, touch, taste, sound, and smell. We might say that our experience 
of the world is always mediated by a cognitive apparatus. What 
explains these conscious experiences and representations? 
On the one hand, realists, including Searle, want to say that these 
experiences are caused by an external reality which is logically inde-
pendent of those experiences and representations. 
On the other hand, skeptics and idealists see no independent evi-
dence for a reality that exists independent of our mental states. If all 
of our experiences are mediated, it seems irresponsible to posit an 
additional, representation-independent world. We smile when we see 
a cat at the side of a television, intent on catching the object which 
disappeared off the side of the screen. We of course understand that 
there is nothing behind the representation on the screen—at least 
nothing like the object displayed. Similarly, a skeptic might contend 
that there is nothing independent of the wall of representation which 
constitutes our experience. They might observe with amusement the 
realist’s pawing for a world claimed to exist independently of any-
one’s experience. 
Searle vehemently disagrees with this view, whose supporters 
include Bishop Berkeley. Berkeley writes “All the choir of heaven and 
furniture of the earth, in a word all those bodies which compose the 
mighty frame of the world, have not any subsistence without a 
mind.”4 Bertrand Russell is also among Searle’s targets. Scientific 
truths are not, according to Russell, basic truths; they are rather sim-
ply configurations of conscious experience or sense-data. As such, 
Russell treats the external world as a kind of postulation—a “logical 
fiction” or a paraphrase of a series of phenomenological experiences 
bound by relations of similarity and continuous change.5
Searle retorts: the fact that the world is mediated by a cognitive 
apparatus (an epistemic point) need not imply that the world itself 
is somehow logically dependent on those experiences (a metaphy-
sical point). The existence of the universe does not depend on the 

JOHN SEARLE
6
experience of any being within that universe. Or, as Searle has 
it, “there is a real world that exists completely independent of us, 
that doesn’t give a damn about us.”6 He calls this view “External 
Realism.”
While External Realism is intuitively compelling, Searle also rec-
ognizes that it is impossible to verify empirically. We can corroborate 
empirical claims by citing independent evidence for their truth. Both 
a tripped circuit breaker and a general power outage might explain 
why the electricity suddenly cut off in my apartment, but only the 
second explanation explains why my neighbors are also without 
power. Only a general power outage can explain this independent 
fact. We saw this in the pyramid example. The lack of a crystalline 
structure in certain limestone blocks is already strong evidence 
that the blocks were poured rather than quarried. But this alone 
is inconclusive. The further fact that they exhibit a certain density 
profile corroborates this conclusion. However, the more global 
claim that there persists a reality which is independent of our repre-
sentations cannot be corroborated in this way; the very terms in 
which the question is phrased precludes some sort of independent 
verification. 
We have conscious experience. What explains this experience? 
External Realists want to posit a representation-independent reality 
as a significant part of the explanation. But because both realists and 
skeptics agree that access to this putative reality would anyway be 
mediated by consciousness, skeptics see no corroborating evidence 
for External Realism. There is, in short, no way to get behind our 
experience so as to independently demonstrate an autonomous, 
physical world. 
Searle wants to argue for the existence of a mind-independent 
reality. But such a reality cannot be treated as just another factual 
claim, along the lines of the poured limestone blocks. Searle thus 
offers a transcendental argument for the existence of a mind-
independent reality.7 Transcendental arguments argue back from a 
factual conviction to its preconditions. He argues, in short, that 
in communicating factual claims we are already presupposing the 
existence of a mind-independent reality.
More specifically, the idea seems to be as follows: Assertions 
can be true or false. (1) “Pyramid blocks have a peculiar microphy-
sical structure” and (2) “The world exists independently of our 

FUNDAMENTAL ONTOLOGY
7
representations” seem to be two instances of assertion. Thus, without 
evidence to the contrary, the idealist or skeptic might be justified 
in thinking that (2) is false just as further inquiry might lead one 
to discover (1) to be false. Searle’s response is to deny that, in spite 
of appearances, (2) is a case of genuine assertion. “Rather, (2) is a 
presupposition of (1). Additionally, (2) is a presupposition of other 
assertions about publically accessible phenomena.” If such asser-
tions are true and false, there has to be something about which they 
are true or false. And whatever this is must be independent of our 
representations—thinking something does not normally make it so. 
This is the sense in which (2) is presupposed by any normal under-
standing of assertions such as (1). Searle says,
Any truth claim presupposes that there is a way that things 
are regarding the content of that claim. And this point holds 
as much for mathematical statements such as “2 + 2 = 4” or for 
statements about personal experiences such as “I am in pain” as 
it does for statements about mountains, dogs, and electrons. What 
is special about these latter sorts of statements is that they purport 
to make reference to publicly accessible phenomena, in these 
examples, publicly accessible physical objects. But for such cases 
we presuppose not only that there is a way that things are that 
is independent of our representations, but that there is a way that 
things are in a publicly accessible, i.e., ontologically objective, 
realm.8
Moreover, not only does the content of certain assertions presuppose 
External Realism, the very fact that in asserting we are also commu-
nicating also presupposes an external reality in which the hearer 
exists. If I am a skeptic, with whom am I communicating?
In response, the skeptic could agree that parts of our language 
seem to presuppose External Realism, but conclude this only implies 
that these concepts stand in need of conceptual revision. We have, 
along these lines, come to accept that the objects that we have called 
“solid” are, in some sense, porous—the atoms which compose them 
are separated by fields of force. 
Searle grants his argument is not conclusive. But if we endorse the 
skeptic’s argument, we are forced to reconfigure our understanding, 
not just of the concept solid, but any utterance which refers to a 

JOHN SEARLE
8
mind-independent world (Russell attempted something like this). 
Moreover, we are forced to abandon any ordinary understanding of 
what it is to communicate with others.
Before moving on to Searle’s substantive articulation of the nature 
of external reality, it is worth saying something about the tradition 
which precedes Searle’s articulation of this argument. These admit-
tedly cryptic remarks are intended to give the reader only a taste of a 
much larger dialogue in which Searle is a participant. The first tran-
scendental argument against the skeptic was advanced by Immanuel 
Kant in the Refutation of Idealism. Kant argues that an external 
reality is a condition for the possibility of self-consciousness or 
“empirical apperception.” Undermining the very possibility of skep-
ticism, Kant, unlike Searle, understands his argument to be con-
clusive. But, for Kant, there remains a sense in which empirical 
reality is held to be dependent on our cognitive faculties (it is mind-
dependent), and so does not satisfy the requirements of External 
Realism.9 While Searle’s argument bears some affinity to that of 
G. E. Moore’s,10 Searle explicitly rebukes Moore’s argument.11 Moore 
offers an argument for the truth of a specific empirical claim, “that 
[my] two human hands exist.” But Searle’s argument, unlike Moore’s, 
does not infer the external world from the truth of a particular 
empirical claim. Rather, Searle argues that statement making of any 
kind already implies the existence of an external world. Like Kant, 
Ludwig Wittgenstein’s12 attack on skepticism appears to be more 
ambitious than Searle’s. Searle worries that in adopting the skeptic’s 
conclusion we will be driven to a very foreign interpretation of 
otherwise perfectly intelligible speech acts. But where Searle only 
holds that the skeptic must radically alter our normal understanding 
of the words we say, Wittgenstein makes the stronger claim that 
skepticism undermines our ability to understand anything whatsoever.
SCIENTIFIC NATURALISM
In the previous section we rehearsed Searle’s transcendental argu-
ment against the skeptics and idealists who would deny a representa-
tion-independent reality. But External Realism makes only a negative 
claim—if Searle is right, we know that reality, whatever it is, is 
not mind-dependent. Searle also makes a positive claim about the 
ultimate nature of that external reality. 

FUNDAMENTAL ONTOLOGY
9
Searle’s fundamental ontology is that of the Scientific Naturalist,13 
in that, not only is the universe representation-independent, but he 
supposes it to be roughly as the natural sciences describe it as being.14 
Obviously, we will come to discover that some of our scientific theo-
ries are in fact false. But the Scientific Naturalist maintains that the 
basic portrait of the universe as painted by the natural sciences is 
largely correct, even if there is some disagreement over the details. 
Searle starkly asserts, “It is a condition of your being an educated 
person in our era that you are apprised of these two theories: the 
atomic theory of matter and the evolutionary theory of biology.”15 
In particular, the universe consists of subatomic particles in fields 
of force. These particles are organized into physical, chemical, and 
biological systems. The development of the biological systems is 
largely governed by evolutionary processes. 
Searle’s commitment to Scientific Naturalism is issue framing in 
the sense that this naturalistic fundamental ontology determines 
what is to count as a philosophical problem. In this respect, Searle is 
an exemplar of a certain way of doing philosophy. Moreover, it is not 
unfair to say that this way of doing philosophy has increasingly come 
to dominate the philosophical imagination since 1950.16 
By way of locating Searle’s work within its historical context, we 
might start with Wilfrid Sellars’ 1962 essay, “Philosophy and the Sci-
entific Image of Man.”17 According to Sellars, philosophical prob-
lems are versions of what might be called the two-images problem. On 
the one hand, there is the “manifest image,” which is the world as it is 
ordinarily experienced by human beings. This is a world which is 
felt—conscious agents apprehend macrophysical objects from a first-
personal, subjective point of view. That world is moreover filtered 
through a network of emotions, values, and teleological commit-
ments. On the other hand, there is the “scientific image,” which is the 
world as described by the natural sciences in general, and a mathe-
matized physics in particular. This is the view from nowhere. This 
world is construed as mechanistic and is free from values and per-
spectives. The scientific image is compositional in that the behavior 
of macroconstituents is assumed to be entirely governed by the 
behavior of microconstituents. 
The two-images problem is simply that many features of the mani-
fest image seem irreconcilable with the scientific image. There is, for 
example, no place for love, or consciousness, in a physicalist ontology 
of objects being pushed around by blind forces.

JOHN SEARLE
10
In his recent book, From Ethics to Metaphysics, Frank Jackson 
rearticulates the two-images problem under the heading, “the loca-
tion problem”:
By serious metaphysics, I mean metaphysics . . . that acknow-
ledges that we can do better than draw up big lists, that seeks 
comprehension in terms of a more or less limited number of ingre-
dients, or anyway a smaller list than we started with. . . . Thus, by 
its very nature, serious metaphysics continually faces the location 
problem. Because the ingredients are limited, some putative fea-
tures of the world are not going to appear explicitly in some more 
basic account. The question then is whether they nevertheless 
figure implicitly in the more basic account, or whether we should 
say that to accept that the account is complete, or is complete with 
respect to some subject-matter or other, commits us to holding 
that the putative features are merely putative.18
What Jackson calls the purported or “putative features of the world” 
correspond to Sellars’ manifest image. Philosophers address the 
two-images or location problem when they try to account for the sup-
posed, putative, manifest image within the framework of the more 
basic, scientific image. Sometimes, Jackson suggests, this translation 
will involve the elimination of the putative features (i.e., are shown to 
be “merely putative”).
In facing the two-images or location problem, it will be clear that 
Searle is less tempted than is Jackson by the eliminativist solution. 
Nevertheless it is important to see that Searle endorses Sellars’ and 
Jackson’s formulation of the problem:
The overriding question in contemporary philosophy is as follows: 
We now have a reasonably well-established conception of the basic 
structure of the universe. But it is not at all easy to reconcile the 
basic facts we have come to know with a certain conception we 
have of ourselves, derived in part from our cultural inheritance 
but mostly from our own experience.19
The characteristic logical structure of persistent philosophical pro-
blems is captured by the two-images or location problem, where 
putative, manifest features of our experience must be brought into 
accord with the basic, scientific features of the world. This theoretical 

FUNDAMENTAL ONTOLOGY
11
base is, for Searle, Sellars, and Jackson, given to us by the physical 
sciences, which construes the world as a blind, valueless, determini-
stic, spatiotemporal manifold. These philosophers are Scientific 
Naturalists, and this is the sense in which Searle agrees that “philoso-
phy starts from the facts of science.”20 It is against the assumption 
that the world is roughly as science describes it as being, that Searle 
asks, “How do we fit in?”21 
Just as the lack of a crystalline structure in certain blocks of the 
Giza pyramids is baffling only against a set of chemical and geolo-
gical background theories, for Searle requests for philosophical 
explanation presuppose the expectations embodied in the metaphy-
sics of Scientific Naturalism. Puzzles, such as the problem of free will 
and the mind-body problem, arise against the expectation that the 
world is as science says that it is.
CONCEPTUAL RELATIVITY AND SEARLE’S SCIENTIFIC 
NATURALISM
Before proceeding to Searle’s answer to the mind-body problem, 
there is a final feature of Searle’s thinking about fundamental onto-
logy that bears consideration. As we have seen, Searle is committed 
to two, increasingly strong ontological theses: first, Searle endorses 
External Realism, which holds that there is a representation-inde-
pendent reality. Second, Searle is committed to a substantive claim 
about the fine structure of this representation-independent reality: 
Scientific Naturalism holds that reality is basically as science describes 
it as being: subatomic particles in fields of force, organized into hier-
archies of systems. 
External Realism and Scientific Naturalism are metaphysical 
claims about how, in fact, the world is. Searle addresses a related 
puzzle, not about the nature of the world, but about the nature of the 
concepts we use to talk about the world.
Searle’s fundamental ontology is compatible with two views about 
the nature of concepts. We can be “Metaphysical Realists” about our 
concepts. According to Hilary Putnam, Metaphysical Realism—or 
what Ian Hacking calls inherent structuralism22—holds that funda-
mental ontology is exhaustively and correctly described in one way: 
What makes the metaphysical realist a metaphysical realist is his 
belief that there is somewhere, One True Theory (two theories 

JOHN SEARLE
12
which are true and complete descriptions of The World would be 
mere notational variants of each other). . . . [T]his belief in One 
True Theory requires a ready-made world—the world itself has to 
have a “built-in” structure since otherwise theories with different 
structures might correctly “copy” the world (from different per-
spectives) and truth would lose its Absolute (non-perspectival) 
character.23
Note that Metaphysical Realism, while principally a claim about the 
possibility of a conceptual scheme that exhaustively describes the 
world, also implies a certain minimal metaphysical commitment: that 
the world has a “‘built-in’ structure.” This minimal metaphysical 
commitment is logically independent of both External Realism and 
Scientific Naturalism. Nevertheless, most who would endorse Scien-
tific Naturalism would also subscribe to Metaphysical Realism: 
scientific descriptions rightly capture the contours of a “ready-made 
world.” Scientific descriptions carve nature at its joints. 
Metaphysical Realism is contrasted with Conceptual Relativity. 
Advocates of Conceptual Relativity, such as Thomas Kuhn24 or 
Nelson Goodman,25 hold that various descriptive schemes are incom-
mensurable or inconsistent with each other. Because the world does 
not have a built-in structure, while some set of descriptions may 
still be held to be more accurate or appropriate than some other set, 
we should not expect to formulate a theory of everything which 
exhaustively characterizes the most general features of the world.
Is Searle a Metaphysical Realist? 
Given that Scientific Naturalism and Metaphysical Realism 
are typically aligned, and that Searle strongly endorses the former, 
it would be easy to assume that he is also a Metaphysical Realist. 
However, Searle argues in favor of Conceptual Relativity. He asserts 
that
[a]ny system of classification or individuation of objects, any set 
of categories for describing the world, indeed, any system of rep-
resentation at all is conventional, and to that extent arbitrary. The 
world divides up the way we divide it, and if we are ever inclined 
to think that our present way of dividing it is the right one, or is 
somehow inevitable, we can always imagine alternative systems of 
classification.26 

FUNDAMENTAL ONTOLOGY
13
To illustrate, Searle suggests that we can take, for example, a desk and 
arbitrarily draw a circle in chalk somewhere on its surface. Point 
within the circle and we can baptize this object a “klurg.” Up until 
that moment a klurg in some sense did not exist, but we can now use 
the concept to make perfectly intelligible sentences—“klurgs are not 
as heavy as desks” or “you’ll find the book on the klurg.” We could, 
in this fashion, go on to invent an infinite number of arbitrary new 
vocabularies, each of which we could use to talk about the world. 
How Can Conceptual Relativity Be Reconciled with Searle’s 
Commitment to External Realism and Scientific Naturalism?
Conceptual Relativity is perfectly consistent with External Real-
ism (ER). Searle thinks that it is a “mistake . . . to suppose that 
realism is committed to the theory that there is one best vocabulary 
for describing reality, that reality itself must determine how it should 
be described. But once again, ER . . . has no such implication.”27 
External Realism holds only that the world is not ontologically 
dependent on our minds or representations. It is indifferent as to 
the question of whether or not there is a representational scheme 
that, moreover, exhaustively or canonically characterizes this exter-
nal world. 
Scientific Naturalism goes beyond the contention that there exists 
a representation-independent reality to claim that the scientific image 
captures the more basic, essential features of that reality. Can Searle’s 
Conceptual Relativity be reconciled with his Scientific Naturalism? 
He never explicitly addresses this question. Most Scientific Natural-
ists are not Conceptual Relativists. It is difficult, but not impossible, 
to simultaneously hold that the world is essentially as science describes 
it as being, but also contend that scientific descriptions are never-
theless, to some extent, arbitrary. Searle might agree that science 
describes our ontological base while also holding that this ontolo-
gical base can be brought under a variety of conceptual schemes. 
Searle grants that “different conceptual systems will generate differ-
ent and apparently inconsistent descriptions of the same ‘reality,’” 
but this should not drive us to a kind of antirealism about scientific 
entities. The possibility of an infinite number of conceptual schemes 
is compatible with Scientific Naturalism, so long as those schemes 
are logically commensurable. And Searle is explicit: against the 
conceptual relativism of Goodman, he contends that between two 
different conceptual schemes “the appearance of inconsistency is 

JOHN SEARLE
14
only an appearance.” Likewise, Putnam agrees that we may unpro-
blematically embrace two theories (not just one), so long as they are 
“mere notational variants of each other.” The idea appears to be that 
Searle is a Conceptual Relativist, but does not go so far as to claim 
that the various schemes by which we talk about the world are poten-
tially incommensurable. His is a mundane and weak Conceptual 
Relativity that allows for the possibility of talking about, for exam-
ple, temperature in terms of either Fahrenheit or Celsius. 
It must be emphasized that Searle’s response to Putnam and 
Goodman allows for the possibility of overlapping schemes insofar 
as they apply to ordinary objects. Of course we could redescribe a 
desk in terms of klurgs. We can describe weight in terms of pounds 
or kilograms, thereby creating the surface appearance of inconsis-
tency. It is arbitrary or pragmatic as to how the night sky is clustered 
into constellations. But it is not at all clear whether or not Searle 
thinks that this kind of macrolevel conceptual relativity extends to 
the microphysical world. Searle does write that “any system of repre-
sentation at all is conventional, and to that extent arbitrary” (italics 
mine), which indicates that he favors a more global version of 
Conceptual Relativity. However, in 1984 Andrew Pickering infa-
mously argued that the introduction of the concept of a quark in 
high-energy physics was not inevitable—that there are, at least in 
principle, alternative schema which would make successful predic-
tions without making reference to anything like a quark.28 Pickering’s 
extreme scientific nominalism does not sound particularly Searlean. 
But, neither is it necessarily incompatible with his theore tical base. 
Searle is likely a Conceptual Relativist about certain scientific 
concepts (i.e., strings) but a Metaphysical Realist about others 
(i.e., electrons).

15
CHAPTER 2
CONSCIOUSNESS AND MATERIALIST 
THEORIES OF MIND
The Scientific Naturalist holds that the scientific image offers a 
comprehensive characterization of the world. What can be said of 
the manifest phenomena that cannot be neatly reconciled with this 
ontological base? This philosophical problematic reasserts itself over 
and over in Searle’s writings: in Speech Acts and The Construction of 
Social Reality, Searle attempts to explain how language and other 
institutional facts such as money can be accommodated within a 
bare-bones scientific ontology. In Rationality in Action, Searle worries 
about whether the Scientific Naturalist can account for rationality 
and freedom. What is Searle’s answer to the mind-body problem? 
How is conscious experience possible in a world that consists entirely 
of particles in fields of force?
Consciousness exhibits properties which seem anathema to the 
scientific image. In particular, consciousness involves, for Searle, sub-
jective qualitative experience. The experience of pain, red, or envy 
each has a qualitative aspect; they have a what-it-feels-like aspect. 
These experiences are subjective in that they are not, unlike the 
objects of science, publically accessible. They have a unique, first-
person point of view. Searle also focuses on another aspect of consci-
ousness: many conscious states are intentional and so are implicated 
in the possibility of understanding. Brute facts, such as rocks and 
electrons, have neither subjective experience nor are they capable of 
intentionality or understanding. There are a number of other pecu-
liar features of consciousness: it is unified, it has a sphere of focus, 
it operates under some mood or other, many conscious states require 
a Background understanding which is not conscious, and so on. 

JOHN SEARLE
16
But Searle treats subjective qualitative experience as the principle 
point of differentiation between mind and body.
In Chapter 1, we quoted Frank Jackson, who considered two pos-
sible answers to the problem of locating consciousness (the manifest 
image) within our scientific world view (the scientific image). If con-
sciousness cannot, somehow, be shown to figure implicitly in the 
more basic scientific ontology, then we must reject it as entirely 
illusory or “merely putative.” According to Searle, both of these 
solutions represent unacceptable varieties of materialism. The first 
answer diminishes the mental so as to fit within the parameters of the 
physical. This is the strategy of the functionalists, identity theorists, 
and behaviorists. A second, more radical solution, adopted by eli-
minative materialists, dismisses the notion of the mental as unsal-
vageably archaic. 
Searle accounts for the possibility of consciousness by pursuing a 
third course. He sees himself as championing the autonomy of the 
mental, while avoiding the extreme of mind-body dualism (where the 
mind is construed as too autonomous). But Searle attempts to achieve 
reconciliation with Scientific Naturalism, not by the attenuation or 
elimination of the mental so as to fall within predesignated parame-
ters of the physical, but by expanding our conception of the physical 
so as to encompass the mental. In characterizing his own findings, 
Searle writes “there has been no question of ‘naturalizing conscious-
ness’; it already is completely natural.”1 Thus, consciousness remains 
a physical phenomenon, but Searle’s physical base is found to be 
more expansive than that of other Scientific Naturalists. 
SEARLE’S FOIL: MATERIALIST THEORIES OF MIND
So far as the mind-body problem is concerned, the motivation for 
materialism should be clear: if philosophical perplexity is ontological 
perplexity, the aim is to render compatible the manifest image with 
the better-understood scientific image. The easiest way to resolve 
ontological perplexity is to contend that the essential features of 
manifest phenomena are already scientific or, more radically, to cast 
off as merely illusory or putative the manifest phenomena. Varia-
tions of these basic approaches are represented by identity theories 
of mind, functionalism, and eliminative materialism.
Eliminative materialists such as Paul Feyerabend, Richard Rorty, 
and Paul Churchland treat our folk psychological vocabulary (“pain,” 

CONSCIOUSNESS AND MATERIALIST THEORIES
17
“desire,” “belief”) as a kind of a protoscientific theory. Contending 
that this theory is unlikely to dovetail with a complete account of 
neurobiology, philosophers recommend its removal from the canons 
of scientific thought. But because science traces the outlines of our 
ontological base, this ruling is tantamount to a declaration of nonex-
istence. According to advocates of eliminative materialism,2 mental 
predicates, like the words “phlogiston” or “vampire,” simply fail to 
refer to anything.
Other philosophical theories of mind are variations on this theme. 
Where eliminative materialists deny that mental predicates have any 
referent, identity theorists (or physicalists) and functionalists argue 
that these same predicates simply refer to physical processes. Just as 
we discovered that the terms “morning star” and “evening star” in 
fact denote the same heavenly body (Venus), identity theorists3 con-
tend that neurophysiological predicates and mental predicates both 
denote states of the brain. In the way that heat is nothing but certain 
patterns of molecule excitation, pain denotes certain physical pro-
cesses. The difference between eliminativists and physicalists lies, 
not in any substantive claim about what in fact exists (the scientific 
image), but in a disagreement over the status of mental predicates. 
Are they more like the term “unicorn,” which refers to nothing what-
soever, or the terms “heat” or “blue,” which refer to phenomena 
which happen to be fully characterizable in another, more primitive, 
ontological, lower-level vocabulary? The term “unicorn” is not sub-
ject to meaningful paraphrase.
If identity theorists and functionalists both redefine mental phe-
nomena in terms of physical categories, what distinguishes them? 
If both the identity theorists and functionalists would see mental 
attributions redescribed in terms of physical properties, they differ 
as to whether those physical properties are to be regarded as intrinsic 
or relational. There are, broadly speaking, two kinds of properties: 
relational and intrinsic. Relational properties, such as “taller than” 
or “caused by,” concern the relative placement of two or more events 
or objects. Intrinsic or categorical properties are the attributes con-
tained within an event or object, and hold irrespective of the place-
ment of other events or objects. 
For a type identity theorist, such as J. C. C. Smart, David Lewis, or 
D. M. Armstrong, a mental state just is a certain configuration or 
cluster of neurological objects; these are its intrinsic or categorical 
properties. The problem, however, is that the same configurations 

JOHN SEARLE
18
might manifest in importantly different ways (different behavior or 
even different qualitative states). Or alternatively, the same mental 
state might be realized on different physical bases. Thus, the func-
tionalist, such as Hilary Putnam or Jerry Fodor, holds that it is not 
the intrinsic configuration that matters but the role the constellation 
of neurons plays in a larger system of inputs and outputs; this is 
to describe mental phenomena relationally against the other events 
in the causal web. By analogy, a type identity theorist about hearts 
would regard natural and artificial hearts as distinct because they 
are composed of different materials. A functionalist about hearts 
would regard them as more or less equivalent, because both organs 
play the same causal role in the body. 
Finally, token identity theorists concede, against the type identity 
theorist, that it is unlikely that the same mental event will always be 
instantiated on the same physical base. But they are anxious about 
letting functional, relational attributions be the final word in the 
individuation of mental states. This may be because some philoso-
phers, such as W. V. O. Quine, have recommended that such relational 
predicates are shorthand for intrinsic, categorical descriptions: to 
describe something as soluble is shorthand for a (perhaps as-of-yet 
unknown) description in terms of the intrinsic structure of that thing. 
This is to say that certain considerations should move us to reduce 
functionalism to an identity theory. Of course, the token identity 
solution creates its own difficulties: there appear to be no criteria by 
which to identify two physical states as the same kind of thing—the 
same mental state.
In conclusion, the materialists adopt two basic strategies in recon-
ciling the mental with the scientific image. The eliminative materialist 
claims that the mental does not denote anything. Other theorists do 
not eliminate mental terminology but contend that the important 
features of the mental are anyway physical. Within the latter camp, 
there are a number of different criteria by which these theorists come 
to individuate mental events.
SEARLE’S CRITIQUES OF MATERIALIST THEORIES OF MIND
Physical Systems Have No Phenomenology
Eliminative materialism, identity theories, and functionalism each 
have problems associated with their specific articulation of a materi-
alist theory of mind. Searle’s criticisms, however, attack the very idea 

CONSCIOUSNESS AND MATERIALIST THEORIES
19
of a materialist theory of mind. Eliminative materialism, identity 
theories, and functionalism are each expressions of a pattern that 
Searle thinks is wrongheaded; he identifies this tendency as 
a recurring tension between the urge to give an account of reality 
that leaves out any reference to the special features of the mental, 
such as consciousness and subjectivity, and at the same time 
account for our “intuitions” about the mind.4 
In particular Searle claims that materialist theories, trying to natural-
ize the mind, end up eviscerating the vital, qualitative, what-it-feels-
like aspect of consciousness. Materialists treat the subjective aspect 
as incidental, whereas Searle contends that anything that is not first 
personal is not a candidate for consciousness. Searle shares the 
project—the task is to “locate consciousness within our overall 
‘scientific’ conception of the world”5—but worries that the material-
ist’s solution is cheap insofar as it achieves reconciliation through 
varieties of elimination.
Searle’s principle worry is that materialist conceptions of mind 
leave out the first-person, what-it-feels-like subjectivity that is essen-
tial to one’s being conscious. Searle sometimes paraphrases this 
subjectivity in terms of awareness or sensations. Other philosophers 
speak of this subjective quality in terms of phenomenology or qua-
lia. Pain, for example, may have a neurophysiological component but 
there is an essential feeling, over and above the brain events, that con-
stitutes my being in pain. All of these descriptors drive at the experi-
ential quality that Searle takes to be indicative of consciousness.
All varieties of materialism fail precisely because, in attempting to 
account for the mental in third-person terms (in terms which render 
the mind accessible to the sciences) they end up eliminating this 
essential qualitative aspect. 
To demonstrate this, Searle rehearses and provides a number of 
arguments meant to remind us that subjectivity is logically distinct 
from, and so irreducible to, the third-person base.
Classic arguments to this effect are offered by Thomas Nagel, 
Frank Jackson, and Saul Kripke. In Nagel’s “What is it Like to be a 
Bat?”6 he argues that we can only attribute mental properties to an 
organism (such as a bat) if and only if there is a particular way in 
which the organism can be said to experience the world. We do not 
know what it is like to perceive the world by way of a kind of sonar. 
Whatever this experience may be, it cannot be understood by even a 

JOHN SEARLE
20
complete understanding of the bat’s neurophysiology. Similarly, 
Jackson7 has us imagine a brilliant neuroscientist—Mary—who is 
raised in conditions such that she has never seen color. The room in 
which she lives and studies is black and white, as is the television by 
which she accesses the world. She has, furthermore, a perfect under-
standing of the processes which underlie our seeing colors. In this 
case, Mary still does not know something about what it is to see red. 
Both arguments show that the first-person qualitative experience is 
not reducible to a third-person quantitative understanding of the 
neurobiology on which the bat’s and Mary’s experience depends.
While Searle endorses Nagel’s and Jackson’s arguments for the 
autonomy of consciousness, he also presents two of his own. In the 
Silicon Brains thought experiment,8 Searle has the reader imagine 
that they are going blind: after a number of treatments, the subject 
resorts to planting silicon chips in the visual cortex, which somehow 
restores vision. Unfortunately, other parts of the brain begin to atro-
phy and are likewise replaced by silicon chips. This continues to hap-
pen until the entire nervous system is replaced with silicon surrogates. 
While we don’t know what would actually happen, Searle sees three 
possibilities. First, the transplantation process would have little effect 
on either the subject’s behavior or conscious mental life. Second, it is 
possible that while the subject’s behavior continues unabated, con-
sciousness subsides with every new transplant until it disappears, 
as if in a deep sleep. Finally, the inverse is possible, so that while 
consciousness is retained, the subject gradually becomes unable to 
exert control over the body, falling into paralysis. 
The force of this thought experiment is as follows: without having 
to say which of these three possibilities would, in fact, happen, by 
merely agreeing that these represent genuine alternatives we are 
already agreeing that the concepts of consciousness and behavior 
are logically distinct. If notions of mind and body were interdefined, 
as the materialist would have it, it would make no more sense to 
contend that a person could behave without being conscious (possi-
bility 3), than claim to be a bachelor without being male. But because 
consciousness is conceptually isolated from behavior, this is evidence 
for the stronger claim that consciousness is not conceptually interde-
fined with the physical.
Note that this argument appears puzzling given Searle’s positive 
view of consciousness. As we will see, Searle grants that consciousness 
is both caused by, and a feature of, the underlying neurophysiology. 

CONSCIOUSNESS AND MATERIALIST THEORIES
21
If it is not so caused, it does not qualify as consciousness, as changes 
in consciousness must be underlain by changes in the brain. But given 
that consciousness is thus defined in terms of its physical causes, 
consciousness does not appear to be conceptually isolated from the 
physical, broadly construed to include the neural happenings. The 
Silicon Brains thought experiment argues that behavior is concep-
tually distinct from consciousness, but elsewhere Searle seems to 
deny that consciousness can be isolated from neurological events 
or behavior.
In a second thought experiment called “Conscious Robots,”9 Searle 
has us imagine a robot that has subjective experience. Perhaps the 
robot, due to a burdensome workload, experiences a great deal of 
misery. In response, its makers turn off its ability to be conscious. 
This procedure has no effect on its behavior. This shows, like the 
Silicon Brains experiment, that our concept of consciousness is not 
conceptually tied to our concept of behavior. But materialists in 
general, and functionalists in particular, wish to see the notion 
of consciousness collapse into the scientific image, which includes 
physical behavior. 
Physical Systems Have No Intentional Understanding
The Chinese Room argument is Searle’s most famous attack on a 
materialist theory of mind called Strong Artificial Intelligence 
(“Strong AI”). Here, an essentially functionalist account of mind is 
coupled with a vivid metaphor, so that the brain is compared to a 
computer, whereas the mind would be a computer program. This 
analogy provides the basis for a fecund research program spear-
headed by departments of cognitive science. Because a computer can 
be realized on any number of physical platforms, what distinguishes 
computers from noncomputers and so by analogy mental processes 
from nonmental processes, is some formal configuration of inputs 
and outputs. 
The Chinese Room argument concludes that a formally described 
system cannot, in itself, give rise to intentional understanding. Like 
the Silicon Brains and Conscious Robots arguments, the Chinese 
Room argues that something essential is left out when mental phe-
nomena are construed exclusively in terms of their physical base. But 
where the first two thought experiments claim that the materialist 
(including the functionalist) disregards the subjective experience 

JOHN SEARLE
22
essential to consciousness, the Chinese Room argument contends 
that the functionalist-cum-strong-AI-theorist wrongly construes the 
nature of intentional understanding. 
What is intentional understanding and what is its relation to the 
subjective experience, the target of the Silicon Brains and Conscious 
Robots arguments? 
Some mental states are intentional, here defined technically as 
mental states that represent or are about things. The term captures 
the way in which our thoughts, attitudes, beliefs, and desires are 
directed, in various ways, toward the world. Intentional beliefs con-
cern the way that the world is, and our desires concern how we would 
like things to be. The concept of intentionality is a centerpiece of 
Searle’s philosophy of mind.
The Chinese Room argument targets the representationalist 
account of intentional understanding. Searle’s own summary of the 
Chinese Room argument is as follows:
Imagine a native English speaker who knows no Chinese locked in 
a room full of boxes of Chinese symbols (a database) together 
with a book of instructions for manipulating the symbols (the 
program). Imagine that people outside the room send in other 
Chinese symbols which, unknown to the person in the room, are 
questions in Chinese (the input). And imagine that by following 
the instructions in the program the man in the room is able to pass 
out Chinese symbols which are correct answers to the questions 
(the output). The program enables the person in the room to pass 
the Turing Test for understanding Chinese but he does not under-
stand a word of Chinese.10
According to the functionalist, mental states are defined relationally 
in terms of their causes (inputs) and effects (outputs). The Chinese 
Room experiment is also intended to capture certain features of the 
computationalist flavor of functionalism, wherein the mind is com-
pared to a program. Programs transform symbols according to cer-
tain rules. The book of instructions for symbol manipulation, to 
which the English speaker has access, is the program. If the Chinese 
Room is given a series of questions, it is able to correctly answer 
those questions—so that, functionally speaking, its behavior mirrors 
a well-informed, native Chinese speaker. The Turing Test, formulated 
by Alan Turing in 1950,11 proposes a criterion by which a machine 

CONSCIOUSNESS AND MATERIALIST THEORIES
23
can be said to be intelligent or capable of understanding. If I am 
interacting with both a machine and human (over a text-only 
channel, such as internet messaging or email), and I cannot reliably 
distinguish which is which, the machine will have passed the Turing 
test. Searle’s point is that even if the Chinese Room passes the Turing 
test, we would not say that the man inside the room understands 
what he, or the Chinese Room, is saying. Thus, the Turing test’s 
benchmark for intelligence does not permit us to say, of the machine, 
that it understands. In particular, the English speaker’s symbol mani-
pulation is blind, lacking the intentional aboutness essential to 
understanding.
The point is sometimes put as follows: syntactical manipulation is 
not sufficient for semantics. Logic concerns the articulation of proce-
dures by which to draw reliable inferences from a set of propositions. 
These syntactical rules hold irrespective of the particular semantic 
content contained in these propositions, so that logical connections 
still hold if we replace a sentence’s nouns and adjectives with dummy 
letters. Using this model, the computationalist wishes to find a set of 
rules or conditional procedures which exhaust the scope of mental 
activity. If mental states are about something, and so have specific 
semantic content, computationalism attempts to capture this inten-
tionality through the multiplication of underlying syntactical rules 
and procedures. To understand something just is to exhibit the right 
response given certain stimuli. But the Chinese Room is designed to 
demonstrate that semantics—intentional understanding—can never 
be derived from a syntax or set of procedures. Part of the thought 
experiment’s effectiveness stems from its not placing any limitations 
on the complexity of the rule book; no amplification of rules can, by 
itself, amount to the symbol manipulator’s understanding of the 
questions asked or the answers given. 
The Chinese Room argument is logically independent of Searle’s 
Silicon Brains argument, which claims that mental phenomena have 
an essential qualitative aspect. It shows that intentional representa-
tion cannot be reduced to formally defined relations. The dummy 
symbols manipulated in the Chinese Room do not mean anything to 
the manipulator. In arguing this, Searle is arguing that intentional 
understanding cannot be reduced to functional, physicalist systems. 
While he endorses Scientific Naturalism, he resists the attempt 
to construe the mental in terms which are reduced without remain-
der to a scientific-ontological base. The Silicon Brains and Conscious 

JOHN SEARLE
24
Robots arguments show that there is a gap between subjective 
qualitative experience and that scientific base. The Chinese Room 
argument shows that there is a gap between intentional understand-
ing (representation) and that same base. As we will see, the former 
arguments are in many ways more important, as, on Searle’s view, all 
intentional understanding depends on the possibility of subjective-
qualitative experience.
Consciousness and Intentional Understanding
Searle has argued that qualitative experience and intentional under-
standing are irreducible to the scientific image. What is the relation-
ship between these two essentially irreducible features of mind?
Broadly speaking, there are two views of mental representation.12 
The phenomenalists, including Searle, understand mental representa-
tion along the lines of a picture, so that mental representation always 
has a qualitative aspect. The representationalists understand mental 
representation in terms of information processing. Information about 
things must be causally linked to that thing, but does not need to 
have an additional qualitative aspect. For example, there is a crude 
sense in which a thermostat understands or is responsive to the ambi-
ent temperature for the representationalist. However, Searle as well 
as other phenomenalists assert that the what-it-feels-like quality indi-
cative of subjectivity is a precondition for intentional understanding.
While Searle is better known for the Chinese Room argument, in 
many ways the conclusion of the Silicon Brains or Conscious Robots 
arguments are more salient. Mind is conscious in that it has an essen-
tial subjective and qualitative aspect. Some of these conscious 
states—intentional states—may also be said to exhibit intentional 
understanding. Thus while understanding requires consciousness, 
the inverse is not true: some nonintentional states, such as some kinds 
of pain or pleasures, are merely qualitative. Intentional states also 
have an object. While some mental states are also intentional, it is 
clear that the qualitative what-it-feels like aspect is the defining 
feature of mind. 
This conceptual hierarchy is underscored in an argument called 
the Connection Principle,13 which elucidates the relationship between 
the conscious and the unconscious. Consciousness is necessarily 
qualitative. Unconscious states are not: when sleeping, the sweeping 
of my hand might suggest that I unconsciously recognize a mosquito 

CONSCIOUSNESS AND MATERIALIST THEORIES
25
on my face, but I am not experiencing the tickle of insect legs or the 
sound of its wings. My behavior might suggest that I have certain 
beliefs that are not otherwise consciously available to me. What 
distinguishes an unconscious desire to swat a mosquito from a ther-
mostat’s propensity to turn on the heater, if neither has a qualitative, 
subjective component? That is, unconscious mental states are con-
trasted with two kinds of events: neither are they conscious mental 
states, nor are they merely physical, blind states or events. They are 
not conscious because they lack the subjective qualitative aspect, 
but why not, as Nietzsche does,14 regard them as among the blind, 
nonmental phenomena described by science? 
According to Searle, unconscious intentional states are differenti-
ated from blind causal happenings insofar as they are potentially con-
scious. There is no possibility of a thermostat’s being aware of a 
desire to turn on the heat in the way that I could be aware of a desire 
to swat a mosquito, and so such intentionalistic attributions could 
only be metaphorical. The point is, unconscious mental states are 
doubly dispositional: they tend, like the thermostat, to bring about 
certain behavior and, unlike the thermostat, they must be also able 
to potentially manifest certain conscious states.
Recall that for the representationalist, the first-person subjective 
or phenomenal experience is just one kind of representational, inten-
tional content; the aim is to reduce consciousness to the more funda-
mental ability to represent the world. Accordingly, a thought or 
perception refers to, for example, a desk because it was caused by 
desks; following this causal-information theory, qualitative mental 
imagery is not necessary to account for an intentional state’s ability 
to be about things.15 Thermostats represent temperature. But accord-
ing to the connection principle, the representationalist has it exactly 
backwards. The qualitative aspect of consciousness is a precondition 
for understanding, insofar as intentional representation must be at 
least potentially conscious. According to Searle, if the brain state is 
not at least potentially conscious or phenomenal, it is disqualified 
from being a kind of representational, intentional state. Thus the 
connection principle excludes a great deal of what the functionalist 
or representationalist might count as an intentional mental state. 
Thermostats do not represent the temperature because they are not 
even potentially conscious. If understanding implies the possibility 
of a subjective qualitative experience, this explains why Searle’s, 
Nagel’s, and Jackson’s arguments for the irreducibility of subjective 

JOHN SEARLE
26
experience is more central to the former’s conception of mind than is 
the Chinese Room argument. 
Both phenomenalists and representationalists agree that inten-
tionality is a basic property of the mind; but Searle’s connection 
principle aims to show that the subjective, phenomenal properties of 
consciousness are more basic than the intentional ones, insofar as the 
latter require at least the possibility of the former. This conviction is 
reflected in Searle’s dividing mental processes into intentional and 
nonintentional, strictly phenomenal states. In that way, the connec-
tion principle is less an attempt to elucidate the idea of the uncon-
scious and more an argument for a phenomenalist theory of mind 
and mental representation.
SEARLE’S ANSWER TO THE MIND-BODY PROBLEM: 
BIOLOGICAL NATURALISM
Much of The Rediscovery of the Mind is dedicated to a rejection of 
the materialist theories of mind. Searle shares with the materialist a 
scientific metaphysics, wherein the fundamental ingredients of the 
universe are roughly as physics describes them as being. But where 
materialists attempt to reduce higher-level mental properties, such 
as phenomenology and understanding, to the lower-level theore-
tical base, Searle wishes only to reconcile the former with the latter. 
Indeed, he regards these higher-level phenomena as importantly 
autonomous:
[O]ne can accept the obvious facts of physics—that the world 
consists entirely of physical particles in fields of force—without 
denying that among the physical features of the world are biologi-
cal phenomena such as inner qualitative states of consciousness 
and intrinsic intentionality.16 
The mind-body problem concerns how the mind can be reconciled 
with the body in such a way that maintains the mind’s integrity 
without bowing to ontological dualism, which totalizes the separa-
tion. Searle then hopes to chart a course between two extremes. 
According to dualism, mental phenomena are regarded as so unlike 
physical phenomena as to be ontologically distinct. Dualism is 
correct in that it captures the sense in which mental phenomena 
are auto nomous, but overstates the insight by making such states 

CONSCIOUSNESS AND MATERIALIST THEORIES
27
irreconcilable with the theoretical base. Dualism is incompatible with 
Searle’s commitment to Scientific Naturalism.
In short, Searle achieves the desired reconciliation by expanding 
his ontological base to include consciousness, rather than collapsing 
the mental so as to accord with an apriori conception of that onto-
logical base. It is not, then, that the mental stands in need of natural-
izing; Searle argues that the notion of the natural, rather, is already 
inclusive enough to encompass consciousness. 
How is consciousness construed as natural? A reader could be 
forgiven for thinking that Searle is being temerarious when he opens 
the Rediscovery of the Mind with an answer to that question.
The famous mind-body problem, the source of so much contro-
versy over the past two millennia, has a simple solution. This solu-
tion has been available to any educated person since serious work 
began on the brain nearly a century ago, and, in a sense, we all 
know it to be true. Here it is: Mental phenomena are caused 
by neurophysiological processes in the brain and are themselves 
features of the brain.17
Brain processes fall unproblematically within the scope of the scien-
tific image. Because consciousness is, first, caused by those natural 
processes and, second, a feature of those processes, Searle thinks that 
consciousness should not be any more troubling to the naturalist 
than is the underlying neurobiology.
Along these lines, Searle recommends that consciousness stands 
to the brain as digestion stands to the movements of the stomach, 
boiling stands to the rapid movements of the underlying particles, or 
phenotypes stand to genotypes. More generally put, Searle asserts 
that in addition to standard, temporal, left-right, Humean causa-
tion (low pressure causes the storm to move), there is also a down-up 
causation, where macroproperties are explained by appeal to the 
behavior of microproperties. Macroeconomic fluctuations, such as 
increased inflation, are a function of billions of microtransactions 
taking place. A full accounting of consumer behavior already fully 
explains the inflation. According to Searle, then, there is no more a 
mind-body problem than there is a macro-micro economics problem. 
They are different levels of description of the same set of phenomena.
Moreover, the standard left-right causation involves a relation 
between two distinct objects or events—the low-pressure zone and 

JOHN SEARLE
28
the movement of the storm. Thus you can, at least in principle, have 
a low-pressure zone without storm movement, or visa versa. But the 
relata involved in up-down causation are not so distinct. Inflation is 
concomitant with certain patterns of microeconomic transactions, 
and certain patterns of microeconomic transactions can be rede-
scribed as inflation.
Apart from these suggestive examples, Searle gives readers rela-
tively little help in disentangling the significance of his view. One 
difficulty is that physicalists might actually agree that the mental is 
a biological, higher-order feature of the brain. And just as macro-
economic movements can be redescribed, without remainder, in terms 
of microlevel transactions, the physicalists might contend that men-
tal concepts can be described, without remainder, in terms of the 
working of the microlevel neural processes. Searle’s analogies seem 
compatible with materialist agendas.18 This conception of the mind, 
where it is caused by and is a feature of the brain, does not, in itself, 
render the mental sufficiently autonomous.
But Searle is careful to maintain that the mental—the domain of 
qualitative experience and understanding—is autonomous and has 
no counterpart on the microlevel; any redescription of these macro-
level features amounts to a kind of evisceration, in a way that isn’t 
the case with the economic analogy. A microlevel articulation of 
inflation is, to be sure, more complicated, but would nevertheless 
preserve the entirety of the macrolevel patterns. We could, similarly, 
describe the workings of a car engine at two levels of description: at 
the level of molecules or at the level of pistons and cylinders. But the 
lower-level description seems only to account for the higher-level 
motion with a kind of increased resolution or precision; nothing is 
lost. But unless the atomic, molecular, and/or neural systems which 
give rise to consciousness are, in some way, already conscious, then 
the analogy breaks down: the materialist might agree that mental 
events are higher-order descriptions according to Searle’s formula, 
but not at all be inclined to further grant that the mental has irredu-
cible, qualitative features. Indeed, Searle’s digestion and economic 
metaphors seem to speak against this possibility. 
In the end, there is a gap between Searle’s claim that mental states 
are both caused by, and a feature of, underlying neurobiological 
states and the stronger suggestion that mental states are irreducibly 
qualitative or subjective. Searle, along with Jackson and Nagel, has 
offered powerful arguments in favor of the view that consciousness 

CONSCIOUSNESS AND MATERIALIST THEORIES
29
cannot be completely redescribed in microphysical terms; but Searle’s 
claim that mental states are caused by and a feature of the neuro-
physiology are not among these arguments.19 
But if, according to the Silicon Brains argument, subjective quali-
tative first-personal experience cannot be reduced to microlevel prop-
erties, how, then, is Searle going to reconcile these macrolevel features 
with the ontological base? Searle appears to achieve reconciliation 
between the scientific image and manifest image by simply stretching 
the domain of the former to include the latter: 
The problem we face with the terminology is that the terms have 
traditionally been defined so as to be mutually exclusive. “Men-
tal” is defined as qualitative, subjective, first personal, and there-
fore immaterial. “Physical” is defined as quantitative, objective, 
third personal, and therefore material. I am suggesting that these 
definitions are inadequate to capture the fact that the world works 
in such a way that some biological processes are qualitative, sub-
jective, and first personal. If we are going to keep this terminology 
at all, we need an expanded notion of the physical to allow for its 
intrinsic, subjective mental component.20
Searle grants that there is an important difference between what has 
been regarded as the physical and the mental. Physical features are 
ontologically objective, in that they are accessible to a variety of 
observers. Mental features are, by contrast, ontologically subjective 
in that any given set of experiences are only accessible to a single 
observer. Searle sees no reason to identify the extension of the term 
“natural” with only those phenomena which happen to be third-
person accessible (ontologically objective). Epistemic points—modes 
of accessibility—should have little to do with determinations of basic 
ontology. The fact that certain events happen to be accessible only to 
an individual person need not impugn on their reality. The problem 
with the standard mind-body distinction is that it pegs, too tightly, 
questions of ontology to an unrelated epistemic question concerning 
modes of accessibility.
Searle’s fundamental ontology includes subjective mental states. 
This inclusion gives Searle the very means to articulate a distinction 
between ontologically objective and ontologically subjective phe-
nomena; these are both a part of our basic ontology. While both are 
“physical” in Searle’s extended notion of the word, only the former is 

JOHN SEARLE
30
“physical” in the traditional sense of the word—as denoting third-
person accessible phenomena such as electrons and mountains.
Searle calls the view that expands the notion of the physical to 
include ontologically subjective mental states “Biological Natural-
ism,” which is a kind of Scientific Naturalism. Other versions of 
Scientific Naturalism about the mind, such as eliminative material-
ism, functionalism, or identity theories, truncate the concept of mind 
so as to fit within a predetermined, narrow, third-person accessible 
conception of the physical.
I will conclude with a brief discussion of the significance of this 
strategy, as it relates to Searle’s own claim that he is a Scientific Natu-
ralist. The aim is to offer a more general characterization of the move 
made in extending the notion of the physical so as to include 
consciousness.
Recall the anomalous limestone blocks found on the pyramids at 
Giza. Among other peculiar features, the blocks contain higher 
amounts of silicon than is found in other sources of limestone. 
A working explanation for these anomalies is that the blocks were 
cast rather than cut; silicon serves as a binding agent. Critics of this 
study have pointed out that silicon is a common geologic element, so 
the fact that it is found in the limestones does not merit explanation. 
What has happened here? 
Briefly, Bas van Fraassen has suggested that in order for a why-
question to arise it must satisfy a number of conditions. One of these 
is that the object under investigation must have a contrast-class—
a set of expectations which renders the explanandum anomalous 
or unexpected.21 For the researchers, the contrast-class is found in the 
claim that silicon is not typically found in limestone. Thus, the silicon 
becomes an object of explanation: why do these limestone blocks 
have silicon in them? And its presence is explained by the fact that the 
blocks were not quarried, but cast using silicon as a binding agent. 
So far, so good. However, if critics contend that silicon is in fact 
ubiquitous, that is tantamount to claiming that the why-question has 
no contrast-class and, thus, does not arise. The worry here is not that 
the explanation (the blocks were cast) is bad; this is the much stron-
ger claim that there is simply nothing to explain in the first place. The 
presence of silicon in limestone was not unexpected, in that it does 
not violate any known chemical and geological theories. It is indeed 
anticipated by these theories, and so is not a proper object of 
explanation.

CONSCIOUSNESS AND MATERIALIST THEORIES
31
Against the dualist and materialist, Searle can be observed as 
making an analogous move. Both the dualist and materialist regard 
subjective, qualitative states as anomalous against expectations 
embodied in the scientific image (the contrast-class): how can a natu-
ral world, which consists of blind particles in fields of force, give 
rise to qualitative, subjective consciousness? While materialism and 
dualism present competing explanatory strategies, the very fact that 
they are attempting to explain consciousness already constitutes a 
tacit endorsement of the question. This is comparable to the research-
er’s attempt to explain the fact that certain blocks contain apprecia-
ble amounts of silicon. What Searle does, against both the materialist 
and dualist, is reject the question. The natural world already contains 
consciousness, so that there is no contrast-class against which the 
materialist’s or dualist’s question gains traction. Just as we do not 
have to explain the presence of silicon if its presence is already 
accounted for by our geological theories, we are not obliged to explain 
the presence of consciousness if it is already part of the natural 
world. Consciousness does not conflict with Searle’s version of Sci-
entific Naturalism, but rather helps constitute it. Materialism and 
dualism are mutually exclusive categories only against a question 
that Searle does not accept:
When confronted with an intractable question such as is presented 
by a clash of convincing default positions, don’t accept the ques-
tion lying down. Get up and go behind the question to see what 
assumptions lie behind the alternatives the question presents. In 
this case, we did not answer the question in terms of the alterna-
tives presented to us but we overcame the question. The question 
was, is dualism or materialism the correct analysis of the mental? 
The answer is: as traditionally conceived, neither; as revised, both. 
Hence it is best to reject the vocabulary of “dualism” and “mate-
rialism” altogether and start over.22 

32
CHAPTER 3
INTENTIONAL MENTAL STATES
Searle’s Biological Naturalism attempts to reconcile the mental with 
the physical while avoiding the excesses of both materialism and 
dualism. He distinguishes the mental from the physical insofar as the 
former has an irreducible experiential, subjective component. Mate-
rialist theories of mind miss the vital fact that mental states have 
a what-it-feels-like quality which is not accessible to any outside 
observer. Pain is an actual feature of the world, even if the experience 
is not intersubjectively available.
Searle further divides the mental into intentional and noninten-
tional phenomena. While both must be potentially conscious, inten-
tional mental states are about things in a way that nonintentional 
states are not. Nonintentional states, such as pain, are not about 
anything at all: they count as mental states because they have the 
requisite phenomenology, but pain does not, or need not, represent 
anything outside of itself. 
Searle’s distinction between intentional and nonintentional mental 
states is intuitive but not uncontroversial. Contra Searle, represen-
tationalists see the aboutness characteristic of intentional states as 
the defining mark of the mental. Some of these theorists might then 
go on to subdivide the mental according to whether it happens also 
to be conscious, so inverting Searle’s prioritization. All mental states, 
including pain, which is perhaps about the state of one’s body, are 
intentional. Searle is a phenomenalist, in that he regards the subjec-
tive, qualitative aspect to be more fundamental to the concept of the 
mental. Nevertheless, he agrees with the representationalist that 
many mental states are also about things. He uses the word “inten-
tionality” to denote this important subset of mental states, which 
represent or have a characteristic aboutness. 

INTENTIONAL MENTAL STATES
33
In this chapter we review Searle’s fine-grained account of the 
aboutness characteristic of intentional states. How, and, in what 
ways, are our intentional states able to represent the world?
AN IMPERFECT ANALOGY: INTENTIONAL 
CONTENT AS A MODEL
How can something be about or represent some other thing? We can 
get some insight into the peculiarities of Searle’s view by looking at 
scientific models, which are representations of some target system. 
Copernicus’ heliocentric model of the universe locates the sun, rather 
than the earth, at the center of the universe. Intuitively, Copernicus’ 
model represents the universe by somehow resembling it. 
To be clear, the analogy between the intentional states and models, 
pictures, or sentences breaks down quickly.1 Searle is quick—perhaps 
too quick—to disavow the connection: 
When I say, for example, that a belief is a representation I am most 
emphatically not saying that a belief is a kind of picture, nor am 
I endorsing the Tractatus account of meaning, nor am I saying 
that a belief re-presents something that has been presented before, 
nor am I saying that a belief has a meaning. . . .2 
Indeed, Searle is going to explain a model’s or picture’s capacity to 
represent by appeal to the mind’s capacity to represent. Still, in other 
places, Searle emphasizes the analogy between mental representation 
and picturing or modeling; as we will see, both intentionality and 
models represent the world as being a certain way, by way of what 
Searle calls conditions of satisfaction. Both mental representation 
and models can get the world wrong or right, under varying degrees 
of idealization. The difference is that pictures get their capacity to 
represent, not just by virtue of their physically mirroring the world, 
but derivatively, by way of our innate capacity for mental represen-
tation.3 While Searle is quite right to deny that intentional states 
are like little portraits in the mind,4 the comparison is nevertheless 
helpful in drawing out three features of Searle’s account of 
intentionality.
First, and most importantly, the analogy between models and 
intentional states nicely illustrates the sense in which, for Searle, 
mental states are fundamentally counterfactual. 

JOHN SEARLE
34
Both modeling and representation entail the very human ability 
to see the world or universe as other than it might in fact be. I can 
imagine a world in which I own a red car rather than a grey car. 
I can imagine a world in which, as of 2007, George W. Bush was not 
president. I can imagine a world which contains no people in it. I can 
also imagine (or represent) the world correctly, as it is. 
A model of the universe is not the universe; it is a kind of por-
trayal, description, or mirror image of the universe. Because an 
intentional state both reflects, and is distinguishable from, its object, 
it can be otherwise. Mental representations and models represent a 
possible universe that stands in various relations with the actual uni-
verse: these relations allow us to speak of both intentional states and 
models in terms of their being accurate, right, wrong, misleading, 
vague, and so on. 
So, both models and mental representations depict a possible 
world (Wp).5 Furthermore, this represented, possible universe might 
either be identical with the actual world (Wa), or else diverge from 
the actual world.6 In the latter case, Wp and Wa would not be iso-
morphic. In a simple example, I can represent a possible world in 
which my closet is full (Wp), when in fact in the actual world it is 
empty (Wa). In this case the represented content diverges from how 
the world in fact is: Wp ≠ Wa.
 
=

INTENTIONAL MENTAL STATES
35
The represented content targets an intentional state’s conditions of 
satisfaction. Unfortunately Searle uses the phrase in two, overlapping 
ways, causing considerable trouble for his interpreters. Getting clearer 
on his notion of conditions of satisfaction requires that we first 
understand his notion of psychological mode, in the next section.
There is a second point of analogy between intentional states and 
models. Insofar as a represented possible world is not identical to the 
actual world, the possible can be distinguished from the actual world 
in two ways: it can be accurate but incomplete (idealized) or it can be 
simply inaccurate. 
Copernicus’ model is more similar to the universe than is Ptolemy’s. 
Moreover, these represented worlds do not just bear a relationship 
of similarity to the actual world, but are partial or incomplete.7 There 
are two importantly different senses in which Copernicus’ heliocen-
tric model is not about our universe, but about a universe which 
is somewhat similar to our own. First, the model is idealized or glo-
bally inaccurate: it is about a universe which is much simpler than 
the actual universe. The model is partial or incomplete. It doesn’t 
purport to account for, for example, the movement of comets or the 
behavior of the people on one of the planets. Planets and their motion 
are treated within a crystalline, geometric framework. So in some 
sense the model is about a different, simplified universe, as compared 
to our own. Likewise, the content of intentional states, like that of 
scientific models, represents our universe under a certain aspect. 
Even when Wp is in accordance with Wa, it remains globally 
inaccurate.
The second sense in which the content of an intentional state may 
not be about our universe, but some possible universe, is simply that 
it may wrongly represent our own world. A model or intentional state 
may inaccurately represent our world in a way that is stronger than 
being an oversimplification or idealization. That is, a model or con-
tent may be locally inaccurate if it misrepresents the features that it is 
trying to represent. If we confine our attention to the subset of fea-
tures a representation purports to be about—such as if we ignore the 
fact that humans are living on earth and focus only on relevant fea-
tures such as planetary size, position, and motion—a representation 
may still fail to fit the world. Copernicus’ model, for example, postu-
lates that the planets revolve around the sun in perfect circles when in 
fact they trace ellipses. The representation is locally inaccurate 

JOHN SEARLE
36
because it fails to rightly depict even that aspect of the world that it 
concerns—planetary motion. Another way of putting this is that 
Copernicus’ model represents the motion of planets in a possible 
(Wp), but not an actual (Wa), universe. 
The difference between a representation’s being globally and 
locally inaccurate amounts to the claim that there are different ways 
in which there can be a gap between intentional content and the 
actual world. In saying that we can imagine the world to be other 
than it is, Searle is drawing our attention to our ability to depict the 
world in locally inaccurate ways. The fact that our representations 
are also globally inaccurate is unremarkable and is tantamount to 
the view that we can only represent certain aspects of the world at 
a time. If a belief is only idealized or globally inaccurate, that does 
not necessarily call for revision; only if a belief is locally inaccurate 
would it ordinarily be said to be false. 
There is a third and final way in which an intentional state might 
be compared to a model. If a model represents an object, it doesn’t 
necessarily do so simply by virtue of its being causally connected 
with that object. While it is undeniable that Copernicus’ model was 
the result of empirical observations, and so caused by the universe, 
this causal connection was not, at least in 1610, robust enough to 
distinguish this model from Ptolemy’s terra-centric or Tycho’s hybrid 
model. Assuming that each of these models could account for, and 
were formulated in response to the facts, these are nevertheless differ-
ent models—something for which the causalist cannot account. Note 
that this third provision targets representationalist accounts of men-
tal representation, which require a causal connection between object 
and belief.
PSYCHOLOGICAL MODES
Given the analogy between intentional states and scientific model-
ing, we are now in a position to present the entirety of Searle’s theory 
of intentionality. 
Intentional states represent their objects. The part of the inten-
tional state that represents these objects is called its representative 
content. The representative content is analogous to a model. The 
content represents a possible world—its conditions of satisfaction—
which may or may not correspond to the actual world. 

INTENTIONAL MENTAL STATES
37
One other ingredient is needed to formulate the bare bones of 
Searle’s account of intentionality—what Searle calls the psychologi-
cal mode. 
Generally speaking, the psychological mode of an intentional state 
specifies the manner in which one uses the representative content. In 
speech, I can do a number of things with a given representative con-
tent: I can assert something, I can express a desire, or I can make a 
promise. I can say: “I want to wash the car,” or “I promise to wash 
the car,” or, “The car is washed.” In doing so, I have brought the 
same content (washed car) under different modes or uses. Similarly, 
Searle is impressed by the fact that I can have a number of different 
intentional states which nevertheless can have a shared content—
I can think: The car is washed, or I wish the car were washed, or I will 
wash the car. In each case I am treating the same representative 
content in a variety of different ways.
With the notion of direction of fit Searle subdivides the various 
kinds of psychological modes into a manageable pair of classes. 
Psychological modes exhibit either a mind-to-world (downward) or a 
world-to-mind (upward) direction of fit. 
When the representative content represents a possible world which 
diverges from the actual world (so that the content is locally inaccu-
rate), the divergence only tells us that there is a gap or mis-fit which 
needs to be rectified. The direction of fit tells us how the gap between 
the represented possible world and the actual world ought to be 
closed. If my intentional content represents a possible world wherein 
my closet is full, and the actual world is such that it isn’t, the gap 
between the represented conditions of satisfaction and the actual 
state of my closet can be closed by either (1) changing the represen-
tative content and so changing the conditions of satisfaction or 
(2) by filling my closet so as to come into line with the original repre-
sented content. In either case, the represented possible world is brought 
into alignment with the actual world. 
If there is a discrepancy between the represented possible world 
and the actual world, when would I close that gap by changing the 
intentional content? I change the intentional content when my aim is 
to accurately represent the world so that the content functions in the 
service of a belief. I have a false belief about the state of my closet (it 
represents a non-actual, possible world in which my closet is full) and 
so change it to represent the world as it actually is. Beliefs have what 

JOHN SEARLE
38
Searle calls a mind-to-world or downward direction of fit: beliefs 
ought to fit the world. 
Where belief is the paradigm case of a psychological mode that 
stands in a mind-to-world direction of fit, there are other modes that 
likewise fall under this category. For example, I might be convinced, 
predict, postulate, suspect, worry, conclude, or fear that some con-
tent stands in a true or false relationship to the world. 
If the same representative content is brought under a different psy-
chological mode (than those which have a mind-to-world direction 
of fit, such as belief), I can close the gap by changing the world (rather 
than by changing the content). If the content functions in the service 
of the psychological mode, a desire to have a full closet, then I can 
make the possible world actual by filling my closet. Desires have a 
world-to-mind, upward direction of fit: the world should be made to 
match the mind’s content. Desire is the paradigm case of a psycho-
logical mode with a world-to-mind direction of fit. I might also wish, 
hope, will, or intend (in the narrower sense of the word) that the 
world be changed in a certain way.

INTENTIONAL MENTAL STATES
39
Psychological mode, and the associated notion of direction of fit, 
has a correlate in modeling: models are typically more akin to beliefs 
than desires, in that they attempt to portray the world as it is and not 
as we might like it to be. However, some models can serve as norma-
tive ideals, and so have a world-to-mind direction of fit—as when an 
economic libertarian attempts to push policies to bring the actual 
market closer to the ideal of a free market.8 
An intentional state’s direction of fit, then, captures the way in 
which all intentional states are inherently normative: intentional 
thought implies, at its base, the possibility of getting it wrong—or, 
more generally, misrepresenting how the world actually is. Both a 
false belief and a desire require that we can represent the world coun-
terfactually, as other than it is. In case of a mis-fit, we are then 
impelled to rectify the divergence. Searle writes that, “Intuitively we 
might say the idea of direction of fit is that of responsibility for 
fitting.”9 This comes out somewhat more clearly when Searle writes:
For any Intentional state with a direction of fit, a being that has 
that state must be able to distinguish the satisfaction from the 
frustration of that state. This follows from the fact that an Inten-
tional state is a representation of the conditions of its satisfaction. 
This does not mean that such beings will always or even most of 
the time get it right, that they won’t make mistakes; rather, it 
means that they must have the capacity for recognizing what it 
would be to get it right.10 
The representative content creates conditions for the possibility of a 
mis-fit between mind and world. But the psychological mode governs 
how we ought to proceed in rectifying that mis-fit if, on the one hand, 
the content is in the service of a belief, we need to change the content 
(change the conditions of satisfaction). If, on the other hand, the con-
tent is in the service of a desire, we satisfy it by changing the world.
We are now in a position to better understand Searle’s notion of 
conditions of satisfaction. The problem is that sometimes Searle uses 
the phrase, so far as beliefs are concerned, to flag the possible world 
as represented by the thinker (Wp) and sometimes uses the phrase to 
flag the actual world (Wa). Searle’s use of the phrase is not so much 
incoherent as it is muddled. However, the sense in which he uses the 
phrase is almost always transparent in context.

JOHN SEARLE
40
Confining his attention to beliefs, Searle attempts to rectify the ambi-
guity as follows:
The expression “conditions of satisfaction” has the usual process-
product ambiguity as between the requirement and the thing 
required. So, for example, if I believe that it is raining then the 
conditions of satisfaction of my belief are that it should be the 
case that it is raining (requirement). That is what my belief requires 
in order that it be a true belief. And if my belief actually is a true 
belief then there will be a certain condition in the world, namely 
the condition that it is raining (thing required), which is the condi-
tion of the satisfaction of my belief, i.e., the condition in the world 
which actually satisfies my belief.11 
I have a belief, with a downward direction of fit, that the closet is full 
(Wp) when in fact it is empty (Wa). Either Wp or Wa might be this 
belief’s condition of satisfaction, depending on how the phrase is 
used. Recall that beliefs are such that, if there is a divergence between 
Wp and Wa, I am obliged to change the belief. Thus the fact that the 
closet is empty (Wa) is the belief’s condition of satisfaction, in the 

INTENTIONAL MENTAL STATES
41
sense of the thing required. But Searle sometimes talks about Wp, 
rather than Wa, as its condition of satisfaction: this is the require-
ment (what would be required to be the case, if the belief were to be 
true). So far as beliefs are concerned, their conditions of satisfaction 
(requirement) are equivalent to its truth conditions.
Note that these distinctions only hold so far as Wp and Wa diverge. 
If I have the true belief that in 2007 George W. Bush was President of 
the United States, the content represents the conditions of satisfac-
tion both in the sense of requirement and thing required.
Note that the difficulty does not arise for intentional states with 
a world-to-mind direction of fit: conditions of satisfaction simply 
represent Wp.
To conclude, intentional states, for Searle, have two components. 
First, they have a content, which represents a possible state of affairs 
or conditions of satisfaction. This representative content makes it 
possible for an intentional statement to be about things. Second, that 
content serves under a psychological mode that dictates where the 
problem lies in case of a misfit between the conditions of satisfaction 
and the world: if the psychological mode is a belief, then the problem 
lies with the content, but if the psychological mode is a desire, it is the 
world which needs to be brought in line with the content. 
Searle summarizes these two components when he says that, in 
general, intentional states have the form “S(r),” where S is the 
psychological mode and r is the representative content.
EXTENDING THE THEORY
Intentional mental states include, but are not limited to the cases of 
belief and desire. Other states, such as fear, expectation, disappoint-
ment, regret, remorse, pride, and shame represent the world by way of 
either an upward or downward direction of fit. Fear, Searle contends, 
cannot be reduced to configurations of beliefs and desires—say, the 
belief that an intruder is in my house and the very strong desire that 
the intruder be gone. Both of these could be true without entailing 
that I fear the intruder. Nevertheless, beliefs and desires are para-
digm cases of intentionality.12
More dramatically, Searle extends his theory of intentionality to 
umbrella not just beliefs, desires, and other mental states such as 
fear, but perception and action. Indeed, there is a certain sense 

JOHN SEARLE
42
in which belief and desire are not even the paradigm cases of 
intentionality: 
Beliefs and desires are not the primary forms, rather they are 
etiolated forms of more primordial experiences in perceiving 
and doing. Intention, for example, is not a fancy form of desire; it 
would be more accurate to think of desire as a faded form of 
intention, intention with the Intentional causation bleached out.13
All beliefs, desires, and intentional mental states model or are about 
the world. Searle describes these cases as etiolated or faded because, 
as described, the states appear relatively disembodied: they represent 
possible worlds and the actual world may or may not correspond to 
them. Beliefs and desires have some bearing on the world as the direc-
tion of satisfaction indicates what ought to be fixed in case of a dis-
parity. But this normative imposition on us still understates the sense 
in which intentional phenomena are part of the world, part of the 
causal mesh leading up to and away from these mental states. Things 
typically cause us to have beliefs about those things. Desires can actu-
alize their conditions of satisfaction. Perception and action are 
robust, primal cases of this embeddedness, where the world’s bring-
ing about a certain content, or else the content bringing about some 
state of affairs in the world, is not just a possibility, but definitional: 
perception and action are defined in terms of their realized content.
Perception
A belief’s intentional content represents conditions of satisfaction 
(requirement) to the extent that the conditions of satisfaction diverge 
from the actual world; the belief is false and needs to be changed. 
Perception includes visual experience which, like the content of 
belief, represents a set of conditions of satisfaction. Both contents 
represent the world under a certain aspect, drawing out certain 
features while suppressing others. Copernicus’ model represents 
the universe, but the universe under the aspect of celestial movement. 
As such it is merely globally inaccurate. 
Just as the content of a belief can be wrong—it represents condi-
tions of satisfaction or a possible world which does not resemble the 
actual world—so can visual experiences misrepresent the world. The 
most vivid example of this is a hallucination, whose conditions of 

INTENTIONAL MENTAL STATES
43
satisfaction represent, for example, an oasis in the desert when in fact 
there is nothing but sand. I can similarly have a false belief about the 
existence of an oasis. 
Both perceptions and beliefs have a mind-to-world direction of fit, 
so that in case there is a disparity between the represented conditions 
of satisfaction (requirement) and the way that the world in fact is, the 
fault lies with the content. Contrawise, a desire whose content con-
cerns a desert oasis, finds fault with the world, so that the content is 
only satisfied if we, say, act to build such an oasis. Also, both beliefs 
and perceptions are identified in terms of their constitutive content 
or visual experience, so that my saying “I see an oasis” need not imply 
that there is an oasis.
Against this background of similarities, we are now in a position 
to discuss the principle point of difference between beliefs and per-
ceptions. Where the content of beliefs represent the conditions of 
satisfaction in a way that does not require direct acquaintance with 
its object, visual experience relates to its conditions of satisfaction in 
a way which is direct, immediate, and involuntary. The basic idea is 
that the content of a belief can represent a desert as having an oasis, 
and that belief will be true depending on whether the desert does in 
fact have an oasis. But a veridical or true perception requires more 
than (1) a visual experience whose conditions of satisfaction include 
an oasis and (2) there actually being an oasis that would satisfy its 
conditions of satisfaction. The visual experience’s conditions of sat-
isfaction must also (3) represent the actual oasis as being the cause of 
the visual experience. Searle describes this third requirement in terms 
of the content of visual experience being “causally self-referential.” 
The idea is that a belief about the oasis may be true whether or not its 
content is caused by its object. Not so with perception. A perception 
of an oasis is not veridical, even if there is an oasis, unless that experi-
ence is further caused by the oasis (and is not some optical effect).
This causal immediacy moves Searle to sometimes talk of a visual 
experience not just representing its conditions of satisfaction, but pre-
senting those conditions of satisfaction. This distinction emphasizes 
the way in which perception, for Searle, must be directly caused by its 
conditions of satisfaction if it is to be veridical. 
Perceptions and beliefs are further distinguished on several other 
grounds. 
First, Searle stipulates that “perception,” unlike “belief,” is a 
success term. One can have a false belief, but one cannot have a 

JOHN SEARLE
44
perce ption which isn’t veridical (caused by the very thing its condi-
tions of satisfaction represent). In that way, “perception” semanti-
cally functions in a way that is more akin to “knowledge” than 
“belief.” Searle’s deployment of the term is potentially confusing as it 
breaks the analogy with the notion of belief. 
Second, the content of beliefs need not be conscious, whereas 
visual experiences must necessarily be conscious.14 This has the effect 
of excluding the so-called “blind sight cases” from the sphere of per-
ception. In these quasi-subliminal cases, a person behaves as if some-
thing was seen, but did not have a visual experience of the object.15 
Third, while both beliefs and perceptions represent their condi-
tions of satisfaction under a certain aspect (are globally inaccurate), 
because the perception is comprised of a conscious visual experience, 
that aspect more specifically concerns the point of view of the 
perceiver and the world’s spatiotemporal features. Notice that 
the aspect under which Copernicus’ belief or model represents the 
universe is not from any particular point of view.
Action
In Chapter 4 we will outline Searle’s account of action. Briefly and 
intuitively, Searle defines action in terms of its causes, so that in order 
for a body movement to count as an action it must be brought about 
by beliefs and desires (or other intentional states). Because these 
beliefs, desires, and other possible mental states (such as fear or 
shame) are intentional states, and body movements which are actions 
must be caused by such states, Searle extends the concept of the 
intentional to include the body movements themselves. Indeed, as we 
saw in the case of perception, there is a certain sense in which actions 
are more properly intentional than the states which give rise to the 
associated behavior. 
Like perception, the principle difference between desire and action 
is that the action is causally self-referential. Where a desire’s content 
represents a possible state of affairs (its conditions of satisfaction), 
the notion of an action further includes the requirement that the con-
tent itself bring about those possible states of affairs. This is just the 
requirement that the beliefs and desires involved in raising my hand 
cause my hand to rise. 
Action is thus necessarily intentional: all actions must be preceded 
by a set of intentional states, such as beliefs and desires. Entities like 

INTENTIONAL MENTAL STATES
45
thermostats and amoebas, which are not capable of sustaining 
intentionality, are thus incapable of acting (although they are capa-
ble of mere behavior). In Chapter 5, we will begin to discuss Searle’s 
philosophy of language. According to Searle, speech acts are the 
fundamental units of language. Because the notion of action is nec-
essarily intentional, this concept of action, discussed in Chapter 4, 
bridges Searle’s philosophy of mind and his philosophy of language. 

46
CHAPTER 4
REASON AND ACTION
We can locate our behavior on a scale that begins with body 
movements that happen to us and ends with those that we make 
happen. Coughing, tripping over something, and startle responses 
might be thus distinguished from waving at someone to get their 
attention, or saying hello, or even simply raising my arm. The latter 
are voluntary in ways that the former are not. Between these extremes 
is a range of intermediary behaviors—breathing, for example, is 
something that we have a limited amount of control over.
Philosophers of action attempt to say what distinguishes full-
blooded action from those behaviors which are involuntary or less 
voluntary. If we confine our attention just to the behavior itself, the 
action may seem indistinguishable from a body movement which is 
not the agent’s own. In articulating the puzzle, Searle paraphrases 
Ludwig Wittgenstein in asking: if I raise my arm, what is left over if 
I subtract the fact that my arm went up?1 
Almost all commentators agree that actions can be distinguished 
from other varieties of body movements in that actions happen inten-
tionally, for a reason. An action’s connection to some mental event, 
intention, or reason, screens it off from body movements that we are 
reluctant to characterize as actions. Along these lines, Donald 
Davidson—a principal discussant in the action literature—writes, 
“Central to the relation between a reason and an action it explains is 
the idea that the agent performed the action because he had the 
reason.”2 But there remains sharp disagreement over how we ought 
to interpret the claim that actions are explained by appeal to the 
reasons had by an agent. Davidson that if an agent performs an action 
because he had a reason, the significance of this claim will remain 
“dark” until “we can account for the force of that ‘because.’”3 

REASON AND ACTION
47
What is Davidson getting at here? An agent acts because he has a 
reason, but the subordinating conjunction (“because”) that connects 
action and reason is notoriously slippery. “Because” might be inter-
preted in at least three not entirely distinct, senses.4 
THREE SENSES OF THE WORD “BECAUSE”
The word “because” is often used inferentially, so that we can adduce 
something, which is otherwise hidden, from manifest signs. I may 
infer that a friend is sick because he is coughing and wheezing. His 
coughing and wheezing are only symptoms of having influenza, as 
someone may have the flu and yet not be coughing and wheezing. 
But the symptoms, which are easy to recognize, are typically reliable 
enough for me to infer something that would otherwise be difficult to 
detect—the presence of a virus in the respiratory tract. In using 
“because” inferentially, we justify why we believe what we do. But 
there is another mode of justification, which is likewise flagged 
by the subordinating conjunction. Sometimes I justify a course of 
action, as when I explain to a traffic officer that I was speeding 
because I was late. The traffic officer, in turn, cites the law to justify 
his giving me a ticket. Whether we give reasons for beliefs or actions, 
we’ll call the justificatory use of the subordinating conjunction, 
“becausej.” Note that this use need not imply that the justification is 
good. The importance of this sense of the word “because,” so far as 
Searle is concerned, will become clear later in the chapter. 
There are two other senses of the word “because” that might be 
distinguished from “becausej.”
“Because” may also be used to denote a causal relationship bet-
ween various events in the world. Someone might point out that the 
roof collapsed because of the heavy rains or that the car accident 
occurred because a bush obscured the driver’s ability to see oncom-
ing traffic. Such uses of the subordinating conjunction (“becausee,” 
where “e” stands for “etiological”) endeavor to causally explain 
one event by appeal to causally antecedent events.5 We might thus 
causally explain the expulsion of a political incumbent by appeal to 
dissatisfaction among religious voters. “Becausee” maps objectively 
real, law-like or quasi law-like relations between two or more events, 
and has nothing to do with the legitimacy of our beliefs or actions. 
The relation map ped by the subordinating conjunction is ontological 
rather than epistemic.

JOHN SEARLE
48
Finally, there is a sense of the word “because” that is neither justifi-
catory, nor causally explanatory, but rather clarificatory. The clarifica-
tory use (“becausec”) does not seek to justify, nor does it articulate a 
nomological connection found in the world, but rather aims to illumi-
nate what we mean. If I say, “The house is too small because the 
builder misread the plans,” I am using the subordinating conjunction 
in the causally explanatory sense of the word—the misreading explains 
how the house came to be as small as it is. But contrast this with the 
claim, “The house is too small because there is no room for the grand 
piano.”6 In this case I am clarifying what it is for the house to be too 
small; someone else might complain that the house is too small because 
there are not enough bedrooms for the children. There not being 
enough bedrooms for the children does not cause the house to be too 
small, in the way that the builder’s misreading of the plans might. 
This statement rather provides an interpretation of a claim that might 
not otherwise be understood—namely the sense in which the house is 
too small. Not having enough bedrooms or not being able to accom-
modate the piano is, in this case, what counts as being too small. 
Note that in this example, “becausec” can be distinguished from 
“becausej.” While there is a context in which I could be construed as 
justifying why I think the house is too small, there are also contexts 
in which I am simply saying what I mean by “small.” I might say “he 
is a bachelor because he is unmarried” to a child who does not yet 
understand the word. Here I am not justifying why I think someone 
is a bachelor. A speaker and a hearer must use words in the same way 
before justification is even possible.
A central disagreement in the philosophy of action can be brought 
to light by understanding the difference between the causal and 
the clarificatory senses of the word “because.” Recall Davidson’s 
requirement that in order to understand what an action is, we must 
“account for the force of that ‘because’” that links behavior and rea-
sons. Elizabeth Anscombe championed the view that actions and 
reasons are linked by the noncausalist, clarificatory sense of the word 
“because.” But in 1963 Davidson ushered the introduction of a new 
orthodoxy, wherein actions came to be seen, not as clarified, but as 
causally explained by reasons.
ANSCOMBE ON THE FORCE OF THE “BECAUSEC”
Davidson’s causalist account is, in many ways, the more straightfor-
ward of the two views. In Davidson’s groundbreaking paper, the 

REASON AND ACTION
49
obscurity of Anscombe’s view was cited as a principal reason to 
endorse the Aristotelean, “common-sense” view that reasons cause 
actions. “I would urge” Davidson writes, “that failing a satisfactory 
alternative, the best argument for a scheme like Aristotle’s is that it 
alone promises to give an account of the ‘mysterious connection’ 
between reasons and actions.”7
But Anscombe’s view is not nearly as mysterious as Davidson sug-
gests. Anscombe agrees with the claim that one acts because one has 
a reason, and that having a reason distinguishes cases of action from 
other varieties of body movement. But in placing a reason at the 
right of the subordinating conjunction, we are not thereby citing an 
event which is causally antecedent to the action in question. If I say 
“The coffee is good becausec it is not bitter,” I am not saying that lack 
of bitterness causally explains the coffee’s goodness or even necessar-
ily justifies why I think the coffee is good; I am rather specifying the 
way in which this particular coffee is good. 
Anscombe prompts us to reflect on the ordinary situations where 
we find ourselves puzzled about the significance of someone’s beha-
vior (which, like the sounds that come out of our mouths, may be 
meaningful). Off in the distance a man, walking by a tree, begins to 
maniacally flail his arms. In this concrete situation we might be 
puzzled about the significance of the behavior. We might ask of 
him, “Why were you waving so violently?” If he responds, “I waved 
my hands becausec I wanted to get your attention,” he is clarifying 
the significance of his action: by moving his arms he meant “look 
over here.” To be able to cite a reason, in Anscombe’s view, entails 
the ability to clarify or rearticulate the significance of the event—
thunderstorms do not happen for a reason precisely because they 
are not normally the sort of thing of which we can demand an 
interpretation.
A common way to reject a request for clarification or reinterpreta-
tion is to answer a different kind of why-question. Our interlocutor 
might, for example, do this by providing a causal history of the body 
movement—“I waved my hands becausee the cobweb startled me.”8 
There is no answer to the clarificatory why-question as the behavior 
is, we discover, like the thunder storm, not the sort of thing for 
which we can demand clarification or interpretation; the behavior, 
in short, is found not to be an action. All actions, for Anscombe, are 
capable of being interpreted, clarified, or elucidated. When bank 
robber Willie Sutton was asked why he robbed banks he famously 
responded, “Becausee that is where the money is.”9 His response, in 

JOHN SEARLE
50
effect, was a rejection of the question which, presumably, sought an 
interpretation or clarification of these actions. If he had answered 
that question, he might have said that he robbed banks becausec he 
intended to comment on the ruthlessness of American capitalism, 
or to express a kind of internal rage, or whatnot. Part of what is so 
chilling about his response is the implied possibility that human 
behavior is more akin to a force of nature than something we mean-
ingfully do.
Note that Anscombe is not denying that actions are caused by 
mental states. She is rather pointing out that when we look at the 
ordinary case where interpretive disambiguation is required, to cite a 
cause is often tantamount to denying that the behavior is the sort of 
thing that even could be clarified. A mental state may precede an 
action, but when it comes to why-questions which are requests for 
clarification, she denies that “it is in itself of very great importance.”10 
Also, as indicated above, there is an intimate, but not necessary link 
between clarifications and justifications. Anscombe exploits this 
link to show how clarifications can often also be construed as 
reasons for action.
DAVIDSON ON THE FORCE OF THE “BECAUSEE”
Anscombe thinks the fact that a body movement may be brought 
about by certain mental causes is irrelevant to the determination of 
whether or not that body movement is an action. For her, an action 
just is the kind of body movement which can be interpreted or clari-
fied; it is the sort of thing that can be misunderstood. By contrast 
Davidson thinks that certain body movements are actions because 
the movements are brought about in the right way. A body move-
ment’s causal history is, thus, of tremendous importance for David-
son. Body movements that can be traced to beliefs and desires (what 
he calls “primary reasons”) are actions; otherwise, the body move-
ments are, at best, reactions. The flailing of arms was an action if a 
causal trail can be drawn from his desire to draw our attention to the 
behavior; the arm movements fail to be an action if it was largely 
a blind response to running into a spider web.
When Davidson claims that we act because we have reasons, he 
understands “because” in the ordinary, causal sense of the word. 
Indeed, he seems to go so far as to suggest that there is no other way 
to understand the subordinating conjunction.11

REASON AND ACTION
51
For better or for worse, Davidson’s view has long established itself 
as orthodoxy in the philosophy of action. Searle’s own views on 
action are largely Davidsonian (Searle and Davidson were colleagues 
at the University of California at Berkeley).
SEARLE’S ACCOUNT OF ACTION IN INTENTIONALITY
Searle’s account of action, at least as presented in Intentionality, is 
largely Davidsonian, as both distinguish actions from other body 
movements by appeal to the fact that actions have a mental cause.
Both Davidson and Searle require that every action has what Searle 
calls, in Rationality in Action, a “motivator.”12 A paradigm case of a 
motivator is a desire. If I have a desire to eat ice cream, this is what 
motivates me to do so. Of course, each action (such as eating ice 
cream) is further enabled or made possible by means of a series of 
beliefs: in order to satisfy my desires, I must correctly believe, for 
example, that ice cream is to be found in the freezer rather than in the 
pantry. But desires, as well as other kinds of motivators, are what 
ultimately impel action; they contain, within the representative con-
tent, the point of the resulting behavior. Without desires, for example, 
action would be impossible—that is, there would be no reason to 
move an arm or make a sound. In Chapter 9 we will see that Searle 
allows for “desire-independent” motivators, as when we act for moral 
reasons or else from duties and obligations.
Differences between Davidson’s and Searle’s accounts of action 
can, of course, be found in the details. For example, while Davidson 
describes mental causes in terms of beliefs and desires (primary rea-
sons), Searle prefers the more inclusive notion of intentionality. 
Recall from Chapter 3, that beliefs and desires are intentional, but 
not all intentional states (such as fear) can be reduced to configura-
tions of beliefs and desires. In a latter paper, Davidson concedes that 
intentions cannot be reduced to beliefs and desires.13
Searle expands Davidson’s account by suggesting that a body 
movement’s mental cause—what he calls an “intention in action”—
may itself be caused by another kind of intention, the “prior 
intention.”14 This is not a fundamental departure from Davidson’s 
account, but the addition of a prior mental cause does help Searle 
avoid the so-called “deviant causal chain” puzzle.
In order for behavior to count as an action, the intentionality 
which brings about the behavior must be causally self-referential: the 

JOHN SEARLE
52
intentions must cause its conditions of satisfaction, the bodily move-
ments. But while this is a necessary condition, it is not sufficient: 
philosophers have worried about cases in which the beliefs and desires 
bring about the intended behavior in the wrong way. R. M. Chisholm 
imagines a case where someone intends to kill his uncle. He sets out 
in his car to do just that. But he is so distracted by the prospect of 
killing his uncle that he fails to see someone in the road, and so runs 
him over. The pedestrian, further, happens to be his uncle. In this 
case the intention to kill his uncle caused the killing of his uncle; but 
in spite of the connection, this killing is not an action.15 Philosophers 
are tasked with explaining the difference between genuine acts of 
murder and this degenerate case; the difference cannot be simply that 
the act of murder is caused by some intention or desire.
It is with this puzzle in mind that Searle introduces the distinction 
between prior intentions and intentions in action. The man’s running 
over his uncle is not a case of murder because, while he had the prior 
intention to kill his uncle, and this prior intention brought about 
the uncle’s death, it did not do so by way of an intention in action. 
Consider the contrasting case. The man sets out with the (prior) 
intention of killing his uncle. He sees his uncle crossing the road 
which leads him to steer intentionally into his victim. This second 
“intention in action” is the one that matters in distinguishing genu-
ine actions from those consequences which result from inattentive 
driving. This is a case of genuine murder, an action; the behavior is 
caused not just by some intention or other, but by an intention in 
action. 
Searle solves the problem of deviant causal chains by suggesting 
that while the driver had a prior intention to kill his uncle, he did not 
do so with the requisite intention in action. This explains why we are 
not tempted to charge the driver with first degree murder.16
It is not uncommon for a prior intention to eventually cause me to 
act in a particular way. But it is not necessary that the action be in 
accordance with that prior intention. For example, I might have the 
prior intention to vote for candidate A in an election. Upon situating 
myself in the voting booth, I have a sudden change of heart and vote 
for candidate B. The fact that this action was not in accord with a 
prior intention does not mean I did not act—this is not a case of 
someone’s forcing my hand to vote for candidate B or a case of my 
accidentally checking candidate B because my hand cramped at the 
last moment. The vote is still an action because the body movement 

REASON AND ACTION
53
can be traced, if not to a prior intention, to the intention in action 
which constituted my change of heart. Even in the case where I voted 
for candidate A, my action is an action, not because I had the prior 
intention to vote for A, but because the body movement can be traced 
to an intention in action to vote for A; the prior intention, in this 
case, was only the cause of the intention in action—the one that 
matters in distinguishing actions from mere body movements.
Another difference between Davidson’s and Searle’s accounts of 
action concerns the extension of the word “action.” For Davidson, 
“action” refers to a type of body movement—namely, those which 
are appropriately caused by certain mental states. Searle stipulates 
that the word “action” covers not just the body movement, but also 
the intention which causes it. The difference between these two senses 
is trivial. Davidson’s use does not refer to any body movement, but 
only those body movements that are caused by mental states. Searle, 
recognizing that the causal history is an essential ingredient of the 
notion, decides to explicitly include those mental states (intentions 
in action) under the umbrella of the term. 
Davidson’s account of action may be schematized as in Figure 4.1:
The overall picture presented by Searle is as seen in Figure 4.2:
The difference is nominal, differing over whether “action” is predi-
cated over the behavior (which in both cases must be caused by the 
intention) or the intention-behavior pairing. Consider “stumbling.” 
In order to stumble there must be an exogenous cause, whether or 
not that cause is denoted by “stumble.” The Oxford English Diction-
ary defines “stumble” as follows: “To miss one’s footing, or trip over 

JOHN SEARLE
54
an obstacle, in walking or running, so as to fall or be in danger of 
falling.” Does “stumble” refer to the case of your body’s falling for-
ward (prompted by your having hit an obstacle)? Or does it refer to a 
combination of hitting something and then falling forward? Indeed, 
is there a genuine philosophical problem of stumbling here? There is 
not—there is just a narrow and wider use of the word, both of which 
are made true or false by the same sequence of events.
Note that Davidson’s use of the term is probably more in line with 
our ordinary understanding; when we speak of someone acting, we 
typically have only their body movements in mind, even if we grant 
that it is the case that those body movements must be caused by some 
intention or other. 
To conclude, in accounting “for the force of that ‘because’” which 
links action and intention, Searle follows Davidson in recommending 
that the “because” is causal. Actions are simply those behaviors that 
are causally connected to intentional states such as beliefs and 
desires.
SEARLE’S ACCOUNT OF ACTION IN RATIONALITY IN ACTION
Rationality in Action (2001) builds on the basic causalist account of 
action as found in Intentionality (1983) to more sharply diverge from 
Davidson’s view. “Because” links actions and intentions, but Searle’s 
mature view denies that the subordinating conjunction can be con-
strued exclusively in terms of causation (“becausee”). In particular, 
Searle argues that the “because” must also include a justificatory 
element (“becausej”).
Searle begins by arguing against those—including Davidson—who 
view the link between intentions and behavior as simply causal. He 
calls the causalist account “the Classical Model.”
Because beliefs and desires are causally efficacious, it is tempting 
to push the analogy between these and other varieties of causal ante-
cedents. Consider the following examples of causation. First, the rain 
falls and collects on the branches and leaves of a water oak, causing 
one of the older branches to break and fall. Second, someone forci-
bly manipulates my arm into a raised position. Third, I willfully and 
intentionally raise my arm. The first and second effects are distin-
guished from the third case in that the first and second effects were 
not the (direct) result of an intentional cause. 

REASON AND ACTION
55
According to the regularity theory of causation, whose advocates 
include Hume, any time certain conditions are satisfied—the branch 
is not overly thick, the cellular structure has been weakened with age, 
gravity is present, a certain amount of water has collected, and so 
on—it is invariably the case that the branch will fall. Similarly, if 
someone grasps my arm with sufficient force and applies sufficient 
pressure, assuming there are no obstacles, my arm must rise. Note 
that any one of these conditions is not sufficient to break the branch 
or raise my arm. If water accumulates on the branch, but it is rela-
tively thick or else resting on another branch, it will not fall. If the 
attempted manipulation of my arm is cancelled out by my own 
strength, it will not rise. But if the weight of the water or the upward 
force of the push is complemented by a series of other conditions, 
then the regularity theory of causation holds that these must always 
eventuate in the aforementioned effects. That is, according to this 
model of causation, every effect is nomologically necessitated by 
some earlier state; if those initial conditions are replicated, the same 
kind of effect is bound to result. 
Looking at the third case, wherein I choose to raise my arm, regu-
larity theorists might likewise contend that a constellation of beliefs 
and desires (or other intentional states) are such that they entail or 
necessitate my arm’s going up. Anyone with the same beliefs and 
desires would, all things being equal, invariably raise their arm. Like 
causes are followed by like effects, even within the realm of inten-
tional, agentive causation.

JOHN SEARLE
56
While Searle endorses the regularity theory of causation as applied 
to nonintentional phenomena,17 he strongly disagrees with those who 
would extend it to the case of intentional causation. The Classical 
Model sees action as a kind of vector which results from the com-
bined forces of an agent’s various beliefs and desires. These various 
intentional contents are causally sufficient for action. Searle does not 
deny that such contents are among an action’s causal antecedents, 
but denies that any action can be fully, sufficiently explained by 
appeal to intentional contents. 
There are, of course, times when our mental states do fully compel 
action—as when we cannot help ourselves in the face of a particu-
larly strong or intractable desire. Addiction, love, or fear might induce 
an experience such that we feel subject to those intentional states. 
We might, in these cases, have the experience of standing outside of 
ourselves or watching ourselves being acted on rather than acting. 
But these are atypical, degenerate cases of acting. Searle’s principle 
complaint with the Classical Model is that it has the effect of elevat-
ing these exceptional cases to the paradigm case. 
But in rational cases of action, if our beliefs and desires are not 
causally sufficient conditions for action, what causes, for example, 
my hand to go up?
The simple answer is that I do. I am not, contra Hume, simply a 
bundle of intentional states. In particular the self includes both voli-
tional and cognitive components. The volitional component wills or 
initiates action; Searle calls this part of the self the “agent.” Agency 
is causally sufficient to bring about certain bodily movements. But 
the important thing to see is that this mode of causation does not 
appear to be necessitated by extant conditions in the world, be they 
beliefs and desires, or neural-biological configurations. But neither is 
volition a case of causation ex nihilo, which is causally insensitive to 
the world. An action is willed, not simply by virtue of a set of beliefs 
and desires, but in consultation with those beliefs and desires. That is, 
while beliefs and desires do not causally necessitate a course of 
action, as per the regulatory theory of causation, they still may be 
said to cause and justify an action. Thus full selves include, not just 
the capacity for agency or volition, but clusters of beliefs, desires, 
perceptions, memories, and other intentional states. Moreover, these 
various intentional contents and volitional faculties must be gath-
ered within a unified field which flags these as the agent’s own. 

REASON AND ACTION
57

JOHN SEARLE
58
The Classical Model of action has several advantages over Searle’s. It 
is more elegant and much easier to reconcile with Searle’s own com-
mitment to Scientific Naturalism. However, as we have seen, it misses 
one vital feature: it cannot account for the experience of acting. In 
raising my arm I do not feel as though this is something to which 
I am subject. My own beliefs and desires do not typically compel 
my arm in the same way that another human being could or in the 
way that an accumulation of rain causes a branch to fall. In spite of 
the Classical Model’s theoretical virtues, it runs exactly counter to 
our own, undeniable experience of psychological freedom—being 
able to decide how we are to act. Without the experience of psycho-
logical freedom, the experience of moving my own arm would be 
uncomfortably close to the experience of having my arm moved or 
manipulated, except the acting forces would be endogenous rather 
than exogenous. But even when confronted with a desire to do some-
thing which does not conflict with any other desire, we retain the 
sense that we can do otherwise. We may decide to act on that desire, 
and in doing so we can cite the desire as both a cause and a reason of 
the action; but in saying that the desire was a cause, we do not imply 
that we were somehow compelled to action. Thus, so far as actions 
are concerned, while beliefs and desires are among the causes of an 
action, they are not causally sufficient.
Of course, perhaps the experience of freedom is an illusion. In that 
case Searle’s model of action, at best, articulates how words such 
as “self,” “action,” and “reason” function grammatically within the 
English language. If freedom is an illusion, Searle’s model is onto-
logically inert. We will consider this possibility below.
According to Searle’s model, the principle motivation for the pos-
tulation of the self is the experience of freedom. This freedom takes 
place within what Searle calls the gap: “the gap is that feature of our 
conscious decision making and acting where we sense alternative 
future decisions and actions as causally open to us.”18  
The self operates within the gap and in consultation with the 
intentional store, but remains a sufficient source of action. In fact, 
between the desire to do something and the completion of an action 
there are three gaps or points at which the self can intervene. In con-
sultation with the intentional store, the self arrives at a decision to 
act in a way that is sensitive to an agent’s beliefs and desires (prior 
intentions), then decides to act (intentions in action), acts, and then 
brings the act to completion.19 Because the initial decision is sensitive 

REASON AND ACTION
59

JOHN SEARLE
60
to an agent’s particular constellation of beliefs and desires, these are 
causal factors. But because volition may nevertheless abort the chain 
of events that begins with a set of beliefs and desires, and ends with 
the completion of the action, the beliefs and desires may not be said 
to be causally sufficient. 
We are now in a position to describe the transition from Searle’s 
earlier account of action as found in Intentionality, to his more 
mature account of action as found in Rationality in Action. While 
most philosophers agree that actions happen because of reasons, 
there is considerable disagreement over the sense in which the subor-
dinating conjunction must be understood. As we have seen, in Inten-
tionality Searle follows Davidson in recommending that actions 
happen becausee of reasons; in order for behavior to count as an 
action it is must be caused by intentional states. 
To be clear, in Rationality in Action, Searle still maintains that 
actions must be caused by intentional states; thus, he continues to 
endorse the account of action as found in Intentionality. But he 
denies that these intentional states are causally sufficient for, or even 
proximal causes of, action. The proper, sufficient cause of an action 
is the self. But because the self acts in consultation with various 
beliefs and desires, those intentional states or reasons are not caus-
ally inert. So there remains a sense in which actions happen becausee 
of intentions in action, as per Searle’s earlier account.
However, Searle’s reconsidered view adds an additional way in 
which actions are linked to intentional states: not only are beliefs and 
desires causally relevant but they can be used to further justify or 
warrant an action. Intentional states that justify an action have nor-
mative force. Caught speeding, I attempt to justify my action by 
appealing to my desire not to be late: “I was speeding becausej I didn’t 
want to be late.” It is also the case that this same desire caused me to 
speed: “I was speeding becausee I didn’t want to be late.” But not 
every cause of some action can be used to justify the action: the fact 
that my tank had gas in it was also among the causes of my speeding 
(without it’s being full I would not have been speeding), but it does 
not warrant my speeding. 
There are two ways in which X can fail to justify Y. First, X can be 
a bad reason or justification. While being late is not a great reason to 
speed, the fact that one’s hair needs to be blown dry is a positively 
bad reason to speed. However, X can fail to justify Y in a more severe 
sense. Y or X may not be the kind of things that can stand in a 

REASON AND ACTION
61
justi ficatory relation in the first place. X, in this case, might not even 
count as a bad justification of Y. I’ll use the word “unjustifiable” 
to flag phenomena which are not even candidates for justification, 
good or bad. 
Consider three instances in which Y is unjustifiable. Typically, 
although not always, the thing being justified must be an action. 
Something can be an unjustifiable Y, then, if that Y is not an action. 
For example, the rain causally explains why a branch fell, but doesn’t 
justify its falling. The problem, here, is not that the rain badly justi-
fies the branch’s falling. Rather, rain and branches are not the sort of 
things that can stand in a justificatory relationship in the first place; 
they are unjustifiable. An analogous case is one where someone 
physically forces my arm up. My behavior is unjustifiable. But, in this 
case, my arm going up is not an action. 
Searle’s innovation is to suggest that there are also some actions 
which are also unjustifiable.
An addict shoots heroin because of a desire to feel pleasure. This is 
an action, according to both Searle and Davidson, because the beha-
vior is caused by intentions in action. But the desire to feel pleasure 
fails to justify the heroin shot. As stated, the significance of this claim 
is left ambiguous. It could mean simply that the desire to feel pleasure 
is not a good justification; the addict has other, better reasons to not 
shoot heroin. But now imagine that the addict is severely, blindly 
addicted: the desire for heroin has totally eclipsed these competing 
motivators so that he or she cannot help but pursue the drug. Notice 
that for the superaddict, the shooting of heroin remains an action—it 
is behavior caused by intentions in action. But the action is unjustifi-
able. It is not the sort of event that could be justified. It is not that the 
action is done for bad reasons, but—like the fallen tree limb—it is not 
the sort of thing for which a justification, good or bad, could be 
given. The shooting of heroin, in this case, is more like a blind force 
of nature, whose causes cannot be traced back to a self.
Given the Searle-Davidson definition of action, what distinguishes 
rational actions from irrational actions? Irrational actions are com-
pelled from within; these are actions that couldn’t be otherwise, as 
by way of an overwhelming desire. While such actions are caused by 
intentional states, they are otherwise akin to natural phenomena. 
Such incidents typically displace the agent from the sphere of 
accountability, as under the legal concept of diminished capacity. 
Irrational actions are those that are easily brought under the standard, 

JOHN SEARLE
62
regularity theory of causation. Searle remarks with some astonish-
ment that the Classical Model of action ends up endorsing as 
paradigm a variety of actions that would normally be thought of as 
irrational. 
I want to say that cases of actions for which the antecedent beliefs 
and desires really are causally sufficient, far from being models of 
rationality, are in fact bizarre and typically irrational cases. These 
are the cases where, for example, the agent is in the grip of an 
obsession or an addiction and cannot do otherwise than to act 
upon his desire. But in a typical case of rational decision making 
where, for example, I am trying to decide which candidate to vote 
for, I have a choice and I consider various reasons for choosing 
among the alternatives available to me. But I can only engage in 
this activity if I assume that my set of beliefs and desires by itself 
is not causally sufficient to determine my action.20
Rational actions, then, are simply those where one is able to other-
wise act, even given an identical configuration of intentional states. 
If I want to eat and need to eat, but decide not to, my action, although 
badly justified, remains rational. It is rational precisely because I was 
not internally or externally compelled to behave in a certain way. 
Searle’s considered view is as follows. In order to count as an action, 
a behavior must be caused by intentions in action, which include 
beliefs and desires. But not all actions are rational. Rational actions 
are those where the intentions in action do not necessitate or guaran-
tee one behavior or another. Actions which stem from overwhelming 
intentional states, such as drug addiction, are not rational; they are 
unjustifiable. Rational actions are caused by the self, in consultation 
with one’s intentional states. Rational actions are thus caused by 
intentional states, without being determined by those same states. 
Just to be clear, not all rational actions are, further, justified 
(although all justified actions are rational). Justified actions do not 
just happen in consultation with intentional states, but are optimally 
executed by way of some standard. Someone who attempts to lose 
weight by strictly adhering to a diet of french fries may be acting 
rationally—they are not in any way compelled to eat fast food even 
given their desire to lose weight. But the action is badly justified—
such a diet is a poor way to lose weight. As mentioned, there are two 
senses in which an action can fail to be justified: it can be unjustified 

REASON AND ACTION
63
in that I am acting for bad reasons. Or it can be unjustifiable, in that 
my action is not the sort of event for which any reasons—good 
or bad—can be proffered. Unjustifiable actions are irrational and 
imply compulsion or some kind or other. Mere behavior is likewise 
unjustifiable.
Searle’s emphasis between Intentionality and Rationality in Action 
has thus changed. As in Intentionality, he still believes that actions 
are caused by intentional states (becausee). However, with the intro-
duction of genuine agency, actions and reasons now stand in two 
relations: while the causal link between intentional states and actions 
hold, those intentional states can, further, justify or rationalize those 
actions. Indeed, actions are not simply behavior that has the right 
causal pedigree; actions are typically the sort of events which can be 
justified (or fail to be justified, in the weak sense). And this is only 
possible if action is something that is willed by a self. Contra 
Davidson, only when intentional states and body movements are 
mediated by the self (take place in the gap; are rational) can those 
intentional states properly be said to be reasons: action not only 
happen becausee of reasons, but, more importantly, rational actions 
happen becausej of reasons. 
Behavior
Mere behavior
(unjustiable)
Irrational
unjustifiable
action
Justified action
Unjustified
action
Rational action
Action

JOHN SEARLE
64
FREEDOM AND SCIENTIFIC NATURALISM: 
THE ONTOLOGICAL QUESTION
Given that the gap—the sense of being able to do otherwise—is so 
radically consistent with our experience in acting, why is the domi-
nant Classical Model committed to a view which seeks to remove, 
downplay, or reduce this central feature of action? Recall that Searle 
is a Scientific Naturalist, in that he endorses the view that physics 
describes the basic constituents of the world. Searle is especially 
interested in locating various features of the world—mind, language, 
institutions—within the scope of this foundational ontology. Indeed, 
he frames a central project of Rationality in Action in precisely 
these terms: “How can there be rational decision making in a world 
where everything that occurs happens as a result of brute, blind, 
natural causal forces?”21  The Classical Model renders rational deci-
sion making less puzzling by treating action as just another kind of 
natural occurrence. However, the experience of the gap suggests a 
possibility that stands in marked contrast with the basic tenets of 
a physicalist ontology. Where the world is assumed to be a closed 
system of causes, and like causes are assumed to produce like effects, 
the gap suggests that human agency is not physically determined and 
constitutes a category of causation where like causes (desires) do not 
necessarily manifest in like effects (actions). 
Is freedom compatible with Searle’s commitment to Scientific 
Naturalism? 
One way to reconcile freedom with Scientific Naturalism is to 
eliminate or redescribe the notion of freedom within the terms of the 
physical base. This is to concede that freedom within the gap is illu-
sory or, following Jackson, “merely putative.” 
Searle also entertains another, more radical strategy. Perhaps 
volitional causes are not fully determined by the underlying neuro-
biological or physical substructure. Accordingly, causation within 
the gap is sui generis and metaphysically real. This is to grant that 
certain effects in the world (actions and their consequences) are not 
fully determined by the causal-physical net leading up to those events.
Note that these two solution strategies to the ontological question 
are analogous to those adopted by the physicalists and Searle, with 
respect to the mind-body problem. Searle’s solution to the mind-
body problem expands the conception of what is natural so as to 
include mental events within its scope. Likewise, the theorist who 

REASON AND ACTION
65
holds freedom to be real, stretches the notion of the natural to include 
causes that are not themselves fully determined by antecedent events 
within the physical sphere. 
Searle remains carefully agnostic about the veracity of these mutu-
ally exclusive solution strategies. If we naturalize freedom, we get an 
account of the world which is more elegant and simple, but which 
defies our manifest experience. However, if we stretch the notion of 
the natural to include the possibility of events—agent causation—
which are not fully determined by their causal antecedents, we are 
left unsettled: “The problem is to see how the consciousness of the 
system could give it a causal efficacy that is not deterministic.”22 This 
possibility, which is entailed by any ontologically robust conception 
of the gap, “does not sit comfortably with our existing conception 
of biology.”23
In any case, Searle remains committed to the claim that the gram-
mar or ordinary use of the concept reason cannot be reduced to the 
grammar of the concept cause, where effects are assumed to invari-
ably follow from a set of causes. If the notion of a gap marks a 
metaphy sically real phenomenon, while actions may be said to be 
caused by intentional states, they are not invariably so caused. Rather, 
an agent simply acts, and appeals to reasons in justifying that action. 

66
CHAPTER 5
FROM ACTS TO SPEECH ACTS: 
THE INTENTION TO COMMUNICATE
Searle is perhaps best known for his work in the philosophy of 
language, which constitutes his earliest writings. While the details of 
Searle’s philosophy of action were worked out later on in his career, 
much of the apparatus was developed with an eye toward his earlier 
account of language. Searle’s conception of action is continuous with 
his conception of language precisely because language is always linked 
with action. The basic unit of language is what Searle calls a “speech 
act.” If several pieces of driftwood collect on the shore of an ocean 
in the shape of the word “hello,” at least part of what precludes this 
physical event from the sphere of the linguistic is that it was not 
the result of an agent’s beliefs and desires. The waves that caused the 
pieces of wood to fall in this manner are not prompted by the requi-
site intentions in action, as required by Searle’s account of action: 
When I take a noise or a mark on a piece of paper to be an instance 
of linguistic communication, as a message, one of the things 
I must assume is that the noise or mark was produced by a being 
or beings more or less like myself and produced with certain kinds 
of intentions.1 
Note that if a collection of wood composed a Shakespearian sonnet, 
we might conclude that it is genuinely linguistic. But in doing so, we 
assume the presence of intentional agency—either that of a trickster 
or perhaps Divine intervention.2 
Note that while Searle talks about speech acts, there is no essential 
link between language and the use of the voice. If I pencil the letters 

FROM ACTS TO SPEECH ACTS
67
“hello,” or make certain gestures with my hands, these may also be 
speech acts. 
Language implicates vocal or physical acts. But action is only a 
necessary but not a sufficient feature of something being language. 
In boiling an egg, or humming a melody, or moving a chess piece, 
I am acting, but I am not, further, engaged in speech. What distin-
guishes speech acts from other kinds of (rational) action? 
The quick, but so far uninformative answer, is that speech acts are 
meaningful in a way that boiling an egg, humming, or moving a chess 
piece are not. Consider the following limiting case of the difference 
between speech acts and other kinds of action: imagine two people 
who intentionally utter the sounds “Jones went home,” but only the 
first of whom means what they have said. Perhaps the second does 
not know English and is mimicking the first. What makes only the 
first utterance, not just an action, but a speech action? 
This question can be phrased in the form of a philosophical conun-
drum. Parroting the question we asked regarding what differentiates 
action from mere behavior, the philosopher of language might query: 
if he spoke meaningfully, what is left over if I subtract the fact that 
he spoke? To put it another way, consider ordinary sentences such as 
“It is raining” or “I promise to cash the check” against the Scientific 
Naturalist’s ontological backdrop. What is perplexing to the Scien-
tific Naturalist are not the noises made—sounds are, after all, noth-
ing but a range of frequencies. Rather, the feature of our words and 
sentences that is not easily reconciled with our naturalistic account 
of the world is the fact that they are meaningful. The mechanical 
vibrations which constitute sound have a well-understood scientific 
basis, but meaning does not. In this vein, Searle asks, “How is it 
possible, for example, that when I say ‘Jones went home,’ which after 
all is in one way just a string of noises, what I mean is: Jones went 
home. What is the difference between saying something and meaning 
it and saying it without meaning it?”3 
TWO CONCEPTIONS OF MEANING: SPEECH ACTS AND 
THE COMMUNICATION-INTENTION THEORISTS
Before we can answer the question as to how meaning is possible 
(the ontological question), we have to get clearer on what meaning is 
for Searle.

JOHN SEARLE
68
Peter Strawson, in “Meaning and Truth,” describes a “Homeric 
struggle” between two philosophical conceptions of meaning.4 On 
the one hand there are the semanticists, who trace their own tradi-
tion to Gotlobb Frege, Bertrand Russell, and the early Ludwig 
Wittgenstein. On the other hand, there are the communication-
intention theorists, who look to G. E. Moore, the later Wittgenstein, 
John Austin, and Paul Grice for inspiration. To understand where 
Searle fits into this dichotomy, it is necessary to have a clear sense of 
the views and motivations which underlie both of these traditions. 
Meaning, for the semanticist, is principally found in a word’s 
capacity to refer to the world, to describe it as being a certain way. If 
I say, “It is raining in New York,” that sentence’s meaning is found in 
its truth conditions: this sentence represents New York as under storm 
clouds. Truth conditions are the semantic counterpart to Searle’s 
notion of conditions of satisfaction (requirement)—a connection to 
which we will return below. Strawson, in characterizing the semanticist, 
writes “the thought that the sense of a sentence is determined by its 
truth-conditions is to be found in Frege and in the early Wittgenstein, 
and we find it again in many subsequent writers.”5 As the early 
Wittgenstein says, words are pictures and “the picture is a model 
of reality.”6 When a sentence is true, the elements of a proposition—
its sense—must have a referent. “That is how a picture is attached 
to reality; it reaches right out to it.”7 While other theorists, such as 
A. J. Ayer, contend that words directly reach out to reality without 
a mediating picture, all semanticists endorse the basic idea that 
words are meaningful because they describe or represent the world. 
For this reason, utterances such as “Colorless green ideas sleep 
furiously” or the sounds of wind whistling through a canyon do 
not qualify as meaningful: they do not represent the world as being 
a certain way.
Is Searle a semanticist about meaning? We will explore this ques-
tion in greater detail below, but it is worth pointing out that Searle is 
relatively sympathetic with this view. As we will see, Searle maintains 
that linguistic utterances mirror the structure of intentionality. Every 
intentional state consists of a representative content brought under a 
psychological mode with one of two directions of fit; the representa-
tive content models the world by way of its conditions of satisfac-
tion, and the psychological mode indicates what the thinker is to do 
in case of a mis-fit between the model and the world. If linguistic 
utterances turn out to reflect the structure of intentionality and 

FROM ACTS TO SPEECH ACTS
69
the latter has representative content, then our words will also have a 
representative content—what Searle calls “propositional content.” 
This propositional content is meaningful in the sense specified by the 
semanticist—it represents the world as being a certain way.
A principle difficulty with the semanticist conception of language 
is that it appears to preclude a great deal of what we ordinarily would 
count as meaningful. The paradigm case of an utterance with truth 
conditions is a hypothesis, such as “It is raining in New York.” But 
not all speech acts have truth conditions; not all utterances appear to 
represent the world as being a certain way. The later Wittgenstein, 
observing that language is a complex phenomenon and is not the sort 
of thing we should expect to bring under a simple characterization 
(i.e., whatever has truth conditions). However, our philosophical 
commitments can dull our sensitivity to the multiplicity of the phe-
nomena which count as meaningful. To remind ourselves of this 
requires that we review and re-review the mundane circumstances 
in which words have application. Wittgenstein attempts to break us 
free from the idea that language principally represents the world by 
surveying the many ways in which we might be said to use words 
meaningfully:
Forming and testing a hypothesis—
Presenting the results of an experiment in tables and diagrams—
Making up a story; and reading it—
Play-acting—
Singing catches—
Guessing riddles—
Making a joke; telling it—
Solving a problem in practical arithmetic—
Translating from one language into another—
Asking, thanking, cursing, greeting, praying.8
Wittgenstein draws out this multiplicity by way of a rich metaphor:
Think of the tools in a tool-box: there is a hammer, pliers, a saw, 
a screw-driver, a rule, a glue-pot, glue, nails and screws.—The 
functions of words are as diverse as the functions of these objects. 
(And in both cases there are similarities.) 
Of course, what confuses us is the uniform appearance of words 
when we hear them spoken or meet them in script and print. 

JOHN SEARLE
70
For their application is not presented to us so clearly. Especially 
when we are doing philosophy.9
Wittgenstein suggests that the semanticist temptation stems from the 
exercise of looking at the word, as met in script and print, and then 
looking at objects in the world—perhaps imagining an arrow between 
them or even that the object has the word inscribed on it. But to do 
this is already to abstract the words from the circumstances in which 
they acquire their significance, perhaps overstating the centrality of 
reference. In assenting to the semanticist’s conception of meaning, 
we bring language under an oversimple picture—that linguistic 
utterances reach out to the world and touch it—and then we find 
ourselves perplexed when that picture leaves us unable to account 
for words’ manifold functions. 
Consider the kind of puzzles that arise if we assume the hypothesis 
(the indicative case) to be the paradigm case of meaning, as per the 
semanticist. Much that is written in the philosophy of language is 
dedicated to showing how nonparadigm cases of language use are in 
fact derivative of the standard, indicative case. Sentences which con-
tain nonreferring expressions to the present King of France are baf-
fling because the subject seems to refer to something that does not 
exist. How do words reach out to that? How does the semanticist 
account for irony or sarcasm, where what is meant is often the oppo-
site of what is said? Moreover, there are a number of speech acts that 
do not even purport to be descriptions of the world: a builder’s order 
to have an assistant bring building material forth, my saying “hello” 
to someone, or a promise to pay back money given to me. 
For those working within the broad outlines of the semanticist’s 
assumptions, the aim is to disentangle the primary, semantical, 
expository aspects of language use from the secondary, pragmatic 
aspects of language, and then to give an explanation as to how the 
latter is derivative of the former. For the semanticist, semantics—the 
ability to refer—is always prior to pragmatics.
But these puzzles simply do not arise if, following the later 
Wittgenstein, we adopt a more inclusive characterization of meaning 
that prioritizes the many things which language can do in addition to 
describing the world. The communication-intention theorists endeavor 
to do precisely that: privilege pragmatics over semantics. 
The communication-intention theorists, such as the later 
Wittgenstein, Grice, Austin, and Strawson, have observed that, telling 

FROM ACTS TO SPEECH ACTS
71
jokes, giving hypotheses, ordering, greeting, and making up stories 
are all forms of communication. What all instances of meaningful 
speech have in common, then, is they are made with the intention of 
producing some effect or other on an audience. The various kinds of 
speech acts are thus distinguished according to the kind of effect they 
have on the hearer. Austin called these utterances, which are hearer 
directed and attempt to affect the audience in a variety of ways 
according to certain conventions, “performatives.” All speech acts, 
on the model of tools, thus have a functional component: they aim 
to produce an effect on an audience. 
Note that it is not required that the utterance actually succeed 
in producing this functional effect in order to count as a speech act. 
A dull knife is still a knife, even if it can’t cut. So long as the utterance 
is made by an agent with the intention to produce the effect, that is 
sufficient to qualify the act as a speech act. If I say “Jones went 
home” to someone who does not speak English, I have succeeded in 
making a speech act, even if I failed to communicate, because I said 
it with the intention to produce understanding, an effect, in the 
hearer.
Communication is a highly conventional affair; we communicate 
for contingent purposes according to more or less well-defined rules. 
“I promise to cash the check” communicates my intention only in 
virtue of constitutive rules that are shared by both me and my inter-
locutor. Perhaps we can catalogue the kinds of communication there 
are by explicating the constitutive rules a person follows in using 
language. The rules themselves are often embedded into the gram-
matical form of an utterance, so that the sounds, “Bring the water!” 
count as an order for water in English, whereas “The water was 
brought,” counts as an assertion. For the communication-intention 
theorist, rather than the semanticist, Strawson writes, “rules are, pre-
cisely, rules for communicating, rules by the observance of which the 
utterer may achieve his purpose, fulfill his communication-intention; 
and that this is their essential character.”10
Is Searle a communication-intention theorist? The early Searle 
takes it for granted that linguistic meaning is best explicated accord-
ing to what can be done with words, according to what effect can be 
produced by them. At least he explicitly characterizes himself as 
working within the boundaries of Austin’s communication-intention 
framework (Searle was Austin’s student at Oxford). Searle writes 
that, “My earliest work was in the philosophy of language, and a 

JOHN SEARLE
72
good deal of it was an attempt to develop a general theory of speech 
acts. I made extensive use of insights already developed by other 
Oxford philosophers, especially Austin.”11 
In Speech Acts Searle explicitly states that his account of mean-
ing follows Grice’s, another communication-intention theorist: “In 
speaking I attempt to communicate certain things to my hearer by 
getting him to recognize my intention to communicate just those 
things.”12 What is important to see here is that Searle defines mean-
ing in terms of the effect an utterance can have on the hearer: we say 
something and mean it, just in case I attempt to communicate things 
to my hearer. The key ingredient which distinguishes speech from 
other kinds of action is, then, that speech is done with the intention 
of communicating, of producing understanding in the hearer. In 
boiling an egg, I am acting, but I am not eliciting understanding in 
a hearer. But, for example, “hello” is meaningful just in case I try 
to produce in the hearer a certain effect—namely, the knowledge that 
I am greeting them. This example is also nice in that “hello” does not 
appear to have representational content, and so cannot easily be 
brought under the semanticist picture. We will rehearse the details 
of Searle’s full account of meaning below.
Part of the force of Searle’s contending that the speech act, rather 
than the word or sentence, is the fundamental unit of language, is 
that language is causally embedded into the world. The linguistic is a 
relational fact, defined across a temporal continuum: it is produced 
by an agent, in response to certain intentions and states of affairs in 
the world, in order to bring about certain results. But according to 
the semanticist, words essentially have senses and those senses refer 
to the world as though hovering timelessly above it. For the semanti-
cist, the fact that an agent uses words to communicate is regarded as 
a derivative, pragmatic feature of the linguistic. But if speech is an 
act, then language is always something that is done by an agent, for 
various purposes. These purposes are enshrined in the actor’s condi-
tions of satisfaction, and the realization of those purposes is found 
in the effects brought about by such acts. Where the semanticist sees 
the referential component of language as logically prior to the prag-
matic component, Searle, in Speech Acts, contends that the order of 
priority is in fact exactly the opposite: 
a study purely of those formal [semantic and syntactic] features, 
without a study of their role in speech acts, would be like a formal 

FROM ACTS TO SPEECH ACTS
73
study of the currency and credit systems of economies without a 
study of the role of currency and credit in economic transactions. 
A great deal can be said in the study of language without studying 
speech acts, but any such purely formal theory is necessarily 
incomplete.13 
So far as Speech Acts is concerned, while many utterances happen to 
have semantic content, Searle is willing to include certain nonrefer-
ential utterances under the umbrella of “meaningful” so long as they 
are instrumental in producing certain effects on their audience—
namely understanding. In that way, the early Searle is aligned with 
the communication-intention camp. However, as we will discuss in 
Chapter 7, with the publication of Intentionality (1983), Searle retreats 
from this position, ultimately aligning himself with the semanticists.
WHAT DISTINGUISHES SPEECH ACTS FROM OTHER 
KINDS OF ACTION? INTRODUCTION TO 
THE ILLOCUTIONARY INTENTIONS
What distinguishes speech acts from other kinds of (rational) action? 
Speech acts are meaningful, but what does Searle mean by meaning-
ful? In the last section we considered two possibilities: according to 
the semanticist, speech acts are meaningful just in case they have 
truth conditions or conditions of satisfaction. This allows speech 
acts, unlike other actions such as boiling an egg, to represent the 
world as being a certain way. In Speech Acts Searle is sympathetic 
with, but ultimately rejects this criterion of meaning. While many 
speech acts do have conditions of satisfaction, certain speech acts, 
such as greetings, have no propositional content. In saying “hello,” I 
am not modeling or representing the world under one aspect or 
another. I am just saying hello. This suggests a second conception of 
meaning: given the huge variety of speech acts, what property do 
they all share which accounts for our describing them as meaning-
ful? In Speech Acts Searle endorses the communication-intention 
theorist’s answer to that question. Speech acts are distinguished from 
other kinds of action in that they are made with the intention to pro-
duce certain characteristic effects in the hearer. This basic insight 
requires further elucidation.
All actions aim to produce some effect or other in the world. What 
is the characteristic effect that all speech acts aim to achieve, and 

JOHN SEARLE
74
which screen them off from other kinds of action? Searle formulates 
a modified version of Grice’s answer to that question, quoted above: 
“In speaking I attempt to communicate certain things to my hearer 
by getting him to recognize my intention to communicate just those 
things.”14 While the significance of this claim may not yet be trans-
parent, we can see that the speaker must have the following two 
intentions if his or her action is to further count as a speech act:
1.  the intention to communicate—to produce a certain illocutionary 
effect in the hearer;
2.  the intention to produce this effect by getting the hearer to recog-
nize the intention to produce the effect;
To these, Searle also adds a third condition:
3.  the intention to produce the effect by means of the hearer’s know-
ledge of the rules governing the sentence.
For reasons discussed below, we will call these three Gricean condi-
tions the illocutionary intentions. After briefly reviewing an objection 
to Searle’s view, we will consider each of these three conditions in 
detail.
If the characteristic intended effect is to produce understanding 
in a hearer, what about soliloquy? Here, I appear to be speaking 
meaningfully, but I am not speaking with the intention of producing 
a communicative effect in a hearer because there are no hearers 
present. According to Searle’s criteria, this action does not seem to 
qualify as a genuine speech act. In response to this objection, the 
early Searle follows Grice15 in suggesting that soliloquy is a deriva-
tive, limiting case, where the speaker is the hearer. Thus, soliloquy 
can continue to count as meaningful so long as speakers intend to 
communicate with themselves.
THE FIRST ILLOCUTIONARY CONDITION OF A SPEECH ACT
 All actions are body movements that result from (“becausee”) inten-
tional states. A condition that distinguishes speech acts from other 
kinds of action is that the speech acts involve the intention to pro-
duce understanding in a hearer. That is, to distinguish speech 
acts from other kinds of action, we have to survey the contents or 

FROM ACTS TO SPEECH ACTS
75
conditions of satisfaction of the intentional states which cause the 
behavior.
Compare the action of boiling an egg with the speech act of saying 
“hello” to someone. Both actions are caused by a desire or some 
other intentional state with an upward, world-to-mind direction of 
fit. The condition of satisfaction of the chef’s desire is that the egg be 
boiled; the chef’s thought represents a possible world in which the 
egg is cooked. The condition of satisfaction of the speaker’s desire is 
that the hearer comes to understand something. If the egg does not 
cook or the hearer fails to understand, the desire of the actor will 
be frustrated. But even if they failed to realize those conditions of 
satisfaction, they still would be said to have acted. To cook or speak 
or perform an action does not every time require that the actor 
succeeds. It only requires that their behavior is the result of a certain 
intention. But cooking and speaking differ precisely with respect to 
the contents of the intentional state which causes the behavior: in 
particular the chef is missing the intention to produce certain effects 
(understanding) in another person. 
This, of course, is the essential intention by which Searle is identi-
fied as a communication-intention theorist. Something is meaning-
ful, not because it represents the world, but because it was made with 
the intention of affecting the hearer. 
What, exactly, is the nature of the intended effect that distinguishes 
speech acts from other kinds of acts? In brief, in speaking, the speaker 
intends to project the contents of some intentional state to the hearer.
Speech acts can be uttered with the intention of doing many things. 
In saying “hello,” not only do I intend to communicate a greeting, 
but, depending on the context, I may be trying to endear myself to 
my interlocutors or distract or surprise or worry them. Which of these 
effects are operative in the speech act? Searle, following Austin, divides 
the many possible intended effects that may result from my speech 
into two broad categories: illocutionary effects and perlocutionary 
effects.
Consider the case where a customs agent orders a traveler to 
show a passport. There are at least two ways in which the order can 
fail. The traveler might understand the order but fail to produce the 
passport—perhaps it was forgotten or else the traveler becomes 
suddenly defiant. In this case the order fails to bring about the right 
sort of perlocutionary effects. The function of something is a certain 
intended consequence and the perlocutionary effects include those 

JOHN SEARLE
76
consequences; the reason or purpose as to why the official issued an 
order is to evoke some behavior or other in the hearer. But note that 
this kind of failure depends on the traveler’s understanding the order 
in the first place; perlocutionary effects are the result of a set of illo-
cutionary effects. Communication was successful in the sense that the 
traveler at least understood what was required. Given the under-
standing that the officer desires to see the passport, the traveler may 
decide to go ahead and comply with that order.
We have looked at a case where the officer’s illocutionary inten-
tions were successful (the utterance prompted the understanding or 
illocutionary effects in the hearer), but where the perlocutionary 
intentions were not successful (as when the traveler refused to show 
the passport in spite of understanding).
It may also be the case that the traveler is quite willing to hand over 
the passport, but the customs officer requests this in an unfamiliar 
language. That is, if the traveler does not know that “Könnte ich 
bitte den Pass sehen” means “I would like to see your passport” in 
German, the speech act is not successful. The order did not prompt 
understanding—the illocutionary effects in the hearer. Note that 
this is not the kind of failure which disqualifies the official’s remark 
from counting as an order; it remains so, even though the hearer 
has not understood. It rather disqualifies the utterance from being 
a successful speech act in the sense of producing the right kind of 
illocutionary effects.
Understanding might be thought of as a kind of projection of a 
speaker’s intentional contents from the speaker to the hearer, by way 
of some physical medium (sounds, scribbles, gestures). The officer 
has a desire that the traveler shows a passport. The projection is suc-
cessful if the hearer comes to know about the officer’s desire. But 
these illocutionary effects are produced with the ultimate intention of 
getting the hearer, not just to understand the order, but to show the 
passport. Thus the speaker’s intended consequences are, first, that the 
traveler understand the officer’s desire (the illocutionary effect) and, 
second, as a result, that the traveler shows the passport (the perlocu-
tionary effect). We will discuss the notion of a perlocutionary effect 
and its associated speaker intentions below, in Chapters 6 and 7.
One difficulty is that the notions of speech act, meaning, com-
munication, understanding, and illocutionary effect form a fairly tight 
logical circle. The contrast offered by the semanticist opens one way 
into this circle: if meaning something is not equivalent to referring to 

FROM ACTS TO SPEECH ACTS
77

JOHN SEARLE
78
something, then it must involve an actor’s attempt to communicate 
with a hearer. The fundamental unit of meaning is thus the speech 
act, wherein an agent intends to use physical sounds to produce a 
certain understanding or illocutionary effect in a hearer. Language 
then is not a two-part, timeless relation between word and object, but 
a temporal, multipart relation between two agents: the speaker’s 
intentional store causes a word to be produced, which, if successful, 
projects a similar intentional state into the mind of the hearer.
THE SECOND ILLOCUTIONARY CONDITION OF A SPEECH ACT
There is a second condition which must be satisfied if an action is to 
qualify as a speech act. We have seen that it is necessary for an actor 
to intend to produce illocutionary effects in a hearer. This, however, 
is not a sufficient condition for speech. Searle, following Grice, also 
requires that the speaker must intend that the hearer recognizes that 
the speaker has the intention to produce understanding in the hearer.
Consider the following example, taken from Grice16: one kind of 
understanding a speaker might wish to induce in a hearer is a belief 
of some kind. Say that A wishes B to believe that C is a murderer. But 
the way that A does this is by surreptitiously leaving C’s handkerchief 
at the site of the murder. This violates the second condition, in that, 
while A (the “speaker”) intends to produce understanding in B (the 
“hearer”), A does not further intend that B recognize that A had this 
first intention. In this case, while the action might be successful (B now 
thinks C is the murderer), we are not tempted to think that in dropping 
the handkerchief A meant that C was the murderer. A’s dropping the 
handkerchief is an action but does not count as a speech act.
In short, this intention, if its conditions of satisfaction are met, 
simply allows the hearer to know that the information gained was in 
fact intended to be communicated. It also, typically, allows the hearer 
to locate the source of the utterance. While this second condition 
might be regarded as a relatively minor qualification in comparison 
to the first condition, it has a broader significance that will become 
clearer in Chapter 6.
THE THIRD ILLOCUTIONARY CONDITION OF A SPEECH ACT
There is a final condition that must be satisfied if an action, further, 
is to count as a speech act. Not only must the hearer’s understanding 

FROM ACTS TO SPEECH ACTS
79
be among the speaker’s conditions of satisfaction (the first condi-
tion), but the speaker must intend to bring about this understanding 
in a characteristic way. The third condition flags the means by which 
communication must happen if the act is to count as a genuine speech 
act: the speaker must act with the intention to produce understand-
ing by conventional means. Conventionality implies an arbitrary 
association between sounds and their meaning. Searle writes, 
In the case of speech acts performed within a language . . . it is a 
matter of convention—as opposed to strategy, technique, proce-
dure, or natural fact—that the utterance of such and such expres-
sions under certain conditions counts as the making of a promise.17 
In particular, a speaker must have an intention to produce under-
standing by means of the hearer’s knowledge of the conventional, 
constitutive rules governing the use of the sentence.
Searle’s appeal to the notion of a constitutive rule is a key feature 
of his account of speech acts. In Chapters 8 and 9 we will review his 
notion of a constitutive rule, as found in The Construction of Social 
Reality. For now, a few examples can illustrate Searle’s requirement 
that speech has a conventional element.
Borrowing examples from Grice,18 consider two ways in which 
Herod intends to impart understanding to Salome (so satisfying the 
first condition):
1. Herod presents to Salome John the Baptist’s head on a platter. 
2. Herod says to Salome, “John the Baptist is dead.”
Similarly, compare:
1.  Bill shows his bandaged leg, in response to an invitation to play 
squash.
2.  Bill says “My leg is bandaged,” in response to an invitation to play 
squash.
While Herod presented the head and Bill displayed his bandaged leg 
with the intention of producing understanding, it is not the case that 
in doing so they meant anything by what they did. However in utter-
ing “John the Baptist is dead” or “My leg is bandaged,” the action 
does have meaning; these utterances are speech acts.19 

JOHN SEARLE
80
Given that both actors intend to induce understanding in another 
party, what is the difference between (1) and (2), such that only 
(2) appears to be a genuine case of meaning something? The fact that 
(2) is a verbalization is not relevant, as speech acts can have many 
physical bases, including sounds, marks, and gestures. The important 
difference, here, is that (2) is conventional: given the syntactic and 
semantic rules that help constitute the English language, the sounds 
“John the Baptist is dead” means that John the Baptist is dead. This 
conventionality is made evident by the fact that in another language, 
different combinations of sounds could have the same meaning, 
whereas the sounds “John the Baptist is dead” could mean something 
else entirely or else nothing at all. The head and bandaged leg are 
telling but are not conventional.
The requirement that the speaker intends to communicate conven-
tionally concerns the means by which understanding is projected from 
speaker to hearer. The vehicle of communication must employ a set 
of constitutive rules or conventions that are agreed upon in advance 
by the interlocutors. In specifying what language is, Searle wants to 
screen out cases where some natural feature of the actor’s behavior 
imparts understanding: smoke may indicate the presence of a fire or 
a plattered head may strongly indicate death, but the means by which 
these do so are natural and not conventional. A speaker acts with the 
intention of producing certain illocutionary and perlocutionary 
effects. In order for this action to count as a speech act, the action 
must somehow bring about those effects in a way that is not depen-
dent on the physical features of the act alone. As we will see in 
Chapter 8, this third condition will be the basis for a more general 
distinction between institutional facts on the one hand and mere 
social facts on the other hand. 
There are many cases that are on the cusp of meeting the third 
conventionality condition. We can intend to impart a belief that it is 
raining by saying (a) “It is raining” or (b) by pointing to a rain cloud. 
The first case clearly meets the conventionality requirement. But, 
is pointing sufficiently conventional? On the one hand, we seem 
hardwired to see this gesture as demonstrative. Bonobos and chim-
panzees have been observed pointing in captivity. But, perhaps they 
learned this from their captors (there has been only one anecdotal 
report of a bonobo pointing in the wild).20 And even if it is hard-
wired, would the gesture then not count as conventional? After all, a 
pointing gesture does not physically compel us to trace a pointing 

FROM ACTS TO SPEECH ACTS
81
gesture from hand to finger tip to object. And if pointing seems clear, 
what about the case where an actor pokes another or else imitates the 
sound of a predator in order to alert companions? 21 Searle is not 
obligated to so precisely delimit the sphere of the conventional: 
indeed, the very ability to appreciate the way in which these cases 
are borderline presupposes sufficient competence to understand the 
third conventionality requirement. 
In Chapter 8, we will consider more pressing difficulties with the 
requirement that language (or any other institutional fact) must per-
form its function by conventional means—a means that is not entirely 
dependent on the physical structure of the action.
SEARLE’S GRICEAN MODEL OF 
ILLOCUTIONARY ACTS: SUMMARY
In this chapter we have reviewed the three criteria by which we might 
distinguish speech acts from other kinds of action. In general a 
speech action, unlike other actions, must be caused by intentional 
states with three characteristic contents: first, the speaker must intend 
to communicate with the hearer. This is equivalent to the require-
ment that a speaker must intend to prompt understanding or illocu-
tionary effects in the hearer. In communicating, a speaker projects a 
certain intentional content into the head of the hearer by certain 
means (gestures, sounds, marks). According to the second condition, 
the speaker must intend that the hearer recognizes that the speaker 
has the first intention. If the first two illocutionary intentions are to 
be satisfied, the hearer will acquire the desired understanding and 
also understand that the speaker intended the hearer to acquire it. 
The second intention, among other things, allows the hearer to locate 
the source of the understanding. The third requirement places a 
condition on the means by which communication must happen. In 
projecting an intentional state from the speaker to the hearer, it must 
happen over a medium that is conventional. Speech does not just 
happen by way of, for example, sound, but those sounds must be 
given significance by a community of language users: thus, crying or 
wailing are, at best, outlier cases of meaning. 
We can represent the difference between speech acts and other 
kinds of action as follows in Figure 5.2.

JOHN SEARLE
82

83
CHAPTER 6
FROM SOUNDS TO WORDS: 
THE INTENTION TO REPRESENT
In this chapter we will expand the basic account of a speech act. The 
basic account holds that an action is a speech act if the behavior or 
sound is caused by the illocutionary intentions: the intention to com-
municate and the intention that the hearer recognizes the speaker’s 
intention to communicate. In particular, communication involves the 
speaker’s intention to produce illocutionary effects in the hearer. 
Furthermore, the speaker must intend to communicate by conven-
tional means. 
There are two points at which we need to extend this basic account 
of linguistic behavior. First, a speaker’s illocutionary intentions are 
preceded by a set of preliminary intentions: the speaker’s intentional 
object of communication and a speaker’s perlocutionary intentions. 
The object of communication—what Searle calls the “sincerity 
condition”—is the intentional state which the speaker wishes to pro-
ject to the hearer. The perlocutionary intention includes the function 
or purpose of the speech act (so far as the hearer’s behavior is con-
cerned). Second, after the agent’s illocutionary intentions, but before 
the actual utterance, the speaker must exercise the intention to repre-
sent, which makes it possible for a sound to be a conventional vehicle 
of communication. 
These two additions can be mapped on to the basic account of 
speech acts as shown in Figure 6.1.
AUSTIN AND SEARLE ON SPEECH ACTS
Part of the technical accomplishment of Speech Acts lies in the fact that 
Searle synthesizes the views of two of the communication-intention 

JOHN SEARLE
84

FROM SOUND TO WORDS
85
tradition’s founding fathers: Paul Grice and John Austin. Chapter 5 
articulated Searle’s account of a speech act under its Gricean aspect: 
speech acts are differentiated from other kinds of action in that 
speech acts are undertaken by way of characteristic intentions, 
including the intention to produce understanding in the hearer. 
But in describing these Gricean intentions as “illocutionary”—
Austin’s word—Searle makes the novel and interesting suggestion 
that these intentions can be embedded into Austin’s overall account 
of linguistic behavior.
In saying something, Austin suggests that we are actually engaged 
in three distinguishable acts: locutionary, illocutionary, and perlocu-
tionary acts. 
The illocutionary act includes, according to Searle’s interpretation 
of Austin, the three Gricean intentions to communicate. If success-
ful, it culminates in the hearer’s understanding that the speaker has 
some intention or other (e.g. the traveler understands that the officer 
wants to see the passport).1
The locutionary act involves the intention to make sounds and 
words which should lead to the hearer’s understanding. Austin sub-
divides the locutionary act into three constitutive acts. At base is the 
phonetic act, which he describes as “the act of uttering certain 
noises.”2 Above that is the phatic act, which he characterizes as “the 
uttering of certain vocables or words, i.e. noises of certain types, 
belonging to and as belonging to, a certain vocabulary, conforming 
to and as conform ing to a certain grammar.”3 Finally the rhetic act is 
“an act of using those vocables with a certain more-or-less definite 
sense and reference.”4 Austin’s locutionary intentions include two of 
the three intentions needed to transform sounds to words, as required 
by Searle (discussed below). 
A speaker performs the locutionary and illocutionary act with the 
intention of securing illocutionary uptake, so that the hearer comes 
to understand what the speaker said. An illocutionary act is “hap-
pily” performed if such uptake is secured. Searle glosses Austin’s 
notion of happiness in terms of the fulfillment of the conditions of 
satisfaction which underlie each of the various acts.
In addition to understanding (the illocutionary effect), there are, 
as we have seen, further effects a speaker may or may not achieve 
in performing a speech act. Recall the passport example in Chapter 5: 
if a customs official orders a traveler to produce a passport, the 
speech act will be illocutionarily happy if the traveler understands 

JOHN SEARLE
86
what is demanded. Illocutionary failure might happen if the request 
is made in a language not understood by the traveler. The utterance 
is also made with certain perlocutionary effects in mind—namely 
that the hearer comes to actually show the passport. Thus, the 
utterance may be illocutionarily successful but perlocutionarily 
unsuccessful if the hearer forgot the passport or else became 
suddenly defiant.
Austin’s overall account of saying something can be represented as 
shown in Figure 6.2, on the next page.
The illocutionary intention, according to Searle’s reading of 
Austin,5 consists of the intention to communicate plus the other two 
Gricean intentions discussed in Chapter 5. 
But why communicate? The causal chain typically starts with the 
perlocutionary intention, which is what motivates or provides a 
functional basis for the speech act. The officer made the noises “show 
your passport”—the phonetic/locutionary effect—in order that he 
satisfies his illocutionary intention to communicate with the traveler. 
But the overall point of communicating is not simply to get the 
traveler to understand the order, but to get the traveler to show the 
passport (the perlocutionary effect). The speaker represents this 
purpose by way of the perlocutionary intention.
In a recent essay on speech acts, Kent Bach offers a comparison by 
which to orient the reader to the significance of Austin’s constella-
tion of intentions, acts, and their associated effects:
The illocutionary act is but one level of the total speech act that one 
performs in uttering a sentence. Consider that in general when one 
acts intentionally, one has a set of nested intentions. For instance, 
having arrived home without your keys, you might move your 
finger in a certain way with the intention not just of moving your 
finger in that way but with further intentions of pushing a certain 
button, ringing the doorbell, arousing your spouse . . . and ulti-
mately getting into your house. The single bodily movement 
in moving your finger comprises of a multiplicity of actions, each 
corresponding to a different one of the nested intentions. Simi-
larly, speech acts are not just acts of producing certain sounds.6 
Bach brings Austin’s distinction under a familiar and commonsensi-
cal picture—actions are conglomerate, consisting of various, nested 
intentions. He wants to understand the illocutionary act according to 

FROM SOUND TO WORDS
87
The performance of a speech act
involves the following three acts, each 
of which are underlain by characterisc
intenon (e.g., illocuonary intenons):

JOHN SEARLE
88
a model of nested intentions, so that alerting my spouse is causally 
dependent on the act of pressing the doorbell which is, in turn, 
dependent on my intentions to do both.
This way of framing Austin, which Searle endorses, has some 
characteristic consequences:  the nested pattern of intentions might, 
as indicated in the figure above, be thought of as an open book. The 
open pages are the locutionary (phonetic) intention and the locution-
ary (phonetic) effect. The fact that these two pages are adjacent rep-
resents causal immediacy: the intention to make sounds immediately 
causes the sounds to be made. Pushing the metaphor further, the 
front and back cover correspond to the perlocutionary intention and 
its conditions of satisfaction, the perlocutionary effect. Unlike the 
phonetic intention, it will be noticed that in speech these are not 
causally adjacent. A perlocutionary intention can only be satisfied 
if the speaker then forms illocutionary and locutionary intentions. 
The illocutionary and locutionary intentions and their effects are 
all means by which the perlocutionary function is fulfilled. If those 
intentions’ conditions of satisfaction are then satisfied, then the per-
locutionary intention might also be satisfied. The perlocutionary 
intention is vitally important to understanding the significance of 
the overall act: it typically provides the motivation or function, which 
explains why a speaker is making a noise in the first place.
The book metaphor holds up remarkably well in capturing the 
corresponding features of Bach’s example. The front cover is the 
functional intention of the act: the intention to get in your house. 
The back cover is the realization of that intention. But, given that 
you do not have keys, in order to satisfy that intention you must 
intend to perform a number of ancillary acts: the intention to alert 
your wife, the intention to ring the door bell, and so on. These con-
stitute the means by which you can get into the house. At one point 
there is an intention whose conditions of satisfaction do not require 
that you intend a further means. There must be some intention that 
is causally adjacent to its conditions of satisfaction: the intention 
to move your finger directly precipitates the finger movement. This 
intention-effect pair are the open pages. Once the finger moves, a 
causal chain is set in motion which, if nothing goes wrong, will even-
tuate in the satisfaction of the desire to get in the house, which is the 
point of ringing the doorbell. 
Notice that in this example, it is always possible to move your 
finger with the intention of getting in your house, while it is not, at 

FROM SOUND TO WORDS
89
least in some circumstances, possible to get in your house without 
moving your finger. Nevertheless, while the finger movement might 
be perceived as having a kind of causal autonomy that the other 
actions in the sequence do not have (it is not dependent on any other 
action), it is also important to see that its significance or justification 
depends on that initial desire to get in the house. That is, if pushing 
the doorbell is not ontologically or causally dependent on the first 
functional intention, it is nevertheless only justified given that latter 
intention. This functional asymmetry, between efficient causation 
and functional justification, will be the basis of a criticism of Searle’s 
account of speech acts offered in Chapter 7.
Having already discussed the illocutionary level of intentions in 
the last chapter, we will now explicate the perlocutionary intentions 
that proceed and the locutionary intentions that follow those illocu-
tionary intentions.
PERLOCUTIONARY INTENTIONS AND 
THE SINCERITY CONDITION
Perlocutionary intentions include, as their conditions of satisfaction, 
desired effects on the hearer that follow those effects prompted by the 
illocutionary intention. As noted, the point or function of the utter-
ance, so far as the hearer is concerned, is typically found within these 
perlocutionary intentions. The officer’s illocutionary intentions are 
satisfied if the traveler understands the sounds “show your passport” 
to have the same force and content as the officer’s desire that the 
traveler show the passport. But the ultimate point or function of the 
order is to have the traveler, not just to understand the illocutionary 
act, but to show the passport.7 
Can a perlocutionary intention be satisfied through nonillocution-
ary means? Yes and no. Of course, sometimes the perlocutionary 
intention can be satisfied though noncommunicative means, as when 
the passport official forcibly takes the traveler’s passport. But there 
are weak and strong senses in which a perlocutionary intention 
cannot be satisfied by nonillocutionary means. The weak sense: there 
are some functional, perlocutionary intentions that require an illocu-
tionary intention—if I am playing blackjack, and I want the dealer 
to deal me another card, I could not satisfy that intention without 
the illocutionary act culminating with the sound “hit.” For example, 
if I physically strong-armed the dealer to give me a card, this does 

JOHN SEARLE
90
not count as being dealt a card; in exercising these alternative means 
of satisfying my perlocutionary intention, I have altogether ceased to 
play Blackjack. So, some perlocutionary effects appear to require 
illocutionary means. Likewise, while I might be able to produce the 
understanding that I’m about to do something through nonlinguistic 
means (I raise the hammer over the nail), I cannot produce in some-
one the understanding that I have promised to do something through 
nonlinguistic means. The strong sense in which a perlocutionary 
intention requires an illocutionary intention banks on a gram matical 
point: perlocutionary literally means “around-locutionary,” so that 
the identification of an intention of an effect as perlocu tionary entails 
that the effect is brought about by way of a communicative act.
Not all perlocutionary intentions are functional, activity-defining 
intentions. For example, in addition to wanting the traveler to display 
the passport, the officer may also want to intimidate the traveler. 
This intention is not an illocutionary intention but may nevertheless 
require an illocutionary intention to be satisfied. In ordering the trav-
eler to display the passport, the officer thus prompts two perlocu-
tionary effects in addition to understanding: the displaying of the 
passport and the feeling of fear and intimidation in the traveler. But 
the point of his asking—the one which justifies the speech act—is 
only found in the first perlocutionary effect.
There can also be a broader class of perlocutionary effects that 
are not even intended by the speaker. The notion of perlocutionary 
effect flags any effect on the hearer that is brought about in virtue of 
their understanding the speaker’s utterance.  If the official’s request 
inadvertently causes the traveler to be late, that is among the perlocu-
tionary effects of the speech act.
We might thus distinguish between three classes of perlocutionary 
effects: there are (1) the primary, functional, and intended conse-
quences (the hearer shows the passport), there are (2) the other 
intended consequences (the hearer feels intimidated), and there are 
(3) the unintended consequences (the hearer is made late). The sec-
ond category might further be subdivided into (2a) those intended 
consequences that are a means to the primary consequences and 
(2b) those that are not. Depending on the context, the officer’s inten-
tion to intimidate could be construed as either of these.
Unless otherwise noted, we will use “perlocutionary intentions” 
and “perlocutionary effects” to flag the first class—the primary 
purposive intentions and their effects.

FROM SOUND TO WORDS
91
In spite of the importance certain perlocutionary intentions play 
in rationalizing or justifying the illocutionary and locutionary acts, 
these intentions have been downplayed by most communication-
intention theorists, including Searle and Austin. Exceptions include 
Grice,8 Stephen Shiffer,9 and Robert Stalnaker.10
Before we can understand Searle’s account of the intention to 
represent, something else must be in place before a speaker forms 
an illocutionary intention: In order to intend to communicate there 
must be something to say—some intentional state that the speaker 
wants to put into the head of the hearer. This intentional state, which 
Searle calls the “sincerity condition,” is the object of communication 
or transmission.
Sometimes the sincerity condition is identical with the functional, 
perlocutionary intention: the officer’s desire that the traveler show a 
passport is precisely the intention the speaker wishes to project to the 
traveler. It may not be that the officer says “I desire to see your pass-
port,” but whatever is said—“please show your passport”—has 
exactly the same conditions of satisfaction as the intention flagged 
by the sincerity condition. A number of factors influence how exactly 
these conditions of satisfaction are expressed, including the need to 
imply the presence of preparatory conditions, such as appropriate 
institutional structures,  as well as certain prudential considerations 
including professionalism, etiquette, and so on. Note that the perlo-
cutionary intention/sincerity condition is, in this case, different from 
the communication intention.
Sometimes the sincerity condition is closely connected to, but 
distinguishable from, the functional perlocutionary intention: for 
example, a speaker may desire that the hearer believes that it is raining 
outside. This intention will be satisfied if this friend comes to believe 
that this is the case. However, according to Searle, the sincerity 
condition—the intentional state which I communicate—is only: the 
speaker believes it is raining outside (I believe it is raining outside). 
The communication intention is successful if the hearer comes to 
believe that the speaker believes that it is raining outside. But there 
remains an additional step until the speaker’s perlocutionary inten-
tion is satisfied: the hearer may take the fact that the speaker believes 
that it is raining outside to be a reason to likewise believe it. Once the 
hearer believes that it is raining, which is different than believing that 
the speaker believes it to be raining (the sincerity condition), the 
speaker’s perlocutionary intention is satisfied.

JOHN SEARLE
92
The fact that we can distinguish the functional perlocutionary 
intention from the sincerity condition is the basis by which Searle 
famously criticizes Grice’s account of meaning. This criticism also 
motivates Searle’s modified version of Grice’s account of meaning as 
presented in Chapter 5. Where Searle focuses on the illocutionary 
effect, Grice emphasizes the perlocutionary, functional effect. In 
Chapter 7, we will see that Searle’s criticism of Grice also provides 
the rationale for a further revision of Searle’s account of meaning, 
as found in Intentionality and in “Meaning, Communication and 
Representation.” 
Both the author of Speech Acts and Grice agree that meaning must 
be construed in terms of the intention to communicate; a sound or 
action counts as meaningful if it is made with the intention to 
produce certain effects in the hearer, plus the other illocutionary 
intentions. But which effects? Looking at a typical case of assertion, 
the speaker must have two intentional states before forming the inten-
tion to communicate. First, the speaker believes p (say, that it is rain-
ing outside) and, second, the speaker desires that the hearer should 
also believe that p. Simply believing something is not sufficient to 
prompt the intention to communicate. Every action, as we have seen 
in Chapter 4, requires a motivator. A typical motivator for expressing 
a belief is that the hearer does not know or is mistaken about the 
climatic conditions. This motivator has, as its conditions of satisfac-
tion, the purpose or function of the communication; the desire that 
the hearer believes that it is raining. 
The speaker’s belief that it is raining is the object of communi-
cation—the sincerity condition. The perlocutionary intention (moti-
vator) and the sincerity condition jointly give rise to the desire or 
intention to communicate, the first of the illocutionary intentions. 
This illocutionary intention to communicate is a means by which the 
perlocutionary intention might be satisfied.
Given this, Searle’s criticism of Grice’s account of meaning is rela-
tively simple. Grice appears to require that in order to mean some-
thing the speaker must intend that the hearer believe that it is raining 
(desire 1). When we assert p, we aim to convince the hearer that, in 
fact, p. Searle objects to this. While we often assert p with the perlo-
cutionary aim of convincing the hearer that p, this is not necessary 
in order to mean something. Meaning something only requires that 
the speaker attempts to communicate p to the hearer. And this is pos-
sible even if the speaker does not further intend that the hearer 

FROM SOUND TO WORDS
93

JOHN SEARLE
94
believes or is convinced of it. A perlocutionary intention—at least 
not the perlocutionary intention to convince (desire 1)—is not a 
necessary ingredient of a speaker’s meaning something. To commu-
nicate, the speaker only needs a desire to communicate (desire 2), 
which is possible without desire 1.
Along these lines, Searle criticizes Grice’s inclusion of perlo-
cutionary intentions as among the three illocutionary-meaning-
communication intentions: 
[E]ven where there generally is a correlated perlocutionary 
effect, I may say something and mean it without in fact intending 
to produce that effect. Thus, for example, I may make a statement 
without caring whether my audience believes it or not but simply 
because I feel it my duty to make it.11
We will return to Searle’s criticism of Grice in the next chapter. For 
now, it is worth considering whether in saying something out of duty, 
I do not, in fact, have the perlocutionary intention to convince the 
audience of what I am saying. Not having the expectation that the 
perlocutionary intention will be satisfied is not the same as not 
having a perlocutionary intention.12 Perhaps people pray with the 
expectation that their prayers will not be answered or heard; but 
that is not tantamount to the fact that their prayer was, thus, not a 
supplication. Perhaps Grice recognizes that there is a sense in which 
we do not mean what we say unless the speaker, further, thinks that a 
hearer ought to believe it.
FROM SOUNDS TO WORDS: THE BRIDGE FROM 
THE SPEAKER’S ILLOCUTIONARY INTENTION TO 
THE HEARER’S UNDERSTANDING
Looking at assertion, a speaker begins with the following intentional 
states: the speaker believes something, p, and the speaker desires that 
the hearer believe p. This is the speaker’s sincerity condition and 
functional perlocutionary intention, respectively. The illocutionary 
or speech act begins with the intention to communicate to a hearer 
that the speaker believes p. To this is added the two other illocu-
tionary intentions: the intention that the hearer recognizes that the 
speaker has the previous intention and the intention that the com-
munication happens by conventional means. 

FROM SOUND TO WORDS
95
We now need to explain how the sincerity condition can be 
communicated conventionally. Searle construes this conventional 
component of speech as a kind of bridge that links the speaker’s 
three illocutionary intentions with each of their conditions of satis-
faction. The third illocutionary intention is satisfied if a sound or 
gesture comes to represent the same conditions of satisfaction that 
are found in the sincerity condition (p). The second illocutionary 
intention is satisfied when the hearer recognizes that the speaker 
intended the sound to represent the fact that the speaker believes p. 
Combining the third and second condition, the hearer comes to 
understand that the speaker believes p: “I achieve the intended effect 
on the hearer by getting him to recognize my intention to achieve 
that effect, and as soon as the hearer recognizes what it is my inten-
tion to achieve, it is in general achieved.”13 With the satisfaction 
of the three illocutionary intentions’ conditions of satisfaction, the 
speaker has achieved the desired illocutionary effect: the hearer now 
understands that the speaker believes p. But the speaker’s perlocu-
tionary intention has not been satisfied until the hearer further comes 
to believe, not just that the speaker believes p, but p itself. Typically, 
but not always, the fact that a hearer believes that the speaker believes 
p is sufficient reason for the hearer to believe p. At that moment, the 
speaker’s perlocutionary intention is satisfied.
The task is to build the center span of the illocutionary bridge. The 
bridge begins with the speaker’s intention to communicate a belief 
that p (the sincerity condition) by conventional means. The bridge 
ends with a sound or action that the hearer can recognize as an 
expression, the contents which match that of the sincerity condition.
We have seen in Chapter 3 that intentional states have conditions 
of satisfaction brought under one psychological mode or another. In 
this case, the condition of satisfaction is p and the psychological 
mode is belief, which has a downward direction of fit. The question, 
then, is how can sounds have these properties—properties of mind. 
Sounds can be loud, soft, high, low, and shrill. But how can they 
further represent the world as being a certain way (p), with a down-
ward direction of fit? Superficially, it seems that someone who 
ascribes such intentional properties to noises is making a category 
mistake, as when someone ascribes anger to a storm cloud or design 
to a banana. How is it possible that mere noises can be the bearer 
of intentional properties? And why do they have these properties? 
Just as an intentional state has both representational content and 

JOHN SEARLE
96
psychological force, words likewise have propositional content and 
illocutionary force. 
Searle does not think that the parallel between our mental states 
and our words is simply a happy accident. Rather, the intentional 
structure of our words mirrors that of intentional states because the 
intentional states explain the structure of our linguistic utterances. 
Without a substructure of intentionality, words are simply sounds, 
marks, or gestures. Intentionality, at least in human beings, has the 
unique and extraordinary power to impart its own structure on 
otherwise dead or lifeless phenomena. Words, then, have what Searle 
calls “derived intentionality.” 
I may believe that Valentina Tereshkova was the first woman in 
space quite independent of my saying so. This is a psychological 
event that takes place within a private sphere of consciousness. This 
intentional state has representative content that represents a possible 
world in which Valentina Tereshkova was the first woman in space. 
Moreover, the intentional force is such that the content is cast as 
having a downward, mind-to-world direction of fit: it is a belief, not 
a desire. In this case the represented possible world is isomorphic 
with the actual world, so that the belief is in fact true. If Valentina 
Tereshkova was not, in fact, the first woman in space, I would be 
obligated to change my belief. For intentional states with a down-
ward direction of fit, such as belief, in case of a mis-fit between 
content (Wp) and world (Wa), I am obliged to change the content.
Sounds and marks become meaningful when I project an inten-
tional state’s force and content onto objects and events in the world, 
so that the publicly available sounds and marks can come to repre-
sent Valentina Tereshkova as being the first woman in space. In 
English the sounds “Valentina Tereshkova was the first woman in 
space” have come to mean simply that this woman was the first 
woman to fly outside the earth’s atmosphere. It has the same force 
and content as the corresponding belief (which is, further, its sincer-
ity condition). I could likewise impose the same intentional content 
on the nonsense sound “gremple” or, for that matter, a glass of water, 
but because this imposition is private or idiosyncratic my doing so 
more or less guarantees that my illocutionary and perlocutionary 
intentions will go unsatisfied. For Searle, unlike Wittgenstein, a 
private language is not incoherent or impossible, but imprudent. 
How does intentionality impose its own structure—content and 
force—onto sounds and marks? An assertion, in which sounds or 

FROM SOUND TO WORDS
97
marks represent Valentina Tereshkova as being the first woman in 
space, consists of three14 basic intentions:15 
1.  The belief that Valentina Tereshkova was the first woman in space. 
The content of this intention represents a possible world in 
which Valentina Tereshkova was the first woman in space 
(a possible world which happens in fact to correspond to the 
actual world) and has a force with a downward, mind-to-world 
direction of fit. This is the sincerity condition.16
2.  A desire that the belief in (1) causes me to utter the noises 
“Valentina Tereshkova was the first woman in space” (or “gremple,” 
or whatnot). This is simply a desire to make some sound, mark, 
or gesture which will come to mean something. The intentional 
content of this second intention includes the sounds themselves. 
But this intention has an upward, world-to-mind direction of 
fit, the conditions of satisfaction are only satisfied when the 
world is changed to match this content. I then satisfy those 
conditions by making the noises. Austin calls this the “phonetic 
intention,” a kind of locutionary intention. 
This second intention is what Austin calls the locutionary-phonetic 
intention and is satisfied when the sound is made. Note that this pho-
netic intention and its conditions of satisfaction are causally adjacent, 
as represented by the open pages of the book of nested intentions and 
effects. Note that intention (1) does cause intention (2) but they are not 
causally adjacent. The sincerity condition causes the three illocution-
ary intentions which then cause the locutionary-phonetic intention.
3. A desire to impose the first intention’s content and force on 
the sounds that result from the second intention—“Valentina 
Tereshkova was the first woman in space.” This third intention 
imbues those sounds with a kind of derived intentionality that 
mirrors the structure of the sincerity condition. Searle calls this 
third intention, “the intention to represent”17 or else the “essential 
condition.”18 Austin calls this the locutionary-rhetic intention.19
Note that Searle seems to suggest that the intention to communicate 
follows the locutionary-phonetic intention, whereas Austin appears 
to reverse the order of causation. Against Searle it seems strange that 
I first make a noise and then impose a force and content on it, as 

JOHN SEARLE
98
if there is a moment when the noise is just a noise. Austin’s view 
captures the sense in which the words we speak are always already 
meaningful. It should be noted, however, that at this level of discus-
sion, neither Searle nor Austin seem overly committed to a precise 
temporal sequencing of the required intentions.
Communication is now possible. Because the speaker imposed a 
force and content on the brute phenomena which is both conven-
tional and public, the hearer is now in a position to interpret the 
sound. The first illocutionary effect of the utterance is that the hearer 
believes that the sound conventionally means Valentina Tereshkova 
was the first woman in space (satisfying the third illocutionary inten-
tion). This leads to another illocutionary effect, wherein the hearer 
ascribes that belief to the speaker (satisfying the second illocutionary 
intention), and so comes to believe that the speaker believes that 
Valentina Tereshkova was the first woman in space (satisfying the first 
illocutionary intention). Finally, all things being equal, the hearer’s 
belief that the speaker believes Valentina Tereshkova was the first woman 
in space provides a reason for the hearer to think that, indeed, Valentina 
Tereshkova is the first woman in space. This is a perlocutionary effect. 
If the speaker’s functional, perlocutionary intention is to convince the 
hearer of this fact (and not just convince the hearer that the speaker 
believes this to be the case), then it will also have been satisfied.
Extending Hubert Dreyfus’s criticism of Searle’s account of action, 
he might criticize Searle’s account of meaning something on the 
following grounds: according to Searle, the speaker will have formu-
lated seven different intentions in order to make a simple assertion. 
But, in surveying our own phenomenology in speaking, it does not 
feel as though we had all of these intentions: we just spoke.20 Grice 
articulates a similar concern when he “disclaim[s]” the “peopling of 
our talking life with armies of complicated psychological occur-
rences.”21 Searle responds to Dreyfus’s criticism, somewhat obscurely, 
by contending that in providing this analysis he is not doing phenom-
enology but “logical analysis.”22 
The speech act that we have considered is an assertion, wherein a 
speaker attempts to describe or characterize the world as being a 
certain way. The intention which underlies statements (its sincerity 
condition) is a belief. But statements or assertions are only one kind 
of speech act: we can, for example, make promises, orders, requests, 
show appreciation, criticize, apologize, censure, approve, argue, wel-
come, warn, and make declarations. Each of these speech acts share 

FROM SOUND TO WORDS
99

JOHN SEARLE
100
the same intentional structure in that there is an underlying intention 
or sincerity condition which is projected to the hearer by conven-
tional means. This condition must be causally connected to the utter-
ance and there is an intention which gives the utterance the same 
conditions of satisfaction as is found in the sincerity condition. For 
example, I promise to do something if (1) I intend to do x, (2) that 
intention causes me to make certain sounds, and (3) those sounds—
“I promise to do x”—put the speaker under the obligation to do x. 
I may, further, communicate my promise to a hearer when I say 
“I promise to do x” with the intention that the hearer understands 
that these sounds have the specified conditions of satisfaction. 
While each type of speech act will be underlain by a distinct kind 
of intention, Searle recommends that all speech acts fall under one 
of five distinct families. In the next section we will review Searle’s 
taxonomy of speech acts.
A TAXONOMY OF SPEECH ACTS
In the previous section we looked at the speech act, “Valentina 
Tereshkova was the first woman in space.” Searle calls this class of 
speech acts assertives. We make assertions when we wish to make a 
claim about how a part of the world is. In other words, assertives 
are truth functional and have the condition of satisfaction that 
there exists a state of affairs that corresponds with that which is 
represented by the assertion. 
There are four other classes of speech acts, besides assertives: 
directives, commissives, expressives, and declarations.23
If assertives have a downward, word-to-world direction of fit, both 
directives and commissives have an upward, world-to-word direction 
of fit. That is, for an assertion, a mis-fit between the possible world 
represented by the assertion and the world itself is corrected by 
changing the assertion. If I assert that the closet is empty and I say 
that it is full, the fault lies with what I say—the speech act is what 
needs to be changed to rectify the misfit. But for directives and com-
missives, if there is a mismatch between that which is represented 
by the words and the way that the world is, the fault lies with the 
world; I need to fill my closet. In spite of the fact that the sentences 
look somewhat different, a directive—“Fill the closet”—has the same 
propositional content as an assertive, “The closet is full.” Both 
sentences represent a possible world in which the closet is full. The 

FROM SOUND TO WORDS
101
syntactical difference between the two speech acts is explained by the 
fact that they have two different directions of fit. If in the actual 
world the closet is in fact empty, because “fill the closet” has a world-
to-word direction of fit, this speech act is satisfied not by changing 
the propositional content, but by changing the world.
Directives are denoted by verbs such as ask, order, command, 
request, beg, plead, pray, and entreat. If there is a misalignment 
between the speaker’s propositional content and the way that the 
world in fact is, a directive will be successful if the hearer changes the 
world so that it matches the content. Because directives have an 
upward, world-to-word direction of fit, they must be founded on a 
speaker’s intention which likewise has a world-to-mind direction of 
fit such as wanting, wishing, or desiring. This underlying intention is 
the directive’s sincerity condition. 
Commissives commit the speaker to a future course of action as 
when a promise is made. If directives are distinguished from assertives 
in terms of direction of fit, why have  an additional class of speech 
acts—commissives—which share a directive’s world-to-word direc-
tion of fit? After all, both directives and commissives are satisfied 
when the world is changed to be in accordance with some proposi-
tional content. What is the difference between saying “empty the 
closet,” a directive, and “I promise to empty the closet,” a commissive? 
Why not combine both kinds of speech act into one super category? 
A request or order—a directive—tries to get the hearer to do some-
thing (change the world to line up with the speech act’s propositional 
content) whereas a promise—a commissive—commits the speaker to 
do something. This difference in who is supposed to evoke the change 
is pronounced enough to justify cleaving these kinds of acts in two, 
in spite of the fact that they have the same direction of fit.
Sometimes the point of our utterance is neither to say something 
about how the world is (assertive) nor to express an intention to have 
it changed in some way (directive/commissive). We feel grateful, 
apologetic, or else find ourselves loathing or admiring things. These 
feelings almost always have a propositional content that frames or 
explains the feeling. I normally do not just have vague and undirected 
feelings of gratitude. When feeling this way, I am grateful because of 
the fact that, for example, someone watched my cat while I was away, 
I’m happy because I passed the test, or else I deplore someone for 
exploiting a helpless stranger. While the feeling is a nonintentional 
state, it is typically framed by some set of intentional contents; the 

JOHN SEARLE
102

FROM SOUND TO WORDS
103
feeling or attitude is about something. Expressives, a fourth category 
of speech acts in Searle’s taxonomy, are performed when we articu-
late feelings: “Thank you for watching my cat” or “It’s disgusting the 
way you exploited that person.”
Expressives have no direction of fit. There may be some tendency 
to think that we are reporting or describing some (internal) state of 
affairs qua an assertive. But Searle is right not to collapse or para-
phrase the expression “Thank you” into the assertion “I am (in fact) 
feeling gratitude.” We are not, in the latter case, making a truth claim 
about how the world in fact is. Searle claims that the truth of the 
assertion that I’m feeling gratitude is presupposed and not put up for 
evaluation, as in the case when I assert that the fuel tank is full. 
Moreover, I’m not trying to change any feature of the world; “Thank 
you” requires no course of action on the part of a speaker or hearer. 
It is simply the external expression of what is at base some feeling. 
Typically when I say, “It’s disgusting the way you exploited that 
person,” I also imply the directive “don’t exploit people,” whose 
conditions of satisfaction are satisfied when the hearer ceases to take 
advantage of people. But it is not necessary to imply this much, so 
that I might express my disgust just to express my disgust; perhaps, 
I know that the person cannot or will not change and so do not 
bother to further intend that they do. Expressives amplify or put into 
the public sphere nonintentional states; they do not, unlike assertives, 
directives, or commissives, have conditions of satisfaction. so, they 
do not have a direction of fit.
A final class of speech act is the declaration. If expressives are 
distinguished from the first three types of speech act by not having 
a direction of fit, declarations are marked by having both a word-
to-world and a world-to-word direction of fit. 
In special circumstances we can bring facts into existence simply 
by declaring that it exists. If God’s saying, “Let there be light,” is suf-
ficient to bring about light, this is a declaration. Obviously humans 
cannot will brute facts into existence, so that my lawn is not mowed 
simply by virtue of my saying that it is so. But there is a class of facts 
that are in some sense created by us—what Searle calls institutional 
facts. For example, the Queen can dub or declare that a man is a 
knight. Just by virtue of her saying so, the man becomes a knight. 
This is a curious function of language, which, as we will see, occupies 
a central place in accounting for the possibility of speech acts in 
particular and institutional facts in general.

JOHN SEARLE
104
Almost all linguistic acts have a representational component 
and so involve an attempt to get the world and our words to match. 
In the event of a mis-fit, assertives, directives, and commissives pro-
voke us to change either the words or the world so as to bring them 
into alignment. This is a sense in which language is inherently nor-
mative; words, themselves, imply robust deontological commitments. 
Declarations—when certain conditions are met—bring the world in 
alignment to the words simply by virtue of their being said. Where 
an assertive has a word-to-world direction of fit and directives and 
commissives have a world-to-word direction of fit, directives have 
both a word-to-world and world-to-word direction of fit. As such the 
directive can be expected to share certain illocutionary properties 
with assertives, directives, and commissives while remaining impor-
tantly distinct from these speech acts. Directives are not assertives, 
which aim to describe the world as being a certain way. When some-
one declares “the meeting is adjourned,” they are not reporting 
or stating an antecedently existing fact; their saying it makes it so. 
Nevertheless the declaration resembles an assertion in the sense 
that the utterance is true, which is why both a declaration and an 
assertion share a word-to-world direction of fit. A declaration also 
has a world-to-word direction of fit, like a directive or a commissive. 
It is like a commissive or directive in the sense that a speaker says 
something with the intention of bringing about some change in 
the world—the meeting is to be closed or the man becomes a knight. 
But unlike commissives or directives there is, when said under the 
right circumstances, no gap between the speaker’s declaring some-
thing and it becoming the case. However, when I promise or ask 
someone to mow my lawn, my commissive or directive is not suffi-
cient to make it so.
Note that a number of conditions need to be in place before, “The 
meeting is adjourned,” “I pronounce you man and wife,” and “I dub 
thee knight” count as declarations. There has to be an institution 
wherein something counts as a meeting, a marriage, or a knight. 
Moreover, the person making the declaration must have a special sta-
tus within that institution: typically only certain people within that 
institution are enabled to adjourn a meeting, consecrate a marriage, 
or dub a knight. Those people must exercise the declaration properly 
as dictated by convention. Depending on how highly codified the 
rules are, a chairperson’s saying, “Let’s call it a day,” might not count 
as an adjourning. Finally, that person has to intend that the utterance 

FROM SOUND TO WORDS
105
counts as a declaration. If a chairperson was reading a transcript of 
a previous meeting and so happened to say the words, “The meeting 
is adjourned,” that would not count as an adjourning: it lacks the 
requisite intention. Similarly, a living will made under duress—and 
so not intended—would not normally count as a binding contract. 
While declaratives are distinguishable from the other speech acts 
in having two directions of fit, there is a way in which other speech 
acts can be embedded within a declarative speech act. Searle calls 
these linguistic declarations “performatives”.24 That is, there are two 
ways to perform a speech act: on the one hand we can do it, so that 
if it is raining I might just say “It is raining.” On the other hand 
I might opt to embed a verb which makes explicit the statement’s 
illocutionary force: “I assert that it is raining.” Where both these 
speech acts make a claim about the state of the weather (an asser-
tive), the latter embeds the assertive into a declarative: to say that 
“I’m asserting p” is sufficient to make it an assertion. Note that the 
declarative aspect does not extend to the content of the assertion: to 
say that I’m asserting that it is raining is not sufficient to make it 
rain; it only makes it the case that p is an assertion. Similarly, I can 
say either, “Wash the car!” or “I’m ordering you to wash the car!” 
While both are directives (orders), the latter is also a declarative: 
whatever content follows “I’m ordering you . . . ” is an order simply 
by virtue of my having said that it is so. Both these linguistic declara-
tions, such as “I assert that . . . ,” and extralinguistic declarations, 
such as a queen who says “I dub thee knight,” have two directions of 
fit: saying that the noises are an assertion or that the person is a 
knight makes it so. 
Why can every speech act be rearticulated, without a change in 
content, in a way that makes reference to a declaration (performa-
tive)? In the last section we saw that every speech act involves the 
intention to represent. This is simply the intention to transform 
sounds into meaningful artifacts. This cognitive capacity can be 
explicitly articulated. Just as a queen can dub a man a knight, we can 
dub a sound to be a speech act. When a performative is used, this 
otherwise implicit intention to represent is simply made explicit. That 
is why the appropriate performative can be added to a speech act 
without changing its content. Since there are five kinds of speech act, 
there are five basic intentions to represent, each of which can be 
made explicit by preceding the speech act with the appropriate 
performative: In uttering ‘the car is washed,’ I assert that the car is 

JOHN SEARLE
106
washed, or In uttering ‘I’m ordering you to wash the car!’ I order 
you to wash the car. Note that declaration is an interesting case 
in that every case involves a kind of a double-declaration: In saying 
‘I dub thee a knight’ I declare that I declare (dub) you a knight. Thus, 
the possibility of declaration is founded on a kind of essential 
human capa city which underlies the very possibility of meaningful 
communication.

107
CHAPTER 7
ON THE MEANING OF MEANING: 
CRITICAL REMARKS
A NEW CONCEPTION OF MEANING
With the publication of Intentionality (1983) Searle reevaluates the 
basic account of meaning as found in Speech Acts (1969). In the 
earlier account, an action (such as the production of sound) is mean-
ingful if it is done with the intention to communicate with the hearer. 
This communication involves the attempt to produce in the hearer, 
by some conventional means, knowledge of the speaker’s intentional 
state (the sincerity condition). 
In Intentionality, Searle reconsiders and revises the extension of 
the term “meaning” to accord with the semanticist. The most explicit 
treatment of the move is found in his article, “Meaning, Communica-
tion, and Representation” (1986), where Searle narrates the shift in 
his understanding of the meaning of meaning.
Like most speech act theorists I have analysed meaning in terms 
of communication. The intentions that are the essence of meaning 
are intentions to produce effects on hearers, that is, they are inten-
tions to communicate. But it now seems to me . . . that in at least 
one sense of “meaning,” communication is derived from meaning 
rather than constitutive of meaning. Communication, one might 
say, is a consequence of meaning, but meaning exists indepen-
dently of the intention to communicate that meaning. As a pre-
liminary formulation, I shall argue that a speaker’s uttering 
something and meaning something by it consists in the speaker’s 
uttering something with the intention that his utterance should 
represent the world in one or more of the possible illocutionary 

JOHN SEARLE
108
modes, and that the intention to communicate is the intention that 
these meaning intentions should be recognized by the hearer.1 
According to his revised view, a sound, mark, or gesture is meaning-
ful when it represents the world as being a certain way. Meaning is a 
function of the intention to represent. According to his old view, 
however, Searle sees meaning as a function of communication. If an 
audience happens to be present, and is privy to the speaker’s intended 
meaning, then the speaker may further be said to communicate. With 
this move Searle decisively breaks the link between the concept 
of meaning and the concept of communication. Contra Grice, no 
longer is the illocutionary intention to communicate a necessary 
condition for a speaker’s meaning something by an action.
There is a way of looking at this shift which minimizes its disrup-
tive pull in reconciling Searle’s earlier and later accounts of language.
Notice . . . that this account of meaning and communication is in 
no way inconsistent with the view that the fundamental purpose 
of language is communication. Language provides us with public 
systems of representation, and thereby allows representations to 
be readily communicated from one speaker-hearer to another in 
virtue of their common knowledge of the rules of language.2
The later Searle is a semanticist about meaning. However, he appears 
to remain a communication-intention theorist insofar as language is 
involved. In order to use language, a speaker must intend to commu-
nicate with the hearer using a conventional system of rules. In spite 
of the awkwardness of disentangling the closely associated notions 
of meaning and language, almost the entirety of the Gricean analysis 
of speech acts remains intact, except for two qualifications: First, no 
longer can the three illocutionary intentions be considered condi-
tions of speaker meaning. They rather specify the conditions under 
which an action counts as a speech act, and speech acts are asso-
ciated with language use or communication. Second, while the fun-
damental purpose of language may be communication, this capacity 
is dependent on the more primitive capacity to mean something, 
which now has nothing to do with communication.
The mistake was to suppose that the speaker’s communication 
intentions and speaker meaning were identical. . . . On my present 

ON THE MEANING OF MEANING
109
account the primary meaning intentions are intentions to repre-
sent and they are independent of and prior to the intention to 
communicate those representations. A primary-meaning intention 
is an intention to represent; a communication intention is an 
intention that the hearer should know the representing intention.3
It is clear that in his later account, a sound, mark, or action counts as 
meaningful when it represents the world, a la the semanticist. Com-
munication is secondary. As we saw in the last chapter, a sound, 
mark, or action comes to represent the world by way of a sincerity 
condition, the intention that the sincerity condition causes the utter-
ance and an intention to represent.
How did Searle come to construe meaning in terms of representa-
tion rather than communication? He construes the shift as a natural 
extension of the criticism directed against Grice in Speech Acts, dis-
cussed above. Reviewing those objections in “Meaning, Communica-
tion, and Representation,” Searle asks himself: “But now the question 
forces itself on us: if my objections to Grice are really valid why can’t 
I extend them to my own account?” 
Recall Searle’s original criticism of Grice: if meaning involves the 
intention to communicate, what is the purpose of communication? 
Confining our attention to assertives, for Grice, saying something 
and meaning it requires that the speaker intends to convince the 
hearer that p is the case. Searle disagrees: to convince someone that 
p is the case requires first that they understand what “p” signifies 
and that the speaker believes that p is the case. Meaning something, 
thus, only requires that the speaker communicates their belief that p, 
which is possible without further intending that the hearer believe p. 
It may also be the case that the speaker intends that the hearer 
also believe that is the case, but that perlocutionary intention is not 
necessary to saying something and meaning it. 
To both illustrate and support this claim, Searle has us consider 
the case of speaking out of duty, where the speaker says something 
without the intention to convince the hearer. Analogously, the author 
of a philosophy book presents reasons for believing an assertion. But 
the fact that the assertion was made does not imply an additional 
reason to believe it. This shows that there is a gap between a speaker’s 
intention that an audience understands an assertion and the further 
perlocutionary intention that the audience believes it. To say some-
thing and mean it only requires the first, illocutionary intention.

JOHN SEARLE
110
In the decades that followed the publication of Speech Acts, Searle 
realized that this same strategy could be amplified to target his own 
early views: 
I argued against Grice that one can say some thing and mean it 
and still not intend to produce any response or action by the hearer. 
But why can there not be cases where one says something, means 
it, and does not intend to produce understanding in the hearer?4 
In other words, if it is possible to mean something without intending 
certain perlocutionary effects, then it might be possible to mean 
something without intending to produce illocutionary effects—
communication. On Searle’s new view, meaning only requires the 
speaker’s intention that some sound, mark, or action represent. Since 
that sound, mark, or action is the result of a further locutionary 
intention, Searle sometimes says that meaning involves the imposi-
tion of conditions of satisfaction on conditions of satisfaction—that 
is, the imposition of a capacity to represent on locutionary effects, 
e.g. mere sounds, marks, or gestures.
This is a remarkable admission. Without renouncing any of the 
structural features of the overall portrait of communication, the shift 
in emphasis is tantamount to a rejection of the communication-
intention tradition. Of course we can communicate. But this is an 
ancillary function which anyway requires the ability to use mere 
words, marks, and actions to represent. In other words, following 
the semanticist, communication is to meaning or representation as 
pragmatics is to semantics: pragmatics is cast off as a secondary and 
derivative extension of semantics, the capacity to represent as being 
a certain way.
How can a shift in emphasis amount to a rejection of a tradition? 
Searle’s move can be roughly schematized as shown in Figure 7.1.
The basic idea is that for Grice (thin line in Figure 7.1), someone 
can’t be said to mean something by a sound unless the speaker intends 
to convince the hearer of a belief, and the hearer comes to under-
stand what the speaker’s belief is. If the hearer actually becomes 
convinced of the belief, then, a sound is not just meaningful, but suc-
cessful. Searle, in Speech Acts (thick dashed line), only requires that 
in order for a sound to be meaningful, the speaker has the illocution-
ary intention that the hearer understands the expression (the sound 
which counts as representing p). For this it is necessary that the sound 

ON THE MEANING OF MEANING
111

JOHN SEARLE
112
become an expression (by means of the intention to represent). But 
in order for the speech act to be successful, this expression must cause 
understand ing or illocutionary effects in the hearer. Finally, in his 
later work, Intentionality and “Meaning, Communication, and Rep-
resentation,” meaning only requires the intention that a sound repre-
sent. In order for a sound to be meaningful it is not necessary for the 
speaker to further intend one effect or another on the hearer. An 
intention to represent is successful if sounds come to have conditions 
of satisfaction under some force or other. A speaker may intend to 
produce illocutionary or perlocutionary effects on the hearer, but 
this requires the application of a separate intention to communicate 
(illocutionary intentions). Thus, meaning intentions are screened off 
from communication (illocutionary) intentions. However, note that 
while the referent of the concept “meaning” has changed, the overall 
account or structure of speech acts remains more or less intact.
Searle’s later view, that the intention to represent is possible with-
out the intention to communicate but not visa versa, is exactly analo-
gous to the view that the (locutionary) intention to make sounds, 
marks, or gestures is possible without the intention to represent but 
not vice versa. And this is correct when “dependency” flags a causal 
or ontological relation. This chain of dependency also helps explain 
why Searle shrinks the earlier accounts of meaning to the core inten-
tion to represent (see Diagram, above). However, there is also a justi-
ficatory or functional relation in which the chains of dependency are 
exactly inversed. The earlier intention to represent justifies or moti-
vates someone’s making a sound, mark, or gesture. And the earlier 
intention to communicate justifies someone’s intention to represent. 
In other words, while the speaker had the intention to communicate 
becausee the speaker had the intention to represent, it is equally true 
that the speaker had the intention to represent becausej the speaker 
had the intention to communicate.5 When Grice cites perlocutionary 
intentions as the key to meaning, it is the justificatory continuum of 
dependency that he has in mind. The fact that there is a sense in 
which the locutionary intention is dependent on the representation 
intention, which is, in turn, dependent on the communication inten-
tion may also be what motivates Austin to state that “in general the 
locutionary act as much as the illocutionary is an abstraction only: 
every genuine speech act is both. (This is similar to the way in which 
the phatic act, the rhetic act, &c., are mere abstractions.)”6 To say 
that the locutionary intention or the illocutionary intention are 

ON THE MEANING OF MEANING
113
abstractions is to point out that what can be screened off in thought 
does not always imply genuine autonomy. 
IS SEARLE’S ORIGINAL CRITICISM OF GRICE COMPELLING?
I will argue that Searle’s rearticulation of the concept of meaning, as 
found in Intentionality, may be a mistake even by Searle’s own lights.
For Grice and the early Searle, meaning is specified in terms of 
communication, in terms of intended illocutionary or even perlo-
cutionary effects. But where the early Searle thought the conditions 
of satisfaction are properly illocutionary, Grice contends that the 
speaker aims to produce a perlocutionary effect—namely, for asser-
tives, to convince the speaker of the truth of the assertion.
However, the early Searle and Grice are not simply providing 
different answers to the same question; they are asking different 
questions. Grice asks, which effects are among an assertion’s typical 
conditions of satisfaction? The early Searle asks, what are among 
an assertion’s minimal conditions of satisfaction? Their answers are 
perlocutionary and illocutionary effects, respectively. I will argue that 
the early Searle has, even by his own terms, misled himself in focus-
ing on an assertion’s illocutionary effects as the defining mark of an 
assertion. This, in turn, prompts the later Searle to further truncate 
the notion of meaning in Intentionality and “Meaning, Communica-
tion, and Representation.” 
It is worth stepping back and surveying the metaphilosophical pre-
suppositions against which Searle’s early criticism of Grice gains 
traction. There are, in general, two approaches to analyzing a con-
cept. We can look at all the instances which fall under a concept and 
try to specify the properties which they all have in common (their 
necessary conditions). Or we can look at the central, paradigm cases 
of a concept and specify the properties which those cases have in 
common. All tables, perhaps, have a horizontal surface. But a typical, 
paradigmatic table has a horizontal surface, plus four legs.7 
Now consider these two approaches when the concept under 
consideration is that of meaning. What Searle has done is identify 
cases—speaking out of a sense of duty or philosophizing—in which 
a speaker is not trying to convince the audience of anything, but 
which nevertheless seems to involve meaningful assertion. Let’s 
take for granted that the counterexamples are successful—that, for 
example, in speaking out of duty, the speaker does not in fact 

JOHN SEARLE
114
have the intention to convince the hearer of anything (rather than 
simply an expectation that this intention will go unsatisfied). Searle 
assumes that such counterexamples mandate a revision of the 
proposed criteria: the speaker, in order to speak meaningfully, need 
only intend to produce an illocutionary rather than perlocutionary 
effect. Searle is after a set of necessary and jointly sufficient condi-
tions for what might minimally count as a meaningful assertion’s 
possible conditions of satisfaction. 
However, there are other ways to understand the significance of 
the counterexamples which would not mandate jettisoning Grice’s 
account. Counterexamples can easily be dismissed as nonparadig-
matic or borderline; the theorist might only point out the proposed 
criteria were never intended to comprehensively cover all conceivable 
instances of meaningful assertion. Indeed, saying something out of 
duty is uncontroversially a derivative case of assertion. The second 
case of philosophizing just misses the point; the perlocutionary effect 
that Grice considered indicative of an assertion’s conditions of satis-
faction, is simply that the speaker be convinced of the truth of what 
is said; it is incidental whether the speaker further intends that the 
hearer be convinced simply by virtue of the fact that it was said. The 
fact that reasons are required to convince the hearer of p’s truth does 
not mean the speaker did not assert p with the intention that the 
hearer believe p. 
Furthermore, the philosophical case may itself be unparadigmatic. 
Typically, the fact that someone said something is a reason to accept 
it as true. Sometimes, as when we philosophize, the speaker aims to 
bring about a perlocutionary effect by way of a battery of explicit 
reasons. Indeed, focusing on reason-giving enterprises, such as sci-
ence and philosophy, can obscure the fact that, in the vast majority 
of assertions that we encounter in our day-to-day lives, the fact 
that someone says something itself constitutes a reason to believe 
it. When a friend tells me they are not feeling well, that is, ceteris 
paribus, a reason to believe that they are not feeling well.8 
Indeed, Searle himself makes several claims that would appear 
to endorse the view that the fact that a speaker says something 
amounts to a prima facie reason to believe it. If a newsanchor tells 
of a bombing in Baghdad, that is typically reason to believe it. 
I believe a computer technician who tells me that my operating 
system is burdened with a malicious computer virus. If my bill says 
that I owe the gas company some amount of money, that is typically 
a reason to believe it. 

ON THE MEANING OF MEANING
115
In Rationality in Action Searle states that a speaker’s assertion imp-
lies a commitment to the truth of that assertion. But if the speaker is 
necessarily committed to the truth of the assertion that, for example, 
it’s raining, then this constitutes a reason for the hearer to believe it is 
raining (and not just that the speaker believes that it is raining). Justi-
fication is, perhaps, a norm of assertion. Tellingly, Searle describes 
this commitment to truth as a condition for meaning something:
[I]f he is not just uttering the sentence but actually saying that it is 
raining, if he actually, means that it is raining, then he must intend 
that the utterance satisfy truth conditions, the conditions of satis-
faction with a downward direction of fit that it is raining. . . . And 
he is not neutral vis-a-vis truth or falsity, because his claim is a 
claim to truth.9
By Searle’s own admission, meaning something implies that the 
speaker believes it, and so constitutes a reason for the hearer’s believ-
ing it. This relationship between truth and assertion has a converse 
aspect. A hearer is not entitled to doubt an assertion unless there is a 
reason to doubt it. Skepticism needs to be motivated by what Grice 
calls a “doubt-or-denial condition.”10 There must be, according to 
Austin, “a special reason to doubt the testimony” or assertion of 
another: “we are entitled to trust others, except in so far as there is 
some concrete reason to distrust them.”11 The default position is 
belief, unless there is a special, additional reason to doubt it. 
The significance of the purported counterexamples depends on 
whether or not the philosopher is aiming to specify the boundary 
conditions of a concept or the paradigm case. Since Searle is worried 
that saying something out of duty or philosophical assertion is not 
covered by Grice’s conditions, it appears that Searle is after the mini-
mal, necessary, and sufficient conditions of a speech act. However, 
this move is surprising, as it is discontinuous with his typical approach 
to philosophizing. For example, in discussing the concept of reference, 
Searle dismisses the force of certain counterexamples to his own view 
according to the following rationale: 
These [counterexamples] seem to lack many of the features which 
give point to paradigm definite references. A common mistake in 
philosophy is to suppose there must be a right and unequivocal 
answer to such questions, or worse yet, to suppose that unless 
there is a right and unequivocal answer, the concept of referring is 

JOHN SEARLE
116
a worthless concept. The proper approach, I suggest, is to examine 
those cases which constitute the center of variation of the concept 
of referring and then examine the borderline cases in light of their 
similarities and differences from the paradigms. As long as we are 
aware of both similarities and differences, it may not matter much 
whether we call such cases referring or not.12 
If concepts are assumed to be well defined, then counterexamples 
can invalidate a proposed theory. However, if Searle is aiming for the 
paradigmatic, the “center of variation of the concept,” counter-
examples may be dismissed as marginal or borderline cases which the 
account was never intended to cover in the first place. Looking at the 
concept of meaning, even if we assume that speaking out of duty or 
philosophizing are counterexamples, Searle himself is typically reluc-
tant to see concepts as sharply defined; he rather attempts to provide 
analysis of central cases, granting, as in the case of the concept of 
reference, that there will be borderline instances. It is unclear why, in 
the case of the concept of meaning, Searle changes methodological 
strategies.
Searle explicitly flags the fact that his method in Speech Acts is at 
odds with his typical approach to philosophizing: “I have used differ-
ent methods for different tasks. When I did the theory of speech acts, 
I tried to analyze the necessary and sufficient conditions for the per-
formance of a speech act and the utterance of a sentence.”13 Given 
this, Searle is able to criticize Grice by way of a method of counter-
examples. But what makes the topic of speech acts, as opposed to 
reference, particularly suitable to this mode of philosophizing? 
The debate between Grice and the early Searle is only superficially 
a debate about which among a meaningful assertion’s many effects 
constitute its proper conditions of satisfaction (illocutionary or per-
locutionary). The debate rather hinges, not on the facts, but on the 
adopted model of philosophical inquiry. These are metaphilosophi-
cal differences disguised as a factual dispute; this is a methodological 
debate in drag.
IS SEARLE’S CRITICISM OF SEARLE COMPELLING?
Searle’s Intentionality and “Meaning, Communication, and Repre-
sentation” explicitly reframes the core features of his philosophy of 
language, rejecting the principles of the communication-intention 

ON THE MEANING OF MEANING
117
tradition, within which Searle had taken himself to be working. In 
this section I will argue that Searle’s semantic turn was just, in fact, a 
working out of a certain trajectory already begun in Speech Acts. As 
such, the viability of the semanticist turn is strongly dependent on 
the viability of his original criticisms of Grice. 
Earlier, in Speech Acts, Searle argued that in order for an assertion 
to be meaningful, the speaker need only intend to provoke illocution-
ary, rather than perlocutionary, effects in the hearer. Later, in Inten-
tionality, Searle wondered whether it was necessary to intend to 
produce any effect in the hearer whatsoever. Following the semanti-
cist, a gesture, sound, or mark is meaningful if the speaker imposes 
the capacity to represent the world, via conditions of satisfaction, on 
those brute facts. Since the speaker also made the sound, mark, 
or gesture, Searle describes the meaning intention or intention to 
represent in terms of the imposition of conditions of satisfaction on 
conditions of satisfaction.
Because Searle iterates the critical strategy directed against Grice, 
this second move can only be as successful as the original move 
against Grice. But, I argued that Grice was not after minimal condi-
tions for an utterance’s meaning something; rather, his account of 
meaning aimed at saying something about the nature of central, par-
adigm cases of meaning. What is so uncanny about Searle’s appeal to 
counterexamples, in the service of generating a set of necessary and 
jointly sufficient conditions for meaning, is that the approach seems 
so un-Searlean. 
Speaking out of duty is an unparadigmatic case of assertion 
and so of limited use when the aim is to articulate the conditions by 
which assertions are typically meaningful. What are the cases which 
motivate Searle’s later account of meaning, in terms of the intention 
to represent rather than the intention to communicate or convince? 
In the article, Searle imagines a case wherein an English speaker 
communicates to a hearer who does not speak English, the fact that 
the speaker’s crankshaft is broken. The speaker does this by way of a 
drawing. To mean something, according to his later view, it is only 
necessary that the speaker intends the marks to represent the fact 
that the crankshaft is broken.
Furthermore, in the example, the representation of the broken 
crankshaft is clearly separable from the communication of the 
fact that the crankshaft is broken. This is brought out by the fact 

JOHN SEARLE
118
that one can represent without communicating, or without any 
intention to communicate. For example, I might just draw the pic-
ture to have a picture of my broken crankshaft without any desire 
or intention to communicate the fact that the crankshaft is broken 
to anyone. Nor does it seem correct to say in such cases that I am 
communicating with my future self, or acting as if I were commu-
nicating with someone else. For I might, for example, deliberately 
draw the picture with the intention that there be no communi-
cation at all. I might intend to destroy the picture or draw it in 
disappearing ink, for example. 
In Speech Acts, Searle used the case of speaking out of duty to show 
that we can communicate without the intention to convince, so 
showing that meaning is not necessarily a matter of perlocutionary 
intentions. Analogously, in his later texts, Searle uses the case of 
soliloquy to show that we can mean something without intending to 
communicate.
But, in response, if speaking out of duty is an unparadigmatic case 
of meaningful assertion, then soliloquy or the production of private 
language are surely likewise exceptional cases of meaningful asser-
tion. The conclusion is somewhat akin to the ecologist who says 
that crows are not black because several albino crows have been 
observed. This would be true if the aim is to provide necessary and 
jointly sufficient conditions of all cases of meaning something. But 
this is hardly paradigmatic of Searle’s approach to philosophizing. 
Should one build an account of meaning on the basis of outliers?

119
CHAPTER 8
THE CONSTRUCTION OF SOCIAL REALITY
ACTS THAT ACHIEVE THEIR AIMS BY CONVENTIONAL MEANS
Words do things; we utter noises with the intention of achieving 
certain purposes or functions.1 Orders and commands attempt to get 
the hearer to do something. In asserting something, a speaker com-
municates by representing a state of affairs and may further do so 
with the intention of communicating with the hearer. 
Many of these functional effects are such that I can bring about 
their realization through nonlinguistic means. I could request that 
someone move out of my way or else I could push them out of the 
way. I could tell someone that I purchased a jacket or I could simply 
show them the new jacket. 
What distinguishes my pushing someone out the way from a 
request or order that they move out of my way, given that both 
actions are undertaken with the same purpose in mind? Either action 
may fail to achieve its intended purpose. The speech act may be less 
rude but it need not be. An important difference is that the speech act 
works by means of a conventional aspect, as required by Searle’s third 
illocutionary intention. If I succeed in pushing someone out of the 
way, my success is entirely a function of the vector sum of the various 
forces acting on the person pushed. A resistance on the part of the 
person pushed or even a strong crosswind might undermine my 
attempts. However if I request that a person move, my success is 
determined, in part, by whether or not the hearer understands what 
I said—understands that the noises “please move” count as a request 
to move (in English). This illocutionary effect is a means by which 
the ultimate perlocutionary effect—that the person does not just 
understand the request but actually moves—is achieved.

JOHN SEARLE
120
As seen in the last chapter, we typically do not talk simply with the 
intention of producing understanding of what I meant—the illocu-
tionary effect. The principle, intended effect or point of my saying 
something is perlocutionary. In asking someone to move I do not just 
want them to know that I have asked them to move—I want them to 
move. In telling someone I bought a new jacket, I don’t want them 
simply to believe that I believe I bought a new jacket. I rather say this 
with the expectation that they will believe that it is the case.
If the intended function of a speech act has a conventional aspect, 
this draws attention to the fact that there is nothing nomologically 
necessary about the means by which the effect was achieved. As an 
English speaker I might ask someone to move by saying “please 
move” but it could have been another series of sounds: a German 
says, “Bitte, berühren Sie sich.” The conventionality of a speech act 
gets at the fact that there is an aspect of the speech act that could 
have been otherwise, that the sounds, “please move,” are in a sense, 
arbitrary. However, if I push someone, they must move given that 
I have shoved them with enough force; the means by which the 
intended outcome is achieved is not dependent on the conventions 
within which the actors are working but it has the force of physical 
necessity.2
The conventions which allow me to pursue various aims and effects 
take the form of what Searle calls “constitutive rules.” Generally, in 
the English language, the sounds “please move” count as a request 
that the hearer move. This is the constitutive rule about how the 
sounds “please move” are used. In another language the same sounds 
are meaningless or could, at least in principle, mean something else 
altogether.
 All constitutive rules have the form “X counts as Y in context C,” 
where X is a brute fact and Y is an institutional fact. C is a contextual 
marker. Constitutive rules are conventional in the sense that there is 
nothing necessary about the fact that X is linked with Y; in a different 
community or context the same institutional fact might be linked 
with an entirely different set of brute facts so that English speakers 
and German speakers use different sounds in order to achieve the 
same effect. 
Part of what the “X counts as Y in C” formula is meant to convey 
is that institutional facts (Y) are built on or in some way dependent 
on a set of brute facts (X). Institutional reality, including language, 
is not free-floating, but is rather founded on a base of physical stuff, 

THE CONSTRUCTION OF SOCIAL REALITY
121
including particles in fields of force. Thus part of the project of The 
Construction of Social Reality is to show how our social and insti-
tutional reality can be founded on the physical base. “Since our inves-
tigation is ontological, i.e., about how social facts exist, we need to 
figure out how social reality fits into our overall ontology, i.e., how 
the existence of social facts relates to other things that exist.”3 
This returns us to the familiar ontological quandary that frames 
most of Searle’s philosophical enterprises: how can a certain puz-
zling fact be reconciled with a less-puzzling fundamental ontology? 
How can the manifest image be reconciled with the scientific image? 
In this case the puzzling facts are institutional facts—language, 
money, the office of the president.
In Chapter 6 we saw Searle’s answer to this question, when the 
explanandum was language. Sounds count as representations if a 
speaker imposes conditions of satisfaction on those sounds. When 
this happens the sounds themselves come to have a derived inten-
tionality—the ability to represent the world under a certain force. In 
other words, Searle answers the ontological puzzle of language by 
appealing to the remarkable intentional ability to impose conditions 
of satisfaction (represent the world as being a certain way) on condi-
tions of satisfaction (the sounds).
But language is just one kind of institutional fact. How is money 
or the presidency possible in a world which consists of particles in 
fields of force and minds? In The Construction of Social Reality, 
Searle generalizes his answer as it applies to language so as to cover 
the entire institutional sphere. But where a language user imposes 
conditions of satisfaction on a sound, mark, or gesture, Searle will 
argue that for institutional facts in general, the agent likewise imposes 
functions (Y) on some brute fact or other (X). This is the basic insight 
captured by the X counts as Y in C formula.
INSTITUTIONAL FACTS
What are institutional facts (Y) and how are they distinguished from 
the brute facts (X) on which they are instantiated? 
Three Kinds of Institutional Facts
We will be in a position to see what an institutional fact is when we 
get a sense of the kind of institutional facts there are. Institutional 

JOHN SEARLE
122
facts can be imposed on three categories of brute facts: actions, 
persons, and other kinds of objects or events.
As we have seen, speech acts are institutional facts. Other actions, 
which are not overtly linguistic, are also institutional facts. For exam-
ple a person could be dubbed a knight by a queen; the movement 
of the sword is probably not a speech act but is an institutional fact. 
The act of punching a hole in a certain card in a voting booth is, 
likewise, a nonlinguistic institutional fact. In these examples institu-
tional facts are actions, although not all actions are institutional 
facts. Simply punching a hole in a card or pushing someone out of 
the way are noninstitutional brute facts. Punching a hole in a certain 
card in a certain context or else saying, “Please get out of my way,” 
are institutional facts. A task is to distinguish merely punching a hole 
in a card from voting.
Sometimes the brute fact on which an institutional fact is instanti-
ated is a person. When people are construed as biological organisms, 
they are seen simply as brute objects. But these organisms are also 
citizens, professors, students, presidents, queens, knights, members 
of the armed services, and so on. As such, these biological organisms 
(X) are construed in terms of institutional facts (Y). In a kind of 
Hobbesian state of nature, there are no citizens or presidents or 
soldiers—we are reduced to conscious, biological beasts. Searle’s 
aim is to give us the means by which to distinguish the queen from 
a woman wearing robes and a metal circlet on her head. He does 
this by explaining how queenhood, or any other institutional fact, 
is possible.
Finally, objects and events, besides actions and persons, can be 
institutional facts. A green piece of paper with certain markings (X) 
can count as money (Y) in certain circumstances. In other circum-
stances, shells and feathers or certain kinds of rocks might count as 
money. A certain noise counts as an air-raid warning. A gold circlet 
counts as a crown. When utterances are causally separated from the 
movement of the larynx which produced them, as in a recording, it 
may be more convenient to treat them as an event rather than part of 
the action, so that if I hear “call home” on my voicemail, it is prefer-
able to say that those noises-qua-event (X) count as a request or order 
(Y). So far as the task of getting clear on what institutional facts are, 
nothing much banks on a precise distinction between the various 
brute substrata of actions, persons, and others sorts of objects or 
events.

THE CONSTRUCTION OF SOCIAL REALITY
123
So actions, people, and other kinds of objects and events can be 
the bearers of institutional facts. What becomes clear in these exam-
ples is that the institutional fact has a kind of significance that goes 
beyond the brute fact on which it is founded. Money is something 
more than the stuff it is made of. “Stop!” isn’t just movement of vocal 
chords and the noise they produce. A queen is more than just a 
woman. It is also clear that whatever money is, in addition to being a 
green piece of paper and ink, it is not another thing that is somehow 
added to the paper. But neither is money simply reducible to the 
brute stuff out of which it is made, as the institutional materialist 
might have it. 
So what is institutional reality?
In introducing the idea of an institutional fact in The Construction 
of Social Reality, Searle tends to focus on things like money, which 
are founded on nonpersonal objects and events. Money is an excel-
lent example insofar as it successfully leverages our intuition that 
money is not just a particular amalgam of paper and ink; we can also 
see how money might be constituted by a variety of different brute 
facts. But the money example is also misleading. Searle recognizes 
this when he writes, “Social objects are always . . . constituted by 
social acts; and, in a sense, the object is just the continuous possibility 
of the activity. A twenty dollar bill, for example, is a standing possi-
bility of paying for something.”4 Then, much later in the text, he 
changes the emphasis again when he writes that “the category of 
people, including groups, is fundamental in the sense that the imposi-
tion of status-functions on objects and events works only in relation 
to people. . . . It is not the five dollar bill as an object that matters, but 
rather that the possessor of the five dollar bill now has a certain 
power that he or she did not otherwise have.”5 Rather than follow 
Searle’s pedagogical model, which begins with objects and events, 
we will begin with the category of people and their actions as our 
primary institutional exemplars.
Institutional Facts as Functional Phenomena
Having provided a list of examples, can we formulate criteria by 
which we are able to distinguish institutional facts from noninstitu-
tional facts? 
Looking at the physical structure of the institutional fact will not 
help: as mentioned, ontologically speaking, an institutional fact is 

JOHN SEARLE
124
nothing more than the brute fact it is instantiated on. The queen is in 
some sense just a woman, a biological organism. 
We might then try to distinguish institutional facts from noninsti-
tutional facts according to what they do—what kind of effects they 
bring about. Both brute and institutional facts stand in causal rela-
tions with other facts in the world. Moreover, since both brute and 
institutional facts may have the same consequences, it seems that we 
can’t look to the kind of effect brought about as a means to distin-
guish the two kinds of fact. For example both an executioner and a 
falling piano might cause a death, but only the former is an institu-
tional fact.
There is, nevertheless, an important difference in the death that 
resulted from the hand of an executioner and the death that resulted 
from the fall of a piano. The killing is a functional effect of the execu-
tioner but not so for the piano. The executioner exists for the purpose 
of killing people, which is not the case for the piano. Institutional 
facts are functional entities; they exist for the purpose of bringing 
about some effect or other: money facilitates exchange, an assertion 
allows me to communicate a state of affairs, queens lead, execution-
ers kill, and so on. 
This functional nature gives part of the means by which to distin-
guish institutional facts from brute facts, such as rocks and rainbows, 
which have no function. The latter are not institutional facts. 
However this criterion is of limited use, as there are many brute 
facts, such as hearts and livers, which have functions but are not 
institutional. Searle argues that we further exclude these so-called 
“nonagentive functions” from the sphere of the institutional on the 
grounds that such attributions make no reference to the specific 
purposes or interests of human beings. A heart may pump blood but 
its doing so can’t be traced back to a network of values and purposes 
which are specifically our own; these effects exist quite independently 
of us. This stands in contrast to knives, chairs, money, queens, execu-
tioners, language, and so on, which would not exist but for the aims 
and desires of human beings. These “agentive functions” are created 
by human beings for their own purposes, and all institutional facts 
are agentive functions.
But the remaining agentive functions are still not necessarily insti-
tutional. Searle claims that walls, which have the function of prohi-
biting trespass, are not institutional facts. I can turn on the stove in 
order to cook, but my doing so is not an institutional fact. Indeed, 

THE CONSTRUCTION OF SOCIAL REALITY
125
Searle even wishes to exclude certain forms of social or cooperative 
action—as when animals coordinate in a hunt—from the sphere of 
the institutional. So, some agentive functions are social facts and 
some of those are institutional facts. In the next section we will 
discuss the criteria by which agentive functions count as social facts 
and the narrower criterion by which some of those social facts count 
as institutional facts.
This taxonomy of phenomena can be diagrammed as shown in 
Figure 8.1:
Note that according to the chart, institutional facts are a kind of 
brute fact—which constitutes Searle’s fundamental ontology—just 
as cars are a kind of vehicle. This is in some sense right, as Searle’s 
ultimate aim is to locate social and institutional facts within an onto-
logy of brute facts. Searle thinks that “social facts in general, and 
institutional facts especially, are hierarchically structured. Institu-
tional facts exist, so to speak, on top of brute physical facts.”6 Nev-
ertheless, throughout much of the text he talks of social and 
institutional facts in contrast to brute facts. If a car is a kind of vehi-
cle, it would be nonsensical to then contrast cars with vehicles. 
However, when Searle makes this contrast, he merely means to say 
that social and institutional facts may be contrasted with other brute 

JOHN SEARLE
126
facts which do not have this status. This is akin to comparing cars 
with vehicles which are not cars, which is unproblematic even if we 
agree that cars are kinds of vehicles.
Institutional Facts and Deontic Powers: The Status Function
Granting that institutional facts are agentive functions, how does 
Searle distinguish those agentive functions which are institutional 
facts (money, voting, queens) from those agentive functions that are 
not (knives, chairs, walls)?
Before answering this question we need to make a preliminary 
distinction between two kinds of intentionality.
Searle distinguishes two kinds of intentions with which action is 
undertaken. My attempt to cook involves a kind of singular, “I” 
intentionality. Social and institutional facts, by contrast, implicate a 
collective, “we” intentionality. As a member of a football team, we 
intend to win, make it to the finals, and so on. This we-intention 
exists within the head of each player on the team; in granting the 
possibility of we-intentionality we ought not imagine it as a kind of 
singular superthought or borg-consciousness, hovering over the 
heads of the participants. In drawing our attention to the possibility 
of we-intentionality, Searle only wishes to remind us of the kind of 
thoughts which accompany collective action, whether in playing 
sports, singing in a church choir, contributing to an online encyclo-
pedia, completing the agenda in a department meeting, and so on. In 
these cases, what is required is a set of collective purposes around 
which we organize, at least to some extent, our own actions and 
decisions. 
To return to the football example, in aiming to accomplish the 
team’s collective purpose of scoring a touchdown or winning the 
game, each player also exercises singular I-intentions. While I and 
the rest of the team each we-intend to score a touchdown, I, as a 
receiver, may I-intend to catch the ball where the quarterback may 
I-intend to throw the ball. But these I-intentions are an extension of, 
and can only be understood against, a shared we-intention. In this 
way, while both, in playing football, blocking and in cooking, turning 
on the stove are agentive, functional phenomena, only playing 
football is a social fact because only it operates within the scope of an 
overriding we-intention. Searle stipulates that any activity done by 

THE CONSTRUCTION OF SOCIAL REALITY
127
way of a we-intention is what qualifies some agentive functions as 
social facts. As we will see, however, not all social facts are, further, 
institutional facts. Obviously, turning on the stove could be a social 
fact if, for example, I did so in my capacity as a member of a team of 
chefs. But then I turn on the stove in order that we might prepare the 
requested menu items (the we-intention’s condition of satisfaction).
My turning on the stove is an agentive, functional phenomenon: 
I do so with the aim of cooking something (the condition of satisfac-
tion). But if I am cooking for myself this is not an institutional fact 
because it is not a social fact—the action is not guided by the required 
we-intentionality. What about the actions of animals in a pack, who 
co ordinate various actions in order to hunt prey? These actions are 
functional. They are, moreover, social actions because they appear to 
be guided by a we-intention. But these actions are not institutional 
facts.
So if social facts involve collective intentionality, how might we 
distinguish institutional facts from mere social facts? 
Early in The Construction of Social Reality Searle gives an answer 
to this question which is telling but ultimately inadequate. Searle has 
us imagine a wall that has been built by a tribe to keep out intruders. 
This wall is a social fact, as it has been built, stone by stone, with the 
collective intention of protecting the tribe. But the wall is not an 
institutional fact. Now imagine that, over time, the wall deteriorates 
until there is nothing but a circle of stones around the village. This 
circle of stone is, for Searle, an institutional fact. Given that the wall 
and line of stones serve the same collective, agentive function, what 
distinguishes them? Searle marks the difference between mere social 
facts and institutional facts by suggesting that the latter can perform 
its function in a way that is not dependent on the physical structure 
of the artifact in question. The wall does not just keep people out; 
it acquires what Searle calls a “status function” when it performs 
that function in a way that is quite independent of its physical 
constitution.
We can mark the difference between the two kinds of functions by 
looking at the terms we would use to characterize functional break-
down. If a wall, as social fact, only performs its function by virtue 
of its physical structure alone, and it failed to perform that function 
(it was not high enough, it was weak) so that members of a rival tribe 
were able to cross it, we would describe the wall as dysfunctional. 

JOHN SEARLE
128
However, if members of a rival tribe cross a circle of stones, the pro-
blem is not with the stones. They see stones, they know that they 
mark a boundary, and they cross it anyway. The stones are not dys-
functional; rather the members of this tribe are remiss. We will 
address the difference between these kinds of breakdown in greater 
detail below. 
Notice that money nicely exemplifies the requirement that institu-
tional facts serve their function in a way which is not dependent on 
their physical structure alone: while a green piece of paper with 
certain markings facilitates exchange, its physical structure is only 
incidentally related to that function. Speech acts also fit this require-
ment: if the officer says, “Show me your passport,” and that order 
succeeds by prompting the traveler to show the passport, the officer’s 
perlocutionary intention is not satisfied simply by virtue of the phy-
sical structure of the sounds. Money, speech acts, and the ring of 
stones thus perform a function in an importantly different way 
than does a wall or a chair, even when a we-intention is present. 
Indeed, this requirement is a generalization of the conventionality 
requirement, (the third illocutionary intention) so far as language is 
concerned: the ring of stones conventionally means, keep out.
I have elsewhere argued that the requirement that institutional 
facts perform their function in a way that is independent of their 
physical structure cannot work.7 Granting that the circle of stones is 
an institutional fact, imagine that the tribe rebuilds the wall. Does 
the border then revert to a mere social fact? No. Putting the same 
point more concretely, the United States is currently building a fence 
that extends across its border with Mexico. This border is uncontro-
versially an institutional fact. But, contra Searle, this status is not 
contingent on whether or not there happens to be a physical barrier 
between the countries. An economic refugee may climb the fence. 
The fence may be dysfunctional, but it also is the case that the refugee 
remains, in some sense, remiss. Searle is mistaken to think that he can 
make a reliable distinction between institutional facts and other kinds 
of functional facts, including social ones, by appeal to the physical 
structure of those facts alone.
There is another problem with Searle’s physicalist criterion. The 
reader may have noticed that the kinds of facts that most easily 
accommodate this criteria are not people nor actions, but other kinds 
of objects—stones, sounds, and certain pieces of paper. But these 
objects are not paradigm cases of institutional facts; they are, as 

THE CONSTRUCTION OF SOCIAL REALITY
129
Searle notes, placeholders of patterns of activity. An execution—an 
action—is an institutional fact and so distinguished from a mere 
killing. But note that the arm movement which drives the blade, in 
the case of a beheading, performs the execution in virtue of the phy-
sical structure alone. While not all institutional actions are like this, 
as when the queen dubs a man a knight, it is clear that Searle cannot 
distinguish institutional facts from other kinds of functions simply 
by appeal to the physical properties of the event in question. 
This misleading picture arises because Searle places undue empha-
sis on institutional objects, such as money and a line of stones, as 
paradigm cases of institutional facts. One problem with this is that 
objects cannot be remiss; under certain conditions, a nonexecutioner 
would be remiss in killing someone whereas an executioner would be 
remiss in not killing someone. Walls and knives are dysfunctional but 
executioners and queens can be remiss. When we move the emphasis 
to persons and their actions, the possibility of various kinds of func-
tional breakdown constitutes a more suitable principle of differentia-
tion, which aims to distinguish institutional from social facts. Searle 
seems more cognizant of this in the latter half of The Construction of 
Social Reality, which places much less emphasis on objects.
Institutional facts cannot be distinguished from social phenomena 
by appeal to the criterion that the institutional facts can perform 
their function independently of the physical structure of that fact. 
That institutional facts carry with them the possibility of remission, 
however, provides a clue as to the actual point of difference between 
institutional and social facts.
Consider the following two cases. First, a member of a pack of 
hyenas gets distracted in such a way that the group fails to catch the 
prey. Second, in the middle of an offensive drive, a receiver gets frus-
trated and walks off the football field thereby undermining the play. 
Both are social facts, but only the latter is institutional, and while 
the actions of both the hyena and the receiver are dysfunctional, only 
the latter is remiss. Why? Simply put, because only the receiver is capa-
ble of bearing what Searle calls “deontic power.” Searle writes that
[a]nimals running in a pack can have all the consciousness and 
collective intentionality they need. They can even have hierarchies 
and a dominant male; they can cooperate in the hunt, share their 
food, and even have pair bonding. But they cannot have marriages, 
property, or money. Why not? Because all these create institutional 

JOHN SEARLE
130
forms of powers, rights, obligations, duties etc., and it is charac-
teristic of such phenomena that they create reasons for action that 
are independent of what you or I or anyone else is otherwise 
inclined to do.8
Searle characterizes the deontic phenomena which underlie institu-
tional facts, and distinguish them from social facts, as a kind of 
power. Moreover, this power implies desire-independent reasons for 
action. A queen who has the right to execute her subjects might be 
said to be empowered to do so. Deontic power is likewise what com-
pels or obligates me to pay my taxes. The physical laws of the uni-
verse make certain actions possible or impossible. The deontic powers 
indicative of institutional reality further constrain those nomological 
possibilities by way of a complex system of rights and obligations. 
People who, by their actions, violate the obligations that are ascribed 
to them as a teacher, citizen, president, queen, executioner, receiver, 
may be said to be remiss. As we will see, to be remiss is not simply to 
fail to bring about a certain goal or function.
The deontic powers—rights and obligations—that underlie 
institutional facts concern the means by which a person with an 
institutional status brings about a function. By virtue of being a 
teacher someone may exercise certain rights (assigning homework) 
and meet certain obligations (assign a final grade); these rights and 
obligations tend to be assigned with an eye toward the function of 
teaching: the transmission of skills and knowledge via instruction.
Because a status function has both an end and a means, there are 
at least two ways in which a person could fail to be a teacher. First, 
they could fail to bring about the end or goal of teaching—instruc-
tion. Second, they could teach in the wrong way so that the means 
by which instruction is brought about falls outside the scope of a 
teacher’s rights and obligations. These are to a large extent separable 
from one another. U.S. Ambassador Jean Kirkpatrick said of John 
Bolton, the controversial diplomat and former U.S. representative to 
the United Nations: “He loves to tussle. He may do diplomatic jobs 
for the U.S. government, but John is not a diplomat.”9 Kirkpatrick’s 
assessment of Bolton does not concern his effectiveness in resolving 
transnational disputes; indeed, his ability to achieve certain results 
is one of the reasons he keeps getting “diplomatic jobs.” Bolton’s 
problem, rather, concerns the means by which he accomplishes these 
ends. Bolton’s hawkish tenacity is not sensitive enough to the deontic 

THE CONSTRUCTION OF SOCIAL REALITY
131
powers constitutive of a status function of diplomat. Robert E. White, 
a former U.S. ambassador to El Salvador, elucidates some of these 
obligations in his criticism of Bolton: “Even the most forthright of 
[diplomats] have to have a certain reserve, a certain respect, courtesy, 
and understanding that you’re dealing with politics and not theology. 
The whole point of diplomacy is to gain your ends without giving 
offense.”10 If Bolton is a bad diplomat, it is not because he is ineffec-
tive or dysfunctional (although he may be this), but it is because he is 
remiss—and remission concerns a failure to bring about a function 
within the scope of preassigned deontic powers. 
The goodness of other, noninstitutional functional phenomena is 
evaluated in a way that is indifferent to the means. Where the means 
by which a certain function is brought about is constitutive of a status 
function, for a nonstatus function this means or mechanism is an 
accidental feature of the fact that some goal or purpose tends to be 
brought about. A heart is a heart simply by virtue of the fact that it 
pumps blood; that it happens to be made of muscle or plastic is an 
accidental, nonessential feature. Not so for institutional functions. 
To be a diplomat, it is not enough that one negotiates on behalf of a 
country; one has to do so in the right way—within a framework of 
assigned rights and obligations. To be a teacher, it is not enough that 
one instructs; one has to do so in the right way—disowning methods 
reliant on, for example, physical torture which, though possibly effec-
tive in instructing students, would render the teacher remiss. Such 
a teacher would be a bad (unvirtuous) teacher, even if they manage 
to induce learning.
Note that these powers are what distinguish Searle’s view from that 
of the structural functionalist. While both Searle and the functional-
ist agree that social phenomena must be understood in terms of a 
network of purposes and functions, Searle further maintains that a 
subclass of these phenomena have an irreducible normative or deon-
tic element, which cannot be paraphrased in terms of a distribution 
of functions. For the structural functionalist, remission is always 
construed in terms of mere dysfunction.
THE CREATION OF INSTITUTIONAL FACTS
Institutional facts are distinguished from brute facts in that the 
former imply a set of deontic powers exercised by some agent or 
other. But how do institutional facts come into existence? 

JOHN SEARLE
132
We might begin by reviewing the distinction between ontologically 
objective and ontologically subjective phenomena, introduced in 
Chapter 2. Ontologically subjective entities, such as mental states,11 
depend on subjects for their existence, whereas ontologically objec-
tive entities, such as electrons and mountains, do not. Ontologically 
objective entities plus mental states constitute the entirety of the 
physical world, according to Searle’s expanded notion of the physi-
cal. They are both part of Searle’s fundamental ontology and are 
correctly regarded as brute facts, defined as those facts which “require 
no human institutions for their existence.”12
The notion of the ontologically subjective, however, extends past 
the scope of the brute. If the ontologically subjective includes any 
fact which is dependent on a subject or agent, it will include the brute 
facts of our mental, qualitative states. But it will also include a num-
ber of other agent- or observer-dependent phenomena, including 
functional facts, social facts, and institutional facts.
How are institutional facts possible given an ontologically objec-
tive world of electrons in fields of force? Searle’s quick answer: “We 
will use the ‘mental,’ so construed, to show how ‘culture’ is con-
structed out of ‘nature.’”13 In short, Searle bridges the gap between 
the ontologically objective world as described by science and the 
ontologically subjective, agent-dependent cultural world by way of 
another, more primitive ontologically subjective fact—the agent’s 
mental states. Money and the presidency are possible because we 
make them possible; we, as conscious agents capable of sustaining 
intentional states, impose a status function on otherwise brute, blind, 
ontologically objective phenomena.
Searle’s move, here, generalizes the intention to represent, dis-
cussed in Chapter 6. Recall that the intention to represent takes the 
conditions of satisfaction of a speaker’s intentional state (sincerity 
condition) and imposes it on a brute sound, mark, or gesture.
The idea, in the case of institutional facts, is that not only do we have 
the ability to impose the capacity to represent on a brute phenomenon, 
but we also have the ability to impose a function and its attendant 
deontic powers on a brute phenomenon (most typically, another agent).
Searle’s ontological categories can be represented as shown in 
Figure 8.2.

THE CONSTRUCTION OF SOCIAL REALITY
133

JOHN SEARLE
134
ON THE CODIFIABILITY OF DEONTIC POWERS: A CRITICISM
If the assignment of rights and obligations are constitutive of insti-
tutional facts, how can things like money and a line of stones desig-
nating a political boundary be institutional facts? Pieces of paper 
and stones are not the sort of things to which we can ascribe deontic 
powers. Recall that institutional objects are not, for Searle, paradigm 
cases of institutionality. Searle writes that “it is not the five dollar 
bill as an object that matters, but rather that the possessor of the five 
dollar bill now has a certain power that he or she did not otherwise 
have.”14 Five dollar bills do not have rights and obligations; they 
rather aid in the distribution of certain rights and obligations, so that 
the possessor is entitled to certain goods and services to which they 
would not otherwise have access. They are also obliged not to destroy 
the currency. Similarly, the boundary markers either impose an obli-
gation on noncitizens to not cross that marker or else flag the fact 
that the noncitizen will be without certain rights if that line is crossed. 
Again, institutional objects are derivative, nonparadigmatic cases of 
institutional facts and, as such, have potentially misleading features. 
In any case, it is clear that something’s status as an institutional 
artifact has little or nothing to do with its categorical, structural, 
brute features, and everything to do with the collective imposition of 
deontic powers, either directly or indirectly, on a person.
There is, no doubt, something right about the suggestion that 
deontic powers help individuate institutional facts from other kinds 
of functional phenomena. However, the characterization of these 
powers in terms of rights and obligations may overarticulate the 
nature of the normative commitments of persons who fall under the 
scope of a status function. When Searle makes this claim he seems to 
have in mind highly codified institutions, such as marriage, the Presi-
dency or a Japanese tea ceremony. Modeling institutionality on these 
cases, Searle requires that all institutions could be so codified.15
A test for the presence of genuine institutional facts is whether or 
not we could codify the rules explicitly. In the case of many insti-
tutional facts, such as property, marriage, and money, these indeed 
have been codified into explicit laws. Others, such as friendship, 
dates, and cocktail parties, are not so codified, but they could be. 
. . . Such institutional patterns could be codified if it mattered 
tremendously whether or not something was really a cocktail 

THE CONSTRUCTION OF SOCIAL REALITY
135
party or only a tea party. If the rights and duties of friendship 
suddenly became a matter of some grave legal or moral question, 
then we might imagine these informal institutions becoming codi-
fied explicitly, though of course explicit codification has its price. 
It deprives us of the flexibility, spontaneity, and informality that 
the practice has in its uncodified form.16 
Notice that the first and last sentences of this passage nearly contra-
dict one another. If codification has “its price,” so that the codified 
institution does not exactly resemble the uncodified institution, what 
can we make of the requirement that all institutions could be codified 
into explicit rights and obligations? And if every institutional fact 
could be codified, why would doing so change or formalize the insti-
tution in question? Can the normative component of friendships, 
dates, and cocktail parties be formalized into explicit laws without 
remainder, as per Searle’s requirement? Are cocktail parties just more 
complicated than a Japanese tea ceremony? By Searle’s own account, 
the answer appears to be “no.” Searle seems to correctly observe that 
institutional phenomena implicate deontic powers, which help gov-
ern the means by which certain functions are realized; but he appears 
to overarticulate and legalize the nature of that normative require-
ment when he maintains that we be able, at least in principle, to 
describe that normative component in terms of “explicit laws.” 
Dating or negotiating a cocktail party correctly is not simply a 
matter of adhering to, subconsciously or otherwise, myriad rules. 
I propose that it requires, rather, a kind of Aristotelian social compe-
tence. Thus, while institutional phenomena have a normative com-
ponent, the characterization of those norms in terms of codifiable 
rights and obligations misses the extreme context-dependency of 
those norms. A host who serves milk at a cocktail party is not quite 
remiss but rather exhibits an error in judgment. Such a host is not in 
violation of an obligation, so much as what Alasdair MacIntyre calls 
“defective in doing or being good.”17 This codification is not so much 
a requirement of institutionality, but a post facto consequence of the 
phronetic normativity which is constitutive of status functions.18

136
CHAPTER 9
TOPICS CONCERNING INSTITUTIONAL REALITY: 
REASONS, LANGUAGE, POLITICS, AND 
THE BACKGROUND
We will briefly consider how the basic account of the creation of 
institutional facts, as captured in the “X counts as Y in C” formula, 
intersects with four topics: reasons, language, politics, and the Back-
ground. First, Searle’s explanation of institutional reality gives us the 
means to understand Searle’s startling contention that there can be 
desire-independent reasons for action, as found in Rationality in 
Action. This extends his basic account of rational action as found in 
Chapter 4. Second, Searle contends that language is a kind of insti-
tutional fact, but also maintains that language occupies a privileged 
position with respect to the other institutional facts. We will review 
and criticize Searle’s reasons for his special treatment of language. 
Third, we will survey a recent essay in which Searle carves out a pecu-
liar functional role for political acts and structures, among the vast 
variety of institutional facts. Finally, we will consider and criticize 
the role the Background plays in explaining institutional reality.
DESIRE-INDEPENDENT REASONS FOR ACTION
Recall Searle’s account of action. Searle follows Davidson in defining 
an action as behavior caused by intentional states or reasons, such as 
beliefs and desires.1 But Searle goes beyond Davidson in suggesting 
that while reasons are causally necessary, they are not sufficient for 
the production of (rational) action. The link between reasons and 
behavior is mediated by free choice within the gap. Here, an agent, 
which is sensitive to but not determined by the antecedent reasons, 

TOPICS CONCERNING INSTITUTIONAL REALITY
137
is the more immediate cause of the behavior. Thus, action is distin-
guished from mere behavior in that action is not just caused by beliefs 
and desires but is freely chosen. Indeed if a behavior is caused by 
intentional states, but is not further mediated by volition, it is not 
a candidate for rational action. This is a radical departure from 
Davidson’s Classical Model of action, as freedom seems irreconcil-
able with Scientific Naturalism.
Having surveyed Searle’s account of institutional reality, we are 
now in the position to articulate another point of difference between 
Searle’s account of action and that of the Classical Model. 
According to the Classical Model, every action must include or 
be proceeded by a set of beliefs and desires. The desires are what 
Searle calls the “motivator.” Every action must include at least one 
motivator.2 All motivators specify conditions of satisfaction with an 
upward, world-to-mind direction of fit; thus, unlike, for example, 
beliefs, desires in particular and motivators in general represent not 
how the world in fact is, but how it ought to be.3 Thus, the reasons 
which precede the action of raising my arm will include the desire 
that my arm be raised. Additionally, of course, I may also have the 
desire to get someone’s attention (by means of the raised arm). Both 
these desires represent conditions of satisfaction (raised arm; caught 
the attention of a person) with an upward direction of fit. 
Searle departs from the Classical Model in holding that, while 
desires may be among an action’s motivators, there may also be 
non-desire-based motivators. That is, where the Classical Model 
requires that every action be preceded by a desire, Searle denies that 
all motivators are desires. Searle allows for the possibility of desire-
independent motivators or reasons for action.4
What are desire-independent reasons for action? They are given 
by the deontology presupposed by institutional facts. Recall that all 
status functions distribute rights and obligations to their bearers. 
Teachers are obliged to instruct in the right way, by grading papers, 
assigning final grades, lecturing, and so on. Money holders have the 
right to procure certain commodities. If I am a teacher, and my class 
has completed a writing assignment, I have a desire-independent rea-
son to grade the papers. I, additionally, may or may not have a desire 
to grade the papers. But even if I do desire to do something else, this 
does not negate the fact that I also have a desire-independent reason 
to grade the papers. Likewise, many of the students who wrote the 
papers may have felt little desire to have done so. For Searle, the fact 

JOHN SEARLE
138
that they are students—another status function—and that they 
signed up for the course, is sufficient reason to write a paper. Some of 
the students may have, additionally, wanted to write the paper or, at 
least, wanted to avoid the consequences of not writing the paper. 
While these desires are no doubt helpful, it is important to see that 
according to Searle’s view, even if these desires were not present, 
there remains a reason to write the paper.
Because institutional reality implicates deontic powers, and these 
rights and obligations are irreducible to desire-based prudential con-
siderations, institutional players must be capable of being motivated 
by desire-independent reasons for action. Indeed, given the intimate 
link between our linguistic competence and institutional reality, 
Searle contends that language use in general implies the possibility of 
desire-independent reasons for action. A simple case is that of the 
commissive or promise. To be able to make a promise already implies 
the ability to take having done so as a reason for action. If I promise 
to attend a meeting, my having done so gives me reason for so attend-
ing, irrespective of what I in fact want to do.5 Note that the fact that 
there are desire-independent reasons does not in any way imply that 
my desire-independent reasons are never to be overridden by my 
desires; how the self weighs competing motivators is a separate issue 
from the more basic contention that there are, in fact, distinct classes 
of motivators. 
Our form of life is permeated with desire-independent rights and 
obligations, as implied by the institutions within which we act. The 
actions that are caused by these motivators cannot be exhaustively 
understood by appeal to prudential or even moral considerations. 
Institutional reality implies an irreducible domain of reasons for action.
INSTITUTIONAL REALITY, LANGUAGE, AND NORMATIVITY
Language stands in a special relation to the sphere of institutional 
facts. On the one hand, Searle treats speech acts as one among many 
kinds of institutional facts. On the other hand, Searle maintains that 
language underlies all institutional facts; institutional reality is, at its 
base, language dependent. 
As we have seen, in the first half of The Construction of Social 
Reality, Searle distinguishes institutional facts from other kinds of 
functional facts, including social facts, by appeal to the following 
criterion: institutional facts, unlike knives, walls, and hearts, perform 

TOPICS CONCERNING INSTITUTIONAL REALITY
139
their function in virtue of something other than their physical fea-
tures alone.
If institutional facts are simply functional phenomena that bring 
about ends in a way that is not reliant on the structural-physical 
features of X alone, then it is easy to see why Searle thinks all cases 
of language are institutional facts. “Stop!” in certain contexts, serves 
to inhibit movement. A wall performs an analogous function, but 
does so in such a way which is reliant on its physical structure. “Stop!” 
a speech act is an institutional fact, because there is nothing about 
this sound which could so inhibit movement. All instances of lan-
guage have this conventional quality—there is nothing about the 
sounds, “Barack Obama is the president of the United States,” that 
makes it represent what it does. Of course a very loud sound might, 
strictly in virtue of the pain it causes, prevent a hearer from moving 
closer to the sound and so have the same functional effect that the 
word “Stop!” might have on English language users. But Searle would 
contend that the piercing noise is more akin to the wall and is thus 
neither a speech act nor an institutional fact. It performs its function 
by virtue of its brute structure alone.
However, the idea that we can identify institutional facts as 
phenomena that do not perform their function in virtue of their 
underlying physical structure alone is, as discussed in the last chapter, 
inadequate. If the sound “Stop!” prohibitively loud, is it not a speech 
act? On Searle’s criterion we would be obligated to exclude it from 
the sphere of the institutional. But surely such a sound is not just 
startlingly painful but also happens to mean something.
So language, and institutional facts in general, are meaningful by 
virtue of the second criterion of institutionality—they implicate 
users in a network of deontic norms. That speech acts can do this 
is easy to see. In promising, I thereby obligate myself to fulfilling 
the promise. When an officer barks “Stop!” at a soldier, the soldier 
is obligated to stop. An analogous case is found in Wittgenstein’s 
primitive language, in which a builder prompts his assistant to action 
by way of various orders (“Block!”).6 But these seem like relatively 
special cases. If I say “Stop!” to someone who is unwittingly about 
to walk into oncoming traffic, am I imposing an obligation on 
them? The case becomes more tricky in thinking about assertives: 
what right or obligation is implicated when I say, of the world, 
“Barack Obama is the president of the United States”? What, exactly, 
is the deontology of a warning, a joke, or a fairy tale? 

JOHN SEARLE
140
Nevertheless, Searle seems committed to the view that speech acts 
have an essential deontological component. A preliminary expres-
sion of this view is found in Searle’s early paper, “How to Derive an 
‘Ought’ from an ‘Is’,”7 wherein he writes:
It is often a matter of fact that one has certain obligations, 
commitments, rights, and responsibilities, but it is a matter of 
institutional, not brute, fact. It is one such institutionalized form 
of obligation, promising, which I invoked above to derive an 
“ought” from an “is.”8
Institutions, including promising, imply rights and obligations. 
But in The Construction of Social Reality Searle modifies, and in 
many ways strengthens, the conceptual links between institutional 
reality, deontology, and language use. 
First, where, on Searle’s early view, some institutional facts hap-
pen to be associated with a norm, he comes to construe deontic 
power as an essential ingredient of the institutional (i.e., status func-
tions; systems of constitutive rules): in his later work, Searle writes, 
“all deontic status functions are matters of conventional power.”9 
In his early paper, Searle makes the weaker claim that only “Some 
systems of con stitutive rules involve obligations, commitments, and 
responsibilities.”10
Second, in his later writings Searle claims that all speech acts 
involve obligations, commitments, and responsibilities. If all institu-
tional facts, including speech acts, have a deontic component, then 
we should expect that other speech acts, besides promises, should be 
underlain by rights, obligations, and commitments. Indeed, Searle 
claims precisely this with respect to assertives in Rationality in 
Action.11 A speaker asserts, “It is raining,” which has a downward 
direction of fit. Searle: 
His utterance now has a status function, it represents, truly or 
falsely, the state of the weather. And he is not neutral vis-à-vis 
truth or falsity, because his claim is a claim to truth. That imposi-
tion of that sort of status function, of conditions of satisfaction on 
conditions of satisfaction, is already a commitment.12 
Thus, assertives presuppose an obligation that has an upward direc-
tion of fit. Truth, then, is not something that is added to an asserted 
proposition; assertion already implies a commitment to its truth on 

TOPICS CONCERNING INSTITUTIONAL REALITY
141
the part of the speaker. As Searle puts it, “the commitment to truth 
is internal to statement making.”13 Moreover, Searle also states all 
speech acts imply a distribution of deontic powers: 
So far we have considered only assertions, but in fact all of the 
standard forms of speech acts with whole propositional contents 
involve the creation of desire-independent reasons for action, 
because the intentional imposition of conditions of satisfaction 
commits or obligates the speaker in various ways.14
Why do speech acts imply obligations and commitments on the part 
of the speaker? The trivial answer is that speech acts are institutional 
facts or status functions, and all of the latter are matters of deontic 
power, so all speech acts implicate rights and obligations. But in 
Rationality in Action, Searle outlines a deeper answer. Why, after 
all, do all institutional facts, including linguistic facts, implicate 
deontic powers? Because we freely and rationally create institutional 
facts, including, that is, assertions, by way of the imposition of a 
status function on some brute X, we are bound to the commitments 
and obligations implied by such an imposition. In short, “The com-
mitments you undertake are binding on you, because they are 
your commitments.”15 Perhaps the only reasons for action that an 
agent can undertake which are absolutely brinding, unconditional, 
or non-contingent, are those which are freely chosen or endorsed by 
the actor. This differs from desire dependent reasons for action, 
whose force depends on whether or not I happen to have the desire in 
question. If you freely and rationally undertake a game of chess, in 
some sense bound to move the bishop on the diagonal. Likewise, if 
you state that something is the case, you, the speaker, cannot remain 
indifferent to the truth value of my own assertion: “because you 
freely and intentionally made the assertion and thus committed 
yourself to its truth, it is not rationally open to you to say that you 
are indifferent to its truth, or sincerity, or consistency, or evidence, or 
entailment.”16 Searle thus grounds the normativity implied by insti-
tutional facts in his conception of agency, outlined in Chapter 4.
There is a third point of difference between Searle’s views in “How 
to Derive an ‘Ought’ from an ‘Is’” and his latter views. In the early 
essay Searle does not require that all institutions or systems of 
constitutive rules are underlain by language itself.
While it is helpful to see illocutionary acts as one among other 
kinds of institutional facts, Searle, in Chapter 3 of The Construction 

JOHN SEARLE
142
of Social Reality, argues that language in fact underlies all institu tional 
facts—all institutional facts are in fact language dependent. His prin-
ciple reason for thinking this again depends on the claim that all 
institutional facts or status functions are underlain by rights and 
obligations. The deontic structure of institutional reality entails the 
possibility of remission, wherein the participant violates the obliga-
tions imposed on them; this, as we have seen, is distinguishable from 
failing to perform an assigned function. The diplomat is required, 
not just to negotiate treaties, but to negotiate them in the right way—
within the scope of the deontic powers entailed by the status function 
of a diplomat. Searle’s view is that the capacity to be the bearer of 
the rights and obligations requires the capacity to represent those 
rights and obligations to oneself, and this requires language. To see 
this, recall Searle’s example of a tribe’s relationship to another tribe’s 
boundary marking, a former wall.
If our imagined tribe just is not disposed to cross the boundaries 
as a matter of inclination, they do not in our sense have an insti-
tutional fact. They simply have a disposition to behave in certain 
ways, and their behavior is just like the case of animals marking 
the limits of their territory. There is nothing deontic about such 
markings. . . . But if we suppose that the members of the tribe 
recognize that the line of stones creates rights and obligations, 
that they are forbidden to cross the line, that they are not supposed 
to cross it, then we have symbolization.17
The wall does not confer a status onto the members of the tribe 
because they do not represent either the line of stones or themselves 
in the right way. Rather, they must represent the line of stones as 
conferring certain obligations, and they must represent themselves 
to themselves as bearers of those deontic powers. And this latter 
capa city requires the ability to use language, which for Searle, is 
the ability to impose conditions of satisfaction on conditions of 
satisfaction. 
Note that here Searle seems to be claiming that normativity (rights 
and obligations) require the capacity to represent—an intentional 
capacity. However, in the discussion of the Background, we will see 
that Searle locates such norms in the preintentional Background 
understanding. And because the Background is a presupposition of 
language, it is not evident that language is in fact necessary for some 
forms of institutional reality.

TOPICS CONCERNING INSTITUTIONAL REALITY
143
Again, while Searle doesn’t appear to agree, it seems clear that 
such tribe members could likewise represent—not just a line of 
stones—but a wall as conferring deontic powers. Thus, something’s 
institutional status does not in any way appear to depend on whether 
or not it happens to also perform its function in virtue of its brute 
structure alone.
INSTITUTIONAL AND POLITICAL REALITY
In his recent essay, “Social Ontology and Political Power,”18 Searle 
considers the relationship between institutional reality in general 
and the state in particular. While political structures are a kind of 
institution, these structures bear a special relation to the rest of insti-
tutional reality. 
Governmental or political power is described by Searle as a kind 
of a superinstitution. This is because governments have the power to 
regulate many other institutions. Governmental bodies have a dis-
proportionate influence in the determination of what is to count as, 
e.g. money, citizenship, criminality, private property, marriage, and 
even language. Because these later nongovernmental institutions are 
both regulated by political bodies and require collective acceptance 
constitutive of any institutional fact, the political body itself must 
typically enjoy an even broader degree of collective acceptance.
How does the government maintain its peculiar status as a steward 
of institutional reality? On the one hand, it derives its power from the 
collective and voluntary acceptance of those who fall under its 
domain. Searle takes this to be the central insight of the social 
contract theorists, including Thomas Hobbes and John Rawls. On 
the other hand, a government has the ability to resist dissent by main-
taining a monopoly on armed violence. While collective acceptance 
is necessary for political power, this acceptance is almost always 
buttressed with an implied threat of violence. However, if a control-
ling body can enforce a collection of status functions only by way of 
violence, the relation between the occupier and the occupied does 
not yet count as political; to the extent that an unwilling population 
is acting in accordance with the rights and obligations implied by 
the status functions; they are acting from prudential rather than 
desire-independent reasons. 
The fact that the political requires collective acceptance may 
be an important point of differentiation between Searle and the 
social-contract theorists. Where the social-contract theorist contends 

JOHN SEARLE
144
that collective acceptance, on the model of contractual agreement, is 
what legitimates a political body, Searle makes the stronger claim 
that collective acceptance is a condition for the possibility of a poli-
tical relationship in the first place; status functions enforced by force 
alone are pseudopolitical, desire-dependent or prudential relations. 
Searle is aware that the ability to operate by way of voluntary 
acceptance stands in some tension with the fact that this same body 
has control over organized violence, and so is in a position to compel 
acceptance; he calls this the “paradox of government.”19
Searle’s views on political power target those who contend that 
political power is simply a matter of control over the mechanisms of 
violence. Because political power requires collective acceptance, an 
organization which distributes status functions does not count as 
political simply in virtue of the fact that people are acting in accor-
dance with the prescriptions of those status functions. And since 
political power requires collective acceptance, Searle contends that 
political power “comes from the bottom up.”20 This, however, is 
compatible with a characteristic feeling of powerlessness on behalf 
of those who are subject to a political body’s regulatory mechanisms. 
While in some sense institutional reality is ontologically subjective or 
socially constructed, and so dependent on us, this does not imply that 
we each could simply and easily, through an act of will, make it other-
wise. Indeed, as Ian Hacking emphasizes in his book The Social Con-
struction of What?, part of the force of deeming something “socially 
constructed” involves overcoming the sense that a status function is 
somehow unavoidable or inevitable.21 An important step in changing 
pernicious conceptions of, for example, gender and race, involves 
reminding ourselves that alternative conceptions are even possible. 
THE BACKGROUND
In both Intentionality and The Social Construction of Reality, Searle 
argues that institutional facts, including speech acts, operate within 
and against a vast, silent “Background” understanding. 
Illustrations of How Status Functions and Language Are 
Underlain by Our Background Understanding
To get a better sense of the Background, consider the following two 
examples. When a status function (Y) is imposed on a person (X), 

TOPICS CONCERNING INSTITUTIONAL REALITY
145
as when I become a tenant, this implies a distribution of a set of 
conventional power relations, rights, and obligations. As a tenant, 
I have the obligation to pay the landlord an agreed-upon rent. I may, 
depending on the contract, also be obliged to provide a security 
deposit or pay for utilities. I am also obligated to inform the landlord 
in advance of my leaving. I have certain rights. I can request that the 
property is maintained in accordance with the local housing codes. 
In some states, the landlord is required to return the deposit within 
three weeks of my moving out (assuming the property is in order 
and the bills have been paid). In the event of default, I am protected 
from property confiscation; the landlord may not turn off the utili-
ties or lock me out of the property. Tenancy, thus, is a status function 
insofar as it implies a bundle of rights and obligations. 
But this short list of rights and obligations is only comprehensible 
to us given a vast Background understanding of how the world in 
fact works. It presupposes that we know, for example, what a land-
lord is. A landlord, of course, is another status function that implies 
its own set of conventional powers. Some of these compliment those 
of the tenant, so that the landlord has the right to collect monthly 
rent or the obligation to keep the property up to code. The landlord 
also has, for example, the obligation to charge tenants within the 
scope of a city’s rent control policies, but perhaps also the right to 
challenge those very policies in accordance with the laws of that city. 
A proper understanding of this brief description of tenancy implies 
much else, most of which goes without saying. It implies a basic 
understanding of the institution of money and property rights. The 
very idea of renting makes no sense in a society which has no notion 
of property or ownership. Tenancy implies that we know that this 
money is potentially available to a prospective tenant, through 
employment or other means. It implies an understanding of speech 
acts, including commissives (making a contract; expressing the inten-
tion to leave the property). 
But the understanding presupposed by the notion of tenancy isn’t 
limited to the institutional (landlords, property, money, language). 
The activity of renting only makes sense given the very basic under-
standing that people are physically vulnerable and so require shelter. 
Much of this basic understanding consists of truisms so obvious that 
they rarely merit articulation. If humans were such that we carried 
our homes on our backs, as turtles do their shells, the very idea that 
we would pay for shelter might require some explanation. It implies 

JOHN SEARLE
146
an understanding of human scale. An apartment, advertised as 
consisting of 1,000 square feet, would nevertheless be unacceptable 
if the ceiling was found only to be six inches from the floor. Humans 
are such that we typically live at or near the surface of the earth, so 
that it is taken for granted that the property is likewise so. It presup-
poses that humans are the sort of beings who do not drift in and 
out of existence spontaneously, a fact which if true, might have 
several implications regarding the calculation of rent. There’s no 
need for the landlord to specify that the property is adequately 
supplied with oxygen, as this isn’t the sort of thing that has to be 
piped in or otherwise provided, and so on.
The point is, an understanding of tenancy, or any other institu-
tional fact, requires a massive understanding of other institutions, 
social arrangements, and truisms which flag the kind of beings we 
are, the sort of activities in which we can and must participate, and 
the kind of world in which we live. This supplementary understand-
ing, most of which is left unarticulated, constitutes what Searle calls 
the Background.
The Background also serves to buttress, not just attributions 
of status, but applications of language. Consider two simple orders: 
(A) “Cut the grass!” and (B) “Cut the cake!” Intuitively, the word 
“cut” has the same literal meaning in both (A) and (B). And yet, 
we interpret these sentences differently. Someone who attempts to 
cut a cake in the same way that they would cut the grass—as with a 
lawnmower—will have misunderstood the order. Similarly, someone 
who attempts to use a knife to divide the grass into a number of 
equal portions, as they would a cake, will have misunderstood (A). 
What this shows is that we cannot read the significance of an expres-
sion off its literal, dictionary definition.
As in our understanding of the status function of tenant, our 
understanding of how “cut” functions in the context of various sen-
tences depends on a great deal of Background understanding about 
how the world works. Given that cake is for eating, the kind of cuts a 
lawnmower would make in it undermines the role it plays in our 
activities. This, of course, presupposes much: cake is the sort of thing 
which is big enough to require division, humans are the sort of beings 
that need to eat, cake does not grow, the mouth with which people eat 
is of limited size, and so on. Likewise, for cutting grass. These pre-
suppositions almost never need to be stated, unless we are, perhaps, 
teaching the word “cut” to a small child (or having a discussion about 

TOPICS CONCERNING INSTITUTIONAL REALITY
147
the nature of Background presuppositions). But even in that case we 
would not point out that objects of certain kinds of material more 
easily penetrate other kinds of material or even that objects extended 
in space are, at least in principle, divisible. Searle claims that even 
though we could say such things, we could not articulate everything 
that constitutes our general understanding of how things work. This 
understanding is largely in our bones, not in our head.
What is the Background?
The Background falls within a family of concepts posited by, among 
others, Wittgenstein (form of life), Heidegger (das Man), and Bourdieu 
(habitus). It is comprised of an open fabric of expectations against 
which we understand, i.e., the literal meaning of a sentence or the 
rights and obligations implied by a given status function. But these 
are just two examples of how the Background structures our under-
standing. The Background is pervasive: it conditions our perception 
(so that we see certain collections of wood as tables), it brings events 
under a narrative structure, it allows us to screen certain events as 
relevant or irrelevant, and it structures our consciousness (bringing 
events and experiences under the aspect of familiarity).22
Because the Background underlies our understanding, it is tempt-
ing to think of it as a collection of very basic beliefs. I know that the 
lawn is to be cut with a mower and not a knife because I believe that 
lawn grows, that it is found on large, flat surfaces of soil, and so on. 
I know that the landlord is to keep the property up to code because 
I already believe that landlords own the property in question, and 
that there are certain statutes which require owners to keep the pro-
perty within the scope of the code, and so on. But while parts of the 
Background can be articulated and so formulated in terms of beliefs, 
the Background is not itself constituted by these beliefs.
The ancient Greek philosophers distinguished between two kinds 
of knowledge. Epistêmê is theoretical knowledge consisting of beliefs, 
propositions, or theories, which represent the world under one aspect 
or another. Epistêmê is explicit and intentional, having representa-
tional content or conditions of satisfaction. When we say or believe 
that grass is a low, nonwoody plant which tends to grow in sprawling 
patches, this is epistêmê. Technê is typically translated as craft, skill, 
or know-how and constitutes a second variety of knowledge. Technê 
captures the sense in which I know how to ride a bike or work a 

JOHN SEARLE
148
clutch. I might be perfectly competent at such activities but find 
myself at a loss if prompted to explain or articulate how I do such 
things. Children learn how to speak grammatically before they are 
taught to bring those skills under the various grammatical catego-
ries—noun, verb, preposition, and so on. For Searle, the Background 
knowledge is technê or know-how. It is in our bones. Of course it can, 
at least in part, be articulated and so translated into epistêmê. But 
this fact should not mislead us into thinking that our Background 
understanding is a matter of epistêmê in the first place. 
Searle is explicit about the status of the Background. In Intention-
ality he writes, 
The Background is a set of nonrepresentational mental capacities 
that enable all representing to take place. Intentional states only 
have the conditions of satisfaction that they do, and thus only are 
the states that they are, against a Background of abilities that are 
not themselves Intentional states.23 
Epistêmê or representational knowledge is thus founded on non-
representational, nonintentional sets of dispositions, capacities, or 
know-how.
A Problem with the Notion of the Background
The Background appears to have no place in Searle’s basic ontology. 
According to Searle’s Scientific Naturalism, this ontology is roughly 
the world as described by physics. These brute facts are organized 
into systems which are defined in terms of what they do, their causal 
relations. Some higher-level systems are organisms and some of these 
acquire nervous systems, the causal basis for intentional consciousness.
In a world that consists exclusively of particles in fields of force, 
various orders of systems including organisms, and intentionality, 
there seems little or no room for the Background. If the Background 
were intentional—and so a kind of epistêmê—then the task of 
explaining what it is, and how it is compatible with Searle’s physical-
ist ontology, can be collapsed into the mind-body problem. One 
may worry whether Searle’s solution to the mind-body problem is 
adequate, but at least Searle isn’t saddled with an additional philo-
sophical problem (the Background-body problem). The difficulty, of 

TOPICS CONCERNING INSTITUTIONAL REALITY
149
course, is that by Searle’s own admission, the Background structures 
intentionality; that is, intentionality presupposes the Background. 
Or, more generally, epistêmê presupposes technê, so that the latter 
can’t be collapsed into the former. Thus in addition to showing 
how intentionality is possible within a world consisting of nothing 
but particles in fields of force, Searle has to show how, further, the 
Background itself is compatible with Scientific Naturalism.
In Intentionality Searle simply says that while the Background is 
akin to intentional representations (epistêmê), it is not intentional. 
Searle is aware of the tendency to talk about the Background 
misleadingly, in terms of epistêmê. 
Ordinary usage invites us to, and we can and do, treat elements of 
the Background as if they were representations, but it does not 
follow from that, nor is it the case that, when these elements are 
functioning they function as representations.24 
Thus, Searle prefers to talk about the Background, less in terms of 
assumptions, presuppositions, or expectations but rather in terms of 
dispositions or capacities, which are less suggestive of intentionality. 
But what or where is the Background, if not in the mind? If the 
Background is not ontologically subjective, then perhaps it is onto-
logically objective.
Twelve years later, in The Construction of Social Reality, Searle 
answers this question: “It is important to see that when we talk about 
the Background we are talking about a certain category of neuro-
physiological causation.”25 It is easy to understand why Searle is 
driven to this view: if the Background is not to be found in the mind 
(intentionality), then naturally it must be in the body. But this sug-
gestion is untenable. The problem, in short, is that while the Back-
ground is nonintentional, it still implies a degree of normativity. If 
Searle collapses the Background into neurophysiological causation, 
he collapses “ought” into “is,” and strips the Background of its 
normativity. 
By way of elaboration, skills or epistêmê always imply the possibi-
lity of failure (and expertise). I can fail to ride a bike or use the clutch 
when shifting gears. There is something wrong with the person who 
speaks ungrammatically, doesn’t know that the landlord is also the 
owner of the property (and so subject to certain obligations), or who 

JOHN SEARLE
150
fails to understand that grass is the sort of thing that is cut with a 
mower and not a knife. To say that our experience is structured 
against a Background know-how must imply that we in some sense 
ought to have that understanding.
Searle is not silent on the question of how normativity is possible 
in a world consisting entirely of particles in fields of force. Indeed, 
Searle seems to recognize this difficulty, although he articulates it in 
terms of rule-following. Rule-following—that is, normativity—is 
most easily understood intentionalistically, as when I decide not to 
drive faster than the speed limit and so on. 
If we think of the Background intentionalistically, then we have 
abandoned the thesis of the Background. . . . But if, on the other 
hand, we say that the rules play no causal role at all in the beha-
vior, then we must say that the Background is such that this is 
just what the person does, he just behaves that way.26 
Searle rejects both views as unacceptable. So, here, he appears to 
recognize that if the Background is just a category of neurophysio-
logical causation, this is tantamount to stripping it of the normati-
vity which is otherwise implied when it is paraphrased in terms of 
explicit rules or intentionality. He is not, however, entirely explicit 
about this.
Understanding Searle’s positive view about the status of the Back-
ground is tricky, partially because the above quotation comes up 
in the context of a different, although related, puzzle. Searle, thus, 
only indirectly tackles the question of how a normativity-laden 
Background is compatible with his basic scientific ontology.
It is worth pursuing these matters in greater detail. 
The question we have been pursuing is how the normativity of the 
Background is possible. The easiest way to construe normativity is in 
terms of intentional rule-following (rights and obligations). But 
Searle argues that the Background is preintentional, and so cannot 
be brought under this picture of norms. But, if we grant that the 
Background is just a “category of neurophysiological causation,” 
then this appears to strip it of all normativity: the Background, in 
this view, is “just what a person does.” But Searle rejects this view out 
of hand. The latter view, moreover, defies the sense in which the 
Background is a kind of know-how.

TOPICS CONCERNING INSTITUTIONAL REALITY
151
Can Searle’s various, seemingly incompatible articulations of the 
Background be brought together again? 
As mentioned, the view that the Background cannot be under-
stood behavioristically, as “just what the person does,” comes up in 
the context of an another question. Institutions, as we have seen, 
have a conventional power structure and are underlain by a system 
of rules in the form of rights and obligations. As a tenant, I am 
obliged to pay the landlord rent. What, Searle asks, explains this 
normativity-laden behavior? Sometimes we consciously or even 
subconsciously follow rules, so that we can explain a subset of this 
behavior by appeal to intentionality. Thus, as a tenant, I might reflect 
on the fact that I have this obligation which prompts me to send the 
check. I thus intentionally follow the rules implied by being a tenant. 
But typically, in paying my rent, I just do it. I do not remember 
reflecting on the rule or even deciding to pay my rent. Of course, if 
my landlord dramatically increases my rent, I might then consciously 
decide to pay the rent (or decide not to) but this is not the typical 
case. So what, if not intentionality, accounts for my acting in accor-
dance with the rules?
At this point it is helpful to draw attention to an asymmetry in 
the role the Background plays in explaining intentionality (a mental 
fact) as opposed to the role it plays in explaining status functions 
(an institutional fact). In Intentionality, Searle explains intentional 
representation (epistêmê) by appealing to nonintentional know-how 
(technê), which is somehow explained by appeal to brute configura-
tions of blind causation. But in The Construction of Social Reality 
Searle does not attempt to explain status functions per se, so much as 
normativity-laden beha vior (paying the rent). So what explains this 
behavior? Now given the role that the Background plays in Intention-
ality, one would expect Searle just to appeal to the Background or 
know-how which anyway explains intentionality. But he doesn’t.
He cannot do this because, somewhere along the line, he identi-
fies the normativity-laden behavior (paying the rent) with the 
know-how or Background which could otherwise be used to 
explain it! The baseball player “acquires a set of Background 
habits, skills, dispositions that are such that when he hits the ball, 
he runs to first base.”27 The tenant acquires a set of behaviors, 
such that the rent is paid. Thus, a potential explanans becomes the 
explanandum. 

JOHN SEARLE
152
This identification is puzzling for other reasons—how is running 
to first base or paying rent a “category of neurophysiological causa-
tion”? In any case, he is now in the awkward position of explaining, 
not just why the baseball player runs to first base or why the tenant 
pays rent, but the Background itself. First-base running or rent-
paying behavior becomes a stand-in for all varieties of know-how. 
Searle doesn’t explain rule-following behavior by appeal to the Back-
ground, as he explains intentionality or literal utterances; he has to 
explain the Background itself.
So if first-base running or rent-paying behavior is a stand-in for 
know-how in general, and know-how is normative (rule-following), 
what explains this Background? More specifically, how is the norma-
tivity which is indicative of the Background possible? Obviously he 
can’t appeal to intentional representation, as the Background is a 
condition for its possibility. Another way of putting this is that we 
can’t explain technê by appeal to epistêmê. But, as we have seen, he 
can’t appeal to blind, brute facts in explanation of the normativity 
either. The appeal to behaviorism in this context would not explain 
how know-how is possible; it’s a rejection of the question, in that it 
contends that the question’s topic is false (there is no normativity 
laden know-how; there is just brute behavior).28
What, then, explains the normativity indicative of the Background-
as-technê? Searle’s answer: “we evolve a set of dispositions that are 
sensitive to the rule structure.”29 That is, we explain our know-how 
(Background, paying the rent without thinking about it), which is 
normative, by appeal to the rules: we develop “a set of dispositions 
that are sensitive and responsive to the specific content of those 
rules.”30 In the following passage note the way in which the 
Background, as dispositions or know-how, gets identified with the 
beha vior under investigation:
The users of money do not know those rules, and in general, I am 
arguing, they do not apply them consciously or unconsciously; 
rather, they have developed a set of dispositions that are sensitive 
and responsive to the specific content of those rules. . . . And those 
sorts of abilities, this type of know-how, that become ingrained 
are in fact a reflection of the sets of constitutive rules whereby we 
impose functions on entities that do not have those functions in 
virtue of their physical structure, but acquire the function only 
through collective agreement or acceptance.31

TOPICS CONCERNING INSTITUTIONAL REALITY
153
We are accountable for the behavior (dispositions, capacities), not 
because we intended to follow a set of rules and not because the 
behavior is somehow grounded in blind causation, but because it is 
sensitive to some sort of rule structure. 
The natural question is, of course, what or where is this rule struc-
ture to which Searle is helping himself? It obviously can’t be the 
Background, because this is what he is trying to explain. Nor can it 
be intentional, as he explicitly rejects that hypothesis. Searle leaves 
this question unanswered.32 It looks as though Searle has to include 
rules within his basic ontology if he is going to account for the know-
how which is indicative of our institutionally significant behavior. 
But this suggestion is at odds with the initial characterization of the 
project, wherein he promises to answer the following question: If 
“institutional facts exist only within systems of constitutive rules,” 
then “how do we make the connection between the fundamental 
ontology of conscious biological beasts like ourselves and the 
apparatus of social facts and human institutions?”33

154
NOTES
INTRODUCTION
1 David Papineau, “Power and Consciousness on the Clapham Omnibus,” 
Times Online (2008), http://entertainment.timesonline.co.uk/tol/arts_and_
entertainment/the_tls/article3196720.ece.
2 John R. Searle, Intentionality (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1983), x.
3 In a recent essay, Searle outlines a chain of ontological dependency that 
begins with brute facts and ends with politics and ethics, proceeding 
through mind, language, rationality, and institutionality. This ontological 
hierarchy implies a natural sequence of philosophical investigation. John 
R. Searle, “What Is to Be Done?” Topoi 25 (2006): 104. John R. Searle, 
Freedom and Neurobiology: Reflections on Free Will, Language, and Politi-
cal Power, Columbia Themes in Philosophy (New York: Columbia 
University Press, 2007), 15–16. 
4 This formulation of Searle’s philosophical agenda, which sees philosophy 
as reconciling human experience with science, may in fact not be limited 
to the latter part of his career. As Searle has recently claimed, “It took 
me a long time to realize that, though I had not been aware of it, [this] 
agenda . . . had always been my agenda.” Contrariwise, David Papineau 
distinguishes between an early and later Searle: “Over the years Searle has 
drifted away from his Oxford roots.” Where the later Searle is preoccupied 
with the task of explaining how humans fit into the world as described by 
science, the early Searle works within the scope of the Oxford ordinary 
language tradition. Searle, “What Is to Be Done?” 101. Papineau, “Power 
and Consciousness on the Clapham Omnibus.”
CHAPTER 1: FUNDAMENTAL ONTOLOGY: 
EXTERNAL REALISM AND SCIENTIFIC NATURALISM
1 M. W. Barsoum, A. Ganguly, and G. Hug, “Microstructural Evidence 
of Reconstituted Limestone Blocks in the Great Pyramids of Egypt,” 
Journal of the American Ceramic Society 89, no. 12 (2006): 3788–96.
2 Such a background theory can constitute the contrast-class, a condition 
for the possibility of a why-question’s arising. Bas C. van Fraassen, 

NOTES
155
 
The Scientific Image (Oxford; New York: Clarendon Press; Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1980), 141–42.
 3 John R. Searle, The Construction of Social Reality (New York: The Free 
Press, 1995), xi.
 4 George Berkeley, A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowl-
edge (Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press, 1998), §6.
 5 It should be noted that where Berkeley denies the existence of a represen-
tation-independent world, Russell’s attitude is that of the agnostic. “It is 
possible that there may be all these things that the physicalist talks about 
in actual reality, but it is impossible that we should ever have any reason 
whatsoever for supposing that there are.” Searle’s External Realism posi-
tively affirms that of which Russell is cautiously skeptical. See Bertrand 
Russell, The Philosophy of Logical Atomism, ed. David Francis Pears 
(LaSalle, Ill.: Open Court, 1985), 144. Indeed, in other writings, Russell 
deploys an inference to the best-explanation-type argument to contend 
that the existence of a representation-independent world isn’t only pos-
sible, but likely. See Bertrand Russell, The Problems of Philosophy 
(Mineola, New York: Dover Publications, 1999).
 6 John R. Searle, “Toward a Unified Theory of Reality,” Harvard Review of 
Philosophy 12 (2004): 97.
 7 See Searle, The Construction of Social Reality, Chapters 7 and 8. 
 8 Ibid., 187–88.
 9 Robert Hanna, in offering an interpretation of the Refutation of Ideal-
ism, suggests several senses in which objects may be said to be “external,” 
the strongest of which is that it is mind-independent. Kant endorses 
a weaker version of externality than does Searle. Robert Hanna, Kant, 
Science, and Human Nature (Oxford; New York: Clarendon Press; Oxford 
University Press, 2006), 69.
10 G. E. Moore, “Proof of an External World,” in Philosophical Papers 
(London; New York: Allen & Unwin; Macmillan, 1959).
11 Searle, The Construction of Social Reality, 177–82.
12 Ludwig Wittgenstein, On Certainty, trans. G. E. M. Anscombe and 
G. H. von Wright (New York: Harper, 1969).
13 Note that the label “Scientific Naturalism” is not Searle’s own.
14 Searle, The Construction of Social Reality, 5–7.
15 Ibid., 6.
16 This assessment and the following historical review owe much to Robert 
Hanna’s book, Kant, Science, and Human Nature. Hanna, in turn, is trac-
ing the surveys of Hilary Putnam and John McDowell. Hanna, Kant, 
Science, and Human Nature, 8. 
17 Wilfrid Sellars, Philosophy and the Scientific Image of Man, ed. Robert 
Garland Colodny, Frontiers of Science and Philosophy (Pittsburgh, Pa.: 
University of Pittsburgh Press, 1962), 35–78. 
18 Frank Jackson, From Metaphysics to Ethics: A Defence of Conceptual 
Analysis (Oxford; New York: Clarendon Press; Oxford University Press, 
1998), 5.
19 Searle, “What Is to Be Done?” 101.

NOTES
156
20 Searle, “Toward a Unified Theory of Reality,” 107.
21 Searle, “What Is to Be Done?” 101. Searle, Freedom and Neurobiology, 4.
22 In some ways, Hacking’s label is preferable. “Realism” seems to be a claim 
about what exists (i.e., the objects of science) rather than a claim about 
the nature of the relation between concepts and the world. Ian Hacking, 
The Social Construction of What? (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univer-
sity Press, 1999), 83.
23 Hilary Putnam, “Why There Isn’t a Ready-Made World,” Synthese 51, 
no. 2 (1982): 142.
24 Thomas S. Kuhn, Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 3rd ed. (Chicago, 
Ill.: The University of Chicago Press, 1962).
25 Nelson Goodman, Of Mind and Other Matters (Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 1984).
26 Searle, The Construction of Social Reality, 160.
27 Ibid., 155.
28 Andrew Pickering, Constructing Quarks: A Sociological History of 
Particle Physics (Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press, 1984).
CHAPTER 2: CONSCIOUSNESS AND MATERIALIST 
THEORIES OF THE MIND
 1 John R. Searle, The Rediscovery of the Mind (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT 
Press, 1992), 63.
 2 Paul Feyerabend, “Mental Events and the Brain,” Journal of Philosophy 
40 (1963). R. Rorty, “Mind-Body Identity, Privacy and Categories,” 
Review of Metaphysics 19, no. 1 (1965).
 3 U. T. Place, “Is Consciousness a Brain Process?” British Journal of 
Psychology 47 (1956). J. J. C. Smart, “Sensations and Brain Processes,” 
The Philosophical Review 68, no. 2 (1959).
 4 Searle, The Rediscovery of the Mind, 52.
 5 Ibid., 84.
 6 T. Nagel, “What is it Like to Be a Bat?” The Philosophical Review 83, 
no. 4 (1974).
 7 Frank Jackson, “What Mary Didn’t Know,” The Journal of Philosophy 
83, no. 5 (1986).
 8 Searle, The Rediscovery of the Mind, 65–70.
 9 Ibid., 70–71.
10 John R. Searle, “The Chinese Room,” in The MIT Encyclopedia of the 
Cognitive Sciences, ed. R. A. Wilson and F. Keil (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT 
Press, 1999).
11 Alan M. Turing, “Computing Machinery and Intelligence,” Mind, no. 54 
(1950).
12 David Pitt, “Mental Representation,” in The Stanford Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy, ed. Edward N. Zalta (2008).
13 Searle, The Rediscovery of the Mind, Chapter 7.
14 The unconscious is, for Nietzsche, a network of “causal relations which 
are entirely withheld from us.” Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche, The Will to 

NOTES
157
Power, ed. Walter Arnold Kaufmann and R. J. Hollingdale (New York: 
Random House, 1967).
15 Advocates of the causal-information theory of mind include Fred 
Dretski, Jerry Fodor, and Michael Devitt.
16 Searle, The Rediscovery of the Mind, xii.
17 Ibid., 1.
18 Note that while materialists might endorse the analogies offered, they 
may still disagree with the “caused by/feature of” characterization of 
those phenomena.
19 The claim that the mental is both caused by and a feature of the underly-
ing neurophysiology is more compelling as an argument to the effect that 
higher-level phenomena, such as inflation or consciousness, are not caus-
ally inert. But this claim more directly concerns the possibility of inten-
tional causation than a resolution to the traditional mind-body problem 
(see Chapter 4). Indeed this may be already to presuppose, against the 
materialist, that the mental is a higher-order system and, further, that 
this higher-order system has the qualitative subjectivity indicative of 
conscious states. To argue for these latter claims, Searle must rely on his 
Silicon Brains and Conscious Robots arguments. Unfortunately, these 
arguments drive such a deep conceptual wedge between the mind and 
brain (behavior, broadly construed) that it is difficult to see the sense in 
which the mind could still be held to be a feature realized in the brain.
20 John R. Searle, Mind: A Brief Introduction (Oxford; New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2004), 116.
21 Van Fraassen, The Scientific Image, 141–42.
22 John R. Searle, Mind, Language, and Society: Philosophy in the Real 
World (New York: Basic Books, 1998), 54.
CHAPTER 3: INTENTIONAL MENTAL STATES
1 So far as the ontology of models go, contemporary theorists are reluc-
tant to identify models with either linguistic or pictorial entities. In 
Roman Frigg’s view, descriptions describe models, which is a structural, 
imagined entity. If this is the case, then the intentional content of an 
intentional state might be helpfully identified with a model. See Roman 
Frigg, “Re-Presenting Scientific Representation,” Dissertation (2003) 
(Unpublished).
2 Searle, Intentionality, 11–12.
3 See “Meaning, Communication, and Representation” for an extensive 
discussion of the way that mental representation is both like and unlike 
models and forms of pictorial representation. John R. Searle, “Meaning, 
Communication, and Representation,” in Philosophical Grounds of Ratio-
nality: Intentions, Categories, Ends, ed. Richard E. Grandy and Richard 
Warner (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1986).
4 Searle agrees with Wittgenstein’s rejection of the idea that mental states 
refer in virtue of their being pictures in the head. “If the meaning of the 
sign (roughly, that which is of importance about the sign) is an image built 

NOTES
158
 
up in our minds when we see or hear the sign, then first let us adopt the 
method we just described of replacing this mental image by some out-
ward object seen, e.g. a painted or modeled image. Then why should the 
written sign plus this painted image be alive if the written sign alone 
was dead?” See Ludwig Wittgenstein, Blue and Brown Books (New York: 
Perennial, 1942), 4–5. Searle points out that pictures (or sentences) are 
used in a way that mental states are not, and so require an agent 
(a user)—we can, in the case of the former, distinguish the underlying 
brute fact from its content. But this distinction makes no sense in the case 
of mental states themselves; there is nothing more to a mental state 
besides its counterfactual content. The analogy between models and 
mental states is not meant to suggest an explanation of how intentional 
states refer. Nevertheless, the comparison is useful in clarifying some 
of the logical properties of intentional states. See Searle’s response to 
Dennett in Searle, Intentionality, 21–22.
 5 This way of talking about the content of representational states can be 
traced to Saul Kripke and, more recently, Robert Stalnaker. Following 
Stalnaker, talk of possible worlds should not imply an implausible meta-
physics. Robert Stalnaker, “Assertion,” in Context and Content: Essays on 
Intentionality in Speech and Thought (Oxford; New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1999), 79.
 6 This suggestion finds its roots in Kant. Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure 
Reason, trans. Paul Guyer and Allen W. Wood (Cambridge; New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 1998), A239/B98.
 7 This discussion owes much to Michael Shaffer’s discussion of idealiza-
tion in modeling. Michael J. Shaffer, “Bayesian Confirmation of Theories 
that Incorporate Idealizations,” Philosophy of Science 68, no. 3 (2001): 
41–42.
 8 This is a complicated issue. A model typically aims to represent the world 
as it is, so that Marx attempts to represent social development in terms of 
production, culminating in communism. In the event of a discrepancy 
between the possible world represented by Marx and the actual world, 
the fault lies with Marx’s belief or model. Lenin, on the other hand, took 
the content as a prescription rather than as (simply) a description, and 
endeavored to change the world so as to bring it into alignment with the 
conditions of satisfaction. According to Lenin’s psychological mode, that 
same model or content has a world-to-mind direction of fit. There is also 
a more subtle way in which a scientific model does not function simply 
to represent the world as it is. This model may, further, function as a 
Kuhnian paradigm if it is upheld as an exemplar of model making. 
Theorists, working in related fields, endeavor to make their models more 
like the paradigm case. In this case, the paradigm doesn’t just represent 
the world, but might be said to serve as a kind of object of desire with a 
world-to-mind direction of fit. Scientists endeavor to make their extant 
theories more like the paradigm case so that the latter serves as a con-
dition of satisfaction (requirement). See Kuhn, Structure of Scientific 
Revolutions.
 9 Searle, Intentionality, 7.

NOTES
159
10 Ibid., 177.
11 Ibid., 13.
12 Ibid., 29–36.
13 Ibid., 36.
14 Beliefs must, however, be potentially conscious. See the discussion of 
Searle’s connection principle in Chapter 2.
15 Searle, Intentionality, 47.
CHAPTER 4: REASON AND ACTION
 1 Searle, Intentionality, 16, 87. Wittgenstein’s original quotation can 
be found in Ludwig Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations, trans. 
G. E. M. Anscombe, 3rd ed. (New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1958), §612.
 2 Donald Davidson, “Actions, Reasons, and Causes,” in Essays on Actions 
and Events (Oxford; New York: Clarendon Press; Oxford University 
Press, 2001), 9.
 3 Ibid.
 4 The following discussion, along with a few of its examples, is more or less 
derived from Larry Wright, Critical Thinking (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2001).
 5 “Becausee” also includes functional explanation.
 6 Wright, Critical Thinking, 62.
 7 Davidson, “Actions, Reasons, and Causes,” 11.
 8 This behavior could plausibly still be construed as an action, if the man 
told us that he flailed in order to get the spider web off of him. But 
merely purposive, goal-directed behaviors—which we might equally 
attribute to the spider that spun the web—are not paradigm cases 
of intentional, autonomous, self-conscious, agentive action. The line 
between action and body movements that are not actions, is continuous; 
while waving someone down falls on one end of the continuum, reacting 
to an unseen cobweb tends toward the other. See Harry G. Frankfurt, 
The Importance of What We Care About: Philosophical Essays (Cambridge 
[England] ; New York: Cambridge University Press, 1988).
 9 This example is found in Wright, Critical Thinking, 158–59. 
10 G. E. M. Anscombe, Intention (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 
1957), 18.
11 Davidson, “Actions, Reasons, and Causes,” 11.
12 John R. Searle, Rationality in Action (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 
2001), 118–19.
13 Donald Davidson, “Intending,” in Essays on Actions and Events (Oxford; 
New York: Clarendon Press; Oxford University Press, 2001).
14 Searle, Intentionality, 84–85.
15 R. M. Chisholm, “Freedom in Action,” in Freedom and Determinism, ed. 
Keith Lehrer (New York: Random House, 1966), 37. See an analogous 
example in Donald Davidson, “Freedom to Act,” in Essays on Freedom 
of Action, ed. Ted Honderich (London; Boston: Routledge and Kegan 
Paul, 1973), 33–34.

NOTES
160
16 Note that the apparatus developed in Rationality in Action, discussed 
below, affords Searle a more elegant solution to the deviant causal chain 
problem. The difference between murdering and accidentally killing 
someone (in spite of having the intention to do so) is that, in the former 
case, the agent willed or chose to kill. This is not the same as having an 
operative intention or reason to kill. Reasons don’t kill, selves do (for 
reasons).
17 Searle might grant the possibility of genuine indeterminacy, as on the 
quantum level.
18 Searle, Rationality in Action, 62.
19 Note that there seem to be other places where freedom might intervene. 
We are not, for example, passive recipients of an intentional store. There 
is a gap between our perceptual experiences and the beliefs we infer from 
them. Perceptual experiences can underdetermine the latter. At least to 
the extent that this is the case, we have a degree of control over which 
beliefs we will endorse. Similar remarks can be made about hierarchies of 
desire.
20 Searle, Rationality in Action, 12–13.
21 Ibid., 5.
22 Ibid., 297.
23 Ibid.
CHAPTER 5: FROM ACTS TO SPEECH ACTS: 
THE INTENTION TO COMMUNICATE
 1 John R. Searle, Speech Acts (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1969), 16.
 2 Reading Speech Acts back through the lens of Rationality in Action, 
Searle might also add that a dog which happens to make the sound 
“hello” is not using language precisely because the utterance, while an 
action, is not a rational action.
 3 Searle, Speech Acts, 3.
 4 P. F. Strawson, “Meaning and Truth,” in Logico-Linguistic Papers 
(London: Methuen, 1971).
 5 Ibid., 176.
 6 Ludwig Wittgenstein, Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, ed. David Francis 
Pears and Brian McGuinness, Routledge Classics (London; New York: 
Routledge, 2001), 2.12.
 7 Ibid., 2.1511.
 8 Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations, I.23.
 9 Ibid., I.11.
10 Strawson, “Meaning and Truth,” 173.
11 John R. Searle, “A Philosophical Self-Portrait,” in The Penguin Diction-
ary of Philosophy, ed. Thomas Mautner (London; New York: Penguin 
Books, 1997), 512.
12 Searle, Speech Acts, 43.
13 Ibid., 17.

NOTES
161
14 Ibid., 43.
15 Searle, “Meaning, Communication, and Representation,” 109–10.
16 H. P. Grice, “Meaning,” The Philosophical Review 66, no. 3 (1957): 217.
17 Searle, Speech Acts, 37.
18 H. P. Grice, Studies in the Way of Words (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press, 1989), 109, 218.
19 It is, perhaps, an open question as to whether Bill meant that he couldn’t 
play squash in showing his bandaged leg.
20 Christine Kenneally, The First Word: The Search for the Origins of 
Language (New York: Viking, 2007), 127.
21 Searle grants that even some illocutionary effects can be brought about in 
a nonconventional way. Searle, Speech Acts, 38. There are, however, a 
number of passages in The Construction of Social Reality, where Searle 
holds that institutional facts cannot perform their function in virtue of 
their physical structure alone, which would suggest that Searle has 
retracted this qualification.
CHAPTER 6: FROM SOUNDS TO WORDS: 
THE INTENTION TO REPRESENT
1 Searle and Austin have differing conceptions of the illocutionary act. For 
Austin, the distinction between the locutionary and illocutionary can be 
elucidated in terms of content and force. What is the basis by which the 
content is separated from the force? Philosophers of language have been 
impressed by the fact that several different speech acts can nevertheless 
have a shared content, as when I say “The car is washed,” “Wash the car!” 
or “I promise to wash the car.” In asking someone to wash the car, I rep-
resent a world in which the car is washed and then bring that content 
under a certain force. The locutionary act proffers a certain content, 
whereas the illocutionary act brings that locution under a certain force—an 
assertion, order, or promise. Note that, for Searle, the linguistic distinction 
between content and force is analogous to the structure of intentional 
states, where a representative content can be brought under different 
psychological modes or forces. This is not accidental. As we will see, the 
distinction between an expression’s illocutionary force and propositional 
content is dependent on and explained by the mind’s capacity for inten-
tionality. Austin and Searle stress different features of the illocutionary 
act. For Searle the essence of the illocutionary act is found in the Gricean 
intentions to communicate. But Austin takes it for granted that the speaker 
is communicating, and emphasizes the fact that illocutionary acts can 
bring certain content under a variety of different psychological modes or 
forces. For Searle, this function is achieved by the intention to represent, 
which is, as we will see, part of the total illocutionary act.
2 J. L. Austin, How to Do Things with Words, The William James Lectures; 
1955 (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1962), 95.
3 Ibid.
4 Ibid.

NOTES
162
 5 Austin would probably be reluctant to grant that the various acts are 
individuated and caused by a characteristic sets of underlying intentions; 
this interpretation is a product of Searle’s imposition of a Davidsonian 
account of action onto Austin’s taxonomy of speech actions.
 6 Kent Bach, “Speech Acts and Pragmatics,” in The Blackwell Guide to the 
Philosophy of Language, ed. Michael Devitt and Richard Hanley 
(Malden, Mass.: Blackwell Pub., 2006), 149–50.
 7 Indeed, in Chapter 7, I will argue, against Searle, that there is a sense in 
which an officer who says “show your passport” but does not also have 
the functional, perlocutionary intention cannot be said to mean what 
they said.
 8 Grice, “Meaning.”
 9 Stephen R. Schiffer, Meaning (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1972).
10 Stalnaker, “Assertion,” 87.
11 Searle, Speech Acts, 46.
12 Stalnaker makes a similar response against an analogous objection, 
where the “essential effect” is not unfairly characterized as something like 
a perlocutionary effect. “My suggestion about the essential effect of 
assertion does not imply that speakers intend to succeed in getting the 
addressee to accept the content of the assertion, or that they believe they 
will, or even might succeed. A person may make an assertion knowing 
it will be rejected just as Congress may pass a law knowing it will be 
vetoed, a labor negotiator may make a proposal knowing it will be met 
by a counterproposal, or a poker player may place a bet knowing it will 
cause all the other players to fold.” Stalnaker, “Assertion,” 87.
13 Searle, Speech Acts, 43.
14 In his later writings, Searle suggests that these three intentions are in fact 
three aspects of one complex intention. Searle, Mind, Language, and 
Society, 141–44.
15 Searle, Intentionality, 167–68.
16 Searle, Speech Acts, 64, 60; Searle, Intentionality, 174–75.
17 Searle, Intentionality, 167. 
18 Searle, Speech Acts, 64, 60.
19 The work of this third intention is actually accomplished by two inten-
tions for Austin: the rhetic intention imposes conditions of satisfaction 
on the behavior, sound, and marks. The illocutionary intention then 
imposes a force on those same brute facts. Searle reserves the notion of 
the illocutionary intention for the intention to communicate by conven-
tional means, and posits an additional intention—the intention to 
represent—to do the work of the intentional imposition. 
20 Dreyfus writes, “According to Searle, the intention in action is the experi-
ence of acting—what William James calls ‘the feeling of effort.’ . . . On 
Searle’s analysis, all acting is accompanied by an experience of acting, 
and this experience of effort has as its intentional content that it is 
causing my body movements.” Hubert L. Dreyfus, Being-in-the-World: 
A Commentary on Heidegger’s Being and Time, Division I (Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Press, 1991), 56.
21 Grice, “Meaning,” 386.

NOTES
163
22 Searle responds that “. . . Dreyfus is so wedded to phenomenology that 
he literally is unable to see that I am not doing phenomenology. I am 
engaged, among other things, in logical analysis and that enterprise is 
quite different from phenomenology.” John R. Searle, “The Limits of 
Phenomenology,” in Essays in Honor of Hubert L. Dreyfus, ed. Hubert 
L. Dreyfus, Mark A. Wrathall, and J. E. Malpas (Cambridge, Mass.: 
MIT Press, 2000), 74–75.
23 John R. Searle, “A Taxonomy of Illocutionary Acts,” in Expression and 
Meaning: Studies in the Theory of Speech Acts (Cambridge; New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 1979).
24 John R. Searle, “How Performatives Work,” Linguistics and Philosophy 
12 (1989).
CHAPTER 7: ON THE MEANING OF MEANING: 
CRITICAL REMARKS
1 Searle, “Meaning, Communication, and Representation,” 212.
2 Ibid., 218.
3 Ibid., 216.
4 Ibid., 210.
5 Indeed, the causal chains of dependency are considerably more com-
plicated than this. Any functional or justificatory chain already implies 
a larger causal chain which tracks those relations. See Larry Wright, 
Teleological Explanations: An Etiological Analysis of Goals and Functions 
(Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press, 1976).
6 Austin, How to Do Things with Words, 146.
7 William Ramsey, “Prototypes and Conceptual Analysis,” in Rethinking 
Intuition: The Psychology of Intuition and Its Role in Philosophical Inquiry, 
ed. Michael R. DePaul and William Ramsey (Lanham, Md.: Rowman & 
Littlefield, 1998).
8 A speaker makes an assertion with the intention that saying so will move 
the hearer to believe that it is so; sometimes, as in philosophy, I make an 
assertion but expect the hearer to believe for reasons independent of my 
saying so. Austin was characteristically sensitive to these differences 
and suggested that there are in fact two different categories of assertion: 
(1) verdictives are assertions whose truth are supported by reasons; 
(2) expositives are assertions not buttressed by explicit reasons; the fact 
that the speaker is asserting something is typically reason, depending on 
the context, to believe its truth. Searle is dissatisfied with this distinction, 
or else fails to see its motivation, and reduces the categories of the verdic-
tive and the expositive to the assertive: “This class will contain most 
of Austin’s expositives and many of his verdictives as well for the, by now 
I hope obvious, reason that they all have the same illocutionary point 
and differ only in other features of illocutionary force.” Having done this, 
he then fails to see the ordinary cases in which asserting alone constitutes 
a reason for a hearer to be convinced of its truth. Searle, “A Taxonomy of 
Illocutionary Acts,” 13.

NOTES
164
 9 Searle, Rationality in Action, 173.
10 H. P. Grice, “The Causal Theory of Perception,” Proceedings of the 
Aristotelian Society 35 (1961): 124–26.
11 J. L. Austin, “Other Minds,” in Philosophical Papers (Oxford; New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1979), 82.
12 Searle, Speech Acts, 28.
13 Gustavo Faigenbaum, Conversations with John Searle (Montevideo, 
Uruguay: Libros en Red, 2003), 181.
CHAPTER 8: THE CONSTRUCTION OF SOCIAL REALITY
 1 No theorist disagrees with this basic claim. The semanticist only main-
tains that while words are typically uttered with the intention of doing 
something (pragmatics), they count as linguistic in virtue of the fact that 
they represent the world as being a certain way (semantics; conditions of 
satisfaction). Thus the semanticist maintains that an utterance may be 
meaningful, even when the speaker lacks the intention of producing any 
illocutionary or perlocutionary effect. Also, as noted in the last chapter, 
the ultimate function or purpose of the utterance is typically found in the 
perlocutionary intention.
 2 In The Construction of Social Reality Searle recommends that the cha-
racterization of speech acts as “conventional” or “arbitrary” is more 
misleading than helpful. Searle, The Construction of Social Reality, 28. 
Obviously some actions are ill-suited to count as, say, a speech act, given 
the purposes to which they tend. High frequency noises above the audi-
tory range of humans cannot, at least in practice, be used to communicate. 
Common pebbles will not be used as a medium of exchange. The des-
criptors “conventional” and “arbitrary,” while driving at an important 
feature of the institutional, misrepresent the fact that there are substan-
tial physical constraints placed on the range of potential means. 
 3 Ibid., 5–6.
 4 Ibid., 36, 57.
 5 Ibid., 97.
 6 Ibid., 135.
 7 Joshua Rust, John Searle and the Construction of Social Reality, 
Continuum Studies in American Philosophy (London; New York: 
Continuum, 2006), 15–16.
 8 Searle, The Construction of Social Reality, 70.
 9 Christopher Marquis, “Absent from the Korea Talks: Bush’s Hard-Liner,” 
New York Times, September 2, 2003.
10 Ibid.
11 Searle writes, “the statement ‘I now have a pain in my lower back’ reports 
an epistemically objective fact in the sense that it is made true by the 
existence of an actual fact that is not dependent on any stance, attitudes, 
or opinions of observers. However, the phenomenon itself, the actual 
pain, has a subjective mode of existence.” Searle, The Construction of 
Social Reality, 9.

NOTES
165
12 Ibid., 2.
13 Ibid., 9.
14 Ibid., 97.
15 Note that this argument parallels the connection principle, wherein some-
thing counts as intentional if it could be made conscious; this is not an 
accident. The deontic rules which constitute institutional facts have a 
derived intentionality. Thus, Searle has to maintain that they exist some-
where, even when they are not explicitly codified. Uncodified rules are 
subconscious in the sense that they could be made conscious or explicit.
16 Searle, The Construction of Social Reality, 88.
17 Alasdair C. MacIntyre, After Virtue: A Study in Moral Theory, 3rd ed. 
(Notre Dame, Ind.: University of Notre Dame Press, 2007), 152.
18 For a more precise exhibition of this criticism see Rust, John Searle and 
the Construction of Social Reality, 138–82.
CHAPTER 9: TOPICS CONCERNING INSTITUTIONAL REALITY: 
REASONS, LANGUAGE, POLITICS, AND THE BACKGROUND
 1 Note that for Davidson “action” refers to behavior, but only those beha-
viors which happen to be caused by intentional states. For Searle “action” 
refers to both the behavior and the intentional states.
 2 Searle, Rationality in Action, 118–19.
 3 Ibid., 37–38.
 4 It should be noted that the Classical Model can make room for desire-
independent reasons. Davidson remains open to this possibility. Davidson’s 
notion of a proattitude is similar to Searle’s notion of a motivator, in that 
it includes not just desires but duties and obligations. Searle nevertheless 
criticizes Davidson for overstating the analogy between desires and other 
kinds of motivators. Similar remarks apply to Bernard Williams’ concep-
tion of a motivational set S. Ibid., 169–70.
 5 Ibid., 178–79; John R. Searle, “How to Derive ‘Ought’ From ‘Is’,” in 
Concepts in Social & Political Philosophy, ed. Richard E. Flathman 
(New York: Macmillan, 1973).
 6 Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations, §2.
 7 Searle, “How to Derive ‘Ought’ From ‘Is’.”
 8 Ibid., 56.
 9 Searle, The Construction of Social Reality, 100.
10 Searle, “How to Derive ‘Ought’ From ‘Is’,” 57.
11 Note that in “How to Derive an ‘Ought’ from an ‘Is’,” Searle appears to 
deny that all descriptions or assertives have a deontological component. 
Ibid., 58.
12 This articulation misses the fact that some speech acts, such as directives 
(“Block!”), can impose rights and obligations, not just on a speaker but 
on the hearer as well. Searle, Rationality in Action, 173.
13 Ibid., 185.
14 Ibid., 174.
15 Ibid., 180.

NOTES
166
16 The details of this remarkable claim are not spelled out clearly in Ratio-
nality in Action. In what sense am I so bound? That is, in what sense can 
I not be indifferent to the truth of my own assertions? Prima facie, this 
seems to imply that it is somehow impossible for an asserter to lie, depend-
ing on how we understand the sense in which a speaker is bound to the 
truth of their statements. Searle’s claim seems stronger than Timothy 
Williamson’s claim that knowledge is the norm for assertion (that is, in 
asserting a speaker ought to know of and so believe in what they speak) 
in that the former is putting forth belief as a condition for the possibility 
of assertion. My obligation to move the bishop on the diagonal is not 
simply a norm for playing chess; it is a condition for chess’s possibility. 
Ibid., 180–81. Timothy Williamson, Knowledge and its Limits (Oxford; 
New York: Oxford University Press, 2000), 238–69. 
17 Searle, The Construction of Social Reality, 71.
18 Searle, Freedom and Neurobiology.
19 Ibid., 95–97, 108.
20 Ibid., 100.
21 Hacking writes that “Social constructionists about X tend to hold that: 
(1) X need not have existed, or need not be at all as it is. X, or X as it is at 
present, is not determined by the nature of things, it is not inevitable.” 
Hacking, The Social Construction of What? 6. 
22 Searle, The Construction of Social Reality, 132–37.
23 Searle, Intentionality, 143.
24 Ibid., 157.
25 Searle, The Construction of Social Reality, 129.
26 Ibid., 140.
27 Ibid., 137.
28 Van Fraassen, The Scientific Image, 141.
29 Searle, The Construction of Social Reality, 145.
30 Ibid., 142.
31 Ibid. 
32 Searle’s paradoxical remarks can be highlighted in a number of different 
ways depending on which of Searle’s seemingly incompatible articula-
tions of the Background are taken as more central. For a different 
argument, where I take seriously the notion that the Background is a 
category of neurophysiological causation, see Chapter 3 of Rust, John 
Searle and the Construction of Social Reality.
33 Searle, The Construction of Social Reality, 28–29.

167
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Anscombe, G. E. M. Intention. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1957.
Austin, J. L. How to Do Things with Words, The William James Lectures; 
1955. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1962.
—“Other Minds.” In Philosophical Papers, edited by J. O. Urmson and 
G. J. Warnock, 76–116. Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press, 1979.
Bach, Kent. “Speech Acts and Pragmatics.” In The Blackwell Guide to the 
Philosophy of Language, edited by Michael Devitt and Richard Hanley, 
pp. 147–67, 446 pp. Malden, Mass.: Blackwell, 2006.
Barsoum, M. W., A. Ganguly, and G. Hug. “Microstructural Evidence of 
Reconstituted Limestone Blocks in the Great Pyramids of Egypt.” Journal 
of the American Ceramic Society 89, no. 12 (2006): 3788–96.
Berkeley, George. A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge. 
Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press, 1998.
Chisholm, R. M. “Freedom in Action.” In Freedom and Determinism, edited 
by Keith Lehrer, pp. 11–44. New York: Random House, 1966.
Davidson, Donald. “Actions, Reasons, and Causes.” In Essays on Actions 
and Events, pp. 3–20, 324 pp. Oxford; New York: Clarendon Press; Oxford 
University Press, 2001.
—“Freedom to Act.” In Essays on Freedom of Action, edited by Ted 
Honderich, pp. 63–81, 215 pp. London; Boston: Routledge and Kegan 
Paul, 1973.
—“Intending.” In Essays on Actions and Events, pp. 83–102, 324 pp. Oxford; 
New York: Clarendon Press; Oxford University Press, 2001.
Dreyfus, Hubert L. Being-in-the-World: A Commentary on Heidegger’s Being 
and Time, Division I. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1991.
Faigenbaum, Gustavo. Conversations with John Searle. Montevideo, Uruguay: 
Libros en Red, 2003.
Feyerabend, Paul. “Mental Events and the Brain.” Journal of Philosophy 40 
(1963): 295–96.
Frankfurt, Harry G. The Importance of What We Care about: Philosophical 
Essays. Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press, 1988.
Frigg, Roman. “Re-presenting Scientific Representation.” PhD dissertation; 
London School of Economics, (2003).
Goodman, Nelson. Of Mind and Other Matters. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press, 1984.
Grice, H. P. “The Causal Theory of Perception.” Proceedings of the 
Aristotelian Society 35, (1961): 121–53.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
168
—“Meaning.” The Philosophical Review 66, no. 3 (1957): 377–88.
—Studies in the Way of Words. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 
1989.
Hacking, Ian. The Social Construction of What? Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press, 1999.
Hanna, Robert. Kant, Science, and Human Nature. Oxford; New York: 
Clarendon Press; Oxford University Press, 2006.
Jackson, Frank. From Metaphysics to Ethics: A Defence of Conceptual Ana-
lysis. Oxford; New York: Clarendon Press; Oxford University Press, 1998.
—“What Mary Didn’t Know.” The Journal of Philosophy 83, no. 5 (1986): 291.
Kant, Immanuel. Critique of Pure Reason, translated by Paul Guyer and 
Allen W. Wood. Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press, 
1998.
Kenneally, Christine. The First Word: The Search for the Origins of Language. 
New York: Viking, 2007.
Kuhn, Thomas S. Structure of Scientific Revolutions. 3rd ed. Chicago, Ill.: 
The University of Chicago Press, 1962.
MacIntyre, Alasdair C. After Virtue: A Study in Moral Theory. 3rd ed. Notre 
Dame, Ind.: University of Notre Dame Press, 2007.
Marquis, Christopher. “Absent from the Korea Talks: Bush’s Hard-Liner.” 
New York Times, September 2, 2003.
Moore, G. E. “Proof of an External World.” In Philosophical Papers, 
pp. 127–50. London; New York: Allen & Unwin; Macmillan, 1959.
Nagel, T. “What Is It like to Be a Bat?” The Philosophical Review 83, no. 4 
(1974): 435.
Nietzsche, Friedrich Wilhelm. The Will to Power, edited by Walter Arnold 
Kaufmann and R. J. Hollingdale. New York: Random House, 1967.
Papineau, David. “Power and Consciousness on the Clapham Omnibus.” 
Times Online (2008), http://entertainment.timesonline.co.uk/tol/arts_and_
entertainment/the_tls/article3196720.ece (Last accessed on October 2, 
2008.)
Pickering, Andrew. Constructing Quarks: A Sociological History of Particle 
Physics. Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press, 1984.
Pitt, David. “Mental Representation.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Phi-
losophy, edited by Edward N. Zalta, 2008. http://plato.stanford.edu/
entries/mental-representation/(Last accessed date September 25, 2008).
Place, U. T. “Is Consciousness a Brain Process?” British Journal of Psychology 
47 (1956): 44–50.
Putnam, Hilary. “Why There Isn’t a Ready-Made World.” Synthese 51, no. 2 
(1982): 141–67.
Ramsey, William. “Prototypes and Conceptual Analysis.” In Rethinking 
Intuition: The Psychology of Intuition and Its Role in Philosophical Inquiry, 
edited by Michael R. DePaul and William Ramsey, pp. 161–78, 335 pp. 
Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield, 1998.
Rorty, R. “Mind-Body Identity, Privacy and Categories.” Review of Meta-
physics 19, no. 1 (1965): 24.
Russell, Bertrand. The Philosophy of Logical Atomism, edited by David 
Francis Pears. LaSalle, Ill.: Open Court, 1985.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
169
—The Problems of Philosophy. Mineola, N.Y.: Dover, 1999.
Rust, Joshua. John Searle and the Construction of Social Reality, Continuum 
Studies in American Philosophy. London; New York: Continuum, 2006.
Schiffer, Stephen R. Meaning. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1972.
Searle, John R. “The Chinese Room.” In The MIT Encyclopedia of the 
Cognitive Sciences, edited by R. A. Wilson and F. Keil, pp. 115–16. 
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1999.
—The Construction of Social Reality. New York: The Free Press, 1995.
—Freedom and Neurobiology: Reflections on Free Will, Language, and Political 
Power, Columbia Themes in Philosophy. New York: Columbia University 
Press, 2007.
—“How Performatives Work.” Linguistics and Philosophy 12 (1989): 535–58.
—“How to Derive ‘Ought’ from ‘Is’.” The Philosophical Review, 73 (1964): 
43–58.
—Intentionality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983.
—“The Limits of Phenomenology.” In Essays in Honor of Hubert L. Dreyfus, 
edited by Hubert L. Dreyfus, Mark A. Wrathall and J. E. Malpas, 
pp. 71–92. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2000.
—“Meaning, Communication, and Representation.” In Philosophical 
Grounds of Rationality: Intentions, Categories, Ends, edited by Richard 
E. Grandy and Richard Warner, pp. 209–26. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1986.
—Mind, Language, and Society: Philosophy in the Real World. New York: 
Basic Books, 1998.
—Mind: A Brief Introduction. Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press, 
2004.
—“A Philosophical Self-Portrait.” In The Penguin Dictionary of Philosophy, 
edited by Thomas Mautner, 512–14. London; New York: Penguin Books, 
1997.
—Rationality in Action. Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press, 2001.
—The Rediscovery of the Mind. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1992.
—Speech Acts. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1969.
—“A Taxonomy of Illocutionary Acts.” In Expression and Meaning: Studies 
in the Theory of Speech Acts, pp. 1–29, 187 pp. Cambridge; New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 1979.
—“Toward a Unified Theory of Reality.” Harvard Review of Philosophy 12 
(2004): 93–135.
—“What Is to Be Done?” Topoi 25 (2006): 101–08.
Sellars, Wilfrid. Philosophy and the Scientific Image of Man, edited by 
Robert Garland Colodny, Frontiers of Science and Philosophy. Pittsburgh, 
Pa.: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1962.
Shaffer, Michael J. “Bayesian Confirmation of Theories That Incorporate 
Idealizations.” Philosophy of Science 68, no. 3 (2001): 36–52.
Smart, J. J. C. “Sensations and Brain Processes.” The Philosophical Review 
68, no. 2 (1959): 141.
Stalnaker, Robert. “Assertion.” In Context and Content: Essays on Intention-
ality in Speech and Thought, pp. 78–96, 283 pp. Oxford; New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1999.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
170
Strawson, P. F. “Meaning and Truth.” In Logico-Linguistic Papers, 251 p. 
London: Methuen, 1971.
Turing, Alan M. “Computing Machinery and Intelligence.” Mind, no. 54 
(1950): 433–57.
van Fraassen, Bas C. The Scientific Image. Oxford; New York: Clarendon 
Press; Oxford University Press, 1980.
Williamson, Timothy. Knowledge and Its Limits. Oxford; New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2000.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. Blue and Brown Books. New York: Perennial, 1942.
—On Certainty, translated by G. E. M. Anscombe and G. H. von Wright. 
New York: Harper, 1969.
—Philosophical Investigations, translated by G. E. M. Anscombe. 3rd ed. 
New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1958.
—Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, edited by David Francis Pears and Brian 
McGuinness, Routledge Classics. London; New York: Routledge, 2001.
Wright, Larry. Critical Thinking. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001.
—Teleological Explanations: An Etiological Analysis of Goals and Functions. 
Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press, 1976.

171
INDEX
action 2, 44–65
agentive causation 55
agentive functions 124–31, 134–5
Anscombe, E. 48–50
Aristotle 49, 135
Armstrong, D. M. 17
assertives 100–5, 109, 113, 139–40, 
163f., 165f.
Austin, J. 1, 68, 70–2, 75, 83–9, 91, 
97–8, 112, 115, 161f., 162f., 
163f.
Ayer, A. J. 68
Bach, K. 86, 88
background 3–4, 11, 15, 136, 142, 
144–53
because (senses of the word) 47–51
Berkeley, G. 5
Biological Naturalism 30, 32
blind sight cases 44
Bolton, J. 130–1
Bourdieu, P. 147
causal self-reference 43–4, 51
causal-information theory 25, 157f.
Chinese Room argument 21–4, 26
Chisholm, R. 52
Churchland, P. 16
Classical Model of action 54, 56, 
58, 62, 64, 137, 165f.
codification (of rules) 104, 134–5, 
165f.
commissives 101–4, 138, 145
communication intention 71, 91, 
108–9, 112
communication-intention 
theorists 67, 70, 71–3, 75, 83, 
117–18
conceptual relativity 11–14
conditions of satisfaction 33, 35–7, 
39–44, 52, 68, 72–3, 75, 78–9, 
85, 88–9, 91–2, 95, 97, 100, 
103, 110, 112–17, 121, 132, 137, 
140–2, 147–8, 158f., 162f., 164f.
Connection Principle 24–6, 159f., 
165f.
Conscious Robots 
experiment 21–4,  157f.
consciousness 4, 6, 9, 15–31, 65, 96, 
126, 129, 147–8, 157f.
constitutive rules 71, 79–80, 120, 
140–1, 152, 153
contrast-class 30–1, 154f.
conventionality 71, 79–81, 83, 
94–5, 98, 100, 107–8, 119–20, 
128, 139, 161f., 162f., 164f.
Davidson, D. 46–51, 53–4, 60–1, 
63, 136–7, 159f., 162f., 165f.
declarative 98, 103–6
Dennett, D. 158f.
deontic powers (rights and 
obligations) 126, 129–31, 
134–5, 138–43, 165f.

INDEX
172
derived intentionality 96–7, 121, 
165f.
desire-independent reasons for 
action 136–8, 141, 143
deviant causal chain puzzle 51–2, 
160f.
diminished capacity 61
direction of fit 37–41, 43, 75, 95–7, 
100–1, 103–4, 115, 137, 140, 
158f.
directives 101–2, 104–5, 165f.
doubt-or-denial condition 115
Dreyfus, H. 98, 162f., 163f.
dualism 16, 26–7, 31–2
duty, speaking out of 94, 109, 
113–18
dysfunction 127–31
eliminative materialism 16–19, 30
Episteme 147–9, 151–2
essential condition 97
expectations 3–4, 11, 30–1, 147, 149
expressives 102–3
External Realism (ER) 5–8, 11–13, 
155f.
Feyerabend, P. 16
Fodor, J. 18, 157f.
form of life 138
free will 2, 15, 58, 64–5, 
137, 160f.
Frege, G. 68,
Frigg, R. 157f.
functionalism 16–22, 25, 30
functions 69–71, 75–6, 81, 83, 86, 
88–92, 94, 98,112, 119–21, 
123–32, 134–5, 138–9, 143, 147, 
152, 159f., 161f., 163f., 164f.
gap 58, 63–5
Goodman, N. 12–14
governmental or political 
structures 143–4
Grice, P. 68, 70, 72, 74, 78–9, 81, 
85–6, 91–2, 94, 98, 108–17, 161f.
Hacking, I. 11, 144, 156f., 166f.
Hanna, R. 155f.
Heidegger, M. 147
Hobbes, T. 122, 143
Hume, D. 27, 55, 56
idealism 5–8, 155f.
illocutionary act 81, 85–6, 89, 91, 
99, 112, 141, 161f.
illocutionary effect 75–6, 78, 81, 83, 
85, 92, 95, 98–9, 110, 112–13, 
119–20, 161f.
illocutionary force 95–8, 105, 109, 
161f., 162f., 163f.
illocutionary intentions 73–83, 86, 
89–92, 94–5, 97–9, 105, 108–10, 
112, 119, 162f.
inherent structuralism 11
institutional facts 15, 80, 103, 
120–34, 136–42, 144, 153, 161, 
165f.
intention to represent 91, 97, 99, 
105, 108–10, 112, 117, 132, 
161f., 162f.
intentional force 95–6, 99, 
112, 121
Intentionality (1983) 1, 32–45, 51, 
60, 63, 92, 107, 112–13, 
116–17, 144, 148, 151
intentionality 2, 15, 22–3, 26, 32–45, 
51, 68, 73, 96–7, 121, 126–7, 
129, 132, 148–52, 161f., 165f.
Jackson, F. 10–11, 16, 19–20, 25, 
28, 64
justification 47–8, 50, 54, 60–1, 89, 
112, 115, 163f.
Kant, I. 8, 155f., 158f.
Kirkpatrick, J. 130

INDEX
173
Kripke, S. 19, 158f.
Kuhn, T. 12, 158f.
Lewis, D. 17
locutionary act 85, 91, 99, 112
locutionary effect 99
locutionary-phatic act 85, 99, 112
locutionary-phonetic act 85, 88, 
97, 99 
locutionary-rhetic act 85, 97, 
112, 162f.
MacIntyre, A. 135
materialism 16, 19, 30–2
meaning 2, 4, 33, 49, 67–81, 92–8, 
105–18, 120, 139, 146–7, 157f., 
164f.
metaphysical realism 11–12
mind-body problem 11, 15–16, 
26–7, 64, 148, 157f.
mind-independent reality, see 
representation-independent 
reality
modeling 33–6
Moore, G. E. 8, 68
motivator 51, 61, 92, 137–8, 165f.
Nagel, T. 19–20, 25, 28
nested intentions 86–8, 97
Nietzsche, F. 156f.
nominalism 14
nonagentive functions 124 
normativity 39, 42, 60, 104, 131, 
134–5, 138, 141–2, 149–52
ontologically objective 7, 29, 132
ontologically subjective 29–30, 132, 
154, 149, 
Papineau, D. 1, 145f.
perception 42–4
performatives 71, 105
perlocutionary act 85, 99
perlocutionary effect 75–6, 80, 86, 
88, 90, 94, 98–9, 110, 112–14, 
117, 119, 162f., 164f.
phenomenalism 24, 26, 32
phronesis 135
Pickering, A 14
prior intentions 51–3, 58
propositional content 69, 73, 95, 
100–1, 141, 161f.
psychological mode 35, 37–9, 41, 
68, 95, 158f., 161
Putnam, H. 11, 14, 18, 155f.
puzzlement 3–4
Pyramids at Giza 3–4, 6, 
11, 30
Quine, W. V. O. 18
Rationality in Action (2001) 15, 51, 
54, 60, 63, 64, 114, 136, 140–1, 
160f., 165f., 166f.
Rawls, J. 143
reason (for action) 46–51, 58, 60–3, 
65, 68
Rediscovery of the Mind 
(1992) 26–7
regularity theory of 
causation 55–6, 62
remission 128–31, 135, 142
representationalism 26, 36
representation-independent 
reality 5–6, 8–9, 11, 13, 155f.
representative content 36–9, 41, 51, 
68–9, 96, 161f.
Rorty, R. 16
Russell, B. 5, 8, 68, 155f.
scientific naturalism 2, 8–13, 
16, 23, 27, 30–1, 58, 64, 
137, 155f.
Sellars, W. 8, 10–11
semanticist 68–73, 76, 107–10, 
117, 164f.

INDEX
174
Silicon Brains experiment 20–4, 
29, 157f.
sincerity condition 83, 89, 91–101, 
107, 109 
skepticism 5–8, 115
Smart, J. C. C. 17
social contract theories 143
social facts 80, 121, 125, 127, 
129–30, 132, 138, 153
sovereignty 144
Speech Acts (1969) 15, 72–3, 83, 92, 
107, 109–10, 116–18, 160f., 161f.
speech acts 2, 4, 8, 45, 66–75, 
79–81, 83, 85–6, 89, 98–105, 
108, 112, 116, 122, 128, 
138–41, 144–5, 161f., 164f., 
165f.
status functions 126–7, 130–2, 135, 
137–8, 140–7, 151–2
Strawson, P. 1, 68, 70–1
Strong Artificial Intelligence 21–2
structural functionalism 131
taxonomy of speech acts 100–6
techne 147–9, 151–2
Tereshkova, V. 96–8, 100
The Construction of Social Reality 
(1995) 4, 15, 79, 119–35, 138, 
140–1, 149, 161f., 164f. 
transcendental argument 6–8 
Turing Test 22–3
Turing, A. 22
two-images problem 9–10
type identity theory 17–18
Urmson, J. 1
van Fraassen, B. 30, 154f.
volition 56, 60, 64, 137
we-intentionality 126–8
Williams, B. 165f.
Williamson, T. 166f.
Wittgenstein, L. 8, 46, 68–71, 96, 
139, 147, 157f., 159f.

