 
 
Dragging quadrilaterals into tetrahedra 
 
Maria Flavia Mammana – Mario Pennisi  
fmammana@dmi.unict.it – pennisi@dmi.unict.it 
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science 
University of Catania  
 ITALY  
 
Abstract: In this paper we present the results of an experimental sequence of classroom activities in Euclidean 
geometry, both plane and space geometry, proposed to high school students. During the activity students discover 
surprising analogies between quadrilaterals and tetrahedra, by means of analogy and of the dynamic geometry 
software they are working in. 
 
1. Introduction 
Euclidean geometry allows us to interpret the space we live in and provides instruments often used 
in several jobs: geodetic lines for sailing and air navigation, the perception of movement of a solid 
by engineers, geometric vision in micro-surgery, etc. The cultural formation/education of today’s 
citizen is weak without geometry, in particular without space geometry. Space geometry is indeed 
part of school programs but, in the classroom, it is often relegated to the end of the year and 
therefore covered superficially at best, if not left out completely. This is because, even though we 
live in a three dimensional space, teaching/learning three dimensional geometry presents difficulties 
in graphic representation as well as in mental visualization: it is not easy to draw a three 
dimensional figure on a plane and it is not easy to imagine the mutual position of objects in space. 
In this paper we present the results we found after proposing  a sequence of classroom activities in 
both 2D and 3D Euclidean geometry to high school students. The educational rationale of the 
proposed sequence of activities is to have students experience  3D geometry in order to enhance 
their sense of self-efficacy, to help them reach an accurate vision of the discipline, and experience 
positive emotional stimulation [9]. Fostering a positive attitude in the students towards space 
geometry is the goal of the project. 
The activity has been realized by means of a conceptual tool, analogy, and of an operative one, a 
particular dynamic geometry software. The chosen topics are quadrilaterals and tetrahedra that 
share a lot of analogies [8]: we start with quadrilaterals, already familiar to the students, and study 
tetrahedra using the numerous analogies with quadrilaterals. Thus, space geometry is less hard 
because students are faced with 3D problems after having already become familiar with the solution 
of an analogous problem in the plane [12]. Analogy, in fact, creates a significant bridge between the 
plane and space and makes properties of tetrahedra easier to perceive. 
In the sequence of activities we proposed we use the conceptual instrument of analogy, and also an 
operative instrument, a dynamic geometry software, that is fundamental in the activity of exploring 
and discovery. We use both Cabri II Plus and Cabri 3D: the former allows to study 2D figures, the 
latter 3D figures, through a dynamic vision achieved from several points of view, and they help to 
overcome the well known problems of spatial visualization/representation. 
The sequence of activities was carried out in computer laboratories, during which students, by 
constructing and observing, discover the surprising existing analogies between quadrilaterals and 
tetrahedra. Geometry teaching in the laboratory is not only reduced to the formal learning of a 
proof, but it takes into consideration the richness of the geometric reasoning, which is divided into 
various stages: 1) observation of a figure; 2) development of conjectures; 3) critical exam and final 
valuation of conjectures with proofs. 

 
 
The atmosphere of a laboratory is similar to the one of a “Renaissance workshop, in which the 
apprentices learned by doing, seeing, imitating, communicating with each other, in a word: 
practising. In the laboratory activities, the construction of meanings is strictly bound, on one hand, 
to the use of tools, and on the other, to the interactions between people working together […] to the 
communication and sharing of knowledge in the classroom, either working in small groups in a 
collaborative and cooperative way, or by using the methodological instrument of the mathematic 
discussion, conveniently guided by the teacher” [11]. The teacher, by trials and errors, leads 
students to solve the problem. In the laboratory then, students, young math researchers, enjoy the 
taste of the discovery and the joy of reaching the result, improving their self-efficacy [1]. 
 
2. The proposed sequence of activities: content and worksheets 
The proposed sequence of activities, based on [8], was elaborated by a team of university professors 
and one high school teacher and is on a topic that is not in school curricula. It is addressed to 
talented students that already know some plane geometry and, possibly, some space geometry. A 
simplified version of this sequence of activities, addressed to all high school students, has been 
elaborated in [5]. 
In this activity, tetrahedra, instead of being assimilated to triangles --being polygons of the plane 
respectively polyhedra of the space with the least number of vertices-- are considered in analogy 
with quadrilaterals [8]. We define quadrilaterals as figures of the plane determined by four vertices, 
such that any three of them are non-collinear, and with six edges (the four sides and the two 
diagonals) and four faces (the triangles determined by three vertices of the quadrilateral), and 
tetrahedra as 3D figures determined by four non coplanar vertices, and with six edges and four 
faces. Then, a quadrilateral becomes a tetrahedron by “extracting”, from the plane, one of its 
vertices (Figure 2.1). 
A
B
C
D
A
B
C
D
 
 
Figure 2.1  Quadrilateral - Tetrahedron 
 
In both figures we introduce analogous definitions (bimedian, centroid, median, axis/axial plane, 
circumcentre, maltitude/Monge plane, anticentre/Monge point) and prove analogous properties. See 
[2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10]. The following table contains the content of the proposed sequence of activities.  
 
Table 2.1  Table of contents 
 
QUADRILATERALS 
TETRAHEDRA 
 
Q is a convex quadrilateral with vertices A, 
B, C, D. 
The points A, B, C, D are such that any three 
 
T is a tetrahedron with vertices A, B, C, D. 
 
The points A, B, C, D are non coplanar. 

 
 
of them are non-collinear.  
 
The vertices detect six segments AB, BC, 
CD, DA, AC, BD, that are called edges. The 
edges of Q are the four sides and the two 
diagonals. 
 
Two edges are said to be opposite if they do 
not have common vertices. 
They are opposite edges: AB and CD, BC 
and DA, AC and BD, that is, either two 
opposite sides or the two diagonals.  
 
We call faces of Q the triangles determined 
by three vertices of Q. There are four faces: 
ABC, BCD, CDA, DAB. 
 
A vertex and a face are said to be opposite if 
the vertex does not belong to the face. For 
each vertex there is one and only one 
opposite face.  
 
 
The vertices detect six segments AB, BC, 
CD, DA, AC, BD, that are called edges. 
 
 
 
Two edges are said to be opposite if they do 
not have common vertices. 
They are opposite edges: AB and CD, BC 
and DA, AC and BD. 
 
 
We call faces of T the triangles determined 
by three vertices of T. There are four faces: 
ABC, BCD, CDA, DAB. 
 
A vertex and a face are said to be opposite if 
the vertex does not belong to the face. For 
each vertex there is one and only one 
opposite face. 
 
The segment joining the midpoints of two 
opposite edges of Q is called bimedian of Q. 
 
Q has three bimedians, two relative to a pair 
of opposite sides and one relative to the 
diagonals.  
 
Theorem 1. The three bimedians of a 
quadrilateral all pass through one point. 
 
The point G common to the three bimedians 
of Q is called the centroid of Q. 
 
Theorem 2. The centroid bisects each 
bimedian. 
 
The segment joining the midpoints of two 
opposite edges of T is called bimedian of T. 
 
T has three bimedians. 
 
 
 
Theorem 1. The three bimedians of a 
tetrahedron all pass through one point. 
 
The point G common to the three bimedians 
of T is called the centroid of T. 
 
Theorem 2. The centroid bisects each 
bimedian. 
 
The segment joining a vertex of Q with the 
centroid of the opposite face is called 
median of Q. Q has four medians.  
 
Theorem 3. The four medians of a 
quadrilateral meet in its centroid. 
 
Theorem 4. The centroid of a quadrilateral 
divides each median in the ratio 1:3, the 
longer segment being on the side of the 
vertex of Q. 
 
Theorem 5. The quadrilateral of the 
 
The segment joining a vertex of T with the 
centroid of the opposite face is called median 
of T. T has four medians.  
 
Theorem 3. The four medians of a 
tetrahedron 
meet 
in 
its 
centroid 
(Commandino’s Theorem). 
Theorem 4. The centroid of a tetrahedron 
divides each median in the ratio 1:3, the 
longer segment being on the side of the 
vertex of T. 
 
Theorem 5. The tetrahedron of the centroids 

 
 
centroids of the faces of a quadrilateral Q is 
the image of Q with dilatation ratio −−−−1/3 
and center the centroid of Q.  
of the faces of a tetrahedron T is the image 
of T with dilatation ratio −−−−1/3 and center 
the centroid of T.  
 
The line that is perpendicular to an edge of Q 
in its midpoint is called axis of the edge. 
Q has six axes. 
 
Theorem 6. The axes of the edges of a 
quadrilateral meet in a point if and only id 
the quadrilateral is cyclic. 
 
The common point to the axes of a cyclic 
quadrilateral Q, i.e. the centre of the circle 
circumscribed to Q, is called circumcenter 
of Q.  
 
The perpendicular plane to an edge of T in its 
midpoint is called axial plane of the edge. T 
has six axial planes. 
 
Theorem 6. The axial planes of the edges of 
a tetrahedron meet in a point. 
 
 
The common point to the axial planes of a 
tetrahedron T, i.e. the centre of the sphere 
circumscribed to T, is called circumcenter of 
T.  
 
The line that is perpendicular to an edge of a 
quadrilateral Q and passes through the 
midpoint of the opposite edge is called 
maltitude of Q. Q has six maltitudes. 
 
Theorem 7. The maltitudes of a cyclic 
quadrilateral are concurrent. 
 
 
The common point to the six maltitudes of a 
cyclic quadrilateral Q is called anticenter of 
Q. 
 
Theorem 8. In a cyclic quadrilateral the 
anticenter is symmetric to the circumcenter 
with respect to the centroid. 
 
Theorem 9. In a cyclic quadrilateral the 
anticenter, the circumcenter and the 
centroid are collinear.  
 
The line containing the anticenter, the 
circumcenter and the centroid of a cyclic 
quadrilateral Q is called Euler line of Q.  
 
The plane that is perpendicular to an edge of 
a tetrahedron T and passes through the 
midpoint of the opposite edge is called 
Monge plane of T. T has six Monge planes. 
 
Theorem 7. The Monge planes of a 
tetrahedron 
are 
concurrent. 
(Monge 
Theorem). 
 
The common point to the six Monge planes 
of a tetrahedron T is called Monge point of 
T. 
 
Theorem 8. In a tetrahedron the Monge 
point is symmetric to the circumcenter with 
respect to the centroid. 
 
Theorem 9. In a tetrahedron the Monge 
point, the circumcenter and the centroid are 
collinear.  
 
The line containing the Monge point, the 
circumcenter 
and 
the 
centroid 
of 
a 
tetrahedron T is called Euler line of T.  
 
The sequence of activity is organized in worksheets, five on 2D geometry and five on 3D geometry. 
The teaching/learning strategy that we used in the worksheets follows the scheme: 
Explore and verify, using Cabri – Conjecture – Prove 
e.g., by observing and exploring a figure, perceive the relations between objects; then, by 
manipulating the figure, experimentally verify the hypothesis; once they are confirmed, formulate a 
conjecture and finally prove it. The activity is proposed in the plane first and then, with the use of 
the existing analogy, in the space. 
The worksheets have been organized so as to offer an immediate correlation between quadrilaterals 

 
 
and tetrahedra: for any Worksheet Q, related to a property of quadrilaterals, there is a Worksheet T, 
related to the corresponding property of tetrahedra. In fact, there is one pair of worksheets per each 
row of the “Table of contents”. 
The activity is strictly led, both in the discovery phase and the proving phase. We have chosen to do 
so in order to get the same results in the plane as well as in the space (so as to point out the 
analogy), and to get the job done in a set amount of time.  
The first worksheet introduces the objects and the procedures that will be used next. In particular, in 
Worksheet 1T, it is showed how to “transform” a quadrilateral into a tetrahedron. This operation 
has then been repeated in several other pairs of the following worksheets. 
 
Worksheet 1Q 
Quadrilaterals: Old figures and new definitions 
1. Open Cabri II Plus.  
2. By using the instrument Polygon draw a convex quadrilateral of vertices A, B, C, D, that we 
call Q. 
3. Draw its diagonals with the instrument Segment. 
 
Definition. We call edges of a quadrilateral the six segments that 
join two vertices.  
The edges of Q are: ………………………………. 
Then Q has 6 edges: the four sides and the two diagonals.  
 
4. Save the figure in a file and call it Quadrilateral. 
 
Definition. Two edges are said to be opposite if they do not have common vertices. 
Opposite edges of Q are: …………………………………………...  
Then Q has 3 pairs of opposite edges: the 2 pairs of opposite sides and the pair of the diagonals. 
Definition. We call faces of Q the triangles determined by three vertices of Q. 
Then Q has ….... faces: ……………………………………………. 
Definition. A vertex and a face are said to be opposite if the vertex does not belong to the face. 
For example, the vertex A and the face BCD are opposite. 
The face opposite to the vertex B is …………………… 
The vertex opposite to the face ABC is ………………… 
 
Worksheet 1T 
Tetrahedra 
1. Open Cabri 3D and, with F1, visualize the Tool Help window, if not open. 
2. Select the origin point of the coordinate system and delete it. 
3. In the base plane construct a convex quadrilateral as follows:  
• 
With the instrument Point draw the 4 vertices such that any three of them 
are non-collinear and call them A, B, C, D;  
• 
with the instrument Segment draw the 6 edges; 
• 
with the instrument Triangle draw the 4 faces. 
4. Save the figure in a file and call it Quadrilateral in the space. 
5. With the instrument Redefinition of the menu Manipulation “extract” the vertex D from the 
plane as follows: click on D and release it, keep pressing  (Upper-case) on the keyboard and 
move the mouse up without clicking. From now on the four points A, B, C, D are not coplanar 

 
 
anymore.  
6. With the instrument Manipulation rotate the figure, by pressing the right click of the mouse 
and moving the mouse itself (as suggested in the Tool Help window). 
The figure you have obtained is a Tetrahedron, that we call T and 
the 4 vertices, the 6 edges and the 4 faces of the quadrilateral are 
now the vertices, the edges and the faces of T. 
Attention. If the figure, when you rotate it, does not look nice, you 
can move the starting vertices; in particular, if the 
tetrahedron appear “way too squeezed on the plane” we 
suggest you to move the point D such that his projection 
on the plane is close to or inside the face ABC (the 
projection of D is indicated when you move it). Finally, in 
order to have a better view of the figure you can change 
the colour or the curve radius (right click of the mouse) of the segments and of the 
faces, and, eventually, even the style (Edit/Preferences/...).  
7. Save this figure in a file and call it Tetrahedron.  
 
Definition. Two edges of a tetrahedron are said to be opposite if they do not have common 
vertices. 
Opposite edges of T are: …………………………………………... 
Definition. A vertex and a face of a tetrahedron are said to be opposite if the vertex does not 
belong to the face. 
For example the vertex A and the face ……… are opposite, the vertex opposite to the face ABC 
is … . 
Suggestion: rotate the figure so to see the “hidden” objects. 
Consider two opposite edges (AB and CD for example). You have already seen that the vertex 
D does not belong to the plane of A, B, C. Then you can conclude that two opposite edges of a 
tetrahedron belong to two lines that are:  
 intersecting  
 parallel 
 skew 
 
Here it follows, for example, Worksheet 2 (that corresponds to the second row of the table of 
contents). In the assignment, after introducing the concept of bimedian of a quadrilateral and of a 
tetrahedron, students study a property of their concurrency. Note that each one of the two 
worksheets consists of two parts: the first part (Part I) gives tips to students on how to discover and 
form conjectures on properties, whereas the second part (Part II) contains the statement of the 
theorem and a guided route to prove it. The same scheme is repeated in the other worksheets. 
 
Worksheet 2Q – Part I 
The bimedian of a quadrilateral 
Definition. We call bimedian of a quadrilateral Q the segment joining the midpoints of two 
opposite edges of Q. 
1. Open, with Cabri II, the file saved with the name Quadrilateral. 
2. With the instrument Label call M1, M2, M3, M4, M5, M6 the midpoints of the edges AB, BC, 
CD, DA, AC, BD, respectively.  
     There are three bimedians, two relative to pairs of opposite sides and one relative to the 

 
 
diagonals, i.e.: ………………………. 
Observation. The points M1 and M3 are distinct because 
they belong to opposite edges of the quadrilateral. For the 
same reason M2 and M4 are distinct. Instead, the points M5 
and M6 are not always distinct. In fact, since M5 and M6 are 
midpoints of the diagonals of the quadrilateral, they 
coincide if and only if the diagonals bisect each other, i.e. if 
and only if the quadrilateral is a ………………………. 
3. With the instrument Segment draw the bimedians M1M3 and 
M2M4. With the instrument Intersection Point(s) draw their 
meeting point and call it G.  
4. Draw the bimedian M5M6 and with the instrument Member? verify if G belongs to it. Using 
the mouse drag some of the vertices of the quadrilateral. Does the property still holds? 
     YES 
 
     NO 
5. Draw the two segments in which any of the three bimedians is divided by the point G and find 
their measures with the instrument Distance or Length. What do you observe? Using the 
mouse drag some of the vertices of the quadrilateral. Does the property still holds? 
    YES 
 
     NO 
Considering what you have discovered about the three bimedians and the point G, you can state 
the following 
Conjecture: 
……………………………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
 
Worksheet 2Q – Part II 
The bimedians of a quadrilateral 
In the previous worksheet you have discovered the following property that we will now prove: 
Theorem 1Q  
The three bimedians of a quadrilateral all pass through one point that bisects each bimedian. 
Proof. Consider a convex quadrilateral Q with vertices A, B, C, D. Let M1, M2, M3, M4, M5, M6 
be the midpoints of the edges AB, BC, CD, DA, AC, BD, 
respectively. 
The bimedians M1M3 and M2M4 of Q meet in a point G. 
Consider the quadrilateral M1M2M3M4.  
Prove that the segments M1M2 and M3M4 are parallel to each 
other.  
(Hint: consider the triangles ABC and ADC and prove that the 
segments M1M2 and M3M4 are parallel to AC). 
……………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………… 
• 
Analogously you can prove that the segments M2M3 and M1M4 are both parallel to BD and 
therefore they are parallel to each other.  
Then the quadrilateral M1M2M3M4 is a ………………… because ………………………… 
and the point G, being the common point to its diagonals, divides them in …………. parts. 
• 
Consider now the third bimedian M5M6 and the bimedian M2M4. Prove that they meet in 
their midpoint. 
……………………………………………………………………………………………….. 

 
 
…………………………………………………………………………………………………
• 
But the midpoint of the bimedian M2M4 is …, then … is the midpoint of M5M6 as well.  
Thus we can conclude that the three bimedians of Q all pass through G that bisect them.              
 
Definition. The common point G to the three bimedians of a quadrilateral is called centroid of 
the quadrilateral. 
 
Worksheet 2T – Part I 
The bimedians of a tetrahedron  
Definition. We call bimedian of a tetrahedron the segment joining the midpoints of two opposite 
edges of the tetrahedron. 
 
1. Open, with Cabri 3D, the file saved with the name Quadrilateral in the space. In analogy with 
what we have done in Worksheet 2Q (Part I), draw the midpoints M1, M2, M3, M4, M5, M6 of 
the edges AB, BC, CD, DA, AC, BD, respectively. Draw the 
three bimedians of the quadrilateral and dash them by choosing, 
with the right click of the mouse, curve style/Dash-line style. With 
the instrument Intersection Point(s) draw their meeting point and 
call it G. 
2. Extract the vertex D from the plane, by using the instrument 
Redefinition (click on D and release, keep on pressing  (Upper 
Case) and move the mouse up without clicking). Remember that 
you can move the vertices if the tetrahedron appear “way too 
squeezed on the plane”. In order to have a better view of the 
figure you can make transparent the faces of the tetrahedron (Manipulation, select the face, 
right click, Surface Style/Empty). 
 
The three segments M1M3, M2M4 and M5M6 are the bimedians of the tetrahedron.  
 
3. By rotating the figure you can observe that the bimedians keep meeting in G. With the mouse 
drag some of the vertices of the tetrahedron. Does the property still hold? 
     YES 
 
     NO 
4. Find the distance of G from the endpoints of any bimedian by using the instrument Distance. 
What do you observe? 
 .......................................................................................................................................................... 
5. Drag with the mouse some vertex. Does the property still hold? 
     YES 
 
     NO 
Considering what you have discovered about the three bimedians and the point G, you can state 
the following 
Conjecture: 
………………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………………………….... 
 
Worksheet 2T – Part II 
The bimedians of a tetrahedron 
In the previous worksheet you have discovered the following property that we will now prove: 
Theorem 1T 
The three bimedians of a tetrahedron all pass through one point that bisects each bimedian. 

 
 
Proof. Consider a tetrahedron with vertices A, B, C, D. Let M1, M2, M3, M4, M5, M6 be the 
midpoints of the edges AB, BC, CD, DA, AC, BD, respectively. 
• 
Prove that M1M2 and M3M4 are parallel to each other. 
……………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………… 
• 
Prove that the four points M1, M2, M3, M4 lie on the same plane. 
………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………… 
• 
Moreover the segments M2M3 and M1M4 are both parallel to 
BD. Therefore the quadrilateral M1M2M3M4 is a …………………………, because 
………………………………………….., and the point G, common point of the bimedians 
M1M3 and M2M4, is the midpoint of both of them because ………………….. . 
• 
In the same way you can prove that the bimedians M1M3 and M5M6 meet in their midpoint. 
But the midpoint of M1M3 is G, then G is the midpoint of M5M6 as well. 
Thus we can conclude that the three bimedians all pass through G that bisects them.                      
 
Definition. The common point G of the three bimedians of a tetrahedron is called centroid of 
the tetrahedron. 
 
Similar worksheets guide the students along the entire activity. Nevertheless, from the third 
worksheet the proofs of the properties of tetrahedra are not as guided as the analogous properties of 
quadrilaterals: this is because the proof is often very similar to the one students already did in the 
plane.  
At the end of each pair of worksheets students fill in a table, called Table of the Analogies. At the 
end of the entire activity, it will look like the Table of contents. This table enables students to have 
an overview of what they have done so far (you can e-mail the authors for a copy of the worksheets) 
 
3. Modalities of the experimentation  
The experimentation of the proposed sequence of activity was done at the Department of 
Mathematics and Computer Science of the University of Catania, between March and May 2010, 
and it was led by the Professors that wrote the worksheets. Twenty-three high school students got 
involved, 7 of them were attending the second year of their studies, whereas 7 of them were from 
the third year along with 9 coming from the fourth year; students of the last year were not invited to 
participate because busy in preparing finals. The students belonged to 6 different schools located 
within the Province of Catania: 5 Scientific Lyceums and 1 Classic Lyceum. The schools 
themselves selected their own best students; the selected students decided, on a voluntary base, 
whether or not enrolling for the course. The class met 6 times, once a week, for 2.5 hours in a 
computer laboratory, and each student had a computer to work with.  
At the first meeting an assessment of the geometry knowledge of the students was done, and the 
output was that none of them had ever done 3D geometry in high school. Then students were 
provided with the basic concepts of space geometry, and after that the activity started with the hand 
out of the first worksheet. Each meeting focused on carrying out two worksheets (Q and T) and the 
"table of analogies" according to the relative worksheets. 
At the end of each “lesson” the students' assignments were collected and copies were given back to 
them the following week. At the beginning of each session, except the first one, besides reviewing 

 
 
what they had previously studied during the last encounter, they could also check what kind of 
faults and errors the teachers had conveniently corrected.  
At the end of the course each student took an oral final exam. Two students missed out two classes 
and therefore were not allowed to take finals, whereas two of them did not want to take finals 
although they did not miss out any lessons. All the other students performed well at the oral exam 
with the professors in charge. 
 
4. Results of the experimentation 
We present here an analysis of the students’ assignments: we distinguish the worksheets on the 
exploration of the figure till the conjecture (Worksheets - Part I) from those on the proof of the 
property (Worksheets - Part II). 
 
4.1 Results on Worksheets Part I: Exploration and formulation of the conjectures  
All the students, with the guided exploration, are able to perceive the properties they were looking 
for. Difficulties arise, instead, when formulating conjectures. This is probably due to the fact that 
students are not well trained in writing about mathematics, in fact, this inability decreases along 
with practice. Percentage of mistake in conjecture’s formulation is 40% in Worksheet 2Q – Part I 
and lower in the following ones, while in Worksheet 4Q – Part I, in which students are asked to 
research a concurrency property on the axes of a quadrilateral, there are no mistakes at all. 
Recurrent examples of wrong formulation of the conjecture in Worksheet 2Q – Part I are: “The 
point G is the midpoint of the bimedians of a quadrilateral”; “The point G lies on the three 
bimedians and it is their midpoint”. Note that both formulations are well anchored to the exploring 
activity (that leads to determine point G) and they do not reach the degree of a general form: “The 
three bimedians of a quadrilateral all pass through one point that bisects each of them”. Later on 
during the activity students, after being helped to individuate the mistake, become able to formulate 
conjectures with higher degree of abstraction and generality.  
 
4.2 Results on Worksheets Part II: Proof of the properties 
At the point of having to prove the properties some difficulties arose. In some Worksheets (for 
example in Worksheet 2) the later elaboration of the proofs in space are sensibly clearer than those 
previously done in the planar case. In other worksheets this improvement does not take place. In 
Worksheet 3 this is probably due to the fact that the sheet contains no hints on the proof of the 
property (Commandino’s Theorem). Several students were not able to reproduce without 
imperfections the analogous proof that they had elaborated in the plane for the medians of a 
quadrilateral.  
In general, the mistakes that we have found in the proofs underline inability to follow a reasoning in 
depth (for example students do not worry to prove that some lines are coplanar, before saying that 
they intersect) and difficulties in visualizing objects (for example the mutual position of lines in the 
space). 
 
5. Final conclusions 
In order to make an overall evaluation of the whole activity, we submitted a questionnaire to the 
students and told them to fill it in anonymously. They handed it back in at their final exam. We had 
asked them to express their opinions about the topic they had developed during the course, as well 
as about the use of Cabri II Plus and Cabri 3D on the activity performed, and how, according to 
them, the whole activity was conducted, and their attitude towards geometry after the course.  
Here we give full details of some of their responses. 
 

 
 
5.1 Topic of the course 
We asked the students to express their opinions on the topic of the course, and particularly how they 
liked it, how hard it was, etc. 
“The topic of the course turned out to be suitable to the entire class, including those of the 
second year and the ones of the forth. It was adequately difficult”; 
“The topic of the course was extremely interesting, because it was completely new to me. It 
was not very difficult and the worksheets were rather exhaustive. I worked by myself without 
great difficulties”; 
“I enjoyed the topic of the course, because space geometry is not quite covered at school. I 
did not find the course to be so hard anyway”; 
“The topic of the course was easy, nice and exiting”; 
“At first I thought that the course would turn out to be boring, and then I changed my mind 
when I found out about the existing analogies of properties among geometric figures, 
apparently so different from each other, like quadrilaterals and tetrahedra”; 
“I enjoyed the analogy between quadrilaterals and tetrahedra of the two columns (Table of 
the analogies)”; 
“Some proofs were hard: they needed more hints”; 
“Sometimes we came across some difficulties that it was possible to overcome thanks to our 
teachers’ help”. 
 
5.2 Use of Cabri II Plus and Cabri 3D 
We asked the students to express opinions on the use of Cabri II Plus and Cabri 3D during the 
activity and in general about their use for the study of geometry. 
“Both Cabri II Plus and Cabri 3D were useful to understand geometry and to immediately 
and ‘manually’ experiment some concepts that otherwise would have not be clear”; 
“These software are user-friendly and very practical too”; 
“Thanks to Cabri II Plus and Cabri 3D it was easier for me to handle with figures, especially 
those in the space, also because we could rotate them. Moreover, the computer made drawing 
figures a lot faster and the entire activity more fun”; 
“Cabri II Plus and Cabri 3D were so essential for the carrying out of the course. I believe 
that without them the worksheets would have been a lot harder and boring”; 
“With Cabri you cannot prove a property. The good thing about it though is the sense of 
awareness provided by it of a geometric situation”. 
 
5.3 Development of the activity 
We asked the students to express their opinions on the way the activity was conducted and in 
particular on the worksheets. 
“The course was very well planned; the worksheets were always very easy to understand. I 
did like the fact that we started from just observing a property (and elaborating  the 
conjecture) ending up with the mathematical proof of what had been  observed”; 
“The method of alternating ‘guided working sheets’, where we were supposed to find out 
properties and elaborate conjectures, with ‘proving working sheets’ enabled me to play an 
active role in the whole process of learning, which is a completely new way for me to learn; 
at school  usually you listen to somebody talking and that is it”; 
“Sometimes it was a quite fast-paced type of class environment, and some of the worksheets 
provided gave me just a few tips for the actual achievement of final proofs”; 
“The entire activity was carried out with no pressure at all, which is always a good thing 
when dealing with such topics”; 

 
 
“The worksheets were good guidelines and made us understand how ‘to do’ geometry”; 
“The worksheets were good for formulating the conjecture; maybe they should have contained 
more tips for proving the properties”; 
“The review part of a previous lesson at each session worked out very well for all of us”. 
 
5.3 Attitude towards geometry 
We asked the students whether their attitude towards geometry had changed after the activity, and 
in particular towards 3D geometry. 
“I found out that space geometry is a lot easier than I thought”; 
“I observed that [space geometry] uses always the same plane geometry theorems”; 
“I did not have a very deep understanding of 3D geometry other than what I studied in middle 
school, so my approach to the discipline got definitely improved. I particularly enjoyed 
learning how to analyze problems in the space, which is probably the most important thing 
I’ve learned”; 
“After this course my attitude towards geometry is more mature, so I guess my viewpoint has 
also changed and I  liked this challenge, it’s more like a ‘game now’”; 
“After the course, I must admit that I’m much more fascinated by geometry. Besides, the 
course made me understand concepts and definitions that were too fast for me to pick up and 
not very clear in my mind”. 
 
References 
[1] Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York, Freeman. 
[2] Altshiller-Court, N. (1964). Modern pure solid geometry. New York, Chelsea Publishing 
Company. 
[3] Coxeter, H.S.M., and Greitzer, S.L. (1967). Geometry revisited. Washington, D.C., The 
Mathematical Association of America. 
[4] Honsberger, R., (1995). Episodes in nineteenth and twentieth century Euclidean geometry. 
Washington, D.C., The mathematical Association of America.  
[5] Mammana, M.F., Margarone, D., Micale, B., Pennisi, M., and Pluchino, S. (2009). Dai 
quadrilateri ai tetraedri: alla ricerca di sorprendenti analogie. Catania, Casa Editrice La 
Tecnica della Scuola. 
[6] Mammana, M.F., and Micale, B. (2008). Quadrilaterals of triangle centers. The 
Mathematical Gazette, vol. 92, n. 525, 466-475. 
[7] Mammana, M.F., Micale, B., and Pennisi, M. (2008). On the centroids of polygons and 
polyhedra. Forum Geometricorum, vol. 8, 121-130. 
[8] Mammana, M.F., Micale, B., and Pennisi, M. (2009). Quadrilaterals and Thetraedra. 
International Journal of Mathematical Education in Science and Technology, Vol. 40, 6, 
817-828. 
[9] Mammana M.F., and Pennisi M. (2009). A class practice to improve student's attitude 
towards mathematics. Proceedings of the 10th International Conference "Models in 
Developing Mathematics Education". Dresden: Dresden University of Applied Sciences, 
vol. 1, 395-398. 
[10] Micale, B., and Pennisi, M. (2005). On the altitudes of quadrilaterals. International 
Journal of Mathematical Education in Science and Technology, vol. 36, n.1, 2005, 15-24.  
[11] MPI (2003). Matematica 2003. La matematica per il cittadino. Lucca, Matteoni 
stampatore. 
[12] Polya, G. (1957). How to solve it. Princeton University Press. 
 

