 
 
Star Formation in Early‐Type Galaxies
Author(s): Gustavo Bruzual
Source: Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, Vol. 110, No. 753
(November 1998), pp. 1375-1376
Published by: Astronomical Society of the Pacific
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/316265
Accessed: 28-02-2023 13:21 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
Astronomical Society of the Pacific is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and
extend access to Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:21:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

1375
Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc, 110:1375–1376, 1998 November
 1998. The Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc. All rights reserved. Printed in U.S.A.
Conference Highlights
Star Formation in Early-Type Galaxies1
Gustavo Bruzual
Centro de Investigaciones de Astronomı´a (CIDA), Me´rida, Venezuela
The proceedings of this meeting will provide a great deal of
information concerning current views on early-type galaxies,
covering a broader perspective than their star formation history
(SFH).
Throughout
the
meeting,
three
questions
were
continuously posed by the speakers: (1) Do we need a new
deﬁnition of early-type galaxies? (2) Are normal E galaxies
those in clusters or in the ﬁeld? and (3) Where do all these
data ﬁt in?
Contrary to early beliefs, the notion that early-type galaxies
may belong to different families is gaining increasing support.
Observational evidence indicates that there are wide ranges of
values allowed for most properties observed in early-type
galaxies (e.g., luminosity, radius, density, isophotal shape,
brightness proﬁle, central vs. global properties, surface
brightness
variations,
stellar
populations,
merger
and
interaction history, etc.). Both age and metallicity seem to vary
along the early-type galaxy sequence, with most luminous
ellipticals being the oldest and most metal-rich systems. The
observed
points to a nonhomologous
0.12
0.15
M/L ∝M
–M
formation process, with differences in SFH among mergers.
More luminous ellipticals may form from mergers of more
massive spirals, resulting in higher star formation rates (SFRs)
as well as stronger color and metallicity gradients in these
systems. Solar scale abundance ratios are inconsistent with the
observations: Mg and other a elements are enhanced with
respect to solar values. The presence of dark matter, less
concentrated than the luminous matter, seems well established
in most ellipticals. However, NGC 404 seems to have no dark
matter!
Early-type galaxies have an ISM that is reminiscent of later
types. Hot, warm, cool, and cold gas and dust have been
detected in these galaxies. In general, the amount of gas
detected is less than expected from stellar evolution during
. S0 and pE galaxies show a 45% detection rate of H i
1
H0
(accreted disk?), whereas normal E galaxies show only a 5%
detection rate. CO has been detected in 40% of E galaxies,
including pE galaxies. The amount of molecular gas in some
dE galaxies is higher than expected from their H i content. H
i is centrally concentrated in low-mass E-type galaxies but not
in gE galaxies. Star formation has been detected in some
galaxies with an unusually high central density of H i. In most
1 The conference was held in Guanajuanto, Mexico, in 1998 July. Proceed-
ings will be edited by P. Carral and J. Cepa and will be published in the ASP
Conference Series.
cases, H i seems distributed in old, relaxed disks with too low
a surface density for star formation to occur.
A large proportion of elliptical galaxies shows Ha in
emission associated with dust clouds and dust lanes. The Ha
emission is strongly correlated with
inside the Ha-emitting
LB
region, which indicates a stellar origin for the ionizing photons.
The intensity of Ha also correlates with the amount of dust.
The gas and dust are not correlated with the stellar distribution,
which may point to an external origin of the gas and dust
component. If the gas is produced locally, it should have the
same metallicity as the stars (this is not clear yet). A signiﬁcant
number of S0 galaxies have H ii regions forming stars at rates
10-100 times lower than in spirals; chemical abundances are
high, and the galaxies appear normal in correlations. S0
galaxies seem to ﬁt into the low end of the Hubble sequence.
But why is the SFR so low in S0 galaxies (fading away vs.
cutoff)? A large fraction of E galaxies in groups shows emission
lines (≈80% in HCG 90 vs. 5% in the ﬁeld), which indicates
that dynamical interactions are going on in these groups.
Most ellipticals are bright in X-rays. A soft component is
produced by hot gas with AZFeS less than solar, and Si/Fe ≈
. X-ray binaries are responsible for the hard component.
solar
X-ray
emission
may
indicate
evaporation
ﬂows.
The
enrichment and chemical evolution of the intracluster medium
are not well understood. Standard CDM models do not
reproduce the observed
proﬁles.
T  j
Despite
all
these
differences,
the
scatter
about
the
fundamental plane (FP) remains remarkably low. The reason
for this is not clear on theoretical grounds, but the thinness of
the FP must constrain the various processes that lead to the
formation of early-type galaxies. An increase in the slope of
the FP from U to K has been detected, in agreement with passive
evolution predictions.
The population of globular clusters (GCs) traces the SFH in
cluster galaxies. gE galaxies show multiple populations of GCs,
mostly formed at early times. Intermediate E galaxies show
one distinctive GC population, whereas isolated E galaxies
seem to show no GCs (mergers?). The bulk of the stellar
population in Local Cluster E galaxies is old, but the last epoch
of star formation is not strongly constrained. Observations of
intermediate-z
clusters show that some galaxies evolve
passively, but these clusters contain a larger fraction of blue
galaxies. What happened to the descendants of these Butcher-
Oemler galaxies? Fundamental relations, such as the FP and
the color-magnitude relation, set limits on the postformation
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:21:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

1376
BRUZUAL
1998 PASP, 110:1375–1376
SFR. The hierarchical galaxy formation model is favored in
low-density environments (ﬁeld), whereas for cluster galaxies,
this model works equally as well as other galaxy formation
scenarios.
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:21:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

