 
 
Galaxy Dynamics
Author(s): David Merritt and  Monica Valluri
Source: Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, Vol. 111, No. 756 (February
1999), pp. 247-248
Published by: Astronomical Society of the Pacific
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/316311
Accessed: 28-02-2023 13:16 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
Astronomical Society of the Pacific is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and
extend access to Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

247
Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc, 111:247–248, 1999 February
 1999. The Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc. All rights reserved. Printed in U.S.A.
Conference Highlights
Galaxy Dynamics1
Rutgers University hosted a conference on Galaxy Dynamics
from 1998 August 8 to 12 in Piscataway, New Jersey. The
Scientiﬁc and Local Organizing Committees were chaired by
David Merritt and Monica Valluri, respectively. Roughly 200
astronomers from 23 countries attended. Social events included
a barbeque at the University’s Log Cabin and a banquet at
which David Malin presented an engrossing and entertaining
slide show of deep-sky photographs.
The program consisted of 21 invited talks, 32 contributed
talks, and about 125 posters. The meeting was dedicated to the
memory of Martin Schwarzschild, and the opening talk by D.
Merritt was a review of his contributions to galactic dynamics.
The major topics covered were galactic nuclei and black holes,
elliptical galaxies, dark matter, disk galaxies and the Milky
Way, and galaxy formation. A panel discussion, arranged by
J. Sellwood, was held one evening during which 10 participants
gave informal short presentations of their views on dark matter
or black holes followed by a lively exchange with the audience.
The ﬁrst day focused on galactic nuclei. J. Kormendy re-
viewed the observations. He discussed the dichotomy between
galaxies with steep nuclear light proﬁles and those with more
corelike proﬁles and argued that the latter were signatures of
an as yet undiscovered physical process. He noted that stellar-
kinematical determinations of black hole masses have remained
remarkably robust in spite of a substantial increase in resolu-
tion. W. Jaffe discussed Hubble Space Telescope observations
of nuclear gas disks and stressed the poor state of our knowl-
edge about their origins and lifetimes. He pointed out that the
currently most secure measurements of black hole masses are
in galaxies with such disks. He emphasized the poor correlation
between the masses of the black holes and their host spheroids.
S. Tremaine discussed a number of topics related to collision-
less dynamics of nuclei, noting that the relaxation time in all
but the densest stellar cusps exceeds the age of the universe.
He focused in particular on nuclear stellar disks and discussed
the wide range in their possible dynamical states, from fully
self-gravitating in the case of the most massive disks to nearly
Keplerian in disks in which the force is dominated by the central
black hole. R. Blandford reviewed current thinking on the for-
mation of supermassive black holes. He emphasized the ne-
cessity of growing black holes on a very short timescale and
noted that black holes could provide a signiﬁcant feedback
mechanism during galaxy formation.
1 Conference was held in Piscataway, NJ, in 1998 August. Proceedings will
be edited by D. Merritt, J. Sellwood, and M. Valluri and published in the ASP
Conference Series.
The second day was opened by R. Bender who reviewed
observations of elliptical galaxy structure. He showed that the
dichotomy in core properties, discussed previously by J. Kor-
mendy, was reﬂected in isophotal shapes and kinematics but
not in the fundamental plane or metallicities. D. Merritt re-
viewed our current understanding of triaxiality, noting the im-
portance of nonintegrability in realistic triaxial potentials. He
suggested that the masses of nuclear black holes were limited
by the value—roughly 2% the mass of their host sphe-
roids—that permitted signiﬁcant triaxiality in the stars. M. Val-
luri discussed recent developments in techniques for torus con-
struction. J. Touma presented work on the structure of orbits
very near the center of a triaxial galaxy containing a black
hole. The Keplerian potential from the black hole enforces near-
integrability in the motion throughout the nucleus, but the or-
bital shapes are not conducive to reproducing a nonaxisym-
metric mass distribution, which suggests that most nuclei may
be axisymmetric. H. Kandrup discussed mechanisms for col-
lisionless relaxation, emphasizing that a number of physical
processes that astronomers have traditionally viewed as dis-
tinct—including phase mixing, Landau damping, and “violent
relaxation”—can usefully be viewed as variations of a single
phenomenon.
Dark matter, faint structures, and low surface brightness
(LSB) galaxies were discussed on the second and third days.
D. Malin presented results from a survey of bright, nearby
galaxies revealing that a moderate fraction have large-scale
extended features in images that reach surface brightness limits
of 28 mag arcsec2. These features are probably indicative of
past mergers or tidal interactions. A. Bosma reviewed H i ob-
servations relevant to the mass distribution in disk galaxies.
He emphasized that rotation curves exhibit a wide variety of
shapes and that, in most cases, there is little evidence of a disk-
halo conspiracy. J. Sellwood summarized a number of lines of
evidence suggesting that most of the mass in the inner parts
of high surface brightness (HSB) galaxies resides in stars, not
dark matter. It follows that dark matter halos must have large
cores, in contradiction to recent claims from cosmological sim-
ulations. C. Pryor reviewed evidence for dark matter in dwarf
galaxies. He discussed, and rejected as inadequate, models that
attribute the large velocity dispersions in these systems to tides
from the Milky Way. P. Sackett reviewed the various ways in
which the shape of the dark matter distribution around galaxies
can be constrained. The most robust estimates pertain to the
in-plane axis ratio, which appears to generally exceed b/a ≈
, and the vertical ﬂattening, which is of order
in
0.7
c/a ≈0.5
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

248
MERRITT & VALLURI
1999 PASP, 111:247–248
the most securely measured cases. She noted that such mod-
erately ﬂattened, oblate conﬁgurations are consistent with N-
body simulations containing a dissipational component. T.
Bridges summarized studies in which the kinematics of “hot”
tracers, including globular clusters, planetary nebulae, and
stars, were used to constrain the large-radius distribution of
dark matter around galaxies. Sample sizes in many galaxies
now approach 103 objects, which allows simultaneous estimates
both of the orbital anisotropy and potential. E. de Blok and S.
McGaugh reviewed the structure and dynamics of LSB gal-
axies. De Blok empasized the degree to which LSB galaxies
appear to be dark matter–dominated; the halos of these galaxies
seem to have lower density than those of HSB galaxies. In one
of the most stimulating talks of the meeting, S. McGaugh ar-
gued that modiﬁed dynamics (MOND) provided the most par-
simonious explanation for the dynamics of these systems.
The fourth day focused on disk galaxies, particularly the
Milky Way. O. Gerhard and P. Englmaier summarized recent
work on the structure and dynamics of the Milky Way with an
emphasis on the inner Galaxy and its bar. J. Binney and W.
Dehnen presented preliminary results on solar neighborhood
kinematics from the Hipparcos data. A photometrically com-
plete sample of ∼104 stars now exists with both good measured
parallaxes and proper motions. From these data, one can de-
termine the velocity of the LSR and the age of the solar neigh-
borhood fairly precisely. The density of stars in velocity space
appears
to
be
signiﬁcantly
more
complex
than
the
Schwarzschild distribution and may be affected by the Galactic
bar. A. Ghez presented a sample of 90 stars within approxi-
mately 3 of the Galaxy’s center with accurately measured
proper motions. The peaks of the stellar suface density and the
velocity dispersion are consistent with the position of Sgr A*.
The velocity dispersion falloff is well ﬁtted by a Keplerian
curve
implying
a
central
dark
mass
of
(2.6  0.2) #
.
6
10 M,
Galaxy formation and evolution were discussed on the fourth
and ﬁfth days. J. Barnes summarized N-body work on mergers
between disk galaxies, with and without dissipational com-
ponents representing gas. He emphasized the strong effect that
a small amount of gas can have on the ﬁnal shape of a merger
remnant, converting it from triaxial to axisymmetric. J. Primack
discussed cosmological simulations of structure formation in
the universe, with a focus on dark matter halos. He presented
results from his group that indicate an approximately power-
law dependence of the density on radius near the halo centers,
with
. R. Ellis reviewed our understanding of the star
0.3
r ∼r
formation history of the universe based on HST imaging and
Keck spectroscopy. He discussed the evidence that the bulk of
star formation in galaxies is recent but cautioned that high-
redshift galaxies could be obscured by dust.
A large fraction of the talks dealt with questions relating to
supermassive black holes: their origin, their inﬂuence on ga-
lactic structure, and their role in galaxy formation. The answers
to these important questions are still mostly tentative, and it
was clear to conference participants that for this and many
other reasons, galaxy dynamics would continue to be an active
and exciting ﬁeld for the forseeable future.
David Merritt and Monica Valluri
Rutgers University
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

