© 1987 Nature Publishing Group
_NATU_RE_VOL_. 
327_25 
JU_NE 1_987 -SCIENTIRC CORRESPONDENCE--------==663 
How many nuclear reactor 
accidents? 
SIR-My complaint' about Islam and 
Lindgren's procedure' for estimating the 
probability of a future nuclear accident 
was that they had ignored the distinction 
between 
probability 
and 
likelihood, 
thereby committing a logical error which 
had led them to estimate the probability 
with unjustified precision. 
Subsequent correspondents have not 
taken this point. Schwartz' integrated the 
normalized likelihood function in order to 
obtain what he called a "confidence 
limit", implicitly adopting a bayesian 
approach with a uniform prior distribution 
for r, the rate parameter of the Poisson 
process. 
Frohner' suggested that I had dis-
regarded "the correct prior" when in fact 
my point was that no prior is correct, and 
that it is wrong to apply bayesian methods 
to this problem. 
Chow and Oliver' stated that I had im-
plicitly used a uniform prior distribution 
for P = l-e-d , the probability of one or 
more accidents in T reactor-years, "which 
is equally dubious" (that is, as dubious as 
using a uniform prior for r). But I did no 
such thing, and once again there has been 
a failure to distinguish between likelihood 
and probability. (They went on to con-
sider further information which was not in 
the specification of the original problem 
and on which I will not comment here.) 
I must emphasize that a graph of a log-
likelihood or 'support' function such as I 
presented is not a probability distribution, 
cannot be integrated, and does not 
depend on any bayesian prior distribu-
tion. Likelihood analysis has a long his-
tory", stretching back well before the 
recent resurgence of bayesianism which is 
sweeping through physics. The reactor 
example is an excellent one for clarifying 
the difference between the two types of 
analysis. 
Frohner mistook what the argument is 
about. It is not about how to choose an 
"uninformative" prior (by using "modern 
techniques for the assignment of prior 
probabilities which have a solid founda-
tion in either group theory or information 
theory"), but about whether it is justifi-
able to use a probability distribution to 
represent ignorance at all. Nothing in 
group theory or information theory 
addresses this vital point. 
R. A. Fisher' stated in this connection 
that "no experimenter would feel he had a 
warrant for arguing as if he knew that of 
which in fact he was ignorant." Bayesian 
risk analysis is contaminated by this logi-
cal fallacy. Physicists have been seduced 
by its extreme elegance and simplicity, 
those quite proper arbiters of physical 
theories; but theories of inductive infer-
ence are not to be selected on such 
grounds. 
Bayesian risk analysis is but Laplace's 
Rule of Succession cloaked with the mod-
ern trappings of group theory and infor-
mation theory, but it is no better founded 
than it was in 1854 when George Boole8 
observed that the appearance of the arbi-
trary constants which are characteristic of 
bayesian theory "seems to imply, that 
definite solution is impossible, and to 
mark the point where inquiry ought to 
stop." 
Surely the last thing to which we should 
apply doubtful logic is the recurrence risk 
of nuclear accidents. 
A. W. F. EDWARDS 
Department of Community Medicine, 
University of Cambridge, 
Fenner's, Gresham Road, 
Cambridge CBl 2ES, UK 
J. Edwards, A.W.F. Nature 324, 417-418 (1986). 
2. Islam, S. & Lindgren, K. Nature 322, 691-692 (1986). 
3. Schwartz. J. Nature 324,622 (1986). 
4. Frohner, F.H. Nature 326, 834 (1987). 
5. Chow, T.e. & Oliver, RM. Nature 327,211--21 (1987). 
6. Edwards, A. W.F. Likelihood (Cambridge University Press, 
1984). 
7. Fisher. R.A. Statistical Methods and Scientific Inference 
(Oliver & Boyd, Edinburgh , 1956). 
R. Boole, G. An Investigation afthe Laws of Thought (Walton 
& Maberly, London, 1854). 
Schrodinger and What is 
Life? 
SIR-In his commentary (Nature 326, 
555-558; 1987) on Schrodinger's book, 
What is Life? Max Perutz concluded that 
"a close study of the book and of the re-
lated literature has shown me that what 
was true in his book was not original, and 
most of what was original was known not 
to be true even when it was written". 
Furthermore, "In retrospect the chief 
merit of What is Life? is its popularization 
of the Timofeeff, Zimmer and Delbruck 
paper that would otherwise have re-
mained unknown outside the areas of 
geneticists and radiation biologists". As 
someone who spent some years around 
1950 working with both Schrodinger and 
Delbriick, I would like to comment briefly 
on these strong criticisms, which are quite 
wrong in my view. 
In What is Life?, Schrodinger managed 
in a slim volume to resurrect the ideas of 
Timofeeff, Zimmer and Delbriick, indi-
cating that genes must be considered as 
large molecules, to liken these molecules 
to an aperiodic crystal, to introduce the 
idea of a genetic code, and to discuss some 
of the thermodynamic problems posed by 
these ideas with regard to the stability of 
living systems, Not all the ideas may have 
been original, or all strictly correct (after 
all Schrodinger was a physicist discussing 
biological problems) but what the book 
did was to formulate these ideas in such a 
way that they gave a sense of excitement 
about the future perspectives of biology to 
established biologists as well as to non-
biologists, students and laymen. This is 
the chief merit of the book and the reason 
why it has become one of the few classic 
volumes in popular science. 
This ability to conjure up vivid imagery, 
and Perutz's failure to appreciate its 
merit, is reflected in that part of his com-
mentary which deals with Schrodinger's 
introduction of the "famous hypothesis 
that the gene is a linear one-dimensional 
crystal, but lacking a periodic repeat: an 
aperiodic crystal". Perutz goes on to 
wonder why Schrodinger did not adhere 
to Delbriick's much better formulation of 
"a polymeric entity that arises by the rep-
etition of identical atomic structures". The 
reason seems clear. Schrodinger's presen-
tation was aimed at a wide audience and 
created a picture that even today manages 
to stimulate new readers. Delbruck was 
writing a scientific paper, and although his 
version was possibly more correct it was 
also eminently forgettable. 
Where Schrodinger admittedly did go 
wrong was in the arguments that led him 
to postulate that" Living matter, while not 
eluding the laws of physics as established 
to date, is likely to involve other laws of 
physics hitherto unknown which, how-
ever, once they have been revealed, will 
form as integral a part of this science as the 
former". It is important, however, to real-
ize that this conclusion was not based, as 
implied by Perutz, on the supposedly un-
predictably erratic behaviour of a small 
molecule such as a gene, but on the prob-
lem of biological order, by which in 
Schrodinger's words, "a single group of 
atoms existing only in one copy produces 
orderly events, marvellously tuned in with 
each other and with the environment 
according 
to 
most 
subtle 
laws". 
Schrodinger's contribution to the debate 
on order in biological systems has been 
discussed by Jacob (The Logic of Living 
Systems, Ch. 5, Allen Lane, 1974), and 
more recently in a perceptive review by 
Yoxen (Hist. Sci. 17,17-52; 1979). 
The idea that new physical laws might 
be needed in order to explain the be-
haviour of living systems was not unique 
to Schrodinger and persisted for a long 
time after the publication of What is Life? 
In 1958 I was working at the Massachu-
setts Institute of Technology, and Bohr, 
who was then 73, came and gave a special 
series of lectures ranging over physics and 
philosophy. As part of the festivities, Del-
briick (who was viewed with varying de-
grees of adulation, affection and awe by 
scores of scientists who had been at the 
California Institute of Technology) was 
asked to deliver a lecture dealing with 
Bohr's influence on biology. In this 
lecture Delbriick (who was a disciple of 
Bohr) first reviewed the then current re-
search of Benzer on the fine-structure 
analysis of the rII genes of phage T4, and 
went on to argue that as the analysis de-

© 1987 Nature Publishing Group
-664--------------SCIENTIRC CORRESPONDENCE-------N-ATU---'--R-E-VO-'---L--'--. =32---,7 2=-5.:....:JU:..:...N=E..:..:19=87 
veloped even further any satisfactory 
genetic theory would have to invoke a new 
type of biological uncertainty principle. In 
the discussion which followed Bohr stood 
up, and much in the manner used in semi-
nars so often by Delbriick, stated simply 
"I don't believe a word of it". 
NEVILLE SYMONDS 
School of Biological Sciences, 
University of Sussex, 
Falmer. Brighton BNI9IG. UK 
Influenza viruses and 
comets 
SIR-Henderson 
et al.' congratulate 
themselves in the belief that they have 
demolished our hypothesis that influenza 
viruses may be connected with comets'. 
Their argument, ostensibly based on 
phylogeny, is contingent on constraints 
that they themselves have imposed. Con-
sequently, their conclusions have no rel-
evance to our original cometary model. 
The assumption that "the simplest comet 
model is that different isolates of HI 
influenza are carried on different comets, 
having developed independently . . . " is 
not one to which we ourselves would sub-
scribe, nor are any of the subsidiary postu-
lates they consider. 
Contrary to the statement that there is a 
lack of a "slow-mixing compartment in 
the atmosphere" , we have repeatedly 
shown that viral-sized particles introduced 
into the upper atmosphere from outside 
have a residence time of a decade or more. 
Such particles are pulled down seasonally, 
following closely the patterns of atmos-
pheric circulation on a global scale. 
Seasonal influenza peaks separated by six 
months in opposite hemispheres are fully 
consistent with this picture. 
There is no requirement in our model 
for viral additions from comets to take 
place any more frequently than about 
once a decade, corresponding to the 
observed major genetic shifts in the 
influenza virus. The more frequently 
occurring changes (designated genetic 
drift), which are essentially what Hender-
son et al. have mapped, are in our view no 
more than a sorting out of an initial viral 
mix according to developing immunities in 
host populations. 
With each cometary inoculation a wide 
range of closely related viral sequences 
will be introduced into the upper atmos-
phere to be pulled down subsequently to 
ground level. The immunity systems of 
host species are thus confronted on a sea-
sonal basis with a range of viral genotypes, 
but only one or two would be permitted to 
'take' in any particular season. Such a 
selective 
response of the lymphoid 
system, which is the basis of the immune 
mechanism, would appear to be well 
documented. As immunity evolves, influ-
enza sub-types circulating earlier will be-
come replaced in subsequent seasons by 
sub-types that would appear to be slightly 
altered. 
The 
'evolutionary' 
changes 
charted by Henderson et al. are therefore 
irrelevant to the evolution of the virus but 
are connected with a progressive develop-
ment of immune responses in host species. 
Next, it is worth noting that the number 
of independent comets responsible for 
carrying the influenza virus need not be as 
large as it has been assumed. We have 
recently speculated that emissions from 
different parts of the same comet occur-
ring in different transits may contribute 
to inoculations that lead to the observed 
genetic shifts'. 
The strongest evidence against a purely 
Earth-bound theory of influenza is to be 
found in data that in our view goes de-
cisively against a simple person-to-person 
transmission hypothesis. All the available 
epidemiological evidence is consistent 
with a model where the causative agent 
(or a trigger for it) is airborne and is 
brought down seasonally from a reservoir 
established in the stratosphere'. 
F. HOYLE 
N.C. WICKRAMASINGHE 
University College, PO Box 78, 
Cardi/fCFlIXL, UK 
I. Henderson.I.M .. Penny. D. & Hendy. M.D. Nature 326. 22 
(1987). 
2. Hoyle, F. & Wickramasinghe. C. Diseases from Space 
(Dent. London. 1979). 
3. Hoyle. F. l.R. Soc. Med. 79. 691 (1986). 
4. Hoyle. F .. Wickramasinghe. C. & Watkins. J. Viruses/rom 
Space (Universi'y College Cardiff Press. 1986). 
Values in Taylor's law of 
spatial distribution 
SIR-Downing' 
has 
recently 
recom-
mended that the values of b in Taylor's'-' 
empirical law s' = am", describing the 
relationship between the sample variance 
s' and the sample mean m of the numbers 
of animals or plants of a species, obtained 
from groups of replicate samples, should 
not be used in comparing different mech-
anisms underlying the spatial distribution 
of natural populations, owing to statistical 
bias. However, if different probability 
models lead to different ranges of values 
of the parameter {3 in a relationship of 
the form a' =:: aJ.l, where J.l and a' 
denote the true (population) mean and 
variance of the counts within a group 
rather than their sample estimates, it may 
nonetheless be pertinent to use {3 as a 
basis for distinguishing between models. 
Downing uses the slope of a linear regres-
sion of log s' against log m as his estimator 
b of {3, and this may well be a biased 
procedure. However, the estimator b is 
not the only estimator of {3 to be used in 
the literature" nor does bias in b preclude 
the existence of more reliable estimators 
of (3. Indeed, simply applying bias-
correcting techniques to b, such as the 
jack-knife or bootstrap, might be expect-
ed to yield better results. Furthermore, 
the bias of potential estimators of {3 in 
small studies could be directly investi-
gated, by examining their performance 
when used with randomly chosen subsets 
of the large datasets for Papillia japon-
icum and Pyrausta nubilalis discussed by 
Downing'. 
Choosing the correct model underlying 
spatial distribution is a difficult problem; 
distinguishing between parameters and 
their estimates, as elsewhere' in ecology, 
at least makes the problem clearer. 
A.D. BARBOUR 
lnstitut fii.r Angewandte Mathematik, 
Universitiit Zii.rich, Riimistrasse 74, 
CH-8001 Zii.rich, Switzerland 
1. Downing. J.A. Nature 32J. 25>-257 (1986). 
2. Bliss. c. l. l . Econ. Em. 34.221-231 (1941) . 
3. Taylor. L.R. in Stati.<tical Ecology Vol. 1 (eds Pati!o 
G.P .• Pielou. E.C. & Waters. W.E.) 352-372 (Penn-
sylvania University Press. 1969). 
4. Taylor. L.R.. Woiwod. J.P. & Perry. J.N. 1. Anim. 
Ecol. 47. 383-406 (1978). 
5. Schatzmann. E .• Gerrard. R. & Barbour. A.D. IMA l. 
Math. appl. Med. Bioi. 3.99- 113 (1986). 
Against 'pragmatype' 
SIR-The problem experienced by R. H. 
L. Disney (Nature 326,251; 1987) is real 
and encountered by many fellow re-
searchers. A type specimen has to ensure 
the continued and correct recognition of 
members of sibling species groups too. 
The problem is, what procedure should 
be followed if the holotype of the first 
described species of the complex could be 
assigned with certainty to any of the newly 
discovered siblings. It is true that a new 
suitably preserved specimen has to be 
selected, but do we need a new type of 
category for this? The International Code 
of Zoological Nomenclature (Vol. 163, 
Recommendation 75E; 1985) suggests the 
nomination of neotypes in the case of 
nomina dubia even if type specimens of 
the nominal species exist. 
But do we need to create a new type 
category, such as Disney's suggested 
'pragmatype', to mark such specimens? 
After all, the holotype of Megaselia puli-
caria (Fallen) on a pin was in its time as 
much a pragmatic designation as the same 
on a slide today. Moreover, the new slide 
preparation would become an impedi-
ment to sensible decisions itself as soon as 
somebody splits the same taxon further, 
based on for example electrophoretic 
characters. A new type would have to be 
designated again, and if we are consistent 
yet again under a new type category. 
The code covers exactly this and similar 
situations. It is recommended that neo-
types should be designated for nomina 
dubia if, despite the existence of a holo-
type or a lectotype, it is not possible to 
resolve a complex zoological problem. 
I think our problem and the aims of 
zoological nomenclature are best served 
by following the offered solution. 
S.ENDRODY-YOUNGA 
Transvaal Museum, 
PO Box4J3, 
Pretoria 0001, South Africa 

