BOOK REVIEWS 
Uncommonly 
interesting 
Paul Colinvaux 
Rarity. By K. J. Gaston. Chapman and 
Hall: 1994. Pp. 205. £17.95 (pbk). 
'RARE' is a term usually used by collectors 
to mean "I have got one and you haven't". 
Rarity is thus desirable, as reflected in one 
of its definitions in the Oxford English 
Dictionary: "thing valued as being rare". 
Biologists are not immune to this human 
foible, rejoicing in a rare bird or an 
unexpected species in the collecting net. 
But for Gaston, in what is apparently 
the first monograph on biological rarity, 
'rarity' merely means of low abundance or 
of small range, or both. The rare are 
ubiquitous, an inevitable part of any com-
munity. This abundance, as it were, of the 
rare is what makes rare species interest-
ing. Why are certain species rare? Do 
ecosystems need them? Are they success-
ful as a species? Is rarity a sign of impend-
ing extinction? 
Frank Preston made a fundamental 
observation in his paper "The Common-
ness and Rarity of Species" (Ecology 29, 
254; 1948) by showing that the distribution 
of relative abundance is log-normal. This 
implies underlying randomness. Subse-
quent attempts to find more subtle pat-
terns of relative abundance have left few 
traces. Robert MacArthur's "broken 
stick" model, in which resources of a 
community are allocated as if by the 
random breaking of a stick into bits of 
unequal length, yields distributions of 
relative abundance that are themselves 
functions of the log-normal. Joel Cohen's 
variant of the broken stick theme, the 
"balls and buckets" model, in which 
population size is allocated by the ran-
dom, sequential throwing of coloured 
balls into an army of buckets, yields a 
similar echo of the log-normal. No other 
models have fired the imaginations of 
ecologists as did the broken stick. 
Gaston believes that interesting ques-
tions remain to be answered. He offers 
no new model or theory of rarity, nor is 
the history of the broken stick and its allies 
mentioned. Instead he begins a quest 
for properties of the rare that can be 
measured. 
Definition is a major problem, and 
Gaston devotes his first chapter to it. He 
concludes that we have no alternative 
but to assign an arbitrary proportion of 
species present as rare, essentially the 
x per cent of species that have lowest 
abundance or smallest range. Five per 
cent of total abundance, biomass or range 
usually provides plenty of species in the 
'rare' category. 
With the rare so defined, Gaston takes a 
666 
population 
biologist's 
approach 
to 
measuring both the rare and the prop-
erties that might account for their rarity. 
Obstacles are formidable. The very rare 
almost cannot be counted, as when Eric 
Pianka noted that it takes a hundred 
person-days to find one specimen of a rare 
lizard. And to measure the area occupied 
by species with patchy distributions prob-
ably needs the use of fractals. 
To investigate the causes of rarity by 
measurement, as the author wishes, with-
out hypotheses of rarity to test, is more 
difficult still. Measuring arrays of en-
vironmental factors becomes uncom-
fortably reminiscent of older schools of 
plant-community analysis, where the aim 
was to explain plant distributions as con-
sequences of physical parameters of en-
vironments alone. 
Gaston 
describes 
several 
possible 
causes of rarity: endemism, individuals at 
range boundaries, vagrancy, the lows of 
fluctuating populations, restricted disper-
sal or establishment, as well as the pseudo-
rarity that results from limits to our pow-
ers of detection. He dismisses the concept 
that some species remain rare because of 
restricted niche opportunities, because in 
the few examples where many resources 
have been measured, he is unable to find 
any correlation between resource and 
relative abundance. 
As one who once tried to introduce 
Raymond Lindeman's concept of effici-
ency of energy transfer between trophic 
levels with an essay called "Why Big 
Fierce Animals are Rare", I remain con-
vinced that tigers are rarer than sheep, 
and that I know why. But this monograph 
is about the rarity that remains after 
possible effects of food chains, functional 
niches, vagrants and sampling error are 
removed. This remainder is massive. Pre-
ston demonstrated the powerful influence 
of random process in bringing it about. 
Gaston suggests that experimental mea-
sures will find better answers. Perhaps. 
But it would be more fun to be given a new 
hypothesis of community-building over 
which we could argue with the passion 
ecologists once brought to the broken 
stick. 
D 
Paul Colinvaux is in the Smithsonian Tropic-
al Research Institute, PO Box 2072, Bal-
boa, Panama. 
Correction 
A line of text mysteriously disappeared from 
Michael Jacobs' review of Environmental Politics 
and Greener Management International in this 
years New Journals supplement (Nature 371. 
458; 1994). His full address is the Centre for the 
Study of Environmental Change, University of 
Lancaster, LancasterLA14YN. UK. 
It has also been brought to our attention that 
Glaucus atlanticus. the sea slug pictured on 
page 456 of the same issue, does not live on the 
sea bed, as stated. The organism is in fact an 
important inhabitant of the ocean surface film. 
Natural selections 
Ray Percival 
Realism Rescued. By Rome Harre, Jer-
rold Aronson and Eileen Cornell Way. 
Open Court/Duckworth: 1994. Pp. 203. 
$42.95, £30 (hbk); $18.95 (pbk}. 
How do you put both physicists and 
biologists on their guard? Answer: pro-
pound a philosophical theory that ignores 
Darwin's demolition of essentialism in 
species and brands any physicist who 
denies your theory of natural kinds as an 
anti-realist. 
A traditional division in philosophy is 
between metaphysics (what sorts of things 
exist) and epistemology ( what and how we 
know). Some think that the core of real-
ism is the metaphysical assumption that 
there is a world independent of our minds. 
But this core assumption is sometimes 
clothed in other assumptions, such as 
theories of truth, truth-likeness, meaning 
and knowledge. Scornful of what they see 
as an unnecessary retreat from a fully 
clothed realism to the naked postulate of a 
mind-independent reality, Harre, Aron-
son and Way present a realism that also 
embraces truth and truth-likeness, as well 
as their own conception of scientific 
method and the structure of the world. 
Informing their whole approach is a 
challenging view of scientific theories. 
Theories, they argue, are "essentially" 
models, or families of models, that consti-
tute their "content". The idea that 
theories are sets of propositions is re-
jected. Well-constructed theories consist 
of a descriptive model, which portrays the 
phenomena, and an explanatory model, 
which portrays the unobservable substruc-
ture that causes the phenomena. Models 
are not simply dispensable aids to the 
construction 
and 
understanding 
of 
theories, as Duhem would have said. They 
expand a theory's explanatory power and 
help us to explain how theories can be 
continuously revised and extended to new 
phenomena. 
Models represent type-hierarchies and 
type-hierarchies are pyramidal repre-
sentations of the ordered hierarchy of 
natural kinds that make up the world. 
Borrowed from artificial intelligence, a 
type-hierarchy analysis, the authors say, is 
more faithful to our natural use of lan-
guage, including metaphor and analogy. 
This 
is 
the 
authors' 
"naturalistic" 
approach. But defining realism in this way 
poses several problems. 
In the authors' picture of the structure 
of the world, natural kinds are ordered in 
a hierarchy. Thus diamonds are a subtype 
of crystals, crystals are subtypes of 
molecular combinations, molecules are 
subtypes of combinations of atoms, atoms 
are subtypes of combinations of sub-
NATURE · VOL371 · 200CTOBER 1994 

atomic particles. In the 1960s, however, 
some people held an interesting non-
atomistic (holistic) view of matter that 
pictured each proton and neutron as made 
of one another. This was called a "boot-
strap theory" after Baron von Munch-
hausen, who claimed to have lifted himself 
up by his own bootstraps. In this view, the 
hierarchy cannot be continued because 
the constituents of the hadrons are no 
more elementary than the given hadrons 
-
they would be subtypes of each other. 
This theory is now refuted, but some 
might quibble at the suggestion that enter-
taining such a theory at the time was 
"anti-realist". Defining realism in terms of 
the details of a particular ontology means 
that the critics of this particular ontology 
are anti-realists by definition! 
Darwin's theory undermines talk of 
natural kinds. The ancestry of both a 
modern human and an earthworm can be 
traced back through intermediate species 
to a common virus-like ancestor. How 
could this be if the virus-like ancestor was 
a natural kind, that is, had an essence? 
Darwin's answer was that the steps up to 
and over the "boundary" between one 
species and another are slight. 
The authors cover in a very readable 
way many problems, including truth, 
truth-likeness, metaphor and analogy, 
similarity, contrary-to-fact-conditionals, 
and primary and secondary qualities. 
Truth itself is defined in terms of their 
view of the structure of the world. Instead 
of defining realism in terms of a proposi-
tional notion of truth as correspondence, 
truth is defined in terms of realism (the 
ordering of natural kinds). A model is true 
if the chunk of the type hierarchy it picks 
out is identical to the section of the 
ordered relationships between natural 
kinds in the world. A model is close to the 
NATURE · VOL371 · 200CTOBER1994 
truth if there is a similarity between these 
two type-hierarchies. 
My reservations about the potential of 
the project are prompted by the authors' 
acceptance of a group of refuted doc-
trines, including naturalism, induction, 
essentialism and antilogicism. Naturalism 
is the idea that we should assess phil-
osophical doctrines in terms of what 
psychologists 
or 
artificial-intelligence 
specialists find out about the way we 
form concepts, reason and so on. A 
naturalistic approach to the philosophy of 
science, however, scorns a real distinction 
between a descriptive analysis of science 
and 
a 
prescriptive 
(methodological) 
analysis. There are several dangers with 
this. Appraisal of method and theory is 
liable to be subject to mere fashion. If the 
'best method' is understood tacitly as what 
scientists happen to do and this happens to 
be unadventurous, then the creation and 
acceptance of theories that challenge the 
orthodoxy are impeded. Naturalism also 
has a tendency to confuse the cognitive 
(psychological) mechanisms that produce 
a theory with the nature of the theory 
considered as an objective product with 
autonomous properties and its appraisal, 
just as a proud carpenter might overvalue 
his product because of the many long 
hours he spent fashioning it. 
There is much to disagree with here, but 
the systematic presentation of the model 
view of scientific theories will produce 
useful debate. 
D 
Ray Percival is at 70 Hillview Court, Astley 
Bridge, Bolton BL1 BNU, UK, and is organiz-
er and chairman of the Annual Conference 
on the Philosophy of Sir Karl Popper 
and associate editor of the Popper News-
letter and Journal of Social and Evolutionary 
Systems. 
BOOK REVIEWS 
No stones left 
unturned 
James A. Tyburczy 
Introduction to the Physics of Rocks. By 
Yves Gueguen and Victor Palciauskas. 
Princeton 
University 
Press: 
1994. 
Pp. 294. $49.50, £35. 
A GEOPHYSICIST studies Earth's subsur-
face by measuring bulk properties such as 
seismic velocity, electrical conductivity, 
thermal conductivity or magnetization 
from the surface or in a borehole. Then, 
using the tools of rock physics, he or she 
extracts from these measurements in-
formation about the physical state of the 
rocks beneath the surface, such as rock 
type, porosity, permeability and fluid 
saturation. In this way, one can explore 
for hydrocarbons, minerals and geo-
thermal resources, and study natural and 
man-made hazards such as earthquake 
faults, groundwater pollution and nuclear 
storage schemes. 
Crustal rocks are heterogeneous mix-
tures of minerals, generally porous and/or 
fractured and commonly partly to fully 
saturated by fluids such as water and 
hydrocarbons. So the tools of the rock 
physicist include not only elasticity 
theory, continuum mechanics, rock de-
formation and fracture mechanics (the 
sum of which is often referred to as 'rock 
mechanics'), but also theories of heteI-
ogeneous and porous media, fluid flow 
and percolation theory, surface chem-
istry, electric and dielectric theory, 
heat transfer and the theory of magnetic 
materials. 
The text fills a unique and previously 
BOVEY Valley 
Woodlands, Devon, 
one of the 140 wildlife 
sanctuaries featured 
in England's National 
Nature Reserves by 
Peter Marren 
(English Nature/ 
T&AD Poyser, .£20). 
With line drawings 
and over 60 colour 
plates, the book 
provides a 
comprehensive look 
atthe background 
and philosophy of the 
reserves and the role 
they play in 
conservation and 
research. 
667 

