Nature © Macmillan Publishers Ltd 1997
palaeobiological issues underlying the study
of ancient marine reptiles. Did fins evolve to
legs and back to fins again? And what was
more important, homoplasy or homology?
Selection or constraint? Unique morpholo-
gies or modifications of the old? Marine rep-
tiles are a model system for posing a broad
range of questions about the evolution of
tetrapods in aquatic environments. We often
consider cetaceans or pinnipeds in this light,
yet forget that ichthyosaurs were ‘dolphin-
like’ about 190 million years before the first
proto-dolphin even thought of going for a
swim.
Michael W. Caldwell is in the Department of
Biological Sciences, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada T6G 2E9.
When the rains
come
Climates of South Asia
by G. B. Pant and K. Rupa Kumar
Wiley: 1997. Pp. 320. £75, $130
Julia Slingo
The climate of South Asia is dominated by
the monsoon, which returns with remark-
able regularity each summer and provides
the rainfall needed to sustain more than 60
per cent of the world’s population. The vast-
ness of the Asian continent and the unique
configuration of the East African Highlands
and the Tibetan Plateau mean that the Indian
summer monsoon is the most vigorous and
influential of all the monsoon circulations.
Increasingly, the monsoon is being seen as an
important player in the global climate. 
It is fortuitous that the first book detailing
the climatology of South Asia should be pub-
lished on the fiftieth anniversary of India’s
independence. Without the influence of the
British Raj and scientists such as Blanford,
who in 1886 recognized “the paramount
importance of knowledge of distribution of
rainfall in space and time”, the comprehen-
sive database that provides the core of this
book might not have been realized. 
The book brings together the vast litera-
ture and data resources of India and its
neighbours (Pakistan, Bangladesh, Nepal
and Sri Lanka), providing a comprehensive
description of a wide range of topics, from
extreme weather events to the environmen-
tal impact of climate change. It is generally
well written, although unfortunately the
authors had not updated much of the mater-
ial to include the most recent observations.
For those seeking an understanding of the
physical mechanisms involved in the clima-
tology of South Asia, its weather systems and
its year-to-year variability, this book pro-
vides little in the way of answers. That said, it
is a valuable teaching aid, is likely to appeal to
the more casual reader and is an excellent ref-
erence book for dipping into. 
Julia Slingo is at the Centre for Global Atmospheric
Modelling, University of Reading, Earley Gate,
Reading RG6 6BB, UK.
Related books
Antarctic Meteorology and Climatology by J.
C. King and J. Turner. CUP, £55, $90.
El Niño Southern Oscillation and Climatic
Variabilityedited by R. Allan, J. Lindesay and
D. Parker. CSIRO, $110.
The Weather of Britain by Rob Stirling.
Revised pbk. Giles de la Mare, £19.99.
Watching the Weather by John and Mary
Gribbin. Constable, £7.95 (pbk).
The Weather Book: An Easy-to-Understand
Guide to the USA’s Weather by Jack Williams.
Revised pbk. Vintage, $20.
book reviews
250
NATURE|VOL 389|18 SEPTEMBER 1997
influenced by the axiomatic method. The
original idea of ‘theory reduction’ was that
the axioms of one, formalized theory should
be derived logically from those of another,
thus showing that nothing is lost when the
former is replaced by the latter. This omis-
sion is more surprising because the coverage
of the book is otherwise excellent. 
There are two further surprises in Mahn-
er and Bunge’s biophilosophy. First, they
reject ‘population thinking’: evolution is not
about ensembles of individuals but about
types of organism. They argue that these
types, which include species, are in some
sense ‘natural kinds’. They strongly reject the
consensus view, deriving from David L. Hull
and Michael Ghiselin, that taxa are ontologi-
cally akin to individual objects such as
nations rather than to natural kinds such as
gold. The second surprise is the authors’ rad-
ical approach to developmental biology:
development is not guided by a genetic pro-
gram. Instead, Mahner and Bunge call for a
synthesis 
between 
the 
‘structuralist’
approach to development, which seeks
emergent laws of complex biological sys-
tems, and the ‘constructionist’ view that the
control of development cannot be localized
in one material cause. 
Having adopted this radical perspective,
Mahner and Bunge attack existing struc-
turalists and constructionists in a manner
worthy of Trotskyite splinter politics. The
structuralism of Brian Goodwin must be res-
cued from “holism, (crypto)idealism and
subjectivism” by the adoption of Mahner and
Bunge’s metaphysical scheme. My own advo-
cacy of constructionism with the biologist
Russell Gray “must be judged as an utter fail-
ure” because of a “severely flawed ontology”
which I share with A. N. Whitehead and Hull.
Mahner and Bunge convict most existing
biological theorists of basic metaphysical
errors, something they hope to avoid through
their formal, axiomatic method. For exam-
ple,  Theodosius Dobzhansky characterized
evolution as change in the genetic composi-
tion of populations owing to “altered interac-
tions with their environment”. The authors
may be right that it is strictly organisms
rather than populations that interact with the
environment, but I remain unconvinced that
Dobzhansky’s slip shows “how easily habits
of speech may obfuscate clarity and proper
theorising”. 
This tendency to over-diagnose funda-
mental metaphysical confusions and to
deduce absurd apparent consequences
reduces the usefulness of this book as a text
for students, despite its admirably wide cov-
erage of the subject. The axiomatic frame-
work and use of logical symbolism will also
be unattractive to students, especially those
in biology. 
Paul E. Griffiths is in the Department of
Philosophy, University of Otago, PO Box 56,
Dunedin, New Zealand. 
Axioms for biology
Foundations of Biophilosophy
by Martin Mahner and Mario Bunge
Springer: 1997. Pp. 423. $54, £36.50
Paul E. Griffiths
The logical empiricist consensus that existed
in the philosophy of science until the 1960s
held that the ideal statement of a scientific
theory would be a formal axiom system of the
kind found in mathematics. The biologist J.
H. Woodger is remembered for his attempts
to make biology live up to this ideal. For rea-
sons too complex and varied to explore here,
few philosophers of science now try to make
scientific theories axiomatic. 
It is therefore surprising to find the biolo-
gist Martin Mahner and the philosopher
Mario Bunge formulating their general
account of biology using the logical apparatus
of predicate calculus and set theory, complete
with axioms, definitions and corollaries. Their
aim appears twofold: to ensure consistency
between their views on diverse topics and to
ensure that their biological views are as tightly
constrained as possible by the metaphysics
that occupies the first third of their book. This
introductory section takes a stand on most of
the basic questions of metaphysics and episte-
mology. Topics covered include basic ontol-
ogy (the nature of events, properties and
things), the interpretation of the probability
calculus and the nature of truth and evidence.
Philosophers will be frustrated at the speed
with which Mahner and Bunge dismiss alter-
native positions, and biologists should beware
of taking their often strongly stated views to
represent a philosophical consensus. Howev-
er, it is hard to see how these problems could be
avoided without turning this into a book on
metaphysics and epistemology, rather than
biology. Bunge has argued at length for his
views in many other works.  
Perhaps the biggest surprise is that there
is no discussion of the reduction of
Mendelian to molecular genetics. This is the
topic in the philosophy of biology most

