ZteA/' /32.CC,
TECHNICAL REPORT
EGG 1183-2078 
NUMBER S-319-R 
FEBRUARY 1966
CT5II PRICES
HLC $ 3.^
MOTION SENSING AND ITS APPLICATION
TO PROJECT WISP
by
C. Hudson, R. Lagerquist, D. Rutland
Approved by
C. B. Leek
H. M. Borella
LEGAL NOTICE
This report was prepared as an account of Government sponsored work. Neither the United 
States, nor the Commission, nor any person acting on behalf of the Commission:
A. Makes any warranty or representation, expressed or implied, with respect to the accu­
racy, completeness, or usefulness of the information contained in this report, or that the use 
of any information, apparatus, method, or process disclosed in this report may not infringe 
privately owned rights; or
B. Assumes any liabilities with respect to the use of, or for damages resulting from the 
use of any information, apparatus, method, or process disclosed in this report.
As used in the above, “person acting on behalf of the Commission” Includes any em­
ployee or contractor of the Commission, or employee of such contractor, to the extent that 
such employee or contractor of the Commission, or employee of such contractor prepares, 
disseminates, or provides access to, any information pursuant to his employment or contract 
with the Commission, or his employment with such contractor.
SANTA BARBARA DIVISION
EDGERTON, GERMESHAUSEN & GRIER, INC

DISCLAIMER
This report was prepared as an account of work sponsored by an 
agency of the United States Government. Neither the United States 
Government nor any agency thereof, nor any of their employees, 
makes any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any legal liability 
or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any 
information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents 
that its use would not infringe privately owned rights. Reference 
herein to any specific commercial product, process, or service by 
trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise does not 
necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or 
favoring by the United States Government or any agency thereof. The 
views and opinions of authors expressed herein do not necessarily 
state or reflect those of the United States Government or any agency 
thereof.
DISCLAIM ER
Portions of this document may be illegible in electronic image 
products. Images are produced from the best available 
original document.

EGEiGiHc.
ABSTRACT
This study examines the field of motion sensing for pos­
sible solutions to motion sensing problems associated with 
Project WISP. Motion sensing principles are outlined, devices 
and systems are evaluated, and promising avenues for further 
research are recommended.
-iii-

n
CONTENTS
Section 
Title 
Page
ABSTRACT...................................... iii
1 
INTRODUCTION ................................ 1
2 
DEFINITION OF THE PROBLEM.................. 2
2.1 Permanent Installation ................ 3
2.2 Storage Installation .................. 3
2.3 Ready Installation .................... 3
3 
MOTION SENSING PRINCIPLES AND SYSTEMS .... 
5
3.1 Systems With an Intrinsic Reference
(Inertial Systems) .................... 5
3.2 Systems With an External Reference ... 
9
4 
EVALUATION OF SOME POSSIBLE MOTION
SENSING SYSTEMS ............................ 11
4.1 Inertial Reference Motion Sensing
Systems................................ 11
4.2 Earth Environment Sensing Systems
(External Reference).................... 23
4.3 Artificial Environment (External
Reference)............................ 29
5 
RECOMMENDATIONS ............................ 43
APPENDIX A - Annotated Motion Sensor Index . . 
46
APPENDIX B - Environmental Background
Vibration...................... 62
APPENDIX C - Tilting an Accelerometer Package
to Conceal Linear Acceleration . 
64
-iv-

J^EG&Gwi*.
CONTENTS (Continued)
Title 
Page
APPENDIX D - Disabling Influences and 
Their Possible Effect on 
Motion Sensing Systems .... 
67
APPENDIX E - Optimization of Inertial 
Systems with Resetting 
Integrators.................. 70
BIBLIOGRAPHY .............................. 77

n __
FIGURES
No. 
Title 
Page
1 
Sensitive Inertial System with Environmental
Isolation........................................ 12
2 
Sensitive Inertial System with Seismic
Cancellation .................................. 16
3 
Sensitive Inertial System with Integrated
Output.......................................... 18
4 
Typical Mossbauer Experiment .................. 28
5 
Microwave (IFF) Transponder .................... 31
6 
Proximity Sensor System (Pier Reference) .... 
35
7 
Pier Reference ..... ...................... 36
C-l 
Three-Axis System.................................64
C-2 
Effect of Linear Acceleration ..................  65
C-3 
Angle of Tilt Required to Conceal Horizontal
Acceleration .................................. 66
E-l 
Integrating Systems ............................  74
TABLES
1 
Distances(s) Traveled When Acceleration (A) is
Applied for Time (T).......................... 7
2 
Velocity (V) Due to Acceleration (A) for
Time (T)...................................... 8
-vi-

n
INC.
1. 
INTRODUCTION
This study examines the field of motion sensing for possi­
ble solutions to the motion sensing problems associated with 
Project WISP. The study approach has been to 1) survey the 
field of motion sensing and define the fundamental problems,
2) index, annotate and evaluate motion sensing principles, 
devices, and systems, and 3) recommend approaches that are 
worthy of further investigation.
To assure that no avenues to solving the motion sensing 
problems would be neglected, the study has attempted to ob­
jectively present and evaluate a wide variety of motion 
sensing devices and systems per se. This philosophy has led to 
the consideration of devices and systems that range from the 
simplest and cheapest to the most complex, sophisticated, and 
expensive.
Since the precision of motion sensing measurements depends 
on the stability of the system's reference, this study has in­
cluded evaluation of the natural and cultural contributions to 
the noise background against which motion sensing must be 
accomplished.
The approaches presented in this report are offered not 
as final solutions, but as hopeful avenues for further research 
on this challenging motion sensing problem.
-1-

INC.
2. DEFINITION OF THE PROBLEM
Conversations between LRL personnel and interested parties 
at EG&G concerning the basic requirements of Project WISP have 
led to a rather fundamental description of the problem. It 
appears that an inanimate object must be given the ability to 
recognize its positional environment and to produce a signal 
if that environment is changed beyond the limits of naturally 
occurring variations.
From this basic definition one may infer that a motion 
sensing system's reference must be such that its only variations 
are those which are natural, i.e., not induced purposefully.
This inference leads to three fundamental questions: 
1) what
are natural variations, qualitatively and quantitatively?
2) what references remain unaffected by variations other than 
natural? and 3) what are the methods by which a sensing system 
can recognize a specific reference?
From the foregoing questions, it can be seen that the 
ideal solution of the motion sensing problem lies in finding 
a reference that approaches the absolute unalterable, and upon 
finding this reference, determining the extent of its natural 
variation. Certain relaxations of this rigorously defined 
solution can, however, be obtained by assigning degrees of 
restraint in either the amount of protection from purposeful 
disturbance desired or the form of the reference. For instance, 
the reference may be made so complex, massive, or minute that 
a purposeful substitution or invalidation would become extremely 
difficult.
The intended use of the inanimate object can greatly in­
fluence the complexity of the problem. Information furnished 
by LRL indicates that three broad classes of installations are 
being considered: 
1) permanent, 2) storage, and 3) ready.
-2-

EG&G iimc.
2.1 PERMANENT INSTALLATION
In this application, the object is more or less permanently 
installed in a vault-like environment. The thickness of the 
walls make them impenetrable except by extremely arduous and 
artful labor accomplished over a long period with massive 
equipment. Since the only practical entry to the vault is 
through the door, the motion sensing system has only to detect 
motion through the vault door or motion indicating that the 
vault door is being opened. For example, where the door is 
located on top of the vault, sensing of the object's absolute 
altitude would indicate whether the object was in place or 
being removed. This principle constitutes a single-degree-of- 
freedom motion sensing system.
2.2 STORAGE INSTALLATION
In this application, the object is stored only in the 
sense that its position is fixed by decree and an unauthorized 
change in position would invalidate the terms of the storage 
agreement. Therefore, the motion sensing system needs to be 
related to a specific environmental reference and be able to 
detect horizontal translations from its assigned position.
It would seem that in this installation, vertical translation 
detection would be of no use except as it can be related to 
the horizontal. Since it is unlikely that external power 
sources for operating the motion sensor would be available in 
this installation, an internal power supply would be necessary.
2.3 READY INSTALLATION
In this installation, the object will be portably mounted 
and permitted to move within a defined area at the option of 
the user. The motion detection system must, therefore, be
-3-

EGelG inc.
able to relate itself to the positional environment in which 
it finds itself at any time that a rest position is attained 
and produce a signal if further movement occurs. Because of 
its portable mounting, the system will be subjected to a 
high degree of noise, hence it must be able to read through 
noise without misinterpreting it. Power should be internal, 
and the sensor should be able to detect motion in any direction. 
Obviously, this installation presents the most formidable 
motion sensing problem.
-4-

If
3. MOTION SENSING PRINCIPLES AND SYSTEMS
Any system which senses motion must have a reference. Al­
though it is important to note whether a system senses displace­
ment, velocity or acceleration, it is convenient to classify a 
motion sensing system on the basis of the reference that it 
uses. This study divides motion sensors into three reference 
categories: 1) sensors that have a self-contained or intrinsic 
reference based on the inertial properties of a moving or 
stationary mass, 2) sensors that use some aspect of the earth's 
natural environment as a reference, and 3) sensors that use an 
artificial or man-made reference. A practical motion sensing 
system may be comprised of sensors selected from any or all of 
these categories (see Appendix A).
3.1 SYSTEMS WITH AN INTRINSIC REFERENCE (INERTIAL SYSTEMS)
Inertia appears to supply a fundamental reference for 
motion sensing, since it is a property which is universal. It 
is the principle used in a family of navigational systems that 
satisfy the requirement of positional information in real time. 
Such systems are composed of an inertial reference (e.g., a 
gyroscope) and sensors that detect changes of motion with re­
spect to the reference (e.g., an accelerometer).
Since the primary concern of this study is motion sensing 
and not necessarily absolute position determination, the systems 
considered can use a steady state condition as a reference and 
measure rates of change from the initial condition. This 
measurement, or accelerometer output, of an inertial system, may 
be used directly so that any acceleration above a specified 
level will result in a signal (threshold-detection system).
Or the output of the accelerometers may be integrated one or
-5-

INC.
two times to yield velocity or position information (integra­
ting system).
Threshold-detection systems have the advantage that non­
linearity of the accelerometers does not affect operation of 
the system, and the system is drift free. The difficulty with 
these systems is that the threshold cannot be set any lower 
than the level of expected random disturbances that might 
cause false outputs (see Appendix B).
Integrating systems have the advantage that low-level 
oscillatory disturbances are cancelled. Their most serious 
problem is that small null offsets and nonlinearities in the 
system will result in false outputs that increase with time.
In any inertial system, it is necessary to prevent un­
detected rotation about either horizontal axis. Unless this 
is done, large horizontal accelerations can be disguised as 
slight increases in the apparent gravitational acceleration.
For example, if an object is tilted 5%° while it is being 
accelerated, a horizontal acceleration of 0.100 g can be made 
to appear as only a 0.005-g increase in the apparent vertical 
acceleration due to gravity. The force of gravity balances 
the force due to linear acceleration so the horizontal acceler­
ometer experiences no net acceleration, and the vertical ac­
celerometer experiences an increase in acceleration amounting 
to only %% (see Appendix C). Providing the coordination of 
rotational and horizontal accelerations are exact, no passive 
inertial device or combination of devices can detect the angle 
of tilt, since the direction of the gravitational or resultant 
force remains constant with respect to the object. The angle 
of tilt may, however, be detected by an angular accelerometer 
if the rate of tilting is of sufficient magnitude. (Tables 1 & 2 
show effects of acceleration applied for various times).
-6-

Table 1. DISTANCES(S) TRAVELED WHEN ACCELERATION (A) IS APPLIED FOR TIME (T) 
(S = \ AT2)
DISTANCE TRAVELED (ft)
Acceleration
g
1 sec
10 sec
60 sec
(1 min)
600 sec
(10 min)
3,600 sec 
(1 hour)
86,400 sec 
(1 day)
864,000 sec 
(10 day)
2,592,000 
(30 day)
10"6
i.eixio'5
i.eixio'3
5.80xl0'2
5.80
2.09xl02
1.20xl05 
(23 mi.)
1.20xl07 
(2,300 mi.)
l.OSxlO8 
(20,500 mi.)
10'5
i.eixio'4
i.eixio'2
5.SOxlO1
58.0
2.09x103
1.20xlG6 
(230 mi.)
1.20xl08 
(23,000 mi.)
10~4
i.eixio'3
i.eixio'1
5.80
5.80xl02
2.09xl04 
(4 mi.)
1.20xl07 
(2,300 mi.)
10'3
i.eixio'2
1.61
58.0
5.80xl03 
(1.1 mi.)
2.09xl05 
(40 mi.)
1.20xl08 
(23,000 mi.)
10'2
i.eixio'1
16.1
5.80xl02
5.80xl04 
(11 mi.)
2.09xl06 
(400 mi.)
10'1
1.61
i.eixio2
5.80xl03 
(1.1 mi.)
5.80xl05 
(110 mi.)
2.09xl07 
(4,000 mi.)
1
16.1
i.eixio3
5.80xl04 
(11 mi.)
5.80xl06 
(1,100 mi.)
2.09xl08 
(40,000 mi.)
10
i.eixio2
i.eixio4 
(3 mi.)
5.80xl05 
(110 mi.)
5.80xl07 
(11,000 mi.)
100
i.eixio3
i.eixio5 
(30 mi.)
5.80xl06 
(1,100 mi.)
1000
i.eixio4 
(3 mi.)
i.eixio6 
(300 mi.)
5.80xl07 
(11,000 mi.)

Table 2.
VELOCITY (V) DUE TO ACCELERATION (A) FOR TIME (T) 
(V = AT)
VELOCITY ATTAINED
(ft/sec)
Acceleration
g
1 sec
10 sec
60 sec
(1 min)
600 sec
(10 min)
3600 sec
(1 hour)
86,400 sec 
(1 day)
864,000 sec 
(10 day)
1,592,000 sec 
(30 day)
10'6
3.22xl0'5
3.22xl0"4
1.93xl03
1.93xl0"2
1.lOxlO'1
2.88
(2.08 mph)
28.8
(20 mph)
86.5
(59 mph)
10'5
3.22xl0~4
3.22xl0'3
1.93xl0'2
1.93x10"1
1.16
28.8 
(20 mph)
2.88xl02 
(200 mph)
10'4
3.22xlO'3
3.22xl0"2
1.93X10'1
1.93
(1.3 mph)
11.6
(7.9 mph)
2.88xl02 
(200 mph)
10~3
3.22xl0'2
3.22xl0-1
1.93
(1.3 mph)
19.3
(13 mph)
1.16xl02 
(79 mph)
2.88xl03 
(2000 mph)
10‘2
3.22X10"1-
3.22
(2.2 mph)
19.3
(13 mph)
1.93xl02 
(130 mph)
1.16xl03 
(790 mph)
10'1
3.22
(2.2 mph)
32.2
(22 mph)
1.93xl02 
(130 mph)
1.93xl03 
(1,300 mph)
1.16xl04 
(7,900 mph)
1
32.2
(22 mph)
3.22xl02 
(220 mph)
1.93xl03 
(1,300 mph)
1.93xl04 
(13,000 mph)
1.16xl05
(79,000 mph)
10
3.22xl02 
(220 mph)
3.22xl03 
(2,200 mph)
1.93xl04 
(13,000 mph)
1.93xl05 
(130,000 mph)
100
3.22xl03 
(2,200 mph)
3.22xl04 
(22,000 mph)
1.93xl05 
(130,000 mph)
1000
3.22xl04 
(22,000 mph)
3.22xl05 
(220,000 mph)
1.93xl06
(1.3x10^ mph)
J
INC.

n
IIMC.
3.2 SYSTEMS WITH AN EXTERNAL REFERENCE
For convenience, external references may be subdivided in­
to two categories: that of earth-environment reference and that 
of artificial reference.
The effectiveness of an external reference system is 
determined primarily by the permanence of the external refer­
ence and the ease with which a false reference may be substi­
tuted for the genuine one. The sensitivity and resolution of 
this kind of system must also be considered. The primary ad­
vantage of an external reference system is the ability to moni­
tor position over long periods of time without drift. The 
sensors for an external reference system may be located in the 
object being monitored, or they may be located remotely and 
keep the object under surveillance.- Precautions must be taken 
to prevent the reference from being moved along with the 
object itself.
Earth-environment references differ widely in their useful­
ness in motion sensing systems. The most reliable and tamper­
proof earth-environment reference is the force of gravity. A 
similar force cannot be generated artifically and gravity can­
not be jammed or interfered with. On the other hand, the earth' 
magnetic field is easily altered or simulated. Further, the 
earth's magnetic field yields relatively little information 
regarding the exact location of an object on the earth's surface
Characteristic topography is another useful earth environ­
ment reference. A system that uses topography as a reference 
stores sufficient information concerning its topographic environ 
ment to detect motion changes by comparing new sensory infor­
mation with that in its memory. The reference may be macro­
scopic (mountains, trees, large buildings, etc.), or it may be

microscopic (e.g., diffraction pattern characteristic of the 
material or materials upon which the sensor rests).
Other aspects of the earth's environment which may be 
sensed include 1) the earth's rotation and rotational effects,
2) the physical makeup of the earth itself, and 3) positions of 
the sun, moon, and stars.
Motion sensing systems based on artificial references must 
rely upon protective measures to ensure the security of the 
reference. In most cases, the artificial reference is located 
close to the object being monitored and must, therefore, be 
protected by an anti-intrusion device. This type of reference 
may be referred to as a pier reference. Typically, it is either 
protected by burglar alarms and various anti-tampering devices, 
or it is extremely difficult to simulate.
In long-range systems, such as those based upon radio and 
radar, it may be possible to eliminate tampering by situating 
the reference (transmitter) in a controlled location. The 
reference might, for example, be contained in an orbiting 
satellite.
According to EG&G's understanding of the scope of this 
work, protection of a motion sensing system and its reference 
from purposeful tampering is not a primary concern. However, 
consideration of tampering techniques is unavoidable when at­
tempting to analyze the stability of the reference. Some of the 
possible modes of tampering considered in the analysis of 
specific motion sensing systems are listed in Appendix D.
-10-

4. 
EVALUATION OF SOME POSSIBLE MOTION 
SENSING SYSTEMS
In this study, attention was given to specific systems so 
their applicability to the problem could be studied in detail. 
Such an approach helps define the problem and isolates motion 
sensing systems that show little promise. This section of the 
report discusses the advantages and limitations of each system, 
and presents available model and price information. Prices in 
most cases are based on single unit purchase and do not reflect 
the cost of installation and integration into a working system. 
Large price reductions are possible in some cases when produc­
tion quantities are purchased. If the items are already in 
production (e.g., most accelerometers), large price reductions 
are not probable.
These systems are presented in the hope that they may 
stimulate trends of thought that would not otherwise be en­
couraged.
4.1 INERTIAL REFERENCE MOTION SENSING SYSTEMS
4.1.1 
Sensitive Inertial System with 
Environmental Isolation
DESCRIPTION
High-sensitivity non-integrating accelerometers 
are mounted within the object to be protected.
The object is placed on a motion-stabilized plat­
form within a sound-proofed, draft-free room.
More than one object may share an isolation system 
(see Figure 1) .
-11-

INC.
ISOLATION ROOM
r ACCELEROMETER PACKAGE
rCONCRETE BLOCK
OBJECT BEING 
PROTECTED-^
SERVO-CONTROLLED 
AIR SPRING
SERVO VALVE
FIGURE I. SENSITIVE INERTIAL SYSTEM WITH ENVIRONMENTAL ISOLATION
-12-
48-A

^^EGElG iimc.
OPERATION
The sensing system is adjusted for the lowest 
threshold levels of angular and linear acceler­
ation consistent with the degree of environmental 
isolation achieved. Acceleration that exceeds 
the preset threshold in any direction will cause an 
output from the system.
ADVANTAGES
The system is drift-free, since the accelerometers 
are used only for threshold detection. No external 
reference is required and power requirements are 
modest. It is not necessary to protect the iso­
lation system from tampering, since its only pur­
pose is to prevent false outputs caused by environ­
mental disturbances. If it is disabled, the 
motion sensing system will still respond to any 
motion that exceeds the threshold of the system.
LIMITATIONS
An effective isolation system is relatively ex­
pensive, although a single system can be used 
to protect several objects. Vibration isolation 
systems are not capable of eliminating disturb­
ances caused by nearby strong earthquakes. Sensi­
tivity is limited by the degree to which vibration 
can be isolated and the platform can be held level. 
(If the platform deviates from true gravitational 
level by 1 arc second, a false indication of 
4.85 x 10 g acceleration will result.) An iso­
lation system will generally be required if the
_ 3
system threshold is 1 x 10 g or less.
-13-

EG&G inc.
TYPICAL SYSTEMS
1 x 10 ^ g System
Genisco Model GAH 2407 Linear 
Accelerometers
(3 required @ $300/each) 
$ 900.00
Power supply and
readout circuitry 
500.00
$1,400.00 
Plus installation
1 x 10 g System
Systron Model 4310 Linear 
Accelerometers 
(3 required @ $900/each)
Systron Model 4525 Angular 
Accelerometers 
(2 required @ $1,500/each)
Power supply and 
readout circuitry
Plus
Vibration Isolated Seismic Mass 
Barry Serva-Level System
(1 required for 2-10 objects 
@ $8,000/each) 
$8,000.00
$2,700.00
3.000. 
00
1.000. 00 
$6,700.00
installation
4.1.2 Sensitive Inertial System with 
Seismic Cancellation
DESCRIPTION
High sensitivity non-integrating accelerometers 
are mounted within the objects to be protected. 
The objects are mechanically coupled to a massive 
pier anchored to bedrock. An identical set of
-14-

n
INC.
accelerometers is housed within the piers and their 
output (representing pier motion) is supplied to a 
motion sensing system in each of the objects. Anti­
intrusion protection includes the pier itself, the 
pier accelerometers, the signal link between the 
pier accelerometers and the motion sensing systems, 
and the objects themselves (see Figure 2).
OPERATION
The pier-motion signal cancels the output of the 
motion sensors as long as there is no relative 
motion between the objects and the pier. An attempt 
to move one of the objects will produce an output 
that is not cancelled by the pier-motion signal.
ADVANTAGES
The system is drift-free, since the accelerometers 
are used for threshold detection only and the output 
is not integrated. No external reference is re­
quired and power requirements are modest.
LIMITATIONS
The pier installation may become expensive, although 
a single pier may be used for several objects. The 
pier must be massive enough or well enough protected 
so that the entire installation, pier and all, cannot 
be removed. The upper frequency limit of the system 
is determined by the degree to which phase matching 
can be achieved between the pier accelerometers and 
the motion sensing systems. Protection of the signal 
link may be difficult.
-15-

ACCELEROMETER PACKAGE
OBJECT BEING 
PROTECTED -
GROUND LEVEL
MASSIVE
CONCRETE
BLOCK
ACCELEROMETER
PACKAGE
BEDROCK
FIGURE 2. SENSITIVE INERTIAL SYSTEM WITH SEISMIC CANCELLATION
-16-
49-A

^EOeOino.
4.1.3 Sensitive Inertial System with 
Integrated Output
DESCRIPTION
Sensitive integrating accelerometers are mounted 
within the object to be protected. The object is 
mounted on a stable pier (see Figure 3).
OPERATION
Accelerometer output is integrated to provide 
outputs proportional to velocity and displacement 
of the object. An output from the system results 
when the velocity or displacement in any direction 
exceeds a preset limit.
ADVANTAGES
The system automatically cancels oscillatory motions 
that do not result in a net displacement. No ex­
ternal reference is required. Power requirements are 
modest. The output of an accelerometer can be used 
simultaneously in an integrating system and a thresh­
old detection system.
LIMITATIONS
Instrument errors and errors in leveling the object 
are cumulative and result in drift of the output. A
_ r
consistent error of 1 x 10 g for one hour will re­
sult in an integrated output of 0.116 ft/sec of veloc­
ity, or 208 feet of displacement. The system can be 
rotated about an axis perpendicular to an applied 
acceleration in such a way that the force of gravity 
cancels the effect of the applied acceleration.
-17-

fl EB&G inc.
INTEGRATING ACCELEROMETER
OBJECT BEING PROTECTED
GROUND LEVEL
—////-=r/ m-
STABLE PIER
— Hi
////—////=//// —
FIGURE 3. SENSITIVE INERTIAL SYSTEM WITH INTEGRATED OUTPUT
-18-
50-A

4.1.4 Sensitive Inertial System with 
Discriminated Output
DESCRIPTION
Sensitive nonintegrating accelerometers are mounted 
within the object to be protected. The accelerom­
eter outputs are applied to an electronic processing 
device.
OPERATION
The accelerometer outputs are processed electron­
ically to discriminate between natural environmental 
motions and purposeful movement of an object. An 
output from the system results when the discrimina­
ted output of any accelerometer exceeds a preset 
threshold.
ADVANTAGES
The system can be made insensitive to normally 
occurring oscillatory motions. No external refer­
ence is required. Power requirements are modest.
LIMITATIONS
Many natural disturbances are random in nature and 
cannot be removed by frequency filtering.
4.1.5 Inertial System With Resetting Integrators 
DESCRIPTION
The outputs of accelerometers are applied to reset­
table integrators. A timer periodically resets 
each accelerometer to zero. Sets of high-pass
-19-

EG&G inc.
filters can be substituted for the resettable 
integrators.
OPERATION
The output of each accelerometer is integrated to 
provide velocity and distance signals. The inte­
grators are periodically reset to zero to prevent 
false alarms due to small cumulative errors (Drift).
ADVANTAGES
The system has all the advantages described in 
Section 4.1.3. In addition, the problem of drift 
is alleviated. Optimization, by use of electrical 
filters, may allow detection of accelerations ap­
proaching the sensitivity limit of available ac­
celerometers (see Appendix E).
LIMITATIONS
The system requires relatively sophisticated elec­
tronics to meet performance, power and size 
requirements.
4.1.6 Sensitive Inertial System with 
Coincident Noise Cancellation
DESCRIPTION
Two or more sets of sensitive accelerometers are 
placed in identical object containers so that each 
set is subject to motion by systems with identical 
dynamic characteristics. The system containers are 
placed some distance apart and interconnected by 
cabling protected from intrusion. (Note: 
Intrusion
protection may be an inherent property of the 
connecting cable.)
-20-

OPERATION
Each system would incorporate a comparison circuit 
so that phased signals of equal amplitudes would be 
disregarded or cancelled by the system. Since 
seismic and cultural noise is presumed to have a 
degree of uniformity within a small given area, 
such signals would be disregarded by the system.
ADVANTAGES
Accelerometers with sensitive settings could be 
used in areas where the establishment of heavy 
piers or motion isolation systems are impractical. 
The requirement that two or more separated systems 
be moved simultaneously in all degrees of freedom 
imposes a severe restraint upon unauthorized tam­
pering. The character of earth noise is unimpor­
tant as long as it is uniform within the area of 
object placement.
LIMITATIONS
The degree of uniformity of earth noise over an 
area of a size consistent with the desired object 
distance is an unknown factor and must be investi­
gated. The interconnecting cabling must be resis­
tant to tampering. The object containers would 
probably have to be constructed with a high degree 
of accuracy to assure similarity of dynamic 
characteristics.
-21-

4.1.7 Resonant Frequency Tester 
DESCRIPTION
The object container would be continuously or nearly 
continuously tested for the resonant frequency char­
acteristics of the container and its support by 
means of a piezoelectric driver-receiver system or 
its equivalent.
OPERATION
Since the resonant frequency of any structural sys­
tem is a function of many parameters and is practi­
cally unique to a particular system, comparing this 
resonant frequency with a reference frequency con­
tinuously or at selected intervals would cause a 
signal to be generated if a difference were detected.
ADVANTAGES
If the ground or surface upon which the container 
rests is part of the resonant frequency system, the 
system is highly tamper-proof. Seismic noise that 
might be translated to the resonant frequency will 
be ignored. The system can be designed to be re­
settable at new rest positions if desired.
LIMITATIONS
The concept of this system is largely conjectural.
The effects of temperature, moisture, and other 
weather conditions may cause a significant change 
in the resonant frequency. The system is an in­
trusion protection device rather than a motion-
-22-

INC.
sensing system. The resonant frequency may be 
difficult to detect if the forcing frequencies 
become large and continuous.
4.2 EARTH ENVIRONMENT SENSING SYSTEMS (External Reference)
4.2.1 Gravity Magnitude Sensing System 
DESCRIPTION
An electronically servoed spring-mass system
measures the force of gravity (vertical axis only).
The system detects variations in gravitational 
force resulting from changes in elevation of the 
obj ect.
OPERATION
The object to be protected is constrained to move 
vertically, e.g., by placing the object in a deep 
well. The gravity sensor is nulled and set to give 
an output if the gravitational force deviates from 
the null by more than a specified amount.
ADVANTAGES
The reference is virtually tamper-proof. The system 
will detect motion at infinitesimal velocities, since 
the system senses the position of the object in rela­
tion to the earth's gravitational field. The system 
is also sensitive to tilting or vertical accelerations. 
A prototype system is capable of detecting elevation 
changes beneath the earth's surface on the order of 
3 feet.
-23-

i
INC.
LIMITATIONS
The system is not sensitive to horizontal displace­
ment. It is also relatively expensive (approxi­
mately $20,000.00 for the prototype, 3-axis self­
leveling gravity sensor with 1200-second period, 
constructed by United Geophysical Corp., Pasadena, 
Calif.)
4.2.2 Earth Rotation Sensor - Gyrocompass 
DESCRIPTION
A gyrocompass provides true north information to a 
motion-sensing system.
OPERATION
The spin axis of a gyroscope is precessed until the 
apparent drift caused by the earth's rotation is 
zero. When this occurs, the axis of the gyroscope 
is aligned with the earth's axis providing an indi­
cation of true north.
ADVANTAGES
Portable instruments are capable of providing an 
indication of true north which is accurate to 1 minute 
of arc within 7 minutes after power is applied.
LIMITATIONS
The only information furnished by a gyrocompass is 
the direction of true north. Gyrocompass systems 
are relatively expensive ($10,000.00 for Belock 
Instrument Company's Compass and Theodolite.)
-24-

*
**
4.2.3 Earth Magnetic Field Sensor - Magnetic Compass 
DESCRIPTION
The direction of the earth's magnetic field is used 
in a motion sensing system to provide an azimuth 
reference. The dip of the earth's magnetic field 
is used to provide a latitude reference.
ADVANTAGES
A well-designed magnetic compass is capable of ap­
proximately 1/2° heading accuracy (Bendix Model 
15026 Flux Gate Compass).
LIMITATIONS
Compass accuracy diminishes at high latitudes, and 
a magnetic compass is not usable in polar regions. 
Magnetic dip gives only a very coarse indication 
of latitude. For instance, the magnetic dip in 
Puerto Rico varies from 0° to 23°. In Tennessee 
the range is from 66° to 68°, and in Alaska it is 
from 67° to 74°. Large ferrous objects such as 
automobiles and steel buildings distort the earth's 
field and may lead to faulty indications. Helmholz 
coils may be used to generate a false magnetic 
reference. Even small permanent magnets can disrupt 
the operation of magnetic field sensors, although 
the presence of such a magnet can be detected and 
used as an indication of attempted tampering.
Handbook of Chemistry and Physics. 42nd Edition.
Geotechnical Report #63-46, Six Degree of Freedom Test Podium 
at the USAF Standards Calibration Laboratory, pp. 16-17.
-25-

n
4.2.4 Level Sensing with Respect to 
Gravity
DESCRIPTION
Two or more sensitive liquid levels sense object- 
container tilting in excess of that which is 
naturally or culturally induced.
OPERATION
Levels provide go or no-go signals, or give con­
tinuous indication of direction and magnitude of 
tilt if electrolytic fluids are used.
ADVANTAGES
Level systems are cheap and reliable. Sensitivities 
to a second of arc or less are obtainable with 
coincident bubble, systems or with electronically 
sensed pendulums, such as K&E Electronic Tilt- 
Angle Transducer or equivalent. Go-no-go systems are 
electronically simple and continuous monitoring is 
only slightly more complicated. Most level systems 
would also act as a sort of "second order" acceler­
ometer that would detect "clumsy" accelerations in 
the horizontal plane.
LIMITATIONS
Level systems are subject to tampering by the same 
combination of tilt and horizontal movements noted 
for accelerometers in Appendix B. Earth tilts from 
natural causes can be in the seconds-of-arc region. 
This would make it necessary to set the detection 
level rather high unless rate information could be
-26-

eg Sits Inc.
utilized. Electrolytic levels may be grossly 
changed by temperature effects.
4.2.5 The Mossbauer Effect 
DESCRIPTION
The Mossbauer effect may be used to measure the 
relative velocity between an emitter and absorber 
of gamma rays. The effect depends upon the fact 
that a nucleus bound in a crystal lattice can 
emit and absorb gamma rays without any loss of 
energy to the lattice. A relative velocity be­
tween source and absorber of a few centimeters 
per second in either direction destroys the condi­
tion of resonance and absorption is greatly dimin­
ished .
To date, the most useful isotope for Mossbauer 
measurements has been Fe^ which emits a 14.4-kev 
gamma with a very sharp emission peak. At room 
temperature, a 40% decrease in gamma counting rate 
has been observed with Fe~^, as the source-absorber 
velocity was changed from 0.2 cm/second to zero 
cm/second/ (see Figure 4).
LIMITATIONS
At present, the Mossbauer effect does not offer an 
attractive means for sensing motion. Elaborate 
nuclear counting and spectrum analysis equipment is 
required, and the data are not easily interpreted
Mossbauer Effect: Applications to Magnetism, G. K. Wertheim,
Journal of Applied Physics, Supplement 32, No. 3, (1961).
-27-

n
<5"^
INC.
ABSORBER
THIN y 
SOURCE
detector}
COUNTER
a. MOSSBAUER EXPERIMENT WITH Fe57 SOURCE
-1.0 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0 0.2 04 0.6 0.8 1.0
VELOCITY cm/sec
b. ABSORPTION OF 14.4 kev GAMMA RAYS FROM Fe57
FIGURE 4. TYPICAL MOSSBAUER EXPERIMENT
-28-
51-A

HOsOmc.
in terms of velocity. While the Mossbauer effect 
is a powerful tool in the hands of a physicist, using 
known velocities to produce interesting nuclear 
phenomena, the reverse has not been true. In any 
event, the effect is not observable beyond the 
range of the gamma rays which are used. In the case 
of Fe"^ this imposes a practical limit of a few feet 
between the source and the detector. Velocity meas­
urements are limited to a maximum of about 2 
cm/second with Fe"^.
Since the Mossbauer effect was discovered as recently 
as 1958, it is reasonable to expect future develop­
ments that may result in more practical applications 
of the effect in sensing motion. For the present, 
simpler and less expensive proximity sensors are 
able to match the performance of systems based on the 
Mossbauer effect.
4.3 ARTIFICIAL ENVIRONMENT (EXTERNAL REFERENCE)
4.3.1 Microwave Transponder 
DESCRIPTION
A modified version of existing IFF (Identification - 
Friend or Foe) equipment is used to keep a large 
number of objects under surveillance from one cen­
tral location. IFF equipment is based upon a com­
bination of radar and coding techniques. It is 
used to distinguish between friendly and enemy 
aircraft and to positively identify ground forces.
In the motion sensing application, a microwave trans­
ponder is mounted within each object to be protected.
-29-

H
Each transponder is interrogated periodically to 
positively and securely identify the object and to 
determine its location. If all conditions are met, 
a coded confirmation signal is sent to the trans­
ponder to prevent automatic functioning of a timer- 
actuated alarm. (See Figure 5)
OPERATION
Several hundred transponders are controlled by a 
single master station. Each transponder has a pre­
arranged time schedule and interrogation code se­
quence so that only one transponder at a time will 
reply to the master station. Each time a trans­
ponder is interrogated, it transmits a different 
coded reply, based on its internally stored pro­
gram. The master•station compares each reply with 
a duplicate copy of the transponder program and de­
termines the range and azimuth of the transponder.
If the master station verifies the range, azimuth 
and identification of the transponder, it transmits 
a uniquely coded confirmation signal to the trans­
ponder. The confirmation signal deactivates the 
automatic alarm circuit until the next interrogation 
period and restarts the transponder interval timer 
in synchronization with the master station timer.
The transponder power is turned off by the timer 
until the next interrogation time window occurs.
In order to increase the reliability of the system, 
the alarm circuit may be adjusted so that it will not 
be actuated until the interrogation process has 
failed two times in succession, or each interrogation 
may consist of more than one coded interrogation and 
reply.
-30-

47-A
I
OJ 
I—1
I
1. TIME TO INTERROGATE *123 ON MODE 4, PROPER 
REPLY IS 3751
2. CHECK RANGE AZIMUTH AND CODING OF REPLY.
IF OKAY, SEND CONFIRMATION SIGNAL
IF NO CONFIRMATION SIGNAL 
IS RECEIVED WITHIN 3 sec, 
ALARM CIRCUIT WILL TRIP
5
FIGURES. MICROWAVE (IFF) TRANSPONDER

J^EBsB^o.
ADVANTAGES
A single master station can monitor many transponders, 
using a single set of microwave frequencies. The 
transponders may be moved within specified limits 
and still remain under control of the master sta­
tion. The system has no "drift," since it measures 
position rather than velocity or acceleration. 
Knowledge of the coding of one transponder is of 
no value in determining the coding of any other 
transponder. The average power requirement of a 
typical solid state transponder is less than 0.05 
watt, when operated for three seconds every five 
minutes. State-of-the-art techniques permit secure 
communication that is highly resistant to jamming.
LIMITATIONS
Range of the system is limited to 30 or 40 miles 
under the least favorable conditions. The trans­
ponder antenna must be located with a reasonably 
unobstructed line of sight to the master station. 
Microwave frequencies allocated for the system 
cannot be used for other purposes. A bookkeeping 
task is involved in updating codes and transferring 
objects into and out of the system. Loss of the 
master station will cause a false alarm at each 
object unless there is a backup master station.
TYPICAL SYSTEMS
Commercially available hardware can perform all the 
functions described above. Commercial aircraft 
carry IFF transponders which are interrogated by
-32-

ground stations that transmit coded pulses at 
1,030 megacycles. The transponders reply at 
1,090 megacycles with any one of 4,096 differently 
coded pulse trains. In one mode of operation, the 
transponder is interrogated by a pair of pulses 
spaced at 21 microseconds. The transponder auto­
matically furnishes a coded reply that corresponds 
to the altitude of the aircraft.
Packard Bell Corporation has developed an all solid- 
state transponder which weighs approximately 8 pounds 
and requires 4.5 watts of power when the transmitter 
is operating. Unit cost is approximately $10,000 
in quantities of 50.
Packard Bell Corporation also manufactures cryptically 
secure IFF transponders. These devices provide a 
secure means for positively identifying an object.
No further information is available without a "need 
to know," except that the equipment itself is classi­
fied and could not be used in the field without an 
armed guard. Standard IFF equipment can be employed 
as described above to provide a system that is 
cryptically secure.
An interesting system results if a microwave trans­
ponder is used in conjunction with integrating accel­
erometers. The confirmation signal transmitted by 
the transponder after each successful interrogation 
resets the accelerometers to zero. In this way, the 
two devices compliment each other. The transponder 
makes up for the most serious fault of the integrating
-33-

INC.
accelerometers ... drift. The accelerometers en­
hance the reliability of the microwave system in 
that a single unsuccessful interrogation does not 
necessarily result in an alarm. The accelerometers 
protect the object in the event of faulty interroga­
tions until drift (or actual motion) results in an 
output.
4.3.2 Proximity Detection System 
DESCRIPTION
Detectors within the object sense the proximity of 
a nearby "immovable" object (Figures 6 & 7) . A 
concrete pier serves as a relatively immovable 
object by virtue of anti-intrusion accelerometers 
implanted in the concrete. Objects are secured 
to the pier in a way which causes a maximum of de­
tectable disturbances when each object is removed.
OPERATION
The objects are placed in depressions or "wells" in 
the top surface of the pier. The objects have to be 
raised up before it is possible to insert anything 
beneath them that might serve as a false reference. 
Lifting the object more than a few thousandths of 
an inch causes the sensors to trip the alarm circuit. 
Any attempt to remove the pier or to tamper with it 
is detected and results in retraction of the ma­
terial which the proximity detectors are sensing.
The system is inexpensive and makes use of commercially 
available proximity sensors which operate by means
-34-

EG&Q inc.
OBJECT
LEVEL SENSOR (MERCURY SWITCH)
CONCRETE
BOSS ON OBJECT
INTRUSION
DETECTOR
ACCESS
COVER
'nUAMVIl I T\
SENSOR \
CONCRETE
SPRING
WIRES
SENSED- 
MATERAL
SOLENOID
•
LATCH
■*: ■
CONCRETE
FIGURE 6. PROXIMITY SENSOR SYSTEM ( PIER REFERENCE)
-35-
52-A

fl
INC.
VERTICAL
ACCELEROMETER
OBJECT
IRON PLATE
STRONG MAGNET
CONCRETE
STRONG MAGNETS AND LONG OVERHANG 
MAKE GENTLE ( LOW ACCELERATION ) 
REMOVAL DIFFICULT
STRAIN GAGES AND VEHICLE DETECTORS 
IN FLOOR PREVENT UNDETECTED APPROACH 
OF LARGE EQUIPMENT REQUIRED 
FOR REMOVAL OF OBJECT
INTRUSION DETECTOR;
FIGURE 7. PIER REFERENCE
-36-
54 -A

INC.
of capacitance, inductance, eddy currents, magnetic 
fields, light beams, etc.
DISADVANTAGES
The reference (pier) is accessible and must be 
adequately protected against tampering. This may 
make it necessary to restrict access to the vicinity 
of the pier to prevent inadvertent triggering of 
the alarm. Power consumption of commercially de­
signed equipment may be excessive.
4.3.3 Laser Range Finders and Velocity Sensors 
DESCRIPTION
The laser can be used as a range finder in either 
the time-of-flight or the interferometric mode so 
as to locate an object with respect to a fixed 
reference. A time-of-flight laser range finder 
can have a precision of 5 centimeters over a total 
range of 200 meters, which is sufficiently accurate 
for the application. The interferometric mode can 
have a precision of less than 1 microinch over a 
total range of 200 inches.
OPERATION
One or more units of either type could be arranged 
to automatically alarm when the object is removed 
with respect to a secure reference. The laser need 
not operate continuously, but could make spot 
checks at a suitable time interval.
-37-

INC.
ADVANTAGES
Compact systems of the time-of-flight type are in 
existence. The narrow beam of either system would 
be difficult to jam. Either system can provide 
additional protection, because the reference reflector 
must be accurately aligned with the system. Simul­
taneous movement of the object and the reference 
would be difficult if accurate spatial and angular 
relationships must be maintained.
LIMITATIONS
Both systems would suffer from effects of atmospheric 
and weather changes. The precision of the laser 
interferometer requires extremely stable source and 
reference mountings to avoid blurring. Both systems 
require considerable power. Both systems must have 
a secure external reference.
4.3.4 Velocity Sensors Using Doppler Effect 
DESCRIPTION
The velocity of an object relative to its surround­
ings may be measured by the doppler effect. When a 
source of sound or radio waves moves with respect 
to a receiver of the same waves, the received fre­
quency changes according to the relative velocities. 
Similarly, if the source and receiver are located at 
one point and the waves are reflected from a surface 
back to the receiver, the motion of the surface to 
or away from the source-receiver produces a frequency 
shift. In the latter case the receiver is close to 
the source and can readily compare the frequencies
-38-

n
of the reflected and transmitted waves. Because 
the comparison can be made without knowledge of the 
exact transmitted frequency, high stability fre­
quency generators are unnecessary.
OPERATION
A sound-wave system based on this principle is now 
available as an intrusion alarm. The unit emits a 
continuous high frequency sound, and is placed in the 
room to be secured. The sound reflects back and 
forth from all objects in the room and a small 
portion of all the reflections is sensed by the 
receiver. The motion of any object in the room 
generates a sound wave of different frequency 
which is immediately detected.
Doppler radar systems usually have beam antennas 
that allow velocity measurement of a certain point 
or object. This type of system is used to measure 
the velocities of aircraft and of automobiles. 
Although they may be used over larger ranges than 
sound doppler systems, radar systems require some­
what more power, are more expensive, and their 
sensitivity is limited to about 1 foot per second.
ADVANTAGES
Systems are in existence. A specific fixed refer­
ence is not required, since the systems can "adapt" 
to features in their environment.
-39-

LIMITATIONS
The velocity sensitivity of these systems may be 
limited by reflections from air density gradients.
In addition, doppler systems cannot sense a very 
slow motion. A secure reference is required. The 
sound doppler in a closed area is primarily an 
intrusion device and not a motion sensor. Consi­
derable power is required.
4.3.5 Laser Velocimeter 
DESCRIPTION
The laser velocimeter is a device developed for the 
continuous monitoring of the linear speed of such 
items as autos, conveyors, and strip stock from 
rolling mills. A device developed by General Pre­
cision, Inc., (G.P.) can measure velocity from 0 
to 5000 feet/min. and can tell direction of move­
ment .
OPERATION
Specific details of operating principle is pro­
prietary information, but G.P. indicates the device 
can sense a diffraction pattern. It operates off 
most any type of surface except mirrors or perfectly 
adsorbent surfaces. G.P. feels that surface substi- 
stution would be very difficult without actuating 
the velocimeter.
-40-

ADVANTAGES
Advantages are difficult to cite unless more is 
known about the principle of the device. In sensing 
a diffraction pattern, the device could be respond­
ing to a unique property of the small area (1/4" dia.) 
at which it is beamed.
LIMITATIONS
Limitations are also difficult to cite. The present 
unit is bulky and power consuming, but no attempt 
at miniaturization has been made.
4.3.6 Pattern Recognition Devices 
DESCRIPTION
This is a general class of devices that depend on 
the visual uniqueness of the object's environment.
If the environment could be sensed in a series or 
matrix of tonal values by photodiodes or other 
devices, a unique pattern could be developed either 
macroscopically (e.g., major geographical features), 
or microscopically (e.g., the reflection pattern 
from the ground or surface over which the device 
rests) .
OPERATION
A matrix of photodiodes focused, for example, upon 
a gravel surface would transmit their outputs to a 
matrix memory comparator Upon establishment of a 
stable position of the object, the comparator would 
lock into its memory the photodiode outputs. Any
-41-

m
INC.
change in any set number of outputs would trigger 
an alarm.
ADVANTAGES
The system can be set to a unique pattern that is 
a property of the object's immediate environment. 
Substitution of an identical pattern would be 
extremely difficult. No special reference, such 
as a pier, is required.
LIMITATIONS
Continuous illumination of the sensed area would be 
necessary to avoid diurnal variation. The sensed 
area must be protected from weather (rain) or other 
elements that would tend to alter its reflection 
properties. No such unit exists. Power drain 
might be high.
-42-

5. 
RECOMMENDATIONS
A comprehensive study of motion sensing must cover a wide 
range of disciplines, including physical metrology, optics, 
electronics, physics, and many others. In surveying the field 
the present study has not, therefore, probed deeply into many 
areas that show promise, nor has it considered some of the more 
exotic approaches, such as sensing systems based in biological 
and physiological sensory activities. The study has, however, 
identified several sensing systems that deserve more intensive 
investigation, and it has pointed out several areas where exist­
ing commercial hardware can be used to verify motion sensing 
principles and system designs.
Based on the findings of this- study, EG&G recommends the 
following theoretical and experimental work.
1. 
Build an inertial system that will test as many of 
the principles discussed in this report as possible.
The system should be designed for maximum flexibility 
so that threshold sensitivity, resetting integration, 
and coincidence noise suppression parameters may be 
investigated at lowest cost. Since the literature 
does not show agreement on the magnitude of cultural 
seismic noise, this inertial system should be field 
tested to determine its performance under a variety of 
environmental conditions.
2. 
Continue the investigation of IFF and low-frequency 
RF transponder systems to more adequately define 
their role in the solution to the motion sensing 
problem. IFF and RF transponder systems offer the 
promise of controlling objects which must have freedom 
of movement over distances of tens or hundreds of miles,
-43-

EG&Ginc.
yet remain under positive control. They also offer a 
potential solution when objects are mounted portably 
and a relatively large amount of natural motion is 
unavoidable.
It would be possible to Duild a working motion sensing 
system from existing hardware. However, it would be 
more economical at this time to concentrate on develop­
ing specifications that will assure the best solution 
to the motion sensing problem in terms of cost, security, 
and practicability.
3. 
Investigate pattern recognition on a theoretical basis. 
Particular emphasis should be placed on further de­
fining the usefulness of reflection diffraction patterns 
to this concept.
4. 
Evaluate proximity sensors, and if they are found to 
be applicable to a particular case of the general 
solution, build a simple system to test the theory.
-44-

INC.
APPENDICES
A. ANNOTATED MOTION SENSOR INDEX
B. 
ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND VIBRATION
C. 
TILTING AN ACCELEROMETER PACKAGE TO CONCEAL 
LINEAR ACCELERATION.
D. 
DISABLING INFLUENCES AND TRIER POSSIBLE 
EFFECT ON MOTION SENSING SYSTEMS
E. 
OPTIMIZATION OF INERTIAL SYSTEMS WITH 
RESETTING INTEGRATORS
-45-

EtS&GiNc.
APPENDIX A
ANNOTATED MOTION SENSOR INDEX
1. 
SENSORS WITH AN INTRINSIC REFERENCE
(INERTIAL SENSORS)
1.1 
RATE OF CHANGE OF ACCELERATION
1.1.1 Jerkmeter - Output is obtained by differentiating the 
signal from a conventional accelerometer. In the motion 
sensing application, the output would have to be inte­
grated again to yield useful information.
Typical Instrument:
Systron Donner Model 4305. Range ±0.5 g/sec.
Price $750.
1.2 
ACCELERATION
1.2.1 Linear Accelerometer - Acceleration is measured by means 
of the relationship:
Acceleration = ?!orce .
Mass
Less expensive instruments consist of a single-degree- 
of-freedom spring-constrained mass. Displacement of the 
mass is measured by one type or another of electrical 
pickoff, giving an output proportional to acceleration. 
High-performance inertial guidance accelerometers are 
generally of the force balance type. The force which 
restrains the mass is generated and measured electron­
ically.
-46-

EG&Gihc.
Typical Aircraft-Grade Accelerometer:
Giannini Model 24171. Range ±1 g. Threshold 
0.02 g. Price $350.
Typical Inertial Guidance Accelerometer:
Palomar Model 3800. Range ±0.050 g. Threshold 
1 x 10 ^ g. Price $1,350.
1.2.2 Angular Accelerometer - Same as a linear accelerometer,
except the mass has a single rotational degree of freedom 
instead of a translational degree of freedom.
Typical Instrument:
o
Systron-Donner Model 4525. Threshold 0.12°/sec . 
Price $1,495.
1.3 VELOCITY
1.3.1 Integrating Linear Accelerometer - The output of a linear 
accelerometer is integrated electronicallly to provide
a velocity output.
Typical Instrument:
Sperry Model SYA 1000. Range is unlimited with 
- 6
1 x 10 g to 30 g accelerations applied. Linearity 
3 x 10 ^ g with acceleration limited to 1 g maximum. 
Prototype instruments have been built, but the 
manufacturer is not planning at present to produce 
this item.
1.3.2 Rate Gyro (Angular Velocity) - A single degree of freedom 
gyroscope in which precession of the gyro is spring re­
strained. Degree of precession is proportional to the 
rate of angular movement.
-47-

INC.
Typical Instruments:
Kearfott Model C70 2021. Threshold 0.01°/sec.
Power requirement 3.5 watts. Operating life
1,000 hr. Price $1,000.
Sperry Model SYG 2000 Fluid Sphere Gyro.
Threshold 0.02°/hr. Operating life 10,000 hr.
Price $2,500.
1.4 
DISPLACEMENT
1.4.1 Integrating Linear Accelerometer - The signal from an 
accelerometer is doubly integrated to provide an output 
proportional to displacement (distance).
Typical Instrument:
Sperry SYA 1000. See 1.3.1 above.
1.4.2 Free Gyro (Angular Displacement) - An unrestrained two- 
degree-of-freedom gyro with electrical pickoffs.
Typical Instrument:
Kearfott Model C70 2315. Drift rate 0.5°/min. 
for each axis. Power consumption 7.5 watts.
1.4.3 Rate Integrating Gyro - A single degree of freedom gyro­
scope is constrained by damping so that displacement
of the gimbal is proportional to the integral of the 
angular rate (proportional to angular displacement).
Typical Instruments:
Kearfott C70 2590 001 (Gas Bearing). Drift rate 
less than 0.015°/hour; actual figure available on
-48-

n
EG&GtNc.
a "need-to-know" basis only. Operating life 40,000 hr. 
Power consumption 8 watts, plus heater.
Price $18,000.
Ball bearing version of the gyro described above.
Drift rate 0.015°/hr. Operating life 3,000 hr.
Price $3,000.
2. 
SENSORS WITH AN EXTERNAL REFERENCE
(EARTH ENVIRONMENT)
2.1 
GRAVITY MAGNITUDE
2.1.1 Self Leveling Gravity Meter - An instrument which is 
aligned with the force of gravity by means of a servo 
system. The instrument consists of an electronically 
servoed spring-mass system with an extremely long period 
(~1,200 seconds). The instrument responds to the steady- 
state force of gravity but is not affected by "high- 
frequency" disturbances such as earthquakes and earth- 
borne cultural noise.
Typical Instrument:
See U.S. Patent 2,776,560, "Means for Measuring and 
Generating Motion." United Geophysical Corporation 
has constructed a three-axis prototype based upon 
this principle. It is capable of detecting earth 
tide effects with a magnitude of approximately 
5 x 10 ^ g. Cost of the prototype was approximately 
$20,000.
2.1.2 Pendulum - Early determinations of the force of gravity 
were made with pendulums, such as the Kater pendulum.
More modern devices employ very long period spring-mass
-49-

INC.
systems. In either case, the apparatus is not amenable 
to automatic operation.
2.1.3 Mossbauer Gravity Detector - The increase in energy of 
photons falling through the earth's gravitational 
field (through a height of approximately 3 feet or more) 
prevents them from being resonantly absorbed. This 
represents a cumbersome and, so far, impractical means 
for sensing the force of gravity.
2.1.4 Kater Pendulum - A compound pendulum which is made and 
used in such a way that it is exactly equivalent to an 
ideal simple pendulum. The period of such a pendulum is
and the force of gravity is given by
g =
8
2.1.5 Spring-Mass Instrument - See U. S. Patent 2,293,437, 
"Force Measuring Device" and U.S. Patent 2,377,889, 
"Force Measuring Instrument."
Typical Instrument:
LaCoste & Romberg Model G Portable Gravity Meter. 
Price $10,000.
-50-

EzGkG imc.
2.2 
GRAVITY DIRECTION
2.2.1 Schuler "Pendulum" - This device maintains a true 
vertical reference regardless of applied accelerations. 
Practical Schuler pendulums are constructed by doubly 
integrating the output of accelerometers in two axes 
and using these outputs to control a gyro stabilized 
platform. The result is a system which behaves as if 
it were a simple pendulum with a period of 84.4 minutes 
(or a length equal to the radius of the earth).
Typical Instrument:
Aeroflex Type LS-19. Accuracy under dynamic 
(aircraft) conditions is ±3 minutes of arc.
Price $30,000.
2.2.2 Simple Pendulum - A simple pendulum may be used to sense 
the direction of gravitational force as long as no 
acceleration is applied to the system. It should be 
noted that no device can distinquish between gravitational 
force and a force caused by linear acceleration.
Typical Instruments:
UED Seismic Switch Model SP-210. Period 1 sec. 
Magnetic eddy current damping. Provides an 
electrical closure if tilt (or acceleration) occurs 
in any direction. Price $350.
Barry Controls Air-Gauge Tracked Pendulum. See 
Instrument Society of America Preprint Number 
17.10-1-65, "Gravity Sensing, Vibration Isolated 
Pier." Accuracy better than 0.7 arc sec. Price 
$28,000 for two-axis system complete with servo
-51-

fl
valves, etc., for use in controlling a pneumatically 
stabilized pier.
2.2.3 Mercury-Pool Tilt Transducer - A mercury pool forms a 
variable capacitance with four metallic plates. Bridge 
circuits sense unequal capacitances between the various 
plates and the mercury pool and produce outputs propor­
tional to tilt in two directions.
Typical Instrument:
Geotechnical Model 18279 Tilt Measuring System. 
Sensitivity 0.02 arc sec. Price (dual channel) 
$4,350.
2.2.4 Mercury Switch - A bead of mercury is free to move 
within a glass vial. As the vial is tilted back and 
forth, the mercury makes and breaks contact with elec­
trodes mounted in the glass. Mercury switches are 
generally sensitive to vibration.
Typical Sensor:
Hamlin SMT-20. Differential angle between make 
and break, . Price $8.
2.2.5 Electrolytic Tilt Transducer - An electrolyte and an air 
bubble are contained in a glass vial. Two sets of 
electrodes protrude into the electrolyte. As the vial 
is tilted back and forth and the bubble moves under the 
influence of gravity, the resistance seen by one set of 
electrodes becomes greater than that seen by the other.
A nonlinear function of tilt results in which there is
a sharp null at zero tilt. Changing the shape of the 
glass and the location of the electrodes can alter the 
shape of the output curve.
-52-

n
INC.
Typical Sensors:
See U.S. Patent 2,592,941, "Apparatus for Determining 
Location of Bubbles in Tubes in Level Instruments."
Hamlin Model ED-121 Gravity Sensing Electrolytic 
Transducer. Sensitivity - lh minute tilt produces 
20% of full scale output. Price $15.
2.3 
EARTH'S ROTATION
2.3.1 Gyrocompass - The axis of a gyroscope is kept parallel 
to the earth's axis by precessing it until the apparent 
drift due to the earth's rotation is zero.
Typical Instrument:
Belock Instrument Co. Compass and Theodolite.
Accuracy - 1 minute of arc within 7 minutes after 
power is applied. Price $10,000.
2.3.2 Foucault Pendulum - A massive pendulum will tend to 
oscillate in a fixed plane in inertial space. At the 
South Pole or at the North Pole, such a pendulum will 
undergo a 360° change in its apparent plane of oscilla­
tion in 24 hours due to rotation of the earth. At a 
given latitude <i>, the rate of rotation of a line on 
the surface of the earth relative to a Foucault pendulum 
is w = 15 Sin <i> degrees per hour.
2.4 
EARTH'S MAGNETIC FIELD
2.4.1 Magnetometer - The strength and direction of the earth's 
magnetic field are measured electronically.
-53-

INC.
Typical Instrument:
Bell Model 120 Hall Effect Gaussmeter. Accuracy
±17o of full scale. Ranges include 1 gauss full
scale. Price $580.
2.4.2 Magnetic Compass - The direction of the horizontal com­
ponent of the earth's magnetic field is measured by means 
of a floated magnet or by means of an electronic magnetic 
field sensor.
Typical Instrument:
Bendix Model 15026 Flux Gate (r) Compass. Accuracy ±^°.
2.5 
POSITION OF CELESTIAL BODIES
2.5.1 Star Sensor - An electro-optical device which is used 
in tracking the position of a star to provide a naviga­
tional fix.
Typical System:
General Precision STINGS (Stellar Inertial Guidance
System).
2.5.2 Sun Sensor - An electro-optical device which is used in 
tracking the position of the sun.
Typical Sensor:
HH Controls Refractosyn Model S-4. Sensitivity
15 microamp/arc minute at null.
2.6 
OTHER EARTH ENVIRONMENT REFERENCES
-54-

INC.
2.6.1 Barometric Pressure - Approximate altitude of an object 
can be determined if the ambient air pressure is measured.
Typical Instrument:
Bendix Model 15527 Barometric Altitude Control.
Threshold sensitivity 1 foot at sea level.
2.6.2 Earth Resistivity
2.6.3 Earth Structure (Boomer)
2.6.4 Cosmic Ray Intensity
2.6.5 Air Temperature
2.6.6 Optical Pattern Recognition
2.6.7 Radar Pattern Recognition
3.0 
SENSORS WITH AN EXTERNAL REFERENCE (MAN MADE ENVIRONMENT)
3.1 
RADAR AND RADIO
3.1.1 RF Radar - Radio frequency energy is transmitted to an 
object and a portion of the energy is reflected back to 
the transmitter. The time delay between the transmitted 
and reflected pulse is measured (Pulse Modulated Radar) 
to give an indication of range, or the frequency shift 
between the transmitted and return energy is measured 
(Doppler Radar) to give an indication of velocity.
-55-

INC.
Typical Instruments:
AN/APG 30 Radar Set. Range 6,000 feet. Accuracy 
±30 feet. Power requirement 450 watts.
Weinschel Engineering Co. Microwave Micrometer.
Range 2 feet. Accuracy ±1 microinch. Price $12,000.
3.1.2 Laser Frequency Radar - Operates on the same principle 
as Doppler radar, using electromagnetic radiation gen­
erated by a laser.
Typical Instrument:
Eldorado Electronics Model 5421 Microminiature 
Laser Range Unit. Range 10,000 yards. Accuracy 
1 yard. Size 18 cubic inches. Weight 19 ounces. 
Power requirement 3 watts. Price $5,000.
3.1.3 Radio Navigational Aids - Signals from transmitters at 
fixed locations are used in determining the position of 
ships and aircraft.
3.1.3.1 IFF - Radar techniques are used to locate and 
positively identify objects which contain 
special radar transponders.
Typical Instruments:
Interrogator set - AN/APX-28.
Wilcox Series 814 Transponder. Range 200 
miles (airborne applications). Coding - 
4,096 pilot selectable codes plus automatic 
altitude reporting feature.
-56-

g,^El3&G inc.
Packard Bell Prototype Transponder. Range 
60 miles (over terrain - land based), peak 
power 40 watts. Input power 4% watts when 
transmitting. One second warmup time (to 
charge capacitors). Price $10,000.
3.1.3.2 Low-Frequency Distance Measuring Equipment 
Phase measurement techniques determine the 
location of low frequency transponders.
Typical System:
Cubic Corporation Ship and Aircraft Location 
Equipment (SALE). Range - 150 miles. 
Accuracy 0.15 mile. Frequency 1.75 Me. 
Secure coding capabilities exist.
3.1.3.3 LORAN - C
3.1.4 X-ray, Gamma-Ray Sensors
3.1.5 Mossbauer Detectors - Resonant absorption of certain 
gamma rays is decreased if there is a velocity between 
the crystalline source and the absorber. The 14.4-kev 
gamma from Fe^^ is the most useful radiation yet dis­
covered for observing Mossbauer effects.
3.2 
SONAR
3.2.1 Transponders
3.2.2 Echo Detectors
-57-

n
3.3 
OPTICAL
3.3.1 Optical Target Tracker - An electro-optical device 
"locks on" to a target and produces an electrical output 
corresponding to changes in the relative azimuth or 
elevation of the target. There is no physical or electri­
cal connection between the tracker and the target, and 
the tracker may be located a mile or more from the 
target.
Typical Instrument:
Optron Model 680 Tracker. Range 200 feet. Resolution 
0.050 inch. Power requirement 40 watts. Price 
$6,500.
3.3.2 Light Beam Reflection Angle - A light beam produced by 
an autocollimator is reflected from a mirror attached
to an object. Any movement of the object which produces 
an extremely slight rotation of the mirror will result 
in an electrical signal from the autocollimator.
Typical Instrument:
Kollmorgen K 342 Dual Axis Autocollimator. Accuracy 
0.2 arc second over a range of ±2.5 minutes. The 
light source output is chopped to reduce the effect 
of ambient lighting (and also reduce the likelihood 
of j amming).
3.3.3 Light Beam Interruption - Objects are located so that 
any motion will result in interruption of a light beam 
that impinges on a photocell.
-58-

J^EGsB^
Typical Instrument:
Farmer Electric LS-3 Light Source and PE-3AF-64
Photoelectric Scanner System. Range 50 feet.
Power required 16 watts. Price $123.
3.3.4 Interferometer - Interference of light beams provides 
a means for measuring distances on the order of the 
wavelength of light. Laser technology makes it possible 
to extend these measurements over relatively long 
distances.
Typical Instruments:
Atomic Laboratories M-3 Michelson Interferometer.
Price $200.
OPTO-Mechanisms Laser Interferometer. Range 200
inches. Accuracy ±5 x 10”^ inches.
3.3.5 Infrared Tracker
3.3.6 Closed Circuit Television
3.4 
PROXIMITY DETECTORS
3.4.1 Mechanical Contact
3.4.2 Electrical Continuity
3.4.3 Magnetic - An electronic sensor detects the presence of 
nearby magnetic materials.
-59-

^EGsG^
Typical Instruments :
Ferrous Metal Detector. General Equipment Co.
GO-Switch Model 43. Sensing distance 3/8 inch.
Price $40,
Permanent Magnet Sensor. Hamlin Magnetic Reed 
Switch Model MRG-DT. Sensitivity 80 amp-turns 
or equivalent permanent magnetic field. Price 
$4.
3.4.4 Capacitive, Inductive - Changes in capacitance or in­
ductance indicate changes in the proximity of nearby 
ferrous or nonferrous metals.
Typical Instruments:
(Capacitive). Decker Model 902-1.
(Inductive). See U.S. Patent 2,922,880 and 
RE 24,779, "Electrical Sensing Apparatus." These 
patents describe a device which relies upon eddy 
current losses (due to induced currents in nearby 
conductive material) to detune an oscillator circuit, 
resulting in a cessation of oscillation. The 
Electro Co. Model 4902 Proximity Switch is based 
on this principle. Price $84.
3.4.5 Light Reflection - The intensity of a reflected light 
beam gives an indication of the distance from an object.
Typical Instrument:
Mechanical Technology Inc. Fotonic Sensor. Range 
0 - 0.360 inch. Maximum output occurs at 0.015 
inch.
-60-

Jlj, EGstG inc.
4. 
SENSOR ACCESSORIES
4.1 
Background Elimination
4.1.1 Shock and Vibration Isolators
Typical Instruments:
Lord Co., Erie Pennsylvania
Barry Controls, Glendale, California
Firestone Co., Los Angeles, California (air springs).
4.1.2 Seismic Block Isolators (Passive)
Typical Instruments:
Manufactured by Barry Controls, Glendale, California
4.2.1 Frequency Discrimination (Filters)
4.2.2 Frequency Pattern Recognition
Typical Instrument:
Sperry Gyroscope Co. "Sceptron". Sceptron is the 
code name of a program initiated and subsequently 
dropped by the Sperry Gyroscope Co. in which quartz 
rods responded to various audio frequencies. By 
exposing photographic plates to light transmitted 
by vibrating fibers, masks are made which result 
in a maximum signal from a photo cell when the 
exact pattern of frequencies is repeated. The 
latest information on Sceptron is that the "Institute 
for Sciehtific Information" has patented a sonic 
lock based upon this principle. (See Product 
Engineering September 27, 1966, page 36.)
-61-

J^eg&Gkic.
APPENDIX B
ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND VIBRATION
Microseisms and earthborne cultural noise limit the ulti­
mate sensitivity of acceleration and velocity sensing systems. 
Background vibrations exist in a wide range of amplitudes, 
depending upon location.
In the quietest locations, removed from sources of cultural
Q
noise, the average ground motion is on the order of 1 x 10 g 
at frequencies below 100 cps. The average for locations which 
are free from cultural noise is approximately 1 x 10 ^ g at fre­
quencies below 100 cps. Over long periods of time, the maximum 
for locations which are free from cultural noise is approximately
_ g
1 x 10 g. In a city, the average background vibration below 
100 cps is on the order of 1 x 10 ^ g . Except for earthquakes, 
natural disturbances are not likely to interfere with any but 
the most sensitive of motion sensing systems.
Cultural noise, on the other hand, can become a serious
_2
problem in relatively insensitive systems. Accelerations of 10 
g to 10 ^ g have been reported at a location 50 feet from a 
railroad track with a short train passing at 25 mph. A single 
automobile on a road 100 feet away produced accelerations at 8 
cps and above of 2 x 10 ^ g to 4 x 10 ^ g. Medium traffic on a 
road 1/4 mile away produced accelerations on the order of 7 x 
10 ^ g. By removing production machinery from a gyroscope and
* Brune, J. N., Oliver, J., "The Seismic Noise of the Earth's 
Surface," Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America. 
Volume 49, No. 4, October 1959, pp. 349-353.
** Kamperman, G. W., Vibration Isolation Effectiveness of Inertia 
Pads Resting on Soil, Bolt, Beranek and Newman Inc., May 16, 
1963.
-62-

i
HO&0INC.
accelerometer engineering facility, the earthborne noise level
- 3 
- A 
'kick
was reduced from approximately 8 x 10 g to 2 x 10 g.
With reasonable care in avoiding cultural noise, it seems 
reasonable to design a motion sensing system to operate with
_3
levels of background vibration not to exceed 1 x 10 g. Unless 
a system can tolerate this level of background noise, some degree 
of vibration isolation would appear necessary.
•kick Keller, Leo A., Test Pad Stability Program at the Aero 
Division, Minneapolis-Honeywell Regulator Co., November
9, 1962.
-63-

n
APPENDIX C
TILTING AN ACCELEROMETER PACKAGE TO CONCEAL 
LINEAR ACCELERATION
Suppose that a motion sensing system measures acceleration 
along three orthagonal axes, as shown in Figure C-l.
Now the system is accelerated at 0.100 g in the direction 
sensed by Accelerometer II. (This example is limited to two 
dimensions so the output of Accelerometer III may be neglected. 
The problem is essentially the same in three dimensions.)
The system is rotated so that one component of gravita­
tional force just balances the acceleration force along the 
sensitive axis of Accelerometer II.
In Figure C-2, resultant (r) of the force of gravity (g) 
and the applied acceleration (a) acts perpendicularly to the 
sensitive axis of Accelerometer II so that the output of 
Accelerometer II remains zero.
* An acceleration of 0.100 g acting for 10 seconds will
result in a velocity of 22 miles per hour. In 30 seconds, 
the velocity will reach 66 miles per hour.
ACCELEROMETER IH (ZERO g STEADY STATE OUTPUT)
ACCELEROMETER U (ZERO g STEADY STATE OUTPUT)
ACCELEROMETER I ( 1.000 g STEADY STATE OUTPUT)
FIGURE C-l. THREE-AXIS SYSTEM
45-A
*
-64-

OBJECT MOVES 
IN THIS DIRECTION. 
ACCELERATION 
FORCE a IS IN THE 
OPPOSITE DIRECTION.
ACCELEROMETER I
ACCELEROMETER H
a
O.IOO g
FIGURE C-2. EFFECT OF LINEAR ACCELERATION
44 - A
Accelerometer I senses the resultant force (r), whose 
magnitude in this example is:
That is, the applied acceleration of 0.100 g is detectable 
only as a 0.005-g acceleration. Ninety-five percent of the 
acceleration has been concealed in this example by tilting the 
object and its accelerometer package approximately 5%° while it 
is being accelerated. The acceleration seen by accelerometer 
I is increased only (from 1.000 g to 1.005 g). Figure C-3 
shows the conditions under which there will be no change 
in output of Accelerometer II. The change in output of 
Accelerometer I is shown as AR.
0 = tan 
= 5° 42
-65-

inc.
AR = 5.0x10
AR = 4.0x10
AR = 2.4x10 39
AR = 1.8x10'
.2x10
A.R= 8.0 x 10'
AR = 4.5xl0'4g
AR = 2 0x10'
AR = CHANGE IN VERTICAL
ACCELEROMETER OUTPUT
AR = 5.0 x I0"59
04 
0.06
LINEAR ACCELERATION, g
FIGURE C-3. ANGLE OF TILT REQUIRED TO CONCEAL HORIZONTAL ACCELERATION
-66-
46-A

APPENDIX D
DISABLING INFLUENCES AND THEIR POSSIBLE EFFECT 
ON MOTION SENSING SYSTEMS
1. 
Physical Intrusion
Almost any electrical or mechanical device can be disabled 
if access can be obtained to its individual parts. Elec­
tronic or mechanical devices may be rendered ineffective 
if they can be totally destroyed along with any anti­
intrusion device before either has a chance to function 
(e.g.j by use of gunfire to blast away all the protective 
devices). For the purpose of this report, it is assumed 
that all systems are protected by effective anti-intrusion 
devices.
2. 
Contamination
Electrical and mechanical devices can be rendered inopera­
tive if their working parts are subjected to corrosive atmos­
pheres, acids, or other matter which will cause short cir­
cuits or prevent mechanical parts from moving. Excessive 
air pressure or vacuum may also be considered as "contami­
nants."
3. 
Radioactivity
Transistor circuits are damaged by radiation in excess of
6 112
approximately 10 roentgens (gamma), 10 n/sq cm (fast
13
neutrons), of 10 nvt (thermal neutrons). Metallic objects 
are not generally harmed by radiation. Plastics, rubber 
and oils are damaged to varying degrees by radiation. Ra­
diation-caused ionization may result in electrical leakage 
and malfunctioning of sensitive electronic circuits.
Shielding against possible radiation damage is not compati­
ble with compact, lightweight design.
-67-

i
INC.
4. 
Electromagnetic Radiation
Radio frequency interference can disrupt the operation of 
electronic circuits. This interference can, however, be 
minimized by rf shielding.
5. Magnetism
Strong magnetic fields may cause malfunctioning of mechani­
cal devices and certain types of electronic equipment.
6. 
Electrical Discharge
Artificial lightning may damage electronic or mechanical 
equipment.
7. 
Electron Beam
Commercial electron-beam welding equipment is capable of 
producing a beam that will penetrate an object and cause 
instantaneous internal damage. A narrow beam (as small as
0.010 diameter) can destroy a vital component within an 
object without affecting adjacent protective devices.
8. Laser Beam
A laser beam can penetrate an object and cause internal 
damage.
9. 
Temperature Extremes
Exposure to high or low temperatures may prevent proper 
functioning of electronic or mechanical equipment due to 
freezing, mositure condensation, battery failure, component 
breakdown, etc.
10. 
Vibration, Shock, Sound
Delicate mechanical devices are susceptible to damage by 
vibration, shock, and high-level sound. Encapsulated 
electronic equipment is generally resistant to such influences.
-68-

11. Acceleration
Mechanical devices may be jammed or damaged by moderate 
to high levels of acceleration, such as that produced in 
a centrifuge, or by spinning an object about its axis, as 
well as linear acceleration. Encapsulated electronic 
devices are generally resistant to acceleration. Inte­
grating accelerometers will give false data if the acceler­
ation exceeds their range.
-69-

inc.
APPENDIX E
OPTIMIZATION OF INERTIAL SYSTEMS 
WITH RESETTING INTEGRATORS
1. 
INTRODUCTION
An inertial system is limited in its ability to detect 
motion of an object resting on the earth's surface by the 
following effects:
• The earth's seismic and cultural vibrations
• The limiting sensitivity of the accelerometers
• The effects of gravity
Practical methods to eliminate or reduce these effects 
are described in the following paragraphs. A combination 
of these methods results in a system that will detect 
motions down to the limit of the accelerometer errors, 
which, in the final analysis, is the best that can be 
achieved with inertial motion sensing systems.
In any inertial system there will be some small ' 
acceleration that is below the limit of sensitivity. The 
present state-of-the-art allows measurements down to about 
10 ^ g. Even this low acceleration can move an object a 
great distance in a short time if steadily impressed on 
that object as shown in Table I. However, it becomes very 
difficult to control the motion so that the acceleration 
does not exceed these low values. Although large movements 
are theoretically possible at this level, there may not 
be a practical way to effect this motion on the earth's 
surface.
-70-

^hss&nc.
2. 
CANCELLATION OF THE EARTH'S VIBRATIONS
The earth's vibrations are typically small in ampli-
_ o
tude (less than 10 feet) but may represent accelerations 
(10_ g) much larger than accelerometer sensitivity (10 g). 
Thus, the vibrations would mask a constant small acceleration. 
However, the effect of a constant small acceleration can be 
detected by doubly integrating the accelerometer output to 
derive a position signal.
The position signal will consist of the earth's vibra­
tory movements plus any other position change. The system
-3
can therefore sense any movement over 10 feet, the ampli­
tude of the earth's vibration. The earth's vibrations are 
effectively cancelled and the full sensitivity of the 
accelerometer may be used.
Double integration is limited by the effects discussed 
in the next two paragraphs.
3. 
CANCELLATION OF ACCELEROMETER ERRORS
Double integration of the accelerometer output will 
produce a continuously increasing position signal due to 
hysteresis and offset of the accelerometer. These effects 
make the integral not equal to zero even though the actual 
net acceleration is zero. As shown in Tables 1 and 2, even 
the smallest error (10 g) will show a large change in 
position during a short time.
A system is therefore required in which the acceler­
ometer offset as well as the earth's vibrations are auto­
matically cancelled. One such method involves periodic 
resetting of the integrators. This, in effect, says that 
one should look for a certain change in position for, say.
-71-

1 second. If the expected change doesn't occur, the amount 
of position change that was actually measured is disregarded 
(since it is not known whether it was caused by accelerometer 
offset or real motion) and one starts looking all over again 
for another second.
If the integrators are reset every t seconds, the 
position alarm must be set to actuate at less than:
So
1
2 ao
t 2
o
where aQ is the accelerometer error. A change in position
less than S every t seconds will remain undetected. Of
course, a constant acceleration less than aQ will also
remain undetected and can result in a large motion. However,
a can be made much smaller than the maximum seismic acceler- 
o
ations. Thus, the resetting integrator system can provide 
more sensitivity than a simple acceleration alarm which must 
be set above the maximum seismic acceleration.
Assume, for example, that maximum seismic and cultural
-3 
-3
vibrations in a typical area do not exceed 10 g and 10
feet amplitude, and that accelerometers may be made with
- S 
- 3 
- 3
10 g error. Letting SQ = 10 feet and a0 = 10 g> we
have t =2.5 seconds. If the accelerometers are moved and 
o
stopped each 2.5 seconds, the resulting maximum motion must
_ O
not exceed 10 feet in 2.5 seconds, or 1-1/3 feet per hour. 
If, however, the accelerometers can be made to move freely, 
their velocity can be increased 1-1/3 feet per hour every
2.5 seconds, which corresponds to an acceleration of 1/2 a
“5 
°
or 1/2 x 10 g. For comparison, a simple acceleration
alarm could be set no lower than 10 g because of the earth's
vibration.
-72-

The resetting integrators may be replaced with two 
high-pass filters to obtain much the same effect. Figure 
E-l(a) shows the use of electronic operational amplifiers,
A, to produce the double integral of the electrical output 
of accelerometer, a. The integrators may be reset by the 
two switches or relays and in this configuration can be 
made to operate a position alarm as described above.
Figure E-l(b) shows the same circuit except that the 
reset switches have been replaced with resistors. The 
effect of the resistors is to continuously "reset" the 
"integrators." The amplifiers now have a finite amplifi­
cation at low input frequencies where the capacitors are 
no longer effective and the resistors determine the 
response. At higher frequencies, the capacitors become 
effective and the amplification drops off. This is the 
characteristic of a low-pass filter. This circuit may give 
the same effect as Figure E-l(a) if the time constant of the 
network is approximately the same as the reset time, tQ.
It is conceivable that other types of filters than the 
RC networks shown in Figure E-l may be used with good 
effects. Filters that eliminate certain naturally occurring 
frequencies in the seismic vibrations may help to further 
discriminate against these motions. Similarly, enhancement 
of certain frequencies may make artificial movement more 
difficult. Considerable theoretical and experimental study 
would be required to explore these possibilities.
-73-

^EBsG^.
RESET 
RESET
ALARM
a. DOUBLE RESETTABLE INTEGRATORS
ALARM
b. DOUBLE LOW-PASS RC FILTERS
-A/W-
-wv-
S
ALARM
c. HI-PASS AND DOUBLE LOW-PASS FILTERS
FIGURE E-l. INTEGRATING SYSTEMS
-74-
53-A

n
INC.
4. 
CANCELLATION OF G ACCELERATIONS
The accelerometers must be accurately leveled so the 
acceleration due to gravity does not give a constant 
reading which would be integrated. An angle of only 2 
seconds from horizontal will give a component of acceler­
ation of 10"5 g. Similarly, the vertical accelerometer
must have means for subtracting the g acceleration from 
its output. Since g varies from place to place on the 
earth's surface, this adjustment would have to be made at 
each location. These constant accelerations may be removed 
when using the systems of Figure E-l(a) and Figure E-l(b) 
by the addition of a high pass filter, Figure E-l(c). A 
third amplifier is added with a series capacitor in the 
input. This capacitor blocks all very long sustained 
accelerations equal or higher than the resetting time t .
The time constant of the first amplifier may be 10 to 100 
time t so that it will have little effect on the outputs 
of the integrators, yet will compensate for the fixed g 
accelerations.
It has been shown that the use of electrical filters 
may allow detection of accelerations approaching the limit 
of available accelerometers. Such a system would be insen­
sitive to earth vibrations, and would automatically 
eliminate gravity effects so that accurate leveling would 
not be required, and would not be subject to long-term drift.
Preliminary investigation of accelerometers and earth
vibrations indicates the system would incorporate an
-3 
-3
acceleration alarm at 10 g, a position alarm at 10
feet, and detect accelerations as small as 10 g. A
motion would be undetected only if the peak acceleration was
_3
less than 10 g and the average acceleration less than 
10"5 g.
-75-

n EGrG inc.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

^EOkOm
BIBLIOGRAPHY
SEISMIC INSTRUMENTS
Sheffield, H. E., "An Electronic Vertical Long-Period Seismo­
meter," IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, 
March 1964.
Lehner, F. E., "Brief Description of Lunar Seismograph," Journal 
Geophysical Research, 1962 IRE Proceedings, p. 2297.
Honig, William, Loral Electronic Systems Co., "Laser Benioff 
Strain Seismometer," IEEE Proceedings, Jan. 1965, pp. 101-102.
Caltech, "Liquid Pendulum Seismograph," Product Engineering,
March 30, 1964, pp. 49-50.
Institute of Theoretical and Applied MechanicsPrague, Czecho­
slovakia, "Portable Battery Powered Vibrograph," Product Engi­
neering, Dec. 9, 1963, p. 75.
Lehner, Francis H., "Introduction to the Theory and Design of 
Seismographs," Teledyne ESP Bulletin No. 4, Pasadena, Calif.
Sheppee, Richard M., "Deep Well Variable-Reluctance Seismometer," 
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience Electronics, Nov. 1964, pp. 2-5.
Coste, L. J. B., and Romberg, Arnold, Force Measuring Instrument, 
U.S. Patent 2,377,889.
Coste, L. J. B., Force Measuring Device, U.S. Patent 2,293,437.
Melton, B. S., and Johnson, D. P., "Inertial Seismograph Design- 
Limitations in Principle and Practice," IRE Proceedings, Nov. 
1962, pp. 2328-2339, (Discussion, July 1963, pp. 1055-1056).
Erath, L. W., Means for Measuring and for Generating Motion,
U.S. Patent 2,776,560.
Bernstein, R., and Bowin, C. 0., "Real Time Digital Computer 
Acquisition and Computation of Gravity Data at Sea," IEEE 
Transactions on Geoscience Electronics, Dec. 1963, pp. 2-10.
-77-

INC.
SEISMIC BACKGROUND SURVEYS
Frantti, G. E., "The Nature of High-Frequency Earth Noise Spec­
tra," Geophysics Vol. XXVIII, No. 4, Aug. 1963, pp. 547-562.
Wilson, C. D. V., "An Analysis of the Vibrations Emitted by 
Some Man-Made Sources of Microseisms," Proceedings of the Royal 
Society, Vol. 217, Feb. 19, 1953, pp. 188-202.
Alsup, S. A., Preliminary Study of LRSM Sites in the United 
States, Geotechnical Corp Report 63-49, Garland, Texas, May 16, 
1963.
Kamperman, George W., Vibration Isolation Effectiveness of In­
ertia Pads Resting on Soil, Bolt, Beranek & Newman, Inc., 
Downers Grove, 111., May 16, 1963.
Richter, Charles F., Elementary Seismology, Freeman, 19580
Brune. James N., and Oliver, Jack "The Seismic Noise of the 
Earth’s Surface," Bulletin of Seismological Society of America, 
Vol. 49, No. 4. Oct. 1959, pp. 349-3537
VIBRATION ISOLATION SYSTEMS
Tsutsumi, Ken, A Ground Tilt Isolation Platform, MIT Instrumen­
tation Lab., Cambridge, Mass, Jan. 1964.
Keller, Leo A., Jr., Test Pad Stability Program at the Aero 
Division Minneapolis-Honeywell, M-H Regulator Co., Minneapolis, 
Minn., Nov. 3^ 1962.
Preskitt, Stanley V., and Fix, James E., Six-Degree-of-Freedom 
Test Podium at the USAF Standards Calibration Laboratory, Geo­
technical Co., Report No. 63-46, Garland, Texas, May 16, 1963.
Garrett, Charles L., and Kerr, James D., Stable Table Project 
VT/072, Air Force Technical Applications Center (AFTAC) Ad- 
vanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA), Geotechnical Co.,
Report No. 64-70, Garland, Texas, July 20, 1964.
Harris, C. M., and Crede, C. E., Shock and Vibration Handbook, 
McGraw-Hill, 1961.
-78-

n —
Technical Comparative Analysis of Pneumatic Versus Conventional 
Vibration Isolators., Barry Controls Corp.. Report No. 505,
October, 1964.
Kunica, Serge, Barry Wright Corp., "Servo Controlled Pneumatic 
Isolators--An Advanced Concept for Vibration Isolation," Design 
News, Sept. 15, 1965, pp. 118-126.
Gieck, J. E.. Firestone Industrial Products Co., "Design with 
Air Springs," Product Engineering, Nov. 26, 1962, pp. 63-74.
Klein, G. Harold, Thompson Ramo Woolridge, Inc., "Investigation 
of a Resonance-Free Vibration Isolation System," Society of 
Automotive Engineers, Reprint No. 100Z, Oct. 5, 1959.
Kunica, Serge, "Gravity Sensing Vibration Isolated Pier," In­
strument Society of America, Preprint No. 17, Oct. 1, 1965.
"Hydraulic Device Provides Accurate Displacements to Microinches," 
NASA Tech Brlpf 65-10230, Aug. 1965.
OPTICAL AND PATTERN RECOGNITION 
AND SONIC LEARNING MACHINES
Olson, Harry R., RCA Laboratories, "Speech Processing Systems 
(Spectral Analysis)," IEEE Spectrum, February 1964, pp. 90-102.
"Learning Machines Minos II," Product Engineering, Jan. 20, 1964, 
pp. 53-54.
"Optical Pattern Recognition Conflex I," Product Engineering,
Aug. 5, 1963, p. 63.
"Sonic Pattern Recognition," Product Engineering, Oct. 28, 1963, 
p. 57.
Vibrating Optic Fibers, A New Technique for Audio-Frequency In­
formation Processing and Pattern Recognition (SCEPTRON), Surface 
Armament Div., Sperry Gyroscope Co.
-79-

LASER DISTANCE AND VELOCITY MEASUREMENT
Gardner, Annesta R., "Lasers in Engineering," Product Engineer­
ing, Oct. 11, 1965, pp. 118-124.
"Laser Terrain Profiler," Product Engineering, June 7, 1965, 
p. 64.
"Laser Range Finder," Electronics, Jan. 11, 1965, pp. 37-38.
"Satellite Laser Ranging Experiment," IEEE Proceedings, March 
1965, pp. 298-299.
"Laser Doppler Radar," IEEE Proceedings, Feb. 1965, pp. 211-212.
"Laser Interferometer for Machine Tools," Product Engineering, 
Sept. 28, 1964, p. 44.
"Laser Spacecraft Rendezvous," (IT&T Federal Laboratories Div.,
San Francisco, California, 75-Mile Range), Product Engineering,
May 24, 1965, p. 39.
"CW Laser Radar - Missile Launch," (Perkin Elmer, Norwalk, Conn.)> 
Product Engineering, April 27, 1964, pp. 94-95.
"Proposed Measurement of Continental Drift with Lasers (Doppler)," 
IEEE Proceedings, April 1964, p. 430.
"Laser Metrology Checks Machine Tool Scales," Machine Design,
Dec. 9, 1965.
Vali, W., "Measurement of Earth Tides and Continental Drift 
with Laser Interferometer," IEEE Proceedings, July 1964, pp. 857- 
858.
RADIO NAVIGATIONAL AIDS AND SYSTEMS
Miller, Barry, "Flight Data System Applies New Concepts (Inertial 
Guidance)," Aviation Week & Space Technology, Sept. 20, 1965,
pp. 101-111.
Dassoulas, John, Applied Physics Laboratory, Johns Hopkins 
University, "Transit/Anna Flight Test Operations," Astronautics 
& Aerospace Engineering, July 1963.
-80-

Guier, W. H., and Weiffenbach, G. C., "A Satellite Doppler 
Navigation System," IRE Proceedings, April 1960, pp. 507-516.
Moody, Alton B., "Navigation Using Signals from High-Altitude 
Satellites," IRE Proceedings, April 1960, pp. 500-506.
Weiffenbach, George C., "Measurement of the Doppler Shift of 
Radio Transmissions from Satellites," IRE Proceedings, April 
1960, pp. 750-754.
Keats, E. S., Westinghouse, "Navigational Satellites, Beacons 
for Ships & Planes," Electronics, Feb. 8, 1965, pp. 79-85.
"Hand Held Radar," Product Engineering, April 27, 1964, p. 90.
"Microwave Interferometer," Machine Design, Oct. 28, 1965, p. 26; 
Product Engineering, June 7, 1965, p^ 64.
"Radar Transponder for Satellite Docking (Westinghouse)," Product 
Engineering, Oct. 11, 1965, p. 103.
PROXIMITY SENSORS
"Fluidic Eye Senses Without Contact," Machine Design, Dec. 9, 
1965, p. 180.
Electrical Sensing Apparatus (Inductive Proximity Sensor), U.S. 
Pat. 2,922,880 and RE 24,779.
"Optical Proximity Sensor," Product Engineering, July 20, 1964, 
pp. 51-52.
OPTICAL ANGLE AND DISTANCE MEASUREMENT
Leftwich, R. F., "Infrared," Machine Design, Sept. 16, 1965, 
pp. 154-159.
Kendall, P. E., and Stalcup, R. E., "Attitude Reference Devices 
for Space Vehicles (Optical Horizon Sensing)," IRE Proceedings, 
April 1960.
"Optical Machine Tool Scale," Product Engineering. Sept. 27, 
1965, p. 44.
-81-

n —
Schepler, H. C., "Azimuth Aiming of Space Vehicles," Proceedings 
of the Conference on Optical Instruments and Techniques, Chapman 
& Hall Pub. Co., London 1961.
"Photoelectric Angle Sensor," Electromechanical Design. Nov. 1961,
pp. 12-18.
680 Tracker Remote Measurement (Optical), Optron Corp., Santa 
Barbara, Calif., July 1, 1963.
INERTIAL SENSING COMPONENTS
Accelerometer Fundamentals: 
Part I - Fundamentals; Part II -
Errors. Product Application Bulletin, Systron-Donner Corp., 
Concord, Calif., Nov. 1, 1963.
"Develops Miniature, Lightweight Laser Integrating Gyro," Research 
& Development, March 1965, p. 31.
Gyros, Platforms, Accelerometers, Tech Info for the Engineer, 
Aerospace Kearfort Div., Little Falls, N.J., June 30, 1963.
Electromagnetic Angular Rotation Sensor, Progress Report AB- 
1272-OOO/, Sperry Gyroscope Co., Great Neck, N.Y., May 1964.
Ring Laser Sensors, Technical Marketing Report AB-1271-0026,
Sperry Gyroscope Co., Great Neck, N. Y., Oct. 1964.
"Ring Laser, Electrostatic Gyro, Fluid Sphere Gyro," Product 
Engineering, Sept. 13, 1965, p. 94.
Lavan, J. T., Martin Co., "Unconventional Inertial Sensors," 
Space/Aeronautics, Dec. 1963, pp. 73-83.
Newton, George C., Jr., "Inertial-Guidance Limitations Imposed 
by Fluctuation Phenomena in Gyroscopes," IRE Proceedings, April 
1960, pp. 520-527.
MISCELLANEOUS
"Electron-Beam Welding Has New Capabilities," Machine Design, 
Jan. 20, 1966, p. 24.
Meier, J. W., Hamilton Standard Co., "Tooling for Electron Beam 
Metalworking," IEEE Paper CP 64-574, Nov. 1964.
-82-

n EGelES inc.
Radiation Damage Effects Handbook, EG&G, Inc., Report No. 5-61, 
Nov. 11, 1961.
Keister, G. L., and Stewart, H. Y., "The Effect of Nuclear 
Radiation on Selected Semiconductor Devices," IRE Proceedings, 
July 1957, pp. 931-937. 
-------------
Harrison, W. E., Jr., Westinghouse, "Effects of Radiation on 
Electronic Components and Materials," Electronic Design News,
Nov. 1963.
General Precision Aerospace Group, "Stellar Inertial Guidance 
Systems," Product Engineering, July 19, 1965, p. 48. Also: 
Technical News Bulletin Vol. 8, No. 4 (Insert).
"Laser TV," Product Engineering. Jan. 3, 1966, p. 28.
Klass, Philip J., Honeywell, "R.F. Probe Finds Intermittent 
Connections, 1 Aviation Week & Space Technology, Oct. 4, 1965, 
pp. 79-82.
Green, A. N., "The Theory, Measurement, and Applications of 
Very-Low Frequency Magnetotelluric Variations," IRE Proceedings, 
Nov. 1962, pp. 2347-2363.
Horton, J. Warren, Fundamentals of Sonar, U.S. Naval Institute, 
Maryland, 1959.
Macomber, George R., and Fernandez, Manuel, Inertial Guidance 
Engineering, Prentice-Hall, 1962.
Frauenfelder, Hans, The Mossbauer Effect,W. A. Bensamin, Inc., 
N.Y., 1963.
Savant, C. J., Jr., and others. Principles of Inertial Navigation, 
McGraw-Hill, 1961.
-83-

n
DISTRIBUTION LIST
LRL
EG&G Albuquerque
J. Salisbury
Library
W. Niven
F. Deadrick
EG&G Santa Barbara
A. Schiff
Programs (2)
R. Henderson
Contracts
General (5)
Library (2)
H. Borella
EG&G Boston
C. Leek (2)
Library
C. Hudson (5)
EG&G Las Vegas 
Library

