IC Recorder
ICD-PX370
Operating Instructions
GB
FR
© 2016 Sony Corporation  Printed in China / Imprimé en Chine
4-595-546-12(1)
Owner’s Record
The model number is located at the rear panel and the serial number is 
located at the rear panel. Record these numbers in the space provided 
below. Refer to these numbers whenever you call upon your Sony dealer 
regarding this product.
Model No. _________________________________
Serial No. __________________________________
You are cautioned that any changes or modifications not expressly approved 
in this manual could void your authority to operate this equipment.
Refer to the Help Guide
This is the Operating Instructions, which provides you with instructions on 
the basic operations of the IC recorder.
The Help Guide is an online manual. 
Refer to the Help Guide when you would like to know further details, 
operations and possible solutions when a problem occurs.
http://rd1.sony.net/help/icd/p37/h_uc/
Check the supplied items
• IC Recorder (1)
• LR03 (size AAA) alkaline batteries (2)
• Operating Instructions (this sheet)
• Warranty card
• Application Software, Sound Organizer 2 (Installer file stored in the built‑in 
memory so that you can install it to your computer.)
Parts and controls
 Built-in microphone (monaural)
  (headphones) jack
 Operation indicator
 Display window
 REC/PAUSE (record/pause) button
 STOP button
 Control button ( DPC (Digital Pitch Control),  
 A-B (repeat A-B)/ 
(review/fast backward),  (cue/fast forward))
  (play/enter) button*
  BACK/  HOME button (  : press,  : press and hold)
 T-MARK (track mark) button
 OPTION button
 Built-in speaker
 Strap hole (No strap is supplied with your IC recorder.)
 USB connector compartment
  (microphone) (PLUG IN POWER) jack*
 VOL –/+ (volume –/+) button*
 Slot cover
 microSD card slot (The card slot is located under the cover.)
 USB slide lever
 HOLD•POWER switch
 Battery compartment
*	 The  (play/enter) button, VOL –/+ (volume –/+) button, and  (microphone) (PLUG IN 
POWER) jack have a tactile dot. Use the tactile dot as a reference when operating the IC 
recorder.
Let’s try out your new IC recorder
Power on
	 Slide and lift the battery compartment lid, insert LR03 (size 
AAA) alkaline batteries with the correct polarity, and close the 
lid.
	 Turn the power on.
To turn the power on
Slide and hold the HOLD•POWER switch in the direction of “POWER” 
until the window display appears.
To turn the power off, slide the HOLD•POWER switch to “POWER” 
and hold it until “Power Off” appears on the display window.
To prevent unintentional operations (HOLD)
Slide the HOLD•POWER switch in the direction of “HOLD.”
¼
¼ To release the IC recorder from the HOLD status, slide the 
HOLD•POWER switch towards the center.
Initial settings
Select
(/)
Enter
When you turn on your IC recorder for the first time, the “Configure 
Initial Settings” screen appears on the display window. You can then 
select the display language, set the clock, and turn on/off the beep 
sound.
	 Select “Yes” to start the initial settings.
	 Select the display language.
You can select from the following languages:
English*, Español (Spanish), Français (French)
* Default setting
	 Set the current year, month, day, hour, and minute.
¼
¼ To go back to the previous clock setting item, press BACK/HOME.
	 Select “Next.”
	 Select “ON” or “OFF” to turn on or off the beep sound.
When the initial settings finish, the completion message and then 
the HOME menu screen appears.
¼
¼
• You can change any of the initial settings at any time later. For detailed 
instructions, refer to the Help Guide.
• When you re-insert batteries, or when you replace batteries with new ones, 
the clock setting display appears, and the approximate date and time 
when you last operated the IC recorder before removing the batteries is 
displayed. Set the clock to the current time again.
• To check the current time after the initial settings, slide the HOLD•POWER 
switch in the direction of “HOLD.”
Record
Built‑in microphone
STOP
REC/PAUSE
Select
(/)
Enter
¼
¼
• Before you start using the IC recorder, make sure that the HOLD•POWER 
switch is at the center dot position.
• You can select a recording scene for each situation by selecting “Scene 
Select” in the OPTION menu.
Recorded audio files are stored in “FOLDER01” under “  Recorded Files” 
by default.
	 Select “   Record” from the HOME menu.
The recording standby screen appears on the display window.
	 Select the folder you want to store the recorded files.
To store the audio files in a folder other than “FOLDER01,” create 
a new folder and change the file storage destination folder to the 
new folder. For detailed instructions, refer to the Help Guide.
	 Turn the IC recorder so that its built-in microphone points in 
the direction of the recording source.
	 Press REC/PAUSE.
Recording starts, “REC” appears on the display, and the operation 
indicator lights in red.
Pressing and holding the REC/PAUSE does not start recording. 
Doing so makes your IC recorder pause for recording.
During recording, the recording level guide () is displayed.
Adjust the orientation of the built-in microphone, the distance from 
the sound source, or the sensitivity setting of the microphone so 
that the input level indicated by  stays at 3/6 or 4/6, which fits 
within the optimum range, as illustrated above. 
	 Press STOP to stop recording.
“Saving...” appears on the display, and then the display returns to 
the record standby screen.
After you stopped recording, you can press  to play the file you 
have just recorded.
Listen
Select
(///)
Enter
VOL –/+
(volume –/+)
Recorded audio files are stored in “FOLDER01” under “  Recorded Files” 
by default.
	 Select “  Recorded Files” from the HOME menu.
	 Select “Folders” - “Built-In Memory” - “FOLDER01,” and then 
press  .
To listen to recorded audio files stored on a microSD card, select 
“Folders” - “SD Card.”
	 Select your desired file.
Playback starts.
	 Press STOP to stop playback.
¼
¼
• Press VOL -/+ to adjust the volume.
• The built-in speaker is provided mainly for checking recorded audio files. 
If you find the volume not loud enough or have difficulty in understanding 
what you hear, use headphones (not supplied).
• When you select “  Recorded Files,” the file search categories of the 
stored files appear on the display window. You can select one of the search 
categories from “Latest Recording,” “Search by REC Date,”  “Search by REC 
Scene,” or “Folders.” 
To add a track mark
You can add a track mark at a point at which you want to divide a file 
later or locate during playback. You can add a maximum of 98 track 
marks to each file. 
You can also add track marks during a recording.
Delete
OPTION
Select
(/)
Enter
 Note
Once a file is deleted, you cannot restore it.
	 Select the file you want to delete from the list of recorded files 
or play back the file you want to delete.
	 Select “Delete a File” from the OPTION menu.
“Delete?” appears and the selected file starts playing for your 
confirmation.
	 Select “Yes.”
“Please Wait” appears and stays until the selected file is deleted.
Using the OPTION menu
You can use the OPTION menu to perform a variety of functions, including 
changing the settings of your IC recorder.
The available items differ depending on the situation.
OPTION
Select
(/)
Enter
	 Select your desired function from the HOME menu, and then press 
OPTION.
	 Select the menu item for which you want to change the setting.
	 Select your desired setting option.
Copying files from your IC recorder to a 
computer
You can copy the files and folders from your IC recorder to a computer to 
store them.
	 Slide the USB slide lever in the direction of the arrow, and insert 
the USB connector into the USB port of a running computer.
	 Drag and drop the files or folders you want to copy from “IC 
RECORDER” or “MEMORY CARD” to the local disk on the computer.
To copy a file or folder (Drag and drop)
1	 Click and hold,
2	 drag,
3	 and then drop.
IC RECORDER or
MEMORY CARD
Your computer
	 Make sure that “Accessing” is not displayed on the display 
window of your IC recorder, and then disconnect the IC recorder 
from the computer.
Installing Sound Organizer 2
Install Sound Organizer on your computer.
Sound Organizer allows you to exchange files between your IC recorder and 
your computer.
Songs imported from music CDs and other media, MP3 and other audio 
files imported to a computer can also be played and transferred to the IC 
recorder.
 Notes
• Sound Organizer is compatible with Windows computers only. It is not 
compatible with Mac.
• This IC recorder is compatible with Sound Organizer 2 only.
• If you format the built‑in memory, all data stored there will be deleted. (The 
Sound Organizer software will also be deleted.)
¼
¼ When installing Sound Organizer, log in to an account with administrator 
privileges.
	 Slide the USB slide lever in the direction of the arrow, and insert 
the USB connector into the USB port of a running computer.
	 Make sure the IC recorder is successfully detected by the 
computer.
“Connecting” appears and stays on the IC recorder's display window 
while the IC recorder is connected to the computer.
	 Go to the [Start] menu, click [Computer], and then double-click [IC 
RECORDER] - [FOR WINDOWS].
	 Double-click [SoundOrganizer_V2001] (or [SoundOrganizer_V2001.
exe]).
Follow the computer's on-screen instructions.
	 Make sure that you accept the terms of the license agreement, 
select [I accept the terms in the license agreement], and then click 
[Next].
	 When the [Setup Type] window appears, select [Standard] or 
[Custom], and then click [Next].
Follow the instructions on the screen and set the installation settings 
when you select [Custom].
	 When the [Ready to Install the Program] window appears, click 
[Install].
The installation starts.
	 When the [Sound Organizer has been installed successfully.] 
window appears, check [Launch Sound Organizer 2 Now], and 
then click [Finish].
 Note
You may need to restart your computer after installing Sound Organizer.
Precautions
On power
DC 3.0 V: Use two LR03 (size AAA) alkaline batteries
DC 5.0 V: when using USB AC adaptor 
Rated current consumption: 500 mA
On safety
Do not operate the unit while driving, cycling or operating any motorized 
vehicle.
On handling
• Do not leave the unit in a location near heat sources, or in a place subject 
to direct sunlight, excessive dust or mechanical shock.
• Should any solid object or liquid fall into the unit, remove the batteries 
and have the unit checked by qualified personnel before operating it any 
further.
• When using your IC recorder, remember to follow the precautions below 
in order to avoid warping the cabinet or causing the IC recorder to 
malfunction.
–– Do not sit down with the IC recorder in your back pocket.
–– Do not put your IC recorder into a bag with the headphones/earphones 
cord wrapped around it and subject the bag to strong impact.
• Be careful not to allow water to splash on the unit. The unit is not 
waterproof. In particular, be careful in the following situations.
–– When you have the unit in your pocket and go to the bathroom, etc. 
When you bend down, the unit may drop into the water and may get 
wet.
–– When you use the unit in an environment where the unit is exposed to 
rain, snow, or humidity.
–– In circumstances where you get sweaty. If you touch the unit with wet 
hands or if you put the unit in the pocket of sweaty clothes, the unit may 
get wet.
• Listening with this unit at high volume may affect your hearing. For traffic 
safety, do not use this unit while driving or cycling.
• You may feel pain in your ears if you use the headphones when the 
ambient air is very dry. 
This is not because of a malfunction of the headphones, but because of 
static electricity accumulated in your body. You can reduce static electricity 
by wearing non-synthetic clothes that prevent the emergence of static 
electricity.
On noise
• Noise may be heard when the unit is placed near an AC power source, a 
fluorescent lamp or a mobile phone during recording or playback.
• Noise may be recorded when an object, such as your finger, etc., rubs or 
scratches the unit during recording.
On maintenance
To clean the exterior, use a soft cloth slightly moistened in water. Then use a 
soft dry cloth to wipe the exterior. Do not use alcohol, benzine or thinner.
If you have any questions or problems concerning your unit, please consult 
your nearest Sony dealer.
WARNING
Do not expose the batteries (battery pack or batteries installed) to excessive 
heat such as sunshine, fire or the like for a long time.
CAUTION
Risk of explosion if battery is replaced by an incorrect type. Dispose of used 
batteries according to the instructions.
FOR UNITED STATES CUSTOMERS. NOT APPLICABLE IN CANADA, 
INCLUDING IN THE PROVINCE OF QUEBEC.
POUR LES CONSOMMATEURS AUX ÉTATS-UNIS. NON APPLICABLE AU 
CANADA, Y COMPRIS LA PROVINCE DE QUÉBEC.
INFORMATION
This equipment has been tested and found to comply with the limits 
for a Class B digital device, pursuant to Part 15 of the FCC Rules. These 
limits are designed to provide reasonable protection against harmful 
interference in a residential installation. 
This equipment generates, uses and can radiate radio frequency energy 
and, if not installed and used in accordance with the instructions, may 
cause harmful interference to radio communications.
However, there is no guarantee that interference will not occur in a 
particular installation. If this equipment does cause harmful interference 
to radio or television reception, which can be determined by turning 
the equipment off and on, the user is encouraged to try to correct the 
interference by one or more of the following measures:
–– Reorient or relocate the receiving antenna. 
–– Increase the separation between the equipment and receiver.
–– Connect the equipment into an outlet on a circuit different from that to 
which the receiver is connected.
–– Consult the dealer or an experienced radio/TV technician for help.
If you have any questions about this product, you may call: Sony 
Customer Information Service Center 1-800-222-7669 or http://www.
sony.com/
Declaration of Conformity
Trade Name : SONY
Model : ICD-PX370
Responsible Party : Sony Electronics Inc.
Address : 16535 Via Esprillo, San Diego, CA 92127 USA
Telephone Number : 858-942-2230
This device complies with part 15 of the FCC Rules. Operation is subject 
to the following two conditions: (1) This device may not cause harmful 
interference, and (2) this device must accept any interference received, 
including interference that may cause undesired operation.
Specifications
Capacity (User available capacity*1*2)
4 GB (approx. 3.20 GB = 3,435,973,837 Byte)
Maximum recording time (Built-in memory)
The maximum recording time of all the folders is as follows.
MP3 192 kbps*3
39 hours 45 minutes
MP3 128 kbps
59 hours 35 minutes
MP3 48 kbps (MONO)
159 hours
 Note
When you are going to record continuously for a long time, you may have to 
replace the batteries with new ones in the middle of recording. For details on the 
battery life, see Battery Life.
The maximum recording time in this topic is for your reference only.
Battery Life
When using LR03 (SG) (size AAA) alkaline batteries*4
REC Mode
Recording
Playback with the 
built-in speaker
Playback with the 
headphones
MP3 192 kbps
Approx. 55 hours
Approx. 18 hours
Approx. 43 hours
MP3 128 kbps
Approx. 57 hours
Approx. 18 hours
Approx. 45 hours
When using NH-AAA rechargeable batteries*4
REC Mode
Recording
Playback with the 
built-in speaker
Playback with the 
headphones
MP3 192 kbps
Approx. 40 hours
Approx. 14 hours
Approx. 34 hours
MP3 128 bps
Approx. 41 hours
Approx. 14 hours
Approx. 34 hours
Dimensions (w/h/d) (not incl. projecting parts and controls)
Approx. 1.51 inches (38.3 mm) x 4.50 inches (114.2 mm) x 0.76 inches (19.3 mm)
Mass
Approx. 2.7 oz (74 g) (including two LR03 (size AAA) alkaline batteries)
Temperature/Humidity
Operating temperature
41 °F - 95 °F (5°C - 35°C)
Operating humidity
25% - 75%
Storage temperature
14 °F - 113 °F (-10°C - +45°C)
Storage humidity
25% - 75%
Compatible memory cards
microSDHC cards from 4 GB to 32 GB
 Note
microSDXC cards are not compatible with your IC recorder.
*1	 A small amount of the internal memory is used for file management and therefore not 
available for user storage.
*2	 When the built-in memory is formatted with the IC recorder.
*3	 Default settings for the recording scenes.
*4	 Measured values acquired under our measurement conditions. These values may decrease 
depending on the usage conditions.
Trademarks
• Microsoft, Windows and Windows Media are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the United States and/or other 
countries.
• macOS is a trademark of Apple Inc., registered in the USA and other 
countries.
• MPEG Layer-3 audio coding technology and patents licensed from 
Fraunhofer IIS and Thomson.
• microSD, microSDHC and microSDXC logos are trademarks of SD-3C, LLC.
All other trademarks and registered trademarks are trademarks or registered 
trademarks of their respective holders. Furthermore, “™” and “®” are not 
mentioned in each in this manual.
The “Sound Organizer 2” uses software modules as shown below:
Windows Media Format Runtime
License
Notes on the License
This IC recorder comes with software that are used based on licensing 
agreements with the owners of that software.
Based on requests by the owners of copyright of these software 
applications, we have an obligation to inform you of the following. Please 
read the following sections.
Licenses (in English) are recorded in the internal memory of your IC recorder. 
Establish a Mass Storage connection between the IC recorder and a 
computer to read licenses in the “LICENSE” folder.
On GNU GPL/LGPL applied software
The software that is eligible for the following GNU General Public License 
(hereinafter referred to as “GPL”) or GNU Lesser General Public License 
(hereinafter referred to as “LGPL”) are included in the IC recorder.
This informs you that you have a right to have access to, modify, and 
redistribute source code for these software programs under the conditions 
of the supplied GPL/LGPL.
Source code is provided on the web. Use the following URL to download it.
http://www.sony.net/Products/Linux/
We would prefer you do not contact us about the contents of source code.
Licenses (in English) are recorded in the internal memory of your IC recorder. 
Establish a Mass Storage connection between the IC recorder and a 
computer to read licenses in the “LICENSE” folder.
Using the HOME menu
You can use the HOME menu for a variety of operations, including locating 
and playing a recorded file and changing the settings of your IC recorder.
 BACK/  HOME
Select
(/)
Enter
	 Press and hold BACK/HOME.
The HOME menu screen appears.
The HOME menu items are aligned in the following sequence.
Recorded 
Files
Record
Settings
Back to 
XX*
Music
* The function you are currently using is displayed in “XX.”
	 Select your desired function from the following:
Music
You can select and play one of the files you have 
imported from a computer.
To locate a music file, select “All Songs,” “Albums,” 
“Artists,” or “Folders.”
Recorded Files
You can select and play one of the files you have 
recorded with your IC recorder.
To locate a recorded file, select “Latest Recording,” 
“Search by REC Date,” “Search by REC Scene,” or 
“Folders.”
Record
You can display the record standby screen, and then 
start recording.
Settings
You can display the Settings menu screen and 
change various settings on the IC recorder.
Back to XX*
You can go back to the screen that was displayed 
before the HOME menu screen.
* The function you are currently using is displayed 
in “XX.”
¼
¼ Press STOP to return to the screen displayed before you entered the HOME 
menu.

ICD-PX370
GB
FR
© 2016 Sony Corporation  Printed in China / Imprimé en Chine
Enregistreur IC
Mode d’emploi
Consultation du Guide d’aide
Ce Mode d'emploi présente des instructions relatives au fonctionnement 
général de l’enregistreur IC.
Le Guide d’aide est un manuel en ligne.
Reportez-vous au Guide d’aide pour de plus amples informations, le 
fonctionnement et les solutions possibles en cas de problèmes.
http://rd1.sony.net/help/icd/p37/h_uc/
Vérification des éléments fournis
• Enregistreur IC (1)
• Piles alcalines LR03 (AAA) (2)
• Mode d’emploi (ce document)
• Carte de garantie
• Application, Sound Organizer 2 (le fichier d’installation est stocké dans la 
mémoire interne afin que vous puissiez l’installer sur votre ordinateur.)
Éléments et commandes
 Microphone intégré (monophonique)
 Prise  (casque)
 Indicateur de fonctionnement
 Écran
 Touche REC/PAUSE (enregistrement/pause)
 Touche STOP
 Touche de commande ( DPC (Digital Pitch Control),  
 A-B (Répétition 
A-B)/ (révision/retour rapide),  (calage/avance rapide))
 Touche  (lecture/entrée)*
 Touche  BACK/  HOME (  : appuyez,  : appuyez de manière 
prolongée)
 Touche T-MARK (repère de piste)
 Touche OPTION
 Haut-parleur intégré
 Orifice de la dragonne (dragonne non fournie avec l'enregistreur IC)
 Compartiment du connecteur USB
 Prise  (microphone) (PLUG IN POWER)*
 Touche VOL –/+ (volume –/+)*
 Protection du logement
 Logement de carte microSD (le logement de carte se trouve derrière la 
protection.)
 Levier coulissant USB
 Commutateur HOLD•POWER
 Compartiment de la pile
*	 La touche  (lecture/entrée), la touche VOL –/+ (volume –/+) et la prise  (microphone) 
(PLUG IN POWER) possèdent un repère tactile. Utilisez-le comme point de référence lors du 
fonctionnement de l'enregistreur IC.
Essai de votre nouvel enregistreur IC
Mise sous tension
	 Faites glisser et soulevez le couvercle du compartiment des 
piles, installez des piles alcalines LR03 (AAA) en respectant la 
polarité, puis refermez le couvercle.
	 Mettez l'appareil sous tension.
Mise sous tension
Faites glisser de manière prolongée le commutateur HOLD•POWER 
vers « POWER »jusqu’à ce que l'écran apparaisse.
Pour mettre l'appareil hors tension, faites glisser le commutateur 
HOLD•POWER vers « POWER »de manière prolongée jusqu'à ce que 
« Power Off » s'affiche à l'écran.
Prévention des opérations involontaires (HOLD)
Faites glisser le commutateur HOLD•POWER vers « HOLD ».
¼
¼ Pour libérer l'enregistreur IC de l'état HOLD, faites glisser le 
commutateur HOLD•POWER vers le milieu.
Paramètres initiaux
Sélection
(/)
Entrée
À la première mise sous tension de l'enregistreur IC, le message 
« Configure Initial Settings » s'affiche à l'écran. Vous pouvez alors 
sélectionner la langue affichée, régler l'horloge, et activer ou désactiver 
le bip.
	 Sélectionnez « Yes » pour configurer les paramètres initiaux.
	 Sélectionnez la langue affichée.
Vous pouvez choisir entre les langues suivantes :
English* (anglais), Español (espagnol), Français
* Paramètre par défaut
	 Configurez l'année, le mois, le jour et l'heure (heures et 
minutes) en cours.
¼
¼ Pour revenir au paramètre de configuration d'horloge précédent, 
appuyez sur BACK/HOME.
	 Sélectionnez « Next ».
	 Sélectionnez « ON » ou « OFF » pour activer ou désactiver le 
bip.
Une fois la configuration des paramètres initiaux terminée, un 
message indiquant la fin de la configuration s'affiche puis l'écran de 
menu HOME s'affiche.
¼
¼
• Vous pouvez modifier n'importe quel paramètre initial ultérieurement. Pour 
de plus amples informations, reportez-vous au Guide d’aide.
• Lors de la remise en place ou le remplacement des piles, l'écran du 
réglage d'horloge s'affiche et l'heure et la date approximatives du dernier 
fonctionnement de l'enregistreur IC avant de retirer les piles s'affichent. 
Réglez l'horloge une nouvelle fois.
• Pour vérifier l'heure actuelle après le réglage initial, faites glisser le 
commutateur HOLD•POWER vers « HOLD ».
Enregistrement
Microphone intégré
STOP
REC/PAUSE
Sélection
(/)
Entrée
¼
¼
• Avant de démarrer l'enregistreur IC, assurez-vous que le commutateur 
HOLD•POWER est aligné sur le repère du milieu.
• Vous pouvez sélectionner une scène d'enregistrement pour chaque 
situation en sélectionnant « Scene Select » dans le menu OPTION.
Les fichiers audio enregistrés par défaut sont stockés dans « FOLDER01 » 
sous «   Recorded Files ».
	 Sélectionnez «   Record » dans le menu HOME.
L'écran de mise en veille de l'enregistrement s'affiche à l'écran.
	 Sélectionnez le dossier dans lequel les fichiers enregistrés 
seront stockés.
Pour stocker les fichiers audio dans un dossier autre que 
« FOLDER01 », créez un dossier puis modifiez le dossier de 
destination de stockage de fichiers vers le dossier en question. Pour 
plus d'informations, reportez-vous au Guide d'aide.
	 Orientez l'enregistreur IC de manière à ce que son microphone 
intégré soit dirigé vers la source d'enregistrement.
	 Appuyez sur REC/PAUSE.
L'enregistrement démarre, « REC » s'affiche à l'écran et l'indicateur 
de fonctionnement s'allume en rouge.
L'appui de manière prolongée sur REC/PAUSE ne démarre pas 
l'enregistrement.
Il met l'enregistrement de l'enregistreur IC en pause.
Lors de l’enregistrement, le guide du niveau d’enregistrement () 
s’affiche.
Réglez l'orientation du microphone intégré, la distance de la source 
sonore ou le paramètre de sensibilité du microphone pour que le 
niveau d'enregistrement indiqué par  se maintienne à 3/6 ou 4/6, 
niveau correspondant à la plage optimale, comme illustré ci-dessus.
	 Appuyez sur STOP pour arrêter l’enregistrement..
« Saving... » s'affiche à l'écran, puis l'écran revient à l'écran de mise 
en veille de l'enregistrement.
Après l'arrêt de l'enregistrement, vous pouvez appuyer sur  pour 
lire le fichier que vous venez d'enregistrer.
Écoute
Sélection 
(///)
Entrée
VOL –/+
(volume –/+)
Les fichiers audio enregistrés par défaut sont stockés dans « FOLDER01 » 
sous «   Recorded Files ».
	 Sélectionnez «   Recorded Files » dans le menu HOME.
	 Sélectionnez « Folders » - « Built-In Memory » - « FOLDER01 », 
puis appuyez sur .
Pour écouter des fichiers audio enregistrés qui sont stockés sur une 
carte microSD, sélectionnez « Folders » - « SD Card ».
	 Sélectionnez le fichier de votre choix.
La lecture commence.
	 Appuyez sur STOP pour arrêter la lecture.
¼
¼
• Appuyez sur VOL -/+ pour régler le volume.
• Le haut-parleur intégré sert principalement à vérifier les fichiers sonores 
enregistrés. 
Si le volume n'est pas assez élevé ou que vous avez des difficultés à 
comprendre, utilisez un casque (non fourni).
• Lorsque vous sélectionnez «   Recorded Files », les catégories de recherche 
des fichiers stockés s'affichent à l'écran. Vous pouvez sélectionner une des 
catégories de recherche dans « Latest Recording », « Search by REC Date », 
« Search by REC Scene » ou « Folders ».
Ajout d'un repère de piste
Vous pouvez ajouter un repère de piste à l'endroit où vous voulez 
diviser un fichier ultérieurement ou pour le rechercher pendant la 
lecture. Chaque fichier peut compter jusqu'à 98 repères de piste.
Vous pouvez également ajouter des repères de piste pendant 
l'enregistrement.
Suppression
OPTION
Sélection
(/)
Entrée
 Remarque
Une fois qu'un fichier a été supprimé, il est impossible de le récupérer.
	 Sélectionnez le fichier à supprimer sur la liste des fichiers 
enregistrés ou lisez le fichier à supprimer.
	 Sélectionnez « Delete a File » dans le menu OPTION.
« Delete? » s'affiche et le fichier en question est lu pour 
confirmation.
	 Sélectionnez « Yes ».
« Please Wait » s'affiche jusqu'à ce que le fichier sélectionné est 
supprimé.
Utilisation du menu OPTION
Vous pouvez utiliser le menu OPTION pour exécuter de nombreuses 
fonctions, notamment la modification des paramètres de l'enregistreur IC.
Les options disponibles varient selon la situation.
OPTION
Sélection 
(/)
Entrée
	 Sélectionnez la fonction voulue dans le menu HOME, puis 
appuyez sur OPTION.
	 Sélectionnez l'option de menu pour laquelle vous voulez modifier 
le paramètre.
	 Sélectionnez l'option de paramètre voulue.
Copie de fichiers de l'enregistreur IC vers 
un ordinateur
Vous pouvez copier des fichiers et des dossiers de l'enregistreur IC vers un 
ordinateur à des fins de stockage.
	 Faites glisser le levier coulissant USB vers le sens de la flèche, 
et branchez le connecteur USB sur le port USB d’un ordinateur 
allumé.
	 Faites glisser et déposez les fichiers ou dossiers à copier de 
« IC RECORDER » ou « MEMORY CARD » vers le disque local de 
l'ordinateur.
Copie d'un fichier ou dossier (glisser et déposer)
1	 Cliquez de manière prolongée.
2	 Faites glisser.
3	 Déposez.
IC RECORDER ou 
MEMORY CARD
Votre ordinateur
	 Assurez-vous que « Accessing » ne s'affiche pas à l'écran de 
l'enregistreur IC, puis débranchez l'enregistreur IC de l'ordinateur.
Installation de Sound Organizer 2
Installez Sound Organizer dans l'ordinateur.
Sound Organizer permet l'échange de fichiers entre l'enregistreur IC et 
l'ordinateur.
Les fichiers musicaux importés d'un CD ou autre support, ainsi que les 
fichiers MP3 et autres fichiers audio importés d'un ordinateur peuvent 
également être lus et transférés dans l'enregistreur IC.
 Remarques
• Sound Organizer n’est compatible qu’avec les ordinateurs Windows. Il n’est pas 
compatible avec les Mac.
• Cet enregistreur IC n'est compatible qu'avec Sound Organizer 2.
• Si vous formatez la mémoire interne, toutes les données qui y sont stockées 
seront supprimées. (Le logiciel Sound Organizer sera également supprimé.)
¼
¼ Lorsque vous installez Sound Organizer, connectez-vous avec un compte ayant  
des droits d’administrateur.
	 Faites glisser le levier coulissant USB vers le sens de la flèche, 
et branchez le connecteur USB sur le port USB d’un ordinateur 
allumé.
	 Assurez-vous que l'enregistreur IC est correctement détecté par 
l'ordinateur.
« Connecting » s'affiche sur l'écran de l'enregistreur IC lorsqu'il est 
connecté à l'ordinateur.
	 Choisissez le menu [Démarrer], cliquez sur [Ordinateur], puis 
double-cliquez sur [IC RECORDER] - [FOR WINDOWS].
	 Double-cliquez sur [SoundOrganizer_V2001] (ou 
[SoundOrganizer_V2001.exe]).
Suivez les instructions affichées à l'écran de l'ordinateur.
	 Assurez-vous d'accepter les dispositions du contrat de licence, 
sélectionnez [I accept the terms in the license agreement], puis 
cliquez sur [Next].
	 Lorsque l'écran [Setup Type] s'affiche, sélectionnez [Standard] ou 
[Custom], puis cliquez sur [Next].
Suivez les instructions affichées et configurez les paramètres 
d'installation lorsque vous sélectionnez [Custom].
	 Lorsque l'écran [Ready to Install the Program] s'affiche, cliquez sur 
[Install].
L'installation commence.
	 Lorsque l'écran [Sound Organizer has been installed successfully.] 
s'affiche, cochez la case [Launch Sound Organizer Now], puis 
cliquez sur [Finish].
 Remarque
Vous devez redémarrer l'ordinateur après l'installation de Sound Organizer.
Précautions
Alimentation
3,0 V CC : utilisez deux piles alcalines LR03 (AAA)
5,0 V CC : avec l'adaptateur secteur USB 
Consommation électrique nominale : 500 mA
Sécurité
Ne faites pas fonctionner l’appareil en conduisant une voiture, une 
bicyclette ou tout autre véhicule motorisé.
Manipulation
• Ne laissez pas l’appareil à proximité d’une source de chaleur ou dans un 
endroit exposé au rayonnement direct du soleil, à une poussière excessive 
ou à des chocs mécaniques.
• Si des éléments solides ou liquides venaient à pénétrer à l’intérieur de 
l’appareil, retirez les pilles et faites-le vérifier par un technicien qualifié 
avant de le remettre en service.
• Lorsque vous utilisez votre enregistreur IC, veillez à suivre les précautions 
décrites ci-dessous afin d’éviter de déformer le boîtier ou de provoquer un 
dysfonctionnement de l’enregistreur IC.
–– Ne vous asseyez pas après avoir placé l’enregistreur IC dans votre poche 
arrière.
–– Ne placez pas votre enregistreur IC dans un sac après avoir enroulé le 
cordon du casque/des écouteurs autour et ne soumettez pas le sac à des 
chocs violents.
• Veillez à ne pas renverser d’eau sur l’appareil. L’unité n’est pas étanche. 
Soyez particulièrement prudent(e) dans les situations suivantes :
–– Lorsque vous vous rendez dans la salle de bain, etc., alors que l’appareil 
se trouve dans votre poche. 
Si vous vous baissez, l’appareil risque de tomber dans l’eau et d’être 
mouillé.
–– Lorsque vous utilisez l’appareil dans un environnement dans lequel il est 
exposé à la pluie, à la neige ou à l’humidité.
–– Lorsque vous transpirez. Si vous touchez l’appareil alors que vos mains 
sont mouillées ou si vous placez ce dernier dans la poche d’un vêtement 
couvert de sueur, il risque d’être mouillé.
• Vous risquez de subir des lésions auditives si vous utilisez cet appareil a un 
volume élevé. Pour des raisons de sécurité, n’utilisez pas cet appareil en 
voiture ou à vélo.
• Vous risquez d’avoir mal aux oreilles si vous utilisez le casque alors que 
l’air ambiant est très sec. Cela n’est pas lié à un dysfonctionnement des 
écouteurs mais à l’accumulation d’électricité statique dans votre corps. 
Vous pouvez diminuer cette électricité statique en portant des vêtements 
non synthétiques évitant son apparition.
Bruits
• Des bruits parasites peuvent se faire entendre si l’appareil est placé à 
proximité d’une source d’alimentation secteur, d’une lampe fluorescente 
ou d’un téléphone mobile durant l’enregistrement ou la lecture.
• Il se peut que des bruits parasites soient enregistrés si quelque chose 
comme votre doigt par exemple, touche ou frotte accidentellement 
l’appareil pendant l’enregistrement.
Entretien
Pour nettoyer l’extérieur, utilisez un chiffon doux légèrement imprégné 
d’eau. Utilisez ensuite un chiffon doux sec pour essuyer l’extérieur. N’utilisez 
pas d’alcool, d’essence ou de diluant.
Si vous avez des questions ou des problèmes concernant cet appareil, 
consultez votre revendeur Sony.
AVERTISSEMENT
Ne pas exposer les piles (pack de piles ou piles installées) à de fortes 
chaleurs (rayons du soleil, feu, etc.) pendant une période prolongée.
ATTENTION
Risque d’explosion en cas de remplacement de la pile par un type incorrect.
Mettez les piles usagées au rebut conformément aux instructions.
Caractéristiques techniques
Capacité (capacité disponible à l'utilisateur*¹*²)
4 Go (environ 3,20 Go = 3 435 973 837 octets)
Durée maximale d'enregistrement (mémoire interne)
La durée maximale d'enregistrement de tous les dossiers est la suivante.
MP3 192 kbps*³
39 heures et 45 minutes
MP3 128 kbps
59 heures et 35 minutes
MP3 48 kbps (MONO)
159 heures
 Remarque
En cas d’enregistrement en continu pendant une longue période, vous devrez 
peut-être remplacer les piles par des neuves au milieu de l'enregistrement. Pour 
plus d'informations sur l'autonomie des piles, reportez-vous à Autonomie des 
piles.
Le temps d’enregistrement maximal indiqué dans cette rubrique est donné à titre 
d’indication uniquement.
Autonomie de la batterie
Avec des piles alcalines LR03 (SG) (AAA)*4
REC Mode
Enregistrement
Lecture avec 
le haut-parleur 
intégré
Lecture avec le 
casque
MP3 192 kbps
Environ 55 heures
Environ 18 heures
Environ 43 heures
MP3 128 kbps
Environ 57 heures
Environ 18 heures
Environ 45 heures
Avec des piles rechargeables NH-AAA*4
REC Mode
Enregistrement
Lecture avec 
le haut-parleur 
intégré
Lecture avec le 
casque
MP3 192 kbps
Environ 40 heures
Environ 14 heures
Environ 34 heures
MP3 128 kbps
Environ 41 heures
Environ 14 heures
Environ 34 heures
Dimensions (l/h/p) (parties saillantes et commandes non comprises)
Environ 1,51 po (38,3 mm) x 4,50 po (114,2 mm) x 0,76 po (19,3 mm)
Poids
Environ 2,7 once (74 g) (avec deux piles alcalines LR03 (AAA))
Température/Taux d'humidité
Température de fonctionnement
41 °F - 95 °F (5°C - 35°C)
Taux d'humidité de fonctionnement
25% - 75%
Température de stockage
14 °F - 113 °F (-10°C - +45°C)
Taux d'humidité de stockage
25% - 75%
Cartes mémoire compatibles
Carte microSDHC de 4 Go à 32 Go
 Remarque
Les cartes microSDXC ne sont pas compatibles avec l'enregistreur IC.
*¹ Une petite quantité de la mémoire interne est réservée à la gestion des fichiers et n’est donc 
pas disponible pour le stockage.
*² Lorsque la mémoire interne est formatée à l’aide l’enregistreur IC.
*³ Paramètres par défaut pour les scènes d'enregistrement.
*⁴ Valeurs mesurées acquises dans nos conditions de mesure. Ces valeurs peuvent être 
inférieures selon les conditions d'utilisation.
Marques commerciales
• Microsoft, Windows et Windows Media sont des marques commerciales 
ou des marques déposées de Microsoft Corporation aux États-Unis et/ou 
dans d’autres pays.
• macOS est une marque commerciale d’Apple Inc., déposée aux États-Unis 
et dans d’autres pays.
• Technologie d’encodage audio MPEG Layer-3 et brevets sous licence de 
Fraunhofer IIS et Thomson.
• Les logos microSD, microSDHC et microSDXC sont des marques 
commerciales de SD-3C, LLC.
Les autres marques commerciales et marques déposées apparaissant dans 
le présent document sont des marques commerciales ou déposées de leurs 
propriétaires respectifs. En outre, « ™ » et « ® » ne sont pas mentionnés 
systématiquement dans ce guide.
Le « Sound Organizer 2 » utilise des modules logiciels indiqués ci-dessous : 
Windows Media Format Runtime
Licence
Remarques sur la Licence
Cet enregistreur IC est doté de logiciels qui sont utilisés sur la base de 
contrats de licence avec les propriétaires de ces logiciels.
À la demande des détenteurs des droits d’auteur de ces applications 
logicielles, nous sommes dans l’obligation de vous communiquer les 
informations suivantes.
Veuillez lire les sections suivantes.
Les licences (en anglais) sont enregistrées dans la mémoire interne de votre 
enregistreur IC. Établissez une connexion.
Stockage de masse entre l’enregistreur IC et un ordinateur pour lire les 
licences dans le dossier « LICENSE ».
À propos des logiciels sous licence GNU GPL/LGPL
Les logiciels susceptibles d’être couverts par la GNU General Public License 
(ci-après désignée par « GPL ») ou la GNU Lesser General Public License (ci-
après désignée par « LGPL ») sont inclus dans l’enregistreur IC.
Cette notice vous informe que vous avez un droit d’accès, de modification 
et de redistribution du code source pour ces programmes logiciels 
conformément aux conditions de la licence GPL/LGPL fournie.
Vous trouverez le code source sur Internet. Utilisez l’URL suivante pour le 
télécharger. http://www.sony.net/Products/Linux/
Nous préférerions que vous ne nous contactiez pas à propos du contenu du 
code source.
Les licences (en anglais) sont enregistrées dans la mémoire interne de 
votre enregistreur IC. Établissez une connexion Stockage de masse entre 
l’enregistreur IC et un ordinateur pour lire les licences dans le dossier 
« LICENSE ».
Utilisation du menu HOME
Vous pouvez utiliser le menu HOME pour effectuer de nombreuses 
opérations, notamment la recherche et la lecture d'un fichier enregistré, 
ainsi que la modification des paramètres de votre enregistreur IC.
 BACK/  HOME
Sélection 
(/)
Entrée
	 Appuyez de manière prolongée sur BACK/HOME.
L'écran du menu HOME apparaît.
Les éléments du menu HOME sont alignés selon l'ordre suivant.
Recorded 
Files
Record
Settings
Back to 
XX*
Music
* La fonction en cours d'utilisation s'affiche dans « XX ».
	 Sélectionnez la fonction voulue parmi les suivantes :
Music
Permet de sélectionner et lire un des fichiers 
importés d'un ordinateur.
Pour rechercher un fichier musical, sélectionnez « All 
Songs », « Albums », « Artists » ou « Folders ».
Recorded Files
Permet de sélectionner et lire un des fichiers 
enregistrés avec votre enregistreur IC.
Pour rechercher un fichier enregistré, sélectionnez 
« Latest Recording », « Search by REC Date », 
« Search by REC Scene » ou « Folders ».
Record
Permet d'afficher l'écran de mise en veille 
de l'enregistrement, puis de commencer 
l'enregistrement.
Settings
Permet d'afficher l'écran du menu Settings et de 
modifier plusieurs réglages de l'enregistreur IC.
Back to XX*
Permet de revenir à l'écran affiché avant l'écran du 
menu HOME.
* La fonction en cours d'utilisation s'affiche dans 
« XX ».
¼
¼ Appuyez sur STOP pour revenir à l'écran affiché avant le menu HOME.

