W
hen e-mail first became available, it was a great innova­
tion that made communication fast and cheap. Then came 
spam — and suddenly, the innovation wasn’t so great. It 
meant having to filter out irrelevant, deceptive and sometimes offen­
sive messages. It still does.
The same corruption of a great idea is now occurring with scholarly 
open-access publishing. 
Early experiments with open-access publishing, such as the Journal 
of Medical Internet Research and BioMed Central, were very promis­
ing. Set up more than a decade ago, they helped to inspire a social 
movement that has changed academic publishing for the better, low­
ered costs and expanded worldwide access to the latest research. 
Then came predatory publishers, which publish counterfeit journals 
to exploit the open-access model in which the 
author pays. These predatory publishers are dis­
honest and lack transparency. They aim to dupe 
researchers, especially those inexperienced in 
scholarly communication. They set up websites 
that closely resemble those of legitimate online 
publishers, and publish journals of questionable 
and downright low quality. Many purport to be 
headquartered in the United States, United King­
dom, Canada or Australia but really hail from 
Pakistan, India or Nigeria. 
Some predatory publishers spam research­
ers, soliciting manuscripts but failing to men­
tion the required author fee. Later, after the 
paper is accepted and published, the authors are 
invoiced for the fees, typically US$1,800. Because 
the scientists are often asked to sign over their 
copyright to the work as part of the submission 
process (against the spirit of open access) they feel unable to withdraw 
the paper and send it elsewhere.
I monitor predatory publishers on my blog, Scholarly Open Access, 
which has become a forum in which scientists can raise their concerns 
over the practice. They send me hundreds of e-mails passing on spam 
solicitations or asking whether a particular publisher is legitimate.
I also get e-mails from the predators’ victims. Some have been named 
as members of editorial boards without their knowledge or permis­
sion. Others have had an article partially or completely plagiarized in 
a predatory journal. Many ask me for advice on where to publish or 
how to withdraw an article that they wish they hadn’t submitted. As a 
librarian, I do my best to answer the questions I receive, but they often 
require expertise in the author’s field of study. So it is important that 
more scientists are made aware of the problem. 
The predatory publishers and journals often 
have lofty titles that make them seem legiti­
mate in a list of publications on a CV. Scholarly 
publishing’s traditional role of vetting the best 
research is disappearing. Now there is a journal willing to accept 
almost every article, as long as the author is willing to pay the fee. 
Authors, rather than libraries, are the customers of open-access pub­
lishers, so a powerful incentive to maintain quality has been removed. 
Perhaps nowhere are these abuses more acute than in India, where 
new predatory publishers or journals emerge each week. They are 
appearing because of the market need — hundreds of thousands of 
scientists in India and its neighbouring countries need to get published 
to earn tenure and promotion. 
Here, the problem is not just with the publishers. Scientists them­
selves are also to blame. Many are taking unethical shortcuts and pay­
ing for the publication of plagiarized or self-plagiarized work. 
Honest scientists stand to lose the most in this unethical quagmire. 
When a researcher’s work is published alongside 
articles that are plagiarized, that report on con­
clusions gained from unsound methodologies 
or that contain altered photographic figures, 
it becomes tainted by association. Unethical 
scientists gaming the system are earning tenure 
and promotion at the expense of the honest. 
The competition for author fees among fraudu­
lent publishers is a serious threat to the future of 
science communication. To compete in a crowded 
market, legitimate open-access publishers are 
being forced to promise shorter submission-to-
publication times; this weakens the peer-review 
process, which takes time to do properly. 
To tackle the problem, scholars must resist 
the temptation to publish quickly and easily. 
The research community needs to use scholarly 
social networks such as Connotea and Mendeley 
to identify and share information on publishers that deceive, lack 
transparency or otherwise fail to follow industry standards. Scientific 
literacy must include the ability to recognize publishing fraud, and 
libraries must remove predatory publishers from their online cata­
logues. The worst offenders can usually be discovered without too 
much effort: their websites are littered with grammatical errors and 
they list bogus contact details. The borderline cases are more difficult 
to spot — here, we need open-access zealots to open their eyes to the 
growing quality problems. 
Conventional scholarly publishers have had an important role in 
validating research, yet too often advocates of open access seem to 
overlook the importance of validation in online publishing. They 
promote access at the expense of quality: a shortcoming that tacitly 
condones the publication of unworthy scientific research. ■
Jeffrey Beall is Scholarly Initiatives Librarian at the University of 
Colorado Denver.
e-mail: jeffrey.beall@ucdenver.edu
 NATURE.COM
Discuss this article 
online at:
go.nature.com/bnuu1y
SCIENTIFIC LITERACY 
MUST 
INCLUDE  
THE ABILITY TO 
RECOGNIZE  
PUBLISHING 
FRAUD.
Predatory publishers are 
corrupting open access
Journals that exploit the author-pays model damage scholarly publishing 
and promote unethical behaviour by scientists, argues Jeffrey Beall.
J. SANCHEZ
1 3  S E P T E M B E R  2 0 1 2  |  V O L  4 8 9  |  N A T U R E  |  1 7 9
WORLD VIEW A personal take on events
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

