PRODUCT DATA SHEET
Raft-R-Mate
®
Under Deck Attic Vent
Performance Criteria
Dimensions
572 mm (22.5") x 1219 mm (48")
Air Channel Depth
38 mm (1.5")
Net Free Air Flow
22.3 sq. inches
Material
Extruded Polystyrene
Sizes
Pieces per Bag
75
Pieces per Unitized Slip Sheet Pallet
1,200
Bags per Truck
416
PRODUCT FEATURES 
Description
Attic ventilation for unconditioned attics or cathedral ceiling cavities.
Basic Uses/Related Uses
Raft-R-Mate® attic vent is a rigid polystyrene sheet shaped to create 
a ventilation path/ cavity between the insulation and the roof deck. 
Raft-R-Mate® attic vents help ensure that the insulation does not 
block the air flow path. Inadequate ventilation may lead to excess heat 
and moisture build-up in the attic or rafter cavity. These conditions 
can lead to the deterioration of the roofing materials and deck, 
insulation, structural framing members, or interior ceiling finishes.
Selection Criteria
	
•	Helps prevent the attic or rafter cavity insulation (batt or blown) 	
	
	 from expanding to fill cavity airways and restricting airflow 
	
•	Maintains a ventilation path through the insulated cavity 
	
•	Increases the life of the roof 
	
•	Installs quickly and easily
	
•	Sized to fit 16 and 24 inch on center framing
	
•	Appropriate for both new construction and remodeling
	
•	Durable and break-resistant construction
	
•	Resists moisture and will not rot or deteriorate
	
•	One of the highest free air flow vents in the industry
Delivery and Storage 
Deliver products in their original packages, and store in
enclosed shelter.
Limitations
Packaging is not UV resistant. Shelter unused packages from 
the elements.
Safety 
For additional information refer to Safe Use Instruction Sheet (SUIS) 
found in the SDS Database via http://sds.owenscorning.com.
Applicable Standards
Most building codes require that enclosed attic or insulated rafter 
cavity space be ventilated. Ventilation is typically provided by 
some combination of gable, ridge and soffit vents. Please consult 
your local building Code for minimum ventilation requirements or 
contact your regional technical representative.

Disclaimer of Liability
Technical information contained herein is furnished without charge or obligation and is given 
and accepted at recipient's sole risk. Because conditions of use may vary and are beyond our 
control, Owens Corning makes no representation about, and is not responsible or liable for the 
accuracy or reliability of data associated with particular uses of any product described herein.
Pub. No. 501136. Printed in Canada. September 2018.
THE PINK PANTHER™ & © 1964–2018 Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios Inc.
All Rights Reserved. The colour PINK is a registered trademark of Owens Corning. 
© 2018 Owens Corning. All Rights Reserved.
OWENS CORNING CANADA LP
3450 MCNICOLL AVENUE
SCARBOROUGH, ONTARIO M1V 1Z5
1-800-GET-PINK®
www.owenscorning.ca
Current Ed: 2018.09.01
Previous Ed: 2018.09.01
PRODUCT PLACEMENT 
Installation
When installed properly against the underside of the roof deck, 
between roof trusses or rafters, Raft-R-Mate® attic vent will provide 
in excess of a 25 mm (1") air space. Fibrous insulation can be 
installed directly against the surface of Raft-R-Mate® attic vent and 
Raft-R-Mate® attic vent will maintain a free airflow channel from the 
eave vent to the ridge or gable vents. Due to its symmetrical design, 
Raft-R-Mate® attic vent can be split in half for 408 mm (16") o.c. rafter 
spacing, or if required for retrofit or cathedral ceiling applications.
Installing Loosefill or Batt Insulation on Attic Floors
1.	 A single 1219 mm (4') length of Raft-R-Mate® attic vent should 	
	
be installed in each rafter or truss space, to the ceiling line, 
	
to ensure that the airway between soffit and attic space 
	
remains open.
2.	 The vent should extend some distance beyond the top of the 	 	
	
horizontal fibrous insulation.
Note: Additional provisions may be required to prevent loosefill 
insulation from filling/flowing into the eave or windwash. Blocking or 
edge blanket insulation are two options to block the eave edge.
Installing Rafter Cavity Batt Insulation in 
Cathedral Ceilings
1.	 Install Raft-R-Mate® attic vent in each rafter cavity beginning at 	
	
the soffit area, to assure the vent remains open, and continue up 	
	
the rafter cavity to the ridge vent or to a common air space.
2.	 Raft-R-Mate® attic vent should be installed with an approximate 
	
51 mm (2") gap between the ends of adjacent pieces to allow 		
	
any moisture to escape more readily into the air channel. Reduce 	
	
gap to 13 mm (1/2") when using blown-in loosefill insulation.
3.	 Install cavity batt insulation or loosefill insulation such that the 	
	
ends of the insulation do not occur in the location of the 
	
Raft-R-Mate® attic vent gap. This precaution permits the 	
	
	
insulation to bridge the gap ensuring the required air 
	
channel airflow. 
Technical Services Available
For Canadian Technical inquiries please contact local representative. 
See Technical territory map via www.specowenscorning.ca/contacttech.

