Learning Motion Patterns
Using Hierarchical Bayesian Models
by
Xiaogang Wang
MASSACHUSETTS INSThtlTE
OFTECHNOLOGY
AUG 0 7 2009
LIBRARIES
Submitted to the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science
in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy in Computer Science
at the
MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
June 2009
© Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2009. All rights reserved.
ARCHIVES
Author ....
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
May 21, 2009
Certified by......
W. Eric L. Grimson
Bernard Gordon Professor of Medical Engineering
Thesis Supervisor
27
7 
Jr' 
I
Accepted by...... 
..............
Terry Orlando
Chairman, Department Committee on Graduate Students


Learning Motion Patterns
Using Hierarchical Bayesian Models
by
Xiaogang Wang
Submitted to the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
on May 21, 2009, in partial fulfillment of the
requirements for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy in Computer Science
Abstract
In far-field visual surveillance, one of the key tasks is to monitor activities in the scene.
Through learning motion patterns of objects, computers can help people understand
typical activities, detect abnormal activities, and learn the models of semantically
meaningful scene structures, such as paths commonly taken by objects. In medical
imaging, some issues similar to learning motion patterns arise. 
Diffusion Tensor
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (DT-MRI) is one of the first methods to visualize and
quantify the organization of white matter in the brain in vivo. Using methods of
tractography segmentation, one can connect local diffusion measurements to create
global fiber trajectories, which can then be clustered into anatomically meaningful
bundles. This is similar to clustering trajectories of objects in visual surveillance. In
this thesis, we develop several unsupervised frameworks to learn motion patterns from
complicated and large scale data sets using hierarchical Bayesian models. We explore
their applications to activity analysis in far-field visual surveillance and tractography
segmentation in medical imaging.
Many existing activity analysis approaches in visual surveillance are ad hoc, re-
lying on predefined rules or simple probabilistic models, which prohibits them from
modeling complicated activities. Our hierarchical Bayesian models can structure de-
pendency among a large number of variables to model complicated activities. Various
constraints and knowledge can be nicely added into a Bayesian framework as pri-
ors. When the number of clusters is not well defined in advance, our nonparametric
Bayesian models can learn it driven by data with Dirichlet Processes priors. In this
work, several hierarchical Bayesian models are proposed considering different types
of scenes and different settings of cameras. If the scenes are crowded, it is difficult to
track objects because of frequent occlusions and difficult to separate different types
of co-occurring activities. We jointly model simple activities and complicated global
behaviors at different hierarchical levels directly from moving pixels without tracking
objects. If the scene is sparse and there is only a single camera view, we first track
objects and then cluster trajectories into different activity categories. In the mean-
while, we learn the models of paths commonly taken by objects. Under the Bayesian

framework, using the models of activities learned from historical data as priors, the
models of activities can be dynamically updated over time. When multiple camera
views are used to monitor a large area, by adding a smoothness constraint as a prior,
our hierarchical Bayesian model clusters trajectories in multiple camera views with-
out tracking objects across camera views. The topology of multiple camera views is
assumed to be unknown and arbitrary. In tractography segmentation, our approach
can cluster much larger scale data sets than existing approaches and automatically
learn the number of bundles from data. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
approaches on multiple visual surveillance and medical imaging data sets.
Thesis Supervisor: W. Eric L. Grimson
Title: Bernard Gordon Professor of Medical Engineering

Acknowledgments
First of all, I want to thank my parents, especially my mom, for their sacrificial love
in the past thirty two years. Whenever I have difficult time, I always can find the
strongest support from them.
I want to thank my wife, Man Tang, for her consistent love, support, encourage-
ment and understanding. She sacrificed so much for me and our son. My achievement
is impossible without her support. My tough PhD study became enjoyable because
of her.
Thanks to ISM brothers and sisters, Pastor Joseph and Lydia Smn. Whenever I
have a happy or difficult time, they are always with me. I love this family. I want to
express my special thanks to Ce Liu. He cared about my life and gave me a lot of
help in many aspects.
Thanks to my advisor Eric Grimson. He gave me a lot of help and guidance on my
study, research and career. He read this thesis carefully for multiple times and gave
me a lot of feedback in time. Thank my thesis committee members Leslie Kaelbling
and Bill Freeman for their helpful suggesions and comments on my thesis work.
I had a great time collaborating with Carl-Fredrik Westin, Kinh Tieu, Xiaoxu
Ma, Biswajit Bose, Gerald Dalley and Keng Teck Ma on many projects during my
PhD study. I learned a lot from them. Thank Gerald Dalley, Joshua Migdal and
Chris Stauffer for their great trackers. Thank Gerald Dalley and Joshua Migdal for
their video IO library which makes life much easier. I want to acknowledge valuable
discussions with Lauren O'Donnell regarding techniques for clustering fiber tracks.
Especially thank Gerald for giving me a lot of technical support in many aspects and
allowing me to frequently bug him. Thank Ce Liu, Gerald Galley, Biswajit Bose and
Dahua Lin for helping me to prepare my thesis presentation.
Thanks to all the APP members, Chris Stauffer, Tomas Izo, Joshua Migdal, Xi-
aoxu Ma, Chaowei Niu, Biswajit Bose, Gerald Dalley, Jenny Yuan, Dahua Lin and
Deepti Bhatnagar. I miss the time spent with them.


Contents
1 Introduction
1.1 
Visual Surveillance ..................
1.1.1 
Activity Analysis ...............
1.1.2 
Learning Scene Structures . . . . . . . ...
1.2 
Tractography Segmentation 
.
..... 
.......
1.3 
Motion Patterns .
...... 
.............
1.4 
Contributions and Summary of Approaches . . . . .
1.4.1 
Crowded and Complicated Scenes . . . . . .
1.4.2 
Sparse Scenes with a Single Camera View .
1.4.3 
Sparse Scenes with Multiple Camera Views .
1.4.4 
Tractography Segmentation . . . . . . ...
1.4.5 
Summary .
..................
1.5 
Thesis Road Map .
..................
2 Literature Review
2.1 
Activity Analysis Without Tracking Objects . . . . . . . . . . . . ..
2.2 Trajectory Analysis and Scene Modeling with a Single Camera View .
2.3 Activity Analysis in Multiple Camera Views . . . . . . . . . . . . ..
2.4 Probabilistic Approaches in Visual Surveillance 
. . . . . . . . . . . .
2.5 Tractography Segmentation 
.
.
......................
2.6 Hierarchical Bayesian Models in Computer Vision Applications . . . .
2.7 Nonparametric Bayesian Approaches .
. . . . .
. . . . ..
17
. . .
.
17
. . .
.
18
. . .
.
19
. . .
.
20
. . . .
.
21
. . . .
.
23
. . . .
.
25
. . . . . . .
29
. . . . . . .
33
. . . .
.
36
....... 37
. . . .
.
38
41
41
42
45
46
47
48
49

3 Activity Analysis in Crowded and Complicated S
3.1 
Low-Level Motion Features . ..........
3.2 
Hierarchical Bayesian Models .
..........
3.2.1 LDA...... 
...............
3.2.2 
LDA Mixture Model ............
3.2.3 
Dirichlet Process ..............
3.2.4 
HDP .....................
3.2.5 
HDP Mixture Model ............
3.2.6 
Dual-HDP ..................
3.2.7 
Discussion on the co-clustering framework
3.2.8 
Example of synthetic data .........
3.3 
Visual Surveillance Applications and Experimental
3.3.1 
Discover Atomic Activities .........
3.3.2 
Discover Global Behaviors .........
3.3.3 
Video Segmentation 
............
3.3.4 
Activity Detection 
.............
3.3.5 
Abnormality Detection ......... 
.
3.3.6 
Query Interactions . ...........
3.3.7 
Comparison with Other Methods .....
3.3.8 
Discussion ......... 
.........
4 Trajectory Analysis in A Single Camera View
4.1 
Modeling Trajectories Using Dual-HDP .........
4.2 
Dynamic Dual-HDP 
...................
4.3 
Experimental Results .
..................
4.3.1 
Trajectory Analysis without Dynamic Modeling
4.3.2 
Trajectory Analysis with Dynamic Modeling . .
4.4 
Summary ..... 
....................
cenes 
51
. . .
.
52
. . .
.
54
..
...
.
54
. . .
.
56
. . .
.
59
..
...
.
60
. . .
.
61
. . .
.
63
. . . . . . . . . . .
65
. . .
.
66
Results ...... 
67
. . .
.
68
. . .
.
72
... . .
.
74
... . .
.
75
... . .
.
75
. . .
.
78
..
. . . .
.
80
. . .
.
80
. . . . . . . .
91
. . . . . . . .
100
..... . 108
5 
Correspondence-Free Activity Analysis in Multiple Camera Views 111
5.1 
Feature Space . ................ 
... 
....
111

5.2 Trajectory Network ...... 
... 
...
5.3 Probabilistic Model ................
5.3.1 
Learning and Inference ..........
5.3.2 
Labeling Trajectories into Activities ...
5.3.3 
Detection of Abnormal Trajectories . . .
5.3.4 
Complexity ................
5.4 
Experimental Results . ............
5.4.1 
Learning Activity Models and Clustering
5.4.2 
Correspondence ..............
5.4.3 
Abnormality Detection ..........
5.4.4 
Computational Cost 
. ..........
5.4.5 
Simulated Data . .......... 
.
5.5 
Discussion ................... 
..
Trajectories
6 Tractography Segmentation
6.1 
Experimental Results .
.........................
7 Limitations and Future Work
7.1 
Low-level features .
...........................
7.2 
Design of "Documents" for Activity Analysis in Crowded Scenes . .
7.3 
Temporal Logic .
............................
7.4 
Jointly Model Activities and Appearance in Multiple Camera Views
7.5 
Guide Tractography Segmentation .... 
. . . . . .
. . . . ..
7.6 Inference 
.................... 
.
.....
8 Conclusion
A Gibbs Sampling for Dual-HDP
112
113
117
118
118
119
119
120
132
133
134
136
143
145
146
151
151
152
152
152
153
153
155
159

10

List of Figures
1-1 
Example of a traffic scene 
................... 
..... 
18
1-2 Tractography in DT-MRI 
................ 
..... . .
20
1-3 Tractography segmentation ................ 
..... 
. .
21
1-4 Compare anatomical structures across subjects . ............ 
21
1-5 Representations of motion patterns ............. 
...... 
23
1-6 Examples of crowded and complicated scenes . ............. 
26
1-7 System diagram for activity analysis in crowded and complicated scenes 27
1-8 Learning motion patterns from temporal co-occurrence of feature values 29
1-9 Examples of paths and trajectories in a parking lot scene ....... 
31
1-10 Learning motion patterns from identity co-occurrence ......... 
32
1-11 Simulated examples of activities observed in multiple camera views 
34
1-12 Examples of multi-camera settings .................... 
. .
35
1-13 An example of multiscale clustering . ............ 
. .
.
37
3-1 
System diagram for activity analysis in crowded and complicated scenes 53
3-2 
Graphical models of LDA and LDA mixture . ............. 
55
3-3 
Graphical models of HDP and HDP mixture . ............. 
60
3-4 Graphical model of Dual-HDP ................... 
... 
64
3-5 
Experimental comparison of HDP and Dual-HDP on a toy example 
66
3-6 Distributions of atomic activities learned by Dual-HDP in a traffic scene 69
3-7 Histogram of moving pixels assigned to atomic activities learned by
Dual-HDP in a traffic scene ........... 
.
........ 
...
70

3-8 Distributions of atomic activities learned by the LDA mixture model
in a traffic scene ...... 
... 
...................... 
...
70
3-9 Some atomic activities learned by Dual-HDP merger into one atomic
activity learned by the LDA mixture model 
. ............. 
71
3-10 Distributions of global behaviors over atomic activities learned by Dual-
HDP in a traffic scene 
. .
..................... 
.
.
73
3-11 Results of video segmentation in a traffic scene . ....... 
.... 
.. 
74
3-12 Activity detection in a traffic scene . ......... 
......... 
76
3-13 Vehicle and pedestrian detection based on motions ........... 
76
3-14 Results of abnormality detection in a traffic scene ..... .
...... 
78
3-15 Query result of interaction jay-walking . ................ 
79
4-1 
An example to explain the modeling of semantic regions and activities 
84
4-2 
Graphical model of dynamic Dual-HDP . ................ 
86
4-3 
Semantic regions at a maritime port learnt from the radar tracks ... 
92
4-4 
Clusters of radar tracks from a maritime port ... 
......... 
94
4-5 
Top 20 abnormal radar tracks from a maritime port ... 
..... 
. .
95
4-6 
Trajectories collected from a parking lot scene within one week . . .. 
96
4-7 
Some semantic regions learnt from a parking lot scene . ....... 
.
97
4-8 
Some clusters of trajectories from a parking lot scene ......... 
98
4-9 
Top 100 abnormal trajectories in the parking lot scene ........ 
99
4-10 Simulate trajectories of different activities 
... 
...... 
...... 
100
4-11 Activity classification accuracies of Dual-HDP and two distance-based
methods ........................................ 
.
101
4-12 Dynamic change of semantic region 1 over time learnt from the radar
tracks ...................................... 
...... 
102
4-13 Dynamic change of semantic region 2 over time learnt from the radar
tracks ........ 
....... 
...... 
................... 
.
103
4-14 Dynamic change of semantic region 3 over time learnt from the radar
tracks ...... 
... .. .. ........................... 
.
103

4-15 Dynamic change of semantic region 4 over time learnt from the radar
tracks ................. 
................. 
103
4-16 Dynamic change of semantic region 5 over time learnt from the radar
tracks 
........................... 
...... 
104
4-17 Abnormal radar tracks detected at different time slices ....... 
.
104
4-18 Dynamic change of a semantic region 1 from parking lot scene over time106
4-19 Dynamic change of a semantic region 2 from parking lot scene over time107
4-20 Dynamic change of a semantic region 2 from parking lot scene over time107
4-21 Abnormal trajectories in the parking lot scene detected at different
time slices ........ 
.............. 
109
5-1 
An example of building a network connecting trajectories in multiple
camera views ................. 
.... 
........ 
113
5-2 
An example to describe the high level picture of our model for trajec-
tory analysis in multiple camera view . ................. 
114
5-3 
Examples of multi-camera settings ................... 
.
120
5-4 Distributions of activity models (1 - 4) and clusters of trajectories in
a parking lot scene ................... 
......... 
122
5-5 
Distributions of activity models (5 - 8) and clusters of trajectories in
a parking lot scene . . .
........ .......... 
......... 
123
5-6 
Distributions of activity models (9 - 12) and clusters of trajectories in
a parking lot scene ................... 
......... 
124
5-7 Distributions of activity models (13 - 14) and clusters of trajectories
in a parking lot scene .......... 
....... 
........ 
125
5-8 
Distributions of activity models (1 - 4) and clusters of trajectories in
a street scene .......... 
.......... 
.. 
......... 
126
5-9 Distributions of activity models (5 - 8) and clusters of trajectories in
a street scene. ................... 
............ 
127
5-10 Distributions of activity models (9 - 12) and clusters of trajectories in
a street scene. ................... 
............ 
128

5-11 Distributions of activity models (13 - 16) and clusters of trajectories
in a street scene .
.
................ 
.. . . .
. . . . .
.
129
5-12 Activity models learnt in an unsupervised way help to solve the corre-
spondence problem ................... 
......... 
132
5-13 Some trajectories with low likelihoods from a parking lot scene . . . .
134
5-14 Some trajectories with low likelihoods from a street scene ....... 
135
5-15 Simulated camera views ................... 
. . . .. 
137
5-16 Manually drawn paths and simulated trajectories ......... 
. .
137
5-17 The accuracies of classifying trajectories into different activities when
A takes different values and T is fixed as 0 ...... 
......... 
.
138
5-18 Distributions of activity models in a single global views learnt from the
simulated data 
.... 
. .
.. 
................. 
. .
140
5-19 Distribution of activity models in four camera views learnt from the
simulated data. The meaning of colors is the same as Figure 5-4. .... 
141
5-20 Statistics of pairs of trajectories connected on the network ...... 
142
5-21 The accuracies of classifying trajectories into different activities when
the temporal threshold T change from 0 to 300 seconds ........ 
142
5-22 Accuracies of correspondence on the simulated data .......... 
143
6-1 
Compare the results of two clustering approaches with the ground truth
on a data set with 3,152 fibers ................... 
... 
146
6-2 
Compare results of our approach and the approach proposed in [107] 
147
6-3 
Cluster fibers across multiple subjects ........ 
.
......... 
149

List of Tables
5.1 
Negative log likelihood under our approach and two alternative trajec-
tory networks ................ 
............ 
..
131
5.2 
Negative log likelihood with models trained on a variable number of
cameras ................... 
............... 
131

16

Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1 
Visual Surveillance
Visual surveillance has been one of the most active research topics in computer vision
in recent years. The goal of visual surveillance is to detect, track and recognize objects
of interest, understand and describe the behaviors of objects, and efficiently extract
useful information for users from a huge amount of video data collected by monitoring
cameras. Visual surveillance has a wide variety of applications in both public and
private environments, such as homeland security [42, 26, 13, 159, 27, 119], crime
prevention [54, 8, 31, 28, 164, 158], traffic control [123, 146, 83, 72, 80], accident
prediction and detection [73, 58, 5, 6, 121], and monitoring patients, elderly and
children at home [100, 89]. Comprehensive surveys can be found in [56, 102]. These
applications require monitoring indoor and outdoor scenes of airports, train stations,
highways, parking lots, stores, shopping malls and offices. There is a growing interest
in visual surveillance due to the growing availability of cheap sensors and processors,
and also a growing need from the public for safety and security.
Currently there may be tens of thousands of cameras in a city collecting a huge
amount of data on a daily basis. Researchers are urged to develop intelligent systems
to efficiently extract information from a huge amount of data. Because of the large
number of cameras, it is also essential for visual surveillance systems to self-adapt to
a variety of scenes with minimum human intervention. The focus of visual surveil-

Figure 1-1: Example of a traffic scene. There are many single-agent activities (e.g.
cars turn left), multi-agent interactions (e.g. a vehicle comes to stop waiting for
pedestrians to cross the street), and global behaviors (e.g. different traffic modes)
happening in this scene.
lance research is moving from processing only one video stream with a single camera
view from sparse and simple scenes to monitoring crowded and busy scenes with a
distributed network of cameras. Intelligence, distribution, adaptability and tolerance
are the most important characteristics of modern visual surveillance systems [115].
1.1.1 
Activity Analysis
Activity analysis has long been one of the foci of research in visual surveillance. Over
the past decade, significant work has been reported on this topic. A literature review
can be found in Chapter 2. As an example, Figure 1-1 shows a traffic scene with many
different types of activities happening. People expect visual surveillance systems to
* discover typical types of single-agent activities (e.g. a car turns left), multi-agent
interactions (e.g. a vehicle stops waiting for pedestrians to cross the street) and
global behaviors (e.g. different traffic modes) in these scenes, and provide a
summary of them;
* detect/classify activities, interactions and global behaviors;
* detect abnormalities (e.g. pedestrians cross the street outside the crosswalk);
* describe scene evolution in natural language;

* obtain various statistics of activities (e.g. how the frequencies of different types
activities vary over time); and
* support query of activities and interactions in a flexible way.
Ideally, a system would learn models of activities to answer such questions in an
unsupervised way with as little human labeling effort as possible. we will do activity
analysis under different scenarios. It depends on the number of camera views and
how crowded the scene is. More concretely, these scenarios include crowded scenes
with a single camera views, sparse scenes with a single camera view and sparse scenes
with multiple camera views.
1.1.2 
Learning Scene Structures
Activities are closely related to the structures of the scenes, such as paths, or entry
and exit points, since they regularize the motion of objects. On the one hand, these
structures can be identified from the moving patterns of objects related to particular
activities [68, 38, 96, 97, 71, 153, 57, 70]. On the other hand, the knowledge of scene
structures helps to classify moving patterns into activities, since it provides prior
information on activities happening in a scene. In this thesis work the two related
problems of activity analysis and scene modeling will be jointly solved. The knowledge
of the learnt scene structures is very useful in many surveillance tasks. It supports
both high-level activity interpretation and low-level object tracking and classification.
It can support activity descriptions with spatial context [119], such as "a car moving
off the road" and "a person waiting at a bus stop". It also can improve low-level
tracking and classification [11, 49, 75, 55]. For example, if an object disappears, but
not at an exit point, then this event is likely to be a tracking failure instead of a true
exit. Through learning the lane marker positions on a highway, cast shadows that fall
over a lane line can be removed [55]. In classification, people can leverage the fact
that vehicles are much more likely than pedestrians to move on the road.

DI a D, 
Dx 
A fiber trajectory
D = 
D , 
D, 
Dyz
D, 
Dyz 
DJ
D = E 
0 
A2 
0 
E 
e
0 
0 
\ I 
DT-MRI visualization 
Visualization of
Diffusion tensor 
with ellipsoidsvectors
main eigenvectors
(a) 
(b)
Figure 1-2: Tractography in DT-MRI. (a) In DT-MRI, a local diffusion tensor D,
which is a 3 x 3 symmetric matrix, is used to characterize the motion of water in
all directions. The eigenvectors (el, e2 and e3) of a tensor are computed, and the
tensor is visualized with an ellipsoid. (b) Tractography is a technique to extract a
fiber trajectory by connecting local diffusion measurements.
1.2 
Tractography Segmentation
Some techniques developed in visual surveillance can also be applied to medical imag-
ing where similar issues of of tracking, clustering, abnormality detection and similarity
retrieval arise. Diffusion Tensor Magnetic Resonance Imaging (DT-MRI) is an MRI
modality that has gained tremendous popularity over the past five years and is one
of the first methods that made it possible to visualize and quantify the organization
of white matter in the human brain in vivo. As shown in Figure 1-2, DT-MRI mea-
sures local diffusivity of a water molecule within the tissue. It provides information
about the orientation of white matter fiber tracts. Extracting connectivity informa-
tion from DT-MRI, termed "tractography", is an especially active area of research,
as it promises to model the pathways of white matter tracts in the brain, by connect-
ing local diffusion measurements into global fiber trajectories. As shown in Figure
1-3, in tractography segmentation, fiber trajectories are clustered into bundles which
help to identify anatomical structures in the brain. Experts compare the anatomical
structures of different subjects to tell whether they are normal. Some examples are
shown in Figure 1-4.

Fornix bundle
Uncinate bundle
Middle Cerebellar Peduncle
(a) 
(b)
Figure 1-3: Tractography segmentation is a technique to cluster fiber trajectroeis
generated from DT-MRI into bundles which correspond to anatomical structures. (a)
Full brain tractography segmentation result. Colors represent different bundles. (b)
Anatomical labels of some bundles.
Subject 1 
Subject 2
Figure 1-4: Bundles of two different subjects. By comparing anatomical structures
across subjects, experts can tell whether they are normal.
1.3 
Motion Patterns
In this work a motion pattern means the pathway of an object moving from one loca-
tion to another. Locations and moving directions are the most important features to
describe motion patterns. This thesis focuses on activity analysis in far-field visual
surveillance. In far-field settings, objects are small in size and the captured videos
are of low resolution and poor quality. It is difficult to compute more complicated
features, such as poses, gestures, and appearance of objects. The activities of ob-
jects are mainly distinguished by their moving patterns. In comparison, in near-field

surveillance, other features may play a more important role in explaining activities.
A motion pattern has several different representations. As shown in Figure 1-5, it
can be represented by a trajectory when an object is tracked in a single camera view.
It can be represented by several trajectories when an object is tracked in multiple
camera views. Without tracking objects, it can be represented by a set of moving
pixels. Through clustering motion patterns, the models of activities and semantically
meaningful scene structures can be learnt.
If the scene is sparse and there is only a single camera view, visual surveillance
systems typically first detect and track objects, and treat the activity of an object
as sequential movements along its trajectory. Through tracking, an activity executed
by a single object can be separated from other co-occurring activities, and features
related to the activity can be integrated as a track. Trajectories are clustered or
classified into different activity categories. The paths commonly taken by objects are
learned from the clusters of trajectories.
The view of a single camera is finite and limited by the structures of scenes. In
order to monitor activities in a wide area, video streams from multiple cameras have
to be used. A typical way of doing multi-camera surveillance is to first infer the
topology of camera views, then track objects across camera views, and finally cluster
trajectories observed in different camera views. However both inferring the topology
of camera views and tracking objects across camera views are notoriously difficult
especially when the number of cameras is large and the topology of the camera views
is arbitrary.
Many scenes, such as airports, train stations, street intersections and shopping
malls, are very crowded. It is difficult to track objects in these scenes because of
frequent occlusions. Alternatively, moving pixels instead of trajectories can be used
as features to model activities. Existing approaches typically treat a video clip as an
integral entity and compute a motion feature vector from the moving pixels detected in
the whole video clip. The whole video clip is labeled as one of the activity categories,
and flagged as normal or abnormal. However, when there are many different types
of activities happening in a busy scene simultaneously, it is difficult to separate a

(a) 
(b) 
(c)
Figure 1-5: Motion patterns have different representations. A motion pattern can be
represented by (a) a trajectory when an object is tracked in a single camera view, (b)
several trajectories when an object is tracked in multiple camera views independently
or (c) a set of moving pixels without tracking objects.
particular activity from other co-occurring activities without relying on detection
and tracking. Activity analysis in crowded and complicated scenes is still a very
challenging problem not well solved yet.
Extracting fiber trajectories by tractography from DT-MRI has some similarity
with tracking objects in visual surveillance. Tractography segmentation aims to clus-
ter fiber trajectories into anatomically meaningful bundles. This is like clustering
trajectories of objects. Thus similar trajectory analysis approaches can be applied in
both fields [153, 107]. Through clustering trajectories, anatomical structures can be
identified in the brain from DT-MRI and semantically meaningful scene structures
can be found in far-field visual surveillance. In this work, we study the problem of
learning motion patterns with applications to both visual surveillance and tractogra-
phy segmentation.
1.4 
Contributions and Summary of Approaches
This thesis work focuses on learning motion patterns with its applications to activ-
ity analysis in far-field visual surveillance and tractography segmentation in medical
imaging. In visual surveillance, we will do activity analysis under different scenar-
ios. It depends on the number of camera views and how crowded the scene is. The
contributions of this work are summarized as four-fold. First, we apply nonpara-
metric hierarchical Bayesian models to learn motion patterns in visual surveillance
and tractography segmentation. Second, we proposed an unsupervised framework to

jointly model simple activities, complicated interactions and global behaviors and to
separate co-occurring activities in crowded scenes without tracking objects. Third,
when existing approaches analyze activities in multiple camera views, they require
tracking objects across camera views and knowing the topology of camera views. We
propose a novel approach for activity analysis from multiple camera views without
tracking objects across camera views and without knowing the topology of camera
views. Fourth, we proposed a novel dynamic nonparametric method to update models
of activities over time. Our approaches can also be used to solve clustering problems
on other data sets.
There are many advantages of using nonparametric hierarchical Bayesian models
for activity analysis and tractography segmentation.
(1) Many existing activity analysis approaches in visual surveillance are ad hoc,
relying on predefined rules or simple probabilistic models. They have difficulty mod-
eling complicated activities. Under a Bayesian framework, visual surveillance tasks
are formulated in a principled way. In this framework, abnormality has a probabilis-
tic explanation. Hierarchical Bayesian models can structure dependency among a
large number of variables to model complicated activities. Various constraints and
knowledge can be nicely added into a Bayesian model as priors. For example, using
the models of activities learned from historical data as priors, the models of activities
can be dynamically updated over time. By adding a smoothness constraint on the
distributions of trajectories over activities as a prior, our hierarchical Bayesian model
clusters trajectories in multiple camera views without tracking objects across camera
views.
(2) In our dynamic hierarchical Bayesian approach, the models of activities are
updated over time and thus can better explain activities at different times. For
example, some activities which are abnormal at a particular time may become normal
at a different time.
(3) When analyzing activities in multiple camera views, our approach assumes
that the topology of camera views is arbitrary. The camera views can have large
overlap, small overlap, or even no overlap.

(4) Many existing approaches have difficulty deciding the numbers of clusters of
moving pixels, video clips and trajectories. Nonparametric Bayesian models can learn
the numbers of clusters driven by data. This provides a solution when the number of
clusters is not well defined in advance.
(5) While many existing approaches need expensive human effort to adjust pa-
rameters or label data, our approaches are unsupervised with little human labeling
effort.
(6) Our approaches have lower space complexity and can cluster larger scale data
sets than many existing approaches.
Our approaches developed in four applications are summarized in the following
subsections.
1.4.1 
Crowded and Complicated Scenes
Many scenes, such as street intersections, train stations, airports, and shopping malls
(see Figure 1-6), of great interest for security purpose are very crowded. It is difficult
to detect and track objects because of frequent occlusions. Most of the tracking based
activity analysis approaches are expected to fail in these scenes. Although many
approaches were proposed for activity analysis directly using motion feature vectors
without tracking objects, they assumed that there was only one type of activity
happening in each short video clip. The whole video clip was labeled as one of the
activity categories, and flagged as normal or abnormal. They held this assumption at
least at the training stage. In these crowded and complicated scenes, many different
types of activities happen simultaneously. It is difficult for existing approaches to
separate co-occurring activities without supervision. A detailed literature review can
be found in Section 2.1.
We proposed an unsupervised framework using a nonparametric hierarchical Bayesian
model, Dual Hierarchical Dirichlet Processes (Dual-HDP), to jointly model simple ac-
tivities, such as cars turning right and pedestrians crossing the street, which are called
atomic activities, and global behaviors, such as different traffic modes, in the scene
directly from moving pixels without tracking objects. Global behavior is defined as

(b)
(c) 
(d)
Figure 1-6: Examples of crowded and complicated scenes, such as traffic scenes, train
stations and shopping malls. In these scenes, it is difficult to track objects because
of frequent occlusions among objects and it is difficult to separate different types of
activities which happen at the same time.
a combination of different types of co-occurring atomic activities in the scene. After
the models of atomic activities are learned, they can be used as units to detect inter-
actions between objects such as jay-walking (when a pedestrian is crossing the street,
a vehicle is simultaneously approaching).
Our system diagram is shown in Figure 1-7. We compute local motions (loca-
tions and moving directions of moving pixels) as our low-level visual features. This
avoids the difficult tracking problem in crowded scenes. We do not use global motion
features ([164, 161]) because, in these complicated scenes, multiple different types of
activities often occur simultaneously and we want to separate them. Each moving
pixel has a feature value which includes location and direction of motion. An ob-
served long video sequence is uniformly divided into many short video clips. Global
behavior is a combination of atomic activities occurring in the same video clip. Thus,
there exist two hierarchical structures in both the data set (long video sequence --
short video clips -- moving pixels) and visual surveillance tasks (global behaviors -
atomic activities). So, it is natural to employ a hierarchical Bayesian approach to

Motion Features
(a)
Atomic activities modeled
as distributions over
the feature codebook
(b)
Global behaviors modeled
as distributions over
atomic activities
(c)
Figure 1-7: Diagram of the system for activity analysis in crowded and complicated
scenes. Our framework connects low-level motion features, middle-level atomic ac-
tivities and high-level global behaviors. (a) The observed long video sequence is
uniformly divided into short clips as documents. In each video clip, moving pixels
are detected and quantized into visual words based on their locations and motion
directions. The four quantized directions are represented by four colors. Each video
clip has a distribution over visual words. (b) Atomic activities (e.g. pedestrians cross
the road) are discovered and modeled as distributions over visual words. Moving
pixels are clustered into atomic activities. (c) Video clips are clustered into global
behaviors, which are modeled as distributions over atomic activities.

connect three elements in visual surveillance: low-level motion features, middle-level
atomic activities, and high-level global behaviors. Atomic activities are modeled as
distributions over low-level visual features and global behaviors are modeled as dis-
tributions over atomic activities. Moving pixels are clustered into atomic activities
and video clips are clustered into global behaviors. Abnormal video clips and moving
pixels are detected as those with low data likelihood under the learned hierarchical
Bayesian model. As explained in [44], a hierarchical Bayesian model learned from a
data set with hierarchical structure has the advantage of using enough parameters to
fit the data well while avoiding overfitting problems since it is able to use a population
distribution to structure some dependence into the parameters. In our case, the same
types of atomic activities repeatedly occur in different video clips. By sharing a com-
mon set of atomic activity models across different video clips, the models of atomic
activities can be well learned from enough data. On the other hand, atomic activities
are used as components to further model more complicated global behaviors, which
are clusters of video clips. This is a much more compact representation than di-
rectly clustering high dimensional motion feature vectors computed from video clips.
Under hierarchical Bayesian models, surveillance tasks such as motion segmentation,
video segmentation, activity detection, and abnormality detection are formulated in
a transparent, clean, and probabilistic way compared with the ad hoc nature of many
existing approaches.
Dual-HDP advances the existing language processing model, Hierarchical Dirichlet
Processes (HDP) [140]. HDP is a nonparametric Bayesian model. It clusters words
often co-occurring in the same documents into one topic and learns the number of
topics from data. Dual-HDP co-clusters both words and documents. Documents
containing similar sets of topics of words are clustered. It automatically decides the
numbers of both word topics and document clusters. Directly using HDP to solve
this problem, HDP can only cluster moving pixels into atomic activities. Since video
clips have different combinations of atomic activities, Dual-HDP has an extra layer
of hierarchical Dirichlet processes to model the clusters of video clips on the top of
atomic activities. Dual-HDP is similar to the nonparametric model, called Nested

Figure 1-8: Learning motion patterns from temporal co-occurrence of feature values.
An atomic activity generates continuous motions in time. Two features have strong
temporal correlation if they are related to the same atomic activity. The models of
atomic activities can be learned from the temporal co-occurrence of feature values.
(a) Moving pixels in a short video clip. They are colored into different atomic activity
category. (b) The spatial distribution of an atomic activity. The two locations marked
by yellow boxes are on the pathway of vehicles. When a car is passing by, we observed
moving pixels at these two locations around the same time. The atomic activity model
has large distribution on both locations with temporal correlation.
Dirichlet Process, proposed by Rodriguez et al. [117] independently applied to health
care quality analysis. It is also closely related to the Transformed Dirichlet Process
proposed by Sudderth et al. [137] applied to object recognition.
Under our framework, video clips are treated as documents and moving pixels are
treated as words. An atomic activity generates temporally continuous motions. Thus
local motions caused by the same atomic activity often co-occur in the same short
video clips. This is called temporal co-occurrence. As an example shown in Figure
1-8, the models of atomic activities are learned from the temporal co-occurrence of
feature values. Video clips containing similar sets of atomic activities are clustered
into the same global behavior. Our model holds the "bag-of-words" assumption. It
does not capture complicated temporal logic in activity, such as two people meet
each other, walk together, and then separate. This part of thesis work was previously
published in [151, 152].
1.4.2 
Sparse Scenes with a Single Camera View
If there is only a single camera view and the scene is sparse, we first detect and track
objects, and then cluster trajectories of objects into different activity categories based
(b)
(a)

on their spatial distributions and moving directions. In the meanwhile the models of
paths commonly taken by objects are learned. Abnormal trajectories are detected as
those with low data likelihood under the learned hierarchical Bayesian models.
We now briefly explain several basic concepts and assumptions held in our pro-
posed framework under this setting. There are paths in the physical world. Paths
may have spatial overlap. The intersections of paths are called semantic regions. A
path is composed of several semantic regions. Objects on the same paths have similar
moving patterns, which is called an activity. Some examples of paths and trajectories
can be found in Figure 1-9. Although some paths, such as roads of vehicles can be
recognized by their physical features, some paths cannot be. For example, pedestrians
may take a short cut on a grass field. A trajectory, which only records the positions
of an object, is a history of the movement of an object in a camera view. The points
on trajectories are called observations.
The scene of a camera view is quantized into small cells. When an object moves,
it connects two cells far apart in a camera view by its trajectory. This is called
identity co-occurrence as explained in Figure 1-10. Our probabilistic model is based
on some simple, general assumptions on the spatial and temporal features related to
activities. (1) Cells located in the same semantic region are likely to be connected
by trajectories. (2) trajectories passing through the same path (a set of semantic
regions) belong to the same activity.
We propose an unsupervised framework using Dual-HDP for trajectory analysis.
Under our framework, trajectories are treated as documents and the observations
(positions and moving directions of objects) on the trajectories are treated as words.
Topics are semantic regions. Observations are clustered into semantic regions based
on identity co-occurrence and trajectories passing through the same set of semantic
regions are clustered into the same activity (path). This part of the thesis work was
previously published in [150].
Dual-HDP is a static model. We further extend Dual-HDP to a dynamic Dual-
HDP model which can online update the models of activities over time. A dynamically
updated model can better explain activities at the current time. For example, some

(a) 
(b)
Figure 1-9: Examples of paths and trajectories in a parking lot scene. We can track
objects in sparse scenes. (a) Examples of paths in the parking lot scene. (b) Trajec-
tories collected from the parking lot scene within one week. Random colors are used
to distinguish individual trajectories.
activities which are abnormal at one particular time may become normal at a different
time. We can analyze how the models of activities and paths change over time. Under
dynamic Dual-HDP, the data is divided into subsets in temporal order. Dynamic
Dual-HDP has a much lower complexity than Dual-HDP, since it clusters subsets of
trajectories incrementally and does not keep any historical data in memory. This
property is very useful if people need to cluster a huge data set collected from several
months or years. Dynamic Dual-HDP is related to the dynamic topic model proposed
by Blei et al. [16], which was a parametric model assuming that the number of topics
are fixed.
Most of the existing trajectory analysis approaches cluster trajectories and detect
abnormal trajectories by defining the pairwise distances/similarities between trajecto-
ries. A detailed review can be found in Section 2.2. This framework has several draw-
backs. First, there is no global probabilistic framework to model activities happening
in the scene. They have an ad hoc nature especially on the definition of distance
measures. Abnormal trajectories are usually detected as those with a larger distance
to other trajectories. Their abnormality detection lacks a probabilistic explanation.
Second, they usually do not provide a solution to the number of clusters and require
that the cluster number is known in advance. Third, some approaches required that

(a) 
(b)
Figure 1-10: Learning motion patterns from identity co-occurrence. 
Identity co-
occurrence means that two feature values are on the same trajectories and are related
to the same object. (a) Two locations marked by yellow boxes are on the same
trajectory. (b) Two locations marked by yellow boxes are in the same semantic region
and thus they co-exist on many trajectories. Based on the identity co-occurrence
information, a semantic region model with large distribution on both two locations
can be learned.
two trajectories were temporally aligned in order to compute their distance. Thus
they are sensitive to misdetection and tracking errors. Fourth, calculating the dis-
tances/similarities between all pairs of samples is computationally inefficient, with a
complexity of O(N2 ) in both time and space, where N is the number of trajectories.
Our framework differs from previous trajectory analysis and scene modeling ap-
proaches in the following aspects.
* Different from existing distance-based clustering approaches, it clusters trajec-
tories using a generative model. There is a natural probabilistic explanation for
the detection of abnormal trajectories.
* Using Dirichlet Processes, the number of activity categories and semantic re-
gions are automatically learnt from data instead of being manually specified.
* It does not require that trajectories are temporally aligned while many existing
approaches do. So it is more robust to tracking errors.
* The space complexity of Dual-HDP is O(N) instead of O(N 2) in the number of
trajectories. We use collapsed Gibbs sampling is to do inference. The time com-
plexity of each collapsed Gibbs sampling iteration is O(N). However, there is
no theoretical justification on the convergence of the collapsed Gibbs sampling.

* Dynamic Dual-HDP online updates the models of activities, while existing ap-
proaches are static and run in a batch mode. Dynamic Dual-HDP clusters
trajectories incrementally. It has much lower space and time complexities than
Dual-HDP and existing approaches.
* Our approach clusters trajectories based on identity co-occurrence, different
from distance based methods which cluster trajectories close in space. Con-
sidering the case when vehicles move on two side-by-side lanes in the same
direction, distance-based methods will group trajectories of these vehicles into
one cluster while our approach will learn the two lanes as different semantic
regions and separate trajectories into two clusters since there are few vehicles
crossing lanes to connect locations in different lanes.
1.4.3 
Sparse Scenes with Multiple Camera Views
In order to monitor activities in a wide area, video streams from multiple cameras
have to be used. We first track objects in each camera view independently, and
then group trajectories, which belong to the same activity category but are observed
in different camera views, into one cluster. The distributions of a path in multiple
camera views are jointly modeled. This is more challenging than activity analysis in a
single camera view since it is difficult to track objects across camera views. Examples
of activities observed in multiple camera views can be found in Figure 1-11.
Many systems [61, 23, 78, 85, 25, 79, 74, 64, 136, 98, 113, 126, 65, 125, 143, 48,
145, 128, 39] using multiple camera views for visual surveillance were proposed in
past years. They were based on various assumptions on the number of cameras, the
topology and geometry of camera views, and the calibration of cameras. A detailed
review of related work can be found in Section 2.3. Most of these approaches focused
on tracking objects across camera views. In general, this is a very difficult problem.
Because of the structures of the scenes, the distribution and configuration of cameras
could be quite arbitrary and unknown. The camera views may have any combination
of large, small, or even no overlap. The objects in camera views may move on one

cL 
amera 3 
Camera 4
(a) 
(b) 
(c)
Figure 1-11: Simulated examples of activities observed in multiple camera views.
Trajectories of different activity categories are marked by different colors. Trajectories
are obtained from simulation. The purpose of our activity analysis in multiple camera
view is to group trajectories which belong to the same activity category but are
observed in different camera views, into one cluster. (a) Activities observed in a single
giant camera view, which is usually unavailable in real life. (b) The same activities
as in (a) are observed in four different camera views, which are similar to the camera
views available in real life. (c) The fields covered by four camera views. They are
marked by polygons in colors: red (camera 1), blue (camera 2), cyan (camera 3) and
black (camera 4).
or multiple ground planes. Analyzing activities over such a multi-camera network is
quite challenging. A natural way of doing multi-camera surveillance is to first infer
the topology of camera views [98, 113], solve the correspondence problem [61, 85,
25, 136, 79, 64, 113, 125, 65, 126, 48, 128], stitching trajectories of the same object
observed in different camera views into a complete trajectory, and then analyze the
stitched trajectories using the same approaches developed for a single camera view.
However both inferring the topology of camera views and solving the correspondence
problem are notoriously difficult especially when the number of cameras is large and
the topology of camera views is arbitrary.
The ultimate goal of some surveillance systems is activity analysis instead of solv-
ing correspondence. In this thesis, we propose an unsupervised hierarchical Bayesian
model for activity analysis in multiple camera views without doing inference on the
topology of camera views and without solving the correspondence problem. Further
more, even though correspondence is not a prerequisite, after the models of activities
have been learnt, they can help to solve the correspondence problem, since if two

U
m 
:ToDologv
Camera 1 
Camera 2 
Camera 3 
Camera 4
(a) Parking lot scene
Camera 1 
Camera 2 
Camera 3 
Camera 4 
Topology
(b) Street scene
Figure 1-12: Examples of multiple camera views and their topology in two data sets,
a parking lot scene and a street scene. When the topology of camera views is plotted,
the fields of camera views are represented by different colors: blue (camera 1), red
(camera 2), green (camera 3), yellow (camera 4). However, our approach does not
require knowledge of the topology of the cameras in advance.
trajectories observed in different camera views belong to the same activity, they are
likely to correspond to the same object.
We assume that the topology of camera views is unknown and quite arbitrary.
The camera setting in our approach is as follows.
* The cameras are static and synchronized but not calibrated.
* The fields covered by these camera views may have no overlap or any amount
of overlap. However we assume that when an object exits a camera view, it is
already in or will enter one of the other camera views within a predefined time
threshold T unless it moves out of range of the entire set.
* Objects may move on different ground planes.
Examples of multi-camera settings are shown in Figure 1-12.
This framework is an extension of the framework of clustering trajectories in a
single camera view as described in Section 1.4.2. Using only identity co-occurrence,
trajectories within a single camera view can be clustered, but we cannot cluster

trajectories across camera views since we do not track objects across camera views.
In this framework, we assume that the trajectories of the same object observed in
different camera views have temporal correlation. If two trajectories are observed in
two camera views around the same time, they are more likely to be the same object
and thus belong to be same activity category. A smoothness constraint is added into
the Bayesian model as prior to cluster trajectories across camera views based on both
identity co-occurrence and temporal co-occurrence information.
A network is first built by connecting with an edge trajectories that are observed
in different camera views and whose temporal extents are close. Then a probabilistic
model, in which a path has joint distribution in all the camera views, is built. If two
trajectories are connected by an edge in the network, the prior of the smoothness
constraint requires that they have similar distributions over paths. This part of the
thesis work was previously published in [154, 155].
1.4.4 
Tractography Segmentation
We use a technology similar to clustering trajectories of objects in a single camera
views to cluster fiber trajectories into anatomically meaningful bundles. Existing
tractography segmentation approaches had difficulty clustering very large scale data
sets. Full brain tractography typically generates 10 thousand to 100 thousand fibers
for each subject. Sometimes fibers from multiple subjects need to be clustered to-
gether. Existing approaches only cluster fibers from a subregion, or sample a small
subset, such as five thousand fibers, from the large data set and learn the models of
bundles from this subset. Thus important information from the full data set is lost.
Many of these methods have difficulty deciding the number of clusters. It was shown
that clustering performance of these approaches changed dramatically when different
numbers of clusters were chosen [101]. A detailed review of existing approaches can
be found in 2.5.
We use Dual-HDP to cluster fibers and learn the models of bundles from a training
set without supervision. The 3D space of the brain is quantized into voxels. If two
voxels are connected by many fibers, both of the voxels have large weights in the

(a) 
(b) 
(c)
Figure 1-13: An example of multiscale clustering. Multiscale clustering makes it easy
for experts to identify anatomical structures across different scales. The spatial range
of the whole brain is 200 x 200 x 200. (a): The clustering result when the space is
quantized into voxels of size 11 x 11 x 11. The bundles correspond to structures at a
large scale. (b): One bundle from (a). (c): The space is quantized into voxels of size
3 x 3 x 3 and the bundle in (b) is further clustered into smaller bundles corresponding
to structures at a finer scale.
model of the same bundle, which means that they are on the same pathway of white
matter tracts. Our approach can cluster a large data set without sampling it and can
learn the number of clustering driven by data. If we need to analyze a new subject, we
use Dynamic Dual-HDP to cluster fibers from new subjects. The models of bundles
learnt from training data are used as priors, and models are adapted to new data.
Instead of fixing the number of clusters, our approach can create new clusters for
structures which are observed in the new data but not in the training data.
Our framework can be extended to multiscale clustering. First we cluster fibers
using a large size of voxels and bundles correspond to structures at a large scale.
Then each bundle can be further clustered using a smaller size of voxels, leading to
structures at a finer scale. An example is shown in Figure 1-13. Multiscale clustering
makes it easier for experts to identify white matter structures across different scales.
1.4.5 
Summary
All these proposed frameworks learn motion patterns from the co-occurrence of fea-
ture values (locations and moving directions) using hierarchical Bayesian models.
Temporal co-occurrence is used to cluster moving pixels and learn the models of
atomic activities in crowded scenes. Identity co-occurrence is used to cluster tra-

jectories and learn the models of paths in a single camera views. Both these two
kinds of co-occurrence are used to cluster trajectories across camera views. These
approaches are applicable to different types of scenes and have different limitations.
If all types of activities most of the time happen together in the scene, which means
that all the video clips have similar combinations of atomic activities, then temporal
co-occurrence is not enough to separate co-occurring atomic activities and to learn
their models. In that case, the approach described in Section 1.4.1 will not work
well. This problem becomes more serious when the field covered by the camera view
is larger and thus activities in the scene have more temporal overlap. The approach
proposed in Section 1.4.2 only works well in sparse scenes where objects are trackable
and the identity co-occurrence information can be reliably obtained.
Hierarchical Bayesian models allow us to jointly model simple and complicated
motion patterns at different levels. Various knowledge and constraints can be nicely
added into Bayesian frameworks as priors. Thus we can better solve problems which
are difficult for nonBayesian approaches, such as modeling activities in multiple views,
dynamically updating the models of activities, and clustering data of new subjects in
tractography segmentation.
One commonality of these hierarchical Bayesian models proposed in this work
is that they extract and quantize low-level features, and explore the co-occurrence
of features at different hierarchical levels. These models can be applied to other
fields such as language processing, object recognition and scene categorization where
co-clustering problems arise. For example, our models can co-cluster words and doc-
uments in language processing. They can jointly cluster images into scene categories
and cluster image patches into object classes at two different levels. These applica-
tions are interesting research directions in the future work.
1.5 
Thesis Road Map
The remaining part of this thesis is organized as follows. Chapter 2 reviews related
work on activity analysis in visual surveillance, tractography segmentation, hierarchi-

cal Bayesian models and nonparametric Bayesian approaches. Details of hierarchical
Bayesian models developed in each of the four applications and experimental results
are presented in Chapter 3 - 6. Chapter 3 first reviews two existing language pro-
cessing models LDA and HDP. Then LDA mixture model, HDP mixture model, and
Dual-HDP model are proposed. They advance LDA and HDP. Dual-HDP is applied
to activity analysis in crowded scenes without tracking objects. Experimental results
on a traffic scene are presented. In Chapter 4, Dual-HDP is applied to trajectory
analysis in a single camera view and a dynamic Dual-HDP model is proposed to up-
date the models of activities over time. Experimental results on radar tracks collected
from a sea port and trajectories collected from a parking lot scene are presented. In
Chapter 5, a trajectory network based hierarchical Bayesian model is proposed to
cluster trajectories in multiple camera views. This approach is evaluated on a street
scene and a parking lot scene. In Chapter 6, Dual-HDP and dynamic Dual-HDP are
used for tractography segmentation and evaluated on multiple DT-MRI data sets. In
Chapter 7, we discuss the limitations of this work and point out future directions we
are interested in investigating. Finally contributions of this work are reiterated in
Chapter 8.

40

Chapter 2
Literature Review
2.1 
Activity Analysis Without Tracking Objects
Many approaches [164, 161, 132, 29, 158, 156] directly used motion feature vectors to
describe video clips without tracking objects. For example, Zelnik-Manor and Irani
[161] modeled and clustered video clips using multi-resolution histograms. Zhong et
al. [164] also computed global motion histograms and did word-document analysis on
videos. Their words were frames instead of moving pixels. They clustered video clips
through the partition of a bipartite graph. Without object detection and tracking, a
particular activity cannot be separated from other activities simultaneously occurring
in the same clip, as is common in crowded scenes. These approaches treated a video
clip as an integral entity and flagged the whole clip as normal or abnormal. They were
often applied to simple data sets where there was only one kind of activity in a video
clip. It is difficult for these approaches to model both single-agent activities and
more complicated global behaviors. Although there were actions/events modeling
approaches [114, 15, 105, 127, 84], which allowed one to detect and separate co-
occurring activities, they were usually supervised. For example, Ke [76] proposed a
supervised approach to detect human action in crowded scenes. At the training stage,
they required manually isolating activities or a training video clip only contained one
kind of activity. It is difficult for these approaches to separate co-occurring activities
without supervision.

Ali and Shah [2] proposed an approach for motion segmentation at every frame in
crowded videos based the spatial and temporal smoothness of motion flows. However,
they did not have activity models shared by the entire video sequence and did not
model global behaviors in the scene.
Our approach uses hierarchical Bayesian models to jointly model single-agent ac-
tivities and more complicated global behaviors at different levels. It can separate
co-occurring activities without supervision. Activity models are shared by the en-
tire video sequence. Following our thesis work described in Section 1.4.1 and 3 and
[151, 152], Li et al. [86, 63] used topic models for activity analysis scene segmentation
based on moving pixels.
2.2 
Trajectory Analysis and Scene Modeling with
a Single Camera View
Many of existing trajectory analysis approaches cluster trajectories and detect abnor-
mal trajectories by defining the pairwise similarities/distances between trajectories.
The proposed trajectory similarities/distances include Euclidean distance [41], Haus-
dorff distance and its variations [71, 153], hidden Markov model [112], and Dynamic
Time Warping (DTW) [77]. Some approaches required that two trajectories are tem-
porally aligned when computing their distance. An alignment method, long common
subsequence (LCSS) analysis was proposed [147, 22]. Instead of matching all points
on a trajectory, it disregarded some outlier points. Similarly, Piciarelli and Foresti
[110] defined a distance measure only matching part of the trajectory. A compar-
ison of different similarity/distance measures can be found in [163]. Based on the
computed similarity matrix, some standard clustering algorithms such as spectral
clustering [104], graph-cuts [129], agglomerative and divisive hierarchical clustering
[12, 87], and fuzzy c-means [57, 59] were used to group trajectories into different activ-
ity categories. These similarity/distance-based approaches have several drawbacks.
First, there is no global probabilistic framework to model activities happening in the

scene. They have an ad hoc nature especially on the definitions of distance measures.
Abnormal trajectories are usually detected as those with a larger distance to other
trajectories. Their abnormality detection lacks a probabilistic explanation. Second,
they usually do not provide a solution to the number of clusters. They often require
that the cluster number is known in advance. Third, some approaches required tem-
poral alignment of trajectories, which is sensitive to misdetection and tracking errors.
Fourth, calculating the similarities between all pairs of samples is computationally
inefficient, with a complexity of O(M 2) in both time and space, where M is the num-
ber of trajectories. Some clustering algorithms such as spectral clustering need to
compute the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of the similarity matrix and their computa-
tional cost is even higher. The complexity of labeling a new trajectory as one of the
activity categories or as an abnormality is O(M), since similarity-based approaches
require computing the similarity between the new trajectory and each of the trajec-
tories in the training set. Visual surveillance systems often require processing data
collected over weeks or even months. These approaches have difficulty clustering very
large data sets. If we monitor a parking lot for a month, there may be half million
trajectories collected. It is even impossible to load such a huge similarity matrix into
memory. Our approach uses a nonparametric Bayesian model for trajectory analysis.
Under this framework, abnormality detection has a probabilistic explanation. The
number of clusters of trajectories is learned driven by data with Dirichlet processes
as priors. It does not require the computation of the similarity matrix. The space
complexity of clustering trajectories is O(M) instead of 0(M 2). The complexity of
labeling a new trajectory as one of the activity categories or as abnormality is O(K)
where K is the number of clusters.
Another kind of approaches used features vectors from trajectories for clustering
instead of computing pairwise distances. Because trajectories have variable length,
it is difficult to directly use them as features for clustering. Subsampling may be
required to let all the trajectory have the same length [96, 11, 88, 59]. Alternatively,
some approaches projected trajectories into features spaces where feature vectors of
fixed size were computed for clustering purpose. For example, the coefficients of least

squares polynomials [99, 160], Chebyshev polynomials [99], Haar transform [90], and
discrete Fourier transform (DFT) [103] were used as features. Johnson and Hogg
[68] first quantized the flow vectors of observations and then treated the pdf of a
trajectory on the quantized flow vectors as a feature vector. Porikli [111] used HMM to
characterize trajectories. Subspace methods such as PCA [10] and ICA [12] were used
to construct a new space of lower dimensionality to improve clustering. A trajectory
was summarized by the hidden state parameters and the transition matrix. Saleemi
et al. [120] represented a trajectory with spatio-temporal variables (start location,
destrination location and transition times). Basharat et al. [9] used the transitions
of the state (destination location and size) of an object on a trajectory as features.
The feature vectors of trajectories were clustered using algorithms such as k-means,
self-organization map [68, 139], and fuzzy self-organizing neural network [60]. Kernel
density estimation [120] and Gaussian mixture model [9] were used to estimated the
probability distribution of trajectories in the feature space. Many of these approaches
were sensitive to tracking errors. For example, the coefficients of DFT may change
significantly if a trajectory is broken in the middle. Our approach does not compute
the feature vectors of trajectories and it is more robust to tracking errors.
One way to decide the number of clusters is to minimize or maximize some ob-
jective criteria. Clustering is performed a number of times by varying the number
of clusters. Hu et al. [57, 59] proposed a tightness and separation criterion, which
measured how close trajectories in clusters were compared to the distance between
clusters. Similar criteria were used in [111, 7] for spectral clustering. The Bayesian
information criterion (BIC) was used in [67].
Trajectory clustering is also related to the problem of modeling scene structures.
It takes a lot of effort to manually input these structures, and they cannot be reliably
detected based on the appearance of the scene. In some cases, e.g. detecting shipping
fairways on the sea, there is no appearance cue available at all. It is of interest
to detect these structures by trajectory analysis. Usually paths were detected by
modeling the spatial extents of trajectory clusters [38, 97, 71, 153]. Semantic regions
were detected as intersections of paths [97, 110]. Entry and exit points were detected

at the ends of paths [134, 153].
2.3 
Activity Analysis in Multiple Camera Views
Considerable work has been done to solve the challenging correspondence problem of
trajectories observed in multiple camera views. One way is to manually label salient
points in the scene and record their coordinates in the 3D world. After mapping 2D
image planes to the 3D world [144, 52], objects can be tracked in multiple camera
views. When the camera views overlap, static features can be selected to compute
an assumed homography between two camera views [20] and camera views are cal-
ibrated to a single global ground plane. Trajectories in different camera views can
be stitched based on their spatial proximity on the common ground plane. In gen-
eral, automatically finding correspondence of static features between different views
is difficult.
Lee et al. 
[85], Sheikh and Shah [128], and Stauffer and Tieu [136] calibrated
multiple camera views using tracking data from moving objects. They also assumed
that camera views had significant overlap and that objects moved on the same ground
plane. Lee et al. 
[85] and Sheikh and Sheikh [128] assumed that the topological
arrangement of camera views was known. Stauffer and Tieu [136] could automatically
infer it, but with high complexity (O(N 2) where N is the number of camera views).
When the camera views are disjointed or their overlap is small, automatic calibra-
tion is difficult and the appearance of objects is often used as a cue to correspondence
[64, 65, 125, 48, 148]. This is a very challenging problem and not well solved yet.
The appearance of objects may significantly change because of different cameras set-
tings and different poses of objects. Many objects, such as cars and pedestrians, have
similar appearance, confusing correspondence. In far-field settings, objects may only
cover a few pixels, making matching difficult. Other approaches [98, 143] inferred the
topology of disjoint camera views using the transition time between cameras.
Even given similarities between trajectories observed in different camera views,
solving the correspondence problem is still difficult because of the large search space,

especially when there are many trajectories and cameras. It requires searching in
the solution space of N-partite graphs, where N is the number of cameras [128]. In
general, if there are more than two cameras, the problem is NP hard in the number
of trajectories [43]. 
It has solution in polynomial time only with some particular
topologies of camera views and the topology has to be known [64].
In summary, all these trajectory correspondence approaches had various assump-
tions on the topology and geometry of camera views, and they faced difficulties of
camera calibration, appearance matching, inference on the topology of camera views,
and high computational cost to search for the optimal solution. Given a general set-
ting of a camera network, solving the correspondence problem is difficult. One of the
contributions of this thesis is that we directly cluster trajectories into activities and
model distributions of paths over a multi-camera network without solving the corre-
spondence problem. So our method has less restriction on the topology of camera
views, the structures of the scene and the number of cameras.
2.4 
Probabilistic Approaches in Visual Surveillance
Probabilistic approaches were widely applied to object detection, tracking and event
detection in visual surveillance [14, 108, 40, 54, 45, 106, 109]. Nillius et al. [106] used a
Bayesian network to associate the identities of isolated tracks. Oliver et al. [108] used
Coupled HMM to model the interaction between two objects. However, there are few
studies on using graphical models to cluster tracks of objects into motion patterns.
Pang et al. [109] proposed a Bayesian filtering framework to group targets which are
moving together in similar directions and are close in space. It was evaluated on a
very small data set only including four trajectories. This approach did not cluster
whole trajectories since the group identities of targets might change dynamically. It
only grouped targets moving at the same time, which means that trajectories were
temporally aligned. In order to group targets observed at different time using this
approach, trajectories have to be first aligned, which is one of the major difficulties in
clustering trajectories since targets might be misdetected during some time windows

and trajectories might be broken or associated incorrectly because of tracking errors.
Our models of clustering trajectories do not require the alignment of trajectories.
2.5 
Tractography Segmentation
Automatically clustering fibers from DT-MRI has drawn a lot of attention in recent
years. A typical framework is to first define a pairwise similarity/distance between
fibers and then to input the similarity matrix to standard clustering algorithms.
Various distances between fibers were proposed. Brun et al. [21] proposed a 9-D
fiber shape descriptor, and computed the Euclidean distances between descriptors.
Jonasson et al. 
[69] measured the similarity between two fibers by counting the
number of points sharing the same voxel. Gerig et al. [46] proposed three measures
related to Hausdorff distance: closest point distance, mean of closest distances and
Hausdorff distance. Various clustering algorithms, such as hierarchical clustering
(single-link and complete-link) [46, 157], fuzzy c-means [130], k-nearest neighbors
[34], normalized cuts [21] and spectral clustering [69, 107] were used. Mean of closest
distances and spectral clustering were popular among possible choices [107, 69].
These clustering algorithms required manually specifying the number of clusters
or a threshold for deciding when to stop merging/splitting clusters, both of which are
difficult to know especially when the data sets are complicated and noisy. Moberts
et al. 
[101] showed that the performance of clustering varied dramatically when
different numbers of clusters were chosen. To avoid this difficulty, O'Donnell and
Westin [107] first chose a large cluster number, such as 200, for spectral clustering
and then manually merged clusters to obtain models for white matter structures.
Another drawback of this framework is the high space and time complexities of
computing pairwise distances between fibers when the data set is large. Whole brain
tractography produces between 10, 000 and 100, 000 fibers per subject. It is difficult
to compute a 100, 000 x 100, 000 similarity matrix or even to store it in memory.
Some clustering algorithms, such as normalized cuts and spectral clustering, need
to compute the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of this huge similarity matrix. This

problem becomes more serious when clustering fibers of multiple subjects. The current
solutions are to cluster only a small portion (such as 5, 000 fibers) of the whole data
set after subsampling or to do some numerical approximation based on the sampled
subset [107]. However, important information from the full data set may be lost after
subsampling.
Maddah et al. 
[94, 93, 95] proposed a probabilistic approach to cluster fibers
without computing pairwise distances. They used a Dirichlet distribution as a prior
to incorporate anatomical information. It was a parametric model, assuming that the
number of clusters was known and required manual initialization of cluster centers.
[95] required establishing point correspondence which was difficult, while our approach
does not.
2.6 
Hierarchical Bayesian Models in Computer Vi-
sion Applications
In computer vision, hierarchical Bayesian models have been applied to scene catego-
rization [36], object recognition [131, 118, 138, 137, 149], and human action recogni-
tion [105]. References [36, 138, 137, 105] were supervised learning frameworks in the
sense that they needed to manually label the documents. The video clip in [105] usu-
ally contained a single activity and [105] did not model interactions among multiple
objects. References [131] and [118], which directly applied language processing mod-
els, probabilistic latent semantic analysis [53] and latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA)
[18], were unsupervised frameworks assuming a document contains only one major
topic. When we apply Dual-HDP to model trajectories and video clips, we assume
that a document has multiple major topics. In our previous work [149], a novel hier-
archical Bayesian model, Spatial Latent Dirichlet Allocation (SLDA), was proposed
to learn models of object classes from image collections without requiring labeled
data. SLDA improved LDA by modeling spatial and temporal structures among
visual words, which are essential for solving many computer vision problems.

2.7 
Nonparametric Bayesian Approaches
There has been a lot work [35, 50, 24, 165] on time dependent Dirichlet Process
(DP) models published in recent years. Griffin et al. [50] proposed a framework,
called Order-Based Dependent Dirichlet Processes (DDP), to model time series data.
Caron et al. introduced a class of time-varying DP mixture models using a generated
polya urn scheme. These works modeled time dependency of DP mixtures without
more complicated hierarchical structures (such as hierarchical Dirichlet processes).
Our dynamic Dual-HDP model is most relevant to [116] and [133]. Ren et al. [116]
proposed a Dynamic Hierarchical Dirichlet Process model which was applied to music
segmentation and analysis and gene expression data. In [116] the data of different
time interval all shared the same set of topics, which did not change over time. It
only modeled the dynamic change of the mixture weights of topics. Srebro et al.
[133] integrated Ordered-Based DDP [50] into hierarchical topic models. They also
assumed that topics were fixed over time. However, in our problem it is important
for our dynamic Dual-HDP to model the dynamic change of topics, which reveals
the change of the spatial distribution of semantic regions over time. Furthermore,
dynamic Dual-HDP has a more complicated hierarchical structure with two layers of
hierarchical Dirichlet processes.
In visual surveillance related tasks, Fox and Willsky et al. [40] used Dirichlet pro-
cess to solve the problem of data association for multi-target tracking in the presence
of an unknown number of targets.
Bayesian models involving Dirichlet process mixtures (DPM) are at the heart of
the modern nonparametric Bayesian movement. DPM was applied to medical image
analysis in recent years because of its capability to learn the number of clusters and
its flexibility to adapt to a wide variety of data. Adelino [1] used a DPM model for
brain MRI tissue classification. In [81, 142] DPM models were used to model spatial
brain activation patterns in functional magnetic resonance imaging. In [66], Jbabdi
et al. modeled the connectivity profiles of a brain region as an infinite mixture of
multivariate Gaussian distributions with a Dirichlet Process prior. To the best of our

knowledge, our work is the first to use hierarchical Dirichlet process mixture models
for tractography segmentation to automatically learn the number of clusters from
data.

Chapter 3
Activity Analysis in Crowded and
Complicated Scenes
This chapter presents hierarchical Bayesian models and experimental results on ac-
tivity analysis in crowded and complicated scenes without tracking objects. Section
1.4.1 briefly summarizes our approach and Section 2.1 reviews related work.
There are some hierarchical Bayesian models for language processing, such as
LDA [18] and HDP [140], from which we can borrow. Under LDA and HDP models,
words, such as "professor" and "university", often co-existing in the same documents
are clustered into the same topic, such as "education". HDP is a nonparametric model
and automatically learns the number of topics from data while LDA requires knowing
that in advance. We perform word-document analysis on video sequences. Moving
pixels are quantized into visual words and short video clips are treated as documents.
Directly applying LDA and HDP to our problem, atomic activities (corresponding
to topics) can be discovered and modeled, however modeling global behaviors in the
scene is not straightforward, since these models cannot cluster documents. Although
LDA and HDP allow inclusion of more hierarchical levels corresponding to groups of
documents, they require first manually labeling documents into groups. For example,
[140] modeled multiple corpora but required knowing to which corpus each document
belonged; [36] used LDA for scene categorization, but had to label each image in the
training set into different categories. These were supervised frameworks. We propose

three novel hierarchical Bayesian models, LDA mixture model, HDP mixture model
and Dual-HDP model. They co-cluster words and documents in an unsupervised way.
In the case of visual surveillance, this means we can learn atomic activities as well as
global behaviors without supervision. In fact, the problems of clustering moving pix-
els into atomic activities and of clustering video clips into global behaviors are closely
related. The global behavior category of a video clip provides a prior for possible
activities happening in that clip. It helps to cluster moving pixels into atomic activi-
ties. On the other hand, first clustering moving pixels into atomic activities provides
an efficient representation for modeling interactions since it dramatically reduces the
data dimensionality. Thus video clips can be clustered into global behaviors efficiently
and effectively. We jointly solve these two problems together under a co-clustering
framework. LDA mixture model assumes that the number of different types of atomic
activities and global behaviors happening in the scene is known. HDP mixture model
learns the number of categories of atomic activities driven by data. Dual-HDP learns
the numbers of categories of both atomic activities and global behaviors.
The following sections explain the computation of motion features (Section 3.1),
hierarchical Bayesian models (Section 3.2), and show the results in the application
area of visual surveillance (Section 3.3).
3.1 
Low-Level Motion Features
Our data is a video sequence from a far-field scene (a traffic scene as shown in Figure
1-6 (a) is used for our experiments) recorded by a fixed camera. There are myriads of
activities and interactions in the video. It also involves many challenging problems,
such as lighting changes, occlusions, a variety of object types, object view changes
and environmental effects.
We compute local motions as our low-level features. Moving pixels are detected
in each frame as follows. We compute the intensity difference between two successive
frames, on a pixel basis. If the difference at a pixel is above a threshold, that pixel is
detected as a moving pixel. The motion direction at each moving pixel is obtained by

Atomic activities modeled
as distributions over
the feature codebook
(b)
Global behaviors modeled
as distributions over
atomic activities
(c)
Figure 3-1: Diagram of the system for activity analysis in crowded and complicated
scenes. Our framework connects low-level motion features, middle-level atomic ac-
tivities and high-level global behaviors. (a) The observed long video sequence is
uniformly divided into short clips as documents. In each video clip, moving pixels
are detected and quantized into visual words based on their locations and motion
directions. The four quantized directions are represented by four colors. Each video
clip has a distribution over visual words. (b) Atomic activities (e.g. pedestrians cross
the road) are discovered and modeled as distributions over visual words. Moving
pixels are clustered into atomic activities. (c) Video clips are clustered into global
behaviors, which are modeled as distributions over atomic activities.

computing optical flow [91]. The moving pixels are quantized according to a feature
codebook, as follows. Each moving pixel has two features: position and direction of
motion. To quantize position, the scene (in the size of 480 x 720 in our experiments)
is uniformly divided into cells of size 10 by 10. The motion of a moving pixel is
quantized into four directions as shown in Figure 3-1(a). Hence the size of the feature
codebook is 48 x 72 x 4, and thus each detected moving pixel is assigned a word
from the codebook based on rough position and motion direction. 
Deciding the
size of the codebook is a balance between the descriptive capability and complexity
of the model. The whole video sequence is uniformly divided into non-overlapping
short clips, each 10 seconds in length. In our framework, video clips are treated as
documents and moving pixels are treated as words for word-document analysis as
described in Section 3.2.
3.2 
Hierarchical Bayesian Models
LDA [18] and HDP [140] were originally proposed as hierarchical Bayesian models
for language processing. In these models, words that often co-exist in the same
documents are clustered into the same topic. We extend these models by enabling
clustering of both documents and words, thus finding co-occurring words (topics)
and co-occurring topics (global behaviors). For far-field surveillance videos, words
are quantized local motions of pixels; moving pixels that tend to co-occur in clips (or
documents) are modeled as topics. Our goal is to infer the set of atomic activities
(or topics) from video by learning the distributions of features that co-occur, and to
learn distributions of atomic activities that co-occur, thus finding global behaviors.
Three new hierarchical Bayesian models are proposed in this section: LDA mixture
model, HDP mixture model, and Dual-HDP model.
3.2.1 
LDA
Figure 3-2(a) shows the LDA model of [18]. Suppose the corpus has M documents.
Each document is modeled as a mixture of K topics, where K is assumed known.

(a) 
(b)
Figure 3-2: (a) LDA model proposed in [18]; (b) our LDA mixture model.
Each topic k is modeled as a multinomial distribution 3k = [kl,... , 3kW] over a
codebook of size W. / = {Pk}. a = [a1,... , aK] is a Dirichlet prior on the corpus.
For each document j, a parameter 7rj = [rjl,..., 7rjK] of a multinomial distribution
over the K topics is drawn from Dirichlet distribution Dir(rj a),
p(jak=1 k) 01a-1 
aK-1
Ik=1r( 
k)
where F(.) is a gamma function. For each word i in document j, a topic label zji = k
is drawn with probability 7jk, and word xji is drawn from a discrete distribution given
by izj,. 7ry and zji are hidden variables. a and , are hyperparameters to be optimized.
Given a and f, the joint distribution of topic mixture 7rj, 
topics zj = {zji}, and words
xj = {xji} is:
Nj
p(xj, zj, rjla, ,) =p(rj I a) J7 p(zji I7rj)p(xji I zji, /3)
i=1
F(Z 
a) 
ai-l 
K 
Njl
I (k= 1 a )k 
)rj _ . .7 eK- 1  
7jzji zjixj 
(3.1)
k=1 
(k) 
i=1

where Nj is the number of words in document j. Unfortunately, the marginal likeli-
hood p(xjlI , 3) and thus the posterior distribution p(rj, zjlc , 3) are intractable for
exact inference. Thus in [18], a Variational Bayes (VB) inference algorithm used a
family of variational distributions:
Nj
q(rj, zj 1Yj, 0j) = q(rjyj) f q(zjIi) 
(3.2)
i=1
to approximate p(7rj, zj l, /), where the Dirichlet parameter -yj and multinomial pa-
rameters {ji} are free variational parameters. The optimal ( j, /) is computed by
finding a tight lower bound on log p(xj a, /).
3.2.2 
LDA Mixture Model
This LDA model in [18] does not cluster documents. All the documents share the
same Dirichlet prior a. In activity analysis, we assume that video clips (documents)
of the same type of global behavior would include a similar set of atomic activities
(topics), so they could be grouped into the same cluster and share the same prior over
topics. Our LDA mixture model is shown in Figure 3-2(b). The M documents in the
corpus will be grouped into L clusters. Each cluster c has its own Dirichlet prior ac.
For a document j, the cluster label cj is first drawn from discrete distribution r, and
-rj is drawn from Dir(jlac,). Given {a,}, 3, and TI, the joint distribution of hidden
variables cj, 7rj, zj and observed words xj is
N
p(xj,zj,7FjCjjf0ZCJ 0, 7) = p( jlT)p((jlOu) IIP(zjil- j)p(xjilZ j,) 
(3.3)
i=1
The marginal log likelihood of document j is:
L
logp(xy {ac}, /3, ) = log 
p(cjIq)p(xjacj, ) 
(3.4)
cj =1

Our LDA mixture model is relevant to the model proposed in [36]. However, the
hidden variable cj in our model was observed in [36]. So [36] required manually label-
ing documents in the training set, while our framework is totally unsupervised. This
causes a different inference algorithm to be proposed for our model. Using VB [18],
log p(xj I c,, ) can be approximated by a tight lower bound L l(yjc, cjCj; ay, /),
log p(x ac) 
= log F 
p(xy, zjx 
)d
= Tlog 
J z
_> 
q(z, xy ,, Acj,) 
log (z, xy 3y, A)d
J 
zi
= L (jc, Ojj; ac,, 0). 
(3.5)
However because of the marginalization over cj, hyperparameters are still coupled
even using VB. So we use both Expectation-Maximization (EM) [30] and VB to esti-
mate hyperparameters. After using VB to compute the lower bound of log p(xj lay, ),
an averaging distribution q(cj Iyjc, qjcj) can provide a further lower bound on the log
likelihood,
L
logp(xj {cc}, /3, r) > log E p(cj 
)eL,(^yjc', 
j ; ,0)
cj =1
L 
(Cj 1)eL1("J, cj 
, j 
;a, ')
1 
q ( c j 1| c, , jc )
> 
q (cj l j, 
jcj ) [log p(cj I q) + LI (j, 
Ojcj; ac j, 0)]
cj=1
L
- E q(c 1I-y, 
j) log q(cj/ %j, Ojcj)
cj=1
= Lz(q(cj I7)cj, cOj), 
,ac}, 
,q) 
(3.6)

L2 is maximized when choosing
~q(c, LjCj, 
4p(cj 
r)eL ( -j 
y ,¢jcj 
;acj ,i)
E , p(cj, T,)eL,(,j) = 
E 
0( jI13
)
Our EM algorithm for hyperparameters estimation is:
1. For each document j and cluster cj, find the optimal values of the variational
parameters {-c, ,j,,j 
: J = 1,..., M;cj = 1,..., L} to maximize L 1 (using
VB [18]).
2. Compute q(cjyIyj*, 0 c) using (3.7) to maximize L2.
3. Maximize L2 with respect to {ac}, , and q. / and q are optimized by setting
the first derivative to zero,
M
TC oC 
q(cj = cl j*, (7c) 
(3.8)
(3.7)
j=1
ML
j=1 cj=1l
N
(3.9)
where xjT = 1 if xji = w, otherwise it is 0. The {a} are optimized using a
Newton-Raphson algorithm. The first and second derivatives are:
OL2 M 
K 
k
'-"-' 
E q(cj = clyj, 
/)I )['JF(E Cck) - T (O ck) + I(-Yjck) - T (E -Yjck)]
j=1 
k=1 
j=1
(3.10)
02L
2
9d0ckl Ack2
M
Sq(cj = c 7jc, ijc)
j=1
K
j 
l( 
Cck) - 6(k,
k=1
(3.11)
where T is the first derivative of log Gamma function.
L2 monotonously increases after each iteration.
k2)''0ck 
)1]
jicjik ji

3.2.3 
Dirichlet Process
Both LDA and LDA mixture are parametric Bayesian models. They require that the
numbers of topics and clusters of documents are manually specified. Using Dirichlet
Process (DP) [37] as prior, they can be extended to nonparametric Bayesian models
which learn the number of clusters driven by data.
DP is used as a prior to sample probability measures. It is defined by a con-
centration parameter -y, which is a positive scalar, and a base probability measure
H. A probability measure G randomly drawn from DP(y, H) is always a discrete
distribution,
00
G 
E= 
k6k, 
(3.12)
k=1
which can be obtained from a stick-breaking construction [124]. In Eq (3.12), Ok is a
parameter vector sampled from H, 65
k is a Dirac delta function centered at kk, and
7rk (ECl 7k = 1) is a non-negative scalar constructed by
k-1
7k = 7k 
l 
)
/=1
' ~ Beta(l, ).
G can be used as a prior of infinite mixture models. Let {xi} be a set of observed
data points. xi is sampled from a density function p(.10i) parameterized by 9i, and
Oi (which is one of the €ks in Eq (3.12)) is sampled from G. Data points sharing the
same parameter vector Ok are clustered together under this mixture model. Given
parameter vectors 01,... , ON of N data points, the parameter vector ON+1 of data
point XN+1 can be sampled from a prior by integrating out G,
nIlk 
J0 H 
H. 
(3.13)
N+ 
yk 
N +
k=l
There are K distinct parameter vectors {O }K=1 (identifying K components) among
01,...,
0N. nk is the number of points with parameter vector 0*. ON+1 can be assigned

(a) 
(b)
Figure 3-3: (a) HDP model proposed in [140]; (b) our HDP mixture model.
as one of the existing components (XN+1 is assigned to one of the existing clusters)
or can sample a new component from H (a new cluster is created for XN+1). The
posterior of ON+1 is
P(ON+1IxN+1, 01,..., 
, 
YN, H) oc p(XN+I ON+1)P(ON+1I~, ...
, N, 
Y, H). 
(3.14)
It is likely for the infinite mixture model with DP prior to create a new component if
existing components cannot well explain the data. There is no limit to the number of
components. These properties make DP ideal for modeling data clustering problems
when the number of clusters is not well-defined in advance.
3.2.4 
HDP
HDP proposed by Teh et al. [140] is a nonparametric hierarchical Bayesian model and
its corresponding parametric model is LDA. HDP automatically learns the number
of topics driven by data. The graphical model of HDP is shown in 3-3. In HDP,
a prior distribution Go over the whole corpus is sampled from a Dirichlet process,

Go ~ DP(-y, H). Go = E=l 7o0k 
k. 
k is the parameter of a topic, which is modeled
as a multinomial distribution over the codebook. Ok is sampled from Dirichlet prior H.
All the words in the corpus are sampled from some topics {qk}. {TOk} are mixture
weights over topics. For each document j, a random measure Gf 
is drawn from
a Dirichlet process with concentration parameter a and base probability measure
Go: Gdla, Go ~ DP(a, Go). Each Gd has support at the same locations { k} 'l
as Go, i.e. all the documents share the same set of topics, and can be written as
Gj = Et 
,1rjk6 k. G' is a prior distribution of all the words in document j. For each
word i in document j, a parameter vector Oji of a topic is drawn from Gd (Oji is sampled
as one of the 
k's). Word xji is drawn from discrete distribution Discrete(Oji),
where Oj = (Ojil,..., Ojiw). In [140], Gibbs sampling schemes were used to do infer-
ence under an HDP model.
3.2.5 
HDP Mixture Model
In our HDP mixture model, as shown in Figure 3-3 (b), clusters of documents are
modeled and each cluster c has a random probability measure G,. G, is drawn from
Dirichlet process DP(p, Go). For each document j, a cluster label cj is first drawn
from discrete distribution p(cjrj). Document j chooses GC, as the base probability
measure and draws its own Gd from Dirichlet process Gd - DP(a, Gcj). We also
use Gibbs sampling for inference. In our HDP mixture model, there are two kinds of
hidden variables to be sampled: (1) variables z = {zjy } assigning words to topics, base
distributions Go and {G,}; and (2) cluster label cj. The key issue to be solved in this
thesis is how to sample cj. Given cj is fixed, the first kind of variables can be sampled
using the same scheme described in [140]. We will not repeat the details here. We
focus on the step of sampling cj, which is the new part of our model compared with
HDP in [140].
At some sampling iteration, suppose that there have been K topics, 
k =,1

generated and assigned to the words in the corpus (K is variable during the sampling
procedure). Go, G, and G] can be expressed as,
K
Go = 
7kbk + 7ruGou,
k=1
K
GC = 
kE 
ITcQ6 k + TcuGcuI
k=1
K
,= Lkk 
+ Wju, 
k=1
where Gou, Gc, and Gj are distributed as Dirichlet process DP(, H). Note that
the prior over the corpus (Go), a cluster of documents (Ge) and a document Gq share
the same set of topics {k}. However, they have different mixtures over topics.
Using the sampling schemes in [140], topic mixtures iro = ( 
1,... , 7rOK, 7rO }, re =
{clT,. , 
r 
,cK, 
7cu} are sampled, while {k}, 
Gou , G 
)
, and w = {w 1,... ,WjK,Wy}
can be integrated out without sampling. In order to sample the cluster label cj of doc-
ument j, the posterior p(cj = cl(mjl,. .. , mjK) 
, {r,}) has to be computed where
mjk is the number of words assigned to topic k in document j and is computable from
Z:
p(cj = c (mjl,..., mjK), 7o, f{rc})
xop(mjl,..., mjK 7rc)p(cj = c)
p(mjl,. . . , mjK
d ) 1s a multinomial distribution. Since Gd is drawn from DP(a, Ge),

p(w r,) is a Dirichlet distribution Dir(wl a. 7r ). Thus we have
p(cj = c (mjl,, 
mjK), 7 0 , {rc})
fK 
K
OC(7rcu + O Ek=1 7rck) c 
-1 I- Wrck +jk-1 d d
F(arcuw) 
1k=1 
k=1
r(a ir 
+ a EKr 
7ck) Fr(a 
) j =1 I (a1rk + mjk)
r(air ) Hk=1 r(a7k)a 
r(
O 7 u 
- 
k=l(areCk + mjk))
(a) 
k=1 F( 
-7ck + mjk) 0 
K= 1 
cF(a 
irk + mjk) 
(315)
= 
o O 
(3.15)
k=+ N r(1 
- rck) 
=1  
k)
where F is the Gamma function.
So the Gibbs sampling procedure repeats the following two steps alternatively at
every iteration:
1. given {cj}, sample z, ro, and {re} using the schemes in [140];
2. given z, ro, and {rrc}, sample cluster labels {cj} using posterior Eq 3.15.
In this section, we assume that the concentration parameters y, p, and a are fixed.
In actual implementation, we give them a vague gamma prior and sample them using
the scheme proposed in [140]. 
Thus these concentration parameters are sampled
from a broad distribution instead of being fixed at a particular point.
3.2.6 
Dual-HDP
In this section, we propose a Dual-HDP model which automatically learns both the
number of word topics and the number of document clusters. In addition to the
hierarchical Dirichlet processes which model the word topics, there is another layer
of hierarchical Dirichlet processes modeling the clusters of documents. Hence we call
this a Dual-HDP model. The graphical model of Dual-HDP is shown in Figure 3-4.
In the HDP mixture model, each document j has a prior G~, drawn from a finite
mixture {Gc}='. In Dual-HDP, G, is drawn from an infinite mixture,
00
Q = 
E~ c 
(3.16)
c=1
63

Figure 3-4: The graphical model of Dual-HDP.
Notice that G, itself is a random distribution with infinite parameters. When a Dirich-
let process was first developed by Ferguson [37], the location parameters (such as Ck
in Eq. 3.12) could only be scalars or vectors. MacEachern 
[92] made an important
generalization and proposed the Dependent Dirichlet Processes (DDP). DDP replaces
the locations in the stick-breaking representation with stochastic processes and in-
troduces dependence in a collection of distributions. The parameters { (Irc, 
ck) }1k=1
of Gc can be treated as a stochastic process with index k. Q can be treated as a set
of dependent distributions, Q = {Qk 
'= 
C 1Ecc6,(rk,k) 
=1. So we can generate Q
through DDP.
As shown in Figure 3-4, Q is sampled from DDP(/L, p, Go). In Eq (3.16), E =
6l-=l' (1 - c'), E' ' Beta(1, p), and Gc - DP(p, Go). Similar to the HDP mixture
model in Figure 3-3 (b), Go - DP(A, H) is the prior over the whole corpus and
generates topics shared by all of the words. {Ge}=1 all have the same topics in Go,
i.e. Ock = 'k. 
However they have different mixtures { ck }= over these topics.
Each document j samples a probability measure Go, from Q as its prior. Dif-
ferent documents may choose the same prior G,, thus they form one cluster. So in
Dual-HDP, the two infinite mixtures Q and Go model the clusters of documents and
words respectively. The following generative procedure is the same as HDP mixture
model. Document j generates its own probability measure G from Gd . DP(a, Gcj).

Word i in document j samples topic qk from Gd and samples its word value from
Discrete( k).
Gibbs sampling was also used for inference and learning on Dual-HDP. The Gibbs
sampling procedure can be divided into two steps:
1. given the cluster assignment {cj} of documents is fixed, sample the word topic
assignment z, masses 7ro and 7r, on topics using the schemes in [140];
2. given z, masses r0o and 7re, sample the cluster assignment {cj } of documents. cj
can be assigned to one of the existing clusters or to a new cluster. We use the
Chinese restaurant franchise for sampling. See details in the Appendix A.
3.2.7 
Discussion on the co-clustering framework
We propose three words-documents co-clustering models. Readers may ask why we
need a co-clustering framework? Can we first cluster words into topics and then
cluster documents based on their distributions over topics, or solve the two problems
separately? 
In visual surveillance applications, the issue is about simultaneously
modeling atomic activities and global behaviors. In the language processing literature,
there has been considerable work dealing with word clustering 
[53, 18, 140] and
document clustering 
[122, 33, 162] separately. Dhillon 
[32] showed the duality
of words and documents clustering: "word clustering induces document clustering
while document clustering induces words clustering". Information on the category of
documents helps to solve the ambiguity of word meaning and vice versus. Thus a
co-clustering framework can solve the two closely related problems in a better way.
Dhillon [32] co-clustered words and documents by partitioning a bipartite spectral
graph with words and documents as vertices. However, one cluster of documents
only corresponded to one cluster of words. 
[53, 18] showed that one document may
contain several topics. In a visual surveillance data set, one video clip may contain
several atomic activities. Our co-clustering algorithms based on hierarchical Bayesian
models can better solve these problems.

Horizontal bars
*EEMUMEM 
.M.EEEEMM
OmMOMMAMM ggMnWgiE 
g
FiMMEni 
ni 
(e)
Vertical bars 
i 
.
.
.. .. 
..
Simulated documents
(a) 
(b) 
0.3
Topics
(d) 
(g)
Figure 3-5: Experimental comparison of HDP and Dual-HDP on a toy example. (a)
There are ten topics with distributions along horizontal bars and vertical bars. A
synthetic document can be generated in one of the two ways. It randomly combines
several vertical bar topics and sample words from them or randomly combines several
horizontal bar topics. (b) The simulated documents. (c) Topic distributions learnt
by HDP. (d) Topics distributions learnt by Dual-HDP. Documents are grouped into
two clusters shown in (e) and (f). (g) Topic mixtures of two clusters 7Ir and 72.
3.2.8 
Example of synthetic data
We use an example of synthetic data to demonstrate the strength of our hierarchical
Bayesian models (see Figure 3-5). The toy data is similar as that used in [51]. The
word vocabulary is a set of 5 x 5 cells. There are 10 topics with distributions over
horizontal bars and vertical bars (Figure 3-5 (a)), i.e., words tend to co-occur along
the same row or column, but not arbitrarily. The document is represented by a image
with 25 pixels in a 5 x 5 grid. Each pixel is a word and the intensity of a pixel is
the frequency of the word. If we generate documents by randomly choosing several
topics from the ten, adding noise to the bar distributions, and sampling words from
these bars, there are only two levels of structures (topics and words) in the data
and the HDP model in [140] can perfectly discover the 10 topics. However, in our
experiments in Figure 3-5, we add one more level, clusters of documents, to the data.
Documents are from two clusters: a vertical-bars cluster and a horizontal-bars cluster.

If a document is from the vertical-bars cluster, it randomly combines several vertical
bar topics and sample words from them, otherwise, it randomly combines horizontal
bar topics. As seen in Figure 3-5 (c), HDP has much worse performance on this data.
There are two kinds of correlation among words: if words are on the same bar, they
often co-exist in the same documents; if words are all on horizontal bars or vertical
bars, they are also likely to be in the same documents. It is improper to use a two-
level HDP to model data with a three-level structure. 15 topics are discovered and
many of the topics include more than one bar as shown in Figure 3-5 (c). Using our
HDP mixture model and Dual-HDP model to co-cluster words and documents, the
10 topics are discovered nearly perfectly as shown in Figure 3-5(d). In the meanwhile,
the documents are grouped into two clusters as shown in Figure 3-5 (e) and (f). The
topic mixtures 1r and 7 2 of these two clusters are shown in Figure 3-5 (g). 71 only
has large weights on horizontal bar topics while 72 only has large weights on vertical
bar topics. Thus our approach recovers common topics (i.e. words that co-occur)
and common documents (i.e. topics that co-occur). For Dual-HDP, as initialization
all the words are in one topic and all the documents are in one cluster.
3.3 
Visual Surveillance Applications and Experi-
mental Results
After computing the low-level visual features as described in Section 3.1, we divide
our video sequence into 10 seconds long clips, each treated as a document, and feed
these documents to the hierarchical Bayesian models described in Section 3.2. In
this section, we explain how to use the results from hierarchical Bayesian models
for activity analysis. We will mainly show results from Dual-HDP, since it auto-
matically decides the number of word topics and the number of document clusters,
while LDA mixture model and HDP mixture model need to know those in advance.
However, if the number of word topics and the number of document clusters are
properly set in LDA mixture model and HDP mixture model, they provide very

similar results. Experimental results are from a traffic scene. The video sequence
lasts 90 minutes. Some video examples of our results can be found from our website
(http://groups.csail.mit.edu/vision/app/research/HBM.html).
3.3.1 
Discover Atomic Activities
In visual surveillance, people often ask "what are the typical activities and global
behaviors in this scene?" The parameters estimated by our hierarchical Bayesian
models provide a good answer to this question.
As explained in Section 1.4.1, an atomic activity usually causes temporally con-
tinuous motions and does not stop in the middle. So the motion features caused by
the same kind of atomic activity often co-occur in the same video clips. Since the
moving pixels are treated as words in our hierarchical Bayesian models, the topics of
words are actually a summary of typical atomic activities in the scene. Each topic
has a multinomial distribution over the motion feature codebook, specified by / in
LDA mixture model and {q$k} in Dual-HDP. (Ok can be easily estimated given the
words assigned to topic k after sampling).
Our Dual-HDP model automatically discovers 29 atomic activities in the traffic
scene. In Figure 3-6, we show the distributions of these atomic activities over locations
and moving directions. The atomic activities are sorted by size (the number of moving
pixels assigned to the atomic activity) from large to small. The numbers of moving
pixels assigned to atomic activities are shown in Figure 3-7. Atomic activity 2 is
"vehicles make a right turn". Atomic activities 5, 14, and 20 are "vehicles make left
turns". Atomic activities 6 and 9 are "vehicles cross road d, but along different lanes".
Atomic activities 1 and 4 are "vehicles pass road d from left to right". This activity
is broken into two atomic activities because when vehicles from g make a right turn
(see atomic activity 2) or vehicles from road e make a left turn (see atomic activity
14), they also share the motion pattern in atomic activity 4. Atomic activities 10 and
19 are "vehicles come to stop behind the stop lines". Atomic activities 13, 17 and 21
are "pedestrians walk on crosswalks". When people pass the crosswalk a, they often
stop at the divider between roads e and f waiting for vehicles to pass by. So this

(1) 
(2) 
(3)
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
(9)
(15) 
(16) 
(17) 
(18) 
(19)
(21) 
(22) 
(23) 
(24)
(26) 
(27) 
(28) 
(29)
Figure 3-6: Distributions of 29 atomic activities (topics) discovered by our Dual-HDP
models. Colors represent four quantized moving directions: red (-+), magenta (t),
cyan (--), 
and green (1). The intensity represents the density of distributions. The
atomic activities are sorted according to how many moving pixels in the data set
are assigned to them (from large to small). For convenience, we label roads and
crosswalks as a, b,... in the first image. From these distributions, we can guess some
activities happening in this scene, such as vehicles turning left (atomic activity 5 and
20), pedestrians crossing streets (atomic activity 13, 17, 21, 22 and 23), and vehicles
crossing the intersection (atomic activity 6 and 9).
(10) 
(11) 
(12) 
(13) 
(14)

15 10,
10
5
ft
10 
15
index of atomic activities
20
25 
30
Figure 3-7: Histogram of moving pixels assigned to 29 atomic activities in Figure 3-6.
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5)
(6) 
(7) 
(8)
Figure 3-8: Distributions of atomic activities learned by the LDA mixture model
when the number of atomic activities is fixed as 14.
activity breaks into two atomic activities 17 and 21.
When the number of atomic activities is set as 29, the LDA mixture model provides
similar result as Dual-HDP. In Figure 3-8, we show the results from the LDA mixture
model when choosing 14 instead of 29 as the number of atomic activities. Several
atomic activities discovered by Dual-HDP merge into one atomic activity in the LDA
mixture model. For example, as shown in Figure 3-9 (a), atomic activities 17, 21, 23,
24, 25, 26, and 27 related to pedestrian walking learned by Dual-HDP as shown in
Figure 3-6 merge into a single atomic activity 4 learned by the LDA mixture model
shown in Figure 3-8. As shown in Figure 3-9 (b), atomic activities 8, 16 and 19 in
Figure 3-6 merge into atomic activitiy 10 in Figure 3-8.
(11) 
(12) 
(13) 
(14)

Some atomic activities learned by Dual-HDP
Some atomic activities
learned by Dual-HDP
Atomic activity 10 learned by
the LDA mixture model /
(b)
Figure 3-9: Some atomic activities learned by Dual-HDP merger into one atomic
activity learned by the LDA mixture model. (a) When the number of atomic activities
is set as 14 in the LDA mixture model, Atomic activities 17, 21, 23, 24, 25, 26, and 27
related to pedestrian walking learned by Dual-HDP merge into one atomic activity
learned by the LDA mixture model. (b) When the number of atomic activities is set
as 14 in the LDA mixture model, Atomic activities 8, 16 and 19 related to pedestrian
walking learned by Dual-HDP merge into one atomic activity learned by the LDA
mixture model.

3.3.2 
Discover Global Behaviors
Global behavior in the scene can be explained as a combination of co-occurring atomic
activities, or equivalently, topics, under our framework. In our hierarchical Bayesian
models, the video clips are automatically clustered into different global behaviors. The
topics mixtures ({ac} in the LDA mixture model and {7r,} in Dual-HDP) as priors
of clusters of video clips provide a good summary of global behaviors. Figure 3-10
plots the mixture weights 7r, of five global behaviors on atomic activities learned by
Dual-HDP. They are different traffic modes. Global behavior 1 explains traffic moving
in a vertical direction. Vehicles from road e and g move vertically, crossing road d
and crosswalk a. 3, 6, 7, 9 and 11 are major atomic activities in this traffic mode,
while the weights on other atomic activities related to horizontal traffic (1, 4, 5, 8,
16 and 20), and pedestrians walking on crosswalk a and b (13, 17, 21 and 23), are
very low. Global behavior 2 explains "vehicles from road g make a right turn to
road a while there is not much other traffic". In this traffic mode, vertical traffic is
forbidden because of the red light while there are no vehicles traveling horizontally
on road d, so these vehicles from g can make a right turn. Global behavior 3 is
"pedestrians walk on the crosswalks while there is not much traffic". In this traffic
mode, several atomic activities (21, 13, 17) related to pedestrian walking have much
higher weights than their average distribution on the whole video sequence. Atomic
activities 10 and 15 also have large weights in this global behavior and they explain
that vehicles on road e come to stop behind the stop line when pedestrians walk on
the crosswalk. Global behavior 4 is "vehicles on road d make a left turn to road f".
Atomic activities 5, 11, and 12 related to vehicles turning left have large weights.
Atomic activities 1 and 4 also have large weights since horizontal traffic from left to
right is allowed at this time. However atomic activities 8, 16 and 20 have very low
weights, because traffic from right to left conflicts with this left turn activity. Global
behavior 5 is horizontal traffic. In this traffic mode, atomic activities 13, 17 and 21
have relatively high weights, since pedestrians are allowed to walk on a. In the second
row of Figure 3-10, we show an example video clip for each type of global behavior.

(al)
0.21
02
0.16
011
S10 
15 
20 
26 
30
(a2)
1I
S 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25
(a4)
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25
(a3)
0.2k
0.15
0.1
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25
(a5)
(bl) 
(b2)
(b3)
(b4) 
(b5)
Figure 3-10: Distributions of global behaviors over atomic activities learned by Dual-
HDP in a traffic scene. Video clips are clustered into five global behaviors. In (al)-
(a5), we plot the mixture weights {re} over 29 atomic activities as prior of each global
behavior represented by blue bars. For comparison, the red curve in each plot is the
average mixture weights over atomic activities on the whole data set. The x-axis is
the index of atomic activities. The y-axis is the mixture weight over atomic activities.
In (bl)-(b5), we show a video clip as an example for each type of global behavior and
mark the motion distributions of the five largest atomic activities in that vide clip.
Notice that colors distinguish different atomic activities in the same video (the same
color may correspond to different atomic activities in different video clips) instead of
representing motion directions as in Figure 3-6.
0.25,

54
3
211lM1 
l1~ III~I I~iUili
00 
0 
0 
5 
0 
5 
0 
0 
0 
5 
0
(a)
cluster by HDP model
149 
0 
2 
0 
0
8 
74 
4 
2 
11
10 
3 
60 
1 
2
4 
0 
2 
88 
11
4 
2 
6 
5 
92
(b)
5
4
t20 
440 
460 
480 
500 
520 
540
(d)
Figure 3-11: Results of segmenting a long video sequence into different global bahav-
iors. (a) The snapshot of our video segmentation result; (b) the confusion matrix;
(c) the segmentation result of the 90 minutes long video sequence; (d) zoom in of the
segmentation result of the last 20 minutes of video. In (c) and (d), the x-axis is the
index of video clips in temporal order, and the y-axis is the label of the five global
behaviors shown in Figure 3-10.
In each video clip, we choose the five largest atomic activities and plot their motion
distributions by different colors.
3.3.3 
Video Segmentation
Given a long video sequence, we can segment it based on different types of global
behaviors. Our models provide a natural way to complete this task in an unsupervised
manner since video clips are automatically separated into clusters (global behaviors)
in our model. 
To evaluate the clustering performance, we create a ground truth
by manually labeling the 540 video clips into five typical interactions in this scene
as described in Section 3.3.2. The confusion matrix between our clustering result
and the ground truth is shown in Figure 3-11 (b). The average accuracy of video
segmentation is 85.74%. Figure 3-11 shows the labels of video clips in the entire one
and half hours of video and in the last 20 minutes. Note the periodicity of the labels
assigned. We can observe that each traffic cycle lasts around 85 seconds.

3.3.4 
Activity Detection
We also want to localize atomic activities happening in the video. Since in our hier-
archical Bayesian models, each moving pixel is labeled as one of the atomic activities,
activity detection becomes straightforward. In Figure 3-12, we choose five ten sec-
onds long video clips as examples of the five different global behaviors, and show the
activity detection results on them. Since our motion detection method is very simple,
the detected moving pixels are quite noisy. They are not smooth in space and time.
However, they are well labeled into different activity categories, because the activity
models are shared by all the video clips and they are well learned from a huge amount
of moving pixels.
As an extension of activity detection, we can detect vehicles and pedestrians based
on motions. It is observed that the vehicle motions and pedestrian motions are well
separated among atomic activities. However, the user first needs to label each of the
discovered atomic activities as being related to vehicles or pedestrians. Then we can
classify the moving pixels into vehicles and pedestrians based on their atomic activity
labels. Figure 3-13 shows some detection results. This approach cannot detect static
vehicles and pedestrians. Most existing object detectors are based on the appearance
of objects. However, our approach is based on motions and activity models. It is
complementary to appearance based vehicle and pedestrian detectors. Further more,
it does not require labeling training examples.
3.3.5 
Abnormality Detection
In visual surveillance, detecting abnormal video clips and localizing abnormal activ-
ities in the video clip are of great interest. Under the Bayesian models, abnormality
detection has a nice probabilistic explanation by the data likelihood of every video
clip and every moving pixel rather than by comparing similarity between samples.
Computing the likelihood of documents and words under the LDA mixture model has
been described in Section 3.2.2 (see Eq 3.5). Computing the data likelihood under
the HDP mixture model and Dual-HDP model is not straightforward. We need to

(1) 
(2) 
(3)
(4) 
(5)
Figure 3-12: Activity detection. Five video clips are chosen as examples of the five
global behaviors shown in Figure 3-10. We show one key frame of each video clip.
The motions are clustered into different activities marked by different colors. However
since there are so many atomic activities, we cannot use a uniform color scheme to
represent all of them. In this Figure, the same color in different video clips may
indicate different activities. Clip 1 has atomic activities 1 (green), 3 (cyan) and
6 (blue) (see these atomic activities in Figure 3-6). Clip 2 has atomic activities 2
(cyan) and 13 (blue). Clip 3 has atomic activities 15 (cyan), 7 (blue) and 21 (red).
Clip 4 has atomic activities 1 (red), 5 (blue), 7(green), 12 (cyan) and 15 (yellow).
Clip 5 has atomic activities 8 (red), 16 (cyan), 17 (magenta) and 20 (green).
Figure 3-13: Vehicle and pedestrian detection based on motions. Vehicle motions are
marked by red color and pedestrian motions are marked by green color.

compute the likelihood of document j given other documents, p(xjlx-J), where x - j
represents the whole corpus excluding document j. For example, in the HDP mix-
ture model, since we have already drawn M samples {z-j(m), 
r(m)), 7m) ~
)  
from
p(z-j, {7rc), 7rox) which is very close to p(z-j, {rc), 
rolx-J), we approximate p(xj x-j)
as
p(XjX-J) 
- - 2 
] 
p(X
ji ZJi, z-J(m),x-J)pP(Zjlwj)p(wjf7C(7m))ilcjdWj
m E 
3 zj 
i
(3.17)
p(wj rm)) is a Dirichlet distribution. If (Ul,..., UT) is the Dirichlet prior on bk,
T
p(xjifzj, z-J(m), x - j) = (ji 
+ nx ,)/(Z(ut + nt))
t=1
is a multinomial distribution, where nt is the number of words in x-J with value t
assigned to topic zji (see [140]). The computation of
J 
Zp(jlzjii,Zj( ),x-J)p(zj j )p(jfl.(m))
W zi
is intractable, but can be approximated with a variational inference algorithm as
in [18]. The likelihood computation in Dual-HDP model is very similar to that in the
HDP mixture model. The only difference is to replace rcj with c) 
in Eq 3.17.
Figure 3-14 shows the top five detected abnormal video clips. Red color highlights
the regions with abnormal motions in the video clips. There are two abnormal activ-
ities in the first video. A vehicle is making a right-turn from road d to road f. This is
uncommon in this scene because of the layout of the city. Actually there is no topic
explaining this kind of activity in our data (topics are summaries of typical activi-
ties). A person is simultaneously approaching road f, causing abnormal motions. In
the successive video clip, we find that the person is actually crossing road f outside
the crosswalk region. This video clip ranked fourth in abnormality. In the second
and third videos, bicycles are crossing the road abnormally. The fifth video is another
example of a pedestrian crossing the road outside the crosswalk.

1st 
4th 
2nd
3rd 
5th
Figure 3-14: Results of abnormality detection. We show the top five video clips
with the highest abnormality (lowest likelihood). In each video clip, we highlight the
regions with moving pixels with high abnormality.
3.3.6 
Query Interactions
Under our framework, it is convenient to use atomic activities as units to query
interactions of interest. For example, suppose we want to detect the interaction
of jay-walking. We simply pick two atomic activities involved in this interaction,
i.e. "pedestrians walk on crosswalk a from right to left (atomic activity 13) while
vehicles are approaching in vertical direction (atomic activity 6)", and specify a query
distribution q (q(6) = q(13) = 0.5 and the weights on other atomic activities are
zeros). Each video clip j has a distribution pj over atomic activities. We match {py }
with the query distribution using relative entropy between q and pj,
K 
q(k)
D(qlIpY) = E q(k)log () 
(3.18)
k=1
Figure 3-15 (d) shows the result of querying examples of "pedestrians walk on
crosswalk a from right to left while vehicles are approaching in vertical direction". All
the video clips are sorted by matching similarity. There are 18 jay-walking instances
in this data set, and they are all found among the top 37 examples out of the 540
clips in the whole video sequence. The top 12 retrieval results are all correct.

Atomic activity 6 
Atomic activity 13
(a)
(b)
10 
15 
20 
25
Number of video clips retrieved
(d)
Figure 3-15: Query result of interaction jay-walking. (a) Two atomic activities 6 and
13 involved in the interaction jay-working. (b) A query distribution is drawn with
large weights on atomic activities 6 and 13 and zeros weights on other topics. (c) An
example of jay-walk retrieval. (d) Precision and recall with the number of video clips
retrieved. There are totally 18 jay-walking instances according to labeling. They are
all found among the top 37 video clips out of the total 540 clips in the data set.

3.3.7 
Comparison with Other Methods
Another option to model interactions is to first use the original LDA (a) or HDP
(b) as a feature reduction step. A distribution pj over topics or a posterior Dirichlet
parameter (yj in Eq 3.2) is associated with each document. Then one can cluster
documents based on {pj} or {fj} as feature vectors. 
[18] used this strategy for
classification. K-means on {pj} only has 55.6% accuracy of video segmentation on
this data set (KL divergence is the distance measure), while the accuracy of our Dual-
HDP model is 85.74%. It is hard to define a proper distance for Dirichlet parameters.
We cannot get meaningful clusters using {yj }.
We also evaluate the algorithm proposed in [164], which used global motion to
describe each frame, on this data set. [164] also adopted word-document analysis and
used spectral graph partitioning. However, it did not model local atomic activities
and the interactions or activities were directly modeled as a distribution over global
motion instead of atomic activities. Although their method worked well on simple
data sets in [164], where usually there was only one kind of activity in each video
clip, it failed on our complicated scene with many activities co-occurring. We did not
find meaningful interactions from the discovered clusters using their approach on our
data. The formation of clusters is dominated by the amount of traffic flow instead of
the types of traffic. The detected abnormal examples are videos with relatively small
amounts of motion and do not really include interesting activities.
3.3.8 
Discussion
The space complexities of the three proposed models are all O(KW) + O(KL) +
O(KM) + O(N), where K is the number of topics, W is the size of the codebook,
L is the number of document clusters, M is the number of documents and N is the
total number of words. Using EM and VB, the time complexity of the learning and
inference of the LDA mixture model is O(ML) + O(NK) + O(LK 2). Running on
a computer with 3GHz CPU, it takes less than one hour to process an 1.5 hours
video sequence. The Gibbs sampling inference of HDP mixture model and Dual-

HDP model is much slower. The time complexity of each Gibbs sampling iteration
is O(NK) + O(ML). It is difficult to provide theoretical analysis on the convergence
of Gibbs sampling. It takes around 12 hours to process an 1.5 hours video sequence.
In recent years, variational inference was proposed for HDP [141] and it is faster
than Gibbs sampling. A possible extension of this work is to explore variational
inference algorithms under HDP mixture model and Dual-HDP model. Currently our
algorithm is running in a batch mode. However, once the model has been learnt from
a training video sequence and fixed, it can be used to do motion/video segmentation
and abnormality detection on new video stream in an online mode.

82

Chapter 4
Trajectory Analysis in A Single
Camera View
Having explained activity analysis in crowded scenes in Chapter 3, we will consider
the scenario when the scenes are sparse and we can track objects in this chapter. We
will presents the results of using Dual-HDP and dynamic Dual-HDP for trajectory
analysis in a single camera view. Objects are first tracked in a single camera view.
Trajectories of objects are clustered into different activity categories and the models
of paths commonly taken by objects are learned. Dual-HDP assumes the models of
activities do not change over time. Dynamic Dual-HDP online dynamically updates
models of activities.
4.1 
Modeling Trajectories Using Dual-HDP
We treat a trajectory as a document and the observations on the trajectory as words.
The positions and moving directions of observations on a trajectory are computed
as features which are quantized according to a codebook. The codebook uniformly
quantizes the space of the scene into small cells and the velocity of objects into
several directions. A trajectory is modeled as a bag of quantized observations without
temporal order.
In the physical world, objects move along some paths. We refer to the intersections

Semantic region 2
Semantic region I
Semantic region 3
Figure 4-1: An example to explain the modeling of semantic regions and activities.
Semantic regions are the overlap regions of paths. There are three semantic regions
(indicated by different colors) which form two paths. Both trajectories A and C pass
through regions 1 and 2, so they are clustered into the same activity. Trajectory B
passes through regions 1 and 3, so it is clustered into a different activity.
of paths as semantic regions, i.e. two paths may share one semantic region as shown
in Figure 4-1. When Dual-HDP is used to model trajectories, topics reveal semantic
regions shared by trajectories, i.e. many trajectories pass through one semantic region
with common directions of motion. A semantic region is modeled as a multinomial
distribution over the space of the scene and moving directions. If two trajectories
pass through the same set of semantic regions, they are on the same path and thus
they are clustered into the same activity. In our Dual-HDP model, each cluster of
documents (trajectories) has a prior distribution over topics (semantic regions). It is
learnt in an unsupervised way. All the trajectories clustered into the same activity
share the same prior distribution. Using Dirichlet Processes, Dual-HDP can learn the
number of semantic regions and the number of activity categories from data.
In Figure 4-1, an example is shown to explain the modeling. There are three se-
mantic regions (indicated by different colors) which form two paths. Both trajectories
A and C pass through regions 1 and 2, so they are clustered into the same activity.
Trajectory B passes through regions 1 and 3, so it is clustered into a different activity.
With the "bag-of-words" assumption, our approach does model the first order
temporal information among observations since the codebook encodes the moving di-
rections. It can distinguish some activities related to temporal features. For example,
if objects visit several regions in opposite temporal order, they must pass through the
same region in opposite directions. In our model, that region splits into two topics

because of the velocity difference. So these two activities can be distinguished by our
model, since they have different topics.
4.2 
Dynamic Dual-HDP
Under Dual-HDP, when the models of activities and semantic regions are learnt
and fixed, classifying unseen trajectories into existing activity categories and detect-
ing abnormal trajectories can be done in an online mode. However, there are still
some reasons to extend the Dual-HDP model to a dynamic Dual-HDP model. First,
people have interest in the dynamic change of models of activities over time. For
example, exploring when a new mode of activity appears, when an old mode of activ-
ity disappears, and when a particular kind of activity becomes more dominant than
other activities in the scene is of interest in surveillance applications. Abnormality
detection may also change over time. An activity may be detected as an abnormality
when it first appears in the scene. However, when more and more instances occur,
it becomes typical. Similarly, a typical activity at an earlier time may becomes ab-
normal when it rarely happens later. Second, when a surveillance system monitors
an area over months or even years, it is difficult to load all the huge amount of data
once into memory and process it. Dynamic Dual-HDP learns the models of activities
incrementally over time and does not have to keep old data.
In order to learn models of activities dynamically, one option is to divide the entire
data set into subsets according to the temporal order and learn the activity models of
each subset independently using Dual-HDP. This has two problems. First, the activity
models learnt in different subsets are not aligned. Without manually permuting the
activity models properly, people cannot observe how these models change over time.
Second, since different subsets do not share information, if there is not enough data
in a subset, the activity models cannot be well learnt from it. Blei et al. [16] proposed
a model which allowed the topics to be dynamically updated. However, it assumed
that the number of topics was fixed. Allowing the addition of new emerging activity

t-1 
t
Figure 4-2: Graphical model of dynamic Dual-HDP
models over time is of considerable interest in surveillance applications.
The graphical model of the dynamic Dual-HDP is shown in Figure 4-2. The data
is divided into subsets based on temporal intervals (e.g. a subset includes trajectories
happening within one hour). The key difference is that G' - 1, which is the infinite
mixture of topics of words learnt at time interval t - 1, is used as prior to predict
Gt, which is the mixture of topics learnt at the next time interval t. Assume that
Kt- 1 topics have been generated from the data up to time t - 1. Then G' - 1 can be
represented as
Kt-l
G-7 = 
t- 16t-i + irGt-G' 
(4.1)
--
k 
k" 
"  70 
U 0
k=1
where the first Kt- 1 topics have been assigned to the data up to time t - 1, and
'GrlGtl 
= 
oo =Kt-1+1 
1-k 
is the remaining part of the infinite mixture of topics,
none of which is assigned to any data up to time t - 1 [140]. Both rt-1Kt- 1 and
{ot-1 }lK 
can be sampled from the data up to t- 1. We assume that they are learnt

and fixed before predicting G'.
In order to use the mixture of topics learnt up to t - 1 as the prior of G', we first
normalize {rt-1 1K 
to { 
}t-lK
t-
LOk I= 
=l 
=1
t-1
Ok 
Kt-1 t-1
Ek'=l 7Ok'
Then a base probability measure Ft is constructed for Gt,
Kt-1
Ft = wt1E -6 
+ (1 - wt)H, 
(4.2)
k=1
where
t Dir(t 
t- + H), 
(4.3)
H is the same Dirichlet distribution as in Section 3.2.6 without changing over time,
Wt is a scalar between 0 and 1, and { is a positive scalar. Gt is sampled from a
Dirichlet process,
Gt - DP( t , Ft ), 
(4.4)
where yt is a positive scalar. We will give more details about wt, ( , and yt later.
From Eq 4.2 and 4.4, we observe that the random measure G' at time t includes the
Kt-1 topics generated before t and new topics never seen before. The weights 7rq 
over
topics change over time. In Eq 4.3, when a topic O at t was observed before and
thus has a corresponding topic model Ot-1 at t - 1, Ot is sampled from a Dirichlet
distribution including 4O-1 as prior knowledge. Thus dynamic Dual-HDP also models
the dynamic change of models of topics { }I} 
instead of assuming that they are fixed
over time as in [116] and [133]. In the following, we explain the inference by Gibbs
sampling.
Suppose that at a sampling step there are Kt topics assigned to the data up to t
(Kt changes during Gibbs sampling on the subset of t). Then an explicit construction

Algorithm 1 Inference under the dynamic Dual-HDP
1: Input trajectories (documents) collected from T time slices, {wi}, t = I ... T.
2: Output models of activities and semantic regions and cluster labels of trajectories
at different times.
3: Initialization Ko = 0, no = 0, so = 0.
4: for t = 1 to T do
5: 
repeat
6: 
given other variables, sample the topic assignment {zji} of the words {w }i
observed at time t, and sample the topic mixtures {ick} of trajectory clusters
using the Chinese restaurant franchise sampling scheme proposed in [140].
7: 
given other variables, sample the cluster labels cj of trajectories (documents)
observed at time t, and sample the mixtures {c.} of trajectory clusters in 3.16
using the Chinese restaurant franchise sampling proposed in Appendix A.
8: 
given other variables, sample topic models {l 
} and mixtures {7rk} from the
models {t-1 } and {r }0k 
learnt at time t - 1 and the data observed at time
t using Eq 4.19 and 4.20.
9: 
until converge
10: 
update n' and st using Eq 4.17 and 4.18.
11: end for
for G' is given as,
K t -1 
K t
G = E 
WOk 
t + 
Ok't + 
G 
(4.5)
k=1 
k=Kt-l+l
{K} Jl 
1are the topics existing before t. They will be updated using the data ob-
served at t. They are the same variables as in Eq 4.2. {k} kK-l1+l are the new
topics assigned to the data observed at t. i7rGt = 
Kt 
t 
th
part of the infinite mixture of topics, none of which is signed to any data up to time
t. From Eq 4.2 and 4.4, G , ~ DP(t(1 - wt),H). ir = (7,... 
,1Kt, 
) and
t }Kt 
are the variables to be sampled. Given 7ir and {t }, the sampling of other
variables is the same as Dual-HDP. We focus on sampling i7r and {0} given other
variables. Suppose the topic assignments to words at t are given. In the Chinese
Restaurant Franchise sampling used by HDP and Dual-HDP, let nkw be the number
of words with value w assigned to topic k, nk be the total number of words assigned
to topic k, sj be the number of big tables serving dish (topic) k, and s be the total

number of big tables 1. nkw, nk, Sk, s are all statistics from the data subset of time
t. Since Gt - 1 provides prior of G' as shown in Eq 4.2, 4.3 and 4.4,
p(r7r fj { 
'}-l) = Dir (2 t 
-1, ... ytwt 
, 0,..., 0, ~7t(1 - wt)). 
(4.6)
When 1 < k < K t-
p(
" 
1 ) = Di( 
t-1 + H), 
(4.7)
and when K t - < k < K t,
p(ot) = Dir(H). 
(4.8)
The data likelihoods are
p(nkl, ... , nkw Ink, q) = Multinomial(ntk, t), 
(4.9)
where W is the size of the codebook, and
p(s, . . , sKt S, rt) = Multinomial(s, 7rt). 
(4.10)
So 7r and Ot can be sampled from posteriors,
r 
K 
t-IjKt
o|{Sk 
1 
t- 
^t-1
'Dir(si + t t WY 
1. 
SKt-1 
7 t 
K, SKt-1+1, .
SKtY(1- 
wt)), 
(4.11)
when 1 < k < K t- l,
k I{nkw} =l, t1 
Dir(nkl + ct-1 
+ ul, . , nkw + 
~+ ± 
¢. 
+ TU), 
(4.12)
where H = (ul,..., Uw). When Kt - 1 < k 
K t ,
~t5 
' Dir(nkl + u l, ... , nkw + UW). 
(4.13)
1The meanings of big tables and dishes in Chinese Restaurant Franchise are defined in [140] and
Appendix A.

Properly choosing wt, yt and ((, we can control how much the old data up to t- I
influences the inference of models of the current time t. In this work, we choose
r -s
t- 1 +
we = 
(4.14)
ty = r. st-1 ,  
(4.15)
t = r" n - 1  
(4.16)
r is a scalar between 0 and 1 controlling how fast the influence of old data decrease.
n and st are the accumulated effective numbers of words assigned to topic k and big
tables. They are updated over time,
nt = r - nt 1 + nk, 
(4.17)
st = r st - 1 + s. 
(4.18)
Remind that nk and s are the statistics obtained from the subset of t. At initialization
n o = 0 and so = 0. Then Eq 4.11 and 4.12 become
t 
8Kt =l, 
t - l j K t - 1
r1o 
Skik= 
T Ok 
k=1
-Dir(si + rs t -  
1 , ... . , SKt-1 + rst- i0K 1, SKt 1+1, .
. , SKJ, '), 
(4.19)
Ok {ntkw}wl, 
Dir(nkl
1 +rr7t-1
1 
0"+ -  
, nkW + rn 1" O 
+ uw). 
(4.20)
When the data becomes older, its influence on the current models is weaker. The
decreasing rate is r. The inference under dynamic Dual-HDP is summarized in Algo-
rithm 1.
In our problem, dynamic Dual-HDP is applied to online learning of activity mod-
els and online abnormality detection, where we assume that data in the future is
unknown. Thus in Eq 4.11 and 4.12, 7r' and Ot are sampled from the posteriors given
^" and 
-1 without knowing fr + 1 and 0 l. If we assume that data both in the
past and in the future is known, the posteriors are more complicated than Eq 4.11

and 4.12, and the Gibbs sampling inference may require keeping all data collected
from the whole period in the memory. In the current sampling algorithm, we only
need to keep the data observed at the current time slice for inference. All the old data
can be removed, as its information has been included in the activity models {7r
1}I
and ~-1 and sufficient statistics nt- 1 and st - 1.
4.3 
Experimental Results
4.3.1 
Trajectory Analysis without Dynamic Modeling
Our nonparametric hierarchical Bayesian models are evaluated on radar tracks col-
lected from a maritime port, visual tracks collected from a parking lot, and simulated
data. The results of Dual-HDP without dynamic modeling will be presented first.
The results of Dynamic Dual-HDP will be reported in 4.3.2.
Results on Radar Tracks
In this section, experiments are done on a relatively small data set which has 577
radar tracks collected from a maritime port data set. They were acquired by multiple
collaborating radars along the shore and recorded the locations of ships on the sea.
Many existing approaches were evaluated on data sets with similar sizes as this one.
According to the feedback of an expert who is familiar with the sea port, the semantic
regions and clusters learned by our approaches make intuitive sense.
23 semantic regions are discovered by our model. In Figure 4-3, we display the
distributions of semantic regions (sorted by the number of observations assigned to
semantic regions) over space and moving directions. As shown in Figure 4-3, the 1st,
4th, 6th, 8th and 15th semantic regions are five side by side shipping fairways, where
ships move in two opposite directions. For comparison, we segment the five fairways
using a threshold on the density, and overlay them in Figure 4-3 (c) in different
colors, green (1st), red (4th), black (6th), yellow (8th), and blue (15th). Since they
are so close in space, they cannot be separated using spatial distance based trajectory

Ith 
6th
4th 
2nd
7th 
9th
14th 
12th
17th 
18th
21th
3rd 
5th
11th 
13th
10th 
16th
19th 
20th
22th 
23th
0o***5**10 
1(a)l*5720- 
25
(a) 
(b)
(c) 
(d)
Figure 4-3: Semantic regions at a maritime port learnt from the radar tracks. Dis-
tributions of semantic regions over space and moving directions are shown (for easier
comparison, they are not shown in order). Colors represent different moving direc-
tions: -+ (red), +- (cyan), T (magenta), and I (blue). (a) Histogram of observations
assigned to different semantic regions. (b) All of the radar tracks. (c) Compare the
1st, 4th, 6th, 8th, and 15th semantic regions. They are five by five shipping lanes.
(d) Compare the 7th, 11th, and 13th semantic regions. Ships first move along the
7th semantic region and then diverge along the 11th and 13th semantic regions.
15th
8th

clustering approaches. In Figure 4-3 (d), we compare the 7th, 11th, and 13th semantic
regions also by overlaying the segmented regions in red, green, and black colors. This
explains the fact that ships first move along the 7th semantic region and then diverge
along the 11th and 13th semantic regions.
Our approach groups trajectories into 16 clusters. In Figure 4-4, we plot the eight
largest clusters and some smaller clusters. Clusters 1, 4, 6 and 7 are close in space but
occupy different regions. Clusters 3 and 5 occupy the same region, but ships in the
two clusters moves in opposite directions. Clusters 2 and 5 partially overlap in space.
As shown in Figure 4-3(d), ships first move along the same way and then diverge in
different directions. Clusters 2 and 5 share the same semantic region. Only modeling
semantic regions using HDP cannot separate these two clusters. For comparison, in
the last two sub-figures of Figure 4-4 we also show two clusters of the result using
Euclidean distance and spectral clustering [41] and setting the number of clusters
as 16. In this approach a similarity matrix is computed by comparing the distance
between each pair of trajectories. Then spectral clustering is used to compute an
embedded space. Trajectories are projected to the embedded space and clustered by
k-means. Some fine structures of shipping fairways cannot be separated using a spatial
distance based clustering method. One of the advantages of our approach is that it
learns the number of clusters from data. When spatial distance based clustering
methods are evaluated on this data set, choosing an improper cluster number, say 8
or 25, causes the clustering performance to significantly deteriorate.
In Figure 4-5, we display the top 20 abnormal trajectories based on their nor-
malized log-likelihoods log(p(wj w-))/Nj. There are two possible reasons for the
abnormality. (1) The trajectory does not fit any major semantic regions. Many ex-
amples can be found in Figure 4-5. (2) The trajectory fits more than one semantic
region, but the combination of the semantic regions is uncommon. The red trajec-
tory in Figure 4-5 (a), and the red and green trajectories in Figure 4-5 (b) are such
examples.

0 
2 
0 
S -4 3 2 1 0 1 2 3 4 5 
4 4 3 21 
0 1 2 3 45 
4 
4 
3 
-4 
.10 
1 2 3 4 5 
4 
4 .
.2 .1 
2 1 
2 
3 
4 
6
cluster 2
cluster 3
cluster 6 
cluster 7
4 
.4 
1 
-2 
0 1 2 
4 6 
4 
-3 -2 1 0 t 2 3 4 
5
cluster 10
cluster 14
cluster 11
cluster 15
cluster 4
cluster 8
cluster 12
cluster 16
-2
S5 4 
3 
-2 1 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5
cluster 1 (Euclidean distance)
0
-2
-3A1
4 
.4 3 
2 
45 0 
1 2 
3 
4 
5
cluster 2 (Euclidean distance)125
cluster 2 (Euclidean distance)
Figure 4-4: Clusters of radar tracks from a maritime port. Random colors are used to
distinguish individual trajectories. For comparison the last two sub-figures show some
trajectory clusters of the result using Euclidean distance and spectral clustering [41].
Some clusters in (a) merge into one cluster in (b).
cluster 1
cluster 5
cluster 5
cluster 9
cluster 
13
cluster 13

0
-2
-2.5 -
-3
3 
-2 
-1 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5
(a) Top 1- 10
0-
-2
5 
4 
-
1 
2 
3 
4 
5
(b) Top 11 - 20
Figure 4-5: Top 20 abnormal radar tracks are plotted in different colors. Other
trajectories are plotted in cyan color. These abnormal trajectories do not fit any
major semantic region or fit more than semantic regions whose combinations are
uncommon.
Results on tracks from a parking lot
There are N = 40,453 trajectories in the parking lot data set collected over one
week. They are plotted in Figure 4-6. Because of the large number of samples,
similarity based clustering methods require both large amounts of space (6GB) to
store the 40,453 x 40,453 similarity matrix and high computational cost to compute
the similarities of around 800,000,000 pairs of trajectories. If spectral clustering is
used, it is quite challenging to compute the eigenvectors of such a huge matrix. It
is difficult for many existing approaches to work on this large data set. The space
complexity of our nonparametric Bayesian approach is O(N) instead of O(N 2). The
time complexity of each Gibbs sampling iteration is O(N). It is difficult to provide
theoretical analysis on the convergence of Gibbs sampling. However, we can gather

Figure 4-6: Trajectories collected from a parking lot scene within one week. Random
colors are used to distinguish individual trajectories.
empirical observations by plotting the likelihoods of data sets over Gibbs sampling
iterations. On the smaller radar data set, the likelihood curve converges after 1, 000
iterations. This takes around 1.5 minutes running on a computer with 3GHz CPU.
On the parking lot data set, which is 70 times large than the radar data set in the
number of trajectories, the likelihood curve converges after 6, 000 iterations. It takes
around 6 hours. In our experiments, the time complexity of our approach is much
smaller that O(N 2)
30 semantic regions and 22 clusters of trajectories are learnt from this data set.
Some of them are shown in Figures 4-7 and 4-8. The first and third semantic regions
explain vehicles entering and exiting the parking lot. Most other semantic regions are
related to pedestrian activities. Because of opposite moving directions, some regions
split into two semantic regions, such as semantic regions 2 and 7, 9 and 12, 5 and
14. Similarly objects on trajectories (see Figure 4-8) in clusters 2 and 3, 5 and 11 are
moving in opposite directions. Many outlier trajectories are in small clusters, such as
clusters 20, 21 and 22. The top 100 abnormal trajectories are shown in Figure 4-9.
Most of these trajectories detected as abnormal are pedestrians walking on the grass
field and and pedestrians crossing the parking lot over empty parking spaces.

5th 
6th 
7th 
8th
9th 
10th 
11th 
12th
13th 
14th 
15th 
16th
17th 
18th 
19th 
20th
Figure 4-7: Some semantic regions learnt from a parking lot scene. The meaning of
colors is the same as Figure 4-3.
3rd 
4th
Ist 
2nd

cluster 1 
cluster 2
cluster 5 
cluster 6
cluster 9 
cluster 10
cluster 13
cluster 14
cluster 19 
cluster 20
cluster 7 
cluster 8
cluster 11 
cluster 12
cluster 15 
cluster 18
cluster 21 
cluster 22
Figure 4-8: Some clusters of trajectories from a parking lot scene. In cluster 1, objects
enter the parking lot and make U-turn. Cluster 2 and 3 occupy the same region but
their trajectories move in opposite directions. In cluster 6, objects come out from a
build and leave the parking lot. In cluster 9 and 10, objects cross the grass field.
cluster 3 
cluster 4

Top 1 - 20 
Top 21 - 40 
Top 41 - 60
Top 61 - 80 
Top 81 - 100
Figure 4-9: Top 100 abnormal trajectories in the parking lot scene. Many of them
are pedestrians walking on the grass field.
Evaluation on Simulated Data
In this section, we simulate trajectories to evaluate how robust our model is to tracking
errors. As shown in Figure 4-10 (a), eight paths are manually drawn on a scene. Some
paths share the same semantic regions. A trajectory is randomly assigned to one of the
eight predefined activities. A trajectory samples the location of its starting point from
a Gaussian distribution centered at the starting point of its path with variance a, = 5.
It samples the remaining points sequentially following the direction specified by the
path, with additive Gaussian noise of variance U2 = 2. The simulated trajectories are
shown in Figure 4-10 (b). In reality, some trajectories are broken because of occlusions
and scene clutter during tracking. In our simulation, we decide whether a trajectory is
broken in a random way with probability r (0 < r < 1). If a trajectory is broken, the
breaking point is uniformly sampled along the trajectory. A larger r simulates the case
when there are more tracking errors. There are other types of tracking errors, such as
wrong associations, not simulated in this experiment. However, breaking is one of the
most common tracking errors, since some other tracking errors can be transferred to
breaking errors by simply stopping tracking when the tracker is confused or there is

(a) 
(b)
Figure 4-10: Simulate trajectories of different activities. (a) The central lines of eight
paths manually drawn in the scene. They are distinguished by different colors. (b)
Trajectories simulated from the eight paths. They are also displayed in the eight
colors.
not enough evidence to support the hypothesis. After the trajectories are clustered by
our algorithm, we manually specify each of the eight clusters as an activity category,
so each trajectory is assigned an activity label by our algorithm. By comparing with
the ground truth, the accuracy of activity classification is computed. Figure 4-11
plots the activity classification accuracies with different r. It is observed that the
performance does not significant drop when tracking errors increase. This shows
that our algorithm is robust to tracking errors to some extent. We also compare our
algorithm with two distance-based methods which use Euclidean distance [41] and
modified Hausdorff distance [153] to compute distance between two trajectories. The
modified Hausdorff distance compares both spatial distance and velocity difference
of observations on the trajectories. The method using Euclidean distance requires
that trajectories are temporally aligned. The performance of these two distance-
based methods, especially when using Euclidean distance, drops significantly when
the trajectory data set has tracking errors.
4.3.2 
Trajectory Analysis with Dynamic Modeling
In this section, the results of the dynamic Dual-HDP model will be presented.
100

0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
0.6 
0.7 
0.8
The probability that a trajectory is broken by tracking errors (r)
Figure 4-11: Activity classification accuracies of Dual-HDP and two distance-based
methods (Euclidean distance [41] and modified Hausdorff distance [153]) when the
simulated trajectories are broken with different probabilities from 0 to 1. The mod-
ified Hausdorff distance compares both spatial distance and velocity difference of
observations on the trajectories.
Results on Radar Tracks
In this section we conduct experiments on a much larger data set than that used in
Section 4.3.1. It includes 8, 478 radar tracks collected from 304 hours. The trajectories
are divided into T = 304 slices by hours. In Figure 4-12, 4-13, 4-14, 4-15, and 4-16,
we show the semantic regions learnt at different time slices. The model of a semantic
region learned at a previous time slice is used as a prior to update the model of
the semantic region at the next time slice. Thus we can observe how the models
of semantic regions change over time. The first subfigure shows when this semantic
region first appears as a new mode under Dual-HDP. Figure 4-12 shows the dynamic
change of semantic region 1. Semantic region 1 first appears at the 35th hour and
its shape changes over time. As shown in Figure 4-13, the topic related to semantic
region 2 first appears at the 47th hour. However, it appears noisy in the first few
time slices. Its shape forms after the 112nd hour. This mode gradually disappears
after 244 hours. Semantic region 3 and 4 are first coupled in the same topic at the
early stage (see the first two subfigures in Figure 4-15). They are well separated when
more data is observed later on.
101

the 69th hour 
the 91st hour
the 129th hour
the 171st hour
the 275th hour
the 305th hour
Figure 4-12: Dynamic change of semantic region 1 over time learnt from the radar
tracks. In the first subfigure, we show when the semantic region first appears, i.e.
semantic region 1 first appears as a new mode learnt by the Dual-HDP model at the
35th hour. Figure 4-13, 4-14, 4-15, and 4-16 follow the same convention.
Figure 4-17 shows the abnormal radar tracks detected at different time. Since
the activity models and semantic regions change over time, the detected abnormal
trajectories are also different depending on the time context. Trajectories detected
as abnormal at some time slices may become normal when they appear at other time
slices. For example, as shown in Figure 4-17, some abnormal trajectories detected
at the 7th hour and the 9th hour actually pass through semantic regions 2, 3, 4,
and 5. However, these modes are learnt later. In the first few hours, only a few
trajectories passing through these semantic regions are observed. So they are detected
as abnormal. When more trajectories of the same activities are observed and the
activity models are well learnt later, they will not be detected as abnormal any more.
102
the 35th hour
the 121st hour

the 91st hour 
the 113rd hour
the 179th hour
the 201st hour
the 245th hour
the 305th hour
Figure 4-13: Dynamic change of semantic region 2 over time learnt from the radar
tracks. This semantic region first appears at the 47th hour. However, it appears
noisy in the first few time slices. Its shape forms after the 112nd hour. This mode
gradually disappears after 244 hours.
the 25th hour
the 179th hour
the 69th hour
the 223rd hour
the 91st hour
the 267th hour
the 135th hour
the 305th hour
Figure 4-14: Dynamic
tracks.
change of semantic region 3 over time learnt from the radar
the 25th hour
the 157th hour
the 267th hour
the 305th hour
Figure 4-15: Dynamic change of semantic region 4 over time learnt from the radar
tracks. Semantic region 3 and 4 are first coupled in the same topic at the early stage
(see the first two subfigures). They are well separated when more data is observed
later on.
103
the 156th hour
the 47th hour

the 15th hour
the 93rd hour 
the 221st hour
the 305th hour
Figure 4-16: Dynamic change of semantic region 5 over time learnt from the radar
tracks.
-0. 
5 
-0.5
" 
-1
-2
-2.5- 
-2.5-
the 7th hour 
the 9th hour
-4 
4
-4.5 
-4.5
-5 
-5
5 
4 
-- 
5 
-2 
-1 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
2 
.1
the 115th hour 
the 299th hour
Figure 4-17: Abnormal radar tracks detected at different time slices. The same
threshold of data likelihood is used for all the time slices. Some abnormal trajectories
detected at the 7th hour and the 9th hour actually pass through semantic regions
2, 3, 4, and 5. However, these modes are learnt later. In the first few hours, only
a few trajectories passing through these semantic regions are observed. So they are
detected as abnormal. When more trajectories of the same activities are observed
and the activity models are well learnt later, they will not be detected as abnormal
any more.
104

Results on Tracks from a Park Lot
The 40, 453 trajectories of the parking lot data set are collected from one week.
We divide them into time slices by hours. Figure 4-19, 4-18, and 4-20 show the
dynamic change of semantic regions over time. We can observe some cyclic change
of the distributions of semantic regions. There are fewer activities happening around
midnight and early in the morning. The distributions of semantic regions are sparser
compared with those in the afternoon and in the evening. Also, because there are few
cars parking at night and early in the mornign, pedestrians can cross the parking lot
over empty parking spaces. In Figure 4-18, the shape of the semantic region at time
slice between 13 o'clock and 14 o'clock on May 16 changes, because there are more
people from the top entering the parking lot and exiting from left at the particular
time interval. In Figure 4-20, the shape of semantic region 3 also changes over time.
People may exit the parking lot from the left of the scene or from a gate in the middle
area of the scene (somewhere between two rows of trees).
105

07-08, May 15
02-03, May 16
07-08, May 16
13-14, May 16 
19-20, May 16
02-03, May 17 
07-08, May 17
13-14, May 17 
19-20, May 17
02-03, May 18
02-03, May 19
07-08, May 18
07-08, May 19
13-14, May 18
13-14, May 19
19-20, May 18
19-20, May 19
Figure 4-18: The dynamic change of semantic region 1 over time learnt from the
trajectories collected from a parking lot. The same background image is used for all
time slices. The background image is not representative of each time slice (i.e. there
are not this many cars parked there late at night). There are fewer activities in the
parking lot around midnight, so the distributions are sparser. Also there are few cars
parking there and pedestrians can cross the parking lot over empty parking spaces.
There are more activities in the afternoon and in the evening. So the distributions
are denser at that time. The shape of the semantic region can change.
106
19-20, May 15
13-14, May 15
02-03, May 15

13-14, May 15 
19-20, May 15
02-03, May 16 
07-08, May 16
02-03, May 17
13-14, May 16
07-08, May 17 
13-14, May 17
19-20, May 16
19-20, May 17
Figure 4-19: The dynamic change of semantic region 2 over time learnt from the
trajectories collected from a parking lot.
06-07, May 16
10-11, May 16
14-15, May 16
19-20, May 16
06-07, May 17 
10-11, May 17
14-15, May 17
19-20, May 17
06-07, May 18
10-11, May 18
14-15, May 18 
19-20, May 18
Figure 4-20: The dynamic change of semantic region 3 over time learnt from the
trajectories collected from a parking lot.
107
07-08, May 15
02-03, May 15

Figure 4-21 shows the abnormal trajectories detected at different time. Between 7
o'clock and 8 o'clock in the morning everyday, many trajectories passing through the
bottom right corner of the scene are detected as abnormal. As shown in Figure 4-19,
there are not many trajectories of this activity happening in the morning. When they
start to appear in a large number between 8 o'clock and 9 o'clock, they are detected
as abnormal. In contrast, these kinds of trajectories are not detected as abnormal
between 14 o'clock and 15 o'clock in the afternoon. Many trajectories detected as
abnormal are those passing through the grass field. An interesting example occurred
between 13 o'clock and 15 o'clock on May 16th. A worker was mowing the grass
around this time. Many trajectories moving back and forth horizontally on the grass
field are detected as an abnormality between 13 o'clock and 14 o'clock. However, after
the model of this activity has been well learnt at this time slice, similar trajectories
are not detected as abnormal in the next hour.
4.4 
Summary
In this chapter, Dual-HDP and dynamic Dual-HDP are used to learn models of seman-
tic regions and cluster trajectories. Dual-HDP assumes that the models of semantic
regions and activities are static, while dynamic Dual-HDP updates the models of
semantic regions and activities over time. Dynamic Dual-HDP cluster trajectoris in-
crementally and thus it can process a huge set of trajectories collected from a very
long period with low computational complexities. Both these two approaches are
evaluated on radar tracks and trajectories collected from a parking lot. Their re-
sults make intuitive sense. Dual-HDP is quantitively compared with other clustering
methods on a simulated data set and it achieves much better performance especially
when there are significant tracking errors. However, a quatitive evaluation on real
data sets is difficult because it is not easy to find the ground truth. One possible way
is to compare with user study. However, different people have different judgement on
clustering and abnormality detection. Further more, the subjects need to observe a
large set of trajectories in order to well understand the scene happening in the scene.
108

08-09, May 16 
08-09, May 17
14-15, May 15
14-15, May 16
14-15, May 17
14-15, May 18
13-14, May 19 
14-15, May 19
Figure 4-21: Abnormal trajectories in the parking lot scene detected at different time
slices. The same threshold of data likelihood is used for all the slices. Between 7
o'clock and 8 o'clock in the morning everyday, many trajectories passing through
the bottom right corner of the scene are detected as abnormal. There are not many
trajectories of this activity happening in the morning. When they start to appear
in a large number between 8 o'clock and 9 o'clock, they are detected as abnormal.
Between 13 o'clock and 15 o'clock on May 16th, a worker was mowing the grass
around this time. Many trajectories moving back and forth horizontally on the grass
field are detected as an abnormality between 13 o'clock and 14 o'clock. However, after
the model of this activity has been well learnt at this time slice, similar trajectories
are not detected as abnormal in the next hour.
This makes user study time comsuming. Quantitive evaluation of trajectory analysis
on real data sets is an important research direction as future work.
109
08-09, May 18
08-09, May 15

110

Chapter 5
Correspondence-Free Activity
Analysis in Multiple Camera Views
Chapter 4 assumes a single camera view. If we need to monitor activities in a large
area, video streams from multiple camera views have to be used. This chapter presents
a hierarchical Bayesian model of clustering trajectories in multiple camera views. We
group trajectories, which belong to the same activity category but are observed in
different camera views, into one cluster. The distributions of a path in multiple
camera views are jointly modeled. It is more challenging than activity analysis in a
single camera view since we do not track objects across camera views.
5.1 
Feature Space
Objects are tracked in each of the camera views independently using the Stauffer-
Grimson tracker [135]. Similar to Section 4, a trajectory is treated as a document.
The locations and moving directions of observations of an object are computed as
features and quantized to visual words according to a codebook of its camera view.
However, the codebook is built from multiple camera views. In each camera view, the
space of the view is uniformly quantized into small cells and the velocity of objects is
quantized into several directions. A global codebook concatenates the codebooks of all
the camera views. Thus the word value of an observation i is indexed by (ci, xi, yi, di)
111

in the global codebook. ci is the camera view in which i is observed. (xi, yi) and di
are the quantized coordinates and moving direction of observation i in camera ci.
5.2 
Trajectory Network
A network is built connecting trajectories observed in multiple camera views based
on their temporal extents. Each trajectory is a node on the network. Let tsi and tei
be the starting and ending time of trajectory i. T is a positive temporal threshold. It
is roughly the maximum transition time of objects moving between adjacent camera
views. If trajectories a and b are observed in different camera views and their temporal
extents are close,
(tsa < tsb 
tea + T) V (tsb 
tsa < teb + T), 
(5.1)
then a and b will be connected by an edge on the network. This means that a and b
may be the same object since they are observed by cameras around the same time.
There is no edge between two trajectories observed in the same camera view. An
example can be found in Figure 5-1. As shown in (a), the views of cameras 1 and 2
overlap and are disjoint with the view of camera 3. Trajectories 1 and 2 observed by
cameras 1 and 2 correspond to the same object moving across camera views. Their
temporal extents overlap as shown in (b), so they are connected by an edge in the
network as shown in (d). Trajectories 3 and 4 observed by cameras I and 3 correspond
to an object crossing disjoint views. Their temporal extents have no overlap but the
gap is smaller than T as shown in (c), so they are also connected. Trajectories 3
and 6, 5 and 7 do not correspond to the same objects, but their temporal extents
are close, so they are also connected in the network. A single trajectory 3 can be
connected to two trajectories (4 and 6) in other camera views. An edge in the network
indicates a possible correspondence candidate only based on the temporal information
of trajectories. But we do not really solve the correspondence problem when building
the trajectory network, since many edges are actually false correspondences. The
112

*------*
**-----9
t2 
.e2
(b)
1s4 
Ie4 T
(a) 
(c) 
(d)
Figure 5-1: An example of building a network connecting trajectories in multiple
camera views. (a) Trajectories in three camera views. (b) The temporal extents
of trajectories 1 and 2. (c) The temporal extents of trajectories 3 and 4. (d) The
network connecting trajectories. Trajectories 1 and 2 observed by cameras 1 and 2
correspond to the same object moving across camera views. Their temporal extents
overlap, so they are connected by an edge in the network. 
Trajectories 3 and 4
observed by cameras 1 and 3 correspond to an object crossing disjoint views. Their
temporal extents have no overlap but the gap is smaller than T, so they are also
connected. Trajectories 3 and 6, 5 and 7 do not correspond to the same objects, but
their temporal extents are close, so they are also connected in the network. A single
trajectory 3 can be connected to two trajectories (4 and 6) in other camera views.
network simply keeps all of the possible candidates.
5.3 
Probabilistic Model
In this section, we describe our probabilistic model which clusters trajectories in dif-
ferent camera views into activities and models paths across camera views. Documents
are trajectories, words are observations, and topics are activities (paths). Each activ-
ity has a distribution over locations and moving directions in different camera views,
and corresponds to a path. In previous topic models, documents are generated in-
dependently. However, we assume that if two trajectories in different camera views
are connected by an edge in the network, which means that they may correspond to
the same object since they are observed by cameras around the same time, they tend
to have similar distributions over activities. Thus the distributions of an activity (a
path of objects) in different camera views can be jointly modeled. In Figure 5-2, we
use an example to describe the high level picture of our model. Trajectories a and b
113

04 
.4 
.
.
.
.
K 
1 2 3 4 
5 
6 
smoothness 
0 
K
Acvity 
models 
Distribution of trajectory a 
Distribution of trajectory b 
Activity models 1
in 
camera 
1 
over activities in camera 1 
over activities in camera 2 
in camera 2
Camera 1 
Camera 2
Trajectory network
Figure 5-2: An example to describe the high level picture of our model. Trajectories
a and b are observed in different camera views and are connected by an edge in the
trajectory network. Points on trajectories are assigned to activity categories by fitting
activity models. Thus both a and b have distributions over activities. The smoothness
constraint requires that their distributions over activities are similar in order to have
small penalty. In this example, both trajectory a and b have a larger distribution on
activity 1, so the models of activity 1 in two different camera views can be related to
the same activity.
are observed in different camera views and are connected by an edge in the trajectory
network. Points on trajectories are assigned to activity categories by fitting activ-
ity models. Thus both a and b have distributions over activities. The smoothness
constraint requires that their distributions over activities are similar in order to have
small penalty. In this example, both trajectory a and b have a larger distribution on
activity 1, so the models of activity 1 in two different camera views can be related to
the same activity.
Let M be the number of trajectories. Each trajectory j has Ny observations. Each
observation i on trajectory j has a visual word value xji which is an index of the
global codebook. Observations will be clustered to one of the K activity categories.
114

Let zji be the activity label of observation i on trajectory j. Each activity k has a
multinomial distribution /k over the global codebook. So an activity is modeled as a
distribution over space and moving directions in all the camera views. qk is sampled
from a Dirichlet prior
P( kI/) = Dir(Ok; 3), 
(5.2)
where Dir(.; .) is Dirichlet distribution and / is a flat hyperparameter. If a visual
word xji has activity label zji, its data likelihood is
p(XjiIzji, {fk}) = czyiji 
(5.3)
Eq 5.2 and 5.3 are the same as modeled in LDA.
Each trajectory has a random variable j which is the parameter of a multinomial
distribution over K activities. Activity labels {zji} of observations are sampled from
0j. If two trajectories jl and j2 are connected by an edge on the network, they are
neighbors and the smoothness constraint requires that Oj, and 032 are similar and the
distributions of { zli} and {zji2 ) are similar. The joint distribution of {0j} and {zji}
are modeled as,
p({0 }, {zji IOY)
M 
K 
K 
M Nj
cx 17 
(Ojk 
1 
jk 
2k 
2 k )-njk
1  
J 
zji
j=1 k=1 
{ji,j
2 }EE k=1 
j=1 i=1
M 
K 
M Nj
o 
1 -7-l j
0  
nj'k 7n 
J
j=1 k=1 
j=1 i=1
lK 
+k 
J'Njk 
N
3
k=1 (a + 
j' E 
fk 
Dir(Oj; a +y Z 'l,..., 
a +y S 
jz
=1 F(K - a +y 
j'EQn, 
k= 
fln'k) 
j'Ej 
i=1
(5.4)
F(.) is the Gamma function. njk is the number of observations assigned to activity k
on trajectory j. E is the set of pairs of neighboring trajectories which are connected.
Qj is the set of trajectories connected with j. a is a flat Dirichlet prior as a hyperpa-
115

rameter. (Ej,laj nj'l,..., j'Ejj nJfK ) is the histogram of observations assigned to
K activity categories on the neighboring trajectories of j. It is used as the Dirichlet
parameter for Oj, after being weighted by a positive scalar y and added to a flat prior
a. Let Pk = a + y7 
" 
.Eyj 
nyjk. According to the properties of the Dirichlet distri-
bution, if Oj - Dir(pl,. .. , PK), the expectation of OB is (Pl/ E Pk, ---, 
PK/ E Pk) and
its variation is small if E Pk is large. Notice that zji is sampled from 03 and 9j has
a constraint added by zj,i, on its neighboring trajectories. So trajectory j tends to
have a similar distribution over activities as its neighboring trajectories, which means
that they are smooth. A larger y puts a stronger smoothness constraint. If 7 = 0,
Eq 5.4 is the same as in LDA where {Oj } are sampled from a Dirichlet prior Dir(.; a)
independently.Given Eq 5.2, 5.3 and 5.4, finally the joint distribution of {k}, {k j },
{zji} and {xji} is
p({tk}, {Oj}, {fzj}, {xija, 3, 
_Y)
K 
M 
Nj
K 
M Nj
SDir(k;) 
(Ojzji 
zjix). 
(5.5)
k=1 
j=1 i=1
116

5.3.1 
Learning and Inference
We do inference by Gibbs sampling. It turns out that {9j} and {k} can be integrated
out during the Gibbs sampling procedure.
p({zj }, {x}jia, 3,'Y)
=( /1" j 
p(j} 
, {Ik}, {zji}, {xji}la, 
p, 
y)d{j}d{bk}
K 
M 
N
= 
p(~kK3) 17 ]7 p({Xji 
{ Zji 
k)d{ 
} 
p(G } {zy}|a, y)d{9,}
{} k= 
j=1 i=1 
ij}
K 
W 
M Nj 
M 
K 
M Nj
7 fi 
/-1 
z 
f 
a-+y 
En nj'k 
jzj 
I 
O
k} k=1 w=1 
j=1 i=1 
j= k=1 
j=1 i=1
K 
W
-
f H 
(¢kw) 
+mkw-1 d{¢k} 
(jJ)7Jnk+ 
Y'j j'nj 
nj'k-1 
d{Oj}
{k1 k=1 w=l 
j 
k
= 
( 
+ 
) 
k 
+, 
k(5.6)
k 
(W 
. 0 + mk) 
I (K -a + nj.+7- 
,
where W is the size of the global codebook, mkw is the number of observations assigned
to activity k with value w, ink. is the total number of observations assigned to activity
k, njk is the number of observations assigned to activity k on trajectory j, and nj. is
the total number of observations on trajectory j. Then the conditional distribution
of zji given all the other activity labels z- ji is
S+ m, 
O 
k 
+ n 
/
k 
-j'E 
nj'k
p(zjj = klz - 
, f{x}, a, , 2') oc W 
+ 
'M7 
Z 
, 
Ka 
(5.7)
W*/+m-ji K 
-
+ 
+ 
n 
n,.
, 
-+ 
7 Ejp 
nj,.
where m-i 
, nk , and nji are the same statistics as mkxi, ink., njk, and nj.
except that they have excluded observation i on trajectory j. To have a large posterior
in Eq 5.7, the first term requires that the value of observation i should fit the model
of activity k, and the second term requires that its activity label is consistent with
those of observations on the same trajectory and neighboring trajectories, with 7
controlling the weight of neighboring trajectories. The models of activities are not
117

explicitly learnt during the Gibbs sampling procedure, but they can be estimated
from any single sample of {zji },
0 + mnk.
kw -
+mk 
(5.8)
W 7 + mk.
5.3.2 
Labeling Trajectories into Activities
A trajectory is labeled as activity k, if most of its observations are assigned to k. The
activity label of an observation can be obtained during the Gibbs sampling procedure
based on Eq 5.7. However, there may be an over smoothing effect, since in some cases
most of the trajectories being the neighbors of trajectory j do not correspond to the
same object as j. In this work, we adopt an alternative labeling approach which
actually achieves better performance in experiments. As shown by the experimental
results in Section 5.4, the activity models learnt from Gibbs sampling are distinctive
enough to label trajectories. After the activity models have been learnt and fixed
at the end of Gibbs sampling, which uses Eq 5.7 and 5.8, we ignore the smoothness
constraint among trajectories and label the observation as
zji = arg max Okji 
(5.9)
This is also used to label an unseen new trajectory.
5.3.3 
Detection of Abnormal Trajectories
When detecting abnormal trajectories, we also ignore the smoothness constraint and
fix the learnt activity models ({ k}. A trajectory is detected as an abnormality if it
does not fit any activity model well. Then abnormality detection is reduced to the
Latent Dirichlet Allocation model proposed in [18]. The likelihood of a trajectory j
under the learnt activity models {fk} is
p(wj = {Xji}c, { k}) 
JPi a) ( PZji 
z 
0j% 
PXiZ 
),i) 
(5.10)
118

where p(Oja) is a Dirichlet distribution, and both p(zjilOj) and p(xji z,j,) are discrete
distributions. Since the computation of Eq 5.10 is intractable, in [18] a variational
approach was used to compute a lower bound of Eq 5.10. A trajectory is flagged as
abnormal if its lower bound is small.
5.3.4 
Complexity
In order to simplify the notation, we assume that all the trajectories have the same
number of observations, which is a fixed constant. The spatial complexity of our
approach is O(WK) + O(MK), while that of similarity based approaches is at least
O(M 2). The storage of similarity based approaches is unmanageable when M is
huge. W is the size of the codebook, K is the number of activity categories, and M
is the number of trajectories. In our approach, the time complexity of each Gibbs
sampling iteration is O(M), however it is difficult to provide theoretical analysis on
the convergence of Gibbs sampling. Similarity based approaches have to compute the
similarity of O(M2) pairs of trajectories and if spectral clustering is used, it is quite
challenging to compute the eigenvectors of a huge M x M similarity matrix when M
is large. The time complexity of our approach to label a new trajectory into one of
the activity categories or detect a new trajectory as abnormal is O(K) 1, while the
time complexity of similarity based approaches is at least O(M). So our approach is
much more efficient when the number of trajectories is huge.
5.4 
Experimental Results
We evaluate our approach on two data sets, a parking lot scene and a street scene.
Each has four camera views. Each camera view is of size 320 x 240. To build the
codebook, each camera view is quantized into 64 x 48 cells. Each cell is of size 5 x 5.
The moving directions of moving pixels are quantized into four directions. There are
tracking errors in both of the two data sets. For example, a track may break into
1In abnormality detection, a variational approach [18] is used to compute a lower bound of the
data likelihood (Eq 5.10) in an iterative process. We assume the number of iterations is small.
119

Topology
Camera 1 
Camera 2 
Camera 3 
Camera 4
(a) Parking lot scene
Camera 1 
Camera 2 
Camera 3 
Camera 4 
Topology
(b) Street scene
Figure 5-3: Camera views and their topology in two data sets, a parking lot scene and
a street scene. When the topology of camera views is plotted, the fields of camera
views are represented by different colors: blue (camera 1), red (camera 2), green
(camera 3), yellow (camera 4). However, our approach does not require knowledge of
the topology of the cameras in advance.
fragments because of interactions among objects. In order to obtain more quantitative
evaluation, we simulate some trajectories whose activity categories are known as the
ground truth, and evaluate our approach on the simulated data.
5.4.1 
Learning Activity Models and Clustering Trajectories
Parking Lot Scene
The parking lot data set has 22, 951 trajectories, collected from 10 hours during the
day time over 3 days. Inspection shows that it is a fairly busy scene. The topology of
its four camera views is shown in Figure 5-3 (a). The view of camera 1 has no overlap
with other camera views. However, the gap between the views of cameras 1 and 2 is
small. The views of cameras 2 and 3 have small overlap. The views of cameras 3 and
4 have large overlap. Our approach does not require the knowledge of the topology
of cameras. Fourteen different activities are learnt from this data set. They are
shown in Figure 5-4 - 5-7. For each activity, we plot its distribution over space and
moving directions in the four camera views and show the trajectories clustered into
120

this activity. When visualizing activity models, moving directions are represented by
different colors, and the density of distributions over space and moving directions is
proportional to the brightness of colors (high brightness means high density). When
plotting trajectories, random colors are used to distinguish individual trajectories.
In Figure 5-4, activity 1 captures vehicles and pedestrians entering the parking lot.
It has a large extent in space and is observed by all four cameras. Activity 4 captures
vehicles and pedestrians leaving the parking lot. In activities 5 (Figure 5-5) and 7
(Figure 5-5), pedestrians are walking in the same direction but on different paths.
From the distributions of their models, it is observed that the two paths are side by
side but well separated in space. The path of activity 6 occupies almost the same
region as that of activity 5. However, pedestrians are moving in opposite directions
in these two activities, so the distributions of their models are plotted in different
colors. In activity 8 (Figure 5-5), pedestrians appear from behind the trees and a
building as observed by cameras 3 and 4 and disappear from a gate of the parking
lot in the view of camera 2.
Street Scene
The topology of the four cameras of the street scene is shown in Figure 5-3 (b).
Camera 1 has a distant view of the street. Camera 2 zooms in on the top-right part
in the view of camera 1. The view of camera 3 has overlap with the views of cameras
1 and 2. It extends the top-right part of the view in camera 1 along the street. The
view of camera 4 partially overlaps with the bottom region of the view in camera
1. There are 14, 985 trajectories in this data set, collected from 30 hours during day
time over four days. Sixteen activities are learnt in this scene. They are shown in
Figure 5-8 - 5-11.
Activity 1 (Figure 5-8) captures vehicles moving on the road. It is observed by all
of the four cameras. Vehicles first move from the top-right corner to the bottom-left
corner in the view of camera 4. Then they enter the bottom region in the view of
camera 1 and move upward. Some vehicles disappear at the exit points observed in
the views of cameras 2 and 3, and some move further beyond the view of camera 3.
121

Activity 1 
Activity 2
Activity 3 
Activity 4
Figure 5-4: Distributions of activity models (1 - 4) and clusters of trajectories in a
parking lot scene. When plotting the distributions of activity models (in the four red
windows on the top), different colors are used to represent different moving directions:
-* (red), *- (cyan), I (blue), I (magenta). When plotting trajectories clustered into
different activities (in the four green windows at the bottom), random colors are used
to distinguish individual trajectories. 
122

Activity 5 
Activity 6
Activity 7 
Activity 8
Figure 5-5: Distributions of activity models (5 -
8) and clusters of trajectories in a
parking lot scene.
123

Activity 9 
Activitv 10
Activity 11 
Activity 12
Figure 5-6: Distributions of activity models (9 -
12) and clusters of trajectories in a
parking lot scene.
124

Activity 13 
Activity 14
Figure 5-7: Distributions of activity models (13 - 14) and clusters of trajectories in
a parking lot scene.
125

Activity 1
Activity 3 
Activity 4
Figure 5-8: Distributions of activity models (1 - 4) and clusters of trajectories of the
street scene. The meaning of colors is the same as Figure 5-4.
126
Activity 2

Activity 5
Activity 7 
Activity 8
Figure 5-9: Distributions of activity models (5 - 8) and clusters of trajectories of the
street scene.
127
Activity 6

Activity 10
Activity 11 
Activity 12
Figure 5-10: Distributions of activity models (5 -
8) and clusters of trajectories of
the street scene.
128
Activity 9

Activity 13
Activity 15 
Activity 16
Figure 5-11: Distributions of activity models (13 - 16) and clusters of trajectories of
the street scene.
129
Activity 14

In activities 4 (Figure 5-8), 6 (Figure 5-9), and 7 (Figure 5-9), pedestrians first walk
along the sidewalk in the view of camera 1, and then cross the street as observed by
camera 4. The paths of activities 6 and 7 occupy similar regions in the view of camera
1, but their paths diverge in the view of camera 4. The paths of activities 3 and 4, 5
and 6 occupy the same regions but pedestrians are moving in opposite directions on
them.
As shown in Figure 5-4 - 5-11, the models of activities reveal some structures, such
as paths commonly taken by objects, and entrance and exit points in the scene. Some
paths are less related to the appearance of the scene. For example, some paths cross
the street outside the crosswalk in the street scene. Usually paths have spatial extents
in multiple camera views. These regions can be detected by simply thresholding the
density of the distributions of activities (qk in Eq 5.5). As observed, in these two very
large data sets there are many outlier trajectories, which do not fit any activity model
well, such as those crossing the grass fields in the parking lot scene. They are finally
assigned some activity at random or because part of the trajectory fits a particular
activity.
Negative log likelihood on testing data
Since clustering trajectories into activities is unsupervised learning, we compute the
negative log likelihood on testing data to evaluate its performance. This is the log
of perplexity in proportion to the number of bits required to encode the testing
data. It measures how unseen testing data fits the model learnt from training data.
Two hundred trajectories randomly sampled from each camera serve as the test set;
the remaining trajectories are used for training. To compare models with different
trajectory networks, the activity models { k} are learnt with smoothness constraint
added by the trajectory network. Once {k } are learnt and fixed, the negative log
likelihood is computed on the test data ignoring the smoothness constraint.
First, we compare our approach with two alternatives: (1) unconnected network;
(2) network with random correspondences 2. The former completely abandons the
2First find correspondence candidates using Eq 5.1. Instead of fully connecting these candidates
130

Table 5.1: Negative log likelihood under our approach and two alternative trajectory
networks.
Our approach 
Unconnected 
Random
Parking Lot 
130.3 
200.3 
176.8
Street 
85.7 
228.8 
135.2
Table 5.2: Negative log likelihood with models trained on a variable number of cam-
eras. The test data is 200 trajectories from a single camera. The activity models in
that camera are jointly learnt with different number of cameras (from 1 to 4). The
last column is a baseline model trained on data whose cluster labels of trajectories
are randomly assigned.
1 
2 
3 
4 
Random
Parking Lot 
120.9 
121.3 
122.8 
123.3 
425
Street 
40.0 
41.5 
44.9 
42.2 
168
smoothing constraint, so it cannot jointly model the distributions of a single activity
in multiple camera views. The latter simulates the case when correspondence is poor.
Both alternatives result in higher negative log likelihood as shown in Table 5.1.
We also compare against models learned with trajectories from a single to all of
the cameras. Models learned from a subset of the cameras will necessarily have lower
negative log likelihood for trajectories within those cameras; however, they are limited
to modeling joint activities only in a subset of the camera views. Our model captures
joint activities in all cameras simultaneously, and only exhibits a small increase in
the negative log likelihood as shown in Table 5.2.
Temporal Threshold
The temporal threshold T in Eq 5.1 determines the connectivity on the trajectory
network. If a camera view A is disjoint from other views and it takes objects more
than T seconds to cross the smallest gap between A and other views, then there is
no way to extend a path in A to other views. If T is large and the scene is busy, the
network will have too many "noisy" edges which connect two trajectories actually
as in our model, a trajectory is randomly connected with only one of the candidates in a different
camera view.
131

Figure 5-12: Activity models learnt in an unsupervised way help to solve the corre-
spondence problem. We pick a query trajectory from one of the camera views and
mark it using green color and a star. All the trajectories in other camera views
satisfying Eq 5.1 are plotted in random colors. The red color and red stars mark
the trajectories with the same activity category as the query trajectory. They are
likely to correspond to the same object. So the information on activity category can
dramatically reduce the search space when solving the correspondence problem.
corresponding to different objects. Under-smoothing could lead to the same activity
separated into different clusters, while over-smoothing could lead to different activities
joining into the same cluster. Empirically, we achieved similar results with a wide
range of values for T: for the street scene data set, good results are achieved when
T varies between 0 and 30 seconds; for the parking lot data set, the range of good
values of T is roughly from 3 to 15 seconds because the parking lot scene is busier
and the view of camera 1 is disjoint from other camera views. There is quantitative
evaluation of T on a simulated data set in Section 5.4.5.
5.4.2 
Correspondence
Although our activity analysis approach does not require correspondence among tra-
jectories in different camera views, after the models of activities have been learnt in
an unsupervised way, they can help to solve the correspondence problem, since if two
132

trajectories belong to the same activity and are connected by an edge, they are likely
to correspond to the same object. For example, see Figure 5-12. We pick a query
trajectory from one of the camera views and mark it using green color and a star.
All the trajectories in other camera views satisfying Eq 5.1 are plotted in random
colors. The red color and red stars mark the trajectories with the same activity cat-
egory as the query trajectory. They are likely to correspond to the same object. So
the information on activity category can dramatically reduce the search space when
solving the correspondence problem.
When there are more than two cameras views, the correspondence problem is NP
hard in the number of trajectories. Finding an approximate solution to this NP hard
problem is not the focus of this thesis. So we demonstrate the capability of our activity
models by doing correspondence among trajectories in two camera views. Given the
distances between trajectories, correspondence of trajectories in two cameras views
can be solved by the Hungarian algorithm [82] in polynomial time. The distance
D(a, b) between two trajectories a and b which are in different views is defined as
follows. Each point on a trajectory is assigned to one of the activities according to
Eq 5.9. Thus each trajectory j has a distribution pj over activities. If trajectories a
and b satisfy the temporal constraint Eq 5.1, then the distance between them is
K 
K
D(a,b).= Epa(k)log Ipk 
+ 
oPb(k)log 
(P(k) 
(5.11)
k=l1 
k=1
which is Jensen-Shannon divergence; otherwise D(a, b) = oc.
We manually label 200 trajectories observed in camera view 1 and 4 in the street
scene as ground truth. Our approaches achieves 93.2% correspondence accuracy on
this data set. As comparison, an appearance based correspondence approach proposed
in [148] only has an accuracy of 79.8% on this data set.
5.4.3 
Abnormality Detection
In Figure 5-13 and 5-14 we plot some trajectories with low data likelihoods, which
have been normalized by the length of trajectories, and are detected as abnormality
133

Figure 5-13: Some trajectories with low likelihoods from a parking lot scene. Random
colors are used to distinguish individual trajectories. In order to indicate the moving
direction of a trajectory, the starting and ending points of a trajectory is marked by
+ in red and cyan colors. Many of them are pedestrians walking on the grass field.
from the parking lot scene and the street scene. All of the trajectories are sorted
by abnormality and the top 30 are shown. Some very short trajectories most likely
caused by tracking errors are not shown here. In the parking lot scene, most of
the detected abnormal trajectories are pedestrians walking on the grass field. In
the street scene, abnormal activities include pedestrians walking on the grass fields,
pedestrians crossing the street, pedestrians walking in the middle of the street, and
vehicles moving along a wrong lane.
5.4.4 
Computational Cost
Running on a computer with 2GHz CPU, it takes about two hours to learn the activity
models from 22,951 trajectories of the parking lot data set and 40 minutes to learn
the activity models from 14, 985 trajectories from the street scene. When the activity
models are learnt and fixed, it takes less than 0.03 second to compute the likelihood
of a trajectory in order to detect abnormality, and it is much faster to label a new
trajectory as some activity category.
134

Figure 5-14: Some trajectories with low likelihoods from a street scene. Random
colors are used to distinguish individual trajectories. In order to indicate the moving
direction of a trajectory, the starting and ending points of a trajectory is marked by
+ in red and cyan colors. Abnormal activities include pedestrians walking on the
grass fields, pedestrians crossing the street, pedestrians walking in the middle of the
street, and vehicles moving along a wrong lane.
135

5.4.5 
Simulated Data
In order to quantitatively evaluate our algorithm, we simulate data used as the ground
truth. As shown in Figure 5-15 (a), we choose a scene which covers almost the
same area of the street scene we used in Section 5.4.1. On a satellite image, we
manually draw the fields covered by four camera views. The fields are convex four-
sided polygons. 
These fields are converted to a standard camera view in size of
240 x 360 through projective transformation. The views observed by four cameras
are shown in Figure 5-15 (b). We manually draw the central lines of eight paths
on the satellite image (Figure 5-16 (a)) and simulate 8000 trajectories. We assume
trajectories have almost the same speed, since speed does not play an important role
in our algorithm. The starting points of trajectories are generated sequentially as
follows.
ts(i+l) = tsi + Ati+l, 
(5.12)
Ati+1 . Exponential(A). 
(5.13)
t,i is the starting time of the ith trajectory. The temporal difference Ati+l = ts(i+l) -
tsi between two successive trajectories is sampled from a exponential distribution with
mean A. A trajectory i is randomly assigned to one of the eight predefined activities,
k. Trajectory i samples the location of its starting point from a Gaussian distribution
centered at the starting point of path k with variance al (al = 5 in this simulation).
Then i samples the remaining points sequentially with the velocity specified by path
k and being added to Gaussian noise with variance a2 (a = 2 in this simulation).
The simulated trajectories in the global views and each of the four camera views are
shown in Figure 5-16 (b) and (c).
Learning activity models and clustering trajectories
A is the parameter controlling how busy the scene is. When A is smaller, more objects
co-exist in the scene at the same time, which means that there are more edges on
the trajectory network and it is harder for our algorithm to jointly learn the models
of activities in different camera views. In our experiments, we change the value of
136

amera S
Camera 3 
Camera4
(b)
(a)
Figure 5-15: (a) The global view of the scene where the data is simulated and the
fields covered by four camera views. The fields are marked by polygons. Colors are
used to distinguish cameras. (b) The views observed by cameras after projective
transformation.
(b) 
(c)
Figure 5-16: (a) The central lines of eight paths manually drawn in the scene. They
are distinguished by colors: 1 (red), 2 (blue), 3 (dark green), 4 (magenta), 5 (black),
6 (cyan), 7 (yellow), and 8 (orange). (b) Trajectories generated from the eight paths.
(c) Trajectories observed in four cameras.
137
camera l

0.7 -
S0.6
S0.5
8 
0.4
0.3
0.1
5 (57.5) 
10(28.7) 
15(19.3) 
20(14 5) 
25(11.5) 
30 (9.6) 
35 (8.2) 
40 (7.1)
x (the number 
of co-esting objects 
on average)
Figure 5-17: The accuracies of classifying trajectories into different activities when A
takes different values and T is fixed as 0. Our approach achieves good performance
when the scene is fairly busy.
A from 5 seconds to 40 seconds. Based on the speed set for this experiment, the
time an object spent to pass through a path varies from 170 seconds to 410 seconds.
It depends on the length of the path. When A takes values from 5 seconds to 40
seconds, the averaged number of objects co-existing in the scene varies from 57.5
to 7.1 (see Figure 5-17). After the trajectories are clustered by our algorithm, we
manually specify each of the eight clusters as an activity category, so each trajectory
is assigned an activity label by our algorithm. By comparing with the ground truth,
the accuracy of activity classification is computed. The accuracies when choosing
different A values are shown Figure 5-17. The accuracy is high (> 97.8%) when
A > 30 seconds. The models of activities in a single global view and four camera
views learnt from the simulated data when A = 30 seconds are shown in Figure 5-18
and 5-19. Notice that when A = 30 seconds, if we randomly sample a time point,
there are around 9.6 objects co-existing in the scene on average. Each trajectory is
connected to 12.4 trajectories by edges on the network on average. When A decreases,
some trajectories of different activities merge into one cluster. When A = 5 seconds,
the scene is very busy (there are 57.5 objects co-existing in the scene on average),
all of the trajectories are merged into one cluster and our algorithm cannot learn
any useful activity models from this data set. Each trajectory is connected to 73.0
trajectories by edges on the network on average.
138

We further look into the structure of the trajectory network constructed according
to the temporal extents of trajectories in the data set when A = 30 seconds. Figure 5-
20 shows the number of edges which are related to different combinations of activities
and camera views according to the ground truth. The entry of (kl, k2) on the table
of camera views ii and i2 are the number of edges connecting two trajectories, one
of which is in camera view il and belongs to activity k1, and the other of which is in
camera view i2 and belongs to activity k2. There are six 8 x 8 tables. As we men-
tioned earlier, the edges on the trajectory network indicate possible correspondence
candidates based on the temporal extents of trajectories. If the correspondence can
be solved just using temporal information, all of the nonzero numbers in the table
will be on the diagonal. Actually many off diagonal entries have nonzero numbers,
which indicate false correspondences, whose ambiguity cannot be solved by only using
temporal information. The ratio between the numbers of edges on diagonal and off
diagonal is 0.2732. This ratio can be understood as a signal-to-noise ratio in some
sense. There are many more false correspondences than true correspondences. How-
ever, these false correspondences almost uniformly distribute among different combi-
nations of activities and work as background noise. So if a trajectory of activity ki is
connected with another trajectory of activity k2, k2 is more likely to be the same as kI
than any one of the other activties. When the scene is busier, the signal-to-noise ratio
is lower. When A = 5, the ratio is 0.1692 and our algorithm fails. Notice that the
signal-to-noise ratio is 1/7 = 0.1429, if trajectories are randomly connected without
using any temporal information.
Figure 5-21 plots the classification accuracies when A is fixed as 40 seconds and
the temporal threshold T in Eq 5.1 changes from 0 seconds to 300 seconds. The
results stay at a high accuracy when T varies in a large range between 0 second and
40 seconds. There is some interesting correlation between Figure 5-17 and Figure 5-
21. The performance of our algorithm drops if there are too many edges on the
trajectory network, which means that the "signal-to-noise" ratio is low. The number
of edges increases if A decreases, which means that the scene is busier and there are
more objects co-existing in the scene, or T increases. From Figure 5-17, when T is
139

Activity 3 
Activity 4
Activity 5 
Activity 6 
Activity 7 
Activity 8
Figure 5-18: Distributions of activity models in a single global views learnt from the
simulated data. The meaning of colors is the same as Figure 5-4.
fixed at 0 second, A = 30 seconds seems to be a turning point on the accuracy curve.
On average, there are around two more objects co-occurring when A = 30 seconds
compared with A = 40 seconds. From Figure 5-21, when A is fixed at 40 seconds,
T = 40 seconds seems to be a turning point on the accuracy curve. Compared with
T = 0 second, the temporal window in Eq 5.1 extends for 2 x T = 80 seconds. In
80 seconds, there are around two more objects appearing on average when A = 40
seconds. So there are approximately the same number of edges under two settings.
For (A = 30, T = 0), on average each trajectory is connected to 12.4 trajectories by
edges on the network, and for (A = 40, T = 40) this number is 13.0.
Using activity models to solve the correspondence problem
As mentioned in Section 5.4.2, the learnt activity models can help to solve the corre-
spondence problem. We evaluate the performance on simulated data.
We choose camera views 1 and 4 which are shown in Figure 5-15. 1000 trajecto-
140
Activity 1 
Activity 2

Activity 1 
Activity 2
Activity 3 
Activity 4
Activity 5 
Activity 6
Activity 7 
Activity 8
Figure 5-19: Distribution of activity models in four camera views learnt from the
simulated data. The meaning of colors is the same as Figure 5-4.
141

Camera 3
1747 
9 
o 
o 
a 
o 
3 
0
, 57 
o 0 
0 
0 
0 
3 
0
G 
615 
, 0 
0 
0 
0 
a 
3 
0
811 
719 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0
811 
753 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
0
485 
47 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0
898 
924 
0 
0 
0 
0 
11 
0
529 
483 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0
Camera 4
n 
i Im
948 
927
881 
914 
870
" II 
1 
9 9 5 
8 
850 70 
0 
746
769 
594 
1796 
714 
633 
656 
0 
586
865 
888 
1028 1 
879 
975 
964 
0 
897
948 939 1014 970 1900 811 
0 
810
sso 
4e 
73 
654 s506 sM 2 
0 
475
1015 
184 
1074 
951 
98 
0 6 
884
609 
484 
737 
597 
579 
503 
0 
1457
i 07 6531 
0I
Camera I
Camera 2
Camera 4
n 
Iw 
Iou 
OWL 4s5 
o 
459
558I 62 
5511588 
571 0 
520
0 
0 
0 
10 
0 
0 
0 
.0
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0
1 
0 
2 
2 
0 
1 
0 
2
o0 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 o
Camera 3
106 I 1011 
0
984 
117 
0 
973 1114 
0 
477 
0
780 
S 
0 
84 
160 
0 
298 
0
1124 
692 
0 
11 
1040 
0 
539 
0
1124 
733 
0 
105 
1374 
0 
561 
0
67 
452 
0 
639 
776 
0 
120 
0
11E 905 0 
1105 1230 0 
1439 0
724 
465 
0 
678 
799 
0 
160
Camera 3
170 
447 
0 
662 
633 
0 
260 
0
744 
1292 
0 
753 
701 
0 
201 
0
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0o
3 
0 
0 
3 
0 
0 
6 
0
0 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0
Camera 4
56 
791 
937 
910 
840 
762 
0 
747
551 
539 
611 
536 
559 
548 
0 
504
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0
15 
693 
88 
881 
767 
6947 
o 
774 
849 
972 
759 
869 
848 
0 
796
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0
323 
224 
525 
357 
228 
274 
0 
291
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0
Figure 5-20:
camera views
The number of pairs of simulated trajectories, which are in different
, belong to activities i and j (i,j = 1,... ,8), and whose temporal
extents are close. Here, A = 6 and T = 0.
Figure 5-21: The accuracies of classifying trajectories into different activities when
the temporal threshold T change from 0 to 300 seconds. Here, A = 40 seconds.
142
Camera 
I
1851
Camera 1
Camera 2
5o2 
o
Camera 2
.1 
I

0.9
0.8
S0.7
OA -
03-
0,1
5(57.5) 
10(28.7) 
15(19.3) 
20(14.5) 
25(11.5) 
30 (9.6) 
35 (8.2) 
40 (7.1)
X (the number of co-eising objects on average)
Figure 5-22: Accuracies of correspondence on the simulated data. Solve the corre-
spondence problem of trajectories observed in the views of camera 1 and camera 4.
A varies from 5 seconds to 40 seconds.
ries are simulated and they are not in the data set of 8000 trajectories used to learn
the activity models. 1000 trajectories are observed in camera view 1 and around
880 trajectories are observed in camera view 4. Some trajectories of activity 7 (see
Figure 5-16) observed in camera view 1 have no corresponding trajectories in cam-
era view 4. We simulate different sets of data by changing the parameter A. The
accuracies of correspondence are plotted in Figure 5-22. It achieves very good corre-
spondence accuracy (higher than 97%) when A > 30. The accuracy drops when the
scene is busier because of two reasons: (1) the activity models are not well learnt;
(2) some objects of the same activity exist around the same time so they cannot be
distinguished by activity categories and temporal extents.
5.5 
Discussion
The performance of our algorithm depends on the number of edges in the trajectory
network. If on average a trajectory is connected to a large number of other trajecto-
ries, which means that there are many false correspondence candidates, the models
of activities cannot be well learnt. The number of edges increases because of two
reasons: the scene is busy or the temporal threshold T is large. A large T allows a
large transition gap between camera views. So if a scene is busy, the transition gaps
between cameras has to be small, which limits the topology of camera views in some
143

sense. In this work, only temporal information is used to build the trajectory network.
That is why the algorithm is sensitive to how busy the scene is. Some other features,
such as appearance, can also be used to eliminate some edges. If two objects observed
in different camera views are poorly matched by appearance, their trajectories are
not connected by an edge even though their temporal extents are close. Thus activity
models may be well learnt even in a busy scene. However, in this case the problem
of matching appearance across camera views has to be addressed. It is a direction of
our future study.
In our clustering method, the number of clusters K has to be manually chosen.
Some nonparametric models such as Hierarchical Dirichlet Processes [140] can learn
the number of clusters from data. They could be used to improve our clustering
method in the future work.
144

Chapter 6
Tractography Segmentation
Having explored applications to activity analysis in far-field visual surveillance, we
will present how the technology of learning motion patterns can also be applied to
tractography segmentation from DT-MRI in this chapter. As explained in Section
1.2, DT-MRI is used to visualize and quantify the organization of white matter in
the human brain in vivo. Tractography connect local diffusion measurements into
global fiber trajectories. In neurological studies of white matter using tractography it
is often important to anatomically cluster fiber trajectories into meaningful bundles.
This technology is called tractography segmentation. Clustering fiber trajectories has
some similarity with clustering trajectories of objects in visual surveillance. So our
approach developed for trajectory analysis in a single camera view can also be applied
to tractography segmentation.
We use Dual-HDP to cluster fibers and learn the models of bundles from a training
set without supervision. A fiber is treated as a document. The points on a fiber
trajectory are treated as words. The 3D space of the brain is quantized into voxels. If
we need to analyze a new subject, we use Dynamic Dual-HDP to cluster fibers from
new subjects. The models of bundles learnt from training data are used as priors,
and models are adapted to new data. Optionally, if the symmetry across hemispheres
is considered, we can do bilateral clustering as in [107]. Let uji = (xj, yji, zji) be the
3D coordinate of point i on fiber j. Assuming that the brain is aligned and x = 0 is
the midsagittal plane, we set observed 3D coordinates as iji = (I xj1, yji, zji) ignoring
145

(a) 
(b)
(d)
10 
15 
20
Number of clusters for spectral clustering
(e)
Figure 6-1: Compare the results of two clustering approaches with the ground truth
on a data set with 3, 152 fibers. Two views are plotted for each result. (a) Ground
truth. (b) Our approach. (c) Spectral clustering when the number of clusters is 6. (d)
Spectral clustering when number of clusters is 7. (e) The accuracies of completeness
and correctness of spectral clustering and our approach (HDPM).
the signs of x coordinates. Thus, learnt models of bundles are symmetric to the
midsagittal reflection.
6.1 
Experimental Results
We evaluate our approach on multiple data sets. The spatial range of the whole
brain is roughly 200 x 200 x 200. The size of voxels is 11 x 11 x 11. We do bilateral
clustering. Running on a computer with 3GHz CPU, it takes around one minute to
cluster 1, 000 fibers and around four hours to cluster 60, 000 fibers.
The first data set has 3,152 fibers with ground truth. They are manually labeled
to six anatomical structures. Figure 6-1 (a)-(d) plots the clustering results of our
146

I:I
(a)
',E 
(b2) 
(c2) 
(d2)
5 
1 
5 
25 
25 
0 
35
(e2) 
MI 
(f2) 
(g)
Figure 6-2: Compare results of our approach and the approach proposed in [107],
in which experts manually merged the clusters from spectral clustering to obtain
anatomical structures. (a) Clustering all the fibers using our approach. (bl)-(fl) show
the obtained anatomical structures by merging clusters from our approach (totally 27
clusters). (b2)-(f2) show the obtained anatomical structures by merging clusters from
spectral clustering (totally 200 clusters). Colors are used to distinguish clusters. (g)
plots the frequency of the numbers of clusters learnt by our approach when running
50 trials of Gibbs sampling with random initializations.
approach and a spectral clustering approach, compared with the ground truth. Colors
are used to distinguish clusters. Since clusters may be permuted in different results,
the meaning of colors is not consistent across different results. The spectral clustering
approach uses the mean of closest distances as the distance measure, which was found
the most effective in previous studies [101, 107]. The clustering result of our approach
is close to the ground truth. Although the correct number of clusters has been set, two
anatomical structures are merged in the result of the spectral clustering approach. A
few outlier fibers form a small cluster. As the number of clusters increases to 7, the
two anatomical structures still cannot be separated, instead, another structure splits
into two clusters.
147
(bl)
(dl)
(cl)

There are two important aspects, called correctness and completeness, to be con-
sidered when comparing a clustering result with the ground truth [101]. Correctness
implies that fibers of different anatomical structures are not clustered together. Com-
pleteness means that fibers of the same anatomical structures are clustered together.
Putting all the fibers into the same cluster results in 100% completeness and 0%
correctness. Putting every fiber into a singleton cluster results in 100% correctness
and 0% completeness. To measure correctness, we randomly sample 5, 000 pairs of
fibers which are in different anatomical structures according to the ground truth and
calculate the accuracy (reorrect) that they are also in different clusters according to the
clustering result. To measure completeness, we randomly sample 5, 000 pairs of fibers
which are in the same anatomical structures and calculate the accuracy (rcomplete)
that they are also in the same clusters. raverage = (rcorrect + rcomplete)/2 is also com-
puted. The accuracies of our approach and spectral clustering are plotted in Figure
6-1 (e). As we increase the number of clusters from 2 to 25, the correctness of spectral
clustering increases and its completeness decreases. Its best raverage is found when
the number of clusters is five, which is close to the ground truth, and it is lower than
raverage of our approach. The correctness of our approach is almost consistently better
than spectral clustering until spectral clustering chooses more than 20 clusters. The
completeness of our approach is significantly better than spectral clustering when the
number of clusters of spectral clustering is larger than 5.
We compare our approach with the approach proposed in [107] on a larger data set
with 12, 420 fibers. In [107], fibers were first grouped into a large number of clusters
(200) and then experts merged these clusters to obtain anatomical structures. In this
data set there are 10 anatomical structures. Our approach clusters these fibers to 27
clusters. We also manually merge them to these 10 anatomical structures, however
its takes much less effort than [107] since the number of clusters is smaller. Figure
6-2 shows some of the anatomical structures obtained by the two approaches. 83.2%
fibers have consistent anatomical labels according to the two results. To evaluate how
our approach is sensitive to initialization, we run 50 trials of Gibbs sampling with
random initializations. Figure 6-2 (g) plots the frequency of the numbers of clusters
148

Training data
Testing data
Figure 6-3: Cluster fibers across multiple subjects.
learnt from data.
Figure 6-3 shows the results of clustering fibers across multiple subjects. The
training data has 63, 751 fibers of two subjects. The models of bundles are learnt
from all these fibers. The testing data has 61, 572 fibers of two subjects.
149

150

Chapter 7
Limitations and Future Work
Previous chapters show that our approaches achieve promising results on activity anal-
ysis in far-field visual surveillance and tractography segmentation in medical imaging.
This chapter discusses the limitations of this thesis work and future directions we are
interested in investigating.
7.1 
Low-level features
For activity analysis in visual surveillance, we use the locations and moving directions
of motions as low-level visual features since they are more reliable and easier to
compute in far-field settings. While we have demonstrated the effectiveness of our
models in a variety of visual surveillance tasks, including more complicated features
is expected to further boost the discrimination power of our models. For example,
if a pedestrian is walking along the path of vehicles, just based on positions and
moving detections his motions cannot be distinguished from those of vehicles and
this activity will not be detected as abnormality. If a car drives extremely fast, it will
not be detected as abnormal either. Other features, such as appearance and speed,
are useful in these scenarios. However, the size of the codebook will increase as more
features are included and thus the computational cost will increase.
151

7.2 
Design of "Documents" for Activity Analysis
in Crowded Scenes
In Chapter 3, the information on the co-occurrence of moving pixels is critical for our
methods to separate atomic activities. One moving pixel tends to be labeled as the
same atomic activity as other moving pixels happening around the same time. This
information is encoded into the design of video clips as documents. We uniformly
divide the long video sequence into short video clips. This "hard" division may cause
some problems. The moving pixels happening in two successive frames might be
divided into two different documents. By intuition, one moving pixel should receive
more influence from those moving pixels closer in time. However, in our models,
moving pixels that fall into the same video clip are treated in the same way, no matter
how close they are. In [149], we proposed a model allowing random assignment of
words to documents according to some prior which encodes temporal information. If
two moving pixels are temporally closer in space, they have a higher probability to
be assigned to the same documents.
7.3 
Temporal Logic
In this work, we do not model activities, interactions and global behaviors with com-
plicated temporal logic. However the atomic activities and global behaviors learnt by
our framework can be used as units to model more complicated activities, interac-
tions and global behaviors considering temporal logic using HMM [108, 19], dynamic
Bayesian network [62], Petri nets [47] and temporal interval logic [3].
7.4 
Jointly Model Activities and Appearance in
Multiple Camera Views
As explain in Chapter 5, to the best of our knowledge, we are the first to use activity
models to do correspondence. Actually there are some potential benefits if we jointly
152

model activities and appearance under a hierarchical Bayesian model. Under our
current model, the trajectories on the network are connected simply based on tem-
poral information. If on average a trajectory is connected to a large number of other
trajectories, which means that there are many false correspondence candidates, the
models of activities cannot be well learnt. Some edges on the trajectory network can
be removed through matching the appearance of objects. This can make the network
sparser and learning easier. On the other hand, objects have different appearance in
different camera views. We want to learn an appearance transform function across
camera views [65]. Activity models can provide some training examples to learn this
transform function through solving the correspondence problem. It will be very inter-
esting to jointly model activities and the appearance transformation functions under
a more complicated hierarchical Bayesian model.
7.5 
Guide Tractography Segmentation
Our tractography segmentation approach is unsupervised. However, our Bayesian
models are very flexible to include knowledge from experts as priors. In future work,
we plan to incorporate anatomical information in the model to guide tractography seg-
mentation. For example, experts first label some regions as initialization of anatomical
structures and then our Bayesian models expand the regions through clustering fiber
trajectories.
7.6 
Inference
In this work, Gibbs sampling is used to do inference on hierarchical Bayesian models.
Although the efficiency of Gibbs sampling has been improved by integrating out
some hidden variables, the inference is still slow for some applications and it lacks
theoretical justification on the convergence of Gibbs sampling. For example, under
Dual-HDP it takes 12 hours to cluster moving pixels and video clips within an 1.5
hours video sequence and it takes 6 hours to cluster 40,453 trajectories of objects
153

collected over one week. Recently some more efficient inference approaches, such as
variational inference [17], and parallel sampling [4], have been proposed and applied
to Dirichlet process mixture models and HDP. In the future work, we will study how
to improve the inference of our models using these schemes.
154

Chapter 8
Conclusion
In this thesis, we use hierarchical Bayesian models to learn motion patterns in visual
surveillance and medical imaging based on the co-occurrence of feature values. Differ-
ent approaches are proposed for activity analysis under different scenarios. It depends
on the number of camera views and crowdedness of scenes. Some technology of learn-
ing motion patterns developed in visual surveillance can also be used to tractography
segmentation which clusters fibers generated from DT-MRI into anatomically mean-
ingful bundles. Three hierarchical Bayesian models, Dual-HDP, dynamic Dual-HDP
and a trajectory network based hierarchical Bayesian model, are proposed for activity
analysis in crowded scenes without tracking objects, trajectory analysis in a single
camera view and in multiple camera views, and tractography segmentation. Dual-
HDP is used to jointly model atomic activities and global behaviors in crowded scenes,
to cluster trajectories in a single camera view, and to cluster fibers in tractography
segmentation. Dynamic Dual-HDP is used to update the models of activities over
time and cluster fibers of new subjects. The trajectory network based hierarchical
Bayesian model is used to cluster trajectories in multiple camera views.
Under a Bayesian framework, activity analysis and tractography segmentation
tasks are formulated in a principled way. While many existing activity analysis ap-
proaches relied on predefined rules or simple probabilistic models and had difficulty
modeling complicated activities, our hierarchical Bayesian models structure depen-
dency among a large number of variables to model complicated activities in crowded
155

and sparse scenes with a single camera view and with multiple camera views. Various
knowledge and constraints can be nicely added into a Bayesian framework as priors.
As examples, by adding a smoothness constraint as a prior, our model can cluster
trajectories in multiple cameras. Using activities models learned from historical data
as priors, we can dynamically update the models of activities over time. These tasks
are difficult to nonBayesian approaches. Our nonparametric Bayesian models auto-
matically learn the numbers of clusters of moving pixels, video clips and trajectories
driven by data instead of manually specifying them as many existing approaches did.
All our approaches are unsupervised requiring less human labeling effort.
If the scene is crowded and it is difficult to track objects, we model activities
directly from moving pixels without tracking objects. Atomic activities and com-
plicated global behaviors are jointly modeled at different hierarchical levels using
Dual-HDP based on the temporal co-occurrence of feature values. It has a better
performance than modeling atomic activities and global behaviors separately or se-
quentially. Co-occurring activities can be separated without supervision. Moving
pixels are clustered into atomic activities and a long video sequence is segmented
into different types of global behaviors. With atomic activities as middle-level rep-
resentations, we can query interactions of interest between object in an easy way.
Abnormal video clips and moving pixels are detected with probabilistic explanation.
This approach has the limitation that it does not work well if all the video clips have
similar combinations of atomic activities especially when the monitored area is large
and activities in the scene have more temporal overlap.
If the scene is sparse, we first track objects and then cluster trajectories of objects
into activity categories and learn the models of paths using Dual-HDP based on the
identity co-occurrence of feature values. Daul-HDP has low space complexity than
many distance based trajectory clustering methods since it does not require computing
the similarity matrix. The time complexity of our approach can be further improved
by using variational inference and parallel computing in the future work. It is more
robust to tracking errors. Dynamic Dual-HDP uses the models learnt from historical
data as priors to update the models of activities over time. It can better explain
156

activities at different time. It clusters trajectories incrementally and does not have to
keep old data in the memory. So it has lower space and time complexities than Dual-
HDP. It property is very important if we need to cluster a huge visual surveillance
data set collected over months or even years. These approaches does not work well
when the scene are crowded with many occlusions and the identity co-occurrence
information cannot be reliably obtained.
In order to monitor activity in a large area, video streams from multiple camera
views have to be used. 
By adding a smoothness constraint on the distributions
of trajectories over activities as a prior, our hierarchical Bayesian model clusters
trajectories in multiple camera views without tracking objects across camera views.
It uses both temporal co-occurrence and identity co-occurrence of feature values. It
does not require inference on the topology of camera views and does not require
solving the challenging correspondence problems. It assumes that the topology of
camera views is arbitrary. The camera views can have overlap or no overlap. After
the models of activities have been learned without supervision, they can be used to
match trajectories of the same object observed in different camera views.
Some of these techniques developed in visual surveillance can be applied to med-
ical imaging where some issues related to learning motion patterns arise. As an
example, Dual-HDP and dynamic Dual-HDP are used to cluster fiber trajectories in
tractography segmentation. Under dynamic Dual-HDP, models of bundles learned
from training data are used as priors to cluster fibers from new subjects. Compar-
ing with existing approaches, our approach has advantages that it can cluster larger
scale data sets without subsampling them and automatically decides that number of
bundles.
Our approaches are evaluated on multiple large scale visual surveillance and med-
ical imaging data sets. They achieve promising results compared with existing ap-
proaches.
These hierarchical Bayesian models exploring co-occurrence of low-level features
at multiple levels can also be applied to other fields such as language processing,
object recognition and scene categorization.
157

158

Appendix A
Gibbs Sampling for Dual-HDP
In the appendix, we will explain how to do Gibbs sampling in the Dual-HDP model
as described in Section 3.2.6. The sampling procedure is implemented in two steps.
In the first step, given the cluster assignment {cj } of documents is fixed, we sample
the word topic assignment z, mixtures ro and 7r, on topics. It follows the Chinese
Restaurant Process (CRP) Gibbs sampling scheme as described in [140], but adding
more hierarchical levels. In CPR, restaurants are documents, customers are words,
and dishes are topics. All the restaurants share a common menu. The process can be
briefly described as following (see more details in [140]).
* When a customer i comes to restaurant j, he sits at one of the existing tables
t, and eats the dishes served on table t, or takes a new table tnew.
* If a new table t,,e is added to restaurant j, it orders a dish from the menu.
Since we are modeling clusters of documents, we introduce "big restaurants",
which are clusters of documents. The label of document cluster cj associates restau-
rant j to big restaurant cj. The CRP is modified as following.
* If a new table t,,, needs to be added in restaurant j, we go to the big restaurant
cj and choose one of the existing big tables r in cj. tne, is associated with r,
and serves the same dish as r.
159

* Alternatively, the new table tnew may take a new big table rnew in the big
restaurant cj. If that happens, rnew orders a dish from the menu. This dish will
be served on both rn,,, and tnew.
Following this modified CRP, given {cj}, k, r0o and {r} can be sampled. It is a
straightforward extension of the sampling scheme in [140] to more hierarchical levels.
In order to sample {cj } and generate the clusters of documents, given z, r0o, and
{ }), we add an extra process.
* When a new restaurant j is built, it needs to be associated with one of the
existing big restaurants or a new big restaurant needs to be built and associated
with j. It is assumed that we already know how many tables in restaurant j
and dishes served at every table.
Let m k be the number of tables in restaurant j serving dish z and m.t 
be the
number of tables in restaurant j. To sample cj, we need to compute the posterior,
p(cj {mk 
, 
T1, 7o) CC p({m 
k} C, C, 
, 
)(C}, 
ro)p (c 
- j , (C{c 
}, 7) 
(A.1)
where c_y is the cluster labels of documents excluding document j. cj could be one
of the existing clusters generated at the current stage, i.e. cj E cold . In this case,
p(mkCj, c, 
C 
, IT,0)= p(m kI rc,) = 
m 1.., m K 
H 
1 kk 
(A.2)c
where K is the number of word topics allocated at the current stage. And,
p(cjl {c}, C- 
7o)= 
n 
(A.3)
where n, is the number of documents assigned to cluster cj.
cj could also be a new cluster, i.e. cj = cne". In this case,
160

P({m'k} IC = C"', c-i , {ii-c}, wo) = J P(Mk 7rnew)P(7rnew iro)drir,,w
M 
K
~lk
F(w0o" + EKi1 Fk 
K
K 
n 
fl1Fudnew~
ITOu 
_l~ 7Ok 
k=1
(mlm;K
Hki- F(a -WOk)
H K
k=l Fka - 7Ok + mnk)
IF(a + m .)
p(Cj = Cnew If7c}, C- 1 I 7o) =
So we have,
P(C-j 
C cf{m'k} IC', 
{w7Fj}, 7w0)
Oc -
11 7ck kc 
E C'l
U.+ k~1
U. +bH l(a 
- 7rOk)
Hk-l '(a - rOk +Mtk)
Ji(a + mj)
161
And,
(A.4)
ft
(A.-5)
n~ 
jew
(A.6)

162

Bibliography
[1] R. Adelino and S. Ferreira. A dirichlet process mixture model for brain mri
tissue classification. Medical Image Analysis, 11:169-182, 2006.
[2] S. Ali and M. Shah. A lagrangian particle dynamic approach for crowd flow
segmentation and stability analysis. In Proc. IEEE Int'l Conf. Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, 2007.
[3] J. F. Allen. Towards a general theory of action and time. Artificial Intelligence,
39:123-154, 1984.
[4] A. Asuncion, P. Smyth, and M. Welling. Asynchronous distributed learning of
topic models. In Proc. Neural Information Processing Systems Conf., 2008.
[5] S. Atev, H. Arumugam, O. Masaoud, R. Janardan, and N. P. Papanikolopoulos.
A vision-based approach to collision prediction at traffic intersections. IEEE
Trans. on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 6:416-423, 2005.
[6] S. Atev, O. Masaoud, and R. J. N. Papanikolopoulos. A collision prediction
system for traffic intersections. In Porc. IEEE Conf. Intelligent Robots Systems,
2005.
[7] S. Atev, O. Masoud, and N. Papanikolopoulos. Learning traffic patterns at
intersections by spectral clustering. In Porc. IEEE Conf. Intelligent Robots
Systems, 2006.
[8] D. Ayers and M. Shah. Monitoring human behavior from video taken in an
office environment. ivc, 19:833-846, 2001.
163

[9] A. Basharat, A. Gritai, and M. Shah. Learning object motion patterns for
anomaly detection and improved object detection. In Proc. IEEE Int'l Conf.
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2008.
[10] F. Bashir, W. Qu, A. Khokhar, and D. Schonfeld. Hmm-based motion recogni-
tion system using segmented pca. In Proc. IEEE Int'l Conf. Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, 2005.
[11] M. Bennewitz, W. Burgard, and C. Grzegorz. Utilizing learned motion patterns
to robustly track persons. In Proc. IEEE International Workshop on Visual
Surveillance and Performance Evaluation of Tracking and Surveillance, 2003.
[12] D. Biliotti, G. Anotonini, and J. P. Thiran. Multi-layer hierarchical clustering
of pedestrian trajectories for automatic counting people in video sequences. In
Proc. IEEE Workshop on Motion and Video Computing, 2005.
[13] N. D. Bird, Masoud O., N. P. Papanikolopoulos, and A. Isaacs. Detection of
loitering individuals in public transportation area. IEEE Trans. on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, 6:167-177, 2005.
[14] S. Blackman and R. Popoli. Design and Analysis of Modern Tracking Systems.
Artech House, 1999.
[15] M. Blank, L. Gorelick, Shechtman, M. Irani, and R. Basri. Actions as space-time
shapes. In Proc. Int'l Conf. Computer Vision, 2005.
[16] D. Blei and J. Lafferty. Dynamic topic models. In Proc. Int'l Conf. Machine
Learning, 2006.
[17] D. M. Blei and M. I. Jordan. Variational inference for dirichlet process mixtures.
Journal of Bayesian Analysis, 1:121-144, 2006.
[18] D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan. Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 3:993--1022, 2003.
164

[19] M. Brand and V. Kettnaker. Discovery and segmentation of activities in video.
IEEE Trans. on PAMI, 22:844-851, 2000.
[20] M. Brown and D. Lowe. Recognising panoramas. In Proc. Int'l Conf. Computer
Vision, 2003.
[21] A. Brun, H. Knutsson, H. J. Park, M. E. Shenton, and C. F. Westin. Clus-
tering fiber traces using normalized cuts. In Proc. Int'l Conf. Medical Image
Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention, 2004.
[22] D. Buzan, S. Sclaroff, and G. Kollios. Extraction and clustering of motion
trajectories in video. In Proc. Int'l Conf. Pattern Recognition, 2004.
[23] Q. Cai and J. K. Aggarwal. Tracking human motion in structured environments
using a distributed-camera system. IEEE Trans. on PAMI, 21:1241-1247, 1996.
[24] F. Caron, M. Davy, and A. Doucet. Generalized polya urn for time-varying
dirichlet process mixtures. In Proc. of Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence,
2007.
[25] R. T. Collins, A. J. Lipton, H. Fujiyoshi, and T. Kanade. Algorithms for
cooperative multisensor surveillance. Proceedings of IEEE, 89:1456-1477, 2001.
[26] R. T. Collins, A. J. Lipton, T. Kanade, H. Fujiyoshi, D. Duggins, Y. Tsin,
D. Tolliver, N. Enomoto, O. Hasegawa, P. Burt, and L. Wixson. A system for
video surveillance and monitoring. Technical report, Carnegie Mellon Univer-
sity, Tech. Rep., CMU-RI-TR-00-12, 2000.
[27] G. Dalley, X. Wang, and E. Grimson. Event detection using an attention-based
tracker. In Proc. IEEE International Workshop on Visual Surveillance and
Performance Evaluation of Tracking and Surveillance, 2007.
[28] A. Datta, M. Shah, N. Da, and V. Lobo. Person-on-person violence detection
in video data. In Proc. Int'l Conf. Pattern Recognition, 2002.
165

[29] J. W. Davis and A. F. Bobick. The representation and recognition of action
using temporal templates. In Proc. IEEE Int'l Conf. Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 1997.
[30] A. P. Dempster, N. M. Laird, and D. B. Rubin. Maximum likelihood from
incomplete data via the em algorithm. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society,
Series B (Methodological), 39:1-38, 1977.
[31] J. Dever, N. V. Lobo, and M. Shah. Automatic visual recognition of armed
robbery. In Proc. Int'l Conf. Pattern Recognition, 2002.
[32] I. S. Dhillon. Co-clustering documents and words using bipartite spectral graph
partitioning. In Proc. of ACM Special Interest Group on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining, 2001.
[33] I. S. Dhillon and D. S. Modha. Concept decompositions for large sparse text
data using clustering. 42:143 157, 2001.
[34] Z Ding, J. C. Gore, and A. W. Anderson. Classification amd quantification
of neuronal fiber pathways using diffusion tensor mri. Magnetic Resonance in
Medicine, 49:716-721, 2003.
[35] D. B. Dunson, N. Pillai, and J. H. Park. Bayesian density regression. Journal
of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B, 69:163-183, 2006.
[36] L. Fei-Fei and P. Perona. A bayesian hierarchical model for learning natu-
ral scene categories. In Proc. IEEE Int'l Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2005.
[37] T. S. Ferguson. A bayesian analysis of some nonparametric problems. The
Annals of Statistics, 1:209-230m, 1973.
[38] J. Fernyhough, A. Cohn, and D. Hogg. Generation of semantic regions from
image sequences. In Proc. European Conf. Computer Vision, 1996.
166

[39] F. Fleuret, J. Berclaz, R. Lengagne, and P. Fua. Multicamera people tracking
with a probabilistic occupancy map. IEEE Trans. on PAMI, 30:267-282, 2008.
[40] E. B. Fox, D. S. Choi, and A. S. Willsky. Nonparameteric bayesian methods
for large scale multi-target tracking. In Proceedings of Asilomar Conference on
Signals, Systems, and Computers, 2006.
[41] Z. Fu, W. Hu, and T. Tan. Similarity based vehicle trajectory clustering and
anomaly detection. In Proc. IEEE Int'l Conf. Image Processing, 2005.
[42] G. Galati, M. Ferri, P. Mariano, and F. Marti. Advanced integrated architecture
for airport ground movements surveillance. In Radar Conference, 1995.
[43] M. R. Garey and D. S. Johnson. Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the
Theory of NP-Completeness. W. H. Freeman, 1979.
[44] A. Gelman, J. B. Carlin, H. S. Stern, and D. B. Rubin. Bayesian Data Analysis.
Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2004.
[45] G. Gennari and G. D. Hager. Probabilistic data association methods in visual
tracking of groups. In Proc. IEEE Int'l Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2004.
[46] G. Gerig, S. Gouttard, and S. Corouge. Analysis of brain white matter via fiber
tract modeling. In Proc. of IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology, 2004.
[47] N. Ghanem, D. Dementhon, D. Doermann, and L. Davis. Representation and
recognition of events in surveillance video using petri net. In CVPR Workshop,
2004.
[48] N. Gheissari, T. B. Sebastian, J. Rittscher, and R. Hartley. Person reidentifi-
cation using spatiotemporal appearance. In Proc. IEEE Int'l Conf. Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2006.
167

[49] D. Greenhill, J. P. Renno, J. Orwell, and G. A. Jones. Learning semantic
landscape: Embedding scene knowledge in object tracking. Real Time Imaging,
11:186-203, 2005.
[50] J. E. Griffin and M. F. J. Steel. Order-based dependent dirichlet processes.
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 101:179-194, 2006.
[51] T. L. Griffiths and M. Steyvers. Finding scientific topics. 
In Proc. of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 2004.
[52] P Gurdjos and P. Sturm. Methods and geometry for plane-based self-calibration.
In Proc. IEEE Int'l Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2003.
[53] T. Hofmann. Probabilistic latent semantic analysis. In Proc. of Uncertainty in
Artificial Intelligence, 1999.
[54] S. Honggeng and R. Nevatia. Multi-agent event recognition. In Proc. Int'l Conf.
Computer Vision, 2001.
[55] J. W. Hsieh, Yum S. H., Y. S. Chen, and W. Hu. Automatic traffic surveil-
lance system for vehicle tracking and classification. IEEE Trans. on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, 7:175-187, 2006.
[56] W. Hu, T. Tan, L. Wang, and S. Maybank. A survey on visual surveillance of
object motion and behaviors. IEEE Trans. on Systems, Man, Cybernetics-Part
C: Applications and Reviews, 34:334-352, 2004.
[57] W. Hu, X. Xiao, Z. Fu, D. Xie, T. Tan, and S. Maybank. A system for learning
statistical motion patterns. IEEE Trans. on PAMI, 28:1450-1464, 2006.
[58] W. Hu, X. Xiao, D. Xie, T. Tan, and S. Maybank. Traffic accident prediction
using 3-d model-based vehicle tracking. IEEE Trans. on Vehicular Technology,
53:677-694, 2004.
[59] W. Hu, D. Xie, Z. Fu, W. Zeng, and S. Maybank. Semantic-based visual surveil-
lance. IEEE Trans. on Image Processing, 16:1168-1181, 2007.
168

[60] W. Hu, D. Xie, T. Tan, and S. Maybank. Learning activity patterns using fuzzy
self-organizing neural network. IEEE Trans. on Systems, Man, Cybernetics-
Part B, 34:1618-1626, 2004.
[61] T. Huang and S. Russell. Object identification in a bayesian context. In Proc.
of Int'l Joint Conf. Artificial Intelligence, 1997.
[62] S. S. Intille and A. F. Bobick. A framework for recognizing multi-agent action
from visual evidence. In Proc. National Conf. Artificial Intelligence, 1999.
[63] Li. J., S. Gong, and T. Xiang. Scene segmentation for behavior correlation. In
Proc. European Conf. Computer Vision, 2008.
[64] 0. Javed, Z. Rasheed, K. Shafique, and M. Shah. Tracking across multiple
cameras with disjoint views. In Proc. Int'l Conf. Computer Vision, 2003.
[65] 0. Javed, K. Shafique, and M. Shah. Appearance modeling for tracking in
multiple non-overlapping cameras. In Proc. IEEE Int'l Conf. Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, 2005.
[66] S. Jbabdi, M. W. Woolrich, and T.E.J. Behrens. Multiple-subjects connectivity-
based parcellation using hierarchical dirichlet process mixture models. Neurolm-
age, 44:373-384, 2009.
[67] L. Jiao, Y. Wu, G. Wu, E. Y. Chang, and Y. F. Wang. Anatomy of a mul-
ticamera video surveillance system. ACM Multimedia Systems, 210:144-163,
2004.
[68] N. Johnson and D. Hogg. Learning the distribution of object trajectories for
event recognition. In Proc. British Machine Vision Conference, 1995.
[69] L. Jonasson, P. Hagmann, J. P. Thiran, and V. J. Wedeen. Fiber tracts of high
angular resolution diffusion mri are easily segmented with spectral clustering.
In International Society for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, 2005.
169

[70] I. Junejo and H. Foroosh. Trajectory rectification and path modeling for video
surveillance. In Proc. Int'l Conf. Computer Vision, 2007.
[71] I. Junejo, O. Javed, and M. Shah. Multi feature path modeling for video surveil-
lance. In Proc. Int'l Conf. Pattern Recognition, 2004.
[72] S. Kamijo, H. Koo, X. Liu, K. Fujihira, and Sakauchi. Development and eval-
uation of real-time video surveillance system on highway based on semantic
hierarchy and decision surface. In Proc. of IEEE International Conference on
System, Man and Cybernetics, 2005.
[73] S. Kamijo, M. Matsushita, K. Ikeuchi, and M. Sakauchi. Traffic monitoring and
accident detection at intersections. IEEE Trans. on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, 1:108-118, 2000.
[74] J. Kang, I. Cohen, and G. Medioni. Continuous tracking within and across cam-
era streams. In Proc. IEEE Int'l Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion, 2003.
[75] R. Kaucic, A. Perera, G. Brooksby, J. Kaufhold, and A. Hoogs. A unified
framework for tracking through occlusions and across sensor gaps. In Proc.
IEEE Int'l Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2005.
[76] Y. Ke, R. Suckthanlar, and M. Hebert. Event detection in crowded videos. In
Proc. Int'l Conf. Computer Vision, 2007.
[77] E. Keogh and M. Pazzani. Scaling up dynamic time scaling up dynamic time.
In Proc. of ACM Special Interest Group on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining, 2000.
[78] V. Kettnaker and R. Zabih. Bayesian multi-camera surveillance. In Proc. IEEE
Int'l Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 1999.
[79] S. Khan and M. Shah. Consistent labeling of tracked objects in multiple cameras
with overlapping fields of view. IEEE Trans. on PAMI, 25:1355-1360, 2003.
170

[80] R. Khoshabeh, T. Gandhi, and M. M. Trivedi. Multi-camera based traffic flow
characterization and classification. In Proc. IEEE Conf. Intelligent Transpora-
tion Systems, 2007.
[81] S. Kim and P. Smyth. Hierarchical dirichlet processes with random effects. In
Proc. Neural Information Processing Systems Conf., 2006.
[82] H. W. Kuhn. Variants of the hungarian method for assignment problems. Naval
Research Logistics Quarterly, 3:253-258, 1956.
[83] P. Kumar, S. Ranganath, W. Hu, and K. Sengupta. Framework for real-time
behavior interpretation from traffic video. IEEE Trans. on Intelligent Trans-
portation Systems, 6:43-53, 2005.
[84] I. Laptev and T. Lindeberg. Space-time interest points. In Proc. Int'l Conf.
Computer Vision, 2003.
[85] L. Lee, R. Romano, and G. Stein. Monitoring activities from multiple video
streams: Establishing a common coordinate frame. IEEE Trans. on PAMI,
22:758-768, 2000.
[86] J. Li, S. Gong, and T. Xiang. Global behavior inference using probabilistic
latent semantic analysis. In Proc. British Machine Vision Conference, 2008.
[87] X. Li, W. Hu, and W. Hu. A coarse-to-fine strategy for vehicle motion trajectory
clustering. In Proc. Int'l Conf. Pattern Recognition, 2006.
[88] H. M. Liao, D. Chen, C. Su, and Tyan H. Real-time event detection and its
application to surveillance systems. In Proc. IEEE Symp. Circuits and Systems,
2006.
[89] C. Lin and Z. Ling. Automatic fall incident detection in compressed video for
intelligent homecare. In Proc. IEEE Int'1l Conf. Computer Communications and
Networks, 2007.
171

[90] J. Lin, M. Vlachos, E. Keogh, and Dunopulous. Iterative incremental clustering
of time series. Advances in Database Technology, 2:106-122, 2004.
[91] B. D. Lucas and T. Kanade. An iterative image registration technique with an
application to stereo vision. Proc. Int'l Joint Conf. Artificial Intelligence, pages
674-680, 1981.
[92] S. MacEachern, A. Kottas, and A. Gelfand. Spatial nonparametric bayesian
models. Technical report, Institute of Statistics and Decision Sciences, Duke
University, 2001.
[93] M. Maddah, W. E. L. Grimson, S. K. Warfield, and W. M. Wells. A unified
framework for clustering and quantitative analysis of white matter fiber tracts.
Medical Image Analysis, 12:191 202, 2008.
[94] M. Maddah, W. M. Wells III, S. K. Warfield, C. F. Westin, and W. E. L.
Grimson. Probabilistic clustering and quantitative analysis of white matter
fiber tracts. In Proc. Information Processing in Medical Imaging, 2007.
[95] M. Maddah, L. Zollei, W. E. L. Grimson, and W. M. Wells III. Modeling of
anatomical information in clustering of white matter fiber trajectories using
dirichlet distribution. In MMBIA, 2008.
[96] D. Makris and T. Ellis. Path detection in video surveillance. Image and Vision
Computing, 20:859-903, 2002.
[97] D. Makris and T. Ellis. Automatic learning of an activity-based semantic scene
model. In Proc. IEEE Conf. Advanced Video and Signal Based Surveillance,
2003.
[98] D. Makris, T. Ellis, and J. Black. Bridging the gaps between cameras. In Proc.
IEEE Int'l Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2004.
[99] S. Messelodi, C. M. Modena, and M. Zanin. A computer vision system for
the detection and classification of vehicles at urban road intersections. Pattern
Analysis and Applications, 8:17 31, 2005.
172

[100] W. Millesi, M. J. Truppe, F. Watzinger, A. Wagner, and R. Ewers. Image
guided surgery extended by remote stereotactic visualization. In Lecture Notes
in Computer Science. Springer, 1997.
[101] B. Moberts, A. Vilanova, and J. W. Jake. Evaluation of fiber clustering methods
for diffusion tensor imaging. In Proceedings of IEEE Visualization, 2005.
[102] B. T. Morris and M. M. Trivedi. A survey of vision-based trajectory learning
and analysis for surveillance. IEEE Trans. on Circuits and Systems for Video
Technology, 18:1114-1127, 2008.
[103] A. Naftel and S. Khalid. Classifying spatialtemporal object using unsupervised
learning in the coefficient features spaces. ACM Multimedia Systems, 12:227-
238, 2006.
[104] A. Y. Ng, M. I. Jordan, and Y. Weiss. On spectral clustering: Analysis and an
algorithm. In Proc. Neural Information Processing Systems Conf., 2002.
[105] J. C. Niebles, H. Wang, and F. Li. Unsupervised learning of human action
categories using spatial-temporal words. In Proc. British Machine Vision Con-
ference, 2006.
[106] P. Nillius, J. Sullivan, and S. Carlsson. Multi-target tracking - linking identities
using bayesian network inference. In Proc. IEEE Int'l Conf. Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, 2006.
[107] L. J. O'Donnell and C. F. Westin. Automatic tractography segmentation us-
ing a high-dimensional white matter atlas. IEEE Trans. on Medical Imaging,
26:1562-1575, 2007.
[108] N. Oliver, B. Rosario, and A. Pentland. A bayesian computer vision system for
modeling human interactions. IEEE Trans. on PAMI, 22:831-843, 2000.
[109] S. K. Pang, J. Li, and S. J. Godsill. Models and algorithms for detection and
tracking of coordinated groups. In Proceedings of Aerospace Conference, 2008.
173

[110] C. Piciarelli and G. L. Foresti. On-line trajectory clustering for anomalous
events detection. Pattern Recognition Letters, 2006:1835-1842, Pattern Recog-
nition Letters.
[111] F. Porikli. Learning object trajectory patterns by spectral clustering. In Proc.
IEEE Int'l Conf. Multimedia and Expo, 2004.
[112] F. Porikli and T. Haga. Event detection by eigenvector decomposition using
object and frame features. In Proc. IEEE Int'l Conf. Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition Workshop, 2004.
[113] A. Rahimi, B. Dunagan, and T. Darrell. Simultaneous calibration and tracking
with a network of non-overlapping sensors. In Proc. IEEE Int'l Conf. Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2004.
[114] C. Rao, A. Yilmaz, and M. Shah. View-invariant reprerepresentation and recog-
nition of actions. International Journal of Computer Vision, 50:203-226, 2002.
[115] P. Remagnino, S. A. Velastin, G. L. Foresti, and M. Trivedi. Novel concepts
and challenges for the next generation of video surveillance systems. Machine
Vision and Applications, 18:135-137, 2007.
[116] L. Ren, D. B. Dunson, and L. Carin. The dynamic hierarchical dirichlet process.
In Proc. Int'l Conf. Machine Learning, 2008.
[117] A. Rodriguez, D. B. Dunson, and A. E. Gelfand. The nested dirichlet pro-
cess. Technical report, Working Paper 2006-19, Duke Institute of Statistics and
Decision Sciences., 2006.
[118] B. C. Russell, A. A. Efros, J. Sivic, W. T. Freeman, and A. Zisserman. Using
multiple segmentations to discover objects and their extent in image collections.
In Proc. IEEE Int'l Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2006.
[119] M. S. Ryoo and J. K. Aggarwal. Hierarchical recognition of human activities in-
teracting with objects. In Proc. IEEE Int'l Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2007.
174

[120] I. Saleemi, K. H. Shafique, and M. Shah. Probabilistic modeling of scene dyan-
mics for applications in visual surveillance. IEEE Trans. on PAMI, 2008.
[121] A. Saunier, T. Sayed, and C. Lim. Probabilistic collision prediction for vision-
based automated road safety analysis. In Proc. IEEE Conf. Intelligent Trans-
poration Systems, 2007.
[122] H. Schfitze and C. Silverstein. Projections for efficient document clustering. In
Proc. of ACM Special Interest Group on Information Retrieval, 1997.
[123] T. N. Schoepflin and D. J. Dailey. Dynamic camera calibration of roadside traffic
mangement cameras for vehicle speed estimation. IEEE Trans. on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, 4:90-98, 2003.
[124] J. Sethuraman. A constructive definition of dirichlet priors. Statistica Sinica,
4:639-650, 1994.
[125] Y. Shan, H. Sawhney, and R. Kumar. Unsupervised learning of discriminative
edge measures for vehicle matching between non-overlapping cameras. In Proc.
IEEE Int'l Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2005.
[126] Y. Shan, H. Sawhney, and R. Kumar. Vehicle identification between non-
overlapping cameras without direct feature matching. In Proc. Int'l Conf. Com-
puter Vision, 2005.
[127] E. Shechtman and M. Irani. Space-time behavior based correlation. In Proc.
IEEE Int'l Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2005.
[128] Y. A. Sheikh and M. Shah. Trajectory association across multiple airborne
cameras. IEEE Trans. on PAMI, 30:361-367, 2008.
[129] J Shi and J. Malik. Normalized cuts and image segmentation. IEEE Trans. on
PAMI, 22:888-905, 2000.
175

[130] J. S. Shimony, A. Z. Snyder, N. Lori, and T. E. Conturo. Automated fuzzy
clustering of neuronal pathways in diffusion tensor tracking. In International
Society for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, 2002.
[131] J. Sivic, B. C. Russell, A. A. Efros, A. Zisserman, and W. T. Freeman. Dis-
covering object categories in image collections. In Proc. Int'l Conf. Computer
Vision, 2005.
[132] P. Smith, N. V. Lobo, and M. Shah. Temporalboost for event recognition. In
Proc. Int'l Conf. Computer Vision, 2005.
[133] N. Srebro and S. Roweis. Time-varying topic models using dependent dirichlet
processes. Technical report, Department of Computer Science, University of
Toronto, 2005.
[134] C. Stauffer. Estimating tracking sources and sinks. In IEEE Workshop on Event
Mining, 2003.
[135] C. Stauffer and E. Grimson. Learning patterns of activity using real-time track-
ing. IEEE Trans. on PAMI, 22:747-757, 2000.
[136] C. Stauffer and K. Tieu. Automated multi-camera planar tracking correspon-
dence modeling. In Proc. IEEE Int'l Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition, 2003.
[137] E. B. Sudderth, A. Torralba, W. T. Freeman, and A. S. Willsky. Describing
visual scenes using transformed objects and parts. International Journal of
Computer Vision, 77:291--330, 2007.
[138] E. B. Sudderth, A. Torralba, Freeman W. T., and A. S. Willsky. Learning
hierarchical models of scenes, objects, and parts. In Proc. Int'l Conf. Computer
Vision, 2005.
[139] N. Sumpter and A. J. Bulpitt. Learning spatio-temporal patterns for predicting
object behavior. Image and Vision Computing, 18:697 704, 2000.
176

[140] Y. W. Teh, M. I. Jordan, M. J. Beal, and D. M. Blei. Hierarchical dirichlet
process. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 2006.
[141] Y. W. Teh, K. Kurihara, and Welling M. Collapsed variational inference for
hdp. In Proc. Neural Information Processing Systems Conf., 2007.
[142] B. Thirion, A. Tucholka, M. Keller, and P. Pinel. High level group analysis
of fmri data based on dirichlet process mixture models. In Proc. Information
Processing in Medical Imaging, 2007.
[143] K. Tieu, G. Dalley, and E. Grimson. Inference of non-overlapping camera net-
work topology by measuring statistical dependence. In Proc. Int'l Conf. Com-
puter Vision, 2005.
[144] B Triggs. Camera pose and calibration from 4 or 5 known 3d points. In Proc.
Int'l Conf. Computer Vision, 1999.
[145] G. Unal, A. Yezzi, S. Soatto, and G. Slabaugh. A variational approach to
problems in calibration of multiple cameras. IEEE Trans. on PAMI, 29:1322-
1338, 2007.
[146] H. Veeraraghavan, O. Maoud, and N. Papanikolopoulos. Computer vision algo-
rithms for intersection monitoring. IEEE Trans. on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, 4:78-89, 2003.
[147] M. Vlachos, G. Kollios, and D. Gunopulos. Discovering similar multidimen-
sional trajectories. In Proc. IEEE Conf. Data Engineering, 2002.
[148] X. Wang, G. Doretto, T. Sebastian, J. Rittscher, and P. Tu. Shape and appear-
ance context modeling. In Proc. Int'l Conf. Computer Vision, 2007.
[149] X. Wang and E. Grimson. Spatial latent dirichlet allocation. In Proc. Neural
Information Processing Systems Conf., 2007.
177

[150] X. Wang, K. T. Ma, G. Ng, and E. Grimson. Trajectory analysis and semantic
region modeling using a nonparametric bayesian model. In Proc. IEEE Int'l
Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2008.
[151] X. Wang, X. Ma, and E. Grimson. Unsupervised activity perception by hi-
erarchical bayesian models. In Proc. IEEE Int'l Conf. Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2007.
[152] X. Wang, X. Ma, and E. Grimson. Unsupervised activity perception in crowded
and complicated scenes using hierarchical bayesian models. IEEE Trans. on
PAMI, 31, 2009.
[153] X. Wang, K. Tieu, and E. Grimson. Learning semantic scene models by trajec-
tory analysis. In Proc. European Conf. Computer Vision, 2006.
[154] X. Wang, K. Tieu, and E. Grimson. Correspondence-free multi-camera activity
analysis and scene modeling. In Proc. IEEE Int'l Conf. Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2008.
[155] X. Wang, K. Tieu, and E. Grimson. Correspondence-free activity analysis and
scene modeling in multiple camera views. IEEE Trans. on PAMI, 2009.
[156] Y. Wang, T. Jiang, M. S. Drew, Z. Li, and G. Mori. Unsupervised discovery
of action classes. In Proc. IEEE Int'l Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2006.
[157] Y. Xia, A. U. Turken, S. L. Whitfield-Gabrieli, and J. D. Gabrieli. Knowledge-
based classification of neuronal fibers in entire brain. In Proc. Int'l Conf. Medical
Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention, 2005.
[158] T. Xiang and S. Gong. Video behaviour profiling and abnormality detection
without manual labelling. In Proc. Int'l Conf. Computer Vision, 2005.
[159] T. Xiang and S. Gong. Beyond tracking: Modelling activity and understanding
behaviour. International Journal of Computer Vision, 67:21-51, 2006.
178

[160] W. Yan and D. A. Forsyth. Learning the behavior of users in a public space
through video tracking. In Proc. IEEE Workshop Applications of Computer
Vision, 2005.
[161] L. Zelnik-Manor and M. Irani. Event-based analysis of video. In Proc. IEEE
Int'l Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2001.
[162] J. Zhang, Z. Ghahramani, and Y. Yang. A probabilistic model for online doc-
ument clustering with application to novelty detection. In Proc. Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems Conf., 2004.
[163] Z. Zhang, K. Huang, and T. Tan. Comparison of similarity measures for tra-
jectory clustering in outdoor surveillance scenes. In Proc. Int'l Conf. Pattern
Recognition, 2006.
[164] H. Zhong, J. Shi, and M. Visontai. Detecting unusual activity in video. In Proc.
IEEE Int'l Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2004.
[165] X. Zhu, Z. Ghahramani, and J. Lafferty. Time-sensitive dirichlet process mix-
ture models. Technical report, School of Computer Science Carnegie Mellon
University, 2005.
179

