Open Research Online
The Open University’s repository of research publications
and other research outputs
Emplotment in the social mediatization of the
economy: the poly-storying of economist Yanis
Varoufakis
Journal Item
How to cite:
Georgakopoulou, Alexandra and Giaxoglou, Korina (2019).
Emplotment in the social mediatization of the
economy: the poly-storying of economist Yanis Varoufakis. Language@Internet, 16, article no. 6.
For guidance on citations see FAQs.
c⃝[not recorded]
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
Version: Accepted Manuscript
Link(s) to article on publisher’s website:
http://www.languageatinternet.org/articles/2018si/georgakopoulou.giaxaglou
Copyright and Moral Rights for the articles on this site are retained by the individual authors and/or other copyright
owners. For more information on Open Research Online’s data policy on reuse of materials please consult the policies
page.
oro.open.ac.uk

 
1
Emplotment in the Social Mediatization of the Economy: 
The Poly-Storying of Economist Yanis Varoufakis 
 
ALEXANDRA GEORGAKOPOULOU 
King's College London 
 
KORINA GIAXOGLOU 
The Open University 
Abstract  
In the context of the Eurozone crisis the economy gained centre stage in a multitude of 
ordinary users' engagements on social media. Prompted by this, we propose a narrative 
perspective on the social mediatization of the economy informed by small stories 
research. We examine the intense mediatization of Yanis Varoufakis, former Minister of 
Finance of Greece (2015) as a case of media-afforded emplotment. We show that 
incidents involving Varoufakis in his negotiations with members of the Eurogroup are 
singled out as emblematic events, shared as breaking news, and satirically reworked, i.e., 
rescripted, mainly on YouTube and Twitter. Such rescriptings place him and the Greek 
economy in popular culture scenarios of one-to-one clashes and fights. Combined with 
iterated quotes (e.g., "you just killed the troika") and incongruous couplings (e.g., the 
Minister of Awesome), they lead to a widely available positioning of him as an unorthodox 
Minister of Finance. This affords and is afforded by what we call poly-storying, i.e., 
possibilities for bringing together multiple different plots and for the users' multiple 
modes of participation in them. An emplotment lens can enrich our understanding of 'lay,’ 

 
2
mass engagements with the economic crisis and political life beyond (sociolinguistic) 
accounts of the vernacularization of the public sphere.  
 
Key words: economist, economy-in-crisis, emplotment, emblematic events, rescripting, 
quotes, incongruous couplings  
Introduction  
Language, politics and economics, as interconnected socio-cultural formations, are 
increasingly being mediatized and studied as such.1 Contemporary mediatization is 
reflexively linked to processes of commoditization and involve close connections among 
the media, institutions, and social life (Agha, 2011, p. 163). This longstanding process of 
the interweaving of media with social life has been taken to a new level with the rise of 
social media. The increasing, unprecedented facilities for user-generated, easily 
distributed, replicable and scalable content (boyd, 2011) provide ample opportunities 
for ordinary users to comment on and engage with current affairs and socio-economic 
life. This has, in turn, problematized traditional mediatization processes, in particular 
earlier clear-cut distinctions between old and new digital media, interpersonal and mass 
communication, and expert and 'lay' communication (see chapters in Androutsopoulos, 
2014).  
 
The above changes in mediatization call for an update of the theoretical and analytical 
ways in which it is studied. Sociolinguistic studies have begun to show how the dynamic 
intermingling of media and the blurring of boundaries between private and public result 

 
3
in changes in the discourse and styles of media language. Such changes push earlier noted 
tendencies toward conversationalization (Fairclough, 1994) even further, for example 
by making vernacular (i.e., informal, non-standard, non-specialist) language choices 
more readily available. This attested significance of the vernacularization of language 
(Coupland, 2014) resonates with media and cultural analyses that have shown the 
salience of vernacular creativities in social media engagements (Burgess, 2006). These 
encompass a range of everyday creative practices shaped outside the cultural value 
systems of either 'high culture' (art) or commercial creative practice (e.g., TV and 
broadcasting media). They involve, more specifically, shifting forms of public 
engagement ranging from physical participation to computer-mediated conversations 
on social media such as Facebook (Herring, 2010), as well as sophisticated multimedia 
productions, which are shaped according to the specific forms of users’ participation 
(Georgakopoulou, 2015). There is still much scope for empirically studying such 
vernacularization processes and their implications for how 'lay' networked publics2 
engage with expert and specialist domains, traditionally seen as the prerogative of 
mainstream media commentators.  
 
This article contributes to this growing line of inquiry by bringing in the importance of 
processes of emplotment (Ricoeur, 1991), i.e., the (re)creation of stories in engagements 
with socio-political life, including the economy. The economy has, since 2008, gained 
centre stage in such engagements, especially in the context of an array of social media-
circulating Euro/crisis discourses (Boukala, 2014; Kryzanowski, Triandafyllidou, & 
Wodak, 2009; Wodak & Angouri, 2014). We see emplotment in such cases as sets of more 

 
4
or less meaningful connections that are made through social media commentary and 
often viral reworkings of public life that circulate in stages or phases across multiple 
media (see Silverstein, 2011). These connections bring together key individuals, notably 
public figures (e.g., politicians), events, and outcomes in specific spatiotemporal 
scenarios. Our contention is that the creation of such plots in relation to key individuals 
ultimately implicates the specific expert domain with which they are associated. We will 
show how this is the case with a focus on the emplotment through intense social 
mediatization of Yanis Varoufakis, former Minister of Finance in Greece (January-June 
2015). Yanis Varoufakis's short term in office, at the helm of an economy-in-crisis, 
quickly earned him a pop celebrity status, as attested in several media outlets and by 
commentators who portray him as a "showbiz economist" (e.g., The Guardian, 2015, Nov. 
18).  
 
As we will show, this celebrity status is intimately linked with emplotment on social 
media, which was instrumental in crafting a "biographically projectible brand"3 of a 
maverick Minister of Finance, that is, a 'moral profile' created "out of issues rendered of 
interest in the public sphere" (Lempert & Silverstein, 2012, p. 1). This developing 
characterization – which is parallel to what in marketing language would be called 
"brand" – becomes equated with what Silverstein (2011, p. 205) calls the "message" in 
political life: It has more to do with the crafting of a persona that the public come to see 
as an individual politician with specific personality attributes and less with any actual 
ideological or other positions.  
 

 
5
We will specifically interrogate our data for how this emplotment of Yanis Varoufakis as 
a Minister of Finance and an economist is shaped in emblematic events, key actors and 
assessments, and how it becomes associated with networked audiences' engagements 
with the Greek economy-in-crisis. Our analysis of key postings on Twitter and YouTube 
during Varoufakis's term in office shows that certain incidents involving his negotiations 
with members of the Eurogroup are singled out as emblematic events, shared as breaking 
news, and satirically reworked, i.e., rescripted (Georgakopoulou, 2015; see 1.1. below for 
details). Such rescriptings systematically place him and the Greek economy in popular 
culture scenarios of one-to-one character clashes with 'evil' forces in Europe. Combined 
with iterated quotes (e.g., "you killed the troika") and incongruous couplings (e.g., "the 
Minister of Awesome"), they lead to a widely available positioning of Varoufakis as an 
unorthodox Minister of Finance, an outsider who "takes on the establishment" (as reads 
the description of his recent memoir Adults in the Room). This affords and is afforded by 
what we call poly-storying, i.e., possibilities for bringing together multiple different plots 
and for affording users’ multiple modes of participation in them. We will conclude by 
reflecting on how a combined focus on emplotment and social mediatization can enrich 
our understanding of 'lay' mass engagements with the economic crisis and political life 
beyond existing sociolinguistic accounts of vernacularization of the public sphere.  
Small Stories Research and Social Media 
Small stories research, a paradigm for narrative and identities analysis, was developed 
to account, conceptually and analytically, for a range of narrative activities that had not 
been sufficiently studied in conversational contexts, nor had their importance for the 

 
6
interlocutors' identity work been recognized. These involve stories that present 
fragmentation and open-endedness of tellings, exceeding the confines of a single speech 
event and resisting a neat categorization of beginning–middle–end. They are invariably 
co-constructed (between teller and audience), rendering the sole teller's story 
ownership problematic. They report mundane events from the teller's everyday life 
rather than big complications or disruptions. In previous work, Georgakopoulou (2007) 
made the case for the significance of such stories in everyday life, as part of the fabric of 
social practices that ordinary people engage in. More recently, she has argued that small 
stories research prefigured the current situation, when social media affordances4 have 
made stories with such features more widely available and visible in mass, (semi)-public 
arenas of communication (Georgakopoulou, 2013a). She has specifically been 
systematizing small stories as a paradigm for the analysis of social media, as part of the 
project "Life-Writing of the Moment: The Sharing and Updating Self on Social  Media" 
(www.ego.media-org5). 
The 
project 
is 
charting 
the 
multi-semiotic 
forms 
(linguistic/textual, visual, auditory) used in sharing everyday life (personal or public and 
political) as it happens, on a range of social media platforms (e.g., YouTube, Facebook, 
Instagram, Twitter), in emergent and remediated genres (e.g., selfies, retweets, spoof 
videos, and remixes) and, where applicable, on the basis of specific (personal, political, 
social, etc.) incidents and issues (e.g., the euro-zone crisis). 
Drawing on Georgakopoulou's study of how small stories develop and are distributed on 
social media, we define emplotment flexibly, as creating more or less meaningful 
connections among characters, events in specific place and time, actions and inter-
actions, assessments, and/or resolutions. We also accept that it is shaped by well-

 
7
attested social media affordances (cf. Marwick & boyd, 2011). These include portability, 
replicability, and remixing facilities and the fact that different and often unforeseen 
audiences may tune into any circulated story. It has been shown that such affordances 
render stories more multiply authored, intertextual, and diverse than their conventional 
definitions (e.g., Page, 2010). Georgakopoulou's research (2015, 2016 a,b) on small 
stories on social media has specifically attested to the following emplotment features 
that need to be identified as part of examining the making and sharing of stories:  
 
(i) 
Emblematic events, i.e., key shared moments that emerge as central in the 
mediatization of specific individuals and current affairs on account of their 
distribution and iterative invocation in (re) tellings;  
(ii) 
Key actors who, through distribution of specific emblematic events, become 
'characters' in circulating stories, often with very different roles and identities 
than those in 'real life';  
(iii) 
Portable and iterated assessments: evaluations of key actors' speech, 
action, values, and style. These are picked out for circulation and, helped by 
replicability and distribution, often lead to repeatable, recyclable 'quotes' that 
are indexical of assessments;  
(iv) 
Tellership: participation roles, rights, and affordances in the distribution of a 
story, including co-narration possibilities.  
 
Georgakopoulou's work (2014, 2015a) has shown that the circulation of the above plot 
ingredients and the connections established among them rely on two social media-

 
8
afforded practices:  
 
(i) 
Narrative stancetaking: The brevity and live-sharing afforded by social 
media environments allow for – and encourages – announcements of stories 
(breaking news) as opposed to full tellings. Conventionalized story-framing 
devices have been found to be used to suggest that there is a story in the 
making, a story that can be told, developed, and updated later 
(Georgakopoulou, 2013a, 2017). These devices include: reference to time, 
place, events, and characters, and/or condensed, indexical associations among 
them. Subsequent audience engagements (e.g., with comments) and 
transposition can help turn a narrative stance on an incident into a story. 
(ii) 
Rescripting: This involves the deployment of media affordances (e.g., video-
editing, remixing) for visually and/or verbally manipulating and reworking 
specific incidents (mainly relating to news events). Rescripting routinely 
entails the creation of humorous, satirical takes on an incident, and thus it is 
commonly associated with YouTube satirical videos (e.g. spoofs, memes, 
remixes, and mashups; Georgakopoulou, 2014). It also involves manipulations 
of plot ingredients so as to create more or less cryptic analogies between an 
'original' incident and other already circulated stories. For instance, the place 
and time of a shared event changes so that the original actors in it become 
'characters' in another story (Georgakopoulou, 2015).  
 

 
9
To forge links among the emplotment features presented above, the social media 
affordances and environments that they are shared in, and their 'tellers' and 
participation roles, we draw on positioning analysis in its connections with small stories 
(Bamberg & Georgakopoulou, 2008; Georgakopoulou, 2013b). In so doing, we seek to 
identify and establish any iterativity (i.e., systematic recurrence) in the following:  
 
(i) How characters are presented in the taleworld, their relations, evaluative 
attributions, activities, and overall placement in time and place (Level 1) 
(ii) How a story is locally occasioned and distributed. Who participates and how? 
Who ratifies, legitimates, or contests which part of the story? Who co-authors, 
what and how? (Level 2)  
(iii) What aspects of the key character(s) are presented as 'stable' and continuous, 
'biographically projectible brands' beyond specific emblematic events and across 
circulated stories? (Level 3). This emerges from the interaction of Levels 1 & 2. 
 
Based on the above framework, our specific questions for the emplotment of Yanis 
Varoufakis are as follows:  
 
(i) How is Yanis Varoufakis emplotted as a (former) Minister of Finance and as an 
economist on social media? How does this relate to and implicate the Greek economy-
in-crisis? 
(ii) More specifically, what is shared and, through distribution, becomes widely available, 
as emblematic events, key actors, and assessments? How are these inter-connected 

 
10 
and, if applicable, rescripted? How are they taken up in networked audiences' 
engagements?  
Methods and Data  
Small Stories and Remix Methods 
Small stories research requires open-ended, flexible methods of data selection and 
collection so as to suit the flexible definition of small stories as a process: Stories often 
emerge through engagement with a specific incident beyond a single event, posting, or 
platform. What is signalled as a story has been found to have organized implications for 
the ensuing participation modes and for how relational stances on the post and/or poster 
will be displayed (Georgakopoulou, 2015). Small stories research is thus compatible with 
ethnographic perspectives, in particular adaptive digital ethnography that is open to 
imaginative, reflexive, and even playful methods (Horst & Miller, 2012; Pink et al., 2016). 
This involves taking flexible routes to what is investigated to suit the mobile, ever-
shifting landscape of social media. It also involves being open to the use of 'remix' 
methods, in Markham's terms (2013). In the spirit of social media practices of remixing, 
remix methods bring together unlikely resources in imaginative and reflexive ways. For 
instance, the researcher's own immersion and participation in social media culture, 
involving processes of catching up, sharing, and real-time tracking so as to document 
iterativity of specific phenomena, are recognized as a major part of the development of 
ethnographic understandings.  
 

 
11 
In addition, Georgakopoulou (2016a, b) has adapted digitally native methods (i.e., 
specifically applying to online settings) for fieldwork, for instance, by observing 
systematically, as a 'lurking' participant in a specific site, activities and postings, so as to 
identify key posts and participants. Some of these methods involve auto-phenomenology, 
that is, the researcher's reflexivity about her own position, stakes, and interests in the 
field of social media engagements. While it is beyond the scope of this article to discuss 
fully our own position on the topic of study as UK-based Greek, female, left-leaning 
academics, our personal, subjective, and in many ways emotionally charged 
engagements with the Greek crisis are worth noting. Tracking Varoufakis' mediatized 
highs and lows in a process of promised re-negotiation of the terms of the Greek bail-out 
and ahead of the referendum of 2015, which left many voters disappointed, could not 
involve, in our case, a purely dispassionate, etic perspective. Alongside many Greek 
supporters of the anti-austerity agenda, we too experienced a mix of fears, hopes, and 
frustrations in the continuing escalation of the severe economic crisis in Greece. This 
involvement may inadvertently have biased us toward specific kinds of social 
mediatizations of Varoufakis, i.e., confrontational, satirical, and largely produced by 
Greek-speaking users, from the maze of possibilities. We thus acknowledge that, despite 
employing social media metrics (e.g., most-viewed videos), our research selections and 
angles are by no means exhaustive, and they are inevitably mediated by our own 
positionality (Riessman, 2001).  
The dataset  
Yanis Varoufakis was thrust onto the public scene during the crisis and ended up serving 

 
12 
as a (short-lived) Minister of Finance for six months, from January to July 2015 under the 
coalition government of the leftwing party Syriza and the rightwing party Independent 
Greeks (ANEL). During Varoufakis's term in ministerial office, an unprecedented media 
fascination developed around him, not just as an economics expert, but as the 'face' of 
the fight against the Greek economic crisis. This fascination went hand-in-hand with, and 
was possibly fuelled by, his own prolific self-fashioning as a media persona: a prolific 
blogger and willing interviewee in the Greek and international presses, Varoufakis made 
his views as an economist on the Greek crisis widely available, long before he took up a 
ministerial post.  
 
Through his blog Thoughts for the post-2008 world and his Twitter account that counts 
more than 731K followers, Yanis Varoufakis has projected an identity primarily as "an 
economist thrust into politics" (a spur-of-the-moment politician), at the same time 
furnishing a sharp contrast between himself and other ministers of finance who are 
professional “politicians.” An academic economist with expertise in game theory, he has 
taught in Britain, Australia, the USA, and Greece and was also appointed in 2012 as 
economist-in-residence at Valve, an online gaming company. Since he left office, he has 
been voicing his views on Europe in public talks and conversations (with Noam Chomsky 
and with Jeremy Corbyn), opinion editorials, online articles, and books, including a 
memoir of his time in office, drawing on his own recordings of meetings and the diary he 
kept during that time. He is one of the co-founders of the pan-European left-wing 
Democracy in Europe Movement 2025 (DiEM25; 2016-now).  
 

 
13 
Data collection for this study was based on real-time tracking of the most intense period 
of Yanis Varoufakis’ mediatization, during his six-month period in ministerial office, by 
identifying and following the circulation of emblematic events and key phases in sharing. 
The mediatization of his persona has continued through the time of writing, currently 
capitalizing, for example, on the relevance of his former ministerial experience of 
negotiating directly with the European Union for UK’s Brexit negotiations (The Guardian, 
2018, 8 Nov.; Newsnight, 2018, 22 Nov.). Drawing on Georgakopoulou's (2014) previous 
study of the social mediatization of the Greek crisis, we followed the principle of tracking 
specific incidents as they circulated rather than focusing on a single social media 
platform from the outset. For that reason, we employed the concepts of telling case 
(Mitchell, 1984) and critical moment (Vaajala, Arminen, & De Rycker, 2013) to identify 
postings worthy of further investigation. Both concepts suggest that a micro-scale event 
or incident may provide a glimpse of meanings, ideas, and values that are taken for 
granted or remain tacit under 'normal' circumstances. Tracking a critical moment or 
telling case is routinely done with the help of adaptive ethnography, as discussed above. 
To track the phases and stages of sharing, we employ popularity indexes and Google 
trends that show popular postings and when the circulation of an incident peaks and on 
which platform.  
 
In total, we analysed nine satirical videos and their accompanying 4,030 comments; 622 
tweets; and 13 news articles relating to an emblematic event at the climax of the Greek 
bailout negotiations, right after the elections of Syriza (see Table 1 below), as well as six 
key interviews that Varoufakis gave after leaving office reflecting on his time as a 

 
14 
Minister (Appendix; Table 2).  
 
Social media 
platform 
Date  
Title of video/ 
medium 
Data  
YouTube  
30th Jan. 2015 
Thug Life 
7 videos 
294 comments (cut-off point  
for collection: July 2015) 
 
5th Feb. 2015 
V for Varoufakis  
3,000 comments (cut-off point  
for collection: July 2015) 
 
21st Feb. 2015 
Rap Battle  
764 comments (cut-off point  
for collection: July 2015) 
Twitter 
30th Jan. 2015 
 
 
 
February-July 
2015 
 
You Killed the Troika 
 
 
 
Top hashtags related 
with Varoufakis  
 
622 posts (cut-off point: 2 Feb. 
2015) 
13 news articles (cut-off point: 1
Feb. 2015) 
 
 
Table 1. Data 
Sharing Emblematic Events 

 
15 
Emplotments of Yanis Varoufakis in emblematic events emerged concurrently with his 
role as Finance Minister (January 2015) and continued until his resignation (July 2015). 
The first emblematic event we identified is linked to Varoufakis' initial meeting as 
Minister with his Dutch counterpart and Chief of Eurogroup, Jeroen Dijsselbloem in 
Athens, just five days (January 30, 2015) after the coming to power of Syriza-ANEL. At 
the joint press briefing following the meeting, Varoufakis referred to the Troika, the 
international committee of lenders, as a “rottenly constructed committee” with which the 
Syriza-ANEL government was not going to co-operate. Upon hearing this statement, 
Jeroen Dijsselbloem laid down his headset and allegedly whispered to Yanis Varoufakis 
"You just killed the Troika"; Varoufakis, in turn, replied, "Wow – This is an unearned 
compliment."6  
This tense conversation was rescripted on the same day on YouTube as a Thug Life meme 
entitled Varoufakis thug life (OFFICIAL): Ο Γιάνης Βαρουφάκης ρίχνει άκυρο στην Τρόικα 
(Yanis Varoufakis cancels out Troika). The video is an instance of Thug Life Remixes, 
which emerged as a meme on Reddit in 2014, peaked in 2015, and have been in decline 
ever since. Thug Life Remixes typically begin with home movies of pre-adolescents using 
overly confrontational or expletive language, followed by a freeze-frame at a close-up 
image of the subject and an instrumental fade out to Dr Dre's 1992 gangsta rap song 
Nuthin' But a G Thang. Thug Life videos feature "the unexpected thug life" as exemplified 
mainly by children “with attitude” who engage in acts of verbal defiance (YouTube Thug 
Life, 2014).  
The parting dialogue from that first meeting also circulated virally on Twitter, with 

 
16 
posting activity peaking immediately after the news bulletin on Mega TV at 9:00 p.m. 
(local time) revealing the words exchanged. Posting activity continued through the next 
couple of days. The collected tweets (see Table 1) are both in Greek and English and 
include retweets, which are an integral part in this type of mimetic sharing. The analysis 
of this emblematic event was complemented by related media reports on the meeting 
published between January 30 and February 12, 2015.  
 
The other key posting we analysed involved the popular video "V for Varoufakis" 
produced by controversial German comedian and TV personality Jan Böhmermann for 
Neo Magazin Royale, his late-night talk show. The video was uploaded on February 25, 
2015 and became popular very quickly: it boasts 3,652,201 views and 4,724 comments 
by 'lay' networked publics (last checked: November 25, 2018). The video was posted in 
English (with the odd Greek word), but the main languages used in the comments are 
English, German, and Greek. 
 
Additional emblematic events that were analyzed for supplementary insights include the 
Rap Battle – Dijsselbloem vs. Varoufakis broadcast on YouTube on February 21, 2015. We 
also considered the first contemporary political Greek comic "WOW (V for V)" (Ariadni, 
Aris, & Jimkos, 2016). Finally, we analyzed (selectively) Varoufakis' own reflexive 
storying of his term in office and presentation of a biographical brand of an economist in 
interviews, newspaper articles, podcasts, and public talks (see Table 2; Appendix).  
 
Drawing on small stories and positioning, as discussed above, we tracked in the data the 

 
17 
emplotment features (see 1.1 above) and analyzed any iterated connections among them. 
We also looked into if and how any of these emplotment features are taken up in 
comments on video-based postings. In this analysis, we also took into account and coded 
the participation and interactional features of each analyzed comment: e.g., which are 
the most viewed and engaged comments? (at the time of our cut-off point which was the 
resignation of Varoufakis from office; see Table 1 above); is a comment atomized or part 
of a thread? 
Analyzing Emplotment 
Rescripting Emblematic Events  
In satirical rescriptings of emblematic events, such as "Thug Life,” "You Killed the Troika,” 
or "V for Varoufakis,” Varoufakis's emplotment is based on his emergence as a character 
positioned in contest with other characters:  
(i) 
Varoufakis versus Jeroen Dijselbloem, his Dutch former counterpart and chief 
of the Eurogroup; 
(ii) 
Varoufakis versus the Troika, the tripartite committee of international lenders 
made up of the European Commission, the European central bank, and the 
International Monetary Fund;  
(iii) 
Varoufakis versus the German Finance Minister, and most ardent supporter of 
austerity policies, Wolfgang Schaüble;  
(iv) 
Varoufakis versus the German Chancellor, Angela Merkel.  
 

 
18 
 
Figure 1 Varoufakis' emplotment as a character in contest with other characters 
 
The "Thug Life" remix, in particular, which includes three snippets from the press 
conference following the meeting of January 30, 2015, picks out Yanis Varoufakis's 
statement about the Troika being a "rottenly constructed committee" and renders it into 
a freeze-frame: A close-up image of Yanis Varoufakis is quickly followed by the addition 
of sunglasses and a joint to the image (see Image 1), alongside a fade out to the Niggaz 
Wit Attitudes' (N.W.A.) song “Straight Outta Compton” ("Fuck tha police coming straight 
from the underground, young nigga got it bad").  
 
Yanis 
Varoufakis 
versus
Wolfgang Schaϋble: 
[V for Varoufakis song]
Angela Merkel 
[Rap Battle -
Dijsselbloem vs. 
Varoufakis]
The Troika
[You Killed the Troika
meme]
Jeroen Dijsselbloem 
[Thug Life remix]

 
19 
 
Image 1 Screenshot of Thug Life remix video, YouTube 
 
This remixing of frames constructs Varoufakis's words as overtly confrontational and 
emblematizes him as a “Thug” figure.7 In this type of character assessment, the (former) 
Minister of Finance becomes a symbol of defiance in the context of Greece's bailout 
negotiations with its European partners.8 
The representation of Varoufakis as a “thug” is further reworked in rescriptings of the 
reported parting words exchanged between Dijsselbloem and Varoufakis (“You Killed the 
Troika – WoW”) at the end of their joint press conference on January 30, 2015. In these 
rescriptings, Varoufakis tends to be depicted as "the winner" of verbal confrontations 
with his European partners, even if this is not translated into any actual re-negotiation 
of the terms of the Greek bailout, which was his stated aim. Positive assessments are also 
attested in circulating descriptions of Varoufakis in YouTube comments and tweets as 
"the man" or "the Greek hero" (Examples 1 – 2; italics added) and in memes depicting 
him as a "good man - troika killer" (see Image 2).  

 
20 
 
Example 1 
@user1: He's the man @yanisvaroufakis – Caught on Tape: Dijsselbloem to 
Varoufakis: 'You just killed the troika' . 
 
Example 2 
@user2: Varoufakis the Greek hero. 'You just killed Troika’, whispered Dutch Finance 
Minister, and Eurogroup Chief.  
 
 
Image 2 Meme about Yanis Varoufakis (Source: Unruly hearts blog) 
 
Incipient positive assessments shared in relation to the emblematic event "You Killed the 
Troika" are gradually seen to sediment and become part of a widely available positioning, 
as we will discuss below. It is worth noting here the political Greek comic "WOW (V for 

 
21 
V)" (Ariadni, Aris, & Jimkos, 2016), the plot of which features an extended emplotment 
of Yanis Varoufakis as a superhero who puts himself in the service of the Greek people 
by setting out to fight the Troikan army of the powerful elites, the dark forces of the 
banking cliques, and the representatives of economic elites that dominate the world. 
Importantly, his economic theory and equations are presented as his weapons in this 
fight. The mission becomes that of killing the monster, in this case the European 
Minotaur,9 and ending its financial tyranny. The plot of an economics fight extends to the 
initial of his name, V, serving as a code name for Victory. It is also a powerful echo of the 
anarchist revolutionary "V" depicted in Alan Moore and David Lloyd's graphic novel V for 
Vendetta, which became a symbol for the Anonymous and Occupy movements. 
 
Such rescriptings of emblematic events and one-on-one character clashes between 
Varoufakis and Greece's creditors as “the enemies” need to be seen in the context of 
circulating characterizations of the former Minister of Finance in newspapers as well as 
in specific media reactions to the incident. In many cases of such reporting, the meeting 
is discussed drawing on the register of war and conflict (e.g., "the battle lines between 
Greece and its creditors were drawn in Athens," The Guardian, 2015, Jan. 20) or assessed 
as part of a military strategy for wielding power and leveraging social support for it.  
 
In other reports, however, Varoufakis's statement about the Troika was framed by 
comments on his unconventional dress style, as shown in the following extract taken 
from a BBC news article:     
 
 

 
22 
Example 3  
Breaking with tradition, Mr Varoufakis wore an open-neck shirt – hanging loose at 
his belt. Mr Dijsselbloem was dressed conventionally. On the troika, Mr Varoufakis 
said "we have no intention of co-operating with a three-member committee whose 
goal is to implement a programme whose logic we consider anti-European" (BBC, 
2015, Jan 30).  
 
Comments on Varoufakis's dress style in the media, although open to a range of 
interpretations depending on the context where such characterizations appear, enter 
and sediment his characterization as a defiant actor in the political scene, e.g., the "leather 
jacket" versus "the suits" in the "international media catwalk" (EuroCrisisPress, 2015, 
Jan.25). This is also noted by Theodoropoulou (2016), who suggests that the 
mediatization of Varoufakis is based on "his powerful, anti-conformist, unconventional 
and rebellious persona, which transgresses the expected standardness associated with 
his institutional role as a minister" (p. 11).  
 
Media references to Yanis Varoufakis also revolve around his preferred mode of 
transport, e.g., "the motorbike riding finance minister" (BBC, 2015, July 9) vs. the "bullet-
proof cars," and his expertise, e.g., the "macro-economist,” "radical economist,” "erratic 
Marxist" (Varoufakis, 2015) vs. professional politicians. Varoufakis was also recurrently 
described as "the emerging rock star of Europe's anti-austerity uprising" (The Telegraph, 
2016, Feb. 3), whose motto could be "never waste an opportunity to antagonize" 
(Politico, 2015, December 24 ). In self-reflective articles and interviews, Varoufakis 

 
23 
himself emphasized his confrontational stance vis-à-vis European partners, drawing on 
a vocabulary of 'war.’ This is evident, for instance, in his statement to Germany's 
Tagersspiegel in June 2015, where he noted that Greece's creditors have turned the 
negotiations "into a war"; or in his interview in Open Democracy in May 2016, where he 
acknowledged that: "We challenged austerity unsuccessfully, we were defeated, and so 
we surrendered in July” (n.p.; italics added).  
 
This emphasis on confrontation, clashes, and ultimately, a lost  war thus became part of 
Varoufakis’s biographical brand, fashioned partly by himself and partly by social media 
engagements with him. It is notable that a comparable waging of a (social) media 'war' 
has been suggested about Greece-in-crisis overall: a confrontation with Europe by a weak 
country through a fight and dispute over not just economic facts and figures, but also of 
words, images, and values (Salmon, 2015). From this point of view, the biographizing of 
Varoufakis as a defiant actor can be seen as an embodiment and a person-centred 
iconography of a national economy in crisis.  
Assessments as incongruous couplings 
Emplotting Varoufakis, as discussed above, capitalizes on the reiteration and circulation 
of incongruous couplings. Couplings refer to “the binding of two meanings across 
paradigmatic systems of potential and may be involved in larger syndromes of meaning 
[…]; [they are] related to the simpler notion of collocations, two linguistic items occurring 
near the text” (Zappavigna, 2011: p. 795). As Zappavigna has shown (2011, 2014), 

 
24 
couplings of ideation and evaluation are used to affiliate users around shared values (in 
her case Obama supporters or coffee lovers). 
  
 In the case of Varoufakis, assessments of his persona that are used in the media and 
social media frustrate expectations of what should co-occur with what, by introducing an 
element of incongruity between his professional role (ideation) and assessments of him 
(evaluation): e.g., "Minister of Awesome" as opposed to "Minister of Finance.” The 
resulting incongruous couplings are integrated into rescripted plots of emblematic 
events. Inserting a Minister of Finance into plots that construct him as a Thug and an 
action hero, as we saw above, implicates the creation of assessments of Varoufakis that 
partake of both worlds: the world of economics and politics, and the world of an action-
hero. The unexpected act of putting the two worlds together brings forward an element 
of satire, which works well with the style of satirical YouTube videos, as we will see 
below. 
 
The role of incongruous couplings is evident in the satirical emplotment of Varoufakis in 
the video V for Varoufakis. The video extends circulating depictions of Yanis Varoufakis 
as a defiant hero to parallelisms of him with the Greek God Hercules, well-known for his 
triumphant victory over the giants, thanks to his massive strength. These parallelisms 
are rendered through the following evaluations of the persona of Varoufakis, which 
iconicize Varoufakis and background the ideational content (Varoufakis as a finance 
minister) in favour of interpersonal meaning (Varoufakis as an icon, rallying people’s 
support and alignment) based on the use of parallelisms. 

 
25 
 
(i) 
The coupling of Hercules with economics in Varoufakis' depiction as a "financial 
Hercules"; 
(ii) The assessments “Greek Minister of Awesome! Relentless Varoufakis!," "Greek 
Minister of OMFG!,” and “Maverick Varoufakis!”, which present a conflicting 
semiology of perceptions of conventionality associated with a ministerial post and 
a 'cool' persona; 
(iii) The descriptions of him as “half-God, half-souvlaki,” which draw on clashing 
stereotypical connotations of ancient and modern Greece;  
(iv) The word play of Hell with Hellenic in the lyric "jacket collar raised, on a black 
motorcycle he puts the 'hell' into Hellenic”  (‘V for Varoufakis’), which constructs 
Varoufakis as an economist who is both Greek and revengeful (destined to bring 
hell).  
 
Such couplings entered the mediatized iconography of Varoufakis across different media. 
Their popularity is attested, for example, in invocations of such parallelisms of 
Varoufakis with Hercules in tweets posted about the Greek referendum in 5 July 2015: 
  

 
26 
 
Image 3. Image accompanying tweet 
@user4: 21st Century Hercules, #Varoufakis #Tripras #Eurogroup  
 
Example 4. Tweets depicting Varoufakis as Hercules 
(i) 
Jul 10, 2015 
@user3: Varoufakis es Hércules, Ben Affleck es Batman y Casillas el porter del 
Madrid  
(Trans. from Spanish: ‘Varoufakis is Hercules, Ben Affleck is Batman and Cassilas  
the goalkeeper of Madrid’) 
(ii)  Jul 6, 2015 
@user4: Mandado uma cartinha pra Disney perguntado porque no desehno do 
Hércules não tem nem um nome parecido com Tsakalotos ou Varoufakis  
(Trans. from Portuguese: ‘Sent a letter to Disney asking why the drawing of 
Hercules doesn't feature the name of Tsakalotos or Varoufakis’)  
(iii) Jul 6, 2015  

 
27 
@user5: Si os preguntan el nombre de cuatro heroes griegos responded: Léonidas, 
Hércules, Aquiles y Varoufakis  
(Trans. from Spanish: ‘If they ask you the name of four Greek heroes reply: 
Leonidas, Hercules, Achilles and Varoufakis’) 
 
The above tweets, which were sampled using the hashtags most commonly associated 
with Varoufakis (see Table 1) circulated during the Greek referendum in July 2015 and 
appeared beyond Greek-speaking social media. Such tweets suggest the sedimentation 
of assessments in the rescripting of Varoufakis as a Greek god-like 'hero.' 
 
Studies of couplings on social media platforms (Zappavigna, 2011, 2014; 
Georgakopoulou 2016a) have shown: a) the recurrence of a pairing of meanings or 
modalities, enhanced by wide distribution or by conventional expectations of a specific 
type of response to specific posts; and b) the performative, community-creation roles 
that these have. In this case, the incongruous couplings of assessments of Varoufakis 
establish pairings of ideational and interpersonal meaning in incongruous ways, 
prompting users’ alignment (or disalignment) with his battle against the European 
Union.  
 
Having examined the rescripting of emblematic events in terms of the emplotment and 
assessment of key characters, we turn in the next section to the selection of key 
characters' quotes and their insertion into rescriptings. 

 
28 
Quotes as Portable Assessments  
Rescriptings of emblematic events are shared on Twitter as breaking news. The 
microblogging platform affords quick, fragmentary posting activity, which we have 
characterized as "ecstatic sharing, i.e., affective sharing in the here-and-now of 
instantaneous proximity with networked audiences" (Giaxoglou, 2018). In rescriptings 
of the emblematic event of Varoufakis's tense press conference with Dijsselbloem, a brief 
quote ("You just killed the Troika – wow") was lifted from the event and rendered into a 
portable for further circulation, distribution, and commenting. This is evident in the 
outburst of tweets that quickly followed the announcement of the parting dialogue on 
Mega TV at 9:00 pm through to the next day. During this period, the quote was shared 
including one or both turns from the reported dialogue (e.g., "You just killed the troika" 
and/or "Wow"). It thus associated narrative stancetaking devices with a breaking news 
story, specifically with what Labov (1972, 2013) would call an abstract consisting of a 
reference to time (just), a key event (in the past tense), (implied) characters, and 
indexical associations of confrontation between them. The more this quote was shared, 
the more it became a reference, a brief and elliptical allusion to the incident (De Fina and 
Georgakopoulou 2012, pp. 109-110).  
 
This type of sharing creates conditions of story recipiency for further participants (see 
also 3.4 below). For instance, tweeters may take up the proposal of the quote for how the 
referred to and implied story needs to be understood, and amplify the fighting scenario 
by providing a positive assessment of Varoufakis, as in the tweet  below:  
 
 

 
29 
Example 5  
@user6: Βαρουfuckis και δερνεις (‘Varoufuckis and you kick ass’)  
 
Or, they may personalize and bring in their own motive reactions to the quote, as in 
example 6 below. Usually this is done with references to songs10 and other shared 
popular culture texts.  
 
Example 6 
@user7: You just killed the troika. I just died in your arms tonight YOLO [i.e., you only 
live once] 
 
These possibilities for participation extend beyond what has been described in the 
literature as co-narration and instead constitute cases of what we call poly-storying, as 
we discuss further below. 
 
The quote "you just killed the troika – wow" has been extremely portable beyond the 
original setting of the press conference and the breaking news of it on Twitter. Its 
transmedia and trans-semiotic mobilisation from posters, photoshopped materials, T-
shirts (images 4-5 below), or other artefacts, and a WoW comic cover (image 6 ) can be 
described as trans-plotment: the quote, a narrative stancetaking on an emblematic event, 
becomes a reference story to it through sharing, but it also becomes part of new plots in 
its distribution.  
 

 
30 
 
Image 4. Tostadora Woman's T-shirt (http://www.tostadora.com)  
 
 
Image 5. Tostadora Men's T-Shirt (by aritzcirbian) (http://www.tostadora.com)  
 

 
31 
 
Image 6. Cover of WoW comic, 2016 
 
Trans-plotment is created on the back of already shared rescripted accounts of 
emblematic events. For instance, the above images recycle the clash between the 
Minister of Finance and the Troika in counter-stories of financial institutions as the 
personified 'evil,’ encoding moral values (good versus evil). In this way, the multi-
semiotic manipulations of the original plot through rescripting and the intertextual links 
between the emblematic event and its creative reworkings are reminiscent of transmedia 
narratives (Harvey, 2013; Jenkins, 2008). In transmedia narratives, the mediatized 
'story'  takes shape in multiple forms across multiple media platforms from varied tellers 
and across time, attesting to the experiencing of mediatization as panmediation, i.e., as 
the co-existence, permeation, and interaction of an ever-changing combination of media 
in society (DeLuca et al., 2012, p. 487). In this way, the mediatized 'story' spreads, 
rendering visible particular aspects of social and political life otherwise hidden from 

 
32 
view (Thompson, 2005). At the same time, the wide distribution of the mediatized story 
sediments key events, characters, and stances around Yanis Varoufakis's transmedially 
constructed biographical aura. In this case, social media affordances of portability and 
multiple audience engagement are key to the transmedia emplotment of Varoufakis. 
Below, we will show  the main possibilities for such forms of multi-engagement. 
Rescripting the Minister of Finance: Multi-Participation  
YouTube satirical videos have emerged as a prime circulation phase for news stories 
(Georgakopoulou, 2014). In this case, too, YouTube served as the primary site for 
satirical rescriptings of Yanis Varoufakis, affording users multiple possibilities for 
multiple types and modes of participation. The functions or social effects of this kind of 
satire and humour about social and political matters are not obvious, and it is beyond the 
scope of this article to fully explore them. Based on existing research on political humour, 
however, it can be noted that political humour often ends up reinforcing dominant values 
and views on politics, rather than promoting radical thinking (see Tsakona & Popa, 2011, 
p. 2).  
 
Authors of the analyzed comments on the video in our data tend to co-author the 
rescripted plot(s) of the video. In Example 7 below, the commenter suggests that turning 
Varoufakis into the late rapper Tupak from whom Thug Life evolved would have added 
impact to the memetic video.  
 
Example 7  

 
33 
Georgio111: Αφού του έβαλες την φράση thug life έπρεπε να τον κάνεις 2pac στο τέλος 
και να παίζει το hold on be strong!! Χαχαχαχα πάντως τέλειοο  
‘Since you went for thug life you should have turned him into 2pac at the end and 
have the song hold on be strong playing. Haha though perfect’  
[From comments on the Varoufakis Thug Life video]   
 
It is typical for comments to pick up on different aspects of the circulating story, leaping 
for instance from positive assessments of Yanis Varoufakis to an appreciation of 
comedian Jan Böhmermann, as Example 8 illustrates. In this process, users build new 
associations11 (in this case of Varoufakis with Böhmermann) in the branching out of the 
story:  
 
Example 8  
Snoopy243: OMFG, this man is soo awesome!!! Varoufakis? Nooo, Böhmermann!!!! 
He's raising the average German IQ by about 5 percent! And isn't it a cosmic joke that 
GERMANY of all countries now has a Staatsaffäre because of its HUMOR going too far? 
There IS hope, I tell you, there IS hope!  
[From comments on the V for Varoufakis video] 
 
In addition, new audiences (i.e. beyond those interested in the Greek/Eurozone crisis 
and him personally) seem to tune into the Varoufakis story. We can hypothesize that the 
commenter above is a fan of the popular comedian Böhmermann and that is what took 

 
34 
him to Varoufakis’s video in the first place. Similarly, many comments on Thug Life: 
Varoufakis suggest that the users are, on some level, thug life video connoisseurs or 
enthusiasts (as in example 7 above). This allows them to co-construct Varoufakis as a 
rescripted character, e.g., "a gangsta,” "a roadman,” or a "Thug Life" character, as 
illustrated in Example 9: 
 
Example 9 
akazabubu: step up nigga 
O Koinodontas: To step up το 2 ή το 3? (‘Step up 2 or 3?’) 
[From comments on V for Varoufakis video]   
 
 
Other typical storying possibilities include:  
 
(i) the ratification of character contests, e.g., between Yanis Varoufakis and key 
characters in the emblematic event, such as Wolfgang Schaüble: 
 
Example 10 
 
Zarathustra: I'm german and I'm here to say that he's amazing and he should kick 
Schäubles skinny ass. 
  
[From comments on V for Varoufakis] 
 

 
35 
(ii) assessments of both the rescripted plot of the memetic video and the original: 
 
Example 11 
 
DailyPointless: gamise kai to video kai o varoufakis!  
 
(‘both awesome - the video and Varoufakis!)  
 
[From comments on V for Varoufakis] 
 
(iii) comments that may include (i) and (ii) above, at the same time as talking about the 
Greek economy. These longer contributions routinely occur as part of threads rather 
than as atomized comments. Our zoomed-in analysis of the most replied-to comment in 
our data, from the video V for Varoufakis, which attracted 159 comments, reveals that the 
Greek economy and economic terms (e.g., 'taxes,’ 'economic output,’ 'big bang') are 
introduced in personalized terms, that is, as part of the commenters' lived experience 
and of stories of living in hardship. We can see this in the initial comment by snoopy199: 
 
Example 12 
 
I have to say this video is absolutely brilliant. I haven't laughed like this in quite a 
while! But here's what I see through my eyes. I'm 15 years old (Greek), and I have to 
tell everyone asking for their money... I do not have it. I'm not sure who has it (you 
can read that in other comments), but I can tell you I don't have it, nobody that I 
know has it and nobody I don't know has it either. The Greek population below the 
poverty line was 20% in 2009 and I'm pretty sure it hasn't changed for the best, if it 

 
36 
has changed at all. The only reason I can afford my PC, internet, heating or even food 
is because of relatives I have in Belgium and without them I would live in some hole 
in the ground, eating worms after mushing them with stones. Now, about 
Varoufakis. I don't know what media outside of Greece says, but here he is a symbol 
of hope. If  he doesn't make a difference then we all know that nobody can. 
 
[From comments on V for Varoufakis] 
 
It is hard to know which of the statements in the above comment are deliberately 
exaggerated and provocative.12 It is notable, however, that the majority of comments that 
respond to it follow the style of integrating any economic commentary into the 
commenters' personal lives and kinship networks (e.g., my grandmother, my son, etc.) at 
the same time as engaging with the video and the satirical rescripting of Varoufakis.  
 
Memetic videos foster possibilities for commenters to appreciate the production and 
performance of the video and to engage with the story of the video, often by making links 
to the original incident as well as personalizing (Georgakopoulou, 2015). Commenters 
may specifically refer to scenes, address the characters directly, or echo words or 
catchphrases that were lifted from the original incident and recycled in the creative 
reworkings of it (cf. Leppaenen & Hakinen, 2014).  
 
As we can also see in the comments above, multi-contributions are important in the ways 
in which the videos are produced and engaged with. In addition, the rescripting of 
Varoufakis as an action hero, a character in contest with powerful Eurogroup leaders and 

 
37 
elites, seems to create conditions of storied participation, and, more often than not, of 
aligned storied participation for commenters.13 This means that commenters tend to 
align with the stance in the original posting and the rescripting of Varoufakis or to 
elaborate on and amplify it, often on the basis of lived experience, as in example 11 above.  
Concluding Discussion 
The Emplotment of Varoufakis (and the Economy) as Poly-Storying  
In this article, we have examined the social mediatization of the former Minister of 
Finance of Greece, Yanis Varoufakis, as a case of emplotment. Drawing on insights and 
methods for the analysis of small stories on social media (Georgakopoulou, 2014, 2015), 
we advanced emplotment as a lens to understand (pan)mediatized vernacularizations of 
the economy that can be extended to other expert-based domains in the contemporary 
socio-political sphere.  
 
Our analysis showed how incidents relating to the Greek bailout negotiations were 
creatively reworked in multi-semiotic rescriptings that emplotted Yanis Varoufakis as a 
character of 'thug life,’ a 'gangsta,’ an 'action superhero,’ 'kicking ass,’ and 'the Killah.’ 
Such iterated characterizations, often expressed in incongruous couplings, became part 
of contests that set Varoufakis in clashing semiologies as the 'hero' vs. the 'villains,’ the 
'good guy' vs. 'bad guys’ in 'David vs. Goliath' type of fights, echoing popular culture plots. 
Their transmedia distribution, enhanced by iterative, portable quotes ("you just killed 
the Troika") sedimented the iconography and biographing of a maverick, embattled 
Minister of Finance. Sharing practices also attested to audiences' participation 

 
38 
engagements with emblematic events in ways that often aligned with, and further 
rescripted, this characterization. Interestingly, the biographing of Yanis Varoufakis 
continues to this day, shaping and being shaped by shifting incongruous couplings: from 
his self-biographing as an 'outsider' by choice and conviction (Varoufakis, 2017) to 
others' fashioning of him as “the motorbike-riding academic-economist” who spoke out 
against the austerity policies during the eurozone crisis (Reuters, 2018, Nov. 25).   
 
The above emplotment was found to implicate the Greek economy-in-crisis in more or 
less direct ways. For instance, the economy formed an integral part of recyclable and 
replicable plots in which Yanis Varoufakis figured as the main actor and came to stand 
almost metonymically for it. In these cases, the economy was concurrently rescripted as 
'a battlefield' or as 'an agon,’ i.e., as a site of political struggle  (Lempert & Silverstein, 
2012).  
 
Our analysis suggests that emplotment is shaped by the affordances of portability, 
replicability, and remixing and is characterized by cumulativeness, multiple authoring 
(including Varoufakis's self-fashioning), and trans-mediality. Through distribution, 
certain positionings are amped up and sedimented, not least in the sense of becoming 
readily available. However, this is by no means a linear or deterministic process. The 
process of emplotment is best described as poly-storying rather than as a coherent 
biography, as traditional conceptualizations of the term would have it. Poly-storying is 
understood as the availability and/or remixing of different plots involving Varoufakis, as 
well as of the different possibilities for networked audiences to contribute to them. 

 
39 
Multiplicity and co-existence are key facets of poly-storying. As we saw in the analysis, 
Varoufakis's rescripting as a Troika-killer was done multi-semiotically and in many sites:  
 
- 
linguistically, e.g., with a quote 
- 
visually, e.g., with images 
- 
in remixed ways, e.g., with memes 
- 
as breaking news on Twitter 
- 
as captions on T-shirts, etc.  
 
At the same time, in the same space, for instance, in comments on a YouTube video, the 
context collapse (Wesch, 2008) of participation resulted in the co-existence of different 
contributions from different users. If we also take into account the possibility for 
diachronic contributions (Bou-Franch & Blitvitch, 2014) to video postings, poly-storying 
has to be viewed in principle as an open-ended communication process, with the 
potential for more and new layers of associations, particularly as discussions about 
Varoufakis and/or the Greek economy, and Europe more broadly, may be resurfacing as 
part of current affairs.14 
 
From this point of view, poly-storying points to the importance of social mediatization 
affordances in creating and rendering available (new) multi-associations and parallel, 
alternative understandings or reworkings of issues of public interest. It would be useful 
for the studies of the Greek and Eurozone financial crisis to recognise such 
understandings as part of the historiographies of the crisis. There is also scope for 

 
40 
exploring their role in making available anti-austerity voices that depart from the tabloid 
and austerity-supporting stereotypes of the early days that painted crisis as the fault of 
Greece and the Greeks (e.g., Wodak & Angouri, 2014).  
 
The role of poly-storying in creating celebrities out of experts also needs to be further 
explored as part of studies of shifts into 'pop' politics or politainment (cf. Baym & Burnett, 
2009), particularly on social media. It can specifically afford analytical routes into the 
(re)appraisal of satire, humour, and emotion in doing, communicating, and engaging with 
politics (cf. van Hout & Burger, 2016), In the light of this article, affective responses are 
intimately linked with jointly (re)creating and remixing plots as part of networked 
audiences' engagement with expert-based domains. In a similar vein, the study of social 
mediatization through the lens of the emplotment of key individuals as part of self-
mediatization practices in panmediated environments can be a useful extension of 
sociolinguistic studies of vernacularization, so as to begin to address the increasingly 
porous boundaries between official/unofficial, professional/amateur, and expert/lay 
engagements. In particular, a focus on emplotment can offer a complementary analytical 
route to the study of linguistic forms, multi-modal resources, and their shifts across 
contexts (re-contextualizations and resemiotizations). In this way, it can add insights 
into the study of how mediatization processes create indexical links of specific semiotic 
resources with the specific personalities of politicians, which in turn become their 
'message': 'who they are' becomes a proxy for 'what they stand for' (Silverstein, 2011).15 
As such, our focus on emplotment can prove a productive point of entry into explorations 

 
41 
of the increasingly prominent and consequential post-truth public engagements with 
political and economic life, in particular in relation to expert-based 'facts.’  
References  
 
Agha, A. (2011) Meet mediatization. Language and Communication (Special Issue edited 
by A. Agha on Mediatized Communication in Complex Societies), 31(3), 163-170.  
Androutsopoulos, A. (Ed.) (2014) Mediatization and sociolinguistic change. Berlin: 
Mouton de Gruyter.  
Bamberg, M. & Georgakopoulou, A. (2008) Small stories as a new perspective in 
narrative and identity analysis. Text & Talk, 28, 377-96.  
Baym, N. K. & Burnett. R. (2009) Amateur experts: International fan labor in Swedish 
independent music. International Journal of Cultural Studies, 12 (5), 1-17 
Bou-Franch, P. & P. Garces-Conejos Blitvitch (2014) Conflict management in massive 
polylogues: A case study from YouTube. Journal of Pragmatics 73: 19-36. 
boyd, d. (2011) “Social Network sites as networked publics: affordances, dynamics, and 
implications”. In Networked self: identity, community, and culture on social 
network sites (ed. Zizi Papacharissi). New York: Routledge. pp.39-58. 
Boukala, S. (2014). Waiting for democracy: Political crisis and the discursive 
(re)invention of the 'national enemy' in times of 'Grecovery.’ Discourse & Society, 
25 (4), 483-499.  

 
42 
Burgess, J., (2006). Hearing Ordinary Voices: Cultural Studies, Vernacular Creativity and 
Digital Storytelling. Continuum: Journal of Media & Culture Studies 20 (2), 201-214.  
Coupland, N. (2014) Sociolinguistic change, vernacularization and broadcast British 
media. In Androutsopoulos, A. (ed.) (2014) Mediatization and sociolinguistic 
change. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 67-98. 
De Fina, A. and A. Georgakopoulou (2012). Analyzing narrative. Discourse and 
sociolinguistic perspectives. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
DeLuca, K., Lawson, S., & Sun, Y. (2012). Occupy Wall Street on the public screens of 
social media: The many framings of the birth of a protest movement. 
Communication, Culture & Critique, 5, 483–509.  
Fairclough, N. (1994) Conversationalization of public discourse and the authority of the 
consumer. In: Russell Keat, Nigel Whiteley and Nicholas Abercrombie (eds.), The 
authority of the consumer, London: Routledge, 253–268. 
Georgakopoulou, A. (2007) Small stories, interaction and identities. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins.  
Georgakopoulou, A. (2013a) Small stories research as a framework for the study of 
social media practices: Narrative stancetaking and circulation in a Greek news 
story. Sociolinguistica 27, 19–36.  
Georgakopoulou, A. (2013b) Building iterativity into positioning analysis: A practice-
based approach to small stories and self. Special Issue on Positioning. Narrative 
Inquiry 23, 89–110.  

 
43 
Georgakopoulou, A. (2014) Small stories transposition & social media: A micro-
perspective on the 'Greek crisis.’ Special Issue. Discourse & Society 25, 519–539.  
Georgakopoulou, A. (2015) Sharing as rescripting. Place manipulations on YouTube 
between narrative and social media affordances. Discourse, Context & Media 9, 64–
72.  
Georgakopoulou, A. (2016a) From narrating the self to posting self(ies): a small stories 
approach to selfies. Open Linguistics 2, 300-316.  
Georgakopoulou, A. (2016b) Friends and followers 'in the know': A narrative 
interactional approach to social media participation. In Mildorf, J. & Thomas, B. 
(eds.) Dialogue across media. Amsterdam/Philadephia: John Benjamins. 155-178. 
Georgakopoulou, A. (2017) Sharing the moment as small stories: The interplay  
between practices & affordances in the social media-curation of lives. 
Narrative Inquiry 27, 311-333. 
Giaxoglou, K. (2018) #JeSuisCharlie? Hashtags as narrative resources in contexts of 
ecstatic sharing. Discourse, Context and Media (Special Issue edited by C, Lee: 
Social Tagging) 22, 13-20.  
Harvey, B. C., (2013). Transmedia storytelling and audience: memory and market in 
Youngs, G. (ed) Digital world: Connectivity, creativity and rights. London: 
Routledge.  
Herring, Susan (2010) Computer-mediated conversation: introduction and overview. 
Language@Internet 7 (2).  
 

 
44 
Horst, H.A. and D. Miller (eds) (2012). Digital anthropology. London, New York: 
BERG.Irvin Morris, V. (2012). The readers' advisory guide to street literature. 
Chicago: American Library Association.  
Jenkins, H. (2008). Convergence culture: Where old and new media collide. London: New 
York University Press.  
Markham, A. N. (2013) Remix culture, remix methods: Reframing qualitative inquiry for 
social media contexts. In Denzin, N., & Giardina, M. (Eds.) Global Dimensions of 
Qualitative Inquiry. Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press, pp. 63-81. 
Labov, W. (1972). Language in the inner city. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania 
Press. 
Labov, W. (2013) The language of life and death. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.  
Lempert, M. and M. Silverstein (2012) Creatures of politics. Media, message and the 
American presidency.  Bloomington: Indiana University Press.  
Marwick, A.E. (2013) Status update: Celebrity, publicity, and branding in the social media 
age, New Haven & London: Yale University Press. 
Marwick, A. and d. boyd (2011). "I Tweet Honestly, I Tweet Passionately: Twitter users, 
context collapse, and the imagined audience.” New Media and Society 13, 96-113.  
Mitchell, C. (1984) Case studies. In R. Ellen (Ed.) Ethnographic research: A guide to 
general conduct. London: Academic Press, pp. 237-241.  

 
45 
Page, R., (2010). Re-examining narrativity: Small stories in status updates. Text and 
Talk 30 (4), 423–444. 
Pink, S., H. Horst, J. Postill, L. Hjorth, T. Lewis, J. Tacchi, (2016). Digital ethnography. 
Principles and practice. London: Sage Publications.  
Ricoeur, P. (1991) From text to action. London: Continuum  
Riessman, C. K., (2001). Analysis of Personal Narratives. In Gubrium, J.F. and J.A. 
Holstein (eds.) Handbook of interview research. London: Sage Publications .  
Silverstein, M. (2011) The "message" in the (political) battle. Language and 
Communication (Special Issue edited by Asif Agha: Mediatized Communication in 
Complex Societies) 31 (3): 203-216.  
Salmon, C. (2017).  Storytelling: Bewitching the modern mind. Trans: by David Macey. 
London and New York: Verso Books.  
Senft, T. M. (2013) Microcelebrity and the branded self. In A companion to new media 
dynamics (eds. J. Hartley, J. Burgess and A. Bruns). Wiley-Blackwell: Oxford, UK.  
Theodoropoulou, I., (2016) Mediatized vernacularization: On the structure, 
entextualization and resemiotization of Varoufakiology. Discourse, Context and 
Media 14: 28-39.  
Thompson, John B. (2005) The new visibility. Theory, Culture & Society 22 (6), 31–51.  
Thornborrow, Joanna (2015) The discourse of public participation. From talk show to 
Twitter. London and New York: Routledge.  

 
46 
Tsakona, V. and D. E. Popa (eds) (2011) Studies in Political Humour. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins.  
Vaajala, T., I. Arminen & A. de Rycker, (2013) Misalignments in Finnish emergency call 
openings: Legitimacy, asymmetries and multi-tasking as interactional contests. In 
De Rycker, A. & Z. Mohd Don (eds.) Discourse and crisis: Critical perspectives. 
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.  
van Hout, T. and P. Burger (2015). Mediatization and the language of Journalism. 
Tilburg Papers in Culture Studies, Paper 131, 1-24. 
Varoufakis, Y. (2014) Being Greek and an Economist while Greece is Burning! An 
intimate account of a peculiar tragedy. Journal of Modern Greek Studies, 32 (1), 1-
23.  
Varoufakis, Y. (2017) Adults in the room. My battle with Europe's deep establishment. 
London: Penguin.  
Wesch, M. (2008) Context collapse. Available at: 
http://mediatedcultures.net/projects/youtube/context-collapse.  
Wodak, R., & J. Angouri, (2014). From Grexit to Grecovery: Euro/crisis discourses. 
Discourse & Society 25 (4), 417-423.  
Zappavigna, M. (2011) Ambient affiliation: A linguistic perspective on Twitter. New 
Media & Society 13 (5), 788-806.  
Zappavigna, M. (2014) Enacting identity in microblogging through ambient affiliation. 
Discourse & Communication 8 (2), 209-228.  

 
47 
(Select) Media 
Ariadni, Aris, Jimkos. (2016). WOW: V for V. Athina: Patakis. [book] 
EuroCrisisPress (2015, January 25) Varoufakis on the international media catwalk: on 
the politics of style. Retrieved from: 
http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/eurocrisispress/category/maria-kyriakidou/. 
BBC News. (2015, January 30). Greece's Varoufakis: 'No debt talks with EU-IMF troika.’ 
BBC News [Europe]. Retrieved from: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-
31055069. 
BBC News. (2015, July 9) Greek debt crisis: Mr Varoufakis’s exit stage left. Retrieved 
from: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-33441646. 
BBC Newsnight (2018, 22 November). Yanis Varoufakis: ‘Nobody negotiates with the 
EU’. Retrieved from: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SY3wj4gmv5s. 
Reuters (2018, Nov. 25) Greece’s Varoufakis to run in European election – in Germany. 
Retrieved from: https://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-eu-election-germany/greeces-
varoufakis-to-run-in-european-election-in-germany-idUKKCN1NU0QR 
Politico (2015, December 24). Yanis Varoufakis talks again, insults everydbody. 
Retrieved from: https://www.politico.eu/article/six-bluntest-statements-of-yanis-
varoufakis-volkskrant-interview-schauble-dijsselbloem-tsipras-bailout-deal/. 
The Guardian (2015, November 28). Brian Eno meets Yanis Varoufakis: "Economists 
are more showbiz than pop stars.” Retrieved from: 

 
48 
https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/28/conversation-brian-eno-
yanis-varoufakis-interview 
The Guardian Online (2015, January 20). Greece's finance minister vows to shun 
officials from troika. Retrieved from: 
https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/30/greece-finance-minister-
yanis-varoufakis-shun-officials-troika 
The Guardian (2018, November 8) Podcast/Can you take on the EU and win? Retrieved 
from: https://www.theguardian.com/profile/yanis-varoufakis 
The Telegraph (2015, February 3) Greece’s rock-star finance minister Yanis Varoufakis 
defies ECB’s drachma threats. Retrieved from: 
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/economics/11388263/Greeces-rock-star-
finance-minister-Yanis-Varoufakis-defies-ECBs-drachma-threats.html 
Varoufakis, Y. (2015, July 6), Minister no More! Blog post in Thoughts for the post-2008 
world, July 6, 2015. Retrieved from: http://yanis.varoufakis.eu.  
 
Appendix 
Table 2. Varoufakis' self-reflexive storying 
 
Media  
Date  
Title 
Sky TV  
Jan.19, 2015 
Istories (interview by Alexis Papachelas)  

 
49 
The New Yorker 
August, 3 2015 
The Greek Warrior: how a radical finance minister 
took on Europe – and failed 
The GUARDIAN  
April, 5 2016 
Why we must save the EU  
BBC  
March, 31 2016  
Hard Talk (Interview by Stephen Sackur)  
Open Democracy 
May, 13 2016 
Europe and the spectre of democracy: Michel  
Feher interviews Yanis Varoufakis 
Shedia  
July, 18 2016 
There is an epic struggle between light and darkness.  
Who wins? – Yanis Varoufakis in-depth interview  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Notes 
 
 
2 We enclose the term ‘lay’ in quotation marks, as we are aware of the difficulty in 
establishing clear-cut distinctions between members of the public and ‘expert’ 
contributors. At the same time, in line with Thornborrow (2015, p. 3), the benefits of using 
the term ‘lay’ participants lie in providing a way of distinguishing them from other 
categories of participant: those who are employed by the media network as hosts or 
presenters; other media professsionals, including journalists and politicians; and those 
who are labelled ‘experts’ and who often represent institutions or organisations of some 
sort or another. As such a distinguishing category, the term lay “works – but only up to a 
certain point. […] .. to label them ‘ordinary’ members of the public does not fully capture 
                                                      

 
50 
                                                                                                                                                              
the complex local identities and situated expertise that their participation frequently 
involves” (p. 3).  
3 Social media analysts have noted the pressures and salience of affordances for the 
creation of ‘branded’ selves online, i.e., commoditized selves modelled on marketing and 
advertising (e.g., Marwick, 2013) that become (disproportionately) known for a specific 
aspect of their lives. This branding is conducive to the creation of celebrity selves, even 
among ordinary users (‘micro-celebrities’), with friends and followers encouraged to 
behave as ‘fans’ (Senft, 2013). 
4 Affordances, a concept originating in psychology, is commonly used in relation to social 
media communication to describe the users’ “perceived possibilities for action and 
constraints’ in different social media platforms” (Barton & Lee, 2013). 
5 This research received funding from the European Research Council under the European 
Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013). 
6 The incident is described in some detail in Yanis Varoufakis’ memoir Adults in the Room 
(pp. 164-172) under the heading “Ultimatum”. 
7 As defined by the late hip-hop artist Tupac Shakur (1971-1996), “a thug is someone who 
is going through struggles, has gone through struggles, and continues to live day by day 
with nothing for them. That person is a thug. [A]nd the life they are living is the thug life” 
(Irvin Morris, 2012, p. 29).  
8 That said, despite the reclamation of the term ‘thug,’ the co-existing meaning of a 
criminal opens up possibilities for alternative associations of such popular symbolisms. 
9 The creators of the comic consulted with Yanis Varoufakis during the production phase 
in addition to drawing heavily on allegories of the present situation that feature 
Varoufakis’ book The Global Minotaur (2011) in their attempt to provide a popular guide 
to the Greek bailout negotiations of that period.  
10 ‘I just died in your arms tonight’ is a popular song by the rock band Cutting Crew, 
released in 1986. 
11 Searchable talk online is a tangible indication of such associations.  
12 Many respondents, for instance, question the truthfulness of the commenter’s young 
age. 
13 The well-attested YouTube conflicts and rants (e.g., Pihlaja, 2014) are notably a minority 
in our data: Most comments are atomized. Economics commentary that is not grounded 
in lived realities but is offered in general, nation-state terms (e.g., the Greek people), 
which can lead to oppositional (us vs. them) exchanges, is also infrequent. Only nine 
comments out of the 159 replies were of this kind. 
14 Chains of more recent rescriptings are outside the scope of the present article, although 
worthy of attention in further research.  
15 This has so far been mainly explored in relation to the role of mass media. 

 
51 
                                                                                                                                                              
 
 
 
 
 
Alex Georgakopoulou is Professor of Discourse Analysis & Sociolinguistics, King’s College London. She 
has (co)-authored 8 books which include Analyzing Narrative (with Anna De Fina, 2012, CUP) and (co)-
edited several Special Issues and collections, incl. The Routledge Handbook of Language & Digital 
Communication (with Tereza Spilioti, 2016, Routledge). Her forthcoming monograph is entitled 
‘Quantified Stories: A narrative analysis of metrics on social media’ (with Stefan Iversen & Carsten Stage, 
Palgrave).   
 
Korina Giaxoglou is Lecturer in English Language and Applied Linguistic, The Open University, UK. She 
has co-edited two special issues on emotion and social media (Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic 
Media, 2017 & Social Media + Society, 2018). She is currently completing a monograph entitled ‘Sharing 
small stories of life and death online’ (Routledge).  
 

