International Journal of Management, Knowledge and Learning, 5(1), 81–97
Managerialism: An Ideology
and its Evolution
Christine Doran
Charles Darwin University, Australia
The article focuses attention on managerialism from the point of view of its
ideological status. It traces the rise of managerialism, the main contributors
to theorising about the nature of managerialism, and the characteristics and
appeals of an outstanding managerialist text. The article begins by outlining
the major features of the economic and social context in the United States,
the United Kingdom and other Western countries that have contributed to the
rise in the intellectual and social standing of the concept of managerialism.
The problem of establishing consensus on the deﬁnition of managerialism is
noted, as is the difﬁculty of positioning it within the conventional left-right po-
litical spectrum. The nature of an inﬂuential variant of managerialism known
as ‘socially responsible’ management is then explored.
Keywords: management, managerialism, managers, shareholders, postwar
consensus, neoliberalism, trade unions
Introduction
This article focuses on managerialism in terms of its ideological status. It
charts the rise of managerialism, the main contours of the ﬁeld of theoris-
ing about the nature of managerialism, and the characteristics and appeals
of a salient managerialist text. As discussed below, there is no generally
accepted deﬁnition of managerialism, but as a working deﬁnition it can be
said that managerialism is an ideology based on the belief that optimisa-
tion of the productivity and outcomes of all organisations can be achieved
through the application of managerial expertise, theories and techniques;
this applies to both private and public organisations. The article begins
by outlining the main features of the economic and social context in the
United States, Britain and other Western economies that have contributed
to the rise in the intellectual and social inﬂuence of the concept of man-
agerialism. It notes the extreme difﬁculty of establishing consensus on the
deﬁnition of managerialism and on positioning it within the usual left-right
political spectrum. This is partly because of the highly ideological nature
of the concept itself. It is suggested that many of the key conceptual com-
ponents of managerialism have a much longer historical genealogy than is
usually recognised. The emergence and recent rise in public awareness of
the discourse of ‘socially responsible’ management is also examined.
www.issbs.si/press/ISSN/2232-5697/5_81-97.pdf

82
Christine Doran
Analysing managerialism is of crucial importance because in the last
twenty years this ideology has risen to a position of intellectual and social
prominence, if not dominance, impacting decision making in both the pri-
vate and public sectors, as well as social policy more broadly. The ideology
of managerialism has been implemented and has had major impacts at
both the macroeconomic level and at the level of the ﬁrm or public entity.
For that reason, the analysis of managerialism is of importance for those
working at both of those levels. It is argued that those operating in the
ﬁelds of business or management, or in economic and political life more
generally, need to become more aware and more critical of the ideology of
managerialism and its variants.
Economic and Cultural Shifts
During the decades after the Second World War, for thirty years or so in
fact, the major Western economies enjoyed a period of relative stability and
consistent growth. As a result of the experience of the Great Depression,
Western governments were committed to a proactive approach to maintain-
ing full employment. The ruling economic orthodoxy was Keynesianism, and
governments were willing to use aggregate demand management, mainly by
means of ﬁscal policy, to regulate levels of economic activity. Trade union-
ism was relatively strong, certainly compared to the subsequent period.
Business accepted both a fairly high level of government intervention in the
economy, and the presence of unionism in workplaces and at the bargaining
table. This was the basis of the so-called postwar ‘consensus.’ This postwar
consensus led people to talk hopefully of the ‘end of ideology’ (Bell, 1962).
At the time, things were certainly not experienced as so harmonious and
stable as this thumb-nail sketch implies. To some extent, this paciﬁc picture
of economic relationships is an outcome of retrospect, an artefact of sub-
sequent experience, and is often tinged with nostalgia. Nevertheless, there
is clear evidence that a social compact of this type existed. Business was
generally accepting of some limited restraints imposed by government, ac-
knowledging the role of government as Keynesian stabiliser of the economy
and as a means of ameliorating some of the harsher results of the market
economy. Acceptance of trade union activity was more qualiﬁed, and varied
between countries, with the least favourable environment being the United
States, where the Taft-Hartley Act of 1947 severely curbed the prospects of
union militancy.
This all changed in the 1970s, launching a new era of rising instability
and higher risk. In many recent studies the 1970s has been identiﬁed as
the ‘pivotal decade’ (Davis, 2009; Stein, 2010; Rodgers, 2011; Krippner,
2011, Madrick, 2011). Most often pointed to as pivotal moments were the
so-called ‘oil shocks’ of 1973 and 1979, when policies of the Organization
International Journal of Management, Knowledge and Learning

Managerialism
83
of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), a cartel of oil-producing countries,
suddenly raised the price of oil. In 1973 the Organization reacted to US
and European support for Israel in the Yom Kippur War. The 1979 shock
was associated with the Iranian revolution and the war between Iran and
Iraq. The resulting price hikes sent shock waves through many Western
economies. Inﬂation emerged as a pressing issue.
But there were other, more structural, problems that began to surface
in the 1970s. By then, the postwar reconstruction of national economies
in Europe, most notably West Germany, and in Asia, notably Japan, had
succeeded to the extent that the products of the dominant Western coun-
tries, such as the United States, Britain and, to a lesser extent, Australia,
were now facing stiffer international competition. In the relentless search for
proﬁts and low-cost venues, global capital ran over the borders of national
economies. Globalisation and deindustrialisation became the hallmarks of
the period. Manufacturing industries in particular now came under great
pressure from other low-wage economies. In the early industrialised coun-
tries, the focus shifted from manufacturing to service industries, particularly
ﬁnance, a process sometimes referred to as ‘ﬁnancialisation’ (Krippner,
2011).
This is part of a long-term shift in the international balance of economic
power, from dominance by the developed Western economies, towards the
developing countries of Asia, Latin America and Africa. As this secular shift,
together with the immediate shocks, worked their way through the West-
ern economies, rates of proﬁt began to fall, unemployment and under-
employment rates gradually increased, pressure on government budgets
became continuous. A new and unexpected phenomenon, stagﬂation (the
combination of high unemployment together with high inﬂation) bewildered
economists and policy makers. Such a combination was untheorised within
the Keynesian paradigm. The buoyant economy of the 1960s was clearly at
an end.
This was the context for the collapse of the previously established ‘con-
sensus.’ The economic arena became markedly more conﬂictual. Struggling
to maintain proﬁts, at least domestically, businesses were no longer willing
to countenance government regulation of their activities or, more broadly,
an extensive role for government in the economy as a whole. Business also
wished to clamp down on unions, which were ﬁghting to maintain wage rates
and jobs in the context of deindustrialisation and economic stagnation. By
the end of the 1970s, the ideological conﬂict had become intense. Daniel
Rodgers in Age of Fracture (2011) shows that the main themes of the suc-
ceeding decades were disaggregation and individualism. These decades
were characterised by the rising ascendancy of neo-classical economics,
monetarism, free markets, the New Right and libertarianism, all fostered
Volume 5, Issue 1, 2016

84
Christine Doran
by inﬂuential conservative think tanks. Margaret Thatcher came to power
in Britain in 1979, Ronald Reagan in the United States in 1981, and Hel-
mut Kohl in Germany in 1982, and they proceeded to put into effect a
new economic dispensation involving the suppression of unions, rescind-
ing of welfare provisions, privatisation of public enterprises, lower taxes
for the wealthy, and deregulation of ﬁnancial markets. The big losers in
the process were trade unions, pressured simultaneously by governments,
business and unfavourable economic conditions. This was, consequently, a
period of increasing income and wealth disparities and rising poverty.
From the 1970s, signiﬁcant shifts in power also took place within the
corporate world. Many analysts have characterised this as a transition from
the postwar business system of ‘managerial capitalism’ to that of ‘share-
holder capitalism’ since the 1970s (Davis, 2009; Locke & Spender, 2011).
The ﬁfties and sixties are said to have been the heyday of managerial cap-
italism. Based on and helping to form the consensus of the period, com-
pany managers played a pivotal role mediating between a wide range of
economic interests, including government, employees, customers, share-
holders, communities, and so on. Managers had a cooperative relationship
with proactive governments at all levels. The system provided well-paid and
continuing employment for most people, as well as accompanying beneﬁts,
such as pensions and health insurance, giving people a sense of security.
At a time when social institutions in general were strong, managers made
corporations themselves into social institutions. This was an era of what
has been called ‘corporate statesmanship’ (Mizruchi, 2013). The resulting
arrangements were stable and reliable, the business culture ordered, based
on control by a gentlemanly elite. The term used most often in the literature
to describe this corporate system is ‘socially responsible.’
Major problems set in during the 1970s, beginning with the impact of the
ﬁrst oil shock. As the rate of growth in Western economies began to decline
and the consensus started to falter, the position of managers came under
ﬁre from investors and shareholders concerned about the falling rate of
proﬁt. Academic economists, particularly of the neo-classical persuasion,
were also at the forefront of the attack on the position of managers. In
1976 Jensen and Meckling published their landmark study on the theory
of the ﬁrm, managerial behaviour, agency costs and ownership structures.
Based on theories of ‘agency conﬂict,’ managers were accused of seeking
the easy life through sweet-heart relationships with workers and govern-
ment, to the detriment of proﬁts and stock values. Pro-management writers
often fail to mention or minimise the fact that during this period corporate
managers were increasingly compensated by means of shares and stock
options, a way of overcoming the agency problem by bringing managers’ in-
terests into closer alignment with those of corporate owners. This change in
International Journal of Management, Knowledge and Learning

Managerialism
85
patterns of remuneration became a powerful additional incentive for the rise
of ‘shareholder capitalism.’ ‘Shareholder value’ became the mantra not only
of shareholders and economists, but increasingly of corporate managers as
well.
This system of ‘shareholder capitalism,’ which has reigned for forty
years, has been, in comparison to the years of consensus, more volatile
and insecure; the business culture it has created has become more com-
petitive. Companies are said to have broken their relationships with both
government and employees. In many cases, employees have lost their jobs
or their previous working conditions in the context of automation, globali-
sation and deindustrialisation. Contemporary corporations are supposed to
have lost connection with communities. In short, they have become less
‘socially responsible.’ It was within this broad economic and social context
that the concept of managerialism and its analysis attained a level of social
and intellectual salience that it had never previously enjoyed.
Managerialism: Being Deﬁnitive
Turning now to the question of deﬁnition, as for other ideas, ideologies
or ‘isms,’ deﬁning managerialism is difﬁcult and fraught with contention.
Very few of the major writers working in this ﬁeld have given an explicit
deﬁnition of managerialism. The notion that an uncontested deﬁnition is
possible before entering the battleﬁeld of ideas is a myth. Perhaps John
Quiggin (2003) of the University of Queensland provides a useful and widely
accepted starting point:
The central doctrine of managerialism is that the differences between
such organisations as, for example, a university and a motor-vehicle
company, are less important than the similarities, and that the per-
formance of all organisations can be optimised by the application of
generic management skills and theory.
This deﬁnition, offered on Quiggin’s blog in 2003, has proved to be pop-
ular, if it cannot actually be said to have ‘gone viral,’ having now found its
way into the published academic literature on the subject (Glow & Mina-
han, 2007, p. 5; MacRitchie, 2011, p. 57). In more concrete terms, and
according to Quiggin, the implementation of managerialism is recognisable
by a marked shift in the economic and power relations between senior man-
agers and employees, especially professionals: ‘The main features of man-
agerialist policy are incessant organisational restructuring, sharpening of
incentives, and expansion in the number, power and remuneration of senior
managers, with a corresponding downgrading of the role of skilled workers,
and particularly of professionals’ (Quiggin, 2003).
Volume 5, Issue 1, 2016

86
Christine Doran
Another deﬁnition is given by Robert Locke, who has written extensively
on management and managerialism, a deﬁnition in which the emphasis is
placed directly on political considerations (2009, p. 28):
What occurs when a special group, called management, ensconces
itself systematically in an organization and deprives owners and em-
ployees of the decision-making power (including the distribution of
emoluments) – and justiﬁes that takeover on the grounds of the man-
aging group’s education and exclusive possession of the codiﬁed bod-
ies of knowledge and know-how necessary to the efﬁcient running of
the organization.
Clearly both of these deﬁnitions offered by Quiggin and Locke are pro-
grammatic deﬁnitions, closely intertwined with the arguments they wish to
make about managerialism and the positions they adopt with respect to it.
Often in this literature, analysts’ evaluations of managerialism, their ideo-
logical commitments, drive their deﬁnitions and descriptions of it. As their
various theories are outlined in the rest of the paper, the way in which they
conceptualise managerialism will emerge from the discussion.
Right or Left; and How Far Back?
The politics of managerialism and its genealogy in terms of its antecedents
in political philosophy are extremely mixed. For instance, within a histori-
cal perspective, situating managerialism on the left or right of the political
spectrum proves to be even more difﬁcult than establishing a deﬁnition.
This section of the paper is devoted to canvassing the ﬁeld of ideas about
whether managerialism should be associated with the left or right of politics
and, at the same time, to giving an indication of the historical longevity of
some of these debates. The ﬁrst thing to note is that there is no consen-
sus whatsoever on locating managerialism within any spectrum of political
ideologies.
In their comprehensive study of the impact of ‘cultures of management’
in Britain over a thirty-year period, Robert Protherough and John Pick exam-
ine the effects on the arts, education and religion, as well as on economic
life. They conclude by discussing whether modern managerialism should
be considered a political system, a means of exerting political control. An-
swering in the afﬁrmative, they emphasise the resemblance to Marxism
(Protherough & Pick, 2002, p. 202):
It is perhaps Marxism that modern managerialism most nearly resem-
bles. Like Marxism, it is capable of inﬁltrating and distorting the work-
ings of many kinds of organisation. Like Marxism it works primarily
by colonising and colouring everyday language. And like Marxism it
International Journal of Management, Knowledge and Learning

Managerialism
87
asserts that all creation, imagination and cultivation stem from mea-
surable material processes.
The resemblance consists, according to Protherough and Pick, mainly in
their common commitment to materialism. Consequently, perhaps ‘the clos-
est comparison is with the glum orthodoxy which drove the Soviet bureau-
crats’ (2002, p. 201). After ﬁfty years of Cold War polarisation, during which
the USSR was entrenched in the West as national enemy No. 1, forging a
mental link between managerialism and the evil empire was doubtlessly an
effective rhetorical strategy for these critics of managerial culture. Conjuring
up thoughts of Stalin’s characterisation of artists as ‘engineers of the soul,’
Protherough and Pick cite the managers of Britain’s ‘creative industries’ as
promoting ‘as mechanistic a view of cultural evolution as could be found
anywhere in history’ (2002, p. 202). Protherough and Pick do concede,
however, that Karl Marx himself was not guilty of such crass materialism.
Nevertheless, they deﬁnitely trace the forerunners of managerialism to the
far left. There is indeed a longer tradition of associations between manageri-
alism and the left, which can be traced back, through the utopian socialists
such as Henri Saint-Simon and Auguste Comte, to the dawn of modern his-
tory with the French Revolution. That canonical conservative Edmund Burke
memorably linked the spirit of the revolution to the predominance of ‘sophis-
ters, economists, and calculators.’ The rise of these representatives of ma-
terialism and demystiﬁed rationalism, according to Burke, portended the
eclipse of the age of ‘chivalry’ as the characteristic ideology of feudalism
(Burke, 1864, pp. 515–516). In terms of the politics of the day, of course,
the revolutionaries of France were representatives of the left.
On the other hand, linkages between managerialism and movements of
the right have also been asserted. In the recent literature on managerial-
ism, it is this link that is made most frequently. For example, in Confronting
Managerialism (2011) Robert Locke and J.-C. Spender identify the source
of managerialism, or at least its most recent forward impetus, variously as:
neoclassical economics, University of Chicago economists, Hayek and his
generation of neoliberal economists, ﬁnance economics, ‘neoliberal market-
driven capitalism’ and ‘aggressive neoliberalism’ (pp. 14–17, p. 59, p. xvi,
p. xviii, p. 143, p. 145). Similarly, according to Quiggin, managerialism is
associated historically with ‘the radical program of market-oriented reforms
variously referred to as Thatcherism, economic rationalism and neoliberal-
ism’ (Quiggin, 2003). In the same vein, Richard Hil (2012) identiﬁes the
broader context for his study of the market-driven transformation of univer-
sities as a mixture of ‘economic rationalism, commercialisation, manageri-
alism, corporate governance and other outgrowths of neo-liberal ideology’
(p. 10). Thus the origins of managerialism have often been sought on the
Volume 5, Issue 1, 2016

88
Christine Doran
political right, more speciﬁcally in a range of ideological positions associ-
ated with the New Right. However a longer historical trajectory can also be
traced. There have been close links between managerialist approaches and
both fascism and nazism, along with futurism and addiction to high tech
(Baker, 2006). A century before that, the administrative reforms forcibly
implemented in Prussia under king Frederick William III (1797–1840) can
also be seen within the same tradition; these amounted to the creation of
a police state, with close regulation of important areas of social relations
including government, the economy, religion, education, culture, family and
everyday conduct (Holborn, 1982, pp. 468–507).
There is also a lineage associating managerialism with totalitarianism in
general, whether of the right, left, or centre. This idea was developed and
widely disseminated in the work of James Burnham on The Managerial Revo-
lution (1941). In the midst of the Second World War, Burnham predicted that
the future would be neither capitalist nor socialist, but the dominance of an
oligarchic group of experts he called the ‘managers.’ This group, rather than
the owners of private property, would provide economic leadership. Society
would not be democratic, but based on centralisation of control, centred
on economic planning rather than the free market. Those exerting effective
control over the means of production would be a managerial class of busi-
ness executives, bureaucrats and social engineers, assisted by technicians
and scientists. The power of the previous ruling class of capitalists would
be toppled, and the working class would be cowed and exploited, reduced
to serfdom. The managerial society would be strictly hierarchical, with the
ruling managerial elite oppressing a mass of downtrodden workers. It would
be a society of strict binaries: ‘the powerful and the weak, the privileged and
the oppressed, the rulers and the ruled’ (p. 138). Burnham believed that
managerialism had reached its fullest development in the USSR, ostensibly
under socialism, but was almost equally well developed in Germany under
nazism and Italy under fascism, and was in the process of entrenching itself
in the United States under capitalism, especially with the New Deal and war
economy, and that the trend was, in fact, universal.
Placing this war-time study within a wider context, Burnham’s analysis
was strongly inﬂuenced by that of Hilaire Belloc in The Servile State (1912).
Belloc argued that the unsustainable evil of capitalism, together with its
resultant collectivist reformism, would produce a third way: what he called
a servile state in which the majority of people would be legally bound to
labour for the beneﬁt of the few. A somewhat similar theory was developed
around the same time by the rather eccentric but often prescient Amer-
ican economist Thorstein Veblen, who foresaw a revolution by engineers
and technicians, and the replacement of business owners and managers
by a specially trained technocratic class that undertook economic planning
International Journal of Management, Knowledge and Learning

Managerialism
89
(Pena, 2001, pp. 1–27). George Orwell reviewed Burnham’s book at length
and on the whole approvingly, and it seems clear that Burnham’s ideas in-
ﬂuenced Orwell’s thinking on the probable contours of the dystopia of the
future, which bore fruit in Animal Farm (1945) and 1984 (1949). Despite
his startlingly abysmal record in making international geo-political predic-
tions, Burnham has continued to be inﬂuential in the broad ﬁeld of studies
of managerialist social organisation. Since its publication, The Managerial
Revolution has been regarded as a seminal text in the ﬁeld, and has in-
deed experienced a marked resurgence of interest in the last two decades
(Borgognone, 1999, 2000; Pena, 2001; Kelly, 2002).
In view of the complete lack of consensus regarding the ideological afﬁli-
ations of managerialism, it is not surprising that it has been suggested that
managerialism has developed as a sort of grab-bag of ideological inputs,
a conﬂuence of various – sometimes incompatible – ideological streams.
Thus, Christopher Hutton has described it as a ‘black hole of ideology, suck-
ing in and neutralizing all mainstream socio-political philosophies.’ Among
other things, he contends, it has swallowed up both ‘Thatcherism and 1968’
(Hutton, 2012, p. 362).
A growing perception that it is fruitless to try to trace the confused ideo-
logical afﬁnities of managerialism has also prompted the thought that it is
in fact an ideology in itself, sui generis. In his 1993 analysis of manageri-
alism as a totally new and distinct ideology, Willard Enteman contends that
a new ideology emerged in advanced industrialised societies in the second
half of the twentieth century, growing out of pragmatic decision making by
‘practical people’ faced with making choices and taking action. He warns
that it is possible to be distracted from an understanding of the emerging
reality by thinking that the ideological principles that guide managers’ deci-
sion making are ‘capitalist or socialist, democratic or totalitarian, or some
combination’ (1993, p. 153). Enteman argues instead that managerialism,
considered as a separate ideology in its own right, provides ‘a more useful
clinical description of what is occurring in advanced industrialized societies
than any existing alternative ideologies offer, including capitalism, social-
ism, and democracy’ (p. 154). Enteman does not provide a deﬁnition as
such, but gives a basic description of a managerialist society as one in
which the fundamental social unit is neither the individual nor the state, but
the organisation. For managerialism, the individual and the state are merely
empty abstractions. Managerialism denies that the fundamental nature of
society is an aggregation of individuals. Social decision making arises from
the transactions that take place between managements of organisations.
Managerialism is an ideology created by managers. Certainly it is not demo-
cratic; a managerialist society does not respond to ‘the needs, desires, and
wishes of a majority of its citizens’ (p. 154). Enteman is not a defender of
Volume 5, Issue 1, 2016

90
Christine Doran
managerialism, for which he ‘cannot ﬁnd sufﬁcient moral warrant’ (p. 154).
He contends that the justiﬁcation for the new ideology is currently very
weak, partly because it evolved in a context of the breakdown of the pre-
vious ruling ideologies of capitalism, socialism and democracy, and as yet
intellectuals have not developed any persuasive justiﬁcation for it (p. 192).
The Discourse of ‘Socially Responsible’ Management
Although Enteman remains dubious about the intellectual and moral ratio-
nale for managerialism, recent economic developments on the global scale
have given rise to an ethical discourse of so-called ‘socially responsible’
management. This discourse has come to the fore as a result of the ﬁnan-
cial and economic crisis that brought the global economic system to the
brink of collapse in 2008. The crisis called attention to deeply entrenched
inefﬁciency and dishonesty at the highest levels of the managerial elite
in the ﬁnancial sector. Disillusionment and discontent with the social and
economic power of managers was expressed not only on the left of the
political spectrum, but also in groupings on the right, such as the far-right
populist Tea Party movement in the United States. Even Alan Greenspan,
who chaired the US Federal Reserve from 1987 to 2006, admitted that he
had made a mistake in trusting that concern for their reputations would con-
strain the managers of banks and other institutions from practising fraud
and deception. This new atmosphere of public outrage and contempt gener-
ated popular and political pressure to curb the power of the top managers
and to reduce their, often gross, levels of ﬁnancial remuneration. This was,
to put it simply, a crisis of legitimation for the managerial class.
But the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) and the ensuing Great Recession
were only the last in a long series of corporate collapses and scandals. For
instance, the previous decade or so saw the collapse of Enron, WorldCom,
Arthur Andersen, AIG, Lehman Brothers, Bear Stearns and Merrill Lynch in
the United States; of the Royal Bank of Scotland, Northern Rock, Lloyds,
and Anglo Irish Bank in Britain; and, for example, of HIH, FAI, Storm Finan-
cial, and ABC Learning in Australia. Widely publicised throughout the West-
ern world, including the United States, Europe, Australia and New Zealand,
have been high proﬁle cases of corporate scandal and questionable busi-
ness ethics, giving rise to public contempt for management in general. In
the wake of the GFC (2007–), following upon the dot.com collapse in 2000–
2001 and the Enron debacle in 2002, there has been a widespread sense
that there are grave problems with corporate management, especially in the
United States. In other words, an intense quest for legitimacy on the part of
the business community is of long standing and has been ongoing for more
than a decade.
In his incisive analysis of the causes and signiﬁcance of the Global Finan-
International Journal of Management, Knowledge and Learning

Managerialism
91
cial Crisis, Freefall (2010), Joseph Stiglitz sardonically suggests that those
who prospered under the pre-GFC regime of deregulated markets and lax
supervision would tend to minimise the signiﬁcance of the crash and would
recommend fairly superﬁcial ways of responding to it: rescue the banks and
bankers, tweak the regulations, tell the regulators to be a bit more vigi-
lant and – signiﬁcantly for this study – ‘add a few more business school
courses on ethics’ (p. xiv). It is in this context that the inﬂuential discourse
of ‘socially responsible’ management has risen to prominence.
There are many competing deﬁnitions of ‘socially responsible’ manage-
ment. As regards the private sector, it is often discussed under the rubric
of Corporate Social Responsibility (frequently abbreviated to CSR). A widely
accepted deﬁnition was given by Richard Holme and Phil Watts, for exam-
ple, in Making Good Business Sense (2000), published by the World Busi-
ness Council for Sustainable Development: ‘the continuing commitment by
business to behave ethically and contribute to economic development while
improving the quality of life of the workforce and their families as well as the
local community and society at large’ (p. 8). Behind such anodyne terminol-
ogy, it is important to recognise the claims this discourse makes on behalf
of the interests of managers. It is this development that James Burnham,
Hilaire Belloc, Willard Enteman and other theorists warned about.
It would be easy enough to dismiss management literature as a whole as
a ‘gloriﬁed form of public relations’ (Frank, 2010, p. 221). However, to gain
an insight into the type of thinking that informs the culture of managerialism
and socially responsible management, in this paper a salient book will be
considered in detail: Confronting Managerialism: How the Business Elite and
Their Schools Threw Our Lives Out of Balance (2011) by Robert R. Locke
& J.-C. Spender. It would be easy for some in the academic community
to dismiss the cultural productions emanating from business schools and
so-called management ‘gurus’ as simplistic, emotive, biased, even out of
touch with reality. But that would be a mistake if we wish to comprehend the
wide appeal of these texts, as evidenced for instance in the serried masses
of them on the shelves of major book stores, and the inﬂuence they exert on
political and economic decision-making in society as a whole. To understand
that inﬂuence, we need to begin by reading the texts attentively and taking
their contents seriously. Paying close attention to the actual statements
made in these texts will allow us to gain insights into their potent mixture
of idealism and disillusionment, egalitarianism and elitism, radicalism and
conservatism.
Placing themselves ﬁrmly within the ﬁeld of ‘socially responsible’ man-
agement, Robert Locke and J.-C. Spender are management consultants and
former deans of business schools. In Confronting Managerialism (2011),
they advocate the reform of managerialism from within, to make it more hu-
Volume 5, Issue 1, 2016

92
Christine Doran
mane, as well as more productive. Their subtitle, How the Business Elite and
Their Schools Threw Our Lives out of Balance, is an admission that some-
thing serious has gone wrong in the ﬁeld of management, and an indication
of where they see the rot.
Locke and Spender’s argument operates on a binary logic: on the basis
of a distinction between managerialism (bad) and management (good). From
this it follows that two types of managers are conceivable: Good Managers
and Bad Managers (my terms, not theirs). They describe the adherents of
managerialism as a ‘caste,’ with implications that they are an exclusivist
elite with pretensions to superiority over others. The picture on the front
of my paperback edition of their book shows a male ﬁgure in a dominating
pose, wide-shouldered, power-dressed, smoking a cigar, with a 50s haircut,
a blank face, and with dollar signs for his eyes. This is presumably the
repellent ﬁgure of a Bad Manager, a follower of the cult of managerialism.
This extreme caricature emphasises the reductive nature of the dualistic
logic their argument employs.
In the preface, the authors deny that they want to evoke an image of an
earlier Golden Age of ‘socially responsible’ management, and to an extent
they do avoid this, mainly because of their imprecise and shifting chronology
of the emergence of managerialism. Nevertheless, the argument does de-
pend on the impression they create of the halcyon days of management in
the 1950s and 1960s, especially in the United States, when management
(Locke and Spender, 2011, p. 82)
[...] did not consider itself, nor was it considered postwar, a bunch
of unprincipled rufﬁans. Deﬁnitions of managerialism usually pointed
out at the time that managers, although their ﬁduciary duty was to
stockholders, had the moral duty to look after the well-being of other
stakeholders in the ﬁrm and to be good corporate citizens. The post-
1945 version of managerialism, moreover, cobbled together elements
of a partnership between the management caste, big labor, and gov-
ernment ﬁrst hammered out during the New Deal and World War Two.
According to Locke and Spender, these principled managers of the
1950s and 1960s were capable of reconciling, from Olympian heights,
the conﬂicting interests of capitalist investors, workers and unions, govern-
ment, and presumably their own, thus ensuring peace and prosperity on
the battleﬁelds of business. The outcomes, according to the authors, were
particularly attractive for employees, promoting amicable relations between
management and workers and indeed an extension of democracy in indus-
try: ‘Heralded collective bargaining agreements provided for better wages
and working conditions; they introduced company retirement plans, medical
plans, and other social beneﬁts’ (p. 82).
International Journal of Management, Knowledge and Learning

Managerialism
93
In essence Confronting Managerialism represents another manoeuvre in
the historic battle between owners (including entrepreneurs and sharehold-
ers) and managers. By its critique of the functioning of business schools
in the United States and its recommendations for reform, Confronting Man-
agerialism also stakes a claim within the multi-billion dollar management
education industry (worth over 900 billion dollars in the US). Conﬂict be-
tween managers and owners, referred to by economists as ‘agency conﬂict,’
is addressed by Locke and Spender (p. 140) as follows:
This conﬂict arose after 1980 because the management caste in-
creasingly lived under the tyranny of stock market valuations and
the demands of institutional investors. To satisfy the latter’s preoc-
cupation with the price of a company’s stock, corporate management
tended to the bottom line, that is, it shored up short-term proﬁts
so that stock market analysts’ expectations would be met and its
company’s stock price would beneﬁt accordingly [...] If, however, the
high stock valuations were achieved at the ﬁrm’s expense, conﬂict
between professional management and the ﬁrm as an entity exists,
even though there is little conﬂict between management and its insti-
tutional stockholders.
Here Locke and Spender (2011) assert a claim on the part of managers
to know better than owners what is good for the ﬁrm, and to be given lat-
itude and discretion in their decision-making without having to endure the
‘tyranny’ of the market. Indeed the authors identify the opposition, the en-
emy, the source of all the problems variously as: neoclassical economics
(pp. 14-17, p. 59), University of Chicago economists (p. xvi), Hayek and his
generation of neoliberal economists (p. xviii), ﬁnance economics, ‘neolib-
eral market-driven capitalism’ (p. 143) and ‘aggressive neoliberalism’ (p.
145). Thus in Confronting Managerialism Locke and Spender stake out a
claim on the part of managers to the economic rents – presumably sizeable
considering the intensity of the conﬂict being waged over them – gener-
ated by capitalist economic activity. Like Plato’s guardian caste, Good Man-
agers are supposed to be capable of mediating sagely among competing
interests – such as shareholders, workers, unions, environmentalists, con-
sumers, local communities, government, and managers – to strike a just
balance among the rival claims of the warring elements of contemporary
economic and political life. To do this, like Plato’s guardians, they are sup-
posed to require a special education to ﬁt them for social leadership and
equip them to make ‘socially responsible’ moral judgments. Courses in ‘so-
cially responsible’ management at business schools would do this, afﬁrm
Locke and Spender. This argument is consistent with the recent trend to
what Slavoj Zizek has called, a little crazily, ‘liberal communism,’ which con-
Volume 5, Issue 1, 2016

94
Christine Doran
sists of attempts by such heroes of capitalist enterprise as George Soros
and Bill Gates to give capitalism a more humane face. This would be the
face of Locke and Spender’s Good Manager after having received training in
‘socially responsible’ management, presumably at their approved business
schools.
Locke and Spender’s positive recommendations are brieﬂy set out in
their conclusion. To counter the effects of managerialism in producing ‘bad
management,’ they recommend reform in the governance of companies to
strengthen the position of managers. This is partly intended to protect the
ﬁrm from marauding outside predators. Internally, Locke and Spender also
want the position of management to be reinforced in order to protect the
ﬁrm from the power of shareholders and investors. In particular, they re-
fer approvingly to the statement on German Generally Accepted Manage-
ment Principles, which allows managing directors of a company to carry out
a ‘protective function’ that stops shareholders from making ‘exaggerated
demands’ on the ﬁrm (p. 186). Although couched in the ethical terms of
‘socially responsible’ management, Locke and Spender’s book consistently
asserts the claims and interests, both political and economic, of managers
as a group. Their approach could therefore be expected to be very appeal-
ing to managers and potential managers. On the surface, the binary logic
they use divorces ‘socially responsible’ management from managerialism,
attempting to put as much distance as possible between their position and
the corporate scandals of the recent past. But their argument actually as-
serts the claims of managers more forcefully than ever before, in a new,
more nuanced variant of managerialism presented in a more sophisticated
register.
Conclusion
By charting the major economic developments of the latter half of the twen-
tieth century, it has been shown that the 1970s represented a pivotal turn-
ing point in many Western economies, giving rise to new forms of economic
behaviour and to the emergence into prominence of something known as
‘managerialism.’ Probing into the deﬁnition of managerialism, it was found
that it was difﬁcult to ﬁnd any consensus on the meaning of the term. Lo-
cating it within a left-to-right political spectrum proved equally difﬁcult. It
was suggested that many of the key components of the concept of man-
agerialism have a much longer historical genealogy than many assume. The
recent emergence of an inﬂuential variant on managerialism called ‘socially
responsible’ management was discussed.
This paper has also offered an analysis of an inﬂuential text produced by
prominent management ‘gurus,’ a text that I would place within the broad
stream of managerialist literature, but putting forward the more nuanced
International Journal of Management, Knowledge and Learning

Managerialism
95
arguments of ‘socially responsible’ managerialism. The aim was to begin
to comprehend the appeal of such texts and the inﬂuence they exert both
on the behaviour of those who read them, including managers as well as
management educators, and on the creation and maintenance of broader
political and social ideologies. Unpicking the rhetoric of managerialism and
management literature allows us to gain some perspective on their claims,
which in turn encourages the questioning of their normative prescriptions
and the sources of authority to which they appeal. Even though such texts
often appear to be unsophisticated and even anti-intellectual in tone, cul-
tural researchers should take the words of management theorists seriously,
should engage with and critique their assertions, thus opening them up to
challenge and exposing them to democratic debate.
One of the most important implications of this study is to draw attention
to the way that managerialism, including the ideas of ‘socially responsible’
management, seeks to protect and advance the interests of managers as
a group. It is important to open up the claims they make on behalf of the
interests of management to open intellectual enquiry and democratic de-
bate. Many of the theorists whose works have been canvassed here have
made signiﬁcant contributions to uncovering the assumptions and rhetorical
strategies used to further those interests. For those engaged in the ﬁelds of
business and administration, and in economic and political life more gener-
ally, it is essential to be aware of other often competing interests, whether
those of employees and unions, investors, owners, clients, ﬁnancial insti-
tutions, local communities or government bodies. In terms of pointing out
possible directions for future research, there is an urgent need to develop a
critical theory of managerialism, or at least the application of critical theo-
retic concepts to managerialism and the discourse of ‘socially responsible’
management. This article is offered as a step in that direction.
References
Baker, D. (2006). The political economy of fascism: Myth or reality or myth
and reality? New Political Economy, 11(2), 227–250.
Bell, D. (1962). The end of ideology: On the exhaustion of political ideas in the
ﬁfties. New York, NY: Free Press.
Belloc, H. (1912). The servile state. London, England: T. N. Foulis.
Borgognone, G. (1999). L’itinerario politico e intellettuale di James Burnham:
Dal trockismo all’ultraconservatorismo. Studi storici, 40(3), 755–797.
Borgognone, G. (2000). James Burnham: Totalitarismo, managerialismo e teo-
ria delle elites. Aosta, Italy: Stylos.
Burke, E. (1864). Reﬂections on the revolution in France (vol. 2). London,
England: Henry G. Bohn.
Burnham, J. (1941). The managerial revolution: What is happening in the
world? New York, NY: John Day.
Volume 5, Issue 1, 2016

96
Christine Doran
Davis, G. (2009). Managed by the markets: How ﬁnance re-shaped America.
Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Enteman, W. F. (1993). Managerialism: The emergence of a new ideology.
Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press.
Frank, T. (2010). One market under God: Extreme capitalism, market populism,
and the end of economic democracy. New York, NY: Random House.
Glow, H., & Minahan, S. (2007, December). Managerialism and the arts: A
complete and utter bloody waste of time. Paper presented at the the 21st
ANZAM Conference, Sydney, Australia.
Hil, R. (2012). Whackademia: An insider’s account of the troubled university.
Sydney, Australia: NewSouth Publishing.
Holborn, H. (1982). A history of modern Germany: 1648–1840. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Holme, R., & Watts, P. (2000). Corporate social responsibility: Making good
business sense. Geneva, Switzerland: World Business Council for Sustain-
able Development.
Hutton, C. (2012). The worst revolution of all? Managerialism and the ‘body
without ears.’ In P. Caringella, W. Cristaudo, & G. Hughes (Eds.), Revolu-
tions: Finished and unﬁnished, from primal to ﬁnal (pp. 350–363). New-
castle upon Tyne, England: Cambridge Scholars.
Jensen, M. & Meckling, W. H. (1976). Theory of the ﬁrm: Managerial behavior,
agency costs and ownership structure. Journal of Financial Economics,
3(4), 305–360.
Kelly, D. (2002). James Burnham and the struggle for the world: A life. Wilm-
ington, NC: Isi Books.
Krippner, G. R. (2011). Capitalizing on crisis: The political origins of the rise of
ﬁnance. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Locke, R. R. (2009). Managerialism and the demise of the big three. Real-
World Economics Review, 51, 28–47.
Locke, R. R., & Spender, J.-C. (2011). Confronting managerialism: How the
business elite and their schools threw our lives out of balance. London,
United Kingdom: Zed Books.
MacRitchie, F. (2011). Scientiﬁc research as a career. Boca Raton, FL: CRC
Press.
Madrick, J. (2011). Age of greed: The triumph of ﬁnance and the decline of
America, 1970 to the present. New York, NY: Knopf.
Mizruchi, M. S. (2013). The fracturing of the American corporate elite. Boston,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Orwell, G. (1945). Animal farm. Harmondsworth, England: Penguin.
Orwell, G. (1949). 1984. London, England: Secker and Warburg.
Pena, D. S. (2001). Economic barbarism and managerialism. Westport, CN:
Greenwood Press.
Protherough, R., & Pick, J. (2002). Managing Britannia: Culture and manage-
ment in modern Britain. Exeter, England: Imprint Academic.
International Journal of Management, Knowledge and Learning

Managerialism
97
Quiggin, J. (2003). Word for wednesday: Managerialism (deﬁnition). Retrieved
from http://johnquiggin.com/2003/07/02/word-for
-wednesday-managerialism-deﬁnition/
Rodgers, D. T. (2011). Age of fracture. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Stein, J. (2010). Pivotal decade: How the United States traded factories for
ﬁnance in the seventies. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Stiglitz, J. (2010). Freefall: Free markets and the sinking of the global economy.
London, England: Allen Lane.
Christine Doran is Senior Lecturer in History and Political Science in the
School of Creative Arts and Humanities at Charles Darwin University, Dar-
win, Australia. She lectures mainly on Asian and Australian history. Dr Doran
has published widely on Asian and Australian affairs, on topics such as eco-
nomic policy, globalisation, technology and development, in journals such as
Globality Studies Journal, Journal of Contemporary Asia, Asia Paciﬁc Viewpoint,
and Gender, Technology and Development. christine.doran@cdu.edu.au
This paper is published under the terms of the Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0)
License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Volume 5, Issue 1, 2016

