Area-Contracting Maps Between Rectangles
by
Lawrence Guth
Bachelor of Science, Yale University, June 2000
Submitted to the Department of Mathematics
in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy
at the
MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
June 2005
) Lawrence Guth, MMV. All rights reserved.
The author hereby grants to MIT permission to reproduce and
distribute publicly paper and electronic copies of this thesis document
in whole or in part.
Author 
..... 
.
...........
OF TECHNLOGY
MAY 2 7 2005
LIBRARIES
Department of Mathematics
April 25, 2005
Certified by ...-
Tomasz S. Mrowka
Professor of Mathematics
Thesis Supervisor
Accepted by ......................................
Pavel Etingof
Chairman, Departmental Committee on Graduate Students

h

Area-Contracting Maps Between Rectangles
by
Lawrence Guth
Submitted to the Department of Mathematics
on April 25, 2005, in partial fulfillment of the
requirements for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy
Abstract
In this thesis, I worked on estimating the smallest k-dilation of all diffeomorphisms
between two n-dimensional rectangles R and S. I proved that for many rectangles
there are highly non-linear diffeomorphisms with much smaller k-dilation than any
linear diffeomorphism. When k is equal to n-l, I determined the smallest k-dilation
up to a constant factor.
For all values of k and n, I solved the following related problem up to a constant
factor. Given n-dimensional rectangles R and S, decide if there is an embedding of
S into R which maps each k-dimensional submanifold of S to an image with larger
k-volume.
I also applied the k-dilation techniques to two purely topological problems: es-
timating the Hopf invariant of a map from a 3-manifold to a high-genus surface,
and determining whether there is a map of non-zero degree from a 3-manifold to a
hyperbolic 3-manifold.
Thesis Supervisor: Tomasz S. Mrowka
Title: Professor of Mathematics
3

4

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank all of my math teachers, including Michael Narosny, Deanna
Wong, Joanne Lund, Priscilla Burbank-Schmitt, Mike Frantz, Terry Leverich, Serge
Lang, Peter Jones, and my thesis advisor Tom Mrowka. They went beyond the call
of duty, sharing their ideas and experiences with me.
I think that I put Tom in a somewhat awkward position. Instead of studying his
field of expertise, I insisted pretty stubbornly on studying a different field in which
few people work, and after three years I had no results. Tom gently made sure that
I would graduate. 
(For the first few months of my fourth year, we met together
privately for almost two hours a week.)
Tom was happy to talk about any kind of problem in geometry. Sometime in my
second year, my friend Max revealed to him in the common room that I had spent
several months thinking about crumpling paper, and so we once talked about that.
When I would pass him in the hall, he would say "So?", and his eyebrows would rise
in anticipation. 
Sometimes he added a few more words, which made the question
clearer: "anything new and exciting?" For several years, I had nothing to say, but
Tom continued to ask.
I thank Andre Henriques and Bobby Kleinberg for interesting conversations about
math. Daniel Biss helped me figure out a topology problem that appears in section
7.8. Haynes Miller gave me some references to results in homotopy theory that I
needed in section 7.9.
I want to thank my friend Ben Stephens for many kinds of support. 
We had
conversations about math and about our lives. He edited the introduction of this
thesis. In the difficult month of writing before the thesis deadline, he often cooked
me dinner.
My most important role model as a scientist is my father. I want to thank him for
teaching and encouraging me for twenty seven years. One of the little pleasures of my
time at MIT was using the same office that my father had when he was a graduate
student before I was born.
5

Finally, I want to thank my whole family for their love and support. Even with
all this help, I was often frustrated in graduate school, and occasionally I thought I
might have made the wrong choice. I also wondered what it would have been like
to work in a well-established field, frequently talking with other students and more
senior people in the same field as me. When I felt down, I would talk with my family
at the kitchen table about the whole experience, with its good and bad parts, and I
generally felt much better afterwards.
6

Contents
1 Introduction 
13
2 The (n-1)-Dilation of Diffeomorphisms Between Rectangles 
25
2.1 The snake map .............................. 
26
2.2 Packings by wide sets ........................... 
33
3 The Width-Volume Inequality 
43
3.1 The definition of k-width ......................... 
43
3.2 The width-volume inequality ....................... 
45
3.3 Application to the k-dilation of diffeomorphisms ............ 
51
3.4 A generalization of the snake map .................... 
53
4 An Isoperimetric Inequality Involving Packings by Wide Sets 
57
4.1 
A ball covering argument ......................... 
57
4.2 Slicing inequalities 
............................ 
58
5 The Volume Enclosure Problem 
63
5.1 The outline of the proof ................ 
........ 
64
5.2 The width-volume inequality for families ................ 
67
5.3 The width-volume inequality for families inside a rectangle ...... 
74
6 Area-Expanding Embeddings of Rectangles 
79
6.1 The k-width of an open set around a complex ............. 
80
6.2 A width-volume inequality for multiple families of functions 
..... 
87
7

6.3 
Combinatorial width 
........................... 
91
6.4 
Constructing area-expanding embeddings ................ 
98
6.5 Application to the k-dilation of diffeomorphisms ............ 
101
7 Rational Homotopy Invariants of Area-Contracting Maps 
103
7.1 Review of rational homotopy invariants and differential forms 
... 
.
105
7.2 Review of primitives and isoperimetric inequalities ........... 
107
7.3 
Linear isoperimetric 
inequalities 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. .
.
108
7.4 Directionally dependent isoperimetric inequalities 
........... 
109
7.5 Lipshitz maps with large rational homotopy invariants 
........ 
114
7.6 Estimates for rational homotopy invariants .............. 
116
7.7 Application to the k-dilation of diffeomorphisms ............ 
128
7.8 The Hopf invariant of k-contracting maps between ellipsoids ..... 
132
7.9 Homotopically non-trivial maps with small k-dilation ......... 
136
8 Partial Results On 2-Contracting Diffeomorphisms Between 4-Dimensional
Rectangles 
139
8.1 Lower bounds for the 2-dilation ................... 
.. 
140
8.2 Variations of the snake map. 
...................... 
144
9 Applications to the Topology of 3-Manifolds 
151
9.1 
Homotopies 
to 2-contracting 
maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
.
152
9.2 
The Hopf volume ............................. 
157
9.3 
Estimates for the combinatorial Hopf volume .............. 
159
9.4 The Hopf volume of hyperbolic 3-manifolds ............... 
168
9.5 The situation for non-orientable manifolds ............... 
177
A Other Stretching Conditions 
179
B Literature on Area-Contracting Maps 
191
C Open Questions 
201
8

List of Figures
9

10

List of Tables
11

12

Chapter 1
Introduction
This thesis is about estimating the k-dilation of mappings. The k-dilation of a smooth
mapping measures how much the mapping stretches the k-dimensional volume of k-
dimensional submanifolds in the domain. We say that a mapping has k-dilation at
most A if it maps every k-dimensional manifold of volume V to an image of volume
at most AV. The k-dilation of f can be defined algebraically as the supremal value of
the norm of Akdf. A smooth map is called k-contracting if its k-dilation is less than
or equal to 1.
The 1-dilation of a smooth map is equal to its Lipshitz constant. We can think
of the k-dilation as a variation on the Lipshitz constant, which measures how much
k-dimensional volumes stretch instead of how much distances and lengths stretch.
We can now state the main problem of the thesis.
Problem 1. Given two n-dimensional rectangles R and S, estimate the smallest k-
dilation of all diffeomorphisms from R to S.
When I first thought of this problem, I expected the linear diffeomorphism from
R to S to have the smallest k-dilation, or at least close to the smallest k-dilation.
Clearly, the linear diffeomorphism from R to S has the smallest n-dilation of any
diffeomorphism. With a little more work, one can show that, up to a constant factor,
the linear diffeomorphism has the smallest 1-dilation of any diffeomorphism from R
to S. Also, if T1 and T2 are two flat tori, then each homotopy class of maps from T
13

to T2 contains a linear map, and this linear map has the smallest k-dilation of all the
maps in the homotopy class. It turns out, though, that linear diffeomorphisms can
have far from the smallest k-dilation.
Theorem 1.1. If k lies in the range 1 < k < n, then there are n-dimensional rect-
angles R and S so that there is a k-contracting diffeomorphism from R to S and yet
every linear diffeomorphism from R to S has arbitrarily high k-dilation.
The 1-dilation and the n-dilation are probably more familiar to most people than
the k-dilation for other values of k. This theorem shows that the k-dilation for the
other values of k can be more complicated than the 1-dilation or the n-dilation.
To prove this proposition, we will construct some non-linear diffeomorphisms with
small k-dilation, which we will call snake maps. For example, in three dimensions, we
will construct a highly non-linear diffeomorphism from the rectangle [0, e] x [0, 1] x [0, 1]
to the rectangle [0, e] x [0, e] x [0, e- 1] with 2-dilation less than 10,000. The 2-dilation of
a linear map between these rectangles is e-1. Therefore, when c is very small, our non-
linear diffeomorphism has much smaller 2-dilation than any linear diffeomorphism.
It turns out that when k is equal to n-1, there is always a combination of linear
diffeomorphisms and snake maps which gives the smallest possible k-dilation, up to
a constant factor. As a result, we can solve Problem 1 when k is equal to n-1, up to
constant factor.
To state the result, we make some conventions that we will use all through the
thesis. If R is an n-dimensional rectangle, then we refer to the dimensions of R by
Ri, for i from 1 to n. We always order the dimensions so that R1 < ... < R.
Throughout the thesis, C and c will denote positive constants that depend only
on the dimension n. Their value may change from line to line. When we use the letter
c, the reader should imagine a very small number, and when we use the letter C, the
reader should imagine a very large number. All the constants can be made explicit,
but they are pretty bad.
Theorem 1.2. Let R and S be n-dimensional rectangles. Define Qi to be the quotient
Si/Ri. For each integer I in the range 1 < I < n - 1, we define a number D(l) as
14

follows.
Dl = QQ... 
.
(Qi+ ... Qn) n-l
Also, we define Dn to be Q2...Qn. Finally, we define D to be the largest of all the
numbers D1, for I from 1 to n.
Any diffeomorphism from R to S has (n-1)-dilation at least cD. On the other
hand, we will construct a diffeomorphism from R to S with (n-1)-dilation less than
CD.
The idea of k-width is very useful for estimating k-dilations. Roughly speaking,
if we slice a Riemannian manifold M into k-dimensional slices, then the k-width of
M is less than W if we can arrange that each of these slices has k-volume less than
W. A little more formally, the k-width of a Riemannian n-manifold M is defined to
be the infimal W so that there is a nice map from M to R n - k each of whose fibers
has k-volume less than W. (A nice map is defined to be a piecewise linear map whose
restriction to each face has maximal rank. The reason we need to restrict to nice
maps is that I don't even know how to prove that every smooth map from the unit
n-ball to R n - k has a fiber with k-volume at least .)
Since the k-width is defined using an infimum over a very large space of maps, it
is not obvious how to estimate the k-width even for simple sets. For instance, the
k-width of the unit n-cube is clearly at most 1, but is it actually 1? I don't know how
to solve this problem. There are theorems of Almgren about families of cycles which
show that the k-width of the unit n-sphere is exactly the volume of the unit k-sphere.
As a corollary, one can give a lower bound for the k-width of the unit cube. There
is also a more elementary argument due to Gromov which gives a lower bound for
the k-width of the unit cube. (Both arguments appear in appendix 1 of [12].) Using
one of these techniques, it is not hard to show that the k-width of a rectangle R is
roughly R1... Rk.
What can we say about the k-width of a very complicated set? Of course, if the
set fits inside of the unit cube, its k-width is less than 1. Suppose, however, that we
15

are dealing with a very diffuse set, consisting of thin tubes and membranes, but with
volume less than 1. What can we say about the k-width of such a set? My geometric
intuition suggests that it should be possible to fold such a set into the cube of side
length 10 without distorting its internal geometry very much - just as one squeezes
the water out of a sponge. If you could perform such a folding operation, you would
get an upper bound for the k-width of the set. In fact, I don't know whether or not
it is possible to perform this folding, but it still turns out that the k-width of a set is
bounded by its volume.
Theorem 1.3. If U is a bounded open set in Rn, then the k-width of U is less than
Cvolume(U)k/n.
The lower bounds for k-dilation in Theorem 1.2 come from understanding how
many disjoint k-wide sets fit in a rectangle. For example, how many disjoint sets of
2-width (1/100) can fit into the unit cube in R3? More generally, if Ui are disjoint
subsets contained in a rectangle R, what is the largest possible value of the sum
(>i k-width(Ui)q)l / q, where q is a real number between n/k and oo? Using the
width-volume inequality, we will answer this question. For each value of q, we will
calculate a supremal value up to a constant factor C. The answer is a little painful to
write in closed form, but it is given by taking the sets Ui to be disjoint sub-rectangles
with dimensions R 1 x ... x R1 x Rl x ... x Rl, for an integer 1 which depends on q. As
q goes from n/k to oo, this supremum interpolates between the volume of R and the
k-width of R. The dependence on q is somewhat analogous to the Lq norm, which
interpolates between the integral of a positive function and its supremum.
Our next theorem is a variation of the isoperimetric inequality which involves a
sum of k-widths raised to a power.
Theorem 1.4. If U is a bounded open set in R n with smooth boundary, then there
are disjoint subsets Si in the boundary of U so that the following inequality holds.
Volume(U) < C 
(n-2)-width(Si)n- 2.
i
16

To get an idea of what this theorem means, let us consider the case that the open
set U is a rectangle R. The volume of U is equal to R1... R,. Following the analysis in
the last full paragraph, we can estimate the right-hand side of this inequality up to a
constant factor. If n is even, the right-hand side is less than CR2
.. Rn22 Rn2+l -.R2,
n 
n 
n--1
and if n is odd, the right-hand side is less than R n- 2 ... Rn-2)/2Rnn 
2 
.Rn.
2 '" 
(n-1)/2 (n+l)/2(,+)/
For comparison, the standard isoperimetric inequality gives the estimate that the
volume of R is less than C(R 2... R)n- . If the dimensions of R are very different from
one another, then our isoperimetric inequality is sharper than the standard one.
The fact remains that our isoperimetric inequality gives an estimate which is
much larger than the actual volume of R. To understand why we cannot expect our
isoperimetric inequality to give a sharp estimate, let us first consider the standard
isoperimetric inequality. The standard isoperimetric inequality gives a terrible esti-
mate for the volume of long, thin rectangles because it is only allowed to consider the
volume of the boundary. The standard isoperimetric inequality is really estimating
the largest volume that can be enclosed by any hypersurface with the same volume
as the boundary of R - which gives a much bigger number than the volume of R. Our
isoperimetric inequality gives a large answer for the same reason. It only involves
the (n-2)-widths of subsets of the boundary of R. Therefore, it is really estimating
the largest volume that can be enclosed by an (n-2)-contracting embedding of the
boundary of R into Rn.
We will construct an (n-2)-contracting embedding from the boundary of R into
Rn that shows that our isoperimetric inequality, considered from this point of view,
is sharp up to a constant factor. If n is even, we will construct an (n-2)-contracting
7 
n 
n
embedding which encloses a region of volume cR-2 ...RRn2 Rn,/2+1 ...Rn. An analogous
statement holds when n is odd.
This discussion suggests our next problem.
Problem 2. Estimate the largest volume that can be enclosed by a k-contracting
embedding of an (n-l)-dimensional ellipsoid E into Rn.
We have indicated the solution of this problem when k = n- 2. With a somewhat
17

different technique, we will solve the problem up to a constant factor for all values of
k.
Theorem 1.5. Let E be an (n-1)-dimensional ellipsoid with principal axes Eo < ... <
En-1 .
We define a monomial Vk(E) = El 
...
elEEl+ 
... 
En- 1, where the numbers
b and are determined by the condition that the total degree of Vk(E) is n and the
condition that 1 < b < n
Any k-contracting embedding from E into Rn encloses a volume less than CVk(E).
On the other hand, we will construct a k-contracting embedding that encloses a volume
greater than cVk(E).
These results on isoperimetric inequalities and the volume enclosed by k-contracting
maps can also be applied to estimate the k-dilation of diffeomorphisms. Suppose we
have a k-contracting embedding I from an (n-1)-dimensional rectangle R' into an n-
dimensional rectangle S, which takes the boundary of R' to the boundary of S, and
which divides the volume of S roughly in half; and suppose we write S as S' x [0, Sn].
Applying the techniques from the last theorem, it follows that Vk(R') > cVk(S').
Now if R = R' x [0, Rn], and if there is a k-contracting diffeomorphism from R
to S, then by restricting this diffeomorphism to an appropriate slice R' x (xn},
we get a k-contracting embedding I that cuts S in half. Therefore, it follows that
Vk(R') > cVk(S').
In addition to studying k-contracting diffeomorphisms, we will also study k-
expanding embeddings. An embedding from one domain into another is called k-
expanding if it maps every k-dimensional manifold in the domain to a k-dimensional
manifold of larger volume in the range. Here is an equivalent way to say it. There
is a k-expanding embedding of S into R if there is some open subset U in R and
a k-contracting diffeomorphism from U to S. Our first problem asked when there
was a k-contracting diffeomorphism from R to S. We can also ask when there is a
k-expanding embedding from S into R.
Problem 3. Given two n-dimensional rectangles R and S, estimate the smallest k-
dilation of any diffeomorphism from any subset U of R onto S.
18

The main result of my thesis solves this problem up to a constant factor.
Theorem 1.6. Let R and S be n-dimensional rectangles. Define Qi to be the quotient
Si/Ri. For each number in the range 0 
1 < k and each number p in the range
k + 1 < p < n, define Dk(l, p) by the following formula.
k--
Dk(1,p) = Q1... Q(QI+l 
..
Qp) P- .
We abbreviate the maximum of these numbers by Dk. Any diffeomorphism from any
subset U of R onto S has k-dilation at least cDk. On the other hand, we will construct
an open subset U in R and a diffeomorphism from U to S with k-dilation less than
CDk.
The mappings involved in this theorem are not very complicated. The open set U is
always quasi-isometric to some rectangle, and the diffeomorphism is just a linear map
from this rectangle to S. The hard part is to prove that the k-dilation is greater than
cDk(l, p) for every choice of 1 and p. The inequality Vk(R') > cVk(S') is just a special
case of these inequalities. In fact, these inequalities include all of the inequalities we
have mentioned so far as well as many others.
To prove Theorem 1.2, we estimated how many disjoint wide subsets fit into a
rectangle R. We can think of a bunch of disjoint wide subsets as a thick neighborhood
of a set of points. In order to prove Theorem 1.6, we need to make analogous estimates
for thick neighborhoods of simplicial complexes of all dimensions. The first and most
important step is to find a sensible definition for the k-width of a thick complex,
which reduces to the original definition of k-width when the complex happens to be
a point.
We will soon make some more estimates of the k-dilation of diffeomorphisms be-
tween rectangles, but in order to explain them we need to consider the k-dilations of
some other maps. In [10], Gromov gave an estimate for the rational homotopy invari-
ants of maps with bounded k-dilation. For example, if f is a map from (S 4n - l, g) to the
unit 2n-sphere with 2n-dilation A, then Gromov proved that the Hopf invariant of f is
bounded by C(g)A2. For large values of A, this expression is sharp up to a constant
19

factor, for an appropriate choice of C(g). We consider the problem of estimating the
constant C(g), as g varies among the ellipsoids. We will prove the following theorem,
which shows that for an ellipsoid E with principal axes Eo < ... < E4n-1, the constant
C(g) is roughly E2nE ...E4n-1
Theorem 1.7. If E is an ellipsoid of dimension 4n-1, and f is a 2n-contracting map
from E to the unit 2n-sphere, then the Hopf invariant off is bounded by CE2nE1...E4n- .
On the other hand, if E1 > C, then we will construct a 1-contracting map from E to
S2n with Hopf invariant greater than cE2nE1 ...E4n-1
Gromov's result can be generalized to all rational homotopy invariants. We will
generalize our theorem to a number of more complicated rational homotopy invariants,
but not all of them.
For our first generalization, let X be the bouquet Ski V S k2 , where 2 < kl < k2.
If E is an ellipsoid of dimension n = k + k2 -
1, then we can define a homotopy
invariant as follows. Let ac be a top-form on Sk with f a = 1, and the same for a 2.
If f is a map from E to X, then we define H(f) = fE f*(acl) A Pf*(a 2), where Pf*(a 2 )
indicates any primitive of the exact form f*(a2). This number does not depend on
the choice of primitive and it is a homotopy invariant of the map f. We can estimate
the invariant H in terms of the k-dilation.
Theorem 1.8. Give X a metric by putting the unit sphere metric on each sphere in
the wedge. Assume that kl < k2. Iff is a kl-contracting map from E to X, then H(f)
is bounded by CEn-kl+lEl...En. On the other hand, if E1 > C, we will construct a
1-contracting map f with H(f) greater than cEn-kl+lEl...En.
We can create more complicated homotopy invariants of the same kind by con-
sidering maps to the wedge of larger numbers of spheres. For example, let X be the
wedge of three spheres Sk, V Sk2 V Sk3 . We order the spheres so that k l < k 2 < k3, and
again we assume that kl > 2. If E is an ellipsoid of dimension n = kl + k2 + k3 - 2,
then we can define two linearly independent homotopy invariants as follows.
Hi(f) = 
Pf*(a,) A f*(a2) A Pf *(oa)
20

H2(f) = 
f*(al) Pf*(a) A Pf*(3).
Theorem 1.9. Let f be a kl -contracting map from E to X. Then the homotopy invari-
ant Hi(f) is less than CE,-k 1+lEn,-kk
2+2El...E. The homotopy invariant H2(f)
is less than CEn-k2+ En-_kl-k2
+2E 
...En .
On the other hand, if E1 > C, we will construct a 1-contracting map fi with
Hl(fl) greater than cEn-k+lEn-kj-k2 +2El...En and H2(fl) = 0; and we will also
construct a 1-contracting map f2 with H2(f2) greater than cEn-k2+lEn-kk
2+2EE1...En
and Hi(f2) = 0.
An interesting feature of this theorem is that the homotopy invariants H1 and H2
have different behaviors. As the number of spheres in the bouquet X increases, we
can define more complicated homotopy invariants along these lines. For example, for
maps to a wedge of four spheres, we will define six different homotopy invariants with
six different behaviors. In many cases, but not in all cases, we will prove estimates
analogous to the theorem above. We will give more details in the body of the paper.
Each of these estimates for homotopy invariants of maps from ellipsoids implies
a lower bound on the k-dilation of diffeomorphisms between rectangles, for certain
values of k. Some of these inequalities follow from the estimates in earlier theorems,
but most of them are new. For example, we will prove that the smallest 3-dilation of
a diffeomorphism between 5-dimensional rectangles is at least (Q1Q2Q3Q4Q5)/ 2, and
that the smallest 2-dilation of a diffeomorphism between 8-dimensional rectangles is
at least (Q2Q3 
2Q Q6 7Q8)1/5
Gromov also asked whether the k-dilation controls the torsion homotopy invariants
of maps. In [10], he proved that any map from Sm to Sn with sufficiently small 2-
dilation is null-homotopic (provided n is at least 2). We will show that the 3-dilation
gives much less control of homotopy invariants.
Theorem 1.10. For each n, there are infinitely many choices of m so that we can
find homotopically non-trivial maps from Sm to S" with arbitrarily small 3-dilation.
21

The next simplest case of Problem 1 is to estimate the 2-dilation of diffeomor-
phisms between 4-dimensional rectangles. We will construct a variety of non-linear
diffeomorphisms with small 2-dilation, generalizing the snake map in various ways.
The results of Theorems 1.6 through 1.9 imply a variety of lower bounds for the
2-dilation of any diffeomorphism. Nevertheless, these results are far from solving
Problem 1 up to a constant factor. I do not even have a guess of what the right
answer might be. As a very partial result, we will solve the problem in the special
case that R is the unit cube.
Theorem 1.11. If there is a 2-contracting diffeomorphism from the unit 4-cube to
S, then S2S3S42 < C. On the other hand, if S2S3S42 < c, then there is a 2-contracting
diffeomorphism from the unit 4-cube to S.
In the last chapter of the thesis, we pursue a connection between area-contracting
maps and the topology of 3-manifolds. The bridge connecting these topics is the
following result.
Theorem 1.12. Let X be a 3-dimensional simplicial complex. We give X a metric by
putting the standard metric on each simplex. Let M be a complete hyperbolic manifold
(of any dimension). Then any continuous map f from X to M can be homotoped to a
map f with 2-dilation bounded by C.
In the 1970's, Thurston invented a simplex-straightening argument which shows
that f can be homotoped to a map that has bounded 2-dilation on each 2-simplex
and bounded 3-dilation on each 3-simplex. We prove our theorem by adding an
additional argument to Thurston's, which allows us to bound the 2-dilation on each
3-simplex. Although we have made only a small, technical improvement I found the
proof surprisingly difficult.
Given this theorem, we can apply geometrical estimates for 2-dilation to bound
the homotopy invariants of arbitrary smooth maps to hyperbolic manifolds. By this
method, we will prove two topological theorems.
The first theorem concerns estimates for a generalization of the Hopf invariant.
Recall that if ac is a 2-form on S2 with integral 1, then the Hopf invariant of a map
22

f from S3 to S2 can be defined by the formula H(f) = fs3 f *(a) A Pf*(a), where
Pf*(a) denotes any primitive of the exact form f*(a). Now if X is any closed oriented
3-manifold and , is any closed oriented surface, then we can define an analogous
invariant for maps from X to E. We pick a 2-form a on E with integral 1, and define
the Hopf invariant of a map f to be fS f*(a) A Pf*(a). 
The form f*(a) will always
be closed but it may or may not be exact. If the form is not exact, the Hopf invariant
of f is not defined. If the form is exact, however, then the integral above does not
depend on the choice of primitive and defines a homotopy invariant of f, which we
will call the Hopf invariant.
Thurston's straightening lemma was used to bound the degrees of maps to a
hyperbolic manifold. Using our refined version, we can bound the Hopf invariant.
Theorem 1.13. Let X be a closed oriented 3-manifold that can be triangulated by N
simplices. Let f be a map from X to a surface of genus 2. If the Hopf invariant of f
is defined, then it is bounded by CN. On the other hand, we will give examples where
the Hopf invariant is greater than cN, for a constant c > 1.
Using related techniques, we are able to bound the degrees of maps to a hyperbolic
manifold with small injectivity radius.
Theorem 1.14. Let X be a closed oriented 3-manifold that can be triangulated by
N simplices. Let M be a closed oriented hyperbolic manifold with injectivity radius
e. If there is a map of non-zero degree from X to M, then e is greater than C-N.
On the other hand, we will give examples of closed oriented hyperbolic manifolds with
injectivity radius e that can be triangulated by N simplices, where e < c- N for a
constant c > 1.
(Before I had proven any of the theorems in this thesis, my adviser suggested
that I try to use area-contracting maps to bound the degrees of maps between 3-
manifolds. Somewhat baffled, I looked at the literature on the degrees of maps be-
tween 3-manifolds. One of the interesting results that I found is the following theorem
of Teruhiko Soma, from [19].
23

Theorem. Let X be a closed oriented 3-manifold. Then there are only finitely many
closed oriented hyperbolic 3-manifolds M which admit a map of non-zero degree from
X.
As a corollary of Theorem 1.14, we will give a new proof of this theorem of Soma.)
24

Chapter 2
The (n-1)-Dilation of
Diffeomorphisms Between
Rectangles
In this section, we solve the problem of (n-l)-contracting diffeomorphisms between
rectangles up to a constant factor.
Theorem 2.1. Let R and S be n-dimensional rectangles. If there is an (n-1)-
contracting diffeomorphism from R to S, then the following inequalities hold. For
every integer in the range 1 < 1 < n - 1,
nR_...R__(R_+_...Rn 
n-I > cSl S(SI+l 
Sn n--
R ... Rt(Rj+ ... n) 
-
> cS ... S(S+ 1...Sn)-I
B 
R2... R 
> cS2...Sn
On the other hand, if these inequalities hold with a larger constant C in place of
c, then we will construct an (n-1)-contracting diffeomorphism from R to S.
By scaling considerations, this theorem allows us to estimate the minimal (n-1)-
dilation of any diffeomorphism from R to S.
25
A

Corollary. Let R and S be n-dimensional rectangles. Define Qi to be the quotient
Si/R. 
For each integer I in the range 1 < I < n - 1, we define a number D(l) as
follows.
DI = Ql... QI(Ql+l ...
n) n- 
b
Also, we define Dn to be Q2...Qn. Finally, we define D to be the largest of all the
numbers Dl, for from 
to n.
Any diffeomorphism from R to S has (n-1)-dilation at least cD. On the other
hand, we will construct a diffeomorphism from R to S with (n-1)-dilation less than
CD.
Let us compare the best (n-1)-dilation of a diffeomorphism from R to S with the
best (n-1)-dilation of a linear diffeomorphism from R to S. An easy calculation shows
that the linear diffeomorphism from R to S with the best (n-1)-dilation is just a
diagonal matrix which maps the interval [0, RI] to the interval [0, S] for each 1. Its
(n-1)-dilation is the largest of the n quotients (S,...SI-,Si+li...Sn)/(R1...RI_-R+1...Rn)
as 1 varies from 1 to n. If the largest of these numbers occurs for 1=1 or l=n, then
the linear map is at least roughly as good as any non-linear map. On the other
hand, if the th quotient in the list is much larger than the first quotient and the nth
quotient, then there is a non-linear diffeomorphism from R to S with (n-1)-dilation
much smaller than the (n-1)-dilation of any linear diffeomorphism.
The proof of the theorem has two parts. In the first part we construct some non-
linear diffeomorphisms with small (n-1)-dilation. In the second part, we give some
lower bounds for the (n-1)-dilation of an arbitrary diffeomorphism between rectangles.
2.1 
The snake map
We will now construct our fundamental example of a non-linear diffeomorphism with
smaller (n-1)-dilation than any linear diffeomorphism. This map is a diffeomorphism
between 3-dimensional rectangles. We will call it the snake map.
26

Proposition 2.1.1. If R1 = Si, R2 > S2, and R2R3 > S2S3, then there is a diffeo-
morphism from R to S with 2-dilation less than C.
Proof. We let I be a smooth quasi-isometric embedding of the rectangle [0, 3S2] x
[0, 3S3 ] into [0, R 2] x [0, R3 ]. Because R2 is greater than S2 and R 2R 3 is greater than
S2S3, it is easy to construct an embedding with quasi-isometric constant 10. Let H be
a smooth function on [0, 352] x [0, 3S3] which is equal to R1 on the central rectangle
[S2, 2S2] x [S3, 2S3], and which is equal to a tiny number 
on a neighborhood of the
boundary of [0, 3S2] x [0, 3S3]. Since R1 = S1 < S2, we can choose H with Lipshitz
constant less than 1.
The function Ho I-1 is defined on the image of I in [0, R2] x [0, R3], and it is equal
to 
on the boundary of this image. We extend this function to all of [0, R2] x [0, R3]
by setting it equal to 
on the complement of the image of I. We call the resulting
function H. The graph of the function H defines a surface in the rectangle R. The
first step of our construction is to push R below this hypersurface by a Lipshitz map.
Namely, we define l (x, y, z) = (xHft(y, z)R - 1, y, z). The map 
1i is a diffeomorphism
from R to the region 0 < x < H(y, z), 0 < y < R2, 0 < z < R3. Because the function
H has Lipshitz constant less than 1, the function H has Lipshitz constant less than
C, and the diffeomorphism <1 has Lipshitz constant less than C as well.
The next step of our construction is to push this region into [0, R1] x image(I).
To do this, we first pick a diffeomorphism 0 2 from [0, R2] x [0, R3] to the image of I.
This diffeomorphism will have the following properties. Its restriction to the image
of the central rectangle [S2, 2S2] x [3, 2S3] is the identity. Its restriction to a small
open neighborhood of the image of I has Lipshitz constant less than 2. It maps the
complement of the image of I to a 6-neighborhood of the boundary of the image of I,
for some tiny number . It has Lipshitz constant less than 1000R2 /S2. At each point
where the Lipshitz constant of 0 2 is more than 10, the smaller singular value of dq2 is
less than . (The diffeomorphism 
2 is just a small perturbation of a retraction from
[0, R2] x [0, R3] to the image of I.) Finally, we define 4D2(x, y, z) = (x, 02(Y, Z)).
The map 
2 itself has very large 2-dilation, but the composition 1q2 o (I1 has 2-
dilation less than C. To prove this bound, we consider two cases. If the coordinates
27

(y, z) lie in the image of I, then we prove the bound as follows. The map (I has
1-dilation less than C at (x, y, z), and it maps (x, y, z) to (xH(y, z)Ri 1, y, z). The
map 
2 has 1-dilation less than C at this point. If the coordinates (y, z) do not lie in
the image of I, then the derivative of 2 o 1 is given by the following matrix.
O 
0
d(2 
° 1) = 
0 
ay 
a 
|
M, 
az
(In this equation 0q5 denotes the y-coordinate of the mapping 02.) If the Lipshitz
constant of 0 2 at (y, z) is less than 10, then the 2-dilation of this matrix is certainly
less than C. On the other hand, if the Lipshitz constant of 02 at (y, z) is more than 10,
then the smaller singular value of dq2 is less than 6, and the larger singular value of
dq2 is less than 1000R2/S 2. Therefore, the matrix d(( 2 o 1) has two singular values
less than 6 and the largest singular value less than 1000R2/S 2.
If 6 is sufficiently
small, the matrix has 2-dilation less than C.
Next, we define a map I3 from the region [0, R1] x image(I) to [0, S1] x [0, 3S2] x
[0,3S3]. This map is defined by c 3(x, y, z) = (x, I-(y, 
z)). It is quasi-isometric.
The composition 
I3 o 
2 o 4I1 is an embedding of R into [0, S1] x [0, 3S2] x [0, 3S3 ],
with 2-dilation less than C. The image of this embedding contains the sub-rectangle
[0, S1] x [S2, 2S 2] x [S3, 2S3], which is isometric to S. Since this sub-rectangle is convex,
there is a 1-contracting retraction from the image of R to it. This retraction is not
a diffeomorphism, but it can easily be approximated by a diffeomorphism 
4 with
Lipshitz constant as close as we like to 1.
The composition 4I4 o I3 o q2 
0o (1 is a diffeomorphism from R to S with 2-dilation
bounded by C. 
O
Using the snake map, we can quickly construct a 2-contracting diffeomorphism
between three-dimensional rectangles R and S which obey the conditions in Theorem
2.1. Suppose R1R 2 > S1S2, R1R2R 3 > S12S2S3, and R 2R3 > S2S3. It suffices to
construct a diffeomorphism from R to S with 2-dilation less than C.
If R1 < S, then we define a 2-contracting linear diffeomorphism from R to T,
28

with T1 = S1, T2 = R 2R 1/S1 , and T3 = R 3R 1/S 1.
(The length T2 is indeed bigger
than T1 because R1R2 > S1S2.) Using the first two equations in the list above, we
see that T2 > S2 and T2T3 > S2S3. Therefore, there is a snake map from T to S with
2-dilation less than C.
If R 1 > S1 but R2 < S2, then we define a 2-contracting linear diffeomorphism
from R to T, with T1 = R1R2/S2, T2 = S2, and T3 = R3R2/S2. (The length T3 is
indeed bigger than T2 because R 2R 3 > S2S3.) Since R1R 2 > S1S2, T1 > S1. Since
R2R3 > S2S3, T3 > S3. Therefore, there is a 1-contracting linear diffeomorphism
from T to S.
If R1
S and R2 > S2, there is a snake map from R to S with 2-dilation less
than C.
To generalize the snake map to higher dimensions, we take the Cartesian product
of a snake map from a three-dimensional rectangle R to a three-dimensional rectangle
S with an identity map from an (n-3)-dimensional rectangle R' to itself. The resulting
map is an (n-1)-contracting diffeomorphism from R x R' to S x R', which we will also
call a snake map. All of the (n-1)-contracting diffeomorphisms needed for Theorem
2.1 can be constructed by composing a sequence of snake maps with a linear map.
To prove this fact requires some tedious algebra, which we divide into a sequence of
propositions.
Proposition 2.1.2. If the rectangles R and S obey the conditions R1 > S1, and
R2...Rb > S2.. Sb for each number b in the range 2 
b < n, then there is a dif-
feomorphism from R to S with (n-l)-dilation less than C. This diffeomorphism is a
composition of snake maps and contracting linear maps.
Proof. If Ri > Si for every value of i, then there is a contracting linear diffeomorphism
from R to S. Let a denote the smallest number so that Ra < Sa. We perform a snake
map from T to S, where the three active directions are [0, Si] x [0, S2] x [0, Sa]. More
precisely, write S = [0, S1] x [0, S2] x [0, Sa] x S', and T = [0, Si] x [0, AS2] x [0, \ -1 Sa] x
S'. We choose A to be the smaller of the two ratios R2/S2 and Sa/Ra. Then there is
a snake map from T to S with (n-1)-dilation less than C.
29

If the ratio R2/S 2 is smaller than Sa/R,, then T is equal to [0, R2] times a lower
dimensional rectangle T'. We let R' be equal to the (n-1)-dimensional rectangle R1 x
R 3 X ... x Rn. Now it is easy to check that the rectangles R' and T' satisfy the
hypotheses of this proposition. By induction on the dimension, we can assume that
there is a diffeomorphism from R' to T' with (n-2)-dilation less than C. Taking the
direct product of this diffeomorphism with the identity map from [0, R2] to itself gives
a diffeomorphism from R to T with (n-1)-dilation less than C. Composing with the
snake map from T to S gives a diffeomorphism from T to S with (n-1)-dilation less
than C.
If the ratio Sa,/R is smaller than R 2/S 2, then T is equal to [0, S1] x [0, S2Sa/Ra] x
[0, Ra] x S'. In this case, the rectangle T obeys R1 > T1, R2...Rb > T2...Tb for all b,
and Ri > Ti for all i less than or equal to a. By induction on the number a, we can
assume that there is a diffeomorphism from R to T with (n-1)-dilation less than C.
Composing with the snake map from T to S, we get a diffeomorphism from T to S
with (n-1)-dilation less than C. 
l
Proposition 2.1.3. If R1 > S1 and R2...R(R,+i...R) 
n- > S2...St(S+1.. 
Sn) 
n-
for each I in the range 1 < 1 < n - 1, then there is a rectangle T with T = S1,
R 2...Rb > T2...Tb for each b in the range 2 < b < n, and an (n-1)-contracting linear
diffeomorphism from T to S.
Proof. We prove this proposition by induction. More generally, we will prove that for
every p in the range 1 < p < n - 1, the conclusion of the proposition follows from
the following conditions, which we call C(p).
1. R1 > S.
2. R2...Ra > S2...S, for a in the range 2 < a < p,
n--l--1 
.
n--1
3. R2...Rt(Rl+l 
... ) 
> S2...S(St+Sn 
) 
n-l forlintherange p < <n-1,
and
4. R 2...Rn > S2...Sn.
When p=l, these hypotheses are just the hypotheses of the proposition. On the
other hand, the conclusion of the proposition follows immediately from C(n - 1).
30

Therefore, it suffices to show that if the conclusion follows from C(q) for each q
greater than p, then it also follows from C(p). We now carry out that induction.
Suppose that R and S satisfy C(p). 
Let b be the smallest number for which
R 2...Rb < S2 .. Sb. If there is no such b, then the conclusion of the proposition clearly
holds for R and S. Because of condition 4 we know that b is not equal to n, and
because of the condition 3 with 1 = n - 1, we know that b is not equal to n-1.
Therefore, b lies in the range 2 < b < n - 2.
The case b = 2 is special. If b = 2, then we must have had p = 1. There is
an (n-1)-expanding linear diffeomorphism from S to S', where S = 
1, S 
=R2
and S = Si(S 2/R 2) 1/( n-3) for all i > 3. (The length S is at least S because
S = S1 < R1 < R 2 = S.) 
We check that S' obeys C(2). Condition 1 follows
because R1 > S1 = Si. Condition 2 follows because R2 = S2. Condition 3 follows for
1 in the range 2 
I < n - 1, by a straightforward calculation. Finally, condition 4
follows from Condition 3 for 1=2 along with the equality S2 = R2. Since p = 1, our
inductive hypothesis is that C(2) implies the conclusion of the proposition. Therefore
the conclusion of the proposition holds for R and S in this case.
Now we deal with the more general case that b > 2. In this case, we apply an
(n-1)-expanding linear transformation to S that leaves S through Sb-1 invariant,
decreases Sb, and increases all the other directions equally, until either R2...Rb =
S2.. Sb, or Sb-l = Sb. In the latter case, we then apply an (n-1)-expanding linear
transformation to S that leaves S through Sb-2 invariant, decreases Sb-1 and Sb
equally, and increases all the other directions equally until either R2... Rb = S2.. Sb
or Sb-2 = Sb-1 = Sb. In the latter case, we then apply a linear transformation that
decreases Sb-2, Sb-l, and Sb, and so on. Because R2 > S2, this process terminates
without decreasing S2.
At the end of the process, we have an equality R 2...Rb =
S2...5b. 
We check that the rectangles R and S' obey the condition C(b). Condition
1 follows because S = S1 < R1. Condition 2 follows because R2...Rb = S2...5b, and
because for each a less than b, S... S 
< S2.. Sa < R2...Ra. A calculation shows
__--_-- 
1 
n--I--
that 52 
'-
5 (5 l+1
-..
5 )f-'' 1l = S2...Sl(Sl+1...S) 
n-i for 1 > b. Therefore, condition
3 holds for R and S'. Finally condition 4 follows from the case l=b of condition 3
31

along with the equality R 2... Rb = S...Sb. 
Since b is greater than p, our inductive
hypothesis tells us that the conclusion of the proposition holds for R and S'. Since
there is an (n-1)-contracting linear diffeomorphism from S' to S, the conclusion of the
proposition holds for R and S.
This argument proves the inductive step and hence the proposition. 
O
Proposition 2.1.4. Suppose the rectangles R and S obey the following inequalities
for each 1 in the range 1 < I < n- 1.
RI... RI(RI+j... Rn) n 
> S. 
n- 
-
Also suppose that R2...Rn > S2...Sn. 
Then there is a rectangle S' with an (n-l)-
contracting linear diffeomorphism to S, so that R and S' obey the hypotheses of Propo-
sition 2. These are R1 > S' and R2...Rl(R+l 
n...Rn
)
-
S..S(S...S 
n , for
each 1 in the range 1 < < n- 1.
Proof. If R1 < S, then there is an (n-1)-expanding linear diffeomorphism from S to
S', where S' = R1 and Si = S(S
1/R 1)/(-
2) for i at least 2. A short calculation
shows that S... S(S 
) -
= Sl...Sl(S+...S) 
n-l 
for each 1 between 1 and
shows th S...S (SI,+... Sn) -n-1
n-1. Therefore, R 1... R(RI+1... 
n 
S...S(S+...S) 
nl 
Since R1 = S,
R2...R1(Ri+1...R) 
> S...S1(S+i...) 
n-l , and the proposition follows in this
case.
If R1 > S, then we apply an (n-1)-expanding linear transformation to S which
decreases S2 and increases all other directions of S equally until either S1 = R1 or
S1 = S2.
In the second case, we apply an (n-1)-expanding linear transformation
to S which decreases S3 and increases all other directions of S equally until either
S1 = R1 or S1 = S2 = S3, and so on. We continue this process until either S1 = R
or S1 = Sn < R 1. In the latter case, the proposition follows trivially.
In the former case, we call the final rectangle in this chain of (n-1)-expanding
diffeomorphisms S'. Suppose that the last diffeomorphism was decreasing Sb+l and
increasing Si for all other i. We have R1 = S, = S2 = ... = Sb. A short calculation
shows that S ... S (S+l...S) 
n-i = S...S (S1+ ... S) 
n-l as longasis atleastb+.
32

Since R1 = S$, it follows that R2...Rl(Rl+l...R)- n-l 
> S...Sf(S+...S
)
n-l as long
as 1 is at least b+1.
Since S = ... = S = R1, we know that R 2...R > S...SI for 1 less than or
equal to b. Also, a short calculation shows that S...S 
= S2 ...Sn. By hypoth-
esis, S2...Sn < R2...Rn. Therefore R2...Rn > S...S,. 
Combining this inequality
with the first inequality of this paragraph, it follows that R2...Ri(R+...Rn) n-1 
! n--1
S.. .S(+1 ... S) 
n-l 
as long as 1 is at most b. Therefore, the conclusion of the
proposition holds in this case also. 
O
Given these three propositions, we can construct all the (n-1)-contracting diffeo-
morphisms which we need to prove Theorem 2.1. Suppose that the side lengths of
R and S obey the inequality R1...R(Rl +... 
n-I > 
S 
..... 
n-l for each
1 in the range 1 < I < n- 1 and that R2...Rn > S2...Sn. It suffices to construct a
diffeomorphism from R to S with (n-1)-dilation less than C. According to Proposi-
tion 2.1.4, there is a linear (n-1)-contracting diffeomorphism from T to S, where T
obeys the inequalities R1
T and R2...R(R 1+1...Rn) n-l 
T2-..T(T+l...Tn)nn
-l
for each 1 in the range 1 < I < n - 1. According to Proposition 2.1.3, there is a
linear (n-1)-contracting diffeomorphism from U to T, where U obeys the inequalities
R1 > U1, and R2...Rb > CU2...Ub for each number b in the range 2 < b < n. Ac-
cording to Proposition 2.1.2, there is a non-linear diffeomorphism from R to U with
(n-1)-dilation less than C.
2.2 
Packings by wide sets
We define the width of an open set U in Rn to be the infimal number W so that
there is a piecewise-linear function 7r from U to R so that each level set of r has
volume less than W. This definition has a good relationship with (n-1)-contracting
diffeomorphisms. Namely, if there is an (n-1)-contracting diffeomorphism from U to
V, then the width of U is greater than or equal to the width of V. (To see this,
approximate the diffeomorphism by a piecewise linear map with a negligible increase
in the (n-1)-dilation.)
33

In this section we will prove a sequence of estimates for the widths of subsets of
R n. First we estimate the width of the unit ball. This proof is due to Gromov. We
let w(n) denote the volume of the unit ball in R n .
Proposition 2.2.1. The width of the unit ball in Rn is at least [(1/2) n- - 1/2]nw(n).
Proof. The isoperimetric inequality in R" can be written as follows.
[Volume(U)w(n)-l] n < Volume(&U)n-lw(n)-1 .
Let r be a piece-wise linear map from the unit ball in Rn to R. If there is some
value of x so that r-l(x) has positive n-dimensional volume, then the width of f is
infinite. If not, we can find a value of x so that r-l(x) is a polyhedral chain in the unit
ball which cuts it into two pieces of equal volume. One of these two pieces meets the
boundary in less than half of its volume. Therefore, this piece has volume (1/2)w(n),
and its boundary has volume at most (n/2)w(n) + Volume(r-l(x)). According to the
isoperimetric inequality, the volume of r-l(x) is at least [(1/2) n 
- 1/2]nw(n). 0
Remark: As far as I know, this proof was first written down by Gromov in ap-
pendix 1 of Filling Riemannian Manifolds, [12]. It may well be older. Probably, the
exact value of the width of the unit ball is known to be w(n - 1), but I am not sure
how to prove it. In Appendix B, we give a short description of Almgren's work on
families of cycles, which gives a sharp estimate for the width of the unit sphere.
Corollary. The width of the unit cube is at most 1 and is greater than c.
Corollary. The width of a rectangle R is at least cR1... Rn_1 and at most R1...
_Rn
Proof. If the rectangle R is a cube, then this estimate follows from the previous
corollary by scaling. For general R, there is an (n-l)-contracting linear map from R
to a cube with side-length (R...Rn_l)
1/(n - 1). Therefore, the (n-l)-width of R is at
least the (n-l)-width of this cube, which is greater than cRj...Rn-l. On the other
hand, the function xn has level sets which are parallel to the face of R with dimensions
R1 x ... x Rnl 1, and so the width of R is at most R1...Rn 1_. 
El
34

Using this corollary, we can prove one of the inequalities in Theorem 2.1.
Proposition 2.2.2. If there is an (n-1)-contracting diffeomorphism from R to S,
then R...Rn-1 > cS ...Sn-1.
Proof. By the last proposition, we know that R 1... R_- 1 is greater than or equal to the
width of R. Since there is an (n-1)-contracting diffeomorphism from R to S, the width
of R is greater than or equal to the width of S. But according to the last proposition,
the width of S is greater than cS1...Sn_ 1.
[
This proposition proves inequality A of Theorem 2.1 in the case that I = n - 1.
In order to prove the other cases of inequality A, we will need upper bounds on the
widths of subsets of rectangles. The first case of an upper bound which we will prove
is the following.
Proposition 2.2.3. (Width-Volume Inequality) If U is a bounded open set in Rn,
then the width of U is less than CVolume(U) n
This upper bound follows from a width-volume inequality for functions. Let f be
a non-negative function on Rn. Then the width of f is defined to be the smallest
number W so that there is a piecewise linear map r from Rn to R with fl(y) 
f < W
for each y in R.
Theorem 2.2. Suppose that f is a continuous, compactly supported function in Rn,
and that 0 < f < 1 pointwise. Then the width of f is bounded by C(f f) 
n
Proof. By rescaling the coordinates, we can reduce this theorem to the case that
ff=l.
Let S(x) be the (n-1)-skeleton of the unit lattice in R , centered at the point x.
For a random point x in the unit cube, the average value of fs(.) f is n. Therefore,
we can pick a point x so that fs(.) f < n. From now on, we call this S(x) simply S.
We are going to construct a piecewise linear map to R so that each fiber closely
hugs the skeleton S except for a set of bounded volume. Since fs f is bounded, we
can bound the integral of f over the part of the fiber near to S. On the other hand,
35

since f < 1, we can bound the integral of f over the remainder of the fiber. We now
turn to the details.
We will first construct a piecewise linear isomorphism J of Rn which fixes S and
which pushes most of space into a small neighborhood of S. The complement of S
consists of disjoint unit cubes. Let K be one of these cubes. Since the boundary of K
lies in S, J fixes the boundary of K. Let k be a cube with side length e and the same
center as K, for some very small number e which we will choose later. The restriction
of J to k is the dilation whose image is the cube with side (1- e) and with the same
center as K. While I magnifies the tiny central cube k, it squeezes the region between
k and K into the e/2-neighborhood of the boundary of K. Once we have defined the
restriction of J to K, we extend I to a periodic function on Rn .
It is a little bit tedious to write down the extension of I to the region between
K and k, so we will postpone it to the end of the proof. We will divide the region
between K and k into convex polyhedra KF, where F is a hyperface of K. We will
construct a triangulation T of K so that each simplex lies in one of the KF. The
extension of ' is linear on each simplex of this triangulation. The map IF takes each
simplex of T in KF into a very small neighborhood of F. Finally, the restriction of F
to each simplex in KF takes almost every (n-1)-plane to be almost parallel to F.
Next let r0 be a linear projection from R n to R, which we will choose later.
Our map 7r will be equal to the composition ro0 o T-1. The fibers of Ir0 are parallel
hyperplanes. Let P be one of these hyperplanes. 
The corresponding fiber of r is
(P). We only need to worry about the part of the fiber which lies in the support of
f. For generic choice of Ir0, if e is sufficiently small, each plane P will hit the central e
cube k for at most one cube K in the support of f. The part of P through this central
region is mapped to a piece of plane inside of that cube K, with volume less than C.
Since f is no more than 1, the integral of f over 
(P n k) is less than C.
The remainder of P lies in the union of the convex polyhedra KF. For each simplex
A of our triangulation, the map 'l takes P n A to a piece of plane which is very close
to the face F. For each A and for most choices of 1r0, this piece of plane is also very
close to being parallel to F. Since 
is periodic, we only have to consider finitely
36

many linear maps. Therefore, we can choose 7r0 so that the restriction of J to every
A in every KF maps the fibers of ir0 to (n-1)-planes that are almost parallel to F.
Because f is continuous, the integral of f over 
(P n A) is bounded by the integral
of f over the face F. Therefore, the integral of f over 
(P n KF) is bounded by C fF f'
Finally, applying this to each region KF, we can bound the integral of f over the
complement of the central -cubes k by C fS f, which is less than C.
Assembling these two bounds, we see that the integral of f over 
(P) is less than
C, for each plane P which is a fiber of ir0. In particular, the integral of f over any
fiber of 7r is less than C. The map r is clearly piecewise linear. For a generic map r0,
the map r is generic also. Therefore, the width of f is bounded by C.
To finish the proof, we now have to construct the extension of I to the region
between K and k. Any reasonable extension of 
to all of K will probably work. Over
the course of the thesis we will have to construct a number of mappings in similar
situations, so we are going to write down a standard approach now. In a first reading
of the proof, the reader should not take these details too seriously.
The first step is to divide the region between K and k into convex polyhedra. For
each face F of K, we can define a pyramid with base equal to F and apex equal to
the center of K. This pyramid meets the boundary of k in exactly one face. The
intersection of the pyramid with the region between K and k is a convex polyhedron.
(This intersection is the convex hull of the union of F and the corresponding face of
k.) As F varies among the faces of K, these convex polyhedra tile the region between
K and k. The region between K and (1 - E)K has a combinatorially equivalent tiling,
consisting of the intersection of the above pyramids with this smaller region. The
map which we will construct will map each convex polyhedron in the first tiling to
the corresponding convex polyhedron in the second tiling.
The second step is to define the map on each convex polyhedron. We will often
have to define piecewise linear maps between combinatorially equivalent convex poly-
hedra. It turns out be convenient to define such maps using barycentric subdivisions.
Let P be a convex polyhedron. For each face F of P, let c(F) be a point in the
interior of F. Using c(F) we can define the barycentric subdivision of P inductively
37

on the faces of P. The barycentric subdivision of any polyhedron is a triangulation.
Suppose that we have defined the barycentric triangulation on the boundary of a face
F. Then the barycentric subdivision of F is the cone from c(F) to the barycentric
subdivision of the boundary. (If A is a p-simplex in the barycentric subdivision of
the boundary of F, then the barycentric subdivision of F contains a (p+l)-simplex
with base A and apex c(F).)
Now suppose that P1 and P2 are combinatorially equivalent convex polyhedra.
More precisely, suppose that we are given a particular combinatorial equivalence
from P1 to P2. Also, suppose that we have chosen a "center" c(F) for each face of
each polyhedron. Given this data, there is a unique map from P1 to P2, which maps
the center of each face of P1 to the center of the corresponding face of P2, and which
is linear on each simplex of the barycentric subdivision of P1.
This map is a PL
isomorphism from P1 to P2, taking each simplex of the barycentric subdivision of P1
onto the corresponding simplex of the barycentric subdivision of P2. We will call this
map the barycentric map from P1 to P2.
The restriction of T to KF will be a barycentric map. We need to set up some
coordinates. Put the center of the cube K at 0. The face F is given by the inequalities
-1/2 
< xi < 1/2 for i from 1 to n-1, and the equation xn = 1/2. The cone from
F to the center of K is given by the inequalities 0 < xn < 1/2 and -x 
< xi < x~
for i from 1 to n-1. The convex polyhedron KF is equal to this cone, minus a small
cube centered at the origin with side length e. The polyhedron KF is given by the
equations e/2 < xn < 1/2 and -xn < xi < x. The polyhedron KF is combinatorially
equivalent to a rectangle. We are going to map KF to an analogous polyhedron that
lies between K and (1 -
)K. This image polyhedron is defined by the equations
1/2 -
/2 < x, < 1/2 and -x 
< xi < x~. It is also combinatorially equivalent
to a rectangle. The polyhedra have the face F in common. There is exactly one
combinatorial equivalence from KF to the other polyhedron which restricts to the
identity on F.
To define the barycentric map, we need to pick a "center" for each face of KF
and each face of the other polyhedron. We define the center of each face to be the
38

average value of its vertices. Given this choice, there is a unique barycentric map from
KF onto the other polyhedron defined in the last paragraph. Since the definition of
the center of a face only depends on the face itself, the map that we defined on
two neighboring polyhedra agrees on the boundary. 
It is easy to check that this
barycentric map restricts to the identity on the face F and that it restricts to I on
the boundary between KF and the small central cube k. Therefore, this barycentric
map gives a globally well-defined PL isomorphism I. The barycentric map takes KF
into the e/2 neighborhood of the face F.
The only thing that we still have to do is to check that the barycentric map on
each barycentric simplex of KF maps almost every (n-1)-plane to be almost parallel
to F. An explicit calculation shows that each linear map is given by a matrix Mij
with the following form. The diagonal elements Mi,i are at least on the order of 1
when i is between 1 and n-1. (Depending on which simplex we are looking at, some
of these entries will be on the order of e- 1 and others will be on the order of 1.) The
entry M,n is on the order of . The off-diagonal entries are all 0, except for the
entries Mi,,. The absolute value of Mi,n is less than 2. For e very small, this matrix
maps almost every (n-l)-plane to be almost parallel to F. 
O
To prove the width-volume inequality for a bounded open set U, we apply the
theorem to a continuous function f approximating the characteristic function of U.
(All we need to assume about f is the following: f f is roughly the volume of U, f is
greater than or equal to the characteristic function of U, f is between 0 and 1, and f
is compactly supported.)
In order to bound the (n-1)-dilation of diffeomorphisms between rectangles, we
need to understand the following problem. If U is an open set in a rectangle R with a
given volume, what is the largest possible width of U? According to the width-volume
inequality, the width of U is less than CVolume(U) 
n 
. Also, the width of U is at
most the width of R, which is at most R1... R,
1.
These two inequalities are not
sufficient to give a good estimate for the width of U. We will prove a sequence of
inequalities which interpolate between them.
39

Proposition 2.2.4. Let U be a subset of the rectangle R. For each I in the range
O < I < n - 1, we have the following inequality.
Width(U) < C(R1...RI) n 
Vol me(U)r 
.
Proof. When I = 0, this inequality reduces to the width-volume inequality. When
1 = n - 1, this inequality says that the width of U is less than CR1...Rn_ . Since U is
a subset of R, the width of U is at most the width of R, and this inequality follows.
Now we turn to the intermediate values of 1.
Let f be a continuous approximation to the characteristic function of U. More pre-
cisely, f is a non-negative continuous function supported in R in a small neighborhood
of U, with 0 < f < 1, f = 1 on U, and f f approximately equal to the volume of U.
Let g be the function on the (n-l)-dimensional rectangle Rl+ x ... x Rn defined
by g(y) = (R 1...RI)- 1 fR l x...xR, f(x,y)dx. 
The function g is continuous, compactly
supported, and 0 
g < 1. Applying our theorem to the function g, it follows
that the width of g is bounded by C(f g) n--. This expression is roughly equal to
C[(R 1...Rz)-'Volume(U)] 
l . According to the definition of width, there is some
smooth function r from Rn-
to R so that the integral of g over each level set is
bounded by this expression. We define a smooth map 7i on R by ir(x, y) = 7r(y).
The volume of U intersected with a fiber 
-1(z) is bounded by (R1... RI) times the
integral of g over the the fiber r-1 (z). Therefore, the width of U is bounded by
C(Ri...Ri) n-Volume(U) n-i .
Oi
We are now ready to prove all the inequalities in Theorem 2.1. We restate all the
inequalities as a proposition.
Proposition 2.2.5. If R and S are n-dimensional rectangles, and there is an (n-1)-
contracting diffeomorphism from R to S, then the following inequalities hold.
A. RI...RI(RI+i...R,) 
n-' > CS ...SI(S+1... Sn) n- , for each I in the range 1 <
< n-1.
B. R2...Rn > cS2...Sn.
40

Proof. Let 1 be any integer in the range 1 < 1 < n- 2. Inside of S, we choose disjoint
subrectangles with dimensions S x ... x SIl1 x S x S x ... x S1.
We can choose
roughly N of these disjoint rectangles, where N = Sl+l...SnISI'-'. 
Each rectangle has
width at least CS1...SSn-l-1.
According to the last proposition, any subset of R with width W has volume at
least [W(Ri...RI) n-] n--1. Therefore, the inverse image of each of the above rectan-
n-l 
n-1
gles has volume at least c(S ...$S)n-.-
S 
Sn- (R 1...R) n-l-1. These inverse images are
disjoint, and so their total volume is less than the volume of R. Since there are N
inverse images, the following inequality holds.
n--l 
-
-1
R1...Rn > c(...S--(Ri...R)n/
1
Plugging in the value of N, which is roughly Sl+ ... Sn/Sn-, we get the following
inequality.
>.. 
> 
.
n- 
R ...Rn > c(Sl..S)n--l 
Sl+ .. Sn(Rl ...Rl)n-"- .
Finally, bringing the factor (R1...R1)n- -1 to the other side leaves the following
inequality.
(Ra...R)tR,-I R(+...R. 
> C(S1lSi)n 
q 
SA+. 
nSrn
Taking the (n -
-
)/(n - 1) power of each side leaves inequality A for any integer
1 in the range 1 < I 
n- 2. We already proved inequality A in case 1 is equal to n-1.
This inequality followed because the width of R is at least the width of S. Therefore,
we have proven inequality A in all cases.
Inequality B is completely elementary. The number 2nR2... Rn is at least as great
as the volume of the boundary of R. Since there is an (n-1)-contracting diffeomorphism
from R to S, the volume of the boundary of R is at least as great as the volume of
the boundary of S. But the volume of the boundary of S is greater than 2S2...S,.
Therefore, R 2...Rn > (1/n)S 2 ...S. 
[]
This finishes the proof of Theorem 2.1.
41

42
_I

Chapter 3
The Width-Volume Inequality
In the previous chapter, we gave several lower bounds for (n-1)-dilation. All of these
lower bounds generalize in a straightforward way to give lower bounds for the k-
dilation. In particular, we will define a k-width which generalizes the width that we
defined in the last chapter. The k-width of a set U is small if the set can be swept out
by a family of k-dimensional surfaces with small k-volume. The main result of the
chapter is that the k-width of an open set in Rn is controlled by its volume. Given this
inequality we will prove lower bounds for the k-dilation of diffeomorphisms between
rectangles. When k lies in the range 1 < k < n - 1, the resulting estimates are far
from good enough to calculate the minimal k-dilation up to a constant factor.
3.1 
The definition of k-width
In this section, we define a k-width, which measures the k-dimensional volume needed
to sweep out a set by k-dimensional slices. The k-width generalizes the width defined
in the last section, which measured the (n-1)-dimensional volume needed to sweep out
a set by (n-1)-dimensional slices. Gromov defined a k-volume width in appendix 1 to
the paper Filling Riemannian Manifolds [12], and similar definitions have probably
been around a long time at least implicitly. For technical reasons, we need a definition
which differs slightly from previous definitions.
It turns out to be convenient, for technical reasons, to work with piecewise linear
43

maps. A piecewise linear map from a domain to Rm is called generic if its restriction
to each simplex (of any dimension) has maximal rank. The generic PL maps have
several convenient features. The inverse image of each point is a polyhedral chain of
the expected dimension. Moreover, the inverse image of a polyhedral chain is again a
polyhedral chain of the expected dimension. Also, if r is a generic PL map, then the
integral of a continuous function over the fiber 7r- 1(y) is a continuous function of y.
We define the k-width of U to be the infimal W so that there is a generic PL map
7r from U to R n- k with fibers of k-volume less than W. We will sometimes abbreviate
the k-width of U by Wk(U).
The most basic estimate of k-width is the following.
Proposition 3.1.1. (Gromov, Almgren) The k-width of the unit n-cube is at least
some positive constant c(n).
Proof. Here is Gromov's proof. Suppose that r is a generic PL map from the unit
n-cube to Rn- k, and that each fiber has k-volume less than 6. Take a very fine
triangulation T of R n -
k. Since r is generic PL, the inverse image of each vertex of T
is a (relative) cycle in the unit n-cube. Using the isoperimetric inequality, the cycle
can be filled by a (k+l)-chain of volume less than C6. For each vertex v of T, define
F(v) to be a filling of r-l(v) with (k+1)-volume bounded by C6.
Since 7r is generic PL and the triangulation T is very fine, we can assume that the
inverse image of each edge of T has (k+l)-volume less than e, which is much less than
6. For each edge E of T, we define a (k+l)-cycle C(E) in the unit n-cube, which is
equal to the union of r-(E), and F(vl) and F(v2), where vl and v2 are the endpoints
of E. The (k+l)-volume of C(E) is bounded by C6. Next, choose a (k+2)-chain F(E)
with boundary C(E), and with (k+2)-volume bounded by CS.
Iterating this construction we finally define a cycle C(A) for each (n-k)-simplex
A of T. Each cycle C(A) has n-volume less than C6. On the other hand, the sum of
the cycles C(A) is equal to the sum of the chains 7r-l(A), which is homologous to the
fundamental cycle of the unit cube. Therefore one of the cycles C(A) has volume at
least 1, and 6 > 1/C > 0.
44

This finishes the proof of the theorem. It is essentially identical to Gromov's proof
in appendix 1 of Filling Riemannian Manifolds [12]. 
O
In fact, the proof actually gave a stronger result.
Corollary. If M admits a k-contracting map of non-zero degree to the unit n-sphere,
then the k-width of M is at least c.
Given Gromov's theorem, it is easy to estimate the k-width of a rectangle up to
a constant factor.
Corollary. The k-width of a rectangle R is greater than cR1...Rk but less than R 1...Rk.
Proof. Since there is a linear diffeomorphism from the rectangle R to the unit cube
with k-dilation equal to (R 1...Rk)-
1, it follows that the k-width of R is at least
cR1...Rk. On the other hand, since the projection to the last (n - k) coordinates
is an admissible map, the k-width of R is at most R1...Rk. 
LO
3.2 
The width-volume inequality
The width-volume inequality which we proved in the first section generalizes to the
k-width for all k. For any bounded open set U in Rn, we will prove the bound
k-width(U) < Cvolume(U)k/n.
As before, our inequality will follow from a slightly more general inequality in-
volving the k-widths of functions. Let f be a function on Rn which is greater than or
equal to zero. We say that the k-width of f is less than W if there is a generic PL
map ' from Rn to Rn-k so that the integral of f over each fiber of T is less than W.
Theorem 3.1. If f is a continuous function with compact support on Rn, and 0 <
f < 1, then k-width(f) < C(f f)k/n.
The original inequality for sets U follows from this theorem by taking f to be
a continuous approximation to the characteristic function of U. We now prove the
theorem.
45

Proof. After rescaling the coordinates, it suffices to prove that k-width(f) < C when
f f = 1. From now on, we will assume that f f = 1.
We begin by finding a k-dimensional skeleton S with fS f bounded. The reason
for finding S is that each fiber of the map 7r which we are going to construct will hug
the skeleton S except along regions of controlled volume.
Let S(x) be the k-skeleton of the unit lattice with center x. Since the integral of f
is 1, the average value of fs(.) f as x varies over the unit cube is equal to (n). We can
choose a point x so that fs(z) f is no more than the average value (n). From now on,
we refer to S(x) simply as S. The set S is the k-skeleton of a translated unit lattice,
and we have proven that s f 
()
We will tile the space Rn with polyhedra in a way that fits nicely with S. First
we need to make some definitions. Let T be the (n-k-l)-skeleton dual to S. If A is a
k-dimensional face in S, then we define the link of A in the following way. The set A is
defined by equations xi = ai for (n-k) coordinates i, and equations ai < xj < aj + 1 for
the other k coordinates. There is an (n-k) cube transverse to A given by the equations
ai - 1/2 < xi < ai + 1/2 for the (n-k) coordinates i above, and xj = aj + 1/2 for
the other k coordinates. This cube is simply the (n-k) cube centered at the center of
A, perpendicular to A, and parallel to the coordinate axes. The link of A is defined
to be the boundary of this (n-k) cube. It consists of 2(n - k) (n-k-l) cubes, each of
which is an (n-k-l) dimensional face of T. If B is an (n-k-l) dimensional face of T,
we define the link of B in an analogous way. It is a topological k-sphere consisting
of 2(k+1) k-dimensional faces of S. We let A denote a k-dimensional 
face of S and B
an (n-k-l)-dimensional face of T. A quick calculation shows that A is in the link of
B if and only if B is in the link of A. For each pair (A, B) of faces with A in the link
of B, we define K(A, B) to be the convex hull of the union of A and B. These sets
K(A, B) are the tiles of our tiling.
We check that the polyhedra K(A, B) tile Rn. The hyperfaces of the tile K(A, B)
correspond to pairs (A, b) where b is an (n-k-2)-face in the boundary of B, or pairs
(a, B), where a is a (k-1)-face in the boundary of A. (The corresponding face is just
the convex hull of A and b, or of a and B.) Each face borders exactly two tiles in
46

our tiling. Given a face (A, b), let B' be the (n-k-1)-face in the link of A which lies
on the other side of b from B. Then K(A, B') is the only other tile with (A, b) as
a face. Therefore, the tiles form a pseudo-manifold, and the embedding of the tiles
is an orientation preserving proper map from the tile space to R n. The intersection
of K(A, B) with the skeleton S is equal to A. In particular, the only tiles that come
near to the center of A are tiles K(A, B) for some B in the link of A. It is easy to
check that a typical point very close to the center of A lies in exactly one of the tiles
K(A, B). Therefore, the tiles have disjoint interiors and cover all of space.
Next we define a PL isomorphism T which leaves each tile invariant, and which
maps the -neighborhood of T to the complement of the -neighborhood of S, for a
very small number e which we will choose later.
After renumbering the coordinates, translating, and reflecting, we can assume
that A and B have the following simple form. The face A is given by the inequalities
0 < xi < 1 for i from 1 to k, xi = 0 for i from k + 1 to n. The face B is given by
inequalities -1/2 < xi < 1/2 for i from k + 1 to n - 1, the equations xi = 1/2 for
i from 1 to k, and xn = 1/2. The convex set K(A, B) is given by the inequalities
0 < n < 1/2, -n < xi < xn for i from k + 1 to n-1, and 11/2-x il < 11/2-xnI
for i from 1 to k.
We slice K into two polyhedra with the plane xn = t, where 0 < t < 1/2. Let
K(t) be the intersection of K with the set xn < t, and let K'(t) be the intersection of
K with the set xn > t. Up to combinatorial equivalence, the resulting two polyhedra
do not depend on the choice of t.
The restriction of I to K(1/2-e) is the barycentric map from K(1/2-e) to K(e).
The restriction of q to K'(1/2 - e) is the barycentric map from K'(1/2 - e) to K'(e).
To define these barycentric maps, we need to pick a "center point" for each face of
each polyhedron. It turns out that a rather ad hoc choice of center point simplifies
the calculations that we have to do later. Here is the definition for the center point
of faces of K(t). When i is in the range 1 < i < n - 1, the xi coordinate of the center
point for a face F is just the average value of the xi coordinate of the vertices of F.
The xn coordinate of the center point for F is equal to t if all of the vertices of F lie
47

in the plane x,, = t; it is equal to 0 if all of the vertices of F lie in A; and it is equal
to t/2 if some vertices of F lie on the plane x, = t and some vertices lie on A. For
faces that lie in K'(t), we define the center to be the average of the vertices. A short
calculation shows that if a face lies in both K(t) and K'(t), or if it lies in several
different tiles K(A, B), then all of the definitions of its center agree. Therefore, the
map I is consistently defined, and it gives a periodic PL isomorphism of Rn .
We will call the simplices in the barycentric subdivision of K(1/2 -
) good sim-
plices, and the simplices in the barycentric subdivision of K'(1/2 - e) bad simplices.
(Recalling what we have done so far, we see that good simplices are rather big and
bad simplices are small. Bad simplices lie near to T, and good simplices lie fairly
near to S. The map T has Lipshitz constant 1 on the good simplices, but very large
Lipshitz constant on the bad simplices.)
The restriction of I to each good n-simplex A in K(A, B) is a linear map which
takes A into the e-neighborhood of the face A. Moreover, this linear map takes almost
every k-plane to a k-plane which is almost parallel to A. To check this last property,
we let Mi,j be the matrix of this linear map. An explicit calculation shows that the
matrix elements have the following form. The diagonal elements Mi,i are at least on
the order of 1, when i goes from 1 to k. The diagonal elements Mi,i have absolute
value less than 2c when i goes from k + 1 to n. All of the off-diagonal elements vanish
except for the entries Mi,,. Finally, the absolute value of Mi,n is bounded by 2Mi,i.
This matrix maps almost every k-plane to a k-plane almost parallel to A.
Next, we will choose a linear projection r0O from Rn to Rn-k which we will choose
later. The fibers of 7r0 are parallel k-planes. Let A be a good n-simplex simplex in
K(A, B). We have just seen that the linearization of I on A maps almost every
k-plane to be almost parallel to A. Since I is periodic, there are less than C different
linear maps among all the good simplices in the barycentric triangulation of Rn. If
e is sufficiently small, we can choose 7ro so that the linearization of I on each good
simplex in each K(A, B) maps the fibers of 7ro to k-planes that are almost parallel to
A.
We define r to be the composition 7ro o J-1. Since 
-1 is a periodic PL isomor-
48

phism, for almost every choice of ro, the composition 7r is generic PL. The fibers of
iro are parallel k-planes. Let P be any one of these k-planes. Then the corresponding
fiber of 7ro is 
(P). Therefore, we need to prove that the integral of f over T(P) is
less than C.
First we bound the contribution to our integral from the good simplices. We
consider the intersection of P with a good simplex A, which lies in K'(A, B). The
image of this intersection under I is a piece of k-plane which lies very close to A. It
is also very close to being parallel to A. Since f is continuous, if e is sufficiently small,
the integral of f over 
(P n A) is bounded by 2
A f . Since there are less than C good
simplices lying in tiles K which border A, the sum of the contribution from all good
simplices is bounded by C fS f, which is bounded by C.
Next we bound the contribution to our integral from the bad simplices. For each
bad simplex A, 
(P n A) is a piece of k-plane lying in a tile K(A,B). Therefore, this
piece of k-plane has volume less than C. Since the function f is less than or equal to
1, the integral of f over J(Pn A) is less than C. Now fix a very large ball which easily
contains the support of f. We claim that for e sufficiently small, the number of bad
simplices which lie in this ball and which intersect P is less than C. Let To be the
intersection of T with this large ball. Since 7ro is generic, the images of the faces of To
intersect transversely in R n -k. Therefore, the number of faces of To which meet any
fiber ir-ol(y) is less than C. For e sufficiently small, the number of faces of To which
come within e of 7r l(y) is less than C. Since there are less than C bad simplices lying
in tiles K which border a given face B of To, the number of bad simplices which meet
the support of f and which intersect P is less than C. Therefore, the total contribution
of all the bad simplices is less than C.
Combining these two estimates, we see that the integral of f over T(P) is less than
C. Since the sets 'T(P) are the fibers of 7r, we see that the k-width of f is less than
C. 
[
In order to bound the k-dilation of diffeomorphisms between rectangles, we will
use a variation of this inequality, which holds for sets U lying in a rectangle R. We
might expect to find a stronger inequality for a set U confined to a rectangle for
49

the following reason. For a given volume V, the set U with the largest k-width is
approximately a round ball of radius V 1/ ". If a round ball of radius V 1/" does not fit
in the rectangle R, then we must substitute a different shape. It seems reasonable to
guess that a rectangle of dimensions R1 x ... x Rl x S x ... x S, where S > Rl, is the
"widest" shape of its volume that fits in R. This intuition turns out to be correct, at
least up to a constant factor.
Proposition 3.2.1. If U is an open set contained in R, then for each integer between
O and k, the following inequality holds.
k-width(U) < Cn(R... R)(
- k)/( - ') Volume(U)(k-l) /(n-l)
Proof. When 
= 0, this inequality reduces to the width-volume inequality. When
1 = k, this inequality says that the width of U is less than CR1...Rk. Since U is a
subset of R, the width of U is at most the width of R, and this inequality follows.
Now we turn to the intermediate values of 1.
Let f be a continuous approximation to the characteristic function of U. More pre-
cisely, f is a non-negative continuous function supported in R in a small neighborhood
of U, with 0 < f < 1, f = 1 on U, and f f approximately equal to the volume of U.
Let g be the function on the (n-l)-dimensional rectangle Rl+ x ... x Rn defined
by g(y) = (R 1...R 1)-
1 fRx...xR, f(x, y)dx. The function g is continuous, compactly
supported, and 0 
g < 1. Applying our theorem to the function g, it follows
that the (k-l)-width of g is bounded by C(f g) n- . This expression is roughly equal
to C[(R1...RI)-<Volume(U)] n-. 
According to the definition of (k-l)-width, there is
some generic PL function r from Rn- l to Rn-k so that the integral of g over each level
set is bounded by this expression. We define a smooth map fr on R by -r(x, y) = r(y).
The volume of U intersected with a fiber 7r-l(z) is bounded by (R1...R1) times the
integral of g over the the fiber r-l(z). 
Therefore, the k-width of U is bounded by
C(R. .R)n-
k
k-olume(U)
C(R... wrI) 
Volume(U) 
-
[
50

3.3 Application to the k-dilation of diffeomorphisms
We will apply our estimates for k-width to lower bound the k-dilation of diffeomor-
phisms, or more generally to control k-expanding embeddings. An embedding is called
k-expanding if it maps each k-dimensional submanifold of the domain to an image
with larger k-dimensional volume. If there is a k-contracting diffeomorphism from R
to S, then its inverse is a k-expanding embedding of S into R.
In section 1, we showed that if the k-width of a rectangle R is roughly R 1...Rk. If
there is a k-expanding embedding of S into R, then the k-width of R is at least the k-
width of S, and so Rl...Rk > cSl...Sk. A k-expanding embedding is also p-expanding
for each p greater than k. Therefore, if there is a k-expanding embedding of S into
R then R 1...R > cS1...Sp for each p in the range k < p < n. Next we turn to some
harder inequalities based on counting disjoint wide subsets of R and S.
Theorem 3.2. Suppose that there is a k-expanding embedding of S into R. Then the
following inequality holds for each I in the range 1 < I < k - 1.
R.~
n - '
n-1
(R ...R,) k- Rl+l .. Rn > c(S ...SI) k- Sl+l...Sn.
Proof. For each 1 in the range 1 < 1 < k - 1, the rectangle S contains N disjoint
sub-rectangles with dimensions
S1 x ... x S x ... x Sl,
N = (Sl+1 ...Sn)/Sn-'.
Each of these rectangles has k-width roughly S,...S, Sk-1
Suppose that there is k-expanding embedding of S into R and consider the images
of these rectangles in R. Since our embedding is k-expanding, the image of each
rectangle has k-width at least S1...SSk-1. 
Let V be the smallest volume of any of
these images. Next we apply the version of the width-volume inequality in Proposition
3.2.1 to the image with the smallest volume, which gives us the following inequality.
Sl...SSlk-
< C(R...Rl)(n-k)/(n-l)v(k- I)/(n- l) .
51

Rearranging this inequality gives the following lower bound for V.
V > C(S ...S1)(n l)1(k-l)Sn-I(R... 
R)-(n-k)/(k-)
We began with N disjoint sub-rectangle in S. Their images are N disjoint subsets
of R, each with volume at least V. Their total volume is at most the volume of R,
which equals R... Rn. Therefore, we have the following inequality.
R1...R > cNV > cN(Si...S)(n-l)/(k-1)Sl-(R...R)(nk)/(k).
After plugging in the value of N, we get the following inequality.
R1...R > c(S+ ...Sn)(S ...S)(n-l)/(k-) (R .. R)-(
Moving all of the terms involving R to the left hand side, we are left with the
inequality we were trying to prove.
(R...R)(n-/(k-')R,+... 
.
> (Sl... S)(n-l)/(k-l)S/+1...Sn.
These inequalities are all necessary for a k-expanding embedding of S into R, but
they are far from sufficient. We will give a complete answer to the embedding problem
in Chapter 6.
When there is a k-contracting diffeomorphism from R to S, then we can apply the
above analysis to the boundaries of R and S. With a small amount of extra work, the
above proofs adapt to give the following inequalities.
For each p in the range k + 1 < p < n, R2...Rp > cS2...Sp.
For each 1 in the range 2 < 1 < k, we have the following inequality.
)n->. 
S 
.R 
n- +I 
Sn
(R2...R) k-- RI+...R, > c(S2...SR)k--- S+x...S,.
52

3.4 
A generalization of the snake map
The construction of the snake map in the last chapter easily generalizes to produce
some non-linear diffeomorphisms with small k-dilation for all k in the range 1 < k < n.
In particular, we will prove the following theorem.
Theorem 3.3. For every value of k in the range 1 < k < n, there are n-dimensional
rectangles R and S, with a k-contracting diffeomorphism from R to S, such that any
linear diffeomorphism from R to S has arbitrarily high k-dilation.
We begin by constructing some non-linear maps with small 2-dilation, which are
just a small generalization of the snake map.
Lemma 3.1. There is a diffeomorphism from the rectangle R with dimensions R1 x
... x R, to the rectangle S with dimensions R1 x ... x Rn- 2 x )- 1R_l 
x AR, with
2-dilation less than C, for any A in the range 1 < A < (Rn-l/Rn- 2).
Proof. We pick a quasi-isometric embedding I of [0, 3A-1R,_ 1] x [0, 3AR-
2]. Let A
be the image of the central rectangle [A-1 R_1, 2A-'Rn 1_] x [AR, 2ARP] under the
embedding I. We define a subset U of R which is equal to the union of [0, R1] x
... x [0, Rn-2] x A with {0}n- 2 x [0, R-
1] x [0, Rn- 2]. There is a Lipshitz retraction
of R to this set U, which takes the boundary of R to the boundary of U. Next we
pick a retraction of [0, R,- 1] x [0, Rn] to A, which takes the complement of A to the
boundary of A. Taking the direct product of this retraction with the identity gives a
retraction from U to [0, R1] x ... x [0, Rn- 2] x A. This latter retraction is the identity
on the first part of U, and on the second part of U it maps a 2-dimensional set to
a 1-dimensional set in the boundary . Therefore it is 2-contracting. Finally, using
the inverse of I, we construct a quasi-isometry from [0, R1] x ... x [0, Rn-2] x A to
our target rectangle S. The composition of these maps has 2-dilation less than C and
takes the boundary of R to the boundary of S with degree 1. Slightly perturbing this
map gives a diffeomorphism from R to S. 
O
Using these maps, along with a little algebra, we construct non-linear diffeomor-
phisms with small k-dilation.
53

Corollary. There is a k-contracting diffeomorphism from R to S if the side lengths
of R and S obey the following inequalities.
1. Ri > CSi for 1< i < n-k.
2. Rn-k+l--Rn-k+a 
> CSn-k+l...Sn-k+a for each a in the range 1 < a < k.
Proof. If Ri > Si for every value of i, then there is a contracting linear diffeomorphism
from R to S. Let a denote the smallest number so that Ra < Sa. We perform a snake
map from T to S, where the active directions are [0, S1] x ... x [0, Sn-k+l] X [0, Sa].
More precisely, write S = [0, S1] x ... x [0, Sn-k+l] X [0, Sa] x S', and T = [0, S1] x
... x [0, Sn-k] x [0, ASh-k+l] x [0, A-Sa] x S'. We choose A to be the smaller of the
two ratios Rn-k+l/Sn-k+l 
and Sa/Ra. Then there is a snake map from T to S with
k-dilation less than C.
If the ratio RB-k+l/Sn-k+l is smaller than Sa/Ra, then T is equal to [0, R-k+l]
times a lower dimensional rectangle T'. We write R as [0, &R.-k+l] 
x R'. Now it is
easy to check that the rectangles R' and T' satisfy the hypotheses of this proposition
with k - 1 in place of k. By induction on the dimension, we can assume that there
is a diffeomorphism from R' to T' with (k-1)-dilation less than C. Taking the direct
product of this diffeomorphism with the identity map from [0, R-k+l] to itself gives
a diffeomorphism from R to T with k-dilation less than C. Composing with the snake
map from T to S gives a diffeomorphism from T to S with k-dilation less than C.
If the ratio Sa/Ra is smaller than Rn-k+l/Sn-k+l, 
then T is equal to [0, S1] x ... x
[0, Sn-k] x [0, Sn-k+lSa/Ra] x [0, Ra] x S'. In this case, the rectangle T obeys Ri > T
for i from 1 to n - k, R-k+l...Rb 
> Tn-k+l...Tb 
for all b, and Ri > T for all i less
than or equal to a. By induction on the number a, we can assume that there is a
diffeomorphism from R to T with k-dilation less than C. Composing with the snake
map from T to S, we get a diffeomorphism from T to S with k-dilation less than
C. 
O
In particular, for every k in the range 1 < k < n, there are pairs of rectangles R
and S with k-contracting diffeomorphisms from R to S, and so that the k-dilation of
any linear diffeomorphism from R to S is arbitrarily high.
54

Combining the results of the last two sections gives certain upper and lower bounds
for the smallest k-dilation of a diffeomorphism from R to S. When k = n - 1, the
upper bound and the lower bound agree up to a constant factor. (For k = n - 1, we
get the same upper and lower bounds as in Chapter 2.) On the other hand, when
1 < k < n- 
1, there is an enormous gap between these upper and lower bounds. In
Chapters 6-8, we will reduce the gap somewhat, but we will not be able to close it.
55

56
-I

Chapter 4
An Isoperimetric Inequality
Involving Packings by Wide Sets
The main result of this chapter is the following variation of the isoperimetric inequal-
ity.
Theorem 4.1. Let U be a bounded open set in R n with smooth boundary. Then the
boundary of U contains disjoint sets Si so that the following inequality holds.
Volume(U) < C E (n-2)-width(Si)n-2
.
4.1 
A ball covering argument
This section gives the first half of the proof of Theorem 4.1.
We need to find some disjoint sets Si in the boundary of U with large (n-2)-width.
The sets Si will be the intersections of the boundary of U with some disjoint balls.
We will call a ball B(p, R) good if the (n-2)-width of aU n B(p, R) is at least cRn -2.
We will prove that for each point p in U, there is a positive radius R so that B(p, R)
is a good ball. Fix a point p in U. For each positive number R, we define a map OR
from Euclidean space to the unit n-sphere, which maps B(p, R) to the complement of
the south pole using the exponential map and the rest of Rn to the south pole. The
57

Lipshitz constant of OR is 7r/R. Next we define a metric g on AU x (0, oc), where we
parameterize (0, oo) with the variable R. The metric g restricted to the slice U x {R}
is very small away from AU n B(p, R), and is equal to r/R times the given metric on
9U nB(p, R). The metric g is very large transverse to the slices AU x {R}. Finally, we
define the map 1 from dU x (0, oo) to the unit n-sphere by 4(x, R) = ORR(x). Using
the metric g on the domain and the standard metric on the unit sphere, the map D
is a contracting map. For some very large number A, the map · takes AU x {A-1} to
the south pole and dU x {A} into a very small neighborhood of the North pole. We
compose 
with a degree 1 map that pinches this small neighborhood of the North
pole to the North pole and leaves the South pole invariant. This pinching map can
have Lipshitz constant as close as we like to 1. The composition is a degree 1 map
from AU x [A-1, A] to the unit n-sphere, which maps each boundary component of the
domain to a single point of the range.
In the next section, we will prove a slicing lemma, which guarantees that one of
the slices AU x {R} has (n-2)-width at least c, using the restriction of the metric
g. The metric g restricted to this slice is essentially equal to the given metric on
aU n B(p, R) rescaled by a factor r/R. Therefore, the (n-2)-width of AU n B(p, R) is
at least cRn- 2. This proves that the ball B(p, R) is good for at least one value of R.
According to the Vitali covering lemma, there are disjoint good balls B(pi, Ri)
with E R? > c Volume(U). We define Si to be the intersection of the boundary
of U with B(pi, Ri). 
Since the (n-2)-width of Si is at least cR?-2 , we see that
] (n-2)-width(Si)n/(n- 2) is at least c E R_ > c Volume(U).
This finishes the proof of our theorem, except for the slicing lemma, which we will
prove in the next section.
4.2 
Slicing inequalities
Let me first explain what I mean by a slicing inequality in a fairly general setting.
Suppose that we have a Riemannian metric g on M = M x [0, 1], for some manifold
M. Next, suppose that we know that M is large in some sense. For example, we might
58


know that there is a contracting map of non-zero degree from M to the unit sphere
which takes the boundary of M to a point. For each t between 0 and 1, we consider
the restriction of g to M x {t} to get a metric gt on M. The Riemannian manifolds
(M, gt) are "slices" of M. What can we conclude about these slices? Is it true that
at least one slice is large in some sense?
Now we state our main inequality.
Lemma 4.1. Let M be a manifold of dimension m. Let g be a Riemannian metric on
Mi = M x [0, 1] and define gt to be the restriction of g to M x {t}. Then the following
inequality holds.
Wm_l( (M, g) < 2 sup Wm- 1(M, gt).
t
In this equation, Wmn- denotes the (m-1)-width.
Warning: This inequality does NOT generalize to k-width for k < m - 1.
Proof. By assumption, for each t we can find a generic PL map rt from the slice
M x {t} to R whose fibers have volume less than W. If the maps 7rt varied continuously
in t, then we could define a continuous map r from M x [0, 1] to R2 by 7r(x, t) =
(lrt(x), t), and all the fibers would have volume less than W. The maps rt may not
vary continuously, and our proof consists of a trick to turn them into a continuous
family. We will choose generic PL maps 7ri from M to R for i from 1 to some large
number N, so that the following holds. We define gi to be the supremum of gt for all
t in the range (i - 1)IN 
t < (i + 1)IN. For sufficiently big N, we can arrange that
for each y in R, r -l(y) 
has volume less than W + e with respect to the metric gi.
Therefore, it suffices to solve the following homotopy problem. Given two generic
PL maps, r0 and 
17r, from an m-dimensional Riemannian manifold (M, g) to the real
numbers, all of whose fibers have volume less than W, we will construct a homotopy
Ft with F0 = 7ro and F1 = 7rl so that for each t, each fiber of Ft has volume less
than 2W. We first reparameterize the ranges so that the images of 7ro and rl are both
contained in the interval (0, 1). Next, we define Ft(x) = min(ro(x)+ t, r1(x) + 1- t).
The map F is continuous in both t and x. Moreover, F is a piecewise linear map from
59

(M, g) x [0, 1] to R2. After we slightly perturb ro and 7rl, the map F will be generic.
Finally, for each t, each fiber of Ft is contained in the union of a fiber of ro and a
fiber of rl. Therefore, each fiber of Ft has volume less than 2W. 
[
We would like to apply this lemma to the manifold AU x [A-', A] with its metric
g, which were defined in section 1. We know from section 1 that there is a degree 1
map from (U x [A-', A], g) to the unit sphere, with Lipshitz constant less than 2,
and which collapses each boundary component to a point. According to the corollary
after Proposition 3.1.1, the (n-2)-width of of (U x [A-1, A],g) is at least c. Our
lemma now guarantees guarantees that one of the slices U x R has (n-2)-width
at least c/2 (where the width is measured using the restriction of the metric g). This
estimate is exactly the one we used in section 1.
In the paper [14], Gromov proved a different slicing inequality involving the Uryson
width. Recall that the Uryson p-width of a Riemannian manifold (M, g) is the small-
est number W so that there is a continuous map f from M to a p-dimensional polyhe-
dron whose fibers have diameter less than W. (Warning: The k-width in this paper
refers to the sizes of k-dimensional fibers in a manifold, whereas the Uryson p-width
refers to the sizes of fibers of maps to a p-dimension polyhedron.)
Lemma. (Gromov) If f is a continuous function from (M, g) to R and each level set
off has Uryson k-width less than 1, then (M,g) has Uryson (2k+1)-width less than
1.
If we use Gromov's slicing lemma instead of the slicing lemma at the beginning
of this section, we can prove a different isoperimetric inequality.
Corollary. Let U be a bounded open set in R2n with smooth boundary. Then the
boundary of U contains disjoint sets Si so that the following inequality holds.
Volume(U) < C EUWn-1 (Si).
In this formula, UWn_1 denotes the Uryson (n-1)-width. If U is a bounded open
set in R2n+1 with smooth boundary, then the boundary of U contains disjoint open
sets Si so that the following inequality holds.
60
__

Volume(U)< C UWn(S)2n+l
Proof. The proof follows exactly the proof in section 1, except that each reference to
k-width needs to be replaced by an appropriate reference to an Uryson width. We
call a ball B(p, R) good if the Uryson (n-1)-width of aU n B(p, R) is at least cR. We
need to show that for each point p inside U, there is a radius R so that B(p, R) is
good.
Following the arguments in section 1, we know that there is a degree 1 map from
(OU x [A- 1, A], g) to the unit sphere with Lipshitz constant 2. According to Gromov's
paper [14], the Uryson p-width of this manifold must be at least c, where p is one
less than the dimension of U x [A-', A]. Applying Gromov's slicing inequality, it
follows that one of the slices (U x {(R, g) has Uryson (n-1)-width at least c. Since
this slice is essentially the intersection U n B(p, R) rescaled by the factor r/R, the
intersection itself must have Uryson (n-1)-width at least cR. Therefore, for each point
p in U, there is a radius R so that B(p, R) is good.
Applying the Vitali covering lemma as in section 1 proves the corollary. 
O
There may well be other interesting slicing inequalities.
61

62
I

Chapter 5
The Volume Enclosure Problem
In this section, we estimate how much volume can be enclosed by a k-contracting
embedding of an ellipsoid.
Theorem 5.1. Let E be an n-dimensional ellipsoid with principal axes Eo < ... < En.
We will define below a monomial Vk(E) in the principal axes of E so that any k-
contracting embedding of E into Rn +l bounds a region of volume less than CVk(E).
On the other hand, we will construct a k-contracting embedding of E which bounds a
volume greater than cVk(E).
The monomial Vk(E) has the following form.
n+l 
n+l
Vk(E) = El k ...El_k
1
ElEl+l...En.
To specify Vk(E) exactly, we need to pick a value of I and a value of b. These values
are uniquely determined by two conditions. First, the total degree of Vk(E) is n + 1.
Second, the number b lies in the range 1 < b < n+l
The proof of the theorem follows the same lines as the isoperimetric inequality in
Chapter 4. In place of the slicing inequality that we used in Chapter 4, we will use a
version of the width-volume inequality for families.
In section 1, we give the proof of the main theorem assuming a lemma. In section
2, we explain and prove a width-volume inequality for families of functions. The
inequality in section 2 is the simplest and most natural version of the width-volume
63

inequality for families, but the lemma that we need is a small modification of it. We
prove the lemma in section 3.
5.1 The outline of the proof
We begin with the easy direction of the proof, constructing a k-contracting embedding
of E into Rn+l which encloses a volume greater than cVk(E).
When k = 1, the monomial Vk(E) is simply EE2...En. 
It is not difficult to
construct a 1-contracting map bounding this much volume. The ellipsoid E is C-
bilipshitz equivalent to the double of a rectangle with side lengths E1 
... < En.
The dimensions of this rectangle do not depend on E at all, and so E is in particular
bilipshitz to the ellipsoid E' with principal axes E = E1 and E' = Ei for all other
i. The ellipsoid E' encloses a volume proportional to E 2E2...En. After rescaling the
bilipshitz map from E to E', we get a 1-contracting embedding of E which bounds a
volume greater than cE E2 .. En.
For all k less than or equal to (n + 1)/2, the monomial Vk(E) is EE2...En. 
When
k increases beyond (n + 1)/2, the volume Vk(E) finally increases, and we need to
construct new maps to enclose volume Vk(E). The ellipsoid E contains approximately
N = El+...En/Eln - l disjoint rectangles of dimension E1 x ... x El_1 x El x El x ... x El.
(The number 1 here has the same value as in the statement of Theorem 5.1.) Each of
these rectangles admits a k-contracting diffeomorphism to the cube with sidelength
S = (El...EElk-I)l/k. 
Therefore, each rectangle admits a k-contracting degree 1 map
to the n-sphere of radius cS. There is a k-contracting embedding of E into Rn+1 which
takes each rectangle in our collection to an n-sphere of radius cS and which takes the
rest of E to a bunch of very thin tubes connecting them. A little more precisely, there
will be one thin tube leaving each n-sphere and running to a central small sphere.
The total volume enclosed by the image of E is greater than cNS n +l, which is equal
to cVk(E).
It remains to prove that the volume enclosed by the image of E is less than CVk (E).
The proof has two main ideas: a version of the width-volume inequality for families,
64

and the ball packing argument from Chapter 4. The version of the width-volume
inequality that we need is the following lemma.
Lemma 5.1. Let R be an n-dimensional rectangle, and let f be a continuous compactly
supported function on R x R. Suppose that 0 < f < 1. Let x be a coordinate on R
and y a coordinate on R. Let 6 be any number greater than zero. Then there exists a
generic PL map from R x R to R n- k x R with the following properties.
1. For each I in the range 0 < I < k,
n-1- 
n -1
( 
f) L < C(R1 ...Ri) k-i 
(6 +f)
(- (Z,Y) 
xly}
2. The fiber 7r-l(z, y) lies within 
of the plane R x y}.
We defer the proof of this lemma to sections 2 and 3. In order to keep track of the
complicated exponents in the inequality, it helps to notice the scaling of each side.
Each length Ri has degree 1. The integral of f over a k-dimensional fiber 7r-l(z,y)
has degree k. The integral of f over the n-dimensional rectangle R x y} has degree
n. Using these degrees, each side has total degree k(-).
The inequality that we will need in our proof is the geometric average of two of
the inequalities in 1. First, we choose the integer 1 so that n--+1 < n+- < n-l We can
write n+l as an average (1- a) (n+) 
+ a(n-l), where a lies in the range < a <1.
Now we take the geometric average of inequality 1 using 1-1 and 1, weighted by 1 - a
and a. We get the following inequality.
(f,-1(ZY) f) k < C(R1 ... R-1) 
k' 1R-' (6 + fRX{Y} f)
In this equation, the number b is short for the ugly expression (1 -a)+a(4). 
The
numbers 1 and b in this formula are the same numbers that appear in the definition
of Vk(E). An easy calculation shows that b lies in the range 1 < b < n1. By scaling
considerations, the total degree of the monomial (R1...Rzl)n+-lR 
b- 1 is equal to 1.
Therefore, we have the following formula.
( f) k < C(R/ Rn) lk(R)(+|J- 
(1)
-1(zy) 
X{}
65

The proof of our theorem now follows from the ball-packing argument of Chapter
4, after substituting this inequality for the slicing lemma used there.
Let f be a k-contracting embedding of E into Rn+l, and let U be the open set with
boundary the image of f. Pick a point p in U. We define V(p, R) to be the volume
of f-(B(p, 
R)) in E. We say that the ball B(p, R) is good if the volume obeys the
following inequality.
V(p, R) > c(E ... En)Vk(E)-Rn
" + x.
For each point p in U, we will prove that for some radius R the ball B(p, R) is
good. For each R, we consider the (modified) exponential map from Rn+l to the unit
(n+l)-sphere which takes B(p, R) to the complement of the south pole and takes the
rest of Rn +1 to the south pole. Composing with f we get a map 
R from E to the unit
(n+l)-sphere. 
We view this family of maps as a single map from E x (0, oo) to the
unit (n+l)-sphere. Next we put a metric g on E x (0, oo) as follows. The restriction
of g to each slice E x {R} is very small away from f -(B(p, 
R)) and is equal to the
standard metric rescaled by r/R on f -(B(p, 
R)). Transverse to the slices, g is very
large. We now have a map 
from (E x (0, oo),g) to the unit (n+l)-sphere. This
map 
is k-contracting. Because p lies inside of U, the map q) has degree 1. For some
large number A, we can slightly alter (I to get a degree 1 map from (E x [A-', A], g)
to the unit (n+l)-sphere taking each boundary component to a point.
Let U be the open set whose intersection with E x {R} is equal to f -(B(p, 
R)).
We think of E as the double of a rectangle R with side lengths E1 < ... < En, and
we let f be a continuous approximation to the projection of U onto R x [A- ', A]. We
apply Lemma 5.1 to the function f. The lemma gives us a generic PL map r from
Rn x [A-l, A] to R n- k x R. The integral of f over R n x {R} is approximately V(p, R).
According to equation 1, the integral of f over the fiber r-l(y, R) is less than the
following expression.
C[(E1...En)- Vk(E) ( + V(p, R))] n+ .
By abuse of notation, we will also use r to indicate the PL map from E x [A-', A]
which we get by first projecting from the E to R and then applying 7r. Since f is
66

at least one on the image of U, the volume of 7r-l(y, R) is bounded by the same
expression. 
Lemma 5.1 also tells us that the fiber r-l(y,R) 
lies within 
of the
ellipsoid E x R}. For sufficiently small 6, we conclude that the volume of the fiber
r-l(y, R) with respect to the metric g is bounded by the following expression.
CR k[(E...E) lVk(E)(6 + V(p, R))]n+l .
(2)
As we noted above, the manifold (E x [A-l, A], g) admits a k-contracting degree
1 map to the unit sphere. According to the corollary after Proposition 3.1.1, it has
k-width at least c. Therefore, one of the fibers ir-l(y, R) must have volume at least c.
Given the upper bound in equation 2, it follows that for some R in the range [A-l, A],
the volume of f-l(B(p, 
R)) obeys the following inequality.
V(p, R) > c(El...En)Vk(E)-R
n+l - 6.
Finally, taking 
very small compared to A-', we see that the ball B(p, R) is good for
some radius R in the range [A-', A].
Now by the Vitali covering lemma, we can find disjoint good balls B(pi, Ri) with
Z R +1 > cVolume(U). By the definition of a good ball, the region f-l(B(pi, 
R)) in
E has volume at least cR+l'(El ...En)Vk(E) -
.
Since the balls B(pi, Ri) are disjoint,
their inverse images are disjoint subsets of E, and so the total volume is bounded
by CE,...En. This bound shows that ER, +l < CVk(E). Therefore, Volume(U) <
CE R+l < CVk(E).
This finishes the proof of our theorem, except for the proof of the lemma, which
we will give in the next sections.
5.2 
The width-volume inequality for families
In this section, we will prove an analog of the width-volume inequality that holds for
families of functions.
Here is the setup. Let f be a compactly supported continuous function on the
product Rn x Rq, 0 < f < 1. Let x be a coordinate on Rn and y be a coordinate on
RIq. We can think of f as a family of functions on Rn parameterized by Rq. Similarly,
67

we give coordinates (z, y) to Rn-k x Rq where z is a coordinate on Rn-k 
and y is a
coordinate on Ig.
Theorem 5.2. For each > O, there is a generic PL map 7r from Rn xR q to Rn- k xR q
obeying the following estimate for the integral of f over fibers.
|_(zY) f < C( + |xly 
f)k/n'
Moreover, the fiber ir-'(z, y) lies within 6 of the plane R" x {y}.
(The constant C depends on n and q.)
Before we prove this theorem, let us mention a simpler corollary. If faRnXy} f < 1
for every y, then the k-width of f is less than C.
Proof. The first step of the proof is to set up a scaffold So analogous to the k-skeleton
of the unit lattice in the proof of the width-volume inequality. The scaffold S resembles
a lattice on large balls, but the lattice spacing needs to vary from one region to another
because the bound we want to prove varies from one region to another.
Instead of the usual Euclidean metric, we are going to work with the metric
dx2 + Ady2, for some number A which is enormous compared to 3-1 or to the size
of the support of f. We define a function L(y) = ( + fRnxjy f)l/n. Because A is so
large, the function L(y) is almost constant on very large balls in this metric. Many
parts of the proof will take place on bounded regions, and up to a small error, it is
possible to treat L as being constant on these regions.
The metric dx2 + Ady2 is a Euclidean metric, and we consider the unit lattice
in this Euclidean space, with axes parallel to the x and y coordinates. 
Next we
consider the barycentric subdivision of this unit lattice. We define a mapping on
the vertices of this triangulation, which maps a vertex with coordinates (x, y) to the
point (L(y)x, y). This mapping extends to a PL mapping which is linear on each
simplex of the barycentric subdivision. Because L varies so slowly as y changes, this
PL mapping is a PL isomorphism. We define So to be the image of the k-skeleton of
the unit lattice under this barycentric map.
68

Next, we define a Riemannian metric g on RN = Rn x Rq with ds2 = dx2 +
AL(y) 2dy2.
Because L(y) changes so slowly, this metric appears very close to Eu-
clidean on very large balls. With respect to this metric, the k-skeleton S appears
on large balls to be very close to the k-skeleton of the cubical lattice of side length
L. Moreover, because the number A is so large, this metric is strictly larger than the
original Euclidean metric dx2 + dy2.
The next step of the proof of the width-volume inequality was to translate the
k-skeleton So to a k-skeleton S with fs f bounded in terms of the integral of f. In the
present situation, we need a localized version of this construction. Namely, we will
"wiggle" the skeleton So to get a k-skeleton S, so that the integral of f over each face
F of S is bounded in terms of the integral of f on a ball near F. Next we give an exact
description of the wiggling procedure, which I call barycentric wiggling.
The k-skeleton So was defined as the image of the k-skeleton of the unit lattice
by a PL map. We are going to perturb this PL map. The original PL map took
a vertex of the barycentric triangulation located at (x, y) to the point (L(x), y). A
perturbation of this map is allowed to take the vertex at (, y) to any point in a
ball of radius 2- N L around the original target (L(x), y). (From here on, every ball
mentioned in the proof is defined using the metric g.) This perturbed map on the
vertices also extends to a PL map which is linear on each simplex of the barycentric
subdivision. Because L is essentially constant and because 2-NL is small compared
to L, this map is still a PL isomorphism, and it is bilipshitz equivalent to the original
map. We call this map (D. The skeleton S is defined to be the image of the k-skeleton
of the unit lattice under (. We claim that for a carefully chosen map 
, the integral
of f over each k-face of S obeys the following inequality.
|II 
< CL-(N-k) 
| 
f
L(F) 
B(4(c(F)),2NL)
(In this equation, F denotes a k-face of the unit lattice, c(F) denotes its center,
and B denotes a ball defined using the metric g.)
Before we get started, let me make a few remarks. If we take a given k-face F
and simply translate its image (I(F) by a random vector with length on the order
69

of 2- N L, then on average the integral of f over the translation will be bounded by
the expression on the right-hand side of the last inequality. If we could translate
all the faces independently of one another then we could easily choose TX to make
the above inequality hold for every face F. We cannot, however, move the k-faces
independently of each other, because they intersect in (k-1)-faces. Roughly speaking,
the barycentric perturbation is the best perturbation that we can do without tearing
the skeleton apart.
To define our perturbed PL isomorphism -I, we have to define its value on each
vertex of the barycentric triangulation. The vertices of the barycentric triangulation
correspond to the faces of the unit lattice. We are going to define Q4 first for the vertices
corresponding to O-faces of the unit lattice, then for the vertices corresponding to 1-
faces, and so on. After we have defined q) on the vertices corresponding to all faces
of dimension up to p, the restriction of q to the p-skeleton is determined.
First, we define J) on the vertices of the unit lattice. For each vertex v, we have
to pick a value w for 1(v) which lies in certain allowed ball of radius 2- N L. For an
average choice of w, the following inequality holds.
L|W2N1 dist(x, w)(Nk)f(x)dx 
< CL(N LkL) 
f(x)dx.
The average value of the left hand side as w varies over a ball of radius 2- N L is
bounded by CL-N fB(2-NL)(fB(,2N-1L) 
diSt(, w)-(N-k)f()dx)dw. 
But the integral
fB(2-NL) dist(x, w)-(N-k)dw is less than CLk. Plugging this fact into the expression
for the average gives the inequality above.
Next, we proceed inductively to define 
on the center of each p-face of the unit
lattice, for p from 1 to k-1. Suppose that we have to define 
on the center of a q-face
F. Let the boundary of F be Ei. Let w be the value of 
at the center of F. The
point w is constrained to lie in a certain ball of radius 2- N L. Since we have already
defined (I on the (p-1)-skeleton of the unit lattice, choosing w defines (I on the face
F. For an average choice of w, the following inequality holds.
70

|,,.~,, 
dist(x, (F))-(N-1)f(x)dx
< C E | 
dist(x, (D(Ei)--I)f (x)dx.
To see this, we consider the barycentric subdivision of the face F. For each p-simplex
A, we can consider f dist(x, 1(A))-(N-k)f(x)dx. 
If we can bound this integral for
each A we are done. The p-simplex A can be thought of as a pyramid whose base
is a (p-1l)-simplex A' lying in I4(Ei) and whose apex is at w. The plane spanned by
A depends only on the projection of w to the (N-p+l)-plane normal to A', and in
particular it only depends on the direction of the projected vector on SN - p, which we
call b. If we write the projection of x onto the plane normal to A' in polar coordinates
(r, 0), then dist(x, 1((A)) is at least crdist(O, 0). The average value that we are trying
to calculate is bounded by C f db(f r-(N-k)dist(O, 0)-(N-k)f(x)dO). 
Since (N - p) is
strictly bigger than (N - k), the integral f dist(, 0)-(N-k)d 
converges, and so our
average value is bounded by C f r-(N-k)f(x)dx. 
Unwinding the definitions, we see
that this expression is bounded by C f dist(x, (Ei))-(N-k) f (x)dx.
Composing all the inequalities that we have proven so far, we see that for each
(k-1)-face E of the unit lattice, we have the following inequality.
I|N 
idist(x, (E))-(N-k) f (x)dx < CL-( -k)N 
f(x)dx.
Finally, we have to define 
at the center point of a k-face F. The value w of 
at this center point is constrained to lie in a ball of radius 2- N L. Let the boundary
of F be equal to the union of some (k-1)-faces Ei. We have already defined 4I on the
Ei. For an average value of w, the integral of f over 
(F) is bounded by the following
inequality.
L() 
f (x)dx < C 
. , 
dist(x, 4D(Ei))-(N-k) 
f(x)dx.
To see this, we again consider the barycentric subdivision of the face F. It suffices to
bound the average value of fj(A) f(x)dx for each k-simplex A in this subdivision of
71

F. The image 4(I(A) is a k-simplex with base A' lying in one of the images )(Ei) and
with apex w. By a routine calculation, the average value of fA f(x)dx is bounded by
C fSB(2N-kL) 
dist(, q(Ei))-(N-k) f ()dx.
Composing the last two inequalities gives us the bound that we wanted to prove.
() f <CL(N-k)
This estimate finishes the construction of the scaffold S. The next step in the
proof of the width-volume inequality is to define a PL isomorphism I of RN that
squeezes most of space into a small neighborhood of S. In Chapter 3, we constructed
a periodic PL isomorphism I that squeezed most of space into a small neighborhood
of the unit lattice. The map I squeezed the complement of an e-neighborhood of
the (N-k-1)-skeleton of the dual lattice into the E-neighborhood of the k-skeleton of
the unit lattice. The E-neighborhood of the dual (N-k-1)-skeleton is called the bad
region, and the complement is called the good region. The good region inside of a
fundamental cube is divided into C simplices. On each good simplex A, the map 
is
a linear map which takes that simplex into the -neighborhood of one of the k-faces
of the k-skeleton. Finally, the map I on A maps almost every k-plane to a k-plane
almost parallel to the k-skeleton of the unit lattice.
We will use a squeezing map I' defined by ' = I o 
o -1. Since 
-l(S) is the
k-skeleton of the unit lattice, I' squeezes most of space into an Le neighborhood of
S.
The next step in the proof of the width-volume inequality was to choose a pro-
jection r0 from R" to Rn-k at a good angle with respect to J. In our case, we would
like to choose a projection at a good angle with respect to V'. Globally, it is not clear
that such a good angle exists, so we will have to define a PL map r0.
In a given region where L is almost constant, we call a generic linear map to R n - k
good if its fibers are at an angle that gets mapped to be almost tangent to S by the
restriction of I to each good simplex. An orthogonal projection to a random (N-k)-
plane, chosen with respect to the locally almost constant metric dx2 + AL(y) 2dy2 is
good with high probability. We look at the barycentric subdivision of some trian-
72
-
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
_

gulation of RN with simplices that are fairly standard and quite large compared to
L(y) but quite small compared to A. Then we define the PL projection 7r0 by taking
a barycentric perturbation of the projection onto the last (N - k) coordinates. (We
perturb the values of the barycentric subdivision at a given vertex within a small re-
gion shaped like the image of the projection map from simplices bordering the given
vertex.) To define this barycentric perturbation, we must first choose its value on the
vertices corresponding to 0-faces, then on the vertices corresponding to 1-faces, and so
on. We have defined a good map on the n-dimensional simplices. Now we inductively
define a good map on lower dimensional simplices by saying that a map on a q-face
is good if almost all of its extensions to the neighboring (q+l)-faces are good. When
e is very small, it follows inductively that most maps from a given simplex are good.
Then we define r0o starting at the 0-faces so that it is good at each step. In this way,
we produce a good map ro.
Let us pick a large cube [-S, S]n in R" so that the support of f is easily contained
in [-S, S]i x Rq. The fiber r-'(z, y), intersected with this cylinder, lies within a ball
of radius CS around the point (0, y). The projection from the fiber intersect this
region to the first k coordinates has image [-S, S]k and is bilipshitz, with bilipshitz
constant less than C.
Now let P be the fiber 7rol(z, y). According to our wiggling inequality, the sum
of the integral of f over all the k-faces of S that come within CL of the fiber P is less
than the following expression.
C 
E 
L-(N-k) [ 
f
faces near P 
(face,L)
Since f is essentially constant in the y direction, this expression is less than
CL-f(N-k)Lq fx}y) 
f, which is less than CLk.
On the other hand, when 
is very small, any fiber of r0 meets less than C bad
simplices.
Finally, we define our projection 
7r to be the composition 
r o 
o I-1 o 
- 1.
As usual, we need only be concerned about the part of the fibers of r near to the
73

support of f. The fiber 7r-(z, y) lies within a distance L(y) of the fiber ro'l(z, y). It
is pressed close to the k-skeleton S except on a region of volume bounded by CLk.
The integral of f along the part of r-1(z, y) which is pressed close to S is bounded
by a constant times the sum of the integral of f on all the faces of S lying within
CL of the fiber 7rol(z, y). We have just seen that this sum is bounded by CLk. On
the other hand, since f is no more than 1, the integral of f on the remainder of the
fiber r-'(z,y) 
is bounded by CLk. Therefore, the total integral of f over the fiber
7r-'(z, y) is bounded by CLk. Recalling the definition of L, we see that this integral
is bounded by C(3 + RnX{y f(x)dx)k/n. 
So far, we have bounded the integral of f
over the fiber 7r-'(z, y) in the metric g. Since the metric g is bigger than the original
Euclidean metric on Rn, it follows that the same estimate holds using the Euclidean
metric. This estimate is the bound that we wanted to prove.
The intersection of the fiber 7r 1 (z, y) with the region [-S, S]n x Rq lies in the
ball of radius CS around (0, y). Therefore, the intersection of the fiber i7ro (z, y) with
[-S, S]n x Rq lies in the ball of radius C(S + L). These balls are defined using the
metric g = dx2 + AL(y) 2dy2. Since L is at least a and A is very very large, it follows
that the fiber r-l(z, y) is actually as close as we like to the plane Rn x {y} in the
original Euclidean metric. 
0
5.3 
The width-volume inequality for families in-
side a rectangle
In the last section, we proved a families version of the width-volume inequality in
Theorem 3.1. In order to prove Theorem 5.1, we need a families version of the width-
volume inequality for subsets of rectangles in Proposition 3.2.1. Let us recall the
statement of Lemma 5.1.
Lemma. Let R be an n-dimensional rectangle, and let f be a continuous compactly
supported function on R x R. Suppose that 0 < f < 1. Let x be a coordinate for R
and y a coordinate for R. Let 5 be any number greater than zero. Then there exists a
74

generic PL map from R x R to Rn-k x R with the following properties.
1. For each in the range 0 < I < k,
f < C(R...Rl) 
( + 
f)k- i
-- I(ZV )
X (Y}
2. The fiber r-1(z, y) lies within 6 of the plane R x {y}.
Proof. This proof is a small modification of the proof of the width-volume inequality
for families. We will go through the steps of that proof and describe the alterations
that need to be made at each step.
The first step is to construct a rough scaffold So. We need to choose the size of
this scaffold in a different way, and we need to do a bit of work to make sure that the
scaffold is transverse to the rectangle R.
Define L(y) to be the smallest value of [(J + fRx{} 
f)/(R...R,)]1 -
', as varies in
the range 0 < 1 < k. A short calculation shows that the choice of 1 that gives the
smallest value to this expression obeys Rl < L < R1+,. (There may be two different
choices of 1 that give the smallest value to this expression. In this case, these two
values are consecutive, say lo and lo + 1, and L = Ro+l.)
We begin with the unit lattice in Rn, with respect to the metric dx2 + Ady2.
We consider the barycentric subdivision of this lattice, and we move a vertex of this
subdivision located at (x, y) to (L(y)x, y) as before. We extend this map to a piecewise
linear isomorphism. As before, we define So to be the image of the k-skeleton of the
unit lattice. From now on, we work in the metric g = dx2 + AL(y) 2dy2.
We translate R so that it is equal to the product [R1, 2R1] x ... x [R, 2Rm]. As a
result, each k-face of So intersects R x iR in a region with volume at most 2R 1...RILk-
.
This inequality holds for any value of 1.
Next, we apply barycentric wiggling to get a skeleton S. In the original proof, we
wiggled each vertex in a ball of radius 2-"L. Now we need to use a ball of radius
cL for some small constant c that we will choose later. As c gets smaller, the map
lb which takes the unit lattice to S rotates the angles of planes by less and less. The
same barycentric wiggling proof now gives the following estimate for the integral of f
75

over a k-face F of S.
If < CL-(n-k+l) 
f
Next, we construct a PL isomorphism I which presses most of space against the
unit k-skeleton. We will use a perturbation of the map I from Chapter 3. We call
the map from chapter 3 '0. Now we define '1 by following 0o with with a barycentric
perturbation that fixes the unit k-skeleton but moves around the rest of space a little
bit. The map 
o 
o 
-1,, which pushes most of space to the k-skeleton S, expands
certain k-planes that pass through the bad region. As a result of our perturbation,
most k-planes which hit the bad region get mapped to k-planes that are slightly, but
quantitatively, transverse to R.
Finally, we construct a PL projection ro from R n to RI
n - + l, which is a barycentric
perturbation of the projection onto the last (n-k+1) coordinates, with respect to a
triangulation of size much larger than supy L(y) but still very tiny with respect to A.
Locally, a good projection is one for which the k-plane fibers on the good simplices
get pushed almost parallel to S and the k-plane fibers on the bad simplices get pushed
slightly transverse to R x R. With respect to the local metric, almost every orthogonal
projection is good. By our standard barycentric trick, there is a globally good PL
projection 
r0o.
As before, we define r = ro 
o 
o 
-1 o q-1. The intersection of each fiber of
7r with R x R is bilipshitz to R 1 x ... x Rk, with the projection onto the first k
coordinates being the bilipshitz map. Each fiber hugs the k-skeleton S except along
a set of volume less than CR 1... RiLk for each value of 1. The integral of f over the
part of S within L of the fiber is bounded by CL-(n-k+l)L 
fRx{} 
f, which equals
CLk-lLI-n fRx{} 
f. When 1 takes the value which minimizes the expression in the
definition of L, then this quantity is less than CR 1... RiLk
-
l . We saw above that for
this value of 1, Rl < L < R1+1. Therefore, the integral of f over the fiber 7r-l(z, y) is
less than CR 1... RiLk - t for every value of 1 in the range 0 
I 1 < k. Plugging in the
definition of L, we conclude that the integral of f over the fiber r-'(z, y) is bounded
n- 
f) 
for every value of 1.--
by C(R1...RI) -'-(Sx(
)f 
) -I for every value of 1.
76

The fiber 7r-l(z, y) lies within CRk of the k-plane defined by having last (n-k+1)
coordinates equal to (z, y). This statement holds in the metric g. Therefore, in the
original metric, 7r-1(z, y) lies within 6 of the plane R x {y}. 
O
77

78

Chapter 6
Area-Expanding Embeddings of
Rectangles
In this chapter we consider the problem of deciding whether there is a k-expanding
embedding of one rectangle into another. We are able to solve this problem, up to
a constant factor, for all values of k and n. This theorem is the main result of my
thesis.
Theorem 6.1. Let R and S be n-dimensional rectangles. If there is a k-expanding
embedding of S into R, then the following inequalities hold.
For each integer I in the range 0 < I < k, and each integer p in the range k + 1 <
p < n,
R1...R(R ,+~... 
/ 
Rp)(k- )/(p- I) > S...S(Sl+ ...Sp) (k - l) / (p - l)
On the other hand, if the same inequalities hold with a large constant C in place
of the small constant c, then there is a k-expanding embedding of S into R.
Over the course of the first three sections, we will prove the inequalities in the
theorem. In fact, we will prove something a little bit stronger. Define S(p, ) to be
the complement in S of the (p-1)-skeleton of the cubical axes-parallel lattice with side
length S1. If there is a k-expanding embedding from S(p, ) into R, then we will prove
that R1...R (Rl+1...R,)(k
-
l)
/
(p-l) > CSl...l(Sl+l...p)
(k
-
l
)/(
p
- l) .
79

The region S(p, ) is a thick neighborhood of the (n-p)-skeleton of a lattice with
side length S1. The main idea of the proof is to find a good definition for the k-width
of the open set S(p, 1) around this skeleton. We explain this idea in the first section,
and in the next two sections we apply it to prove the inequalities above.
Once we have proven the inequalities, we have to construct the k-expanding em-
beddings described in the theorem. The embeddings involved are geometrically very
simple - they are standard quasi-isometric foldings followed by linear maps. Checking
that such an embedding exists whenever the side lengths of R and S obey the above
inequalities requires some tedious algebra. We do the tedious algebra in section 4. Fi-
nally, in section 5, we apply our results to estimate the k-dilation of diffeomorphisms
between rectangles.
6.1 
The k-width of an open set around a complex
Let X be a finite complex embedded in Rn, and let U be a neighborhood of X. We
are going to give a definition for the k-width of U around X.
More generally, for each face F of X, suppose that we have a function B(F), non-
negative and compactly supported. We are going to define a k-width of the set of
functions B around X.
When we defined k-width in Chapter 3, we used generic PL maps from IRn to Rn - k.
The fibers of such a map form a family of k-cycles. It would have been reasonable to
define k-width using more general families of k-cycles. At the time, we did not need
to use more general families, but we will need them in this chapter.
A nice family of k-cycles in Rn consists of the following data. We have a pseu-
domanifold W of dimension w, a generic PL map r from W to R w- k, and a generic
proper PL map P from W to Rn. If y is a point in Rw - k, then r-l(y) is a k-cycle in
W, and P(r-l(y)) 
is a k-cycle in Rn . For example, if 7r' is a generic PL map from Rn
to Rn-k, 7r' defines a nice family of cycles by taking W = Rn, r = ir', and P equal
to the identity. We will work with oriented families of cycles, which means that W
is oriented, but non-oriented families of cycles also make sense. Families of cycles
80
__

of all dimensions make sense, but we will assume throughout the chapter that the
dimension of W is n, which means that the parameter space is Rn-k
We need some simple vocabulary to talk about nice families of k-cycles. Let C
be a nice family of k-cycles. For a point y in Rn - k, we define C(y) to be the k-cycle
P(r-1(y)). 
More generally, if A is an m-simplex in IR-k, then we define C(A) to be
the (k + m)-chain P(7r-l(A)). 
If C and C' are two nice families of k-cycles, then we
say that C and C' agree on an open set U if C(y) n U is equal to C'(y) n U for every
point y in R n - k. The degree of a family C is defined to be the degree of the proper
map P from W to Rn. If two nice families agree outside of a compact set, then they
have the same degree.
Now we can state the definition of the k-width of B around X. We say that the
k-width of B around X is at least W, if for every nice family of cycles C in Rn, there is
a nice family C' which agrees with C outside of a compact set, and with the property
that if fc(y) B(F) < w, then C'(y) is disjoint from F. (This last property holds for
every face F of X and every point y in Rn-k.)
This definition may seem confusing at first. I'm going to try to make it a little
clearer. Suppose we pick a nice family C of k-cycles in R n with degree 1. For each
function B(F), we define the w-thick shadow of B(F) to be the set of points y in
Rn-k so that fc(y) B(F) > w. (One good feature of nice families of cycles is that this
integral varies continuously in y.) We denote the w-thick shadow of B(F) by T(F).
If the width of B around X is at least w, then first of all each of these sets Tw(F) is
not empty. Moreover, we can deduce something about the way these sets overlap.
Let C' be the nice family of k-cycles guaranteed by the definition above. We have
a map P' from W' to Rn with degree 1. If y lies in the image of 7r'(P'-'(F)), then
the face F meets C'(y), and so y lies in Tw(F). In other words, the map r' takes
P'-1(F) into T,(F). 
Since C has degree 1, the map P' also has degree 1. After
putting the map in general position with respect to X, the inverse image of each
0-face of X is a sum of points in W with multiplicity, and with total weight 1. For
each 0-face v in X, r'(P-l(v)) 
is a 0-chain in TW(v) homologous to a point. For each
1-face E in X with boundary v1 - v2, r'(P-1(E)) is a 1-chain in Ta(E) with boundary
81

7r'(P-(v)) 
- 7r'(P-(v
2)). For each 2-face F of X with boundary E1 + E2 + E3 + E4,
7r'(P-1(F)) is a 2-chain in T(F) with boundary equal to Ei ir'(P-l(Ei)). And the
pattern continues for higher-dimensional faces.
These comments about overlapping thick shadows seem to me a little more intu-
itive than the definition of k-width of B around X, but the actual definition is a little
stronger, and we need it.
Now, if U is an open set containing X, we define the k-width of U around X to be
the supremal value of the k-width of B around X, where B(F) are functions supported
in U and EF B(F) is less than 1 pointwise.
Let us consider the simplest example: a rectangular lattice. 
Let X be the q-
skeleton of an m-dimensional rectangular lattice of dimensions N1 x ... x Nm, where
q < m. Embed X in Rn as part of a cubic lattice of side length L, where m < n.
Let U be the (L/3)-neighborhood of X. (Although we don't need this fact, X is a
deformation retract of U.)
Theorem 6.2. The k-width of U around X is greater than cLk. (As usual, the
constant c depends only on n, and does not depend on the dimensions of the complex
X.)
This theorem is the analog for k-width around complexes of the fact that the
k-width of the cube of side length L is at least cLk.
Proof. By scaling it suffices to prove this theorem when L is equal to 1.
Our first task is to define some functions B(F), which requires a few steps. For
each face F of X, we define a region U(F), which is equal to a thickened copy of
the center of the face F. Suppose that F is an 1-dimensional face of X. Then U(F) is
defined to be the product of C1 x C2, where C1 is an 1-dimensional sub-cube of F, with
the same center as F, and with side length 1 - 2-4 l- 1, and C2 is a cube perpendicular
to F, centered on F, and with side length 2-41-3. Inside of U(F), we define a region
U'(F), which is the product C x C2, where C~ is the sub-cube of F with the same
center as F and with side length 1- 2-4 1- 2 and C is a cube perpendicular to F,
centered on F, and with side length 2- 41- 4. A neighborhood of U'(F) lies inside of
82
__

U(F). The regions U(F) and U(G) overlap only if F is a sub-face of G or vice versa.
The union of U'(G) for all sub-faces G of F contains the face F. Next we define bump
functions b(F) which are continuous approximations to the characteristic function of
U(F), multiplied by some constant c. Finally, we define B(F) to be the sum of b(G)
over all the sub-faces G of F. We choose the constant c so that E B(F) is less than
1 pointwise.
Now we suppose that we have a nice family C of cycles in Rn. We need a procedure
to alter C on a compact set to get a family C'. First of all, we choose a very fine
triangulation T of the range Rn-k. We can choose this triangulation sufficiently fine
that if fc(u) B(F) > 2w for any y in A, then the same integral is greater than w for
every y in A.
Recall that we defined a function b(F) which was a continuous approximation of
the characteristic function of U(F). We define the w-thick shadow of b(F) to be the
set of y in Rn-k 
so that fc(y) b(F) > w. We denote the w-thick shadow of b(F) by
t,(F). (To set the notation, the thick shadow of B(F) is T(F), and the thick shadow
of b(F) is t(F).)
The number w will be a small constant, depending only on n, which we will choose
later. We are going to alter C on a compact set to get a family C' with the following
property.
1. If a simplex A of T does not meet t2,(F), then the chain C'(A) does not
intersect U'(F).
We check that this property suffices. Suppose that y does not lie in T,(F). 
Let
A be a simplex of T containing y. It follows that A does not intersect T2,(F). 
Since
B(F) 
b(G) for each sub-face G of F, it follows that A does not intersect t2 ,(G).
According to Property 1, C'(y) does not intersect U'(G) for any subface G of F. But
F lies in the union of the sets U'(G). Therefore, C'(y) does not intersect F.
We are going to construct a sequence of nice families Cl for 1 from -1 to q. The
family C_1 is just the initial family C, and the family Cq will be C'. Each family
is formed by altering the previous one on a compact set. The family C will obey
property 1 for faces F of dimension less than or equal to 1. Since X is a q-dimensional
83

complex Cq will obey property 1 entirely.
In order to construct a nice family C1, it suffices to define a (k+m)-chain Ci(A)
in R" for each m-simplex A of T, obeying two simple properties. The boundary of
Cl(A) should be equal to Cl(aA). (After picking an orientation of A, this statement
should hold as integral chains.) Also, Ci(A) should agree with C_ 1 (A) outside of a
compact set.
For inductive purposes, we will prove that the chains Ci(A) satisfy two more
conditions.
2. If A is a 0-simplex which does not lie in t4 (F), then Cl(A) meets U(F) in a
region with k-volume less than Cw. On the other hand, if A is any m-simplex for
m > 1, then Ci(A) meets U(F) in a region with (k+m)-volume less than Cw.
3. If A is an m-simplex and F is an 1-face of X, then C1(A) agrees with Cl_(A)
in the region inside of U(F) but outside the m+12-41-8-neighborhood of U'(F).
Since the triangulation T is very fine, we can assume that C_1 (A) = C(A) obeys
property 2. Properties 1 and 3 only assert something for the later families C, when
1 > 0. This gives the base for our induction.
The main point of the proof is an inductive procedure to modify the chain Ci1-(A)
into the chain Cl(A). We will define Cl(A) first for all the 0-simplices A, then for all
the 1-simplices, and so on, up to (n-k)-simplices.
The construction of Cl(A) for 0-simplices
Since we will be talking so much about t2w(F), we abbreviate t2, by t.
For each 1-face F, we repeat the following procedure.
If the 0-simplex A lies in t(F), then we don't need to do anything. If A does not
lie in t(F) then we will modify Cl_l(A) as follows. First notice that by property 2,
the intersection of C_l(A) with U(F) has k-volume less than Cw.
Let H(r) denote the boundary of the r-neighborhood of U'(F). As long as r is less
than 2-41-8, the surface H(r) lies in U(F). We can choose a value of r in the range
[0, (1/n)2 -4 1-8] so that H(r) meets Cl_l(A) transversely in a (k-1)-cycle C of volume
less than Cw. The cycle C lies in U(F), but outside of U'(F). By induction, Cl_l(A)
lies outside of U'(G) for each sub-face G of F for which A° lies outside of t(G). Let
84

V be the region in U(F), outside of U'(F), and outside of U'(G) for each sub-face G
of F for which A° lies outside of t(G). Since C is a subset of Cl_(A), 
C lies in V.
We claim that there is a filling F of C in V, with k-volume less than Cw. For any
compact polyhedron such as V in Rn, there is some small constant v so that each
(k-1)-cycle C in V of volume less than v is homologically trivial and can be filled by
a k-chain with k-volume less than Cvvolume(C). Since there are only finitely many
possible polyhedra V which occur in our construction, we can take a uniform values
for v and Cv. If w is sufficiently small, we will have Cw < v, and we can apply this
estimate. This proves the claim.
We construct Cl(A) from Cl-_(A) by deleting the portion of Cl-1((\) inside of
H(r) and replacing it with the filling F we have just constructed. (We repeat this
procedure for each face F. Since the regions U(F) are disjoint, these surgeries don't
interfere with one another.)
Next we have to check that the family of cycles Ci(A) obeys all the properties
which we laid out above. We carefully followed property 1 when we filled the cycle
C inside the polyhedron V. By induction, we can assume that if A does not lie in
t2 ,(G), then the k-volume of C_1 l(A) n U(G) is bounded by Cw. The surgery which
we performed in U(F) affects this intersection only if F is a subface of G or G is a
sub-face of F. This occurs for less than C 1-faces F. Each of these surgeries adds less
than Cw to the volume of Cl_l(A). Therefore the k-volume of Cl(A) n U(G) is less
than Cw. Finally, since we chose r in the range [0, (1/n)2- 4 1-8] 
and performed our
surgery inside of the r-neighborhood of U'(F), our surgery obeys Property 3.
The construction of Cl(A) for m-simplices
Since we already constructed Cl(A) for the 0-simplices, we can assume that m is
at least 1, and that we have already constructed Cl(A) for all the (m-1)-simplices of
T.
For each 1-face F we repeat the following operation.
Let A be an m-simplex. We check how many vertices of A lie in t(F).
If each vertex of A lies in t(F), then we just put Cl(A) = Cl_l(A). If some vertices
of A do not lie in t(F) then we will modify Ci_ (A) as follows. By Property 2 applied
85

to Cl_(A), 
the volume of Cl_l(A) intersected with U(F) is bounded by Cw. As
before, we define H(r) to be the boundary of the r neighborhood of U'(F). For r in
the range [0, 2-41-8], the surface H(r) lies in U(F). Because of the volume bound on
C-l,(A), we can choose r in the range [2-48, 
!!2-4-8], 
so that the intersection of
C_ 1(A) with H(r) has (k+m-1)-volume less than Cw. By property 3, in the region
between H(2
-4 1-s 8) and H(m+ 12-41-8), C1(OA) agrees with Cl_l(OA). Therefore,
we can form a cycle C consisting of the union of the intersection of Cl_1(A) with
H(r) and the intersection of C(OA) with the r-neighborhood of U'(F). According to
property 2, the (k+m-1)-volume of C(aA) intersected with U(F) is also bounded by
Cw. (If m=l, this is still true for the following reason. One of the vertices in the
boundary of A does not lie in t(F) = t 2w(F). Since the triangulation is very fine,
the other vertex does not lie in t4vw(F). 
Then by property 2, the volume of Cl(0A)
intersected with U(F) is bounded by Cw.) Therefore, the volume of C is bounded
by Cw.
The cycle C lies in U(F). If every vertex of A is disjoint from t(F), according
to property 1 applied to Cl(&F), the cycle C avoids U'(F). Similarly, according to
property 1, the cycle C also avoids U'(G) for each proper subface G of F so that all
vertices of A are disjoint from t(G). Therefore, just like for 0-simplices, we can fill
C by a chain with (k+m)-volume less than Cw which lies in U(F) and avoids all of
the U'(G) which it's supposed to avoid. We define Cl(A) to be Cl_l(A), minus the
part of the chain inside the r-neighborhood of U, plus the filling of C which we just
constructed.
Again we have to check that the nice family Cl(A) obeys the properties that we
stated above. We carefully performed our filling to obey Property 1. We can assume
by induction that the (k+m)-volume of Cl_l(A) intersected by U(G) is less than Cw.
The chain Cl(A) intersected with U(G) differs by a bounded number of surgeries, each
of which adds at most Cw volume. Therefore, the (k+m)-volume of Cl(A) intersected
with U(G) is bounded by Cw, and so our construction satisfies Property 2. Since
we chose r in the range [m2-41-8, m+ 2-41-8] and performed our surgery inside of the
r-neighborhood of U'(F), our construction obeys Property 3.
86

Therefore, by induction, we get a nice family of cycles Cq(A) which satisfies prop-
erty 1. Therefore, the k-width of U around X is at least w. The number w is greater
than zero. It depended on n, but it did not depend on the choice of X. 
O
The set U relates to the rectangle S in the following way. Suppose that X in the
(n-p)-skeleton of an (n-l)-dimensional rectangular lattice with dimensions roughly
(S1+1/S 1) x ... x (Sn/S). 
Set L = (S1...S1S-l)
1 /k. 
Now there is a k-expanding
diagonal linear embedding of U into S, taking the point x with coordinates (xl, ..., xn)
to ((SilL)xl, 
..., (Sl_1/L)x 1_l, (S1/L)x 1, (S1/L)xi+l, ...(S/L)xn). 
The image of U lies
in the set S(p, ) defined in the introduction to this chapter.
6.2 
A width-volume inequality for multiple fami-
lies of functions
Suppose that I is a k-expanding embedding of S(p, ) into R. By a slight perturbation,
we can assume that I is piecewise linear. Since we already had a k-expanding embed-
ding of the set U into S(p, 1), we can compose them to get a k-expanding embedding
of U into R. In the last section, we defined compactly supported bump functions
B(F) on U. By abuse of notation, we will also use B(F) to refer to the pushforward
of these functions in R. Since I is k-expanding, the functions B(F) have k-width at
least cLk around the complex I(X).
Let R' be the rectangle with dimensions R+l1 x ... x Rn. We then define bump
functions B'(F) on R' by the following formula.
B'(F)(y) = (R1.. R 1) 
B(F)(x, y)dx.
,Rl] ... x [,R,]
The function B'(F) is just the average value of B(F) over the -plane perpendicular to
R'. In the last section, we constructed the functions B(F) so that the sum EF B(F)
is at most 1 pointwise. By an easy averaging argument, the sum ZF B'(F) is also at
most 1 pointwise.
87

Consider the restriction of the functions B'(F) to a subrectangle with dimensions
R1+1 x ... x Rp. By the width-volume inequality, if one of these restrictions has (k-l)-
width at least W, then it has integral at least cW k-. Since the integral of the sum of
B'(F) is at most R1+1...Rp, it follows that the number of faces F so that the restriction
p-t
of B'(F) to our sub-rectangle has width at least W is bounded by CW-k- 
R1+l...Rp.
With a little bit more thought, it is possible to show that we can find a single generic
PL map 7r from our sub-rectangle of R' to Rp-k so that the integral f_1(y) B'(F) is
p-E
less than W for every z for all but N faces F, where N < CW- k- Rl+l...Rp. We need
a version of this result for families, which we now formulate.
Proposition 6.2.1. Let B'(F) be functions on Rn-l. We will use coordinates (x, y)
for Rn- l, where x is in Rp-l and y is in Rn-p. Each function B'(F) is compactly
supported, continuous, and obeys 0 < B'(F) < 1. Suppose that fRp_x (yZ 
W 
F B'(F)
is less than M for every choice of y. We will use coordinates (z, y) for Rn-k 
where
z lies in R p- k and y lies in n-p. If 7r is a generic PL map from Rn-l to Rn -k, we
define Nw(y) be the number of faces F for which there exists some point z in R p- k so
that the integral of B'(F) over r-1(z, y) is at least W. Then for each W, there exists
a generic PL map 7r so that Nw(y) < CW-k- M.
Proof. The proof of the lemma is only a small modification of the proof of the width-
volume inequality for families, Theorem 5.2. After rescaling, this lemma reduces to
the special case that W=1. 
After rescaling y, we can assume that each function
B (x, y) is practically constant in y on the scale 1.
We let So be a cubical lattice of side length s, for a number s on the order
of 1 which we will choose later. 
We choose a linear projection 7ro from Rn- 
to
Rn - k. We want to choose 7ro to have two properties. The first property is that the
inverse image 7ro1 (Rp- k X {y}) is fairly close to being parallel to the plane R p -l x
{y}. More precisely, the orthogonal projection from the fiber to the plane should be
bilipshitz with bilipshitz constant C. After changing coordinates on the range, this
condition holds for most linear projections. The second property is that the fibers
of 7ro get mapped to k-planes effectively tangent to the k-skeleton of So by the map
88
_ 
__ 

' constructed in Chapter 3, and that this remains true for any k-planes tilted by a
small angle e relative to the fibers of 7r0.
Next, we cover R n - l with overlapping regions R(yi), where each region is the 2ns
neighborhood of one of the plane 7rl( (RP-k, Yi), and so that any point of R' lies in
less than C regions.
Let 6 be a positive number that we will choose later. We pick a barycentric wiggle,
(, based on the barycentric subdivision of the cubical lattice with side length s. We
wiggle each vertex of the barycentric subdivision inside of a very small ball, so that
we distort the angles little enough that 7ro still enjoys the second property above. We
set S = (S). 
For a good choice of the wiggle , we can guarantee that the skeleton
S obeys the following inequalities. For each region R(yi), the number of faces F so
that the integral fsnR(yi) B'(F) > 6 is bounded by C - 1 fRplx{,y} 
B'(F). Put another
way, for each region R(yi), we can pick out a set X(yi) of faces of F, with cardinality
less than C6-1M, so that fsn 
B'(F) < unless F is a member of X(yi).
Now we define a map 7r = ro o 
o I o I- 1. The integral of B'(F) over each fiber
r-l (z, y) is controlled by the sum of two terms. To define the first term, we let R(z, y)
be the 2s neighborhood of r-'(z, y). The first term is C fsnR B'(F). The second
term is Csk. By choosing s sufficiently small, we can guarantee that the second term
is less than 1/2.
To control the first term, we need to use the barycentric wiggling estimate. The
region R lies in the union of less than C regions R(yi). We define X(y) to be the
union of the sets X(yi) corresponding to these regions R(yi). The cardinality of X(y)
is less than C6-1M. If a face F is not contained in X(y), then the integral fsnR B'(F)
is less than C6. Therefore, f-l(z.,) B'(F) is less than C6 + (1/2). We now choose 6
to be 1/(4C) for this last constant C. Therefore, fr-(z,y) B'(F) < 1 unless F lies in
X(y). But the cardinality of X(y) is less than C6-1M, which is less than CM. 
O
To apply this lemma, we need to pick a value of W. We are going to choose
W = c(R 1...Rl)-lLk. 
Applying the last proposition gives us a map, which we will
call 7r', from R' to Rn - k. By precomposing with the orthogonal projection from R to
R', we get a map 7r from R to Rn-k. 
The integral of B(F) over the fiber r-l(z, y) is
89

equal to (R1...RI) fS,_-(,y) B'(F).
Let us write down what the result of the proposition says about 7r. Recall that
Nw(y) is defined to be the number of faces F so that the integral of B'(F) over the
fiber r'-'(z, y) is at least W for some z. Equivalently, Nw(y) is the number of faces
F so that the integral of B(F) over the fiber 7r-l(z, y) is at least cLk. Equivalently,
Nw(y) is the number of faces F, so that the thick shadow TcLk(F) meets the plane
Rp-k X {y}. In any case, the last proposition tells us that this number Nw(y) is less
than CW-'M.
The fibers of the map 7r form a nice family of k-cycles C, of degree 1. According to
the theorem in the first section, the functions B(F) have k-width at least cLk around
the complex I(X). Therefore, we can alter C on a compact set to get a nice family C',
so that each cycle C'(z, y) intersects a face I(F) of I(X) only if (z, y) lies in TcLk (F).
Now we define a family of p-cycles by taking C"(y) to be the union of C'(z, y) for
all z. Since the projection from Rn - k to Rn - p is generic PL, C" is a nice family of
p-cycles of degree 1. Each cycle C"(y) intersects at most Nw(y) different faces of
I(X).
Now we write down our estimate for this number Nw(y). We showed that Nw(y)
is less than CW k-i M. But W is equal to c(Ri...R)-lLk, and M is equal to R+l ...Rp.
Therefore, Nw(y) is less than C(R 1...Ri)iL-k--R
1+l1...Rp. But L was defined to be
(S1...S 1Sk-l) 1/ k. Therefore, Nw(y) is less than the following expression.
:_-I S (p-l
C(Rl .. RI) -/RI+, ... Rp (S.. .S) -
.
k-
-
St
(p
-
I).
We have proven that there is a nice family C" of p-cycles, of degree 1, such that
each p-cycle meets the complex I(X) in less than the above number of faces. We
recall that X is the (n-p)-skeleton of an (n-l)-dimensional rectangular lattice with
dimensions roughly (S1+l/Sl) x ... x (Sn/SI).
90
__

6.3 Combinatorial width
We now have to deal with certain combinatorial questions which are closely analogous
to the questions about k-width which we have studied earlier. Let X be a cubical (or
simplicial) complex. We define the combinatorial width of X over Rn - p to be at most
W if there is a generic PL map from X to Rn-p so that each fiber intersects at most
W faces of X. For example, suppose that X is the n-skeleton of the unit lattice in Rn,
restricted to a rectangle of dimensions N1 x ... x N,. The combinatorial width of this
complex over Rn- 
gives a kind of coarse analogue of the geometric p-width of the
rectangle. As we will will see, the combinatorial width of this complex over Rn- 
is
roughly N1...Np. The proof we will give is basically a coarse analogue of the standard
geometric proof.
Now suppose that instead of the n-skeleton of the unit lattice, we take only the q-
skeleton of the unit lattice, restricted to the same rectangle. If q is less than n-p, then
each fiber of a generic PL map from X to Rn - p meets only C faces of X, regardless
of the size of the Ni. We will prove that the width of the (n-p)-skeleton over Rn-p is
roughly N1 ...Np.
Proposition 6.3.1. Let X be the (n-p)-skeleton of a rectangular lattice in Rm of
dimension N1 x ... x Nm. Suppose that X is embedded into Rn. Let C be a nice family
of p-cycles, parameterized by Rn - p, with non-zero degree. Then one of the p-cycles in
C must intersect X in at least cN...Nm+p-n faces.
Proof. In the situation where we will use this proposition, the embedding of X in
]Rn is standard. 
This point is not important, however, and we begin by reducing
the general case to the special case that m = n and that X is embedded in Rn as a
rectangular region in the standard unit lattice.
Let X be embedded into Rn, and let F be a family of p-cycles, parameterized by
Rn-p, 
so that each cycle meets X in at most W faces. If n is not at least 4m, then we
embed Rn into R4m = Rn x R4 m -n. Then we replace each cycle C in our family by
C x R 4m-n. After this argument, we may assume that n is at least 4m. In this case,
any embedding of X into R" is isotopic to a standard embedding. In particular, the
91

embedding of X into Rn extends to an embedding of R m, where X is considered as a
subset of the (n-p)-skeleton of the unit lattice in Rm . Next, we move the embedding
of R m into Rn into general position, and restrict each cycle to Rm. In this way, we
obtain a family of (m+p-n)-cycles in Rm, parameterized by Rn - p, which sweep out
Rm , and so that each cycle meets at most W faces of X. The complex X is just the
(m-p)-skeleton of the unit lattice in the rectangle with dimensions N1 x ... x Nm.
From now on we assume that X is the (n-p)-skeleton of the unit lattice in the
rectangle R with dimensions N1 x ... x Nn in Rn, 
and that C is a nice family of
p-cycles with non-zero degree. Suppose that each cycle in C meets X in less than
W faces. It suffices to prove that W is greater than cNi...Np. We pick a very fine
triangulation T of the parameter space Rn -p, so that for each simplex A in T, C(A)
meets X in less than CW faces.
The first main step of the proof is to surger the family of cycles so that each cycle
is covered by CW cubes of the unit lattice.
To do this, we will construct a sequence of nice families of cycles C(l, m), where
1 goes from (n-p) up to n, and m goes from 0 to n-p. Our original nice family is
C(n - p, n - p). The next family is C(n - p + 1, O), then C(n - p + 1, 1), and so on
up to C(n - p + 1, n - p). The next family after that is C(n - p + 2, 0), and so on
up to C(n, n - p), which is the last family in the sequence. Each family is obtained
by doing surgery on the previous family, supported in a compact subset, and so each
family has non-zero degree.
The main property of these families is the following. For any simplex A of the
triangulation T, C(1, m) (A) meets the (-1)-skeleton of the unit lattice in our rectangle
in less than CW faces. Moreover, if the dimension of A is less than or equal to m,
then C(1, m)(A) meets the -skeleton of the unit lattice in our rectangle in less than
CW faces.
We will construct each C(l, m) inductively, by doing surgery on the previous one.
To anchor the induction, we have defined C(n -p, n -p) to be our original nice family
C. We have assumed that for this family, C(A) meets X in less than CW faces, for any
simplex A in T. Since X is the (n-p)-skeleton of the unit lattice in R, C(n - p, n - p)
92
__

does obey the condition above.
The construction of C(1, O)
We are going to construct C(l, 0) by doing surgery on C(l- 
1, n - p). Fix a
O-simplex A in T. By induction, C(l- 
1, n - p)(A) meets the (1-1)-skeleton of the
unit lattice in less than CW faces. We define an -face of the unit lattice in R to
be legal if its boundary intersects C(l - 1, n - p)(A). The rest of the -faces of the
unit lattice in R we call illegal. There are less than CW legal -faces. We are going
to surger C(l - 1, n - p) (A) so that it no longer intersects any illegal 1-faces of the
unit lattice in the rectangle R. The surgery will take place in a small neighborhood
of these illegal 1-faces.
Suppose F is an illegal 1-face. By definition, C(l - 1, n - p)(A) does not intersect
the boundary of F. Therefore, after putting the family of cycles in general position,
the intersection of C(l- 1, n-p)(A) 
with F is a (p-n+l)-cycle K in F. If the cycle K is
empty, we don't need to do anything, but if it's not empty we will perform a surgery.
Pick a chain L in F with boundary K. The cycle C(l- 1, n -p)(A) 
in a neighborhood
of F is equal to K x B n - l. To define C(1, 0)(A), we remove the region K x B n - l and
replace it with L x aBn- l. The resulting p-cycle avoids the illegal face F. We repeat
this operation for every illegal face F, and the resulting cycle is C(l, 0)(A). It meets
the -skeleton of the unit lattice in R in at most CW faces.
Next we have to define C(1, 0)(A) for simplices A of dimension greater than 0. For
simplices of dimension at least 2, we simply define C(1, 0)(A) = C(I - 1, n - p)(A).
For 1-simplices, we make the following surgery. Let A be a 1-simplex with boundary
vl - v 2. For each of these vertices, C(1, 0)(v) - C(l - 1, n - p)(v) is given by a sum
of p-cycles, each of the form L x B n - l -
L x B n - t. Each of these p-cycles is the
boundary of a (p+l)-chain L x Bn- l. Call the sum of these (p+l)-chains M(v). We
define C(1, 0) (A) as C(l-1, n-p)(A)+ M(vi)-M(v 2). The boundary of C(1, 0)(A) is
indeed equal to C(1, O)(v1)-C(1, 0)(v2). Since each of these (p+l)-chains is supported
away from the (-1)-skeleton of the unit lattice in R, the chain C(l, 0)(A) still meets
the (1-1)-skeleton of the unit lattice in R in less than CW faces. Finally, we need to
check that for a 2-simplex A, the boundary of C(1, 0)(A) is equal to C(l, 0)(QA). If
93

A is a 2-simplex of T with vertices vl, v2, and v3 , and with edges E12, E23, and E 31 ,
then we perform this calculation as follows.
C(I, 0)(aA) = C(l, 0)(E12) + C(1, 0)(E23) + C(1, 0)(E31) =
C(l - 1, n - p)(E12) + M(Vl) - M(v2) + C(l - 1, n - p)(E23)+
M(v2) - M(v3) + C(l - 1, n - p)(E31) + M(v3) - M(vi) 
=
C(l - 1, n - p)(A) = aC(1, 0)(A).
This finishes the construction of C(1, 0).
The construction of C(1, m)
Next we construct C(l, m) when m is bigger than 0 by performing surgery on
C(1, m - 1). The construction is similar in many ways to the last one.
For simplices A of dimension less than m, C(1, m)(A) = C(l, m- 1)(A). 
The next
step is to define C(1, m)(A) for m-simplices (A).
Fix an m-simplex A in T. By induction, C(1, m - 1)(A) meets the (l-l)-skeleton
of the unit lattice in less than CW faces. Also by induction, C(1, m - 1) (A) 
meets
the 1-skeleton of the unit lattice in less than CW faces. We define an -face of the
unit lattice in R to be legal if its boundary intersects C(1, m - 1)(A) or if it intersects
C(1, m - 1)(MA). The rest of the 1-faces of the unit lattice in R we call illegal. There
are less than CW legal 1-faces. We are going to surger C(1, m - 1)(A) so that it no
longer intersects any illegal -faces of the unit lattice in the rectangle R. The surgery
will take place in a small neighborhood of these illegal -faces.
Suppose F is an illegal -face. By definition, C(1, m- 1)(A) does not intersect the
boundary of F, and C(1, m - 1) (A) 
does not intersect F. Therefore, after putting
the family of cycles in general position, the intersection of C(1, m - 1)(A) with F is
a (m+p-n+l)-cycle K in F. If the cycle K is empty, we don't need to do anything,
but if it's not empty we will perform a surgery. Pick a chain L in F with boundary
K. The cycle C(1, m - 1)(A) in a neighborhood of F is equal to K x B n - l. To define
C(1, m)(A), we remove the region K x Bn-1 and replace it with L x 6B n - l. The
resulting (p+m)-cycle avoids the illegal face F. We repeat this operation for every
illegal face F, and the resulting cycle is C(1, m)(A). 
It meets the -skeleton of the
unit lattice in R in at most CW faces.
94

Next we have to define C(1, m) (A) for simplices A of dimension greater than m.
For simplices of dimension at least m+2, we simply define C(1, m)(A) = C(1, m -
1)(A). For (m+l)-simplices, we make the following surgery. Let A be an (m+l)-
simplex with boundary Ej Ai. For each face of the boundary, C(1, m)(Ai) - C(1, m -
1)(Ai) is given by a sum of (p+m)-cycles, each of the form L x aBn-l-aL x B n - '. Each
of these (p+m)-cycles is the boundary of a (p+m+1)-chain L x Bn- l. Call the sum of
these (p+1)-chains M(Ai). We define C(1, m)(A) as C(l, m- 1)(A) + 
M(Ai). The
boundary of C(1, m)(A) is indeed equal to C(1, m)(OA). Since each of these (p+m+l)-
chains is supported away from the (1-1)-skeleton of the unit lattice in R, the chain
C(1, m) (A) still meets the (-1)-skeleton of the unit lattice in R in less than CW faces.
Finally, we need to check that for an (m+2)-simplex A, the boundary of C(1, m)(A)
is equal to C(1, m)(OA). Suppose that the boundary of A is equal to E Ai. Then
C(1, m)(0A) is equal to the sum E C(1, m)(A,). Now, suppose that the boundary of
Ai is equal to Eji Ai,j. Then Ei C(1, m)(Ai) = Ei(C(l, m - 1)(Ai) + Ej M(Ai,j)).
Now Ai,j is equal to Aj,i with opposite orientation, so the terms M(A,j) and M(Aj,i)
cancel, leaving C(1, m)(9A) = Eji C(l, m- 1)(Ai). This sum is equal to the boundary
of C(1, m - 1)(A), which is equal to the boundary of C(1, m)(A).
This finishes the construction of C(1, m). By induction, each chain C(n, n -p)(A)
intersects less than CW unit cubes of the rectangle R.
The second main step of the proof is to prove an isoperimetric inequality which
says that any k-cycle in our rectangle which can be covered by M cubes is the boundary
of a (k+l)-cycle that can be covered by CMNk+l cubes.
Let C be a relative k-cycle in our rectangle, lying in the union of M cubes. For
each cube, we can push the cycle C out to the boundary of that cube. Proceeding
inductively, we construct a cobordism from C to a union of k-faces of the unit lattice,
the cobordism staying inside the union of M cubes that cover C. Therefore, without
loss of generality we may assume that the cycle C consists of some union of k-faces
of the unit lattice, counted with multiplicity.
Next we pick a point p with non-integer coefficients and use it to push our cycle
out to the boundary by the following recipe. Let F be a k-face of the unit lattice
95

included in C. The face F is defined by n equations, one for each coordinate. For
k of the n coordinates, we have an equation of the form ai < xi < ai + 1, and for
the other n-k coordinates we have an equation of the form xi = bi. We define an
integer j by saying that the coordinates from x1 up to xj-1 have equations of the first
form, but the coordinate xj has an equation of the second form. (The integer j is
at least 1 and at most k+1.) Now, we define a chain H(F) by the following recipe.
If ai < pi < ai + 1 for every i in the range 1 
i < j - 1, then the cycle H(F) is
defined by the following equations. (Technical point: if j=1, then this hypothesis is
vacuously fulfilled.) For the first j-1 coordinates, there are no equations. If pj < aj,
then we use the equation xj > aj. If pj > aj, then we use the equation xj < aj. For
i in the range j + 1 
i < m, we include the equation for the coordinate xi in the
definition of F. On the other hand, if it is not the case that ai < pi < ai + 1 for every
i in the range 1 < i < j - 1, then H(F) is empty. We assign H(F) an orientation and
multiplicity consistent with the orientation and multiplicity of F in C.
We now check that the chains H(F) counted with multiplicity, fit together to form
a relative chain with boundary C. For any sum D of k-faces F of the unit lattice, we
define H(D) to be the sum of H(F). By an easy calculation, H(OH(F) - F) = 0.
It follows that H(OH(C)- 
C) = 0. We abbreviate OH(C) - C by K. Since C is a
relative cycle, K is also a relative cycle. Since H(K) 
= 0, every face of K is parallel
to the x axis. But since K is a relative cycle, it must have the form [0, N1] x K', for
some relative (k-2)-cycle K' in the rectangle R' with dimensions N2 x ... x Nn. Let
p' be the orthogonal projection of p to R'. Now H(K) is equal to [0, N1] x Hp,(K').
Since H(K) = 0, we conclude that Hp,(K') = 0. By induction, we can conclude that
K' is zero, and hence that K is zero. In other words, the boundary of H(C) is indeed
C.
It is easy to check that for a fixed face F and a random point p, the number of
cubes necessary to cover H(F) is on average less than CNk+l. Therefore, for some
point p, the filling H(C) can be covered by less than CMNk+l cubes.
Given the isoperimetric inequality, Gromov's method for bounding the k-width of
the unit cube shows that W is at least cN...Np. 
We give the details of this proof.
96
_

From now on, we denote C(n, n - p) by C'. For each 0-simplex A of T, choose a
(p+l)-chain F(A) with boundary C'(A), so that F(A) meets less than CWNp+l
unit cubes of the unit lattice in the rectangle R. Then, for each 1-simplex A of
T, define a (p+l)-cycle D(A) to be equal to C'(A) + F(a/). 
The cycle D(A) is
contained in less than CWNp+l unit cubes of the rectangle R. For any (p+l)-cycle
E Ai in T, E D(Ai) = E C(Ai), because the terms involving F cancel. Now we
continue inductively. Once we have defined D(A) for m-simplices A, as a (p+m)-
dimensional relative cycle in R which meets less than CWNp+l...Np+m unit cubes,
then we define a (p+m+l)-dimensional 
chain F(A) which fills this cycle, so that
F(A) meets only CWNp+ ... Np+m+ unit cubes. Once we have defined F(A) for
each m-dimensional simplex A, we define a (p+m+l)-dimensional 
cycle D(A) for
each (m+l)-simplex A by the formula D(A) = C'(A) + F(OA). The cycle D(A)
meets only CWNp+l...Np+m+l unit cubes. As before, for any (m+l)-cycle E Ai in
T, E D(Ai) = E C'(Ai). 
At the end of the induction, we have defined an n-cycle
D(A) for each (n-p)-simplex A of T. Each of these n-cycles is contained in less than
CWNp+1...Nn unit cubes. If W < (1/C)N...Np, 
then each cycle is contained in a
proper subset of R and so has degree 0. But E D(A) over all the (n-p)-simplices A
of T is equal to E C'(A) over all the (n-p)-simplices of A. This cycle has non-zero
degree because C' has non-zero degree. Therefore, W > (1/C)N...Np. 
This is the
inequality which we were trying to prove. 
C
Now we return to the situation of a k-expanding embedding of S into R. We
recall that X is the (n-p)-skeleton of an (n-l)-dimensional rectangular lattice with
dimensions roughly (Sl+1/SI) x ... x (S,/S). 
Applying the last proposition, we see
that any family of p-cycles of non-zero degree must include a cycle which intersects
I(X) 
in at least cS1+1... SpS
(P-
) faces. At the end of the last section, we con-
structed a family of cycles of degree 1, so that each cycle met I(X) in less than
C(R 1... R) k- R+...Rp(S
1...SI)-k- S(P-l) faces. Therefore, we get the following in-
equality.
C(R1...R)- I Rl+l...Rp(Sl...l)- k-- S
(p
-
I) > CS1+1...SpS 
-
)
97

Moving all terms involving S to the right-hand side and raising the equation to the
power (k - l)/(p - 1), we get the inequality that we wanted to prove.
R1.R( 
i+ 
)(k-)p 
> C ...Sarea-expanding 
embedding(S+
6.4 Constructing area-expanding embeddings
When all of the inequalities stated in Theorem 6.1 hold with the constant C, we will
construct a k-expanding embedding of S into R. The embedding has a very simple
form. It is just a k-expanding linear map followed by a simple quasi-isometric folding
map.
Let us define the folding maps that we will use. If R and S are two dimensional
rectangles, with R 1 > S1 and R 1R 2 > S1S2, then there is a quasi-isometric embedding
of S into R. This embedding simply winds S around inside of R like a snake.
Next, let a < b be integers between 1 and n. Suppose that RP = Si except when
i is equal to a or b, and that R, > Sa and RaRb > SaSb. Again there is a quasi-
isometric embedding of S into R. This embedding is simply the direct product of the
embedding that we constructed above for the coordinates a and b with the identity
in the other coordinates.
Composing these quasi-isometric embeddings proves the following baby lemma.
Lemma 6.1. There is a quasi-isometric embedding of S into R if, for each p between
I and n, Rl...R > CS...Sp.
Next we have a little algebra lemma.
Lemma 6.2. There is a rectangle T with Si...Sp < T1...Tp for all p and a k-contracting
linear map from R onto T if and only if the following inequalities hold. For each
integer I in the range 0 < 1 < k, and each integer p in the range k + 1 < p < n,
Ri...Ri(Rl+l...Rp)(k- )/ (p- l)
S...St(Si+1...Sp) (k- )/ (p- ).
98

Proof. First, let us suppose that the above inequalities hold. If it is also true that
Si...Sp < R1...Rp for every p, then we are done. Let b be the smallest integer so that
S 1...Sb > R 1...Rb. Because of all the inequalities in the hypothesis of the lemma, we
know that b < k.
We will define a sequence of linear diffeomorphisms R = R(O) -, R(1) -... 
R(c), for some integer c between 1 and k-1. The diffeomorphism to R(j) is called
Lj. When j is less than c, the rectangle R(j) has R(j)l = ... = R(j)j+l. The linear
map Lj increases each R(j - 1)i for i between 1 and j by a factor of Aj and decreases
every other R(j -
)i by a factor of 
.j/(ki), for some number Aj > 1. From the last
sentence, it follows that each Lj is k-contracting. Finally, if c is not bigger than b,
then R(c)l...R(c)b = S1...Sb. If c is bigger than b, then R(c)l...R(c)c = S...S,.
Now we define the maps Lj. It suffices to define Aj. There is a maximum value of Aj
which increases R(j- 1)j and decreases R(j - 1)j+l until they meet. If there is a lesser
value of Aj which makes R(j)...R(j)m 
= S1...Sm, where m is the maximum of b and
j, then use that value and take c = j. If not, use the maximal value. As we increase
j, R(j),...R(j)b increases. If R(b)l...R(b)b < S1...Sb, then R(b)l...R(b)b+l < S1...Sb+l,
because R(b)l = R(b)b+l. More generally, for j at least b, if R(j),...R(j)j 
< Si...Sj,
then R(j),...R(j)j+l < S1...Sj+l also.
From the formula for the map Lj, it follows that R(j),...R(j)k = R,...Rk for every
j, and by hypothesis R ...Rk > S1...Sk. Therefore, the above construction terminates
with c less than or equal to k-1.
We write R(c) = R(c)l x ... x R(c)m x R', where m is the maximum of b and c.
We have proven above that R(c)l...R(c)m = S1...Sm. Moreover, for every p less than
m, R(c)l...R(c)p > S...Sp. 
If b is greater than or equal to c, this follows because
RI...R 
> S...Sp, and the definition of Lj shows that R(j),...R(j)p 
> RI...Rp for
every p less than k. If c is greater than b, this follows because R(c)l = R(c)m and
R(c)l...R(c), 
= Si...Sm. In either case it is true.
The maps Lj preserve many of the inequalities that we have assumed. In partic-
ular, if I > j, then the following equality holds.
99

R(R(j) .. R(j)R(j)(k-)/-l) 
= R1.. RI (R1+1
) (k-l)/(p-1)
Therefore, if 1 > m then
R(c) ...R(c) (R(c)+l ..... R(c)p)(k- ')
/
-
) > 
.
1...SI(Sl+..Sp) (k- l) (p- l) .
Since R(c)l...R(c)m = Si...Sm, we can divide the above inequality on both sides,
leaving the following inequality for all I > m.
R(c)m+l...R(c)l(R(c)l+l...R()p)
(k-'
)
/
( - ) > Sm+... SI(Sl+ ..Sp) ( k-
l ) / (p- l )
Now we define S' = Sm,+ x ... x S,. We can rewrite the above inequalities in
terms of R' and S'. The result is that for each 1 in the range 0 < 1 < k - m and each
p in the range k - m + 1 < p < n - m, the following holds.
Rl...$tlz+l..R 
(k-m-)/(p-m) 
-- 
Sp1" 
> 
I+... 
S)
( k
-
m
-
l )/ (p
-
1)
By induction on the dimension, we can assume that there is a (n-m)-dimensional
rectangle T', so that T...T 
> S... Sp, and a (k-m)-contracting linear map from
R' to T'. We finally define T to be R(c)l x ... x R(c)m x T x ... x T_,.
The
direct product of the (k-m)-contracting linear map from R' to T' with the iden-
tity map is a k-contracting linear diffeomorphism from R(c) to T. Since we al-
ready have a k-contracting linear map from R to R(c), we can compose the two
maps to get a k-contracting linear map from R to T. Also, we already know that
T ...Ta = R(c)l...R(c)a > Si...Sa when a is less than or equal to m. But for larger a,
T...Ta = Ti...TmT; T 
> S,...SS...S,_ 
= S1...Sm. Therefore, the rectangle T
satisfies all the conditions which we wanted to prove.
The proof in the opposite direction is much easier. This time we suppose that there
is a rectangle T with T, ...Tp > Sl...Sp for each p from 1 to n, and a k-contracting linear
diffeomorphism from R to T. Since there is a k-contracting linear diffeomorphism
from R to T, the inequality Rl...RLRi,...Rik_, > Ti...TTi,...Tik_, holds for any indices
100
---

1 < il < ... < ik- 
< p. By taking geometric averages of these inequalities for
various choices of indices i < ...ik-l, it follows that R1...Rl(Rl+...R)(k-l/(P-l) 
>
T1...T (T+ ...Tp)(k- l)/(P-
l
). Since T1...T_ > S1...Sl, and T1...Tp, > S1...Sp, the inequality
T1...T(Tl+
1...Tp)(k-)/(P-1) > S ...Si(Sl+l...p)(k-)/(P-) 
holds as well. Combining these
two inequalities shows that R1 ...RI(R1+...P~)(k-l)/(p-l) > S1...Sz(S+1....Sp)(k-l )/ (P
-l
),
which is what we wanted to prove. 
O
Combining our two lemmas, we can construct a k-expanding embedding of S into
R whenever the rectangles obey the following inequalities. For each 1 in the range
0 < 1 < k and each p in the range k + 1 < p < n,
This finishes the proof of Theorem 6.1.
6.5 Application to the k-dilation of diffeomorphisms
We can apply our estimates to give lower bounds for the k-dilation of diffeomorphisms.
First we define some terms.
For each 1 in the range 0 < 1 < k and each p in the range k + 1 < p < n, define
Dl,p as follows.
k-I
Dl,p = Q...Q(Ql+l ...Qp)P-- .
For each 1 in the range 1 I 1 < k + 1 and each p in the range k + 2 < p < n,
define D'p as follows.
Dp = Q2...Q(Q+l...Qp) k P-
Proposition 6.5.1. Each diffeomorphism from R to S has k-dilation greater than
cD1,p for each I in the range 0 < 1 < k and each p in the range k + 1 < p < n. Also,
each diffeomorphism from R to S has k-dilation greater than cD,p for each I in the
range 1 < I < k + 1, and each p in the range k + 2 
p 
n.
101

Proof. Suppose there is a diffeomorphism from R to S with k-dilation D. Then, there
is a k-contracting diffeomorphism from D1/kR to S. Therefore, there is a k-expanding
embedding of S into Dl/kR. By the inequalities in Theorem 6.1, Dl,p/D is less than
C. Therefore, D is greater than cDI,p.
We get the other inequalities by considering the map from the boundary of R
to the boundary of S. We take a set U in the largest hyperface of S, and define
functions B(F) as in the proof of Theorem 6.1. We pull the functions B(F) back to
the boundary of R. This boundary is bilipshitz to the double of the largest hyperface
of R. We now define functions B'(F) on the rectangle with dimensions Rl+, x ... x R,
by averaging B(F) over the double of a rectangle with dimensions R2 x ... x R in
the double of the largest hyperface of R. The rest of the proof then proceeds just as
before. As a result, one gets the same inequalities that would follow if there were a
k-contracting diffeomorphism from the largest hyperface of R to the largest hyperface
of S - namely, the k-dilation is greater than cD,p. 
El
102

Chapter 7
Rational Homotopy Invariants of
Area-Contracting Maps
In this chapter, we will estimate the rational homotopy invariants of k-contracting
maps from ellipsoids to wedges of unit spheres. Here is a typical example of the
estimates we will prove.
Let E be a 7-dimensional ellipsoid with principal axes E0 < ... < E7. Let f be
a map from E to the bouquet S2 V S3 V S4.
Let a2 be a 2-form supported on S2
away from the basepoint and with fs2 a2 = 1, and define a3 and a4 similarly. For
any exact k-form a on E, let Pa denote any primitive of a. The integral H(f) =
fE Pf*(a 2) A f*(a3) A Pf*(a 4) is a homotopy invariant of the map f. In order to
define the k-dilation of f, give each sphere in the bouquet the standard unit sphere
metric.
Theorem. For any 2-contracting map f, H(f) is bounded by CE1E2E3E42E5E62E7 .
On the other hand, if E1 is sufficiently large, we will construct a 1-contracting map f
with H(f) at least cE1E2E 3E42EE62E7.
Similarly, we can define H'(f) = fE f*(a2) A Pf*(a 3) A Pf*(a4). The integral
H'(f) is also a homotopy invariant of f, which is different from H(f).
Theorem. For any 2-contracting map f, H'(f) is bounded by CE1E2E3 E4E52E6E7.
On the other hand, if E1 is sufficiently large, we will construct a 1-contracting map f
103

with H'(f) at least cE1E2E3E4E5E6E7.
If X is any simply connected finite complex, then the dual of irn(X) ®Q is a vector
space of invariants defined analogously to H using pullbacks of differential forms and
primitives. We will prove estimates for the primitives of an exact form on an ellipsoid
E in terms of its principal axes. If H is an invariant in the dual of r, (X) ® (Q which
is defined using forms of degree at least k, and if f is a k-contracting map from E to
X, then our estimates for primitives imply an upper bound on H(f). 
Next we will
investigate how sharp this upper bound is in the special case that X is a bouquet of
spheres. For many invariants H, but not all of them, we will show that this upper
bound is sharp up to a constant factor when E1 is sufficiently large.
These estimates can be applied to prove estimates about k-contracting maps be-
tween rectangles. For example, we can apply the theorems above to 2-contracting
diffeomorphisms between 8-dimensional rectangles. If f is a 2-contracting diffeomor-
phism from R to S then it restricts to a 2-contracting diffeomorphism between their
boundaries, which are bilipshitz to ellipsoids. The theorems above imply that the
following inequalities hold in the side-lengths of R and S.
R 2R3R4R5R6R 2R8 > CS2S3S 4S52S6S72S8.
R2 R3R4 R5R2R 7R8 > CS2S 3S 4S2S6S7 S8
At the end of the chapter, we will briefly consider torsion homotopy invariants
of k-contracting maps. We will construct some homotopically non-trivial maps with
very small k-dilation. In particular, we will prove the following theorem.
Theorem For each n, there are infinitely many choices of m so that there are
homotopically non-trivial maps from Sm to Sn with arbitrarily small 3-dilation.
104

7.1 
Review of rational homotopy invariants and
differential forms
We give a quick elementary review of the rational homotopy invariants of maps from
Sn to a bouquet of spheres of dimensions between 2 and n. Rational homotopy
invariants of maps from S" to a space X are defined to be elements of the dual space
to 7rI (X) 0 Q. In this section, we will define a bunch of rational homotopy invariants
for maps from S to a wedge of spheres using differential forms. We will review
the proof that these expressions are rational homotopy invariants, and in particular
we will check that the proof goes through using forms that are only assumed to be
bounded and measurable.
Let X be a wedge of spheres Sk
1 V ... V Skr. Let ai be a top-dimensional form on
S ki with fSki ai = 1. We only assume that ai are bounded and measurable. Let f be
a map from S" to X or from Sn x [0, 1] to X, and let ai be the pullback f*(ai).
We will construct inductively a list of "legal" expressions involving the forms ai,
wedge products, and primitives. First, each form ai is a legal expression of degree ki.
Next, if A and B are legal expressions of degrees a and b, and if a + b < n + 1, then
PA A B is a legal expression of degree a + b - 1. (If A is exact, the expression PA
denotes any primitive of A. If A is not exact, the expression PA is not defined.)
Proposition 7.1.1. If A is a legal expression of degree n, then fs, A is independent of
the choices of primitive, and defines a rational homotopy invariant of the map f. This
remains true even if we choose primitives which are only bounded and measurable.
Proof. By induction, every legal expression has degree at least 2. Therefore, if A and
B are legal expressions with a + b < n + 1, then the degree a of A lies in the range
2< a<n-1.
The wedge product ai A aj = 0 pointwise for any i, j, including i = j. By induction
A A B = 0 for any two well-defined legal expressions.
Next, we will show by induction that any well-defined legal expression is closed.
We have to compute d(PA A B) = A A B ± PA A dB. By induction, we can assume
105

dB = 0. But we proved in the previous paragraph that A A B = 0.
In particular, each well-defined legal expression A of degree between 2 and n-1 is
exact. Therefore, if A and B are well-defined legal expressions with total degree at
most n + 1, then the expression PA A B is well-defined. It follows by induction that
every legal expression is well-defined.
Next, we prove by induction that if we change the choice of primitives in a legal
expression, then the legal expression changes by d(w A L), where w is any form and
L is a form given by a legal expression.
To start the induction, suppose that we change the choice of primitive for the last
primitive in a legal expression C = PA A B. Changing the choice of primitive means
changing PA by a closed form. Since the degree of A is between 2 and n-l, the degree
of this closed form is between 1 and n-2. Since our manifold is homotopic to Sn, this
form must be exact, and we write it as dw. Then the form C = PA A B changes by
d(wA B).
Now we prove inductively that if we change a primitive anywhere in a legal ex-
pression, the resulting form changes by d(w A L). Suppose we are looking at the
legal expression PA A B, and that we have changed a primitive in A. By induction,
we can assume that A changed by d(w A L). Therefore, PA changes by w A L plus
an exact form dw2.
The term w A L A B vanishes, because the wedge product of
any two legal expressions vanishes. Therefore PA A B changes by d(w2 A B). Now
suppose that we have changed a primitive in B. By induction, we can assume that B
changed by d(w A L). Therefore PA A B changes by PA A d(w A L), which is equal to
±d(w A PA A L). (Here we have used the fact that A A L vanishes.)
Let us define an invariant of f by taking an n-form A in our list and defining
A(f) = fSn A. The choice of primitives only changes A by an exact form, so A(f)
does not depend on the choice of primitives. Thus A(f) is an invariant of the map f.
Moreover, applying the whole discussion to the domain Sn x [0, 1] and using the fact
that A is closed, it follows that A(f) is a homotopy invariant of f.
Finally, if S is a self map of S" of degree D then A(f o S) is equal fsn S*(A),
which is equal to fs.(Sn) A, which is equal to DA(f). Therefore, A defines a rational
106

homotopy invariant.
According to Dennis Sullivan's theory of minimal models, the invariants that we
have just constructed generate the rational homotopy invariants of X. The theory of
minimal models is explained in [9]. (The reader should be aware that the invariants
we have just constructed have many linear dependences.)
7.2 
Review of primitives and isoperimetric inequal-
ities
If ai is a form on X of degree at least k, and if the map f is k-contracting, then f*(ri)
is bounded pointwise by the CO norm of ai. Let RH be a rational homotopy invariant
constructed in terms of forms of degree at least k. In order to bound RH, we need to
understand how large the primitive of a bounded form can be.
In a different work, Dennis Sullivan explained how the problem of estimating
primitives is related to the isoperimetric inequality.
Lemma. (Sullivan) Let 
be an exact measurable (k+l)-form in a Riemannian mani-
fold M with L' norm bounded by 1. Suppose that every exact k-cycle C with volume V
admits a filling by a (k+l)-chain with volume less than IsoV. Then , has a primitive
a which is a measurable k-form with L' 
norm bounded by Iso.
Proof. Here is the proof of the lemma, which we borrow from Gromov's book [15].
We record the proof here because it is quite short and we will have to use a more
complicated version of it later. The proof is based on Whitney's theory of flat chains
and cochains. (This theory is explained in Whitney's book Geometric Integration
Theory [20].) For a polyhedral k-chain C in M we define the flat norm of C to be the
infimum of IsolC - ODI + DI, taken over all real polyhedral (k+l)-chains D. (If C
is a real polyhedral p-chain, equal to E aiPi where ai is a real number and Pi is a
polyhedron, then C denotes the mass of C, which is defined to be E lailvolume(Pi).)
The flat k-chains are the completion of the space of polyhedral k-chains in the flat
norm.
107
[]

Consider the space of flat k-chains in M, and the subspace of exact flat k-cycles.
We have a linear functional defined on the vector space of flat exact k-cycles which
assigns to each exact k-cycle C the integral of 13 
over any filling of C. (This linear
functional is well-defined because 3 is exact.) Since 13P 
is bounded by 1 pointwise, the
value of the functional on an exact cycle with filling volume less than V is bounded by
V. By our isoperimetric inequality, the value of the functional on an exact cycle with
volume V is bounded by IsoV. Therefore, the value of the functional on an exact
cycle is bounded by the flat norm of the cycle. By the Hahn-Banach theorem, this
linear functional has an extension to the space of all flat k-chains in M, with norm
bounded by 1. Such a linear functional is called a flat cochain with comass 1.
By a theorem of Whitney, each flat k-cochain corresponds to a measurable dif-
ferential k-form a. This theorem appears as Theorem 5A of Chapter 9 of his book
Geometric Measure Theory [20]. Since our fiat k-cochain has norm 1, it returns a
value at most 1 to any k-chain with volume 1/Iso. Hence the measurable differential
k-form a has norm at most Iso. But the integral of a over any exact k-cycle is equal
to the integral of 13 over a filling of that k-cycle. Therefore da = 13. 
L
7.3 Linear isoperimetric inequalities
Because of Sullivan's lemma, we would like to know the best linear isoperimetric
constants in an ellipsoid.
Proposition 7.3.1. Any (k-1)-cycle of volume V in the ellipsoid E has a filling with
volume bounded by Cmax(Ek, En-k+l)V.
This estimate is sharp up to a constant factor. We will give the proof in the
next section, as a special case of Lemma 7.1. It follows as a special case of our next
proposition. Combining this proposition with Sullivan's Lemma we get the following
corollary.
Corollary. Any exact measurable k-form P on E with L 
norm bounded by B has a
measurable primitive a with L°° norm bounded by Cmax(Ek, En-k+l)B.
108
__

We can use this estimate to prove upper bounds for rational homotopy invariants
as follows. Suppose that f is a k-contracting map from an ellipsoid E to a wedge of
spheres X = Sk1 V ... V Skr, where each ki is at least k. For each sphere S k i in the
wedge, let ai be the volume form of Ski. Since f is k-contracting, each of the pullbacks
f*(ai) is bounded by 1 pointwise. Let H(f) be a rational homotopy invariant given
by the integral of a form, which is constructed from the pullbacks f*(ai) by taking
primitives and wedge products. Whenever we take the primitive of a form we have
already bounded, we can find a bound on the primitive using the corollary above.
Whenever we take the wedge product of two bounded forms, the result is bounded
by the product of the two bounds. As a result, we get a pointwise bound on the
integrand, which gives a bound on H(f).
We will carry out this procedure in detail in section 6. It will turn out that for
first order invariants, this method is sharp up to a constant factor. It will also turn
out that for higher order invariants, this method is not sharp up to a constant factor.
We can hope to improve this estimate for the following reason. When we take
the primitive of a bounded form, some of its coefficients may need to be as large as
the bound above, but other coefficients may be much smaller. It may happen, for
instance, that two forms are both large in the same direction, and so when we take
their wedge product, the largest term cancels. It turns out that such cancellations
occur, and that they lead to sharper upper bounds for rational homotopy invariants.
In order to exploit these cancellations systematically, we need to give directionally
dependent estimates for the primitives of differential forms.
7.4 Directionally dependent isoperimetric inequal-
ities
The ellipsoid E is bilipshitz to the double of the rectangle with side lengths E1 <
... < E, with a bilipshitz constant independent of E. Therefore, it suffices to prove
estimates for the double of this rectangle. On each rectangle in the double we use
109

coordinates xl, ..., x,. If /3 is a k-form, we expand it on each of the two rectangles as
p = ZE 
Odx', where I is a set of k distinct numbers between 1 and n. We define b,
to the supremum of the function 3,I on E.
Theorem 7.1. Let 3 be an exact k-form on E, which may only be bounded measurable.
For each set J of (k-1) distinct indices, we define a number aJ as follows. If i is in
J, and d is the smallest index not in J, then aj = EdbJUd- If 1 is not in J, and e is
the smallest index in J, then aj = ZE-l EdbJUd. Then P has a bounded measurable
primitive a = F ajdxJ, so that IaJI < Caj for each J.
The proof of this theorem will be very similar to the proof of Sullivan's lemma. In
place of the isoperimetric inequality used there, we will use a directionally dependent
isoperimetric inequality which we now formulate.
Put a very fine lattice on the rectangle E1 x ... x E,, so that each face of the
rectangle lies in the lattice. Taking the double of the lattice gives a cubical complex
in E. We call a k-cycle rectilinear if it consists of a union of faces of this cubical
complex for some sufficiently fine lattice. The rectilinear cycles are clearly dense in
the space of fiat cycles, and they are convenient to work with in the proof of the
following proposition. If I is a set of k distinct indices and C is a rectilinear k-chain,
then the I-volume of C is defined to be the total volume of the faces in C parallel to
I.
Lemma 7.1. Let C be a rectilinear (k-1)-cycle in E with J-volume Vj. For each set I
of k distinct indices define WI as follows. If 1 is in I and e is the smallest index not
in I, then WI = '-1l EdVI-d. If 1 is not in I and d is the smallest index in I, then
WI = EdVI-d. Then there is a filling of C with I-volume less than CWI for each I.
Proof. We construct our filling in two steps. In the first step, we push C to a cycle
that lies in one rectangle of the two rectangle of the double. In the second step, we
fill this cycle inside this rectangle.
Step 1. Let C be a (k-1) relative rectilinear cycle in the rectangle R, with dimen-
sions E1 x ... x E,. We will construct a k-chain F whose boundary is the union of C
110


and B, where B is a rectilinear chain in the boundary of R. Let WI be the I-volume
of F, and let VJ be the J-volume of B. Our filling with obey the following estimates.
1. If e is the smallest index not in I, then WI < C Cj: 
EdVI-d*
2. If e is the smallest index not in J, and e2 is the second smallest index not in J,
then VJ < C ZE-d=(Ed/Ee)VJ+e-d.
Now we construct the filling. Let p be any point in the rectangle R. Let Ak -1 be
a (k-1)-face of our very fine lattice, parallel to the coordinates J. The set A is given
by inequalities aj _ xj 
a for each j in J, and by equalities xi = ai for each i not in
J. Let d be the lowest index not in J.
Now we define a k-dimensional rectilinear chain in R called Fp(A). If aj < pj < a,
for each j from 1 to d-1, then Fp(A) is given by the following equations. For j from 1 to
d-1, xj can take any value in [0, Rj]. If ad > Pd, then we have the inequality Xd > ad;
and if ad < Pd, then we have the inequality Xd < ad. For the other coordinates, we
have the same inequalities and equations as in the definition of A. On the other hand,
if pj does not lie in [aj, aj] for some j between 1 and d-1, then Fp(A) is empty.
We define Bp(A) to be the intersection of the boundary of Fp(A) with the boundary
of R. This intersection is a rectilinear (k-1)-chain in the boundary of R.
We extend these definitions linearly to all of the rectilinear (k-1)-chains. The
k-chain F and the (k-1)-chain B will be Fp(C) and Bp(C) for a point p that we will
choose later.
We first claim that if C is a relative (k-1)-cycle, then the boundary of Fp(C) is
equal to C + Bp(C). In other words, we want to show that OFp(C) - Bp(C) - C
is equal to zero. We first consider Fp(OFp(C) - Bp(C) - C). A straight-forward
calculation shows that for each face A, Fp(,OFp(A) - Bp(A) - A) is equal to zero. By
linearity, Fp(6Fp(C) - Bp(C) - C) is also equal to zero. Now &Fp(C)- Bp(C) is a
relative (k-1)-cycle, and C is also a relative (k-1)-cycle, so their difference is a relative
(k-1)-cycle. Therefore, it suffices to check that if K is a rectilinear relative (k-1)-cycle
and Fp(K) = 0, then K vanishes. Since Fp(K) is zero, it follows that every face of K
contains xl as a tangent coordinate. Since K is a relative cycle, it follows that K is
equal to [0, E] x K', where K' is a relative (k-2)-cycle in the quotient rectangle with
111

dimensions E2 x ... x En. Let p' be the orthogonal projection of p down to this quotient
rectangle. Then Fp(K) is equal to [0, El] x Fp,(K'). Since Fp(K) vanishes, it follows
that Fp,(K') vanishes. Now it is easy to check that if K' is zero-dimensional and
Fp,(K') is equal to zero, then K' vanishes. Therefore, by induction on the dimension
of the rectangle, it follows that K is zero, proving our claim.
For a fixed A with axes parallel to J and a random p, we can bound the expec-
tation value of the I-volume of Fp(A). Let d be the smallest index not in J. Then
the expectation value of the (J + d)-volume of Fp(A) is at most 1/2Edvolume(A).
For every other I, the I-volume of Fp(A) is zero. Similarly, for each e in the range
1 
e 
d, the expectation value of the (J + d - e)-volume of Bp(A) is at most
(Ed/Ee)volume(A). 
Therefore, we can choose p so that the I-volume of Fp(A) and
the J-volume of Bp(A) obey estimates 1 and 2 above. This finishes the proof of step
1.
Step 2. Let C be a closed (k-l)-cycle in the rectangle R. Suppose that C has
J-volume Vj. Then C has a filling F whose I-volume obeys the following inequality.
If d is the smallest index in I, then WI < EdVI-d
First, compress C to the plane xl = 0, by filling vertically. The fillings have appro-
priately bounded volumes, (where 1 is the smallest member of I), and the compression
kills all J-volume of C when J contains 1, and leaves the rest of the J-volume unal-
tered. Then we proceed inductively, compressing the result to the sub-plane x2 = 0
again by filling vertically. The fillings have appropriately bounded volumes, (where
2 is the smallest member of I), and the compression kills all J-volume of C when J
contains 2. We continue to proceed in this way until we have compressed C into a
(k-l)-plane, which fills it. This finishes the proof of Step 2. 
]
As a special case of this proposition, we see that any rectilinear (k-l)-cycle of
volume V can be filled by a k-chain with volume less than Cmax(Ek, En-k+l)V
Since any fiat (k-l)-chain of volume V can be approximated by a rectilinear one with
volume less than CV, the same inequality holds for all (k-l)-cycles. This proves
proposition 7.3.1.
Now we have the geometrical tools to prove Theorem 7.1. Again let 3 be an exact
112


k-form with the given bounds. We define a linear functional L on rectilinear (k-1)-
cycles, where L(C) is defined to be the integral of P over any filling of C. Next we
define a norm on the rectilinear (k-1)-chains, which is equivalent to the flat norm, but
which has a particular directionally dependent form which reflects the inequality that
we want to prove. Our norm on a rectilinear (k-1)-chain C is equal to the infimum of
IC -
DIA + IDIB over all rectilinear chains D, in terms of norms IIA and lIB which
we have to define.
Write a rectilinear (k-1)-chain C in the form Ej Cj, where J varies over the (k-
1)-tuples of coordinates, and C is parallel to the corresponding (k-1)-plane. The
norm ICIA is defined to be Eaj volume(C). 
(The numbers a were defined in
the statement of this theorem.) Similarly, write a rectilinear k-chain D in the form
, DI, where I varies over the k-tuples of the coordinates, and DI is parallel to the
corresponding k-plane. Our norm DIB is defined to be 
b volume(DI). We have
to check that the functional L is bounded in terms of our variant of the flat norm.
Clearly if a cycle has a rectilinear filling D, then the integral of 3 over this filling is
at most E bI volume(DI). According to Lemma 7.1, if C is a rectilinear (k-1)-cycle,
then it admits a rectilinear filling D with volumes bounded as follows. If 1 is in I and
e is the smallest index not in I, then volume(DI) < C E'-' Ed volume(CId), and if
1 is not in I and d is the smallest index in I, then volume(DI) < CEd volume(CI_d).
The evaluation of /3 on this filling is bounded by E b, volume(DI), which is bounded
by C E aJ volume(C). 
Therefore, the linear functional L has norm less than C with
respect to our norm. By the Hahn-Banach theorem, L extends to a linear functional
on the space of all rectilinear chains with norm less than C.
Since our norm is equivalent to the standard flat norm, and since the rectilinear
chains are dense in the space of flat chains, this extension of L is a flat cochain.
By Whitney's theorem, it corresponds to a bounded measurable differential form a.
Because the integral of a over any rectilinear (k-1)-cycle is equal to the integral of
/p over a filling of that cycle, da = 
. As a member of the dual to the space of
rectilinear cochains, a has norm less than C using our norm. It follows from this
that the integral of a over a (k-1)-cube in the J-plane with side length s is less than
113

CaJsk -l. This inequality shows that the coefficients of the differential form a obey
the stated bounds.
7.5 
Lipshitz maps with large rational homotopy
invariants
In this section, we will construct Lipshitz maps from ellipsoids to wedges of spheres
with large values of certain rational homotopy invariants.
Theorem 7.2. Let X be a wedge of spheres Ski V ... V Skd+l, with each sphere of
dimension at least 2. Let n = -d + E ki. Let E be an n-dimensional ellipsoid with
principal axes E1 < ... < En, and suppose that E1 is greater than 1. Then there is a
map f from E to X with Lipshitz constant less than C so that the following holds. Let
ai be the pullback of the volume form of Sk by f.
Pal A ... A Pad A ad+l > (EnklEnk-k
2+2...Enkl--+ 
...- 
kd+d)(El ... En).
Also, certain other rational homotopy invariants of the map f vanish. In particular,
the integral fE Pal A ... A Pall A al A Q = O when the form 
= PQl A ... A PQr, is
made from the forms al+l, ..., ad+l using (d + 1 - 1) primitives, and if r is at least 2.
Proof. By induction, it suffices to prove this proposition for n-dimensional ellipsoids,
assuming that it holds for ellipsoids of dimension less than n.
Actually, we need to use a slightly different inductive hypothesis. If X is a wedge
of spheres, let X' denote the complement of the base point in X. If f is a map from E
to X, define the support of f to be the closure of f-1(X'). 
If E is an ellipsoid given by
the equation E/=O 
xi/E2 
-
1, then we call the regions of E where xn < -(9/10)En or
where x, > (9/10)En the tips of E. We will prove inductively that we can find a map
f supported away from the tips of E, and with the properties listed in the proposition.
By induction, we can assume that this is the case for ellipsoids of dimension less than
n.
114


We think of E as the double of a rectangle. We need to describe two open sets
U1 and U2 in E. We can write each set Ui as a product of the double of the rectangle
with dimensions E1 x ... x En-kl with an open region Ri properly contained in the
kl-dimensional rectangle with dimensions En-lk+l x ... x En. The region R1 is equal
to a central sub-rectangle given by the equations 1/4Ei < xi < 3/4Ei for each i from
(n-k+1) to n. The region R2 is equal to an "annulus" around R1. It is given by the
conditions 1/1OEi < xi < 9/10Ei for each i from (n-k+1) to n, and xi > 4/5Ei or
xi < 1/5Ei for one i between (n-k+l) and n. Clearly R 1 and R2 are disjoint.
Since E1 > 1, we can easily construct a compactly supported map fl from R1
to Sn- kl+l of degree En-kl+l...E, 
with Lipshitz constant less than C. We define the
restriction of f to U1 by projecting to R1 and then applying fi. This restriction has
Lipshitz constant less than C.
The region U1 is a thick neighborhood of an (n-k)-sphere S1, given by the product
of the double of E1 x ... x En-k with the central point of R1.
The region U2 is
bilipshitz to E' x S2, where E' is an (n -
k + 1) dimensional ellipsoid of principal
axes Eo < E1 < ... < En-kl+l minus its tips, and S2 is a (k1 - 1)-dimensional sphere
lying in the kl-plane given by the equations xl = ... = xn-_k = 0, and which wraps
around R1. In particular, the linking number of S1 and S2 is 1.
By induction, there is a compactly supported map f2 from E' to the wedge Sk
2 V
... V S kd+ which satisfies the conclusions of the proposition. In particular, the map
f2 has Lipshitz constant less than C, and the integral fE' Pa2 A ... A Pad A ad+l is
at least En-kl-k
2+2..En-kl-...-kd+d(El 
...En-kl+l). 
We define the restriction of f to
U2 by projecting from U2 to E' and then applying f2. This restriction is compactly
supported and has Lipshitz constant less than C.
Finally, we extend f to the part of E away from U1 and U2 by mapping to the base
point of X. The resulting map f has Lipshitz constant less than C and is supported
away from the tips of E. Since the spheres S1 and S2 have linking number 1, the
integral fE Pal A (Pa2 A ... A Pad A ad+l) is equal to the following expression.
(Ene-kl+l .. EnlEc 
E-kk2+ 
2 
.
. En 
...-
k- 
l...kd+d 
(. 
T rEn-kl 
)-
This expression reduces to En-kl+l ... En-kl-...-kd+d(El 
... En). Therefore, f obeys the
115

lower bound stated in the proposition.
It remains to prove that the other rational homotopy invariants stated in the
proposition vanish. We will also prove this by induction on the dimension. Recall
that ai is defined to be the pullback of the volume form of Ski to E by the map f.
Analogously, we can define a to be the pull-back of the volume form to E' by the
map f2.
The rational homotopy invariant which we have to deal with is fE Pal A ... A
Pal-1_ A al A Q.
First we deal with the case that 
is greater than 1. In this case, our integral is
equal to (fR al)(f 
Pa' A ... A Pa_1 A a' A Q'), where Q' has the same expression as 
but with each form ai replaced by a. By induction, the second integral is zero, and
we are done.
Next we deal with the case that 1 = 1. In this case, our integral is equal to
fE al A PQ1 A ... A Per. Each of the forms Qi has degree at least 2. Since r is at least
2, each of the forms Qi has degree at most n - kl. Again, let fQ be the form on E'
that has the same expression as Q, but with each form ai replaced by a'. Each of the
primitives inside of Qi and also each primitive Pi 
can be defined on E'. Therefore,
the form P
1 A ... A POr is the pullback of a compactly supported form on E' by
the projection from U2 to E'. In particular, this form is supported on U2, for an
appropriate choice of primitives. But the form al is supported on U1. Therefore, our
integral is equal to zero. 
E
7.6 Estimates for rational homotopy invariants
In this section, we apply the results of the previous two sections to prove our main
estimates for rational homotopy invariants of maps to bouquets of spheres. Using the
directionally dependent primitive estimate Theorem 7.1, we will get upper bounds for
rational homotopy invariants of k-contracting maps. On the other hand, we can use
Theorem 7.2 to produce Lipshitz maps with fairly large rational homotopy invariants.
For many invariants, but not all of them, we will prove that the invariant of a map
116

guaranteed by Theorem 7.2 is within a constant factor of the maximum value of that
invariant for any k-contracting map.
We will work mostly with non-repeating RH invariants - namely, those in which
a given form f*(ai) = ai appears no more than once.
Invariants of order 1
In this subsection, we consider invariants of order 1. We define X to be the bouquet
X = S ki V Sk2, where 2 < kl < k2 and n = kl + k2 - 1. Let f be a map from Sn to X,
and define ai to be the pullback of the volume form of Ski. There is only one rational
homotopy invariant of maps from Sn to X.
H(f) = fE PalAa2
Proposition 7.6.1. For any kl-contracting map f from En to X, the invariant H(f)
is less than CEn-kl+lEl...En. 
On the other hand, if E1 > C, then there is a 1-
contracting map from E to X with H(f) at least cEn-kl+lEl ...En.
Proof. Since f is kl-contracting, the norms of al and a2 are bounded by 1 pointwise.
According to Proposition 7.3.1, the norm of Pal is bounded by Cmax(En-_k+l, Ekj).
Since n = kl + k2-1, n-k
1 +1 is equal to k2 which is at least as large as kl. Therefore,
Pal is bounded by CEn-kl+l. It follows that H(f) is bounded by CEn-kl+lEl ...En.
On the other hand, if El is sufficiently large, then Theorem 7.2 constructs a 1-
contracting map f from E to Skl V S k2 with RH(f) greater than cEn-kl+lEl...En. n
By the same method, we can get an analogous estimate for the Hopf invariant.
Suppose that f is a 2k-contracting map from E 4 k- 1 to S2k.
By the same argument
we used above, Hopf(f) is at most CE2kEl ... E4k- 
Using Theorem 7.2, if El is
sufficiently big, we get a 1-contracting map from E to S2k V S2k with f Pal V a2
greater than cE 2kEl...E
4k-1. Composing this map with maps from S2k V S2k to S2k
of bidegree (1,0), (0,1), and (1,1), we get 1-contracting maps from E to Sk with Hopf
invariants f Pal Aal, f Pa2 Aa2, and f P(al + a2) A (al + a2). But a quick calculation
shows that f P(al + a2) A (al + a2) - f Pal A al - f Pa2 A a2 = 2 f Pal A a2 >
cE2kE1...E4k.- 1 Therefore, one of our three 1-contracting maps has Hopf invariant at
least cE2k E1...E4k-1l
117

Invariants of order 2
In this subsection we consider non-repeating invariants of order 2. We define X
to be the bouquet X = Ski V Sk2 V Sk3, with 2 < k1 < k2 < k3, and we define n to be
kl + k2 + k3 - 2.
The non-repeating RH invariants of order 2 for maps from Sn to X are a 2-
dimensional vector space spanned by the following two invariants.
Hi(f) = Pal A a2 A Pa3.
H2(f) = al A Pa2 A Pa3.
A general rational homotopy invariant in this vector space is given by a combination
clH1 + c2H2.
Proposition 7.6.2. If f is a kl-contracting map from E to X, then the rational
homotopy invariants of f obey the following bounds.
Hl(f) < CEn-kl+En-kl-k2+2El... 
En.
H2(f) < CEn-k2+1En-kl-k
2+2E1...En.
On the other hand, if E1 > C, then we will construct 1-contracting maps fi and f2
which show that these upper bounds are sharp.
Hl(f) 
> CEn-kl+lEn-kl-k2+2El... En-
H2 (f 2 ) > CEn-k 2+l En-kl -k2+2El... En 
Similar estimates hold for any combination clH1 + c2H2. For any kl-contracting
map f, this rational homotopy invariant obeys the following upper bounds.
(clHl + c2H2)(f) < C(IclIEnkl+l + Ic2jEn-k2+)En-kl-k2+2El...En-
On the other hand, if E1 > C, then we will construct a 1-contracting map f which
shows that this upper bound is sharp.
(cIlH + c2H2)(f) > C(IclEn-kl+l + c2lEn-k2+l)En-kl-k2+2E1...En.
Proof. If f is kl-contracting, then each form ai is bounded by 1 pointwise. If we
apply Proposition 7.3.1, we can get an upper bound for each primitive Pai. The
primitive Pal will be bounded by Cmax(Ek,, En-k+l), and Pa3 will be bounded by
118

Cmax(Ek 3, En-k 3 +l). In the first case, we can say that En-kl+l is larger than Ek,,
but in the second case, either Ek3 or En-k 3 +l could be larger depending on the choice
of the dimensions ki. In any case, Hl(f) is bounded by CEn-k,+lmax(Ek3, En-k+1l).
This estimate turns out not to be sharp.
To improve the estimate, we use the directionally dependent estimate Theorem
7.1 in place of Proposition 7.3.1. We write Pal as a sum fdx', 
where I varies over
the (kl - 1)-tuples of coordinates. Similarly, we write Pa3 as a sum gjdxJ , where J
varies over the (k3 - 1)-tuples of coordinates. Theorem 7.1 gives us upper bounds on
each function f, and gJ. For example, if I does not contain 1, and if d is the smallest
coordinate in I, then fr is less than CEd-l. If I does contain 1, and if e is the smallest
coordinate not in I, then f is less than CEe. Identical estimates hold for gJ.
Now we expand H1(f) as fE a2 A (I,J 
fxgJdx' A dxJ). The main point of this
exercise is that many of the terms dx A dx J vanish. The maximum of the norm
of fgJ over all pairs (I, J) is equal to the upper bound for Pal A Pa3 that we
got using Proposition 7.3.1. Because of the vanishing terms, however, the norm of
Pal A Pa3 is bounded by the maximum of the norm of fIg over all the disjoint pairs
(I, J). Given our bounds on f and gJ, it follows that this maximum is less than
CEn-kl+lEn-k-k
2 +2. Therefore, Hl(f) is bounded by CEn-k 1+lEn-kl-k
2
+2E 
... En
Applying the same analysis to Pa2 and Pa3, we see that H2(f) is bounded
by CE,-k 2+lEn-k-k
2
+2E1 
...En. Combining these bounds, we see immediately that
(clHl + c2H2)(f) is less than C(IcllEn-kl+lIc2lEn-k2+1)En-kl-k2+2El ...En We have
now established all the upper bounds in the proposition.
Next we have to construct maps with large rational homotopy invariants. From
now on, we can assume that E > C. Then we can construct 1-contracting maps
using Theorem 7.2, after a suitable reordering of the spheres in the target X.
The map f is the map given by Theorem 7.2 applied to X = Ski V Sk2 V Sk3.
According to Theorem 7.2, we have the following lower bound.
fE Pal A Pa2 A a3 > cEn-ki+lEn-k-k 2+2El ...En
We also know that fE al A Pa2 A Pa3 = O. Combining these equations, we see that
IHl(fil) > cEnk 1+lEn-k_-k 2+2E1...En. If necessary, we can precompose fi with a
119

reflection so that H1(fl) is positive.
The map f2 is the map given by Theorem 7.2 applied to X = Sk 2 A Ski A Sk3.
According to Proposition 7.5.1, we have the following lower bound.
fE Pa2 A Pal A a3 > cEn-k 2+lEn-kl-k
2
+2E1 
... En.
We also know that fE a2 A Pal A Pa3 = 0. Combining these equations, we see that
I H2(f 2) 
> cEn-k 2+lEn-kl-k2+2El ...En. If necessary, we can precompose f2 with a
reflection so that H2(f2) is positive.
So far, we have constructed the maps fl and f2 described in the proposition. We
still have to construct a map f which gives a large value to a more general rational
homotopy invariant (clH1 + c2H2). When we were discussing f, 
we noted that
according to Theorem 7.2, fE al A Pa2A Pa3 = 0. This equation means that H2(fl) =
0. Similarly, in discussing f2, we noted that fE a2 A Pal A Pa 3 = 0, which means that
Hi(f 2) equals zero. Therefore, we can estimate (clH1 + c2H2)(fi).
I (ClHi + C2H2)(fl)l > c[Cl En-kl+lEn-kl-k
2+2E1 ...En.
I(clHi + c2 H2)(f 2 ) > clc21En-k2+lEn-k-k2+2El ... En.
Therefore, either fl or f2 satisfies the lower bound for the value of (clH1 + c2H2). LO
At this point, I would like to give an example to put these results into some
perspective. Let's consider r13(S4 V S5 V S6) 0 Q, which is a 2-dimensional vector
space. The invariants H1 and H2 define coordinates on this vector space. Let Dk(E)
denote the subset of 7rl3(S4 V S5 V S6) which can be achieved by k-contracting from
an ellipsoid E. Let R(E) denote the rectangle in r13(S4 V S5 V S6) 0 Q given by the
following equations.
[Hlj < EloE6El...E 13.
IH21 < E9E 6E 1 ...E1 3.
We have proven that D4(E) is contained in CR. We have also proven that if E1 > C,
then the convex hull of D1(E) contains cR. Probably, with a little more work, we
could show that if E1 > C, then D1(E) actually contains cR. If this were true, then
we would know that cR C D1(E) c D2(E) c D3(E) c D4(E) c CR. Also, if
El > C, then D5(E) is clearly the whole homotopy group. In short, these techniques
give a fairly good picture of Dk(E) under the assumption that El > C. On the other
120
-

hand, if El << 1, then we still know that D4(E) is contained in CR, but I don't
know whether D4(E) is much smaller.
Invariants of order 3
In the next few pages, we will try to indicate how far these techniques can be
pushed. 
In the last subsection, we proved a pretty sharp estimate for each non-
repeating invariant of order 2. In this subsection, we will prove an analogous estimate
for each non-repeating invariant of order 3. The idea of the proof is the same, only the
algebra is more tedious. In the next subsection, I will explain why these techniques
do not give an analogous estimate for each non-repeating invariant of order 4.
We define X to be a bouquet of four spheres S k V ... V S k4, with 2 < kl < k2 <
k3 < k4, and we define n to be kl + k2 + k3 + k4 - 3. The space of non-repeating
rational homotopy invariants of maps from Sn to X is six-dimensional. If f is a map
from Sn to X, we define ai to be the pullback of the volume form of Ski. In terms of
these forms, we can write down a basis for the rational homotopy invariants.
Hl(f) = f Pal A Pa2 A a3 A Pa4.
H2(f) = f Pal A a2 A Pa3 A Pa4.
H3(f) = f al A Pa2 A Pa3 A Pa4.
H4(f) = f P(al A Pa2) A a3 A Pa4.
H5(f) = f P(al A Pa3) A a2 A Pa4.
H6(f) = f P(al A Pa4) A a2 A Pa 3.
A general rational homotopy invariant is given by a combination of these invariants
Z ciHi. We are going to prove a proposition which gives fairly sharp estimates for
any of these invariants provided that El > C. In order to state the estimates, we
need to make some definitions.
Z1 = En-kl +lEn-kl-k 2+2En-kl -k 2-k3+3
Z2 = En-kl+l En-kl-k3+2En-kl-k2-k3+3
Z3 = En-k2+lEn-k2-k3+2En-kl-k2-k3+3-
Z4 = En-k2+1En-k1-k 2+2En-kl-k2-k3+3-
Z5 = En-k3+lEn-k3-k,+2En-k -k2-k3+3-
Z6 = max(En-k 3+lEn-k3-k2 +2En-k -k2-k 3+3, En-k4+l En-k4-kl+2En-k
4 k -k2+3)-
121

Proposition 7.6.3. If f is a kl-contracting map from E to X, then the homotopy
invariant ( 
ciHi)(f) has norm less than Cl 
cilZiE...En. 
On the other hand, if
E1 > C, then there is a 1-contracting map from E to X with (- ciHi)(f) greater than
cE lciZEl ... En.
Proof. The first step is to give the upper bounds. We suppose that f is a kl-contracting
map from E to X, and we need to prove that Hi(f) < CZiE
1 ...En. This inequality
follows by repeatedly applying Theorem 7.1 to estimate each coefficient of each prim-
itive. Since the calculations are quite tedious, we will omit most of them. We include
the calculations for H6, which is the most difficult case.
Estimating f P(Pa4 A al) A Pa3 A a2
Let a = C adx I be a primitive of a4.
In this equation, I is a set of (k4 - 1)
numbers in the range 1...n. We define I+ to be the smallest number which in not in
I. We define I- to be one less than the smallest number in I. (If 1 is in I, I- then
E1- is defined to be zero.) According to Theorem 7.1, we can choose a to obey the
following inequalities.
1aII 
< C(EI + EI-). 
(1)
We define ,3 = E 3dx J to be a A al. In this equation, J is a set of (kl + Ik4 - 1)
numbers. We define J(1) to be the largest number in J, J(2) to be the second largest
number, and so on. The coefficients of P obey the following inequalities.
1,J < C 
I II
ICJ
< C(Emin(J+,k4) + EJ(k4-1)-l). 
(2)
Let y = 
-yKd x K be a primitive of 3. According to Theorem 7.1, we can choose
-y to obey the following bounds.
K-
ILYKI 
< C(EK+ KUK+I + E Ei KUi ). 
(3)
i=2
122

(Remark: We have left out the case i = 1 in the second term of the sum because it
occurs in the first term.)
Next we plug our bounds for , into this equation. The first term is controlled by
the following expression.
C(EK+ Emin((KuK+)+,k
4) + EK+ E(KUK+)(k
4-1)-1).
We can make one small simplification to this expression. We know that (KUK + )+
is greater than K+. If (KUK+)(k 4 - 1)- 1 is no more than K+, then the second term
is controlled by the first term. On the other hand, if (K U K+)(k4 - 1) - 1 is greater
than K+, then it is equal to K(k 4 - 1) - 1. Therefore, the first term of equation 3 is
bounded by the following expression.
C(EK+ Emin((KuK+)+,k4) + EK+ EK(k4-1)-1).
The second term of equation 3 is bounded by the following expression.
K-
C(I Ei (E(Kui)(k4-1)-1) + E(KUi)+ )
i=2
This expression simplifies considerably. Since i is at least 2, the term (K U i) + is
equal to 1, which is always less than the other term. Since i is less than any number in
K, (KUi)(k 4 -1) is equal to K(k4 - 1). Finally, the term Ei is always less than EK-.
Therefore, the second term of equation 3 is bounded by the following expression.
CEK- EK(k4-1)-1.
Assembling our bounds for the two terms of equation 3, we get the follow inequality
for y.
I[KI < C(EK+Emin((KuK+)+,k4) + EK+EK(k4-1)-1 + EK-EK(k 4_1)1). 
(4)
Next we let 6 = Z JLdxL be a primitive of a3.
In this equation, L is a set of
(k3 - 1) numbers. By Theorem 7.1, we can choose 
to obey the following bounds.
123

[sLI < C(EL+ + EL-).
The integrand P(Pa 4 A al) A Pa 3 A a2 is equal to y A 6 A a 2. Therefore, the norm
of the integrand is bounded by the norm of -y A 6.
1 A 61 < maxKLdisjointlKll 
LI.
Expanding equations 4 and 5, we can bound this expression as follows.
< maxKLdisjointC
(EK+Emin((KuK+)+k4)EL+ +
EK+Emin((KUK+)+,k
4) EL +
EK+ EK(k4-1)-1 EL+ +
EK+EK(k4-1)-1EL- +
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
EK- EK(k4-1)-1 EL+ +
EK- EK(k4-1)-1EL-).
(e)
(f)
Going term by term, we show that each monomial in the above expression is
bounded by Z6. We recall that Z6 is the maximum of En-k 3+1En-k3-k
2+2En-kj-k
2-k 3+3
and En-k4+1En-k 4 -kl+2En-k
4-kl-k
2+3. We also recall that K is a set of (k1 + k4 - 1)
numbers and L is a set of (k 3 -
1) numbers.
a. EK+Emin((KuK+)+,k
4) EL+
Only one of K and L includes 1. If K includes 1, then this term is no more than
Ek 4 +kl-lEk
4El. This expression is equal to En-k2-k
3+2En-k
2-k 3 -kl+3E1, 
which is less
124
(5)

than Z6. If L includes 1 and 2, then this term is no more than E1E2Ek3, which is less
than Z6. If L includes 1 but not 2, then this expression is less than E1Ek4Ek 3, which
is less than Z6.
b. EK+Emin((KuK+)+,k4)EL-
This term is no more than Ek,+k 4-lEk
4 E-k
3 +l. After reordering the terms, this
expression is equal to En-k 3 +lEn-k
2 -k3 +2En-k-k
2
-k
3 +3, which is no more than Z6.
c. EK+EK(k4-1)-1EL+
This term in no more than Ek+k 4 -1En-k 4+lEk 3 which is no more than Z6.
d. EK+ EK(k4-1)-1 EL-
If K+ is greater than kl, then K must include each number from 1 to kl. In this
case K(k 4 - 1) is equal to kl, and the term above is bounded by Ekl+k4-1Ek-lE-k
3+l,
which is less than Z6. If K + is not greater than K1, then this term is bounded by
Ek 1En-k 3+1En-k3-k 4+l, which is no more than Z6.
e. EK-EK(k4-1)-1EL+
This term is no more than En-k-k 4+2En-k4+lEk3. After reordering the terms, this
expression is equal to En-k4+1En-kC-k4+2En-k
1-k 2-k 4+3, which is no more than Z6.
f. EK-EK(k4-1)-1EL-
This term is no more than En-k 3+lEn-k 3-k4 +2En-k3-k4-kl+3 which is no more
than Z6.
Therefore, l-y A 61 is less than CZ6. Therefore, for our choice of primitives, the
integrand P(Pa4Aal)APa 3Aa 2 is less than CZ6 pointwise. It follows that the integral
H6(f) = fE P(Pa 4 A al) A Pa3 A a2 has norm less than CZ6volume(E). Therefore,
the invariant H6(f) has norm less than CZ6El...E. 
By analogous, somewhat easier,
calculations, it follows that 
Hi(f)l < CZiEl...En for each i.
Next we have to construct mappings which satisfy the lower bounds. We only
need to do this construction when E1 > C, which we assume from now on. The first
step is to construct maps fi which have large values of Hi. Again, we will use the
example of H6.
By applying Theorem 7.2 to X = Sk4 V S ki V Sk2 V Sk3, we get a
1-contracting map f from E to X with the following bound.
fE Pa 4 A Pal A Pa2 A a3 >
125

CEn-k4+1 En-k4-kl +2E - k4 - kl-k2 +3 E1 ... En.
We also know that fE Pa4 A a1 A Pa2 A Pa3 = 0. Using this equality, it follows that,
up to sign, the integral we just estimated is equal to fE Pa 4 A Pal A a2 A Pa3 , which
we call I2. We also know that fE a4 A Pal A P(a2 A Pa3) = 0. Using this equality,
it follows that up to sign, the integral I2 is equal to fE Pa 4 A a1 A P(a 2 A Pa3). Up
to sign, this integral is equal to fE P(al A Pa4) A a 2 A Pa3, which is the definition of
H6(f).
Similarly, if we apply Theorem 7.2 to X = Sk3 A Sk2 A Ski A Sk4, we get a 1-
contracting map f' with H6(f') > cE,-k 3+lEn-k 3-k2+lEn-kl-k-2-k
3+3E1...En. Taking
the better choice of f' and f, we get a 1-contracting map from E to X with H6 greater
than cZ6E1...En. By analogous arguments, we can define 1-contracting functions fi,
so that Hi(fi) > cZiEl...E,.
Finally, we will show that for any rational homotopy invariant H = (Z ciHi), one
of the functions fi gives a large value. This last part of the proof depends on the fact
that the monomials Zi are all different from each other. (The funny-looking basis Hi
was chosen to ensure that the Zi would be pairwise distinct.)
We consider the numbers cilZi. First we deal with the case that one of these
numbers is much larger than all of the others. Suppose for instance that Ic3[Z3 >
100(C/c)c i Zi for all the other values of i. In this case, H(f3 ) has a very large norm.
As we proved above, lc3H3(f3)l > cIc3 Z3E ...E,,. On the other hand, since f3 is a
k-contracting map, every other term IciHi(f3)J is less than ClcilZi E
1
...E, which is
less than (1/100)clc 3JZ 3El ...E,. Therefore, the other terms are not sufficiently large
to give any cancellation in the sum, and H(f 3 ) is sufficiently large to satisfy our
proposition.
Next we have to deal with the general case. It may happen that several of the
numbers cilZi are roughly the same size as one another. This does happen for special
ellipsoids, but it is rare in the space of all ellipsoids, because the monomials Zi are all
different. Therefore, we can always pick an ellipsoid E', with axes E > (1/C)Ei, for
which the numbers ci Zi are widely different from one another. By the previous case,
there is a map 1-contracting map f from E' to X with H(f) as large as we need. But
126

clearly there is a 1-contracting degree 1 map from E to E'. Composing these maps
proves our estimate. 
]
A difficult invariant of order 4
The methods in this section can be used to prove analogous estimates for many
invariants of all orders. When I first found them, I had hoped that they would allow
a sharp estimate for all rational homotopy invariants of kl-contracting maps provided
that E1 is sufficiently large. This hope has not been realized.
For example, consider the following fourth order rational homotopy invariant of
maps from Sn to a wedge of 5 spheres X = Ski V ... V S k5.
H(f) 
= 
P(Pa 
)APa5 
A al)P(Pa
4 A a 3) A a2
P(Pa 3 A a2) A Pa 4 A Pa 5 A al.
Suppose that k < k2 and that k2 = k3 =k4 = ks. For example, we could have
X = S2 V S3 V S3 V S3 V S3, and then H would give an invariant of maps from S1 0 to
X.
The invariant H(f) is a sum of two terms. Using techniques analogous to those
above, we can check that each term is bounded by a constant C times the following
expression.
En-kl4 +lEn-k4-k 5+2En-k 4-k4-k+3En-k
4-k 5-ki-k 2+4E1 ... En
The exact value of this expression is not so important. Let us refer to this expression
as P(E). When E1 > C, an argument using Theorem 7.2 shows that this upper bound
is sharp for each term. That is, Theorem 7.2 allows us to construct a 1-contracting
map fo so that each of the two terms in the integral defining H has norm at least
cP(E). It turns out that if we take the correct sign in the definition of H, then H(fo)
vanishes because the two terms cancel.
The following question then arises. Can we find a different kl-contracting map
for which H(f) is at least cP(E)? In other words, is there a cancellation between
the two terms of H whenever one of them is large, or did the cancellation occur only
because the map fo was poorly chosen?
127

In some cases, it is possible to rewrite a sum of two monomials as a different
monomial or sum of monomials. When that happens, one can prove in some cases
that the sum satisfies a more stringent upper bound than either term individually.
For example, consider the rational homotopy invariant for maps from an ellipsoid E
to a wedge of three spheres Ski A Sk2 A S k
3 (with kl < k2 < k3) given by fE Pal A
Pa 2 A a3 i fE Pal A a2 A Pa3s. If E1 > c, then each term in this sum can realize
a value at least CEn-k,+lEn-k-k
2+2EE1 
... En for some 1-contracting map f. With an
appropriate choice of sign, however, this sum is equal to fE al A Pa 2 A Pa3, which is
bounded by CEn-k 2+lEn-kl-k2+2E ...En for all k-contracting maps f.
This algebraic strategy does not work for the fourth-order rational homotopy
invariant defined above. I think that new geometric techniques will be needed to
settle this point.
It may be, however, that the geometrical techniques in this chapter do suffice
to give sharp estimates for a rational homotopy invariant H given by a monomial,
provided that E1 is sufficiently large. This question boils down to a combinatorial
problem that I don't know how to solve.
7.7 Application to the k-dilation of diffeomorphisms
In the previous section, we proved a large number of estimates of the following form.
(STAR) For some rational homotopy invariant H of maps from Sn to some wedge
of spheres X, of order d, we proved two bounds. The first bound says that if f is
any k-contracting map from an ellipsoid E to X, then H(f) is less than CP(E). The
second bound says that if E1 is at least C, then there is a 1-contracting map f from
E to X with H(f) greater than cP(E).
In the above equation, P(E) and k depend on H. The number k was just the
smallest degree of any form used to define H. The function P(E) is a function de-
pending on the principal axes of E, El, ...E,. In simple cases, P(E) is a monomial,
and in more complicated cases, P(E) is a maximum of a finite list of monomials. In
all cases, if we rescale E by a factor A, then P(E) rescales by a factor An+d.
128
_1_1_

Using these estimates, we can prove inequalities for the k-dilation of maps between
ellipsoids and maps between rectangles.
Proposition 7.7.1. Suppose that (STAR) holds for some triplet (H,k,P). Let f be any
k-contracting map from an ellipsoid E to an ellipsoid F. Then the following inequality
holds.
(degf)P(F) < CP(E).
Proof. At first, let us assume that F1 is at least C. By hypothesis, we can con-
struct a 1-contracting map g from F to a wedge of spheres X with H(g) greater
than cP(F). 
The composition g o f is a k-contracting map from E to X with
H(g o f) = (degf)H(g), which is greater than c(degf)P(F). 
On the other hand,
by hypothesis, any k-contracting map from E to X has H less than CP(E). There-
fore, c(degf)P(F) < CP(E). Rearranging the constants gives the equation we want
to prove.
Now we remove the assumption that F1 is sufficiently large. Let F' be a rescaling
of F by some very large factor A, and let E' be the rescaling of E by the same factor.
Then the rescaling of f is a k-contracting map f' from E' to F'. We can assume that
F is sufficiently large. By the preceding paragraph, we conclude that (degf)P(F') 
<
CP(E'). But P(F') = An+dP(F), and P(E') = An+dP(E). Substituting into our
last inequality, we get (degf)P(F)An +d < CP(E)An + d. Cancelling the factor of An+d
leaves the equation we want to prove. 
[
If we have a k-contracting diffeomorphism from a rectangle R to a rectangle S,
then we can get a map between ellipsoids in two simple ways. First, we can restrict the
diffeomorphism to the boundary of R. The restriction is a k-contracting degree 1 map
from the boundary of R to the boundary of S. The boundary of any n-dimensional
rectangle R is bilipshitz to the (n-1)-dimensional ellipsoid with principal axes R 1 <
... < R. 
Second, we can take the double of the diffeomorphism, which is a k-
contracting degree 1 map from the double of R to the double of S. The double of a
rectangle R is bilipshitz to the n-dimensional ellipsoid with principal axes E < R1 <
129

... < 
, for any number 
less than R 1. Therefore, using the estimates for rational
homotopy invariants in the last section and the proposition above, we can prove
inequalities for the k-dilation of diffeomorphisms between rectangles.
As far as I can see, the complete list of inequalities that can be proved in this way
is a combinatorial mess. I don't know how to write the list in closed form. Therefore,
let me instead record the inequalities that we can prove for small values of k and n.
We assume throughout that there is a k-contracting diffeomorphism from R to S.
The three-dimensional case
k=2
We get one inequality by looking at the double.
R1R2R3 > CS1S22S3-
The four-dimensional case
k=2
By looking at the boundary we get one inequality.
R2R32R 4 > cS2 S32S4.
By looking at the double, we get two more inequalities.
R1R 2R3R4 > CSlS2 S32S4.
R1R32RR
4 > CS 1S22S32S4.
k=3
We get no inequalities.
The five-dimensional case
k=2
By looking at the boundary, we get two inequalities.
R2R3R4R 5 > cS2S3S42S5.
R2R32R42R
5 > CS2S32S42S
5.
By looking at the double we get four more inequalities.
R 1R2R2R4R 5 > cSlS2S32S4S 5.
R1R2R3R4R 5 > cS1S2S3S42S5.
R 1R2R3R4R 5 > CS1S2SS42S5.
R 1R2RRR2 
CS2S2S2
5
RR2R~4R5 > CSlS2S34S5.
130
__

k=3
By looking at the double we get one inequality.
R1R2 R2R 4R5 > cS1S2S32S4S5 .
k=4
We get no inequalities.
Some of the inequalities listed above follow from the inequalities in Chapter 3,
especially when n is small. For large n, however, I have no other proof for most of the
inequalities in the list. When k is greater than (n + 1)/2, then this method does not
yield any inequalities. On the other hand, when n is large and k is small, this method
yields a very long list of inequalities. As an example, we record the inequalities that
we get by considering the boundary of R when n is 8 and k is 2. The resulting list
has twelve different inequalities. As far as I can see, none of these inequalities can be
deduced from those we have proven in earlier chapters together with the other eleven.
They show that the 2-dilation of any diffeomorphism from R to S is at least a small
constant times any of the following twelve expressions in Qi = Si/R.
(Q2Q3Q4Q5Q6Q7Qs 
)2/8
(Q2Q3Q4Q5Q6Q7Q)2/ 8
(Q2Q3Q4Q5Q6Q7Qs8) 2/8
(Q2Q3Q4Q5QQQs8)2/9
(Q2Q3Q4QQ6Qs7Q8)2 / 9
(Q2Q3Q4QQ2QQ8)2/9
(Q2Q3Q4Q5Q6Q7Qs8)2
Q2 
2/ 
9
(Q2Q3Q4Q5Q6Q7Qs)2 1
Q2Q2 
2 
2/9o
(Q2Q3Q4QsQ6Q7Q8) 21 10
( Q2Q3Q4 Q5 
s 
6 7Q8 )2/
(232 Q2Q2 )02/ 
1
(Q2Q3 4 sQ6Q7Q8)
131

7.8 
The Hopf invariant of k-contracting maps be-
tween ellipsoids
In this chapter so far, we have given estimates for the Hopf invariant of a k-contracting
map from an ellipsoid E to the unit sphere, as well as for more complicate rational ho-
motopy invariants. In this section, we will give some estimates for the Hopf invariant
of a k-contracting map between ellipsoids. For k-contracting maps from E3 to F2, we
are able to give a good estimate for either k = 1 or k = 2. (In an appropriate sense,
this estimate is sharp up to a constant factor.) For maps from E 7 to F4, the problem
looks quite difficult, but we will give several upper bounds for the Hopf invariant of
k-contracting maps.
Maps from S3 to S2
For 2-contracting maps from a 3-dimensional ellipsoid E to a 2-dimensional ellip-
soid F, the methods above give the following estimate.
(Hopff)F2F22 < CE1E2E 3.
Proof. First, notice that the problem is invariant if we rescale both E and F by the
same factor. Therefore, we can assume that F1 is much bigger than 1, which allows us
to find a 1-contracting map g from F to the unit 2-sphere with degree roughly F1F2.
The Hopf invariant of g o f is equal to (Hopff)F2F22. On the other hand, according
to the results in section 6, any 2-contracting map from E to the unit 2-sphere has
Hopf invariant less than CE1E2E3.
El
This inequality is not sharp for all pairs of ellipsoids. If E1E2 is much smaller
than F1F2, then any 2-contracting map from E to F has Hopf invariant zero. This
result follows from the following lemma, which was worked out jointly with Daniel
Biss.
Lemma 7.2. Let f be a map from S3 to S2.
We can view f as a family of pointed
maps from S2 to S2, parameterized by the unit circle, with the base point of the unit
132

circle corresponding to the constant map. If every map in the family is not surjective,
then f is null-homotopic.
Proof. For some large number n, we can choose points Yi in S2 so that Yi is not in the
range of fe for 2r(i - 2)/n < 
< 2r(i + 2)n. (The index i varies from 1 to n, and the
values of 0 are taken modulo 2r.) At each value 2ri/n, we cut open the circle and
insert an additional segment. Along the additional segment inserted at 27ri/n, the
family of mappings contracts the to the basepoint while avoiding yi, and then expands
to its original value again avoiding Yi. The resulting family defines a new map which
is homotopic to f. After reparamaterizing the circle, we can assume that f2,i/n is the
constant map for each i, and that the region 27ri/n < 
< 27r(i + 1)/n in the original
parametrization is mapped into the same region in the new parametrization. Since
f2,i,/n is the constant map, we can define fi to be map from S3 to S2 corresponding
to the family fe as 0 varies from 2ri/n to 27r(i + 1)/n. The map f is homotopic to
the sum of the homotopy classes of fi. But each fi is homotopic to the suspension of
a map in 7r2(S1 ) and hence null-homotopic. 
O
Now suppose that f is a 2-contracting map from E to F and that E1E2 < cF1F2.
The ellipsoid E is swept out by 2-spheres So with area less than CE1E2. We consider
a 2-contracting map f from E to F as a family of maps fo parameterized by S1, each
map going from a set Se C E to F. Since each S has area less than CE1E2, and
F1F2 > CE1E2, each map fo is not surjective. Applying the above lemma, it follows
that f is null-homotopic.
Now we have enough tools to estimate the Hopf invariant of 2-contracting maps.
Proposition 7.8.1. Let f be a 2-contracting map from E to F. If F1F2 > CE1 E2,
then Hopf(f) is zero. In any case, the Hopf invariant of f has norm less than
CE1E22E3/(F2F22). On the other hand, if F1F2 < cE1 E2, then we will construct
a 2-contracting map f with Hopf invariant greater than cE1E22E
3/(F2F2).
Proof. The two upper bounds were proven above. It remains only to do the construc-
tion. The ellipsoid E contains two thick linked tubes, one bilipshitz to [0, El] x [0, E2] x
133

S1(E3 ), and the other bilipshitz to [0, E2] x [0, E3] x S1(E1 ). Since EiE 2 > CF1F2,
we can construct an area-contracting map from [0, El] x [0, E2] to F with degree on
the order of (ElE 2)/(F1F2 ). Similarly, we can construct an area-contracting map
from [0, E2] x [0, E3] to F with degree on the order of (E2E3)/(FF 2). Taking the
Pontryagin-Thom collapses of either map or of both maps, we get three different
area-contracting maps from E to F. One of these maps has Hopf invariant at least
c(E E22E
3) / (F12 
F22). 
Proposition 7.8.2. Let f be a 1-contracting map from E to F. If F1 > CE1 or
F2 > CE2, then the Hopf invariant of f is zero. In any case, the Hopf invariant
of f has norm less than CE1E22E3/(F2F22). On the other hand, if F1 < cE1 and
F2 < cE2, then we will construct a 1-contracting map f with Hopf invariant greater
than cE1E E3/(F~ F2).
Proof. The ellipsoid E admits a map to the disk with fibers of diameter less than
4El. Every ball in F of radius less than (1/2)Fl is convex. According to a theorem
of Gromov from [14], if 4E1 is smaller than (1/2)F 1, then any contracting map from
E to F factors through the map from E to the disk and is null-homotopic.
The ellipsoid E is swept out by 2-spheres S with diameter less than CE 2.
If
F2 > CE 2, then each map fo from So to F is not surjective, because the diameter of
F is on the order of F2. By the above lemma, f is null-homotopic.
For the final estimate, we embed in E, an ellipsoid minus its tip with principal
axes El, E2, cross S1, linked with a rectangle E2 x E3 crossed with an S1. The two
S1's are linked once. Because E1 > CF1 and E2 > CF2, we get a map from the
tipless ellipsoid to F of degree E1E 2/F1F2 . Similarly, since E2 > CF2, we easily get
a map from the rectangle E2 x E3 to F with degree E2E3/F1 F2. Using these maps
as in the proof of the last proposition, we get a 1-contracting map from E to F with
Hopf invariant at least c(E1E22E3)/(F2F2). 
O
Maps from S 7 to S4
The last two propositions give a pretty good accounting of the Hopf invariant for
1-contracting or 2-contracting maps from S3 to S2. My knowledge of the situation
134
-1_1_----_-·-------.-I

for maps from S7 to S4 is much less complete, but we can still prove some estimates.
Proposition 7.8.3. If f is a 4-contracting map from E7 to F4 , then
(Hopff)F2F2F32F42 < CE1 E 2E3E42E5E 6E7.
Iff is a 2-contracting map from E7 to F4 , then we can prove two additional, rather
strange-looking, inequalities.
(Hopff) F F4F42 < CE1E23E4 EE
6E7.
(Hopff)FF4FF 
< CEjEEE2E2 E2 EE7.
Proof. As usual, we can assume that F1 is large because the problem is scale invariant.
There is a 1-contracting map g from F to the unit sphere with degree on the order
of F1F2F3F4. The Hopf invariant of g o f is at least cHopf(f)F2F22F32F42. But since
g o f is a 4-contracting map, according to Proposition 7.6.1, it has Hopf invariant at
most CElE2E3E42E5E6E7. This proves the first inequality.
By Theorem 7.2, we can construct a 1-contracting map g from F to X = S2 V S3
with fF Pa 3 A a2 greater than cF1F2F32F
4.
Now the map g o f from E to X is a
2-contracting map with 
E P(Pa 3 A a2) A Pa3 A a2 greater than c(Hopff) (F1F2F2F4)2.
Applying Proposition 7.6.3 to estimate this integral over E, we get the second in-
equality above.
Similarly, we can construct a 1-contracting map g from F to X = S2 V S2 V S2 with
fF Pa2,1APa 2, 2Aa 2, 3 greater than cF1F2F32F
4. The composition gof is a 2-contracting
map from E to X with fE P(Pa 2,1 A Pa2,2 A a2,3) A (Pa2,1 A Pa2, 2 A a2,3) greater than
c(Hopff)(FFF32F4)
2. Using Proposition 7.4.1 to estimate the directional norms of
the primitives, we get the third inequality above. 
O
I suspect that these inequalities are far from all the upper bounds that exist on
the Hopf invariant of k-contracting maps from E7 to F4. It would be interesting to
know whether there are 4-contracting maps from E to F with non-vanishing Hopf
invariant even when E1E2E3E4 is much smaller than F1F2F3F4.
135

7.9 
Homotopically non-trivial maps with small k-
dilation
So far in this chapter, we have given bounds for the rational homotopy invariants of
maps with small k-dilation. It is natural to ask whether we can also bound the torsion
homotopy invariants of maps with small k-dilation. Gromov proved that maps with
sufficiently small 2-dilation are null-homotopic.
Theorem. (Gromov) Let M and N be compact simply connected Riemannian mani-
folds. There is a positive constant e, depending on M and N, so that every map from
M to N with 2-dilation less than e is null-homotopic.
A sketch of the proof appears on pages 229-230 of [10]. (For more information, see
appendix B.)
We will show in this section that small 3-dilation has a much weaker effect on
homotopy type. For example, we will construct maps from S4 to S3, homotopic to
the suspension of the Hopf fibration, with arbitrarily small 3-dilation. More generally,
we will construct maps homotopic to high order suspensions with small k-dilation.
Proposition 7.9.1. Fix a homotopy class a in m7r(S
n) and then consider its p-fold
suspension Ypa in rm+p(Sn+P). If k is any integer greater than n + (n/m)p, then
there are maps from Sm+p to Sn+p in the homotopy class SPa, with arbitrarily small
k-dilation.
Proof. Inside of the unit sphere, we can quasi-isometrically embed a rectangle R
with dimensions [0, E]m x [0, e-m/P]p. Let f be a map in the homotopy class a from
[0, ]m to the unit n-sphere (taking the boundary of the n-cube to the base point
of Sn). We can assume that the map f is Lipshitz with some Lipshitz constant L.
Now we construct a map F from R to Sn x SP. The map F is simply a direct
product of a map F from [0, ]m to Sn and a map F2 from [0, E-m/P]p to SP. The
map F1 is just a dilation from [0, E]m to the unit cube, composed with the map f.
The map F2 is a rescaling from [0, e-m/P] to [0, 1]P, followed by a standard degree
1 map from the p-cube to the p-sphere, taking the boundary of the cube to the
136

basepoint. The k-dilation of F is (LE-l)n(em/p)k-n. 
Expanding this expression gives
Ln-n+(m/p)k-(m/p)n. 
The important part of the expression is the power of , which is
equal to (m/p)(k - n - (n/m)p). We have assumed that k is greater than n + (n/m)p,
and so the exponent of e is positive. For e sufficiently small, the k-dilation of F is
arbitrarily small. The map F takes the boundary of R to Sn V SP. We compose F
with a smash map, which is a degree 1 map from Sn x SP to 
n+p, taking Sn V SP
to the base point. The result is a k-contracting map from R to Sn+p which takes
the boundary of R to the basepoint. We can easily extend this map to all of Sm +P
by mapping the complement of R to the basepoint of Sn+P.
The resulting map is
homotopic to EP(a). 
O
For example, this proposition shows that the suspension of the Hopf map in 7r4(S 3)
can be realized by maps with arbitrarily small 3-dilation. In this case, we are con-
sidering a 1-fold suspension of a map from S3 to S2. Therefore p = 1, m = 3, and
n = 2. Since 3 > 2 + (2/3)1, the result follows.
Using some fairly deep results in algebraic topology, we will show that many non-
trivial homotopy classes can be realized with arbitrarily small 3-dilation.
Theorem 7.3. For every N, there are infinitely many M so that there are homotopi-
cally non-trivial maps from SM to SN with arbitrarily small 3-dilation.
Proof. If a is a homotopy class in rm(S 2), then the p-fold suspension SPa can be
realized with arbitrarily small 3-dilation when 3 > (2/m)p + 2, that is when p < m/2.
In order to prove Theorem 7.3, we have to find classes a so that EPa is not zero. In
fact, there are infinitely many such classes. I would like to thank Haynes Miller, who
helped me to find the relevant theorems in the literature.
When i = 8j+1, the homotopy group 7ri(SO) is equal to Z2. The J homomorphism
maps 7ri(SO) to the stable i-stem of the homotopy groups of spheres. When i = 8j+ 1,
the map J is injective, and its image is a copy of Z2. This image contains a non-trivial
element in 7ri+n(Sn), for large n. It turns out that this non-trivial element is the
suspension of a class in 7ri+2(S2). This statement is made clearly in the introduction
to the paper [6], and the proof appears in the older paper [5]. For each i = 8j + 1, let
137

ai be a homotopy class in ri+2(S2) whose suspension is the non-trivial element in the
image J(7ri(SO)). In particular, the p-fold suspension EPai is non-trivial for every p
and every i.
Fix a number N > 2. For each i = 8j + 1 greater than 2N - 6, the class EN-2 ai
in ri+N(SN) can be realized by maps with arbitrarily small 3-dilation. All of these
homotopy classes are non-trivial. 
[
It would be interesting to know whether the 3-dilation controls any torsion homo-
topy invariants. For example, the 100-fold suspension of the Hopf map is a non-trivial
element in r103(S102). According to the above proposition, it can be realized by maps
with arbitrarily small 69-dilation. It would be interesting to know whether it can be
realized by maps with arbitrarily small 3-dilation.
138
I

Chapter 8
Partial Results On 2-Contracting
Diffeomorphisms Between
4-Dimensional Rectangles
In Chapter 2, we estimated the smallest (n-1)-dilation of all diffeomorphisms between
n-dimensional rectangles R and S, up to a constant factor. The next simplest case
is to consider the 2-dilation of diffeomorphisms between 4-dimensional rectangles. In
this case, I am not able to give a complete solution. In this chapter, we will give
some partial results. In the first part we prove some lower bounds for the 2-dilation.
In the second part, we construct a variety of non-linear diffeomorphisms with small
2-dilation, generalizing the snake map.
These partial results show that the case of 2-contracting diffeomorphisms between
4-dimensional rectangles is more complicated in some ways than the case of (n-1)-
contracting maps. We'll say more about this point at the end of the chapter. Also,
the partial results allow us to solve the problem in the special case that R is a cube.
Theorem 8.1. If there is a 2-contracting diffeomorphism from the unit 4-cube to S
then S2S3S42 < C. On the other hand, if S2S3S42 < c, then there is a 2-contracting
diffeomorphism from the unit 4-cube to S.
139

8.1 
Lower bounds for the 2-dilation
A. Embedding inequalities
A 2-contracting diffeomorphism from R to S is a special case of a 2-expanding
embedding of S into R. We solved the k-expanding embedding problem in Chapter
6. In particular, there is a 2-expanding embedding of S into R roughly if and only if
the following inequalities hold.
A1.R 1R 2 > S1S2.
A2.R 1R2R3 > S1S2S3.
A3.R2R 2R3 > S2S2S3.
A4.R 1R2R3R4 > S1S2S3S4.
A5.R13R 2R 3R 4 > S1S2S3S4.
B. Boundary inequalities
A 2-contracting diffeomorphism from R to S restricts to a 2-contracting diffeo-
morphism from the boundary of R to the boundary of S. These two boundaries are
bilipshitz to ellipsoids. We will now solve the problem of deciding whether there is a
2-contracting diffeomorphism between two ellipsoids up to a constant factor.
Proposition 8.1.1. Let E be the ellipsoid with principal axes R1 < R2 < R3 < R4,
and let F be the ellipsoid with principal axes S1 < S2 < S3 < S4.
There is a 2-
contracting diffeomorphism from E to F approximately if and only if the following
inequalities hold.
B1. R2R 3 > S 2S 3.
B2. R2R3R 4 > S22S3S4.
Ba. If R > S2S3, then R2R3R4 > S2/2S33/2S
4.
B3b. If R 2 < S2S3, then R3R4 > S3S4.
Proof. Inequalities B1 and B2 are quite similar to results we have proven about 3-
dimensional rectangles.
The 2-width of the ellipsoid E is roughly R2R3. It is not any bigger, because the
function 
4 has level sets with volume less than CR 2 R 3. It is not smaller, because
140

it contains a set quasi-isometric to the rectangle R2 x R3 x R4 which has 2-width
greater than cR2R3. If there is a 2-contracting diffeomorphism from E to F, then the
2-width of E is at least as big as the 2-width of F. This proves inequality B1.
The ellipsoid F contains N disjoint subsets each quasi-isometric to a cube with
side length S2, where N is at least cS3S4/S22. The inverse image of each of these
subsets in E has 2-width at least cS2. According to the width-volume inequality for
subsets of ellipsoids, the volume of each of these inverse images is at least cR2- S24. (In
Chapter 3 we proved a width-volume inequality for subsets of rectangles. In section
5.1, we used a simple trick to show that the same inequality holds for subsets of
ellipsoids.) It follows that the total volume of the inverse images of all the cubes is
at least cR- 1S2S 3S4. Since these inverse images are disjoint subsets of E, their total
volume is bounded by CR2R3R4. This proves inequality B2.
The ellipsoid F also contains a subset quasi-isometric to the product of a rectangle
with dimensions S3 x S4 with a circle of length S2. We are going to estimate the volume
of the inverse image of this set. We view the set as a family of circles. The transverse
area to this family of circles increases under inverse image, since our diffeomorphism
is 2-contracting.
We will use the isoperimetric inequality to estimate the length of the inverse image
of each circle. We restrict our attention to the circles which go through the central
sub-rectangle of S3 x S4 with dimensions 1/3S3 x 1/3S4. Each of these circles has
filling area greater than cS2S3. Therefore, the inverse image of each circle in E has
filling area greater than cS2S3 .
We will estimate the length of the inverse image using the isoperimetric inequality
in E. If c is a curve in E of length L < cR2, then it sits inside of a ball that is
bilipshitz to Euclidean. Therefore it has filling area less than CL2. If R' > S2S3,
then the inverse image of each circle has filling area greater than c(S 2S3). Therefore
the inverse image of each circle must have length at least c(S 2S3 )1/ 2.
Since the
transverse area measure increases, the inverse image of our solid torus has volume at
least CS /2S3/2S4. Since this inverse image is a subset of E, its volume is bounded by
CR 2R3R4. This proves inequality B3a.
141

On the other hand, if R2 < S2S3, then the inverse image of each circle must have
length at least cR2. As we saw above, if the length is less than cR2, then the filling
area is less than CL2 < R2 < S2S3. Therefore, the inverse image of the solid torus
must have volume at least cR2S3S4.
Since this inverse image is a subset of U, it
follows that R3R4 > cS3S4. This proves inequality B3b.
This concludes the proof of the necessity of inequalities B1, B2, and B3. Next,
if these inequalities hold, we construct a diffeomorphism from E to F with 2-dilation
bounded by C.
Case a. 
> S2S3.
Let G be the ellipsoid with principal axes ((SS23)1/2, (S2S3)1/2, S2 1/2S3/24). 
There
is a diffeomorphism from G to F with 2-dilation less than C. Removing a line from G
and expanding the metric we get the rectangle with dimensions S21/2S31/2 X S21/2S31/
2 X
S-1/23/2S4. 
The volume of this rectangle is S5/2533/254. By inequality 3A., this is
less than the volume of E. Also, by the assumption R22 > S2S3, the rectangle is thin
compared to E, and it admits an expanding embedding into E. The inverse map of
this embedding is a 2-contracting diffeomorphism from a subset of E to the comple-
ment of a line in G. We extend this diffeomorphism by mapping the rest of E to (a
tiny neighborhood of) this line. Since the line is 1-dimensional, this map can be made
2-contracting.
Case b. R2 < S2S3.
In this case, we have the following three inequalities: R2R3 > S2S3, 22R3R4 >
S2S 3S4, and R3R4 > S3S4. According to Theorem 2.1, there is a diffeomorphism
from the rectangle R2 x R3 x R4 to the rectangles S2 x S3 x S4 with 2-dilation less
than C. The double of this diffeomorphism is a diffeomorphism from E to F, with
2-dilation less than C. 
O
Finally, we notice that inequality B3 gives the upper bound that we need for
Theorem 8.1. Suppose that there is a 2-contracting diffeomorphism from the unit
cube to S. We know from inequality B1 that 1 > cS2S3. Therefore, when we apply
inequality B3, we are in the first case. The inequality tells us that 1 > cS21/2S33/2S
4.
Therefore, S 2S3542 < C.
142

C. Other inequalities
In Chapter 7, using rational homotopy invariants, we proved two more inequalities
about 2-contracting diffeomorphisms. If there is a 2-contracting diffeomorphism from
R to S, then we proved that R1R2 R2R4 > cS1S2S32S4, and R1R2R2R4 > cSlS2 
S4.
The second of these inequalities follows from the inequalities in parts A. and B., but
the inequality R 1R2R2R4 > cS1S2S32S4 does not.
The proof of this last inequality is based on the linear isoperimetric inequality. We
might expect to get sharper information by using the exact isoperimetric inequality,
and not only its linearization. Inequality B3 above follows from this line of thinking.
Ideally, I would like to know the isoperimetric profile function Ik(A) which is defined
to be the largest filling (k+1)-volume of any relative k-cycle in the rectangle R. (There
are a number of variations of this function: one can study real cycles or integral cycles,
oriented cycles or non-oriented cycles, relative cycles or absolute cycles, and so on.)
While I am not able to compute this function, even up to a constant factor, we will
prove an isoperimetric estimate that gives some more information than the linear
isoperimetric inequality from Chapter 7.
Proposition 8.1.2. Let C be an oriented relative 2-cycle in the rectangle R with area
less than (1/2)R1 R2. Then C has an oriented filling with volume less than CR1R22.
Proof. We are going to construct this filling C by the same method that we used in
Chapter 7. First we approximate C by a rectilinear cycle C'. (Recall that a rectilinear
cycle is made up of polyhedra each of which is a rectangle parallel to the coordinate
axes.) If C' is sufficiently close, we can construct a 3-chain with boundary C - C'
and with arbitrarily small volume. Therefore, it suffices to find a filling of C' with
volume less than CR1R. 
If the approximation is sufficiently close, we can assume
that the projection of C' to the (l 1, x2)-plane has area at most (2/3)R1R2.
Now we consider the filling Fp(C') defined in section 7.4. For a random point
p, the average volume of this filling is less than C area(C')R3 , which is less than
CR 1R 2R3. Now let S be the subset of [0, R1] x [0, R2] disjoint from the projection of
C'. Because the area of C is less than (1/2)R 1R 2, we can assume that the area of S is
143

at least (1/3)R 1R 2. For a random point p in S x [0, R3], the average volume of Fp(C')
is less than C area(C')R 2. In particular, we can choose p so that the volume of Fp(C')
is less than CR 1R. (The reason for this better estimate is as follows. The definition
of Fp(A) for a 2-face A in C' depends on whether (P1,P2) lies in the projection of A
onto [0, R1] x [0, R2]. If it does, the volume of Fp(A) can be very large, and if we
know it doesn't, we get a better estimate for the volume of Fp(A).) 
O
Using this isoperimetric inequality, we can prove another estimate about the 2-
dilation of diffeomorphisms.
Proposition 8.1.3. Suppose there is a 2-contracting diffeomorphism from R to S. If
CR1R2 < S1S2S3, then R3R4 > cS3S4.
Proof. For each pair (y3, y4) in [0, S3] x [0, S4], we consider the plane [0, SI] x [0, S2] x
{y3} x {y4}. This plane is a relative 2-cycle in S. If we choose (y3, y4) in the central
sub-rectangle [(1/3)S3, (2/3)S3] x [(1/3)S4, (2/3)S4], then the filling volume of this
cycle is at least cS1S2S3.
We consider the inverse image of one of these 2-cycles in R. It must also have
filling volume at least cS1S 2S3, which is greater than CR1R 2. According to the last
proposition, the 2-cycle itself must therefore have area at least cRlR 2.
Let U be the inverse image of [0, S1] x [0, S2] x [(1/3)S3, (2/3)S3] x [(1/3)S4, (2/3)S4].
This set is fibered by the inverse image of the 2-cycles above, each of which has area
at least cR1R2. The area transverse to these fibers in U is larger than in the cor-
responding region of S, because our diffeomorphism is 2-contracting. Therefore, the
volume of U is at least c(RIR 2 )(S3S 4 ). Since U is a subset of R, its volume is less
than R1R2R3R4. Therefore, R3R4 > cS3S4.
El
8.2 
Variations of the snake map
In this section, we will describe five non-linear maps between 4-dimensional rectangles,
generalizing the snake map in various ways. Each map takes the boundary of the
domain to the boundary of the range, has degree 1, and has 2-dilation less than C. By
144

slightly perturbing them, it is possible to construct diffeomorphisms with 2-dilation
less than C.
1. Snake Map
This degree 1 map takes
R1 x R 2 x R3 x R 4
onto
R1 x R2 x 
-1R3 x AR 4.
The constant A is allowed to take any value between 1 and R3/R 2.
Construction:
Let I be a quasi-isometric embedding of A-1R3 x AR4 into R3 x R4. Let the set
U C R be the union of {O} x {O} x R3 x R4 with R1 x R 2 x image(I).
Step 1. There is a Lipshitz retraction of R onto U. (This uses the fact that
R2 < A-1R 3 .)
Step 2. There is a 2-contracting retraction of U onto R1 x R2 x image(I).
Step 3. There is a quasi-isometric diffeomorphism from R1 x R2 x image(I) onto
R1 x R 2 x A-1R3 x AR4.
2. Codimension 1 Snake Map
This degree 1 map takes
R1 x R 2 x R3 x R4
onto
R1 x A-1R2 x AR3 x A-1R4 .
The constant A is allowed to take any value which is bigger than 1, smaller than
(R4/R3)1/ 2, and smaller than (R 2/R 1).
Construction:
In section 2.1, we constructed a snake map S, which gives a 2-contracting dif-
feomorphism from R 1 x R2 x R3 to R1 x A-1R2 x AR3.
(The constant A must be
at least 1 and at most R 2/R1, which we have already assumed.) The Lipshitz con-
stant of S is at most A. Therefore, the map F(xl, x2, x3, X4) = (S(X1, x 2, x3), A-1x4)
is also 2-contracting. The map F is a diffeomorphism from R1 x R2 x R3 x R4 to
R1 x A-IR2 x AR3 x A-1R4.
145

3. A map that stretches the short side of the domain
This degree 1 map takes
R1 x R2 x R3 X R4
onto
AR1 x A-3R 2 x AR3 x -1R4.
The constant A is allowed to take any value which is at least 1, smaller than
(R2/R 1)1/4, and smaller than (R4/R 3)1 /2 .
Construction:
Let I be a quasi-isometric embedding of A-2R 2 x A2R 3 x R4 into R2 x R3 x R4.
Let U be the union of R1 x image(I) with {O} x R2 x R3 x R4.
Step 1. There is a Lipshitz retraction of R onto U.
Step 2. There is a retraction of U onto R1 x image(I), which has 2-dilation
bounded by A2. Moreover, at any point of U, either this map is 2-contracting, or else
the derivative of the retraction maps into the 3-plane spanned by a0/x
2, 0/9x3, and
O/3x4.
Step 3. There is a quasi-isometric mapping from R1 x image(I) to R1 x A-2R 2 x
A2R 3 x R4, which preserves the coordinate xl.
Step 4. Compose with the linear map from R1 x A-2R2 x A2R3 x R 4 to AR1 x
A-3R2 x AR3 x A-1R 4. This linear map is 2-contracting. Moreover, its restriction to
the 3-plane xl = 0 has 2-dilation A-2. Therefore, the composition of all four maps is
2-contracting.
Technical remark: If we take I to be a quasi-isometric embedding of A-2R 2 x
AR3 x AR4 into R2 x R 3 x R4, then the same argument gives us a map from R to
AR1 x A-3R2 x R3 
R4. By an argument interpolating between these cases, we get
a map to AR1 x A-3R2 x A x B, where A4 < (R2/R1), R3 < A < (R3R4)1/2 and
R3R4 = AB.
4. Pinching Map
This degree 1 map takes
R1 x R2 x R 3 x R4
onto
146
-
---
 
I

AxAxAxB,
for any numbers A and B satisfying the following conditions.
1. R 1 >A.
2. R2R3R4 > A2B.
Construction:
Let I be a quasi-isometric embedding of A x A x B into R2 x R3 x R4.
The
conditions above guarantee that such an embedding exists.
Let U be the union of A x image(I) with {O} x R2 x R 3 x R 4.
Step 1. There is a Lipshitz retraction of R onto U.
Step 2. There is a retraction of U onto A x image(I). This retraction has no
bound on its 2-dilation, but it does have the following good property. For each point
in U, either the retraction is 2-contracting or else that point is mapped into the plane
x1 = 0 and its tangent space is mapped into the tangent space of that plane.
Step 3. There is a quasi-isometric map from A x image(I) to A x A x A x B,
which preserves the coordinate xl.
Step 4. There is a degree 1 Lipshitz pinch map from this rectangle onto itself,
whose restriction to the plane xl = 0 is p(O, x2, x3, 
X4 ) = (0, 0, 0, x4).
This pinching maps collapses all of the region with large 2-dilation to the line
Xl = 
2 = 
3 = 0. Since this line is one-dimensional, the 2-dilation of the composition
is less than C everywhere.
This pinching map provides the non-linear diffeomorphism that we need to prove
Theorem 8.1. Let A be equal to S1/2S3/2, and let B be equal to S2 '12S/ 2 S4. There
is a 2-contracting linear diffeomorphism from A x A x A x B to S. There is a 2-
contracting pinching map from the unit cube to A provided that 1 > CA2 = CS2S3,
and that 1 > CA2B = CS/ 2S 3/2S4. Since the second inequality implies the first
inequality, there is a 2-contracting diffeomorphism from the unit cube to S whenever
S 2533 4 < C. This finishes the proof of Theorem 8.1.
5. Double Pinching Map
This degree 1 map takes
R1 x R 2 x R 3 x R4
147

onto
R1/A x A x A x B,
for any numbers A and B satisfying the following conditions.
1. R 1 < A.
2. A 2 < R2R3 .
3. A3B < R1R2 R3 R4.
Construction:
Let I be a quasi-isometric embedding of R1 x A2/R 1 x AB/R 1 into R 2a x R 3 x R4.
The conditions 1, 2, and 3 above guarantee that such an embedding exists.
Let U be the union of R1 x image(I) with {O} x R2 x R3 x R4 .
Step 1. There is a Lipshitz retraction of R onto U.
Step 2. There is a retraction of U onto R1 x image(I). This retraction has no
bound on its 2-dilation, but it does have the following good property. For each point
in U, either the retraction is 2-contracting or else that point is mapped into the plane
xl = 0 and its tangent space is mapped into the tangent space of that plane.
Step 3. There is a quasi-isometric diffeomorphism from R 1 x image(I) to R 1 x
R1 x A2/R1 x AB/R
1, which preserves the coordinate xl.
Step 4. There is a degree 1 Lipshitz pinch map from this rectangle onto itself,
whose restriction to the plane xl = 0 is p(O, x 2, x3, x4) = (0, 0, x3, x4 ).
Step 5. Compose with the linear map 2-contracting map from this rectangle to
R2/A x A x A x B. This map preserves the 2-plane x1 = 0, x2 = 0.
Step 6. There is a Lipshitz pinch map p from this rectangle to itself, whose
restriction to the 2-plane x1 = 0, x2 = 0 is given by p(O, 0, x3, x4) = (0, 0, 0, x 4).
The composition of all of these maps is a degree 1 map from R 1 x R2 x R3 x R4
to R2/A x A x A x B, with 2-dilation less than C.
Final Remarks
In the first part of this chapter, we gave lower bounds for the 2-dilation of dif-
feomorphisms from R to S. Let L(R, S) be the lower bound for the 2-dilation of any
diffeomorphism from R to S which we proved in section 1. In the second section of
this chapter, we constructed several non-linear diffeomorphisms with small 2-dilation.
148
 
_·
----

Let U(R, S) be the smallest 2-dilation of any diffeomorphism from R to S that we
constructed (including the composition of the diffeomorphisms we constructed with
one another or with linear maps). It turns out that U(R, S)/L(R, S) can be arbitrar-
ily large. To be frank, I think that the techniques in this thesis are not even close to
estimating the best 2-dilation of diffeomorphisms between 4-dimensional rectangles.
The partial results in this chapter do show that this problem is more complicated
in certain ways than the problem of estimating the best (n-1)-dilation between n-
dimensional rectangles. 
We recall from Chapter 2 that, up to a constant factor,
this best (n-1)-dilation is equal to the maximum value of a list of monomials in the
variables Qi = Si/Ri.
Our upper and lower bounds show that the best 2-dilation of diffeomorphisms
from R to S cannot be determined, even up to a constant factor, by the quotients
Qi = Si/Ri. We need to look at the actual side lengths Ri and Si, not just the
quotients Si/R 
in order to calculate the smallest 2-dilation of any diffeomorphism
from R to S. (In contrast, we proved in Chapter 6 that if we want to know whether
there is a k-expanding embedding of S into R, then up to a constant factor, we only
need to look at the quotients Qi.)
Now we describe another way that the 2-dilation problem is more complicated
than the (n-1)-dilation problem. Let Pi = logR, let i = logSi, and let Dk,,(p, oa) be
the logarithm of the best k-dilation of any diffeomorphism from R to S. The func-
tion D,,_-, is roughly equal to the maximum of a list of linear functions. Therefore,
it is approximately equal to a concave function. The function D2 ,4 is not even ap-
proximately a concave function. We can find two points with D 2,4 less than 0, and
with D2,4 taking arbitrarily large values on the line between these points. This fact
has the following geometrical interpretation. There are several different strategies for
constructing a 2-contracting diffeomorphism between 4-dimensional rectangles. Us-
ing two different strategies, we can show that D2,4 is less than zero at two different
points. The fact that D2,4 takes arbitrarily large values on the line between these
points shows that there is no way to "interpolate" between these two strategies.
149

150
11______1________

Chapter 9
Applications to the Topology of
3-Manifolds
In this section, we use area-contracting maps in order to bound homotopy invariants
of maps from 3-manifolds.
In particular, we will give bounds for a generalization of the Hopf invariant. Let
M be a closed oriented 3-manifold and E be a closed oriented surface. Let a be a
2-form on E with fr c = 1. Let f be a smooth map from M to E. If the form f*(a) is
not exact, then the Hopf invariant of f is not defined. If the form f*(a) is exact, then
the Hopf invariant of f is defined to be fM Pf*(a) A f*(a), where Pf*(a) denotes
any primitive of f*(a). The Hopf invariant of f does not depend on the choice of the
2-form a nor on the choice of primitive, and it is a homotopy invariant. When M is
the 3-sphere and E is the 2-sphere, then we recover the original Hopf invariant.
Theorem 9.1. Let M be a closed oriented 3-manifold which can be triangulated with
N simplices. Let f be any map from M to a closed oriented surface of genus 2. If the
Hopf invariant of f is defined at all, then it is less than CN . On the other hand, we
will construct manifolds M and maps f with Hopf invariant greater than cN (for some
number c > 1).
As another application of our techniques, we will give lower bounds for the number
of simplices needed to build a homologically non-trivial singular cycle in an oriented
151

hyperbolic 3-manifold with small injectivity radius.
Theorem 9.2. Let M be a closed oriented hyperbolic 3-manifold with injectivity radius
e. Let X be a pseudo-manifold that can be triangulated with N simplices. Suppose that
there is a map of non-zero degree from X to M. Then e is greater than C-N. On
the other hand, we will give examples of closed oriented hyperbolic 3-manifolds with
injectivity radius which can be triangulated with N simplices, where e is less than
c- N (for some number c > 1).
As a corollary, we will give a new proof of the following result of Teruhiko Soma,
proven in [19].
Theorem. (Soma) Let M be any closed oriented 3-manifold. Then the set of all
closed oriented hyperbolic 3-manifolds which admit a map of non-zero degree from M
is finite.
The main motivation for the work in this chapter was to better understand this
theorem of Soma.
9.1 
Homotopies to 2-contracting maps
The bridge which relates topological problems to area-contracting maps is the follow-
ing lemma.
Lemma 9.1. Let X be a 3-dimensional simplicial complex. Let f be a continuous map
from X to a complete hyperbolic manifold M (of any dimension). Put the standard
metric on each 3-simplex of X, so that the metrics agree on all the boundaries. Then
f can be homotoped to a smooth map with 2-dilation less than C.
Proof. This lemma is a refinement of Thurston's simplex-straightening construction,
which appears in [18]. We quickly review simplex straightening. We first homotope
the map f to a map f, 
so that fi agrees with f on the 0-skeleton of X, and so that
the restriction of fi to the 1-skeleton of X maps each 1-simplex to a geodesic in M.
The boundary of each 2-simplex in X is mapped by a lift of fi to the boundary of
152

a geodesic triangle in hyperbolic space. We homotope the lift of fi to map the 2-
simplex to the interior of this geodesic triangle. In this way, we construct a homotopy
from fi to f2, where the lift of f2 maps each 2-simplex of X to a geodesic 2-simplex
in hyperbolic space. The boundary of each 3-simplex in X is mapped by the lift of
f2 to the boundary of a hyperbolic 3-simplex. We then homotope the lifted map to
send the 3-simplex in X diffeomorphically to the interior of the hyperbolic 3-simplex.
For more details, we refer the reader to [18].
At the end of this process, we have homotoped f to a map f which sends each
p-simplex of X to the pushdown of a geodesic p-simplex in the universal cover of M.
We let X be the simplicial complex X, where each simplex of X is equipped with
the metric of the corresponding hyperbolic simplex in the universal cover of M. The
map f is a 1-contracting map from X to M. The goal of the rest of this proof is to
construct a map F from X to X, homotopic to the identity, and with 2-dilation less
than C.
It turns out to be easy to find a diffeomorphism from any simplex of X to the
corresponding simplex of X with 2-dilation less than C. Because of this fact, I assumed
for a while that it would be easy to construct F. When I tried to write down the map
F, though, I found it surprisingly difficult to get these diffeomorphisms to agree on
the boundaries of the simplices. With some labor, we will now construct the map F.
A general strategy for constructing 2-contracting maps is the following. Remove a
1-dimensional polyhedron from the range. Then, find a 1-expanding embedding of the
rest of the range into the domain. Finally, extend the inverse of this embedding to the
entire domain, in such a way that it maps the rest of the domain to the 1-dimensional
polyhedron.
We define P to be a 1-dimensional polyhedron in X, consisting of the 1-skeleton
of X, together with the 1-skeleton of a very fine triangulation of each 2-simplex in X.
The complement of P consists of the interiors of the 3-simplices of X together with
many very thin tubes connecting them. We now construct a 1-expanding embedding
of this complement into X.
Step 1. Embed each hyperbolic 3-simplex of X into the corresponding standard
153

simplex of X. This step is not difficult. A hyperbolic 3-simplex consists of 1 or 2
thick regions which fit inside of a unit ball, together with up to 5 long tubes, whose
width decreases exponentially in the distance from the thick part of the simplex. To
fit it inside of a ball, we simply wind up the long thin tubes into a snake shape in the
plane.
Step 2. The restriction of the complement of P to each 2-simplex of X consists of
a large number of small triangles which are mostly not far from equilateral. Suppose
that the complement of P in a 2-simplex A of X consists of triangles Ti. We can
choose P so that most of the triangles are roughly equilateral with side length 
,
and so that every triangle has diameter less than 106. Then we pick disks Di in the
corresponding 2-simplex of A of X with radius r greater than c6. Because the area
of a hyperbolic triangle is less than ir, we can make the disks Di disjoint. There is an
obvious expanding map fromA - P to A that maps each triangle Ti to Di.
Step 3. Let A be a 3-simplex in X and A the corresponding simplex in X. From
step 1, we have an embedding of A into A. The boundary of A - P consists of a union
of triangles Ti. For each Ti there is a corresponding disk Di in the boundary of A. We
now have to build thick tubes connecting the image of each Ti to the corresponding
Di.
We pick a cube C inside of the simplex A, but not in the image of A. The
complicated part of the tube construction will take place inside of C. First, we build
tubes going from each Di to the top of C. Second, we build tubes going from the
image of each Ti to the bottom of C. This process is not difficult, because the total
cross-sectional area of the tubes is bounded. It remains only to build thick tubes
that connect the corresponding disks at the top and the bottom of the cube C. The
problem is that we have made no assumption about which disk on the bottom of C
should be connected to a given disk on the top of C.
The problem of embedding thick networks of tubes into Euclidean space was
studied by Kolmogorov and Barzdin in [17]. They found an algorithm for connecting
the disks in this situation, which we will now explain.
After rescaling by a bounded factor, we can assume that the cube C is the unit
154


cube. On the top face z = 1, there are roughly (1/100)e -2 disks Di of radius (1/100)E,
and on the bottom face z = 0, there are the same number of disks D, also of radius
(1/100)e. We can assume that the disks are centered at the points of a lattice with
side length 10E.
We consider the 1-skeleton of the cubical lattice with side length e. The 1-skeleton
consists of some straight lines parallel to either the x, the y, or the z directions. We
translate each line parallel to the x-axis by a small vector v(x), (less than 
), and
similarly for the y direction. For the z-direction, we replace each line by two slightly
translated copies of that line. After these translations, no two lines in our list of lines
intersect. In fact, the (1/100)e-neighborhoods of our lines are disjoint. We consider
these neighborhoods as something like a system of highways. In a neighborhood of
each lattice point, the highways come close to one another, and we add a system of
entrance and exit ramps connecting them, all in a (1/10)E neighborhood of the lattice
point.
For each line in the z direction in the 1-skeleton of the lattice, we now have two
slightly thick tubes. We call one of them the starting tube, and we call the other one
the finishing tube. We slightly move the disks Di on the top face z = 1 so that they
coincide with the tops of the starting tubes, and we slightly move the disks Di on the
bottom face so that they coincide with the bottoms of the finishing tubes.
We have numbered the disks so that Di is supposed to connect to D'. Let (xi, Yi, 1)
be the coordinates of the center of Di, and let (xi, yi, 0) be the coordinates of the center
of Di. We have to construct a path Pi from (xi, yi, 1) to (xi, yi, 0). The path Pi follows
the starting highway from (xi, yi, 1) in the downward z-direction down to some height
Hi which we will choose later. The height Hi will be a multiple of e, so it corresponds
to a juncture in the system of highways. At the juncture, Pi changes onto the highway
in the x-direction, which it takes to the juncture closest to xi. At that juncture, Pi
changes onto the highway in the y-direction, which it takes to the juncture closest to
ye. At this juncture, the path Pi gets onto the finishing highway in the z-direction,
which it takes down to the endpoint (x', yi, 0). The thick tube connecting Di to Di
will be the (1/100)e-neighborhood of Pi. We need to check that these neighborhoods
155

are disjoint (for a smart choice of the heights Hi).
Two paths Pi and Pj can come too close to one another only if they take the same
highway between the same two exits. We say that i and j are related if either yi = Yj
or x' = xj. If i and j are not related, then the corresponding paths will stay far apart
no matter how we choose the heights Hi. If i and j are related, the paths Pi and
Pj stay far apart as long as Hi is different from H. 
The number of j related to a
given i is less than 2(1/10)e - 1. On the other hand, the number of choices for Hi is
Ce
- . Therefore, we can choose Hi so that Hi is different from Hj whenever i and j are
related. The resulting thick tubes are disjoint.
Finally, we can slightly tilt the paths Pi so that they are transverse to the foliation
by (x,y)-planes.
We have found an expanding embedding of X - P into X, with some image U. The
inverse map is a contracting diffeomorphism from U onto X - P. Next, we should
check that the expanding embedding is isotopic to the identity. This follows because
the thin tubes constructed in step 3 are transverse to a foliation by 2-spheres of the
space between the embedded 3-simplex and the boundary of the original 3-simplex.
Since our embedding is isotopic to the identity, we can extend the inverse map from
U to all of X, taking the complement of U onto P. Since P is one-dimensional, this
extension is 2-contracting. Finally, we can smooth the resulting map from X to M
with a negligible effect on the 2-dilation. This finishes the proof of the lemma. 
O
Thurston used his straightening lemma to bound the degrees of maps to hyperbolic
manifolds. We will use our lemma in an analogous way to bound the Hopf invariant
of maps from 3-manifolds to hyperbolic surfaces.
It is natural to ask whether this lemma can be extended to higher-dimensional
complexes X. It appears likely to me that it extends to complexes of all dimensions.
This extension would say that any map from a simplicial complex X to a hyperbolic
manifold can be homotoped to a map with 2-dilation less than C, for some constant C
which depends only on the dimensions of the domain and the range. Unfortunately,
I don't know how to prove such an extension.
156
-

9.2 
The Hopf volume
We define the Hopf volume of a closed oriented Riemannian 3-manifold (M, g) as the
supremal value of the integral fM Pw A w as w varies over all exact 2-forms which are
bounded by 1 pointwise. We will abbreviate the Hopf volume of M by HV(M).
Although we do not need any other definition, I think it is interesting to see the
dual description in terms of the flow lines of a vector field. This description is due to
Arnold in [3]. Any 2-form w on (M, g) corresponds to a vector field v according to
the definition idvol = w. If xi are coordinates which are oriented and orthonormal
at p, and if the 2-form w at p is equal to adxl A dx2 + bdx2 A dx 3+ cdx3 A dxl, then the
vector field v at p is equal to a(6/Ox 3) + b(a/xil) + c(6/Ox 2). The 2-form w is closed
if and only if the vector field is divergence-free. In this case, the vector field defines
a possible flow for an incompressible fluid. The 2-form w is exact if, in addition, the
flow lines of the flow are homologically trivial over long time periods. In this case, it
is possible to define the asymptotic linking number of the flow lines over long time
periods. Arnold refers to this as the helicity of the flow. Arnold has proved that
the integral fM Pw A w is equal to the asymptotic linking number of the flow lines of
v. Therefore, the Hopf volume measures the largest asymptotic linking number of a
slowly moving, incompressible flow on (M, g).
Next, we define a combinatorial Hopf volume for closed oriented triangulated 3-
manifold by putting a standard metric on each simplex in the triangulation. 
We
will abbreviate the combinatorial Hopf volume of X by HVomb(X). This definition
applies not only to triangulated manifolds but also to triangulated pseudo-manifolds.
As a technical point, the strict definition is as follows. Embed the pseudo-manifold
X in R" for a large n. Let X be a small neighborhood of X. Put a standard metric
on each simplex of X. Pick a retraction of X onto X, and put a metric on X which
is only slightly bigger than the pullback of the metric on X by this retraction. The
Hopf volume of X is defined to be the supremal value of the integral fx Pw A w. We
will prove in the next section that the Hopf volume is finite for any closed oriented
Riemannian manifold or for any pseudo-manifold.
157

Because of our homotopy lemma 9.1, the Hopf invariant of any map from a 3-
manifold X to a hyperbolic surface is bounded by the Hopf volume of X.
Proposition 9.2.1. Let f be a map from a triangulated 3-manifold X to a surface of
genus 2. If the Hopf invariant of f is defined, then it is bounded by CHVComb(X).
Proof. A surface of genus 2 has a hyperbolic metric. We can homotope f to a map
f with 2-dilation less than C with respect to this metric. The form w on the surface
of genus 2 can be taken to be 1/(47r) times the area form, which has norm 1/(47r).
The pullback f*(w) has norm less than C. But the Hopf invariant of f is equal to
fx P(f *(w)) A f*(w), which is bounded by CHVomb(X). 
°]
Similarly, the Hopf volume controls the degrees of maps from a 3-manifold to a
hyperbolic 3-manifold.
Proposition 9.2.2. If X is a triangulated closed oriented 3-manifold and M is a
closed oriented hyperbolic 3-manifold, and f is any map from X to M, then the degree
of f is bounded as follows.
HVb(X) 
> c deg(f)HV(M).
Proof. We choose an exact form w on M with fM Pw A w essentially equal to the Hopf
volume of M and the norm of w bounded by 1 pointwise. After applying a homotopy
with Lemma 9.1, we can assume that f is a smooth map with 2-dilation bounded by
C. Then the pullback f*(w) has norm bounded by C. The integral fx(1/C)Pf*(w) 
A
(1/C)f*(w) is less than the combinatorial Hopf volume of X. On the other hand,
f*(Pw) is a primitive of f*(w), so this integral is equal to (1/C)2 fx f*(Pw) A f*(w),
which is equal to (1/C) 2 (degf) fM Pw A w. Therefore the combinatorial Hopf volume
of X is greater than (1/C) 2(degf)HV(M). 
El
(This proposition continues to hold, with the same proof, if X is merely a pseudo-
manifold.)
158

9.3 Estimates for the combinatorial Hopf volume
In this section, we will give a variety of estimates for the Hopf volumes of three-
manifolds.
We begin with a standard estimate involving the eigenvalue of an operator. Let
A1 be the smallest non-zero eigenvalue of the operator d taking coclosed 1-forms to
2-forms.
Proposition 
9.3.1. The Hopf volume of (M, g) is bounded by Al1 Volume(M, g).
Proof. Let w be an exact 2-form bounded by 1 pointwise, with fM Pw A w essentially
equal to the Hopf volume of (M, g). We can always choose a primitive Pw with
IPWIL2 < A-1WIL2. Therefore, the integral fM Pw A w is bounded by Allw 122. Since
w is bounded by 1 pointwise, this expression is bounded by Al'Volume(M, g). 
0
This proposition shows that every closed oriented Riemannian 3-manifold has
finite Hopf volume.
In order to use the last proposition, it would be necessary to give estimates for the
eigenvalue Al, which seems difficult to me. We now give a different estimate, using
an isoperimetric constant in place of an eigenvalue.
Define Iso(M,g) to be the infimal constant so that every exact real 1-cycle in M
with length L bounds a real 2-chain with area less than IsoL.
Proposition 9.3.2. The Hopf volume of (M,g) is less than Iso(M, g) Volume(M, g).
Proof. As usual, let w be an exact 2-form with norm bounded by 1 pointwise and
fM Pw A w essentially equal to the Hopf volume of (M,g). According to the Sul-
livan trick (see section 7.2), we can choose a bounded measurable primitive Pw,
with norm bounded by Iso(M,g) 
almost everywhere. We also checked in section
7.2 that this measurable primitive gives the same value in our integral as a smooth
primitive would. The integrand is bounded by Iso and the integral is bounded by
Iso(M, g)Volume(M, g). 
0
159

Using this proposition, we can prove an upper bound for the combinatorial Hopf
volume of a triangulated pseudo-manifold in terms of the number of the simplices.
Proposition 9.3.3. If X is a triangulated pseudo-manifold with N simplices then the
combinatorial Hopf volume of X is bounded by CN.
Proof. We need to estimate Iso(X) or else Iso(X) if X is only a pseudomanifold. Let
c be an exact real 1-cycle in X, with length L. We can easily push c into X itself, with
a negligible increase in length, through an annulus of area eL. Next, we can push c
to the 1-skeleton of the triangulation of X without increasing its length by more than
a factor C, through a surface of area less than CL. This pushing is accomplished
by the Federer-Fleming method of pushing outward from a random point to get to
the 2-skeleton and then again pushing outward from a random point to get to the
1-skeleton. Then we rewrite c as E aiei, where ei is an oriented edge of the 1-skeleton
of X and E lail is less than CL.
We pick an orientation for each 1-simplex and each 2-simplex in the triangulation
of X. There is a boundary map from the free vector space over 2-simplices to the
free vector space over 1-simplices, and by assumption the cycle E aiei is in the image
of this boundary map. The boundary map is given by a matrix M with entries ±1
or 0, and with dimensions bounded by CN. Because each 2-simplex has only three
1-simplices in its boundary, each column of the matrix has at most three non-zero
entries. Recall that the Hilbert-Schmidt norm of a matrix with entries Mij is defined
to be (Z IMij12)1/2. The Hilbert-Schmidt norm of the boundary matrix is bounded
by (CN)1/2
Let r be the rank of the boundary matrix M. We can choose orthogonal matrices
01 and 02 so that 01 M0 2 is zero outside of the top left-hand r x r sub-matrix,
which we call M'. Because the rank of M is r, one of the r x r sub-determinants of
M is not zero. Because the entries of M are all integers, this sub-determinant is an
integer, and so its norm is at least 1. The norm of the determinant of M' is at least
as large as the norm of any r x r sub-determinant of M. Therefore, the determinant
of M' has norm at least 1. The Hilbert-Schmidt norm of M' is equal to that of M,
160


which is less than (CN)1/2.
Any (r - 1) x (r - 1) sub-matrix of M' has smaller
Hilbert-Schmidt norm. The determinant of an arbitrary matrix Mij is bounded by
IIH(Zj aij12)1/2. It follows from this estimate and our bound on the Hilbert-Schmidt
norm that every (r - 1) x (r - 1) sub-matrix of M' has determinant bounded by CN .
Since the determinant of M' is at least 1, the norm of every entry in the inverse of
M' is bounded by CN. The norm of the inverse of M' is bounded by CNCN.
Therefore, the exact 1-chain E aiei is equal to the boundary of a 2-chain E biAi,
with E Ibil bounded by CN2CN E ail. After increasing the constant C, we can say
that E Ibi is bounded by CN E l ail. Therefore, the 1-cycle E aiei bounds a real
2-chain with mass less than CNL. In other words, Iso(X) is bounded by CN .
According to the last proposition, the combinatorial Hopf volume of X is at most
Iso(X) 
times the volume of X, which is less than CNCN. 
After increasing the
constant C, the Hopf volume of X is bounded by CN .
O
This exponential upper bound seemed very high to me at first. For comparison, the
sphere of radius N1/ 3 admits a triangulation by N simplices that are roughly standard
geometrically, and the combinatorial Hopf volume of this triangulation is roughly
N 4 / 3 . We will show, however, that the Hopf volume really can grow exponentially in
N for some triangulated manifolds with N simplices.
Proposition 9.3.4. There exists a triangulation of S3 with N simplices and combi-
natorial Hopf volume greater than exp(cN).
Proof. We start with a torus T2, equipped with a triangulation T and with a choice
of basis for H(T
2), called a and b, with intersection pairing of a and b equal to 1.
Next we take the product T2 x [0, 1], and we Dehn fill both boundary components
to get S3. More precisely, we Dehn fill the component T2 x {O} in such a way that
the homology class a bounds a disk in the new solid torus, and we Dehn fill the
component T2 x { 1} in such a way that the homology class b bounds a disk in the
new solid torus. We pick triangulations of the two solid tori extending T. (So far we
have only constructed the simplest Heegaard splitting of S3.)
161

Next we will construct a triangulation of the central cylinder T 2 x [0, 1] which
restricts to the triangulation T on each boundary component. We pick an Anosov
diffeomorphism T of T2. For instance, IQ might act on homology by * (a) = 2a+b and
4!,(b) = a + b. We pick a triangulation of the mapping cylinder of X1 which restricts
to the triangulation T on each boundary component. Our triangulation of T2 x [0, 1]
consists of N copies of this triangulated mapping cylinder laid end to end, followed
by N copies of the mirror image of the mapping cylinder. The whole triangulation
involves less than CN simplices.
We will show that this triangulated 3-sphere contains two thick tubes with linking
number at least exp(cN). The first tube T1 is localized near the middle of the long
cylinder. Using the local coordinates for T2, it is homologous to a. The second tube
T2 is the core of the Dehn filling of T2 x {0}. The linking number of T1 with T2 is
equal to the pairing of XTN (b) with a, which grows exponentially with N.
For each thick tube, we have a Lipshitz map from S3 to S2, given by the Pontryagin-
Thom collapse of a suitable framing of the thick tube. (What we have to check is
simply that we can find a framing which does not wind around very much compared
to the triangulation near the tube.) Let us call these maps fi and f2. Let a1 and a2
be the pullback of the area form of S2 by fi and f2 respectively. The forms a1 and a2
are bounded pointwise by C. We define another map f3, which is the composition of
a map from S3 to S2 V S2 using the Pontryagin-Thom collapse on both thick tubes
with a degree (1,1) map from S2 V S2 to S2. The pullback of the area form of S2 by
f3 is equal to al + a2.
Now a simple calculation shows that Hopf(f 3) - Hopf(f 2) - Hopf(fl) = 2 fs3 Pal A
a2, which is proportional to the linking number of T1 with T2, which is greater than
exp(cN). Therefore, the Hopf volume of this triangulation is at least exp(cN). 
[1
Of course, the manifold S3 admits much simpler triangulations than the one given
above. If we use the triangulation above to guide a surgical operation, we can con-
struct manifolds M3 which can be triangulated by N simplices, but so that every
triangulation of M has Hopf volume on the order of exp(cN).
162

Proposition 9.3.5. We will construct closed oriented 3-manifolds M which can be
triangulated by N simplices, and which admit maps to a surface of genus 2 with Hopf
invariant at least exp(cN).
Proof. The manifold M is constructed by doing a kind of surgery on the above tri-
angulation X near the two tubes T1 and T2.
For each tube, we do the following
procedure. 
Identify T with D2 x S1, and refine the triangulation X so that the
boundary of D2 x S1 lies in the 2-skeleton. We can do this operation without in-
creasing the number of simplices by more than a constant number, and moreover, the
number of simplices in the triangulation of the boundary of D2 x S1 can be bounded
by C. Finally, the triangulation is well behaved with respect to the basis for H1 of the
boundary given by the curves D2 x {q and {p} x S1 . Next, we let E be a surface
of genus two with one boundary component. We cut out D2 x S1 from our manifold
and glue in E' x S1. The gluing map is the diffeomorphism from 0E' x S1 to 6D2 x S1
given by the product of a diffeomorphism from c9E' to OD2 and the identity map on
S1. Finally, we extend our triangulation to 
' x S1, again adding only finitely many
simplices. Applying this procedure to both T, and T2, we get our 3-manifold M.
Now we construct some maps from M to a closed surface of genus 2. Inside of M,
we have two copies of E' x S', which we added with our two surgeries. For each copy,
we can construct a map in the following way. We map E' x S1 to E' by projecting
to the first factor, and then compose with a degree 1 map from E' to a surface of
genus 2, taking the boundary of E' to the base point of the target surface. The
resulting map takes the boundary of E' x S1 to the base point of E, and so we can
extend the map to all of M, mapping the rest of M to the basepoint of E. In this
way, we construct two maps, called f and f2. We can also construct a third map
f3 by applying the above construction to both copies of E' x S1. As in the previous
proposition, Hopf(f 3 ) - Hopf(fl) - Hopf(f 2) is equal to twice the linking number of
T1 with T2, which is greater than exp(cN). 
[
We are now ready to prove Theorem 9.1. First we recall the statement.
Theorem 9.1. 
Let X be any pseudomanifold that can be triangulated by N
163

simplices. Let f be a map from X to a closed surface of genus 2. If the Hopf invariant
of f is defined, then it is bounded by C N . There are examples of 3-manifolds M which
can be triangulated by N simplices and maps from M to a surface of genus 2 with
Hopf invariant greater than cN.
Proof. We give the surface of genus 2 a hyperbolic metric. We define a = 1/(4ir)darea.
The integral of a over the surface is 1, and so fx Pf*(a) A f*(a) is the Hopf invariant
of f. Using the homotopy lemma 9.1, we can assume that the 2-dilation of f is at most
C. Since the norm of a is bounded by 1/(47r), the norm of f*(a) is bounded by C.
Therefore, the integral fx Pf*(a) A a is bounded by a constant times the combina-
torial Hopf volume of X. By proposition 9.3.3, the combinatorial Hopf volume is less
than CN.
The examples were constructed in the last proposition. 
O
Given a 3-manifold X, it is interesting to know the minimal combinatorial Hopf
volume of any triangulation of X. If X can be triangulated by N simplices, then this
minimum is less than CN . According to proposition 9.3.5, this estimate is fairly sharp
for some 3-manifolds. For many other 3-manifolds, the estimate is not at all sharp.
In particular, we will now give much stronger estimates for circle bundles and for a
large variety of mapping tori. These estimates are not necessary to prove Theorems
9.1 or 9.2. Using these estimates, we could strengthen Theorems 9.1 and 9.2 when
the domain is in the list above.
Proposition 
9.3.6. Let M be the total space of the circle bundle over a closed surface
E of genus G with Euler number 1. Then M admits a triangulation with Hopf Volume
bounded by CG2.
Proof. Let U be equal to the product of the surface E minus a small ball with S1. We
can triangulate U with CG simplices. The manifold M is a Dehn filling of U along
the torus boundary, and we can extend the triangulation to M with only C additional
simplices.
We will prove that for this triangulation, Iso(M) is bounded by CG. To see
this, let c be a closed null-homologous curve in M, with length L. By a homotopy
164
-

through an area less than CL, we can move c to a curve that lies in U. Since c is
null-homologous in M, the number of times c goes around the fiber S1 is equal to the
number of times it goes around the small ball removed from , with opposite signs.
We can find a 2-chain in M - U with area bounded by CL whose boundary lies in the
boundary of U, and which is homologous to the curve c in Hi(U). It suffices to find
a filling of the difference c' of c with the boundary of this 2-chain.
We divide , minus a ball into G regions, each of which is equal to a torus with one
or two boundary components. This division leads to an analogous division of U into
G regions, each of which is the product of one of the regions above with S1. With a
slight addition of length, we can construct a small area cobordism of our curve to a
union of curves, one supported in each region. Each curve in the union is homologous
to a curve in the boundary of the union through a cobordism with area less than C
L. The total length of all the curves is less than C L. These regions in the boundary
can be taken to be either the boundary circles of the regions in E or fibers of U. Now
each boundary circle of the regions in P can be filled by area G. The fibers can all be
moved to the fiber over a given single point by a cobordism with area CGL. Finally,
since the curve we are working with is null-homologous in U, the fibers over this point
cancel. Therefore, Iso is less than CG.
According to proposition 9.3.2, the combinatorial Hopf Volume of M is less than
Iso times the volume, which is bounded by CG2.
[]
(As a topological application, we see that any map from M to a closed surface of
genus 2 has Hopf invariant less than CG2. On the other hand, the projection from
M to 
, followed by the degree G - 1 map to from P to the surface of genus 2, has
Hopf invariant (G - 1)2. Therefore, our estimate was sharp up to a constant factor.
On the other hand, there is a completely elementary proof that any map from M to
a surface of genus 2 has Hopf invariant at most (G - 1)2. The fundamental group of
M is generated by ai, bi, where i go from 1 to g, with the relation that the element
Hi [ai, bi] commutes with all other elements. For any map f from M to a surface of
genus 2, consider the image of this central element in rl of the target surface. If
this image is the identity, then the map f factors through the projection from M
165

to E. The Hopf invariant of the resulting map is equal to the square of the degree
of the induced map from E to the surface of genus 2. This degree is at most G-1
according to Kneser's theorem (see Chapter 5 of [15]), and so the Hopf invariant is at
most (G - 1)2 in this case. If the above image is not the identity, however, then its
commutator subgroup is cyclic, and so the fundamental group of M is mapped to a
cyclic subgroup of the fundamental group of the surface of genus 2. In this case, the
mapping factors through a circle and the Hopf invariant is zero.)
Next, we bound the Hopf volume of certain mapping tori.
Proposition 
9.3.7. Let E be a closed oriented surface of genus G, and let -i be a set
of homologically trivial curves in E. Then there is a constant C, which depends on G
and yi, so that the mapping torus of any sequence of N Dehn twists around curves in
the list yji admits a triangulation with combinatorial Hopf Volume bounded by CN 2.
Proof. Pick a triangulation of E. Then pick a triangulation of the mapping cylinder
of the Dehn twist around each yi, which restricts to the first triangulation on each
boundary component. Now, for any sequence of Dehn twists, we can assemble these
pieces to get a triangulation of the mapping torus.
We show that for the standard metric on this triangulation, Iso is bounded by
CN. (Throughout this paragraph, C will denote a constant which depends only on
G and the curves yi.) Let c be a null-homologous curve in our triangulated mapping
torus. Let t be a function from the mapping cylinder to R modulo N, which goes
from i to i+1 along the mapping cylinder of the ith Dehn twist. Mark the points
of c at half-integer values of t, and straighten c between the marked points. This
produces a cobordism with area controlled by a multiple of L and the final curve of
length less than L. Then cut the straightened c at integer values of t. Since c winds
zero times around M in total, each cut gives rise to a 0-cycle on a copy of E. We
fill the zero cycle at a cost of zero area and increasing the length of the curve by a
factor of G. The new curve is divided into components, each component supported
on the mapping cylinder of a single Dehn twist around some -yi. We then straighten
each curve to lie on a constant t slice with cost of area CL, and length of the final
166

curve less than CL. Now because each curve yi is null-homologous, each Dehn twist
acts trivially on the homology of E. Using this fact, we can construct a cobordism
moving each curve to lie on a single copy of E at t=O, without lengthening them, and
at a cost of area CLN, where this constant depends on the curves yi. The resulting
1-cycle is null-homologous in E, and so we can bound it by a 2-chain with area CL.
In total, we have constructed a filling for c with area CLN, which shows that Iso is
bounded by CN.
According to Proposition 9.3.2, the Hopf volume of our triangulation is bounded
by Iso times the volume. Since the volume of the triangulation is clearly bounded by
CN, the Hopf volume is bounded by CN2.
a
Proposition 9.3.8. Let T be a diffeomorphism of a closed oriented surface E, so
that the action of ,* on the first homology group of E has no eigenvalues on the
unit circle. Then the mapping torus of TN admits a triangulation with Hopf volume
bounded by CN, where the constant C depends on 'I.
Proof. Pick a triangulation of E, and a triangulation of the mapping cylinder of 1
which restricts to the first triangulation on both boundary components. Composing
these cylinders we get a triangulation of the mapping torus of 1N with CN simplices.
We will show that for the standard metric on this triangulation, Iso is bounded
by a constant C independent of N. (This constant does depend on T though.) Let c
be a null-homologous curve in our triangulated mapping torus, of length L. We let t
be a function from the mapping torus to R modulo N, which goes from i to i+1 on
the ith copy of the mapping cylinder of I. Mark the points of c at half-integer values
of t, and straighten c between the marked points. This produces a cobordism with
area controlled by a multiple of L and the final curve of length less than L. Then
cut the straightened c at integer values of t. Since c winds zero times around the
mapping torus in total, each cut gives rise to a O-cycle on the surface S. We fill the
zero cycle at a cost of zero area and increasing the length of the curve by a factor
of G. The new curve is divided into components, each supported on one copy of the
mapping cylinder of I. At the cost of area CL, we can straighten each component to
167

lie on a copy of P and to be equal to a sum of standard generators of the homology
of E. Therefore, it suffices to bound the isoperimetric constant of a real chain with
boundary equal to one of these standard generators.
Let a be one standard generator for the homology of S. We have assumed that
the eigenvalues of ,, are bounded away from the unit circle, and so the eigenvalues of
Id - IF are bounded away from 0. Therefore, we can find an element b in H1 (E, R)
with b- 
l(b) 
= a, and with the norm of b bounded by C, independent of N. The
element b is represented by a real 1-cycle in E with mass bounded by C. The cycle
b- 
(b) can be filled by a real 2-chain with area bounded by C E'N IT'(b)l. Since
a and b are bounded, the equation TN(b) = b - a shows that IN'(b) is also bounded.
Since the eigenvalues of I,* are bounded away from the unit circle, the size of It(b)
is bounded by Cexp[-min(i, N - i)]. Therefore, the above sum is bounded by a
constant independent of N.
Since Iso is bounded by a constant independent of N, the Hopf volume of this
triangulation is bounded by CN. 
[
9.4 
The Hopf volume of hyperbolic 3-manifolds
In this section, we will show that a closed oriented hyperbolic 3-manifold with small
injectivity radius is complicated in one of four ways. Either it has large volume, or it
requires surfaces of large genus to span H2, or it has a torsion element in H1 of high
order, or it has large Hopf volume. Any of these four features leads to bounds on the
degrees of maps into the manifold.
Let M be a closed oriented hyperbolic 3-manifold with injectivity radius e. Then
M contains a closed embedded geodesic y of length on the order of e. If y is torsion in
homology with a fairly small order, then we will prove that either M has large Hopf
volume or else M has large volume. This estimate is the main idea in the proof of
Theorem 9.2.
Proposition 9.4.1. Let M be a closed oriented hyperbolic 3-manifold with a closed
geodesic -y of length e which is torsion in homology. Then either the volume of M is
168

at least ce-1/ 6, or the order of y is at least ce-1 / 6, or the Hopf volume of M is at least
Ce-1/4
Proof. Let T be the Margulis tube around y. (The thin part of M is defined to be
the subset of M where the injectivity radius is less than a certain constant, and the
Margulis tube is the connected component of the thin region containing y.) The uni-
versal cover of 'y is a geodesic in hyperbolic 3-space. We can parameterize hyperbolic
space by the upper half-space model so that the universal cover of -y is equal to the
vertical line through the origin (i.e. the line x = 0, y = 0, z > 0). The group of
covering transformations of M include a loxodromic isometry that fixes this vertical
line. This isometry is given by multiplying the three coordinates by a constant on the
order of (1 + e), and rotating in the (x,y)-plane by an angle 9. Consider the quotient
of hyperbolic 3-space by this isometry, and let T be the Margulis tube around the
core geodesic of this quotient. Taking the quotient by the other covering transforma-
tions of M gives a map from T into M, which takes the core geodesic of T onto -y.
According to the Margulis Lemma, the map is an embedding of T into the Margulis
tube around y.
The Margulis tube T has a simple form. For some number R depending on e and
0, the tube T is equal to the quotient of the region x2 + y2 < z2R2 by the action of
the loxodromic isometry corresponding to -y. A fundamental region for this action
is given by the intersection of the region above with the region 1 < z < 1 + e. The
boundary of the fundamental region includes two disks, the first given by z = 1 and
X2 + y2 < R2 , and the second given by z = 1 + e and x 2 + y2 < (1 + 
)2 R2.
The
loxodromic isometry corresponding to y takes the first disk onto the second disk. In
several constructions, we will use the radial curves in T, which are the straight rays
through the origin in the Euclidean metric on the (x,y,z)-space. These radial lines
are not geodesics in hyperbolic space. On the other hand, their images foliate the
quotient T.
We will give two estimates for R in terms of e and 0. The first estimate says that
if e is small, then R is large. More precisely, the radius R is at least cE- 1/ 2. Beginning
at a point p on the edge of T, we can follow a radial curve with length NeR going
169

N times around the edge of T. This curve hits the circle z = 1, 
2 + y2 = R2 in N
points. Connecting the closest two of these N points by an arc of the circle, we get a
homotopically non-trivial closed curve with length less than NER + R/N. Since this
curve lies on the edge of the Margulis tube, its length is greater than a constant on the
order 1. We can make this construction for any number N. In particular, if N = c- 1/2,
and we get the inequality c1/2R > c. This proves our lower bound R > cc-1/2. On
the other hand, we can assume that R is not too big. The volume of T is roughly
ER2. If the volume of M is at least c -1 / 6 then we are done, so we may assume that
R < C-7/ 12
Our second estimate says that if 0/(27r) is well-approximated by rational numbers,
then R is large. Again, we begin at a point at radius R from the the center of the
horosphere z = 1, and we trace a radial curve that goes vertically q times around the
tube, and then connect the endpoint of this curve to the starting point within the
horosphere z = 1. The total length of this curve is roughly qeR+ Iq0/(2ir)-plR, where
p is the integer that makes this expression smallest. Since this curve is homotopically
non-trivial and lies on the edge of the Margulis tube, it must have length at least on
the order of 1. Therefore, 0/(27r) - p/q > c(1/q)(1/R) -
.
We choose generators for the homology of the boundary of T, given by 1, the
longitude, and m the meridian. (The choice of longitude is related to the choice of
0 in the following way. Take a radial curve on the edge of our fundamental domain,
going once around the tube from z = 1 to z = 1 + e. This line connects to a point
on the base horosphere z = 1. From that point, follow an arc of the circle with
directed length -0 to the initial point of the radial curve. The resulting closed curve
is homologous to the longitude.) Let pm + ql be the homology class of the primitive
curve which bounds in M - T. (The numbers p and q are relatively prime integers.
Since the proposition assumes that -y is torsion in homology, q is not zero. The
absolute value of q is the order of y.) If q is at least cc-1 / 6 we are done, so we will
assume that q is smaller than cc- 1/ 6. The inequality at the end of the last paragraph
tells us that l0/(27r) -p/ql 
> CE3/ 4
-
. Since the volume of M is at least on the order
of 1, we can assume that e is quite small, and therefore 1/(2r) - p/qI > C 3/ 4 .
170
- ----

Finally, we estimate the Hopf volume of M. We claim that the Hopf volume of M
is at least c10/(2r) - p/qR 2, which is greater than ce-1/ 4. To see this, we build a
collection of tubes in T. Each tube goes around the tube T N times, and goes around
the core of T M times, where (M/N) is very close to 0/27r. If 0/(27r) is rational with
denominator N, the tubes are just small neighborhoods of the radial curves. If 0/(27r)
is irrational, but very close to MIN, then the tube T is bilipshitz to the corresponding
tube with a loxodromic rotation through an angle M/N, and we pull back the tubes
from there. We divide the tubes into inner tubes, which stay in the central part of T
given by x2 + y2 < 1/4z2R2, and outer tubes, which stay on the outside of this region.
Geometrically, each tube is bilipshitz to a Euclidean product of a small disk and a
long circle. The total cross-sectional area of the outer tubes is on the order of (R/N),
and the total cross-sectional area of the inner tubes is also on the order of (R/N). The
linking number of an outer tube with an inner tube is given by ((M/N) - (p/q))N2 .
For large values of N, this quantity converges to (/(27r) - p/q)N 2.
Now we use the bilipshitz map from each tube to the product of a Euclidean
disk with a long circle to construct some exact 2-forms. We start with a compactly
supported 2-form on the disk with integral roughly equal to the area of the disk.
We pull this 2-form back to the product and then back to the tube in T, which
gives us a closed 2-form with norm bounded by 1 pointwise. Adding together all the
2-forms on the outer tubes, we get a closed 2-form a, and adding together all the
2-forms on the inner tubes we get a closed 2-form b. Since all the tubes are torsion
in homology, a and b are exact 2-forms on M. Now the Hopf volume of M is at least
(1/3)1 fM P(a + b) A (a + b) - fM Pa A a - fM Pb A bl. This expression, however, is
equal to the linking number of each outer tube with each inner tube, times the total
cross-sectional area of the outer tubes, times the total cross-sectional area of the inner
tubes, which is at least c/(2r) 
- p/qjN 2 (R/N)(R/N). 
This expression is equal to
clO/(27r) - p/qlR 2 , which is at least c3/ 4R2, which is at least c -
1
/ 4.
L
(To understand this result better, it might help to see how it plays out for the
hyperbolic Dehn fillings of a compact oriented hyperbolic manifold with a single cusp.
Let X0 be such a manifold, and let a and b be a basis for the homology of the boundary
171

torus so that the homology class a bounds in X0, and so that the intersection number
of a and b is 1. Let X(m, n) be the manifold formed by Dehn filling the boundary
torus along the curve homologous to ma + nb, for relatively prime numbers m and n.
According to Thurston's theory, the manifold X(m, n) admits a hyperbolic structure
for all but finitely many choices of (m,n). These hyperbolic manifolds have uniformly
bounded volume. They contain a short core geodesic with length on the order of
(m2 + n2)-1 . Except for the single case when n is zero, the core geodesic is torsion
with order n. On the other hand, the Hopf volume of X(m, n) is at least c(m/n)
when m or n is large. The reason is that uniformly in m and n, the manifold X(m, n)
contains two disjoint thick tubes homologous to b, which lie in the thick part of X0.
Neither tube is null-homologous in X0, so their linking number is not defined in X0.
But in X(m, n), the tubes are (rationally) null-homologous, and a short calculation
shows that their linking number is equal to (m/n). 
Therefore, we see that each
hyperbolic Dehn filling with a short core geodesic either has a torsion element in H
with large order or else has large Hopf volume.)
To complement this proposition, we prove a different kind of inequality for hyper-
bolic 3-manifolds with short geodesics that are non-torsion in homology.
Proposition 9.4.2. If a closed oriented hyperbolic manifold has a closed geodesic
which is non-trivial in H1(M, Q) of length , then any surface with non-zero intersec-
tion number with -y must have both area and genus at least ce-
/2.
Proof. We consider as above the Margulis tube around the short geodesic y, which
has radius at least R = ce-1 / 2. It contains thin tubes, each going around N times,
with total cross-sectional area at least RIN. Any surface with a non-zero intersection
number with y meets each of these tubes at least N times, and so it has total area at
least N(R/N) = R > CE- 1/2. By the Thurston simplex straightening argument, the
genus of such a surface must be at least ce-1 / 2 as well. 
O
We define the spanning genus of a 3-dimensional simplicial complex X to be the
smallest genus G so that H2(X, Q) is spanned by surfaces of genus at most G. We can
rephrase the last proposition in this language: if M is a closed oriented hyperbolic
172

3-manifold with a closed geodesic of length e which is not torsion in H1(M), then the
spanning genus of M is at least c - 1/ 2.
In the last section, we proved that the Hopf volume of a complex with N simplices
is less than CN . Similarly, we will prove that the spanning genus of a complex with
N simplices is less than CN .
Proposition 9.4.3. Let X be a simplicial 3-complex with N simplices. Then the
spanning genus of X is less than CN .
Proof. We consider the boundary map from the free vector space of 2-simplices of X
to the free vector space of 1-simplices of X. The boundary map is given by a matrix
M, with dimensions less than CN, and with each entry equal to ±1 or 0. Moreover,
since the boundary of each 2-simplex is only three 1-simplices, each column of the
matrix has only three non-zero entries. Let r be the rank of the matrix M. Pick r 2-
simplices Ai in X, so that M(Ai) gives a basis for the image of M. After renumbering
the 2-simplices, we suppose that these are A1 through A,.
Now for every other 2-simplex Aj, we can express M(Aj) as a sum ai,jM(Ai). 
(In
this formula, the index j runs from r + 1 to the last 2-simplex, and the index i runs
from 1 to r.) Let I be the restriction of M to the span of the first r simplices. The
linear map I is an isomorphism from IRr onto the image of M. This isomorphism has
Hilbert-Schmidt norm less than CN1 / 2, and it has determinant at least 1. Therefore,
its inverse has norm at most CN . For a fixed j, the sum ai,jAi is simply I- (M(Aj)).
Since M(Aj) has length 
/3, the vector ai,j has length less than CN . In particular,
each coefficient ai,j is less than CN .
The coefficients aij don't have to be integers, but they are rational numbers with
controlled denominators. The vectors M(Aj) are integral vectors in the image of M.
iThe vectors M(Ai) span a lattice L of integral vectors in the image of M. Let D
be the index of the lattice L inside all of the integral vectors in the image of M. In
particular, DM(Aj) 
lies in the integral span of the M(Ai), and so Dai,j is an integer
for every i and j. Since the determinant of I is bounded by CN, D is also bounded by
ON .
173

Now the integral 2-cycles DAj - >i Da,jAi span the kernel of the matrix M.
Each of these 2-cycles has less than NCNCN 2-simplices, and so it lies in the span of
some surfaces with genus less than CN .
OE
Over the course of the last proof, we have also bounded the size of the torsion
subgroup of HL (X, Z). This subgroup is equal to the integral vectors in the image of
M modulo the lattice L, and so D is the order of the torsion subgroup of H1 (X, Z). As
we showed above, this order is less than CN. By an analogous argument, the torsion
subgroup of H2(X, Z) has order less than C N .
We can now give the proof of Theorem 9.2. First we recall the statement.
Theorem 9.2 Let M be a closed oriented hyperbolic 3-manifold with injectivity
radius e. Let X be a 3-dimensional pseudo-manifold which can be triangulated by N
simplices. If there is a map of non-zero degree from X to M, then e is at least C- N .
On the other hand, we will give examples of closed oriented hyperbolic 3-manifolds
which can be triangulated with N simplices and have injectivity radius less than c- N,
for a constant c > 1.
Proof. Let f be a map of non-zero degree from X to M. According to Lemma 9.1, we
can homotope f to a map with 2-dilation less than C. Since M has injectivity radius
e, it must contain a closed geodesic of length less than 2e. According to Propositions
9.4.1 and 9.4.2, either M has volume at least cE- 1/ 6, or Hi (M, Z) has a torsion element
with order at least CE- 1/ 6, or M has Hopf volume at least c - 1/ 4, or M has spanning
genus at least C -1 / 2.
If M has volume at least Cc-1/ 6, then according to Thurston's straightening theo-
rem, N is greater than CE- 1/6, and we are done.
If H1(M, Z) has a torsion element of order T, greater than Ce-1/ 6, then we proceed
as follows. Let a be this torsion class, and let a* be the Poincare dual class in
H2(M, Z). The element f*(a*) in H2(X, Z) must also be torsion with some order S
dividing T. We claim that T divides the product of S with the degree of f. Let aT
be the image of a in H,(M, ZT). Let a 
be the Poincare dual class in H2(M, ZT).
The pullback Sf*(a*4) also vanishes. Since Ho(M,Z) is free, H1(M, ZT) is equal to
174

Hom(Hl(M, Z), ZT). In particular, we can choose a class a in H1(M, ZT) so that
a(a) = a(ar) = 1 modulo T. Therefore, the cup product a U a* is equal to the
fundamental cohomology class OT in H3(M, ZT). We let [X]T denote the image of
the fundamental homology class of X in H3(X, ZT). The degree of f modulo T is
given by the pairing f*(OT)([X]T). Finally, S times the degree of f modulo T is given
by f*(SOT)([X]T). 
But f*(SOT) is equal to f*(a) U Sf*(a*), which vanishes. Since
the volume of M is at least on the order of 1, the degree of f is at most CN by
Thurston's simplex straightening argument. Also, the number S is bounded by the
order of the torsion subgroup of H2(X, Z), which is bounded by CN. Therefore CN
must be greater than CE- 1 / 6 , and we are done.
If the Hopf volume of M is at least c-1 / 4, we proceed as follows. Since the map
f has 2-dilation less than C and degree non-zero, the combinatorial Hopf volume of
X must be at least Cc- 1 /4 . According to Proposition 9.3.3, the combinatorial Hopf
volume of X is less than CN . Therefore, CN must be greater than CE- 1/ 4, and we are
done.
If the spanning genus of M is at least cE- 1/2, we proceed as follows. Since the degree
of f is non-zero, and since M obeys Poincare duality, the map f from H2(X, Q) to
H2(M, Q) must be surjective. Therefore, the spanning genus of X must be at least
CE- 1 / 2.
According to proposition 9.4.3, the spanning genus of X is less than CN .
Therefore, CN must be greater than cC-1 /2 and we are done.
We have now proven that if X admits a map of non-zero degree to M, then 
is at least C- N. On the other hand, we will construct closed oriented hyperbolic
manifolds M which can be triangulated by N simplices and which contains closed
geodesics of length less than c- N . Begin with a non-compact finite volume hyperbolic
3-manifold Mo with a single cusp. We view Mo as a manifold with boundary and we
triangulate it. Let T be the restriction of our triangulation to the torus boundary.
Next, we pick an Anosov diffeomorphism 
of the torus and a triangulation of the
mapping cylinder of this diffeomorphism, which restricts to the triangulation T on
each boundary component. Finally, we pick a curve co in the boundary torus and a
triangulation of a solid torus which restricts to T on the boundary and which Dehn
175

fills the curve co. To form the 3-manifold M, we glue together M0, N copies of the
mapping cylinder, and one copy of the solid torus. 
(At each gluing, we glue one
torus with triangulation T to another torus with the same triangulation by using
the identity map.) The resulting 3-manifold can be triangulated with less than CN
simplices. It is diffeomorphic to the Dehn filling of Mo along the curve -N(co). If we
fix any basis of H1(T2), then for most choices of co, the coefficients of the homology
class T-N([Co]) 
grow exponentially with N. By Thurston's theory, almost all of these
Dehn fillings are closed hyperbolic 3-manifolds, with uniformly bounded volume.
If the short geodesic in the core of the Dehn filling has length E, then the radius of
the horosphere cross-section of the Margulis tube must be roughly e-1 / 2, and so there
is a homologically non-trivial simple curve in the boundary of the Margulis tube of
length less than C-1 /2 which bounds a disk in the Margulis tube. For large values of
N, we have proved above that this length must be at least cN, for a constant c > 1.
Therefore, the length of the shortest geodesic is less than c-N.
a
Corollary. Given any closed oriented 3-manifold X, there are at most finitely many
closed oriented hyperbolic 3-manifolds M with maps of non-zero degree from X to M.
Proof. If X can be triangulated with N simplices, then according to Theorem 9.2, M
must have injectivity radius at least C - N . According to the Thurston straightening
argument, M must have volume at most CN. By Cheeger finiteness theorem, there
are only finitely many hyperbolic manifolds obeying these bounds. 
O
This result is due to Teruhiko Soma. Trying to understand Soma's result was the
main motivation for the work in this section. The proof above essentially shows the
following finiteness result for closed oriented hyperbolic 3-manifolds.
Proposition 9.4.4. For any number B, the set of closed, oriented, hyperbolic 3-
manifolds with volume less than B, the order of the torsion subgroup of HI less than
B, Hopf volume less than B, and spanning genus less than B is finite.
Proof. Let M be a closed oriented hyperbolic 3-manifold obeying the above bounds.
Because the Hopf volume of M is less than B, the volume of M is less than B, the
176

spanning genus of M is less than B, and the order of the torsion subgroup of H1 is
less than B, the injectivity radius of M is at least C-B .
By Cheeger finiteness, the
set of hyperbolic 3-manifolds with volume less than B and injectivity radius at least
C-B contains only finitely many diffeomorphism types. 
L]
In particular, there are only finitely many hyperbolic homology three-spheres with
volume less than B and Hopf volume less than B. It seems likely that there are only
finitely many hyperbolic homology three-spheres with Hopf volume less than B.
9.5 
The situation for non-orientable manifolds
Our proof of Soma's theorem does not extend to non-orientable manifolds, because in-
tersection numbers, linking numbers, and the Hopf invariant are only defined modulo
2 in non-orientable manifolds. As Wang discovered, the analogue of Soma's theorem
is false for non-orientable manifolds.
Theorem. (Wang) There is a closed non-orientable 3-manifold X which admits de-
gree 1 maps to infinitely many different closed oriented hyperbolic 3-manifolds M.
(The degree is only defined modulo 2.)
In the paper [4], Boileau and Wang published an incorrect proof that there is a
closed oriented 3-manifold which admits maps of non-zero degree to infinitely many
different closed oriented hyperbolic 3-manifolds. According to Soma's theorem, there
is no such closed oriented 3-manifold. Wang told me that by carefully reading this
incorrect proof, one gets a correct proof of the theorem above. I had some trouble
adapting the argument from [4], but I eventually found a proof along similar lines.
For the reader's reference, here is a proof of Wang's theorem.
Proof. The main idea of the proof is a clever choice of the domain which is due to
Wang. We begin with a finite volume hyperbolic manifold Xo with a single cusp,
which we view as a manifold with a torus boundary. Let us pick a basis for H1 (0X 0),
with elements a and b, so that the intersection product of a and b equal to 1. We then
perform a filling of X0 roughly analogous to a Dehn filling but using a Mobius band
177

in place of a disk. Let us make a precise construction. Let B denote the Mobius band.
The boundary of B x S1 is a torus. We pick a diffeomorphism 0 of the boundary
of X0 with the boundary of B x S1, so that q((9B) is homologous to a and 
(S)
is homologous to b. We define X to be the result of gluing X0 to B x S1 with this
diffeomorphism.
We will construct degree 1 maps from X to half of all the Dehn fillings of X 0. All
but finitely many of these Dehn fillings admit hyperbolic metrics, and they include
infinitely many different manifolds. For every pair (m, n) of relatively prime integers,
let X(m, n) denote the Dehn filling of Xo along a curve homologous to ma + nb. The
manifold X(m, n) consists of the union of X0 and a solid torus, glued along their
boundaries. 
The map that we will construct from X to X(m, n) takes Xo to Xo
identically. The restriction of the identity map to the boundary gives a map from the
boundary of B x S1 to the boundary of D2 x S1.
We now investigate in what cases we can extend this map to a map from B x S1
to D2 x S1. Since maps to D2 automatically extend, it suffices to extend our map
from the boundary of B x S1 to its interior.
The homotopy classes of maps from the boundary of B x S1 to S1 are simply
H1(T
2 ). The cohomology class of our map is n(oB)* - m(Sl)*, 
where (OB)* is the
cocycle that takes the value 1 on aB and the value 0 on S1. Now B is homotopic to
S1. Let c denote a circle in B which is a deformation retract of B. Then HI(B x S1) is
generated by c* and (S1)*. The inclusion map of dB x S1 into B x S1 induces a map on
cohomology taking c* to 2(6B)* and (S1)* to (S1)*. A given map from the boundary
to S1 extends to the interior if and only if the corresponding class in H1(aB x S1 )
lies in the image of H1(B x S1). This condition is met if n is even. Therefore, for
every even n, there is a degree 1 map from the non-orientable 3-manifold X to the
Dehn filling X(m, n). 
[
178

Appendix A
Other Stretching Conditions
In this thesis, we have been studying k-contracting mappings. We might ask, though,
whether there are other conditions which limit how much a mapping can stretch the
underlying space. For simplicity, we restrict attention to maps from RI to RI.
The way in which a linear map distorts the Euclidean metric is described by its
singular values. We recall that any n x n matrix M can be written as a product
0 1D0 2, where 01 and 02 are orthogonal matrices and D is a non-negative diagonal
matrix. The diagonal entries of D, arranged in order, are 0 < sl < ... < s. They are
called the singular values of M.
We will call a set S of n x n matrices a stretching condition if, whenever M is a
matrix in S, and whenever N is another matrix with si(N) < si(M) for each i, then
N is also in S. In particular, membership in S only depends on the singular values
of a matrix. The set S codifies some restriction on how much a matrix is allowed to
stretch space.
A smooth map f from a domain U in R n to Rn is said to obey the condition S
if the derivative df lies in S at each point of U. Since the condition S depends only
on the singular values of a matrix, it also makes sense to say that a smooth map f
between Riemannian n-manifolds obeys the condition S.
The k-contracting condition is an example of a stretching condition. A linear
map is k-contracting if its singular values obey S_k+l... 
Sn < 1. A smooth map is
k-contracting if its derivative is k-contracting at each point.
179

There are many other stretching conditions besides k-contracting maps. For in-
stance, for maps from R3 to I 3, we can consider the condition S/2S3 
< 1. I believe
that a linear map obeys 
/2 
3 < 1 if and only if it decreases the 3/2-Hausdorff mea-
sure of all subsets - but I'm not sure because of technicalities with Hausdorff measure.
In any case, this inequality defines a stretching condition. The reader can see that
the set of all stretching conditions is quite large.
In this section, we show that mappings obeying a certain condition S are often
able to approximate any mapping obeying a much more general condition S'.
Before we state a general result, let's look at the simplest example. Suppose that
n is 2, and consider the family of conditions S(a) given by s1s 2
< 1, for a in the
range [0, 2]. From the point of view of linear algebra, we have a continuous family
of different conditions. But when we consider the space of mappings that obey these
inequalities, then a different, discrete situation appears. If a is in the range (0, 1), and
if L is a linear map that obeys S1 S2 < 1, then L can be CO approximated by smooth
maps that obey S(a). If a is bigger than 1, and if L is any linear map at all, then L
can be Co approximated by smooth maps that obey S(a). From this geometric point
of view, the conditions S(a) do not vary continuously with a. Instead, they exhibit
exactly three behaviors. If a = 0, then S(a) describes Lipshitz maps. If a lies in the
range (0, 1], then S(a) describes 2-contracting maps. If a is bigger than 1, then S(a)
describes the class of all maps.
Let us sketch the construction of these Co approximations. Suppose that a is in
the range (0, 1]. It follows that S(a) is satisfied when s1 = s2 = 1, and also when
sl = 0. Let L be a linear map obeying S1S2 < 1. If sl(L) = 0, then L is already in
S(a), so we have nothing to prove. If not, then L is a diffeomorphism from the unit
square to a rectangle with area less than 1. We make a fine lattice in the rectangle,
and we consider the open squares in the lattice. If we take the lattice fine enough,
then these open squares can be isometrically embedded in the unit cube, as some
subset V of U. This isometric embedding gives us a local isometry from V to the
union of these squares, and this local isometry certainly satisfies S(a). 
Moreover,
if we make the lattice quite fine, we can assume that this mapping from V to R is
180

Co close to the linear map L. We extend the mapping we have constructed so far by
mapping the complement of A to the 1-skeleton of the fine lattice in R. Since the
1-skeleton is only 1-dimensional, the resulting map has s = 0, and so it obeys S(a).
We can make the extension so that the resulting map is Co close to L. (The map we
have just constructed is not smooth along the boundary of A, but with a little more
work, we can construct a smooth map.)
A similar construction can be made when a is greater than 1 in order to C°-
approximate any linear map L. We can assume that L maps the unit square onto
some rectangle R with area A. Again we divide the rectangle into squares of side-
1
length . Let Q be a rectangle with dimensions A a- e x Ab e. There is a linear
map from Q to the square with side length e, with singular values sl = A-a- 
and
s2 = A-l. 
In particular s's2 
= 1, and so this linear map obeys S(a). The area
of Q is (1/A)e2. There are Ae-2 small squares in R, and for each of them we pick
a rectangle isometric to Q in U. Because the area of Q is sufficiently small, we can
find this many disjoint rectangles in U. Now we define the union of these rectangles
to be a set V. As before, we map V onto the union of the open squares in R and
the complement of V to the 1-skeleton. This map obeys S(a), and it can be made
arbitrarily Co close to L by taking e small.
The main result of this appendix is a general CO-approximation theorem that
applies to all open stretching conditions. First we make a few definitions. For an
open stretching condition S, define the k-dilation of S, Dk(S) to be the supremal
k-dilation of any matrix in S. The number Dk(S) can take any value in (0, oo]. We
define the condition D(S) to be the set of matrices M so that the k-dilation of M
is less than Dk(M) for every k. The set D(S) is clearly a stretching condition, and
S c D(S).
Theorem A.1. If f is any smooth map on the closed unit ball which obeys cD(S),
then f can be Co approximated by Lipshitz maps fi, whose derivatives obey S almost
everywhere.
As usual, c denotes a constant that depends only on the dimension n.
181

The main ingredient of the proof is Gromov's theory of convex integration, which
is a general, efficient tool for constructing Co approximations. In the first section, we
review the relevant part of convex integration. The tools of convex integration reduce
the proof to an algebraic problem about the space of matrices, which we carry out in
the second section.
1. Review of Convex Integration
Let R be any subset of the space of n x n matrices. The set R is called principally
convex if, whenever M1 and M2 belong to R and the rank of Ml - M2 is equal to 1,
then the line segment from M1 to M2 also belongs to R. The principal convex hull of
a set R is defined to be the intersection of all principally convex sets containing R.
The principal convex hull of R is denoted Convp(R).
Theorem. (Gromov) Let R be a bounded open set in the space of matrices. Let f
be a smooth function on the closed ball which obeys the condition Convp(R). Then f
can be CO approximated by Lipshitz functions fi, whose derivatives almost everywhere
obey R.
This theorem is a simple case of the theorem on page 218 of Gromov's book Partial
Differential Relations [13].
The idea behind this theorem is the following. Suppose that the rank of M1 - M2
is equal to 1. We are going to construct a piecewise linear approximation to the linear
map tM1 + (1 - t)M2, for a number t between 0 and 1. Since the rank of M1 - M2 is
equal to 1, it follows that there is an (n-l)-plane W in Rn so that M1 and M2 agree
on W. We can view W as the vanishing set of a linear function L. Next, we define
a piecewise linear function F on Rn, whose derivative is equal to M1 if the value of
L modulo 1 lies in [0, t] and is equal to M 2 if the value of L modulo 1 lies in [t, 1].
Because Ml and M2 agree on W, these derivatives fit together on the boundaries to
give a PL map. (To specify the map F completely, we also set F(O) = 0.) We can
calculate F(x) by integrating the derivative of F along the line from 0 to x. If IL(x)
is large, then this line spends about t/1 of its length in the region where dF = M1
and about (1 - t)/1 of its length in the region where dF = M2. Therefore, F(x)
182
_ _

is approximately equal to tMl(x) + (1 - t)M 2(x). Next we define piecewise linear
functions F, whose derivative is equal to Ml if the value of L modulo e lies in [0, te]
and is equal to M2 if the value of L modulo E lies in [It, E]. As e goes to zero, F,
converges in C° to the linear map tM1 + (1 - t)M2.
In order to prove Gromov's theorem, it is necessary to repeat this argument at
many locations and on many scales.
2. The Principal Convex Hull of a Stretching Condition
Given Gromov's theorem in the last section, the next step is to compute the
principal convex hull of a stretching condition. We are not able to compute it exactly,
but we are able to approximate it up to a constant factor.
Proposition A.0.1. Let S be an open stretching condition. Then the principal con-
vex hull of S contains cD(S). On the other hand, the principal convex hull of S is
contained in D(S).
This proposition is a problem in linear algebra, but the proof is fairly long. We
begin by proving the easy direction that the principal convex hull of S is contained
in D(S). It suffices to show that the set of matrices with si...sn < B is principally
convex for any number B. If not, pick matrices M1 and M2 in this set, with rank
M1 - M2 = 1, and with M = tM1 - (1 - t)M2 not in this set. After changing basis
in the domain and the range, we can assume that M is diagonal with Mi,i = si(M).
Therefore, the lower right (n-i+1) by (n-i+1) sub-matrix of M has determinant bigger
than B. Call this submatrix M', and similarly, define Ml and M2 to be the lower right
(n-i+1) by (n-i+1) sub-matrices of M1 and M2. By assumption the determinants
of M' and M2 are less than B. 
But the rank of M - M2 is at most 1, and so
detM' = tdetMi + (1 - t)detM2. Therefore, the determinant of M' is less than B, and
so the set si...sn < B is principally convex. It follows that the set D(S) is principally
convex, and so the principal convex hull of S lies in D(S).
Now we begin the proof in the hard direction. The first step of the proof deals
with a special case for the set S.
Lemma A.1. Suppose that S is equal to the set of matrices with si < Bi, for some
183

numbers 0 < B1 < ... < Bn. Then the principal convex hull of S is equal to D(S).
Proof. The key to this proof is to break the construction into very small steps.
We define S(j) to be the set of matrices obeying the following inequalities.
1. si < Bi for i from 1 to j-1.
2. si... Sn < Bi. Bn.
The set S(n) is equal to S, and the set S(1) is equal to D(S). Therefore, it suffices
to prove that the principal convex hull of S(j + 1) includes S(j).
We will prove this inclusion in a series of even smaller steps.
We define S(j, k) to be the set of matrices obeying the following conditions.
1. M is in S(j).
2. For some number 1 in the range j < I < k, we have the equality sl...sn = B ...Bn.
This defines S(j, k) when k is in the range j + 1 < k < n. As k increases, the set
S(j, k) becomes a larger subset of S(j). We also define S(j, n + 1) to be equal to all
of S(j).
The set S(j, j + 1) actually lies in S(j + 1). If M lies in S(j, j + 1), then sj...s_ <
Bj...B,, but sj+l...sn = Bj+l... B. 
Therefore, sj 
Bj. Since M lies in S(j), it
automatically obeys all the other conditions of S(j + 1).
The main inductive step of our proof is to show that the principal convex hull of
the union of S(j + 1) and S(j, k) includes S(j, k + 1). Once we have this inductive
step, it follows immediately that the principal convex hull of S(j + 1) includes S(j),
and therefore that the principal convex hull of S contains D(S). We now prove the
inductive step.
Suppose that M lies in S(j, k + 1). Since all of our conditions depend only on the
singular values of M, we can assume that M is a diagonal matrix with Mi,i = si(M).
We define M(t) to be the matrix that agrees with M except that M(t)jk 
= t. We will
prove that for some choice of t, M(t) lies in the union of S(j + 1) and S(j, k).
We can assume that M does not itself lie in S(j + 1), and therefore sj(M) > Bj.
On the other hand, since M does lie in S(j, k+ 1) which lies in S(j), sj_(M) 
< Bj_ 1.
We can also assume that M does not itself lie in S(j, k). Since M lies in S(j, k + 1)
but not S(j, k), we know that Sk+1...Sn = Bk+l...Bn. 
Since M does lie in S(j), we
184

know that Sk..sn 
< B.....B. 
Therefore, 
k < Bk. Since M lies in S(j), we also know
that 
k+2...sn < B1+2...Bn. Therefore, sk+1 > Bk+l.
Now, we consider the singular values of M(t). As t increases, sj(M(t)) decreases
and sk(M(t)) increases, while keeping the product sjsk constant. All of the other
singular values remain the same. We continue to increase t until either sj(M(t)) = Bj
or sk(M(t)) = Bk.
To make sure that this happens for some value of t, we need to check two things.
The first thing is to make sure that sk(M(t)) 
remains less than or equal to sk+l(M(t)).
We know that Sk+l(M) > Bk+l > Bk, so this inequality holds. Similarly, we have to
make sure that sj(M(t)) remains greater than or equal to sj_l(M(t)). 
We know that
sj_l(M(t)) 
< Bj_ 1 < Bj, so this inequality holds also. The second thing is to check
that as we increase t very strongly, the singular value sk(M(t)) 
will indeed get high
enough. This part is obvious, because s(M(t)) 
is obviously at least t.
If sj(M(t)) 
Bj, then M(t) lies in S(j + 1). On the other hand if sk(M(t)) =
Bk, then M(t) lies in S(j, k). The singular values of M(-t) 
are the same as the
singular values of M(t). 
Therefore, M(-t) 
also lies in the union of S(j + 1) and
S(j, k). The rank of M(t)- 
M(-t) 
is equal to 1, so our principal convex hull includes
(1/2)M(t) + (1/2)M(-t). 
But this average is just M. This finishes the proof of the
inductive step. Our induction then shows that the principal convex hull of S contains
D(S). On the other hand, we have already proven that S is contained in D(S). 
O
Now that we have proven the lemma, we return to the general case that S is any
open stretching condition. We need to prove that the convex hull of S contains cD(S).
Let D(r) denote the matrices in D(S) with rank at most r. It suffices to prove the
following inductive step.
We will prove that the principal convex hull of S together with (const)D(r) in-
cludes c(const)D(r + 1).
Let M be a matrix in D(r + 1), with singular values si(M).
Since M lies in D(S), there is some matrix Mk in S with sn-k+l(Mk)...sn(Mk) 
>
sn-k+l(M) ...s(M). 
Because S is a stretching condition, it includes any matrix with
singular values si < si(Mk). According to our lemma, the principal convex hull of S
185

includes any matrix with singular values obeying si...s 
< si(Mk)...sn(Mk) for each
i. In particular, the principal convex hull of S contains any matrix with sl 
... 
Sn-k = 0 and Sn-k+l < ... < Sn < (sn-k+l(M)...sn(M)) 
/k.
Now we define M(p) to be the space of all matrices with singular values obeying
the following inequalities.
1. For i from 1 to p, si < si(M).
1
2. For all other i, si < (sp+l...sn)n-.
Since the rank of M is equal to r + 1, the space M(n - r - 2) is contained in
the principal convex hull of S, according to the results in the last paragraph, taking
k = r + 1. On the other hand, the space M(n - 1) contains the matrix M. Using
these space M(p), we can break our task into steps. It suffices to prove the following
smaller inductive step.
We will prove that the principal convex hull of the union of S, cD(r), and cM(p)
contains 3- n cM(p + 1).
This inductive step, we break into yet smaller pieces. We define M(p, q) to be the
set of all matrices whose singular values obey the following conditions.
1. For i from 1 to p, si < si(M).
2. Fori 
p+l, si 
"-P
2. For i = p + 1, si < Sp1 (Sp+2...Sn) (n-p)(n-p-1)
1
3. For i from p + 2 to n- q, si < (Sp+l...s,)-p.
1
4. For i from n -q + 1 to n, si 
(sp+2...sn)n
-
P
-
These spaces are defined for p from n-r-2 to n-2 and q from 0 to n -p- 
1. The
space M(p, O) is equal to M(p), and the space M(p, n - p - 1) is equal to M(p + 1).
Therefore, it suffices to prove an even smaller inductive step.
We will prove that the principal convex hull of the union of S, cD(r) and cM(p, q)
contains (1/3)cM(p, q + 1).
Let N be a matrix in M(p, q + 1). We have to prove that (1/3)cN lies in the
principal convex hull of the union of S, cD(r) and cM(p, q). To see this, it suffices to
check that N lies in the principal convex hull of the union of S, 3D(r) and 3M(p, q).
We may assume without loss of generality that N does not itself lie in M(p, q), and
1
therefore that s,_q(N) is at least (sp+l...s) -- T.
186


Since all the spaces involved depend only on the singular values of the matrices
involved, we can select a diagonal representative for N, with Ni,i equal to si(N).
Finally, we will actually do a principal convex interpolation.
We define two matrices N(1) and N(2), by modifying N. The matrix N(1) agrees
with N except for three entries. First, N(1)n-q,n-q = 0. Second, N(1)p+,nq is a
number t, on the order of Nn-q,nq, 
which we will choose later. Third, N(1)p+1,p+l
1
is equal to Np+,p+lNnq,nq(sp+(M)...sn(M)) -
n-
-
. Because N lies in M(p, q + 1),
the term Np+l,p+l obeys an inequality written above, which implies that the last
expression is bounded by Nn-q,n-q. The matrix N(1) has rank r. Since N lies in
D(r + 1) and since the number t will be less than 2Nn-q,n-q, it easy to check that
N(1) lies in 3D(r).
The matrix N(2) agrees with N except for two entries. 
First, N(2)nq,n_q is
equal to 2(sp+... Sn)n. 
Second, N(2)p+,p+1 is equal to N(1)p+,p+ 1. Since N lies in
M(p, q + 1), a simple but boring calculation shows that N(2) lies in 2M(p, q).
The rank of N(1)-N(2) 
is equal to 1. Therefore, the average (1/2)N(1)+1/2N(2)
is contained in the principal convex hull of the union of 3D(r) and 2M(p, q).
We claim that for an appropriate choice of t, less than 2Nn_q,n_q, the singular
values of this average will be equal to the singular values of N. This average matrix
has only one off-diagonal term. We should think of it as a 2 x 2 submatrix at the p+ 1
and n - q coordinates, plus a diagonal matrix. The singular values of the diagonal
matrix are just the (n-2) singular values of N, leaving out sp+l(N) and snq(N).
Therefore, it suffices to understand the singular values of the 2 x 2 submatrix. The
sub-matrix is upper triangular. Its determinant is equal to sp+l(N)sn_q(N). When
t=O, the submatrix is diagonal. Its singular values are the diagonal terms. Their
product is sp+l(N)sn_q(N), but they are closer together than the singular values of
1
N, because we assumed that sn_q(N) is at least (sn-+l...sn) -
which is the larger
singular value of the diagonal submatrix. 
The upper right-hand term of the sub-
matrix is t/2. As t increases, its singular values move farther apart, maintaining the
same product. When t/2 reaches sn_q(N), then the larger singular value will be at
least 
n-q(N). 
Therefore, for some intermediate value of t, the singular values of the
187

average are equal to those of N.
Since all the spaces involved depend only on the singular values, the matrix N
itself is also in the principal convex hull of the union of S, 3D(r) and 3M(p, q). This
statement completes the inductive step of our proof. Applying the induction, we see
that the principal convex hull of S contains cD(S). 
This finishes the proof of the
proposition.
Given Gromov's theorem and this tedious calculation of principal convex hulls, the
proof of our main theorem is very quick. Suppose that S is a bounded open stretching
conditions, and that f is a smooth map on the unit ball that obeys cD(S). According
to our last calculations, cD(S) lies in the principal convex hull of S. Therefore, ac-
cording to Gromov's theorem, the map f can be approximated in COby Lipshitz maps
fi that obey S almost everywhere. Now suppose that S is only an open stretching
condition. Suppose that f is a smooth map on the closed unit ball that obeys cD(S).
Since the closed ball is compact, f actually obeys a compact subset of cD(S). There-
fore, f obeys cD(S') for some bounded open subset S' of S which is also a stretching
condition. According to Gromov's theorem, the map f can be approximated in Co by
Lipshitz maps fi that obey S' almost everywhere. Since S' is a subset of S, the maps
fi obey S almost everywhere.
3. The S-Dilation of Diffeomorphisms
We have had in mind a generalization of our first problem about k-contracting
maps to other stretching conditions.
Let S be an open stretching condition. Since S contains an open ball around 0,
any matrix lies in AS for some sufficiently large number A. We define the S-dilation
of a matrix M to be the infimal number A so that M lies in AS. For example, if S is
the set of k-contracting matrices, then the S-dilation of M is equal to the k-dilation
of M raised to the power (1/k). The S-dilation of a smooth map f is defined to be
the supremal value of the S-dilation of df at any point in the domain of f.
Problem. Let R and R' be n-dimensional rectangles, and let S be a stretching con-
dition. Estimate the smallest S-dilation of any diffeomorphism from R to R.
188
___

Since S is contained in D(S), the S-dilation of any map is at least as great as
its D(S)-dilation. 
On the other hand, our theorem provides some evidence for the
following conjecture.
Conjecture. If there is a diffeomorphism from R to R' with D(S)-dilation B, then
there is a nearby diffeomorphism from R to R' with S-dilation less than CB.
Our theorem constructs a degree 1 Lipshitz map from R to R' (taking the boundary
of R to the boundary of R'), with S-dilation less than CB almost everywhere.
If the conjecture is true, then, up to a constant factor, our problem reduces
to the special case that S = D(S). 
In other words, S is given by the condition
k-dilation(M) < Ak for some sequence of numbers Ak. These considerations highlight
the following special case of our problem.
Problem. Given n-dimensional rectangles R and R', estimate the largest number A
so that there is a diffeomorphism from R to AR' with k-dilation less than Ak for each
k.
189

190
-
-
-

Appendix B
Literature on Area-Contracting
Maps
In this appendix, we will survey all of the results that I know in the mathematical
literature which relate to area-contracting maps. I would be very interested to learn
of more. One goal of this appendix is to give some context for the results in the thesis.
All of the results we have mentioned in the thesis come from remarks in two papers
by Gromov.
In appendix 1 of the paper "Filling Riemannian Manifolds" [12], Gromov discusses
the k-width. Using Almgren's Morse theory (see B below), he gives the sharp value
for the k-width of the unit n-sphere, and also estimates the k-width of (M, g) in terms
of sectional curvature and injectivity radius. Then he gives his elementary estimate
for the k-width of the unit sphere, by repeatedly using the isoperimetric inequality.
(We repeat this argument in Proposition 3.1.1.) This argument shows in particular
that the unit ball in the n-dimensional space 1C(n) has k-width at least c(n). Gromov
raised the problem whether c(n) is bounded below as n goes to infinity (for a fixed k).
Such a bound would imply that every closed Riemannian k-manifold with the volume
of every 1-ball less than (k) has filling radius less than 1. (I believe this problem is
still open.)
There is a scattered discussion of k-dilation in the long essay "Carnot-Caratheodory
spaces as seen from within" [10]. This essay is mostly about generalizations of
191

Riemannian geometry, but certain results about Riemannian geometry appear in it
as starting points for investigations on Carnot-Caratheodory 
spaces. In particular,
the essay includes several results about the homotopy types of maps with small k-
dilations. First Gromov gives an estimate for the rational homotopy invariants of a
map with k-dilation less than A. He goes on to show that rational homotopy invari-
ants can be controlled by the Lq norm of IAkdf for appropriate choices of q. Even the
L1 norm of Akdf I has an effect on homotopy. Namely, Gromov shows that if the L1
norm of IAkdf is sufficiently small, then f can be homotoped to a map that takes the
k-skeleton of the domain to the (k-1)-skeleton of the range. If k = 2, this homotopy
shows that the map 7rl(M) --+ rl(N) factors through a free group.
Finally, Gromov proves that a map from a compact simply connected manifold
with sufficiently small 2-dilation is null-homotopic. A sketch of the proof appears on
pages 229-230 of [10]. (The proof is not very detailed. Here is my understanding of
the main idea. For example, suppose we have a map f from Sn to a complex X in
RN with very small 2-dilation. View Sn as a family of 2-spheres, parameterized by
the (n-2)-ball. Each 2-sphere is mapped to a 2-sphere of small area. By Riemann
mapping theorem, we can change coordinates so that the mapping on each 2-sphere
has bounded Dirichlet energy s2 df12. By the Sobolev inequality, the map on each
2-sphere then has small BMO norm. We homotope the map by convolving it with
a smoothing kernel, so that at the end of the homotopy it maps each 2-sphere to a
point. At any stage in the middle of the homotopy, a given point is mapped to a
weighted average of the value of f on a ball around that point in S2. Since our map
has small BMO norm, it actually comes close to taking that average value, and so
the average value lies inside of a small neighborhood of X. If the 2-dilation of f is
sufficiently small, this neighborhood retracts to X. Therefore, the map from Sn to X
is homotopic to a map which collapses each 2-sphere in our family to a point. Hence
the map from Sn factors through the map to the (n-2)-ball and is null-homotopic.)
Area-contracting maps also appear very briefly in Gromov's book Partial Differ-
ential Relations [13]. In an exercise, Gromov states that the k-contracting condition
is CO-closed. This means that if fi are C' k-contracting maps that converge in Co to
192
_I · ____

a C1 map f, then f is also k-contracting. (Since Gromov does not include the proof,
we provide it here. If f is not k-contracting, then its derivative at a certain point p is
not k-contracting. Therefore, it maps a small (k-1)-dimensional sphere, centered at
p, bounding a k-ball of volume V, to a (k-1)-dimensional ellipsoid with filling volume
more than V. A very good CO approximation of f maps that (k-1)-dimensional sphere
to a cycle that lies very close to the ellipsoid, and so also has filling volume more than
V. Therefore, a good CO approximation of f is not k-contracting.)
To my knowledge, these are the only results in the literature that deal with area-
contracting maps for their own sake. I have found a number of other papers which
relate area-contracting maps to other topics. Usually, these papers do not mention
area-contracting maps by name. They are listed here, with short descriptions, ac-
cording to topic.
A. Scalar curvature
Gromov and Lawson mention area-contracting maps in their famous work on
scalar curvature [11]. In particular, they prove the following estimate, using the
Atiyah-Singer index theorem.
Theorem. (Gromov and Lawson) If (M, g) is a complete spin Riemannian n-manifold
with scalar curvature greater than a constant C, then any compactly supported 2-
contracting map from M to the unit n-sphere has degree zero.
As far as I know, the paper by Gromov and Lawson is the first paper to re-
fer to area-contracting maps. In section 5 of [11], they prove the above theorem
for 1-contracting maps. In section 6, they generalize it to get the result above for
2-contracting maps. The generalization to 2-contracting maps allows them to under-
stand positive scalar curvature on certain non-compact manifolds. For instance, they
prove that the manifold Tn -
x R does not admit a complete metric with positive
scalar curvature.
B. Families of cycles
The sharpest estimates for k-width come from Almgren's work on Morse theory on
the space of cycles. Almgren studied the space of k-cycles on a Riemannian manifold,
193

equipped with the topology coming from the flat norm. The k-volume is a function
on the space of k-cycles, and its critical points are minimal surfaces. There is a
unique empty cycle with volume 0, and every other cycle has positive volume. If the
k-volume were a smooth function V on a finite-dimensional manifold, with a unique
minimum with value 0, and if C were the first non-zero critical value of V, then the
set V-((o, C)) would be contractible. Almgren proved an analog of this result on
the space of cycles.
Theorem. (Almgren) Let f be a continuous map from Sm into the space of k-cycles on
a Riemannian manifold M. Let Vo be the smallest k-volume of a non-trivial minimal
k-cycle in M. If the image off consists of k-cycles with volume less than Vo, then f is
contractible.
(I have had some trouble finding a reference for this theorem. I believe that it
appears in Almgren's paper "The theory of varifolds - a variational calculus in the
large for the k-dimensional area integrated". Almgren's paper was never published,
and I have not been able to find a copy. According to Jean Taylor's introduction to
[1], there is a copy in the Mathematics and Physics Library at Princeton University.)
In an earlier paper [2], Almgren determined the homotopy groups of the spaces of
cycles.
Theorem. (Almgren) Let C(k) denote the space of integral k-cycles in a Riemannian
manifold M. Then 7ri(C(k)) = Hi+k(M, Z).
I think that Almgren's work provides the most natural definition of k-width. If
we pick an orientation for M, we can define a to be the homotopy class in 71rnk(C(k))
which corresponds to the generator of Hn(M, Z). Then, we define the Almgren k-
width of M to be less than W if there exists a map f from Sn - k to C(k) in the class
a so that every k-cycle in the image of f has k-volume less than W. (The Almgren
k-width does not depend on the orientation that we chose.) The Almgren k-width is
the smallest k-volume of a family of k-cycles which sweep out (M, g) with degree 1.
Because the fibers of a generic PL map form a family of flat cycles in this homotopy
194
I__

class, the Almgren k-width is less than or equal to the k-width we have used in this
thesis.
According to the first theorem we cited above, the Almgren k-width of the unit
n-sphere is at least the smallest k-volume of a minimal surface in the unit n-sphere.
This smallest volume turns out to be the volume of the unit k-sphere. On the other
hand, if we take the fibers of a linear projection from Sn to Rn-k, they form a family
of flat cycles in the homotopy class a, each with k-volume at most the k-volume of
the unit k-sphere. Therefore, the Almgren k-width of the unit n-sphere (and also our
k-width of the unit n-sphere) is exactly equal to the volume of the unit k-sphere.
C. Magnetic relaxation
The first example of an interesting area-contracting map was given by Zel'dovich
and Gehring, working independently on quite different problems, around 1970. They
each found an open set U inside an arbitrarily small ball in R3 which admits an
area-contracting diffeomorphism onto D2(1) x S1(5), for some very small number 6.
Let us explain the construction. 
Begin with 
- 2 ordinary circular tubes, of length
e and cross-sectional area on the order of 2.
All together the tubes have volume
on the order of , and so we can fit them inside a ball of radius 
1 /3.
Let c be a
curve through this ball, which passes once through each tube, as though the tubes
were beads which we were stringing together. The set U is simply the ball with a
small neighborhood of the curve c cut out. The area-contracting diffeomorphism is
constructed as follows. We map each small tube quasi-isometrically to a tube in the
image of the form B2 (e) x S1(e). Then we extend the diffeomorphism in any way to
the rest of U. After that, we squeeze the image tubes closer together and squeeze in
the S1-direction as much as we like. The complement of the tubes is mapped to a
region which is essentially 1-dimensional, and so the map is area-contracting.
(A more careful analysis shows that we can take J > ce2. The separation between
the beads is on the order of , and so the Lipshitz constant of the map we have
constructed to the disk need be no more than 
- 1, which occurs when two adjacent
beads are mapped to opposite ends of the disk. Therefore, after squeezing the beads
together as much as we like, we only need to shrink the Sl-direction by a factor
195

of e. This estimate is sharp up to a constant factor. Any circle near the center of
D2(1) x S1(6) has filling area on the order of a and so its image must have length at
least on the order of 61/2 in R3. Since the area transverse to the circles increases, the
set U must have volume at least cS1/2. But U lies in a ball with volume e. Therefore,
6 is at most Ce2.)
The Russian physicist Zel'dovich discovered this construction while he and Sakharov
were studying the magnetic fields of neutron stars. A neutron star is a liquid made
from a material which carries a magnetic field. The magnetic field is naturally de-
scribed by a closed 2-form B. If the fluid in the star flows from one position to another
according to a diffeomorphism 0, then the magnetic field transforms according to the
usual pushforward for a 2-form. (This last rule is only an approximation, which dis-
regards a friction effect.) The energy of the magnetic field is the integral of B12.
Sakharov and Zel'dovich wondered whether the fluid can flow into another position
so as to reduce the energy of the magnetic field, which would be released in the form
of heat. This process is called magnetic relaxation.
If the initial magnetic field is given by the equation B(x, y, z) = (-y, x, 0), so that
the field lines simply circle around the z-axis, then Zel'dovich found volume-preserving
diffeomorphisms that decrease the energy of the magnetic field as close as one likes
to zero. Zel'dovich's map takes the complement of the z-axis to the set U described
above (rescaled to have volume 1). Each small bead in U has, as its preimage, a long
thin tube running parallel to the magnetic field. Zel'dovich's map stretches the long
thin tube perpendicular to the magnetic field lines of B while shrinking it parallel to
the magnetic field lines. Therefore, the resulting magnetic field in U is very small on
each bead. The preimages of the beads in U can be chosen to fill almost all of the
volume of the star. With a little care, one can control the energy of the magnetic
field on the complement of the beads.
Zel'dovich raised the problem whether a star can dissipate all of its magnetic
energy in this way for other initial states of the magnetic field. He explained the
problem to Arnold. Arnold wrote a paper [3], which contains a good exposition of
the problem. In that paper, he also proved an estimate for a slightly idealized version
196

of the problem, in which the magnetic fluid fills a homology 3-sphere. He defined the
generalized Hopf invariant of the magnetic field B to be the integral fM B APB, where
PB denotes any primitive of the exact 2-form B. Arnold explained that this integral
measures the average linking of the flow lines of B. If Al denotes the first eigenvalue
of the Laplacian acting from coclosed 1-forms to 2-forms, then the Hopf invariant of
B is at most A11BI2. In other words, the energy of B is at least AllHopf(B)I. Since
the Hopf invariant of B is diffeomorphism invariant, a magnetic fluid with non-zero
Hopf invariant cannot release all of its energy by magnetic relaxation.
D. Quasi-conformal geometry
Gehring discovered the set U while working on conformal geometry. If g is a metric
on D2
S1, then Gehring defined a function ml (g) by the following formula.
m (g) = infpsup(j 
p3dvol)( p)-.
D2xS
1
In this formula, p represents any positive function, and -r represents any circle
homotopic to S1. The resulting number ml(g) is a conformal invariant, because a
conformal change in the metric g by a factor A is equivalent to multiplying p by the
function A1/2. For example, if g is the product metric of a disk with area A and a
circle with length L, then ml (g) is equal to AL -2.
Gehring studied the possible values of ml(U) for a solid torus embedded in R3.
It is easy to find solid tori with arbitrarily small ml by taking long thin tubes. It is
less obvious how to find a solid torus with very large mi. The set U described in the
last section does the job. Recall that we constructed a subset U contained in a ball
of volume e, equipped with an area-contracting diffeomorphism I to D2(1) x S1(J).
We select y to be one of the curves ~-'({x} 
x S1). If we choose -y randomly with
respect to darea(x), the average value of f p will be less than (1/pi) fu p. Therefore,
the value of ml(U) is at least infp(f p3dvol)(f pdvol)-3. This quantity is at least
(volume(U)) - 2, which is greater than e-2. Therefore, a solid torus in R3 can take an
arbitrarily large value of mi. By a continuity argument, a solid torus in R3 can have
ml equal to any value in (0, oo).
In the paper [8], Gehring then proved that if U and V are two linked solid tori,
197

then one of them must have ml at least c. As a special case, it follows that if U and
V are linked and have small volume, then they do not both admit area-contracting
diffeomorphisms to D2(1) x S1(3).
E. Knotted flow lines
In the paper [7], Freedman and He improved Arnold's lower bounds for the energy
of a magnetic field. Let B be a magnetic field on a domain in R3, which we can think
of as either a divergence-free vector field or a closed 2-form. Suppose that B leaves
invariant a solid torus U. (By this I mean that the flow of the vector field leaves U
invariant. Equivalently, we can say that the restriction of the 2-form to the boundary
of U is zero.) Suppose that the flux of the vector field through the solid torus is equal
to F. (By this I mean that the integral of the 2-form B over a fundamental relative
2-cycle of the solid torus is equal to F.) It the tube U is unknotted, then the energy
of the magnetic field may be arbitrarily small. If the tube U is tied in a knot with
genus G, then Freedman and He proved the following estimate about the magnetic
field.
Theorem. 
(Freedman and He) Let B be a divergence free vector field on a domain
D in R3. Suppose that B leaves invariant a tube U, which is tied in a knot of genus
G, and suppose that the flux of B across this tube is equal to F. The the following
inequality holds.
j IB13/ 2 > ( 16)1/4 1F3/2(2G_ -1)3/4
As a very special case, we can suppose that there is an area-contracting diffeo-
morphism from U to the product D2(1) x S1(J). We can define B to the pullback of
the area 2-form on D2(1), and we can set the domain D to be equal to U. The above
inequality shows that the volume of U is at least 27r 5/4(2G- 1) 3/ 4. (Freedman and He
also gave estimates for the conformal modulus ml(U), defined in the last section.)
F. Networks in three dimensional space
In the early 60's, Kolmogorov and Barzdin wrote a geometry paper [17], which
originated in trying to understand one feature of the structure of the brain. The
198

neurons on the brain lie in a thin layer along its outer edge (the grey matter), while
the inside of the brain is taken up by axons joining them. This arrangement allows
many fewer neurons than if the neurons were placed throughout the whole brain. It
is a challenge to explain this small number of neurons.
They modeled the brain as a graph, with each neuron corresponding to a vertex
and each axon corresponding to an edge. The graph has bounded valence. Realizing
the graph in the brain means finding a thick embedding in three space, where each
vertex corresponds to a ball of radius 1 and each edge to the 1-neighborhood of a
curve. They proved that every graph of valence 4 and cardinality N can be embedded
into a cube of side length CvN. 
On the other hand, they proved that with high
probability, a random graph cannot be embedded into a cube of side length less than
The embedding of any graph into a cube of side length Cv/N is achieved by
putting the vertices of the graph along the boundary of the cube and all the edges
of the graph on the inside of the cube. For most graphs, this is a fairly efficient
arrangement.
The interesting point is to explain why most graphs require so much more space
than cubical lattices. In modern terminology, the key fact from graph theory is that
most graphs are 1/100 - expanders. A graph is called a 1/100 - expander if it obeys the
following isoperimetric property: for each subset A of the vertices which contains less
than half of all vertices, the number of edges joining A to its complement is at least
IAI/100. Now the cube of side length S can be swept out by surfaces of area S2, and
one of these surfaces must divide the vertices of F into two equal halves. (Technical
remark: any surface can easily be homotoped, without much increasing its area, to
avoid all the 1-balls corresponding to vertices of F.) Such a surface must cut N/200
edges, meeting each in a surface with area 7r, and so the total area S2 > rN/200.
Therefore the side length of the cube is at least vW/20.
This argument gives a lower bound for the size of a cube containing a thick
expanding graph. Kolmogorov and Barzdin also proved a lower bound for the volume
of the graph, on the order of N3/2. The argument in the preceding paragraph really
199

shows that the width of the embedded network is at least cN. According to the
width volume inequality, the volume of the embedded network is at least cN3/2.
(Kolmogorov and Barzdin have a different proof of the volume bound. I thought of
the width-volume inequality while I was trying to understand their proof.)
The published paper includes the theorems on embedding networks in Euclidean
space with no mention of the biological problem. (Although Barzdin mentions this
problem in the notes accompanying the paper in Kolmogorov's collected works.) The
idea about the structure of the brain seems very interesting to me, but it is not
clear that the argument above explains the small number of neurons in the brain in
a convincing way. The brain need not be a random graph, especially since random
graphs fit poorly into three-dimensional space. Here is a question that would clarify
things. Let F be a random boolean function from {0, 1}m to {0, l}n, for large numbers
m and n. We try to find a circuit with standard gates which computes the function F
along with an embedding of a thickened version of this circuit into three-dimensional
space, so that it fits into a ball which is as small as possible. One technique is to find
a circuit with a minimal number of gates, without paying attention to the geometry
of the graph, and then to embed the circuit with all gates on the boundary of a
ball and the wires on the inside. It would be interesting to know whether a circuit
can be found that substantially beats this technique, for random functions F. If this
technique turns out to be (roughly) optimal, it would reinforce Kolmogorov's point
of view about the brain.
200

Appendix C
Open Questions
Since so little is known about area-contracting maps, there are naturally many open
questions. I have picked out four questions that seem important to me.
1. The sponge problem
If U is an open set in R" with very small volume, say less than e(n), then is there
a 1-expanding embedding of U into the unit ball?
The width-volume inequality gives a very weak result in this direction. With a
very small extra effort, the width-volume inequality shows that for each k there is
a k-expanding embedding of U into Bk x Rn-Ck, where Bk denotes the unit ball in
1Rk. The sponge conjecture asks for an embedding obeying a stronger condition into
a smaller region.
This question is related to estimates for the Lipshitz constant of a diffeomorphism
from the unit n-sphere to (Sn, g). Suppose that the target sphere contains disjoint
metric balls B(xi, Ri). Then any diffeomorphism from the unit n-sphere to the tar-
get sphere must have Lipshitz constant at least c(' Rin)/n. Let L be largest lower
bound obtained from this estimate after considering all sets of disjoint balls in (Sn, g).
Then is there a diffeomorphism from the unit sphere to the target sphere with Lip-
shitz constant less than CL? An affirmative answer to this question would imply an
affirmative answer to the sponge problem, as well as other corollaries.
2. The extension problem for k-contracting maps
Given a map F from the unit sphere in R to RN with k-dilation 1, can F be
201

extended to a map from the unit ball with k-dilation less than some constant C?
This question is a special case of a problem that Gromov raised in [10], on page
220.
When k is equal to 1, the answer is trivially yes, and the sharpest constant C is
also known by the Kirszbraun theorem.
Theorem. (Kirszbraun) Let S be a subset of Rn, and let f be a 1-Lipshitz map from
S to RN (using the extrinsic metric on S). Then S extends to a 1-Lipshitz map from
R n.
This theorem is explained in [15], at the end of Chapter 1. In particular, when
k=1, our question has an affirmative answer and the best constant C is equal to r/2.
The Kirszbraun theorem can be interpreted as follows. If the map f can be ex-
tended to any single curve with endpoints in S, then it can be extended to all of Rn.
A possible generalization of the Kirszbraun theorem to k > 1 would be the following.
Question: Let S be a compact submanifold of Rn, and let f be a map from S to
RN. 
Suppose that for any k-chain C with boundary in S, there is a map F from C
to RN, which agrees with f on the boundary of C, and with the property that the
k-volume of F(C) is less than the k-volume of C. Does it follow that f extends to a
k-contracting map from Rn to RN?
An affirmative answer to this question easily implies that any k-contracting map
from the boundary of the unit ball extends to a map on the unit ball with k-dilation
less than C.
3. Variations of the isoperimetric inequality
In this thesis, we have touched on many ways of describing the size of domains
in Euclidean space, or more generally of Riemannian manifolds. I am very curious
to know if there are isoperimetric inequalities involving some of these sizes. Here are
some examples. Throughout, we assume that U is a bounded open set in Rn with
smooth boundary.
a. Suppose that there is a k-contracting diffeomorphism from U to the unit ball. Is
there a (k-1)-contracting diffeomorphism from the boundary of U to the unit sphere?
202

(We can also consider degree 1 maps in place of diffeomorphisms.)
I have proven a weak result in this direction, [16]. In 3-dimensional space, if there
is a 2-contracting diffeomorphism from U to the unit ball, then there is a degree 1
map from the boundary of U to the unit sphere with Lipshitz constant less than 400.
What if there is a k-contracting diffeomorphism from U to some rectangle R?
b. The extension problem can be seen as a kind of isoperimetric inequality. Sup-
pose that there is a k-contracting diffeomorphism from the unit sphere to the bound-
ary of U. Is there a diffeomorphism from the unit ball to U with k-dilation less than
C?
c. In Chapter 4, we proved that the boundary of U contains disjoint sets Si, so
that the volume of U is less than C E (n-2)-width)(Si) n /n-2. Suppose that U contains
disjoint sets Ui with Ek-width(Ui)
q greater than 1. What can we conclude about
the boundary of U? Suppose that U has k-width at least 1 around some simplicial
complex X. (The k-width of an open set around a complex is defined in Chapter 6.)
What can we conclude about the boundary of U?
d. Suppose that there is a k-contracting map from (U, AU) to a wedge of spheres X
with a large rational homotopy invariant. What can we conclude about the boundary
of U?
We wish to compare the size of an n-dimensional object to the size of an (n-1)-
dimensional object. If the objects had the same dimension, then it would be possible
to compare them more "directly", for instance, by mapping one onto the other. If
U were a bounded open subset of Hilbert space, then the boundary of U would also
be infinite dimensional, and we could ask if there is a distance-expanding map from
U into its own boundary. In finite dimensions this is impossible. Still, we can ask
for some geometric control of a map from U into its boundary, as in the following
question.
e. Let V(U) denote the volume of U. Is there a map F from U to the boundary of
U so that, for each p-dimensional manifold M with p-volume V(M) in the boundary
of U, the (p+l)-volume of F-1(M) is less than CV(U) 1/nV(M)?
f. Can we find any Sobolev inequalities in the same spirit, bounding some size of
203

a compactly supported C1 function f by some other size of df?
4. A filtration of homotopy groups
We can use the k-dilation to define a filtration on the homotopy groups of a
simplicial complex X. Let X be a finite simplicial complex. Put the standard metric
on each simplex of X. (But don't worry: any metric on X would be bilipshitz to
this one and define the same filtration.) Next, we say that a class a E r(X) lies in
Vkr,,(X) if it is represented by pointed maps fi from Sn to X with k-dilation of fi
tending to zero.
These spaces form a filtration: 0 = Vl7rn C V21rn C ... C Vnrn C rn.
Here is what I know about this filtration.
a. The identity class in i7r(Sn) is not in Vnrn, because the volume of the image
of any map in a non-trivial homotopy class is the whole target sphere.
b. More generally, Gromov showed that any rational homotopy invariant defined
using forms of degree at least k vanishes on Vk. In particular, the homotopy class of
the Hopf fibration does not lie in V27r3(S 2).
c. If a homotopy class factors through a space Y of dimension m, then that
homotopy class lies in V,+i.
d. The suspension operation maps Vk7r,(X) to Vk+rn,+,(SX).
e. Gromov proved in [10], on pages 229-230, that V2 rn(X) = 0 for any complex
X and any n greater than 1.
f. In section 7.9, we showed that high suspensions admit maps with small k-
dilation. For example, the homotopy class of the suspension of the Hopf fibration lies
in V37r4(S 3).
More generally, we proved that if a is a homotopy class in n,(Sm), then the p-
fold suspension of a lies in Vkrn+p(Sm+P) for any k > (m/n)p + n. According to
a fairly deep result in homotopy theory, rn(S2) contains stably homotopically non-
trivial elements for infinitely many n. Therefore, for each N, V3 rM(SN) is non-empty
for infinitely many M.
The 100-fold suspension of the Hopf map defines a class in rlo3(S1°2). According
to f, this class lies in V69. According to e, it does not lie in V2. What is the smallest
204

k so that Vk contains this class?
It would be interesting to know if this filtration coincides with a filtration defined
purely in terms of homotopy theory.
How does the filtration interact with the long exact sequence of a fibration? If F
is the fiber of the fibration and B is the base, is it true that the boundary map from
7rn(B) to r_l(F) takes Vk7r(B) to VkT7r(F)?
205

206

Bibliography
[1] Frederick J. Almgren. Plateau's Problem, revised edition. American Mathemat-
ical Society, United States, 2001.
[2] Frederick Justin Almgren. The homotopy groups of the integral cycle groups.
Topology, 1:257-299, 1962.
[3] V. I. Arnold. The asymptotic hopf invariant and its applications. 
Sel. Math.
Sov., 5:327-45, 1986.
[4] Michel Boileau and Shicheng Wang. Non-zero degree maps and surface bundles
over s . Journal of Differential Geometry, 43(4):789-806, 1996.
[5] E. B. Curtis. Some non-zero homotopy groups of spheres. Bulletin of the Amer-
ican Mathematical Society, 75:541-544, 1969.
[6] Donald M. Davis and Mark Mahowald. The image of the stable j-homomorphism.
Topology, 28(1):39-58, 
1989.
[7] Michael Freedman and Zheng-Xu He. Divergence-free vector fields: energy and
asymptotic crossing number. Annals of Math, 134(1):189-229, 1991.
[8] F. Gehring. Inequalities for condensers, hyperbolic capacity, and extremal met-
rics. Michigan Math. Journal, 18:1-20, 1971.
[9] Philip Griffiths and John Morgan. Rational Homotopy Theory and Differential
Forms, volume 16 of Progress in Mathematics. Birkhauser, Boston, 1981.
207

[10] Mikhael Gromov. Carnot-caratheodory spaces as seen from within. In Andre
Bellaiche and Jean-Jacques Risler, editors, Sub-Riemannian Geometry, number
144 in Progress in Mathematics, pages 85-325. Birkhauser, Basel, 1996.
[11] Mikhael Gromov and Blaine Lawson. Positive scalar curvature and the dirac
operator on complete riemannian manifolds. Publ. Math. I.H.E.S., 58:83-196,
1983.
[12] Mikhail Gromov. Filling riemannian manifolds. Journal of Differential Geometry,
18:1-147, 1983.
[13] Mikhail Gromov. Partial Differential Relations. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1986.
[14] Mikhail Gromov. Width and related invariants of riemannian manifolds. Aster-
isque, 163:93-109, 1988.
[15] Misha Gromov. Metric Structures on Riemannian and Non-Riemannian Spaces,
volume 152 of Progress in Mathematics. Birkhauser, Boston, 1999.
[16] Larry Guth. Lipshitz maps from surfaces. to appear in Geometry and Functional
Analysis.
[17] A. N. Kolmogorov and Ya. M. Barzdin. On the realization of networks in three-
dimensional space. In A. N. Shiryayev, editor, Selected Works of Kolmogorov,
Volume 3. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1993.
[18] John Milnor and William Thurston. Characteristic numbers of 3-manifolds. En-
seignement Math., 23:249-54, 1977.
[19] Teruhiko Soma. Non-zero degree maps to hyperbolic 3-manifolds. Journal of
Differential Geometry, 49(3):517-46, 1998.
[20] Hassler Whitney. Geometric Integration Theory, volume 21 of Princeton Math-
ematical Series. Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 1957.
208

