Philosophy Study, August 2021, Vol. 11, No. 8, 607-621 
doi: 10.17265/2159-5313/2021.08.003 
 
Information in the Universal Triangle of Reality for 
Non-living/Living Structures: From Philosophy to  
Neuro/Life Sciences 
Florin Gaiseanu 
Science of Information and Technology Bucharest (Romania) and Barcelona (Spain) 
 
With the purpose to understand better the role of information not only in communication systems, but actually in 
our environmental reality, this paper presented the model of Universal Triangle of Reality, composed by Matter, 
Energy and Information, as fundamental constitutive components of this reality. Arguments coming from the field 
of physics, both at the cosmic and microparticles scale are presented, showing undoubtable conclusions that 
information is a fundamental component of reality in our material world. At the cosmic level, where the unusual 
high concentration of mass in the black holes constitutes a special state of matter, suitable for analysis of their 
special properties, the problem of the conservation principle of information is discussed. At the quantum level, the 
special unusual characteristics derived from the non-localization principle are also highlighted, together with 
information-involved problems and solutions. The Universal Triangle of Reality in the living systems reveals the 
high role of the involved information, both as the informational common organization on the entire evolution scale, 
and as the info-dynamics processes inside of own structure and resulted from interaction with the environment. The 
relevant advances in the approaching and understanding of the functionality of the living systems from 
informational point of view are highlighted, showing the high contribution of information concepts in 
understanding/solving of various older/recent problems in philosophy, neuroscience/neurology/psychiatry, 
neuro-physics/neuropsychology/behavior sciences, geriatrics/gerontology, biology and life sciences.  
Keywords: information-matter-energy, universal triangle of reality in non-living and living systems, informational 
system of human body and living structures, neurosciences and life sciences 
Introduction 
Information has been penetrating many of our daily concerns, without us being aware of its special role. 
Our thoughts are actually information, independently whether these remain memorized/“lived” within our 
intimacy, or whether these are shared/communicated to the external world. Information comes to us also by 
communication through the means of modern techniques, which makes us feel closer to each other, although at 
great geographical distances. The media sphere offers us information, by all written, spoken means, or by 
means of television and/or live broadcast. We live in the middle of an ocean of information, without really 
being aware of it. However, in the common or scientific thinking, not only within the philosophical debates, but 
 
                                                        
Florin Gaiseanu, PhD, Principal Senior Researcher (Professor), Science of Information and Technology Bucharest (Romania) 
and Barcelona (Spain). 
DAVID  PUBLISHING 
D 

FROM PHILOSOPHY TO NEURO/LIFE SCIENCES 
 
608 
even in other branches like neurosciences, this is limited on the belief that reality is composed by matter and 
energy. Indeed, starting from the most important consignments of the past millennia, promoted by the Greek 
philosophy of Aristotle (Shields, 2020) about matter as the main/fundamental constituent of reality, and also by 
the Chinese Confucius’s philosophy (Raphals, 2020), which promoted the energetic view of the Yin/Yang 
(Feminine/Masculine) type of reality structuration, the modern sciences base their philosophical construction 
mainly on matter and energy, as fundamental components of reality in which we live. Although information, as 
a concept, is sometimes explicitly recognized and used to describe the phenomena of nature and some 
processes in the human body, this concept is implicitly and tacitly assumed, without a deep understanding of its 
fundamental importance and involvement in the actual structuring of reality itself. In order to clearly 
understand the importance and involvement of information in everything that does surround us, in a series of 
recent articles was highlighted the role of information in describing the functionality of the human body 
(Gaiseanu, 2018a; 2019c; 2019d; 2020a; 2020b), of the mind (Gaiseanu, 2019d), and even of living systems in 
general (Gaiseanu, 2020a; 2020d; 2021a; 2021c), as well as of the relationship between the mind and the body, 
a problem debated since thousands of years ago (Gaiseanu, 2021b). However, the problem of how information 
intervenes in the structuration of matter was approached very little, and even less in the living structures, only 
sporadically and punctually, in some specific concrete cases. 
Recently it was shown that the real concept of information has not a long history, starting actually since 
the middle of the last century (Gaiseanu, 2021h), although information (viewed as “ideas”/”forms”), was 
proposed/promoted by Plato in his Greek philosophy school (Kraut, 2016), as a key element in the organization 
of the world. In order to demonstrate the broad/deep effect of the introduction of information concepts, 
information is presented as a structural component of reality, from which many scientific branches find a 
suitable source and tool of investigation, or solutions to the problems under debate, as it will be shown in detail 
in the presentation bellow. 
The Universal Triangle of Reality: Information, Matter, Energy 
It seems strange to refer to reality as a composition not only of two elementary components, namely matter 
and energy, but also of a third component, which is information. That is because the role of information in 
shaping the surrounding reality is not really understood. If Plato imagined metaphorically the world not only as 
based, but even as initiated by “ideas” and “forms”, we already live today in such a world of ideas, i.e., 
information. This is created by the human mind and communicated through the internet and the 
microelectronic-based means. However, we still believe that the structural basis of reality is simply assured 
only by matter and energy. 
The intervention of science and technology of information in communications has changed definitely the 
life in the world and transformed it into the modern life we enjoy today. From the couriers of the Roman army, 
who were bringing news from the battlefield, and from the post chaise with horses carrying the written 
correspondence, from a not too distant past, today we are not only the partakers, but also the creators of the 
informational abundance coming from the events of daily life, and from the virtual media sphere of human 
creativity. The time difference since the middle of the last century, when started the intensive development of 
our informational 
era based 
on 
microelectronic 
devices is 
quite 
small, but the 
advancing 
technological/informational step is gigantic. We express our thoughts communicated through internet, we live 
and adapt to this formidable world of information, and the computer, telephony, audio-visual means, become 

FROM PHILOSOPHY TO NEURO/LIFE SCIENCES 
 
609
the informational extension of our senses that improved our life and made it more comfortable and longer than 
in the past. Communication through language is also a process of transmission and reception of information 
(Gaiseanu, 2019a), and human, as a rational being, has reached on the evolutionary scale this apogee through 
the development of the nervous system and the brain, as his own informational support (Gaiseanu, 2020e). And 
yet, what do we know, and how much more do we need to know about information and its involvement in 
reality itself? 
Entering the thread of “ideas” and “forms” invoked by Plato’s philosophy and reaching the scientific 
approach of information in our modern era, we notice that the way was not easy at all (Gaiseanu, 2021h). 
Information is still viewed intuitively, as a novelty in the communication process, and that’s all. But 
information has a much deeper meaning, if we look at the way the matter is structured. The process by which 
microparticles combine to form the material macrosystems is an information-assisted process, as they transform 
from a multi-particle micro-configuration, into a new form of matter, in which these particles lose their identity 
and cooperate to form a new structure with modified properties, some of them different from the properties of 
the initial material. The transfer of a material system from a configuration to another takes place with 
information absorption, as recently was shown (Gaiseanu, 2020a; 2021c; 2021h), according to the schematic 
relation: (A + B) + I  AB(I), where the initial distinct components A and B become linked within a 
composite system, and the information I becomes hidden (implicit) as (I) information, but still active within the 
composed structure. Indeed, information can be released by a decomposition/destructuring operation: AB(I) => 
(A + B) + I. The structuration/destructuration of the very long molecule of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) in the 
cells is a relevant example (Gaiseanu, 2020a; 2020c). 
Information is therefore a component of structured matter itself, in whatever form of aggregation it may be 
found. According to the principle of conservation in nature, information is not lost; it is preserved, as well as 
matter and energy. Matter with a mass m can be transformed in energy, according to Einstein’s well-known 
relation E = mc2, where c is the speed of light, as a universal reference. Matter is also generated from energy, 
the energy fluctuations of the vacuum giving rise to particles of matter and antimatter (Hajdukovic, 2012; 2011). 
In a recent reported experiment (Toyabe, Sagawa, Ueda, Muneyuki, & Sano, 2010), it was demonstrated the 
transformation of information into energy. Indeed, in a container with polystyrene particles suspended in an 
electric field, which mimics the imaginary experiment of Maxwell’s demon (Szilard, 1929), the sense of the 
applied field was changed to prevent the energy loss, when it was observed that a particle changes its rotation 
(marking a plus of energy). In this way, it was obtained an energy increase up to 20%. 
The hypothetical experiment of Maxwel’s demon (known also as Maxwell’s paradox), consists in the 
opening of a door by an “intelligent” demon, which would allow the passage of gas particles with higher speed 
(so with more energy due to the fluctuations) in a second container with the same gas under equilibrium 
conditions. Such a process would increase thus temperature in the second container, violating the principles of 
thermodynamics. Such a paradox, however, cannot be explained without considering the information expensed 
by the demon to measure the velocity of gas molecules and to synchronize the door opening (Szilard, 1929). 
Information is therefore an effective participant in the natural processes of inter-correlation between various 
forms of constituents, and a recent article discussed the convertibility between mass, energy, and information 
(Vopson, 2019) as follows: 
 the quantitative conversion between a mass m operating as an informational device and the stored 
information I (m  I) in terms of digital (binary) units (Bits), can be expressed by the elemental relation m = 

FROM PHILOSOPHY TO NEURO/LIFE SCIENCES 
 
610 
kTln2/c2 corresponding to one Bit of information, where k is the Boltzmann’s constant, T the temperature 
in °Kelvin and ln2 comes from Bit-unit information theory (Shannon, 1948); within this frame, the mass of a 
bit of information at room temperature (300°K) is 3.19 × 10-38 Kg, so I corresponding to a mass m can be 
calculated by the relation I(Bits) = m(Kg)/3.19 × 10-38(Kg/Bit) = m(Kg) × 3.13 × 1037 Bits/(Kg); 
 the quantitative relation between mass and energy (mass  energy) can be expressed by the Einstein’s 
relation m = E/c2, showing that a large quantity of energy is necessary to create a very small quantity of mass, 
because of the high value of c; 
 the conversion between energy and information (energy  information) can be expressed by the 
elemental relation E = kTln2 for 1 Bit of information, or E = I(Bits) × 3.19 × 10-38(Kg/Bit) × c2 at room 
temperature, corresponding to the quantity I(Bits) of information. 
Shannon approached information by probability theory in an electronic digital (binary—Bit) 
communication system, showing that information is treated as a new event that occurs distinctly in a series of 
events, like the encoded letters of a texts, in which noise can change their content on the transmission channel. 
Such a system is composed by an information source and an information encoder, connected through the 
communication channel to a receiver and an information decoder. The amount of information is obtained by 
eliminating the uncertainty expressed by entropy, where the entropy expression is similar to Boltzmann entropy, 
applicable in microparticle systems (Shannon, 1948), but distinct as interpretation. Communication circuits of 
this type are widely used in electronic transmissions, but information theory can also be applied as a 
communication process in the nervous system of humans and animals (Gaiseanu, 2021c; 2021h). 
The exploration of reality by considering information as a constitutive element is an issue approached 
relatively recent by physicists in cosmology, where the black hole, formed by a huge concentration of mass, can 
reveal effects that cannot be explained without resorting to information and the conservation principle of 
information. The so-called black hole paradox shows that the black holes emit radiation that would cause their 
evaporation, and therefore information accumulated into the black holes should be lost during this phenomenon, 
which would violate the principle of information preservation (Hawking, 1975). This contradiction can be 
resolved (Hawkins, 2005), within the frame of the string theory of universe and holographic projection of 
information on a surface at the events horizon (Susskind, 2008; Stephens, Hooft, & Whiting, 1994). Therefore, 
information continues to exist, it is not lost, and can be found by holographic projection on this distant surface 
(Susskind, 1995; 2008), the whole universe thus appearing as a structure that preserves its information. 
Alternatively, it was shown that this paradox can also be solved by generalizing the law of entropy near the 
black hole (Bekenstein, 1974), consisting in the addition to the traditional term of an unconventional term 
related to information, so that the amount of information contained in the black hole and a portion/surface 
around it, never actually decreases, so information is preserved in nature. 
At the level of microparticles, the evidences on information are even more surprising. One of the most 
amazing results obtained recently show that the properties of elementary particles, specifically those of 
neutrons, can be separated from their mass body (Denkmayr et al., 2013). Exposing a neutron flux to a 
magnetic field, two spin neutron beams (defined by the direction of rotation around its own axis), different 
from each other, were obtained. By introducing additional filters and magnets on the two fluxes, one of the 
neutron fluxes passed into the other, leaving only their properties in its initial trajectory. This effect has been 
experienced and shown to apply to a wide range of particles and even atoms or groups of atoms (Aharonov et 

FROM PHILOSOPHY TO NEURO/LIFE SCIENCES 
 
611 
al., 2013), revealing two essential conclusions: (1) Information is implicitly contained in the material particle; 
and (2) information may be dissociated as a distinct entity from the material body. 
The way in which information is obtained seems to have a decisive role in the behavior of the 
microparticles in quantum mechanics: when they are not observed, they may occupy more than one of the two 
(YES/NO) states, as it is the case in classical mechanics. To reflect this special property, the unit of information 
in quantum mechanics is called Qubit, or Quantum Bit, and is defined as a complex number. The fundamental 
difference between Bit and Qubit is that Bit is based on the operation between two states: 0 and 1, while Qubit 
includes the possibility of operating in so-called superpositions, consisting in linear combinations of states. The 
process of “collapse” consists in the reduction to one of the fundamental states, 0 or 1 (Nielsen & Chuang, 
2000). Consequently, the state of a Qubit can be expressed by a two-dimensional vector of complex numbers, 
as a combination (α|0i + β|1i), where α and β are complex numbers, and the states 0 and 1 from the classical 
physics are denoted in quantum mechanics by 0i and 1i, to distinguish them from the classical ones. According 
to quantum mechanics, what can be said about the measurement of a Qubit is that the value 0 would have the 
probability |α|2 and the value 1 the probability |β|2. This specific behavior has been recently 
interpreted/explained and described mathematically (Laloë, 2020) as a process of gravity-induced quantum 
collapse, originally proposed by the physicist Roger Penrose (1965). This process would lead to the reduction 
of the multiple system to one of the real states, 0 or 1. Such a quantum mechanics problem is known as the 
Schrodinger paradox, and is suggestively expressed by the fact that a cat in a box can be both alive and dead 
simultaneously, because its true state cannot be known until the box is opened.  
The principle of non-localization of particles in quantum mechanics consists in the fact that the position of 
a particle cannot be precisely determined, as it can “co-exist” in several states simultaneously. However, as 
Gaiseanu recently suggested (Gaiseanu, 2019b), the complementary pairs of elementary particles in vacuum are 
generated and recombined continuously, so that if the position of a single particle is followed, it can disappear 
and reappear elsewhere through the generation/recombination phenomenon, which maintains the local 
concentration in a dynamic equilibrium state. Because the frequency of occurrence/disappearance is much 
higher than the time allocated to a theoretical “observation” in the closed box with particles, this phenomenon 
appears as uncertainty of location of the particle. The real (physical) observation by an instrument includes a 
new component in the system, which determines the separation of the real signal from the 
generation/recombination phenomenon as a “background noise” of the process. 
A direct application of this phenomenon is the quantum computer based on superconducting systems 
technology (Van der Waal et al., 2000), or on semiconductor structures (Loss & DiVincenzo, 1998). In this 
situation, if, in classical computers, the Bit unit is related to the states 0 or 1 associated with the closed (NO), or 
respectively open (YES) conduction of transistors or operational circuits, in quantum systems of isolated 
particles and under controlled temperatures, these computers can work at the same time in parallel, with the 
superposition of both states 0 and 1 simultaneously, which can “collapse” in one of the real positions 1 or 0, as 
commented above. If these atoms/systems are observed while working, these overlays disappear, decompose. 
As expected, the speed and computing power of such computers would increase enormously compared to 
existing classic computers, the application potential being extremely high. 
The dual behavior as particle/wave also does not allow us to specify exactly the state of a beam of 
quantum particles, because this state depends on the experiment: indeed, such a beam behaves like a wave 

FROM PHILOSOPHY TO NEURO/LIFE SCIENCES 
 
612 
when is observed in an interference system, or as a discrete particle, in the case of light measurable by the 
number of photons, for instance in a laser system. The two forms of manifestation are totally different: while 
the wave refers to the propagation of the perturbation of a physical property with energy transport but not mass, 
the other form of manifestation involves mass. The information, mass and energy seem to be consequently 
associated in the same whole, the form of manifestation depending on the conditions of the experiment. 
 
 
Figure 1. Schematic representation of the Universal Triangle of Reality (UTR). 
Note. It is composed by Information-Energy-Matter trinomial shown in the background by a triangle inserted in the 
big circle (non-living world), and the similar (smaller) triangle corresponding to the living word, inserted in the green 
circle of the foreground in this figure. In the top side of this triangle are shown respectively Erwin Schrödinger, 
Claude Shannon, Mihai Draganescu, and Florin Gaiseanu, as contributing authors to the development of information 
concepts and modeling, especially in the biological systems. In the same figure are represented the scientific spheres 
mainly dedicated to the study of each of indicated components of the triangle, in this particular case philosophy being 
included as co-participant to the approach of information concepts. 
 
We can conclude therefore that, according to the recent theoretical and experimental studies, our reality is 
composed not only by matter and energy, but also by information, as a fundamental component associated to 
the first two. On the microparticle scale, the real state cannot be defined exactly as long as the system is not 
observed. Information is conserved in universe and is not lost. As a consequence of the analysis presented 
above, a Universal Triangle of Reality can be defined, able to describe reality at micro/macro or cosmic level, 
shown in the background plan in Figure 1, in which the information was represented in the upper point, the 
energy in the left point and matter in the right point. 

FROM PHILOSOPHY TO NEURO/LIFE SCIENCES 
 
613
In the same figure in the foreground is represented the living world by a similar triangle, as part of reality. 
If ancient and until recent philosophy called information as a world of “ideas”/“forms” (Kraut, 2016) or 
“informatter” (Draganescu, 1990), the universal triangle represented in Figure 1 reveals at the top information 
according to the information theory proposed by Shannon (1948). The microparticle behavior in quantum 
mechanics was described by Scrödinger (Rechenberg, 1987). Gaiseanu showed that reality can be described 
from informational perspective by the binary YES/NO unit of complementary components, associated to 
maintain global neutrality/stability, even if these components can be separated both in the non-living structures 
(Gaiseanu, 2016) and in the living systems (Gaiseanu, 2020d; 2020f). He contributed to the understanding from 
the informational perspective of the structuring/destructuring processes in living and non-living systems 
(Gaiseanu, 2021h), and to the modeling of informational organization in biological systems, as will be 
presented below. In the same figure are marked the main current sciences dedicated to the study of energy 
behavior—the sphere of thermodynamics, and to the study of matter/materials, which is the sphere of 
mechanics. The next chapter presents in more details the contribution of information to the current development 
of the sciences that study the living systems, particularly the field of neuroscience, biology and life science, 
starting from the principles of philosophy and information theory. 
The Universal Triangle of Reality for Living Systems: From Philosophy to  
Neurosciences and Life Sciences 
On the Universal Triangle of Reality of the living systems in Figure 2 are shown schematically the 
components of the Informational System of the Human Body and Living Structures (ISHBLS), which can be 
described as follows. The Center of Acquisition and Storing of Information (CASI) (see Figure 2, left side) is 
connected to the internal and external sensors (IS and ES) for the detection of reality signals from own body 
and external environment, and with the corresponding body regions marked by the dashed line in eukaryotic 
cell (surface receptors shown in the central part of Figure 2) and with the human brain (right side of Figure 2). 
In human, this is reflected in mind as the cognitive center suggestively called Iknow (abbreviated by Ik). The 
Center of Decision and Command (CDC) manages the reactive response of adaptation to the stimuli and is 
connected in the eukaryotic cell with the cell cytosol/info-output (chemical chain reactive pathway of decision) 
and with human/subhuman organism by the brain and especially by the info-output (attitude) expressed as a 
vocal reaction (by Iwant (Iw)). The Info-Emotional System (IES) or Info-Reactive Sentient System (IRSS) of 
the cell and inferior organisms, responsible for emotional/sentient reaction to the input information, is 
connected with the cytosol body in eukaryotic cell and with the brain/heart region of the human/sub-human 
organisms, reflected in the human mind as the cognitive center Ilove (Il).  
The Maintenance Informational System (MIS) is the manager of the metabolic processes both in 
eukaryotic (by mitochondrion pathway) and in human/subhuman organisms by the digestive system, both for 
energy (E) delivery and the necessary nutrients for body maintenance and growth. In human, this activity is 
reflected in mind by the cognition center Iam (Ia). The Genetic Transmission System (GTS) manages the 
info-genetic output, related in the eukaryotic cell to the DNA replication process, and to the brain/reproductive 
apparatus in the human and subhuman organisms, projected in the human mind by the cognition center Icreate 
(Ic). The Info-Genetic Generator (IGG), as the info-genetic inherited input, coordinates by means of 
hypophysis at human/subhuman the body growth and development according to the age, reflected in mind by 
the cognitive centers Icreated (Icd), and is related in the eukaryotic cell by the DNA/RNA (ribonucleic acid) 

FROM PHILOSOPHY TO NEURO/LIFE SCIENCES 
 
614 
process of transcription and translation of information from DNA to proteins, the basic construction material of 
the body. The Info-Connection (IC) center manages the selection of Good/Bad information according to the 
survival necessities and mentality/acquired experience, detected in mind of human as the cognition center 
Ibelieve (Ib), explaining the Religious and Mystic Experiences (RMEs) (Gaiseanu, 2019b), Near-Death 
Experiences (NDEs) (Gaiseanu, 2017a) and Extra Sensorial Experiences (ESEs) (Gaiseanu, 2017b). At the 
inferior organisms, this center is highlighted for instance by the synchronous organization of bacteria in 
geometrical colonies and extra-sensorial sensitivity of some birds/animals/fishes to external preventive signals 
(Gaiseanu, 2019e). 
 
 
Figure 2. Schematic representation of the Informational System of the Human Body and Living Structures (ISHBLS) 
on the Universal Triangle of Reality (UTR), and the corresponding connection to the eukaryotic cell and human body, 
where this is projected in mind as cognitive centers of consciousness.  
 
The Operative Information System (OIS = CASI + CDC + IES) assures the connection with reality at 
human and subhuman organism, and the reactive response by decision and emotional response, whereas the 
Programmed Informational System (PIS = MIS + GTS + IGG) assures the maintenance of the body during the 
lifespan, on the basis of the info-genetic mechanisms inherited and/or acquired for adaptation (Gaiseanu, 2018b; 
2019f), and prepares/transmits to the next generation the info-genetic support for the survival of species. The 
adaptation on long-term period to the environment conditions is obtained by the epigenetic info-integration 
process, suggestively represented in Figure 2 by an arrow connected with the info-input of the informational 
chain CASI/CDC/IES (IRSS), finalized in GTS and transmitted to IGG of the next generation. Such an 
admirable tool patented by nature works in living systems gradually, starting with the detection/capturing of 
information by sensors. For the currently received information (small amplitude/non-repetitive regime), OIS 
provides a reactive response to the info-output, which represents the attitude with respect to the informational 
signal or chain of signals. When the information is repetitively received and/or the signal amplitude is high, the 
epigenetic mechanisms progressively act for info-integration, transferring it from CASI/Ik to CDC/Iw, 
IES(IRSS)/Il, MIS/Ia (stereotype, automatically triggered acquired abilities) to GTS/Ic and further to IGG/Icd 
of the next generation.  
Comparing this process with the distribution of information/energy/matter in UTR in Figure 2, it can be 
seen that OIS specifically works with information in the superior side of the triangle, whereas PIS mainly with 
matter/energy components. The living systems according therefore with the operational mode of ISHBLS, 

FROM PHILOSOPHY TO NEURO/LIFE SCIENCES 
 
615
absorb information from environment and are able: (i) to react and express the response by info-output 
(attitude); and (ii) to progressively integrate this information into the info-genetic system, modifying their own 
genetic informational structure accordingly, but without the modification of the structural info-library of 
species in DNA. The human/subhuman and elementary organisms functionality is based on the co-participation 
of matter/energy/information, and the role of information is fundamental for their functionality. The 
functionality itself is an informational concept, showing that the living organisms operate with and by 
informational processes.  
Comparing with the UTR of information/energy/matter distribution applied to living systems in Figure 2, 
it appears that the body of the living entities is actually informed-matter structures, where the energy/mass and 
information flow by the entire structure. In human and subhuman organisms, the centralized informational 
headquarter is the brain, leading all the processes of the body, and at the cellular level DNA/genes in 
nucleolus/nucleus is the main informational center, co-operating especially with RNA by means of operational 
chains of info-chemical reactions assisted by enzymes to maintain conveniently the body structure and 
functionality (Gaiseanu, 2020d). The living organisms act therefore as animated/self-organized 
info-hierarchical structures, managing both the informational, mechanical (material execution elements) and 
thermodynamic (energy and heat balance) processes, with the main objective, which is the survival. This is 
suggestively represented in Figure 2, where the top side of triangle is assigned to the corresponding 
sciences/spheres interested and/or involved specifically in information, the left side of triangle in 
thermodynamic sphere disciplines, and the right side of the triangle representative for matter, is involved 
especially in mechanic sphere sciences. For the long term survival, the living species are also able to reproduce 
themselves, acquiring from the environment the necessary information for adaptation by epigenetic processes, 
and integrating this information into their info-genetic system.  
The concept of information defined by Shannon in communication circuits/systems is applicable also in 
the analysis of the activities of the living systems. The brain circuitry is an intensively studied topic, and can be 
observed the similarity with the circuits used in the microelectronic devices (Gaiseanu, 2021h) and the concepts 
of information theory, which can be applied even to the cellular level (Gaiseanu, 2019c; Faria, Rocha, & 
Palazzo, 
2014). 
The 
circuits 
analytics 
can 
serve 
today 
to 
observe 
and 
describe 
the 
neurofunctional/neuropsychological properties of the brain (Gaiseanu, 2021h; 2021c). From thermodynamic 
perspective, the so called “negentropy” defined by Schrödinger to describe the global functionality of the living 
organisms is actually information (Gaiseanu, 2020a). From this point of view, the living structures acts as 
thermodynamic systems, similarly with the refrigerator machines, which work to eliminate outside the heat 
from their internal enclosure. The compartmentalization by specific functions (organelles in eukaryotic cell and 
organs in animals) is a form to lower the organism entropy on the evolutionary scale (Gaiseanu, 2020a; 2020d). 
The living organisms use the external nutrients (food, water, air) to transform them in energy, information and 
suitable form of materials used for the organism (re)construction. From this point of view, the living systems 
are examples of admirable natural mechanisms, which continuously convert any form of elementary constituent 
of UTR, in every other form of constituents. As it was shown above, the living organisms do not feed only with 
nutritive substances, but also with information, under two forms: (i) within the interaction conditions with the 
environment reality for short-term reactive adaptation, engaging the OIS component of ISHBLS; and (ii) under 
stress conditions for long-term adaptation by epigenetic processes, engaging also PIS. Such a process is 
actually a learning process. The living creatures learn by interaction with their environment. Referring to 

FROM PHILOSOPHY TO NEURO/LIFE SCIENCES 
 
616 
human and subhuman organisms, we have to observe that the learning process constitutes the basic mechanism 
to acquire the necessary informational experience in memory and the formation of the decision criteria, 
mentality and beliefs (Gaiseanu, 2018b; 2019f). The repetition is a form to consolidate the learning, and is 
supported by epigenetic-type processes in the long-lasting memory. The training of animals is also a form of 
learning, based on epigenetic and associative process of a certain reward information. 
Draganescu proposed a philosophic model of matter, supposing that this is composed by two species: a 
neutral “ortomatter”, unable to form by itself the real matter, and “informatter”, uniquely able to intervene on 
“ortomatter” to form matter of our reality. Gaiseanu has shown that the structuration of matter is actually a 
process with absorption of information I, which is hidden in the structure, and the destructuration is a process of 
releasing of this information, schematically represented by a relation of the form: (A + B) + I <=> AB(I), where 
A and B are the components of an interaction process, I the participating information, which becomes a hidden 
information (I), incorporated (“embodied”) into the structure AB(I). Such an interaction is very frequent 
especially in the living structures, where the interactions between the organic components of the body are based 
on absorption and releasing of information (Gaiseanu, 2021c; 2021h; 2020a). The chemical informational 
agents absorb and release information by interactions between complementary components, like in a 
puzzle-type combination of elements. Such a process allows the reception of information for instance by the 
surface receptors on the cell membrane and the subsequent cascades of interaction in the cytosol of the cell, 
with multiple absorption/release of information during the common reactive pathways, and/or epigenetic 
processes. The learning processes at least in the long-lasting memory are supported by such type of interactions 
and the transfer of information from the nucleus for the structuration of certain kind of proteins is also based on 
the same type of info-transmission during the transcription/translation process. Within the nervous system, the 
transmission of information is basically supported by ionic Na+/K+ (sodium/potassium) participation along the 
axon of the nervous cell, responding to information as a YES/NO (all-or-nothing Bit-type unit) “firing” 
informational mechanism, controlled by a threshold minimal fire value. The chemical informational agents 
continue the transfer of information in the junction gap space (synapse) between two neurons, allowing a 
selective passing only of a certain type of information, according to the YES/NO complementarity between the 
chemical agent and the corresponding surface receptors of the subsequent neuron. 
Defining the matter-related informational processes as described above, supported by the chemical agents, 
Gaiseanu has elaborated and developed the Informational Model of Consciousness, distinguishing the basic 
functions and functionality of the brain from informational point of view, i.e.,: (i) memory (CASI/Ik); (ii) 
decision (CDC/Iw), operating by YES/NO acceptance/rejection (Bit-type mechanism) based on decision 
criteria; (iii) emotions (IES/Il) (interpreted as Good/Bad—YES/NO states); (iv) self-status (MIS/Ia), 
representing especially the power/health of organism; (v) reproduction (GTS/Ic); (vi) info-genetic inheritance 
(IGG/Icd), working in an informational four-letters alphabet/language of DNA/RNA molecules during the 
replication and transcription/translation processes at the cell level, and by reproduction and inherited 
aptitudes/behavior at centralized level; (vii) info-perception/selection (IC/Ib), acting as a Good/Bad (YES/NO) 
selective Bit-type operator. He also developed the Informational Model of the Living Structures, arguing that 
the same type of functions/functionality is characteristic to all creatures on the entire living scale, starting from 
the simplest (prokaryotic/eukaryotic) individual cells to the most complex structure, that of human. IES in the 
inferior organisms was defined as Info-Reactive Sentient System (IRSS), just to highlight the universal 
characteristic of the living structures, which is the sentience-reactivity to information. The reactivity to an 

FROM PHILOSOPHY TO NEURO/LIFE SCIENCES 
 
617
informational stimulus is manifested therefore on two ways: by an info-motor response/decision with respect to 
the nature of information, and by an info-motor sentience/emotion according to the nature of received 
information, expressible in the external environment as attitude.  
Coming from a solid preparation/contribution in solid-state physics/information technology (Gaiseanu, 
2013; 2017c), and based on informational modeling of consciousness and living structures, Gaiseanu has 
approached and explained a series of problems and suitable solutions in language communication, philosophy, 
neuroscience, neuropsychology, neurology, psychology, psychiatry, geriatrics, behavioral sciences, biology, as 
follows: language patterns and certainty/uncertainty in cognitive-sentient exploration of reality (Gaiseanu, 
2019a), 
informational 
intra 
and 
inter-communication 
between 
the 
cells 
in 
human 
body 
by 
embodiment/disembodiment process of information (Gaiseanu, 2019e) in neuro-physics science, analysis and 
modeling of cognitive centers of consciousness (Gaiseanu, 2019e, 2019f, 2018a; 2019c) in neuro-physics, 
modeling of the informational systems of the human body (Gaiseanu, 2016) in physics of consciousness, 
information as a solution to the millenary mind-body relation problem in philosophy/neurosciences (Gaiseanu, 
2021b), information-matter bipolarity of the human organism (Gaiseanu, 2020b)/living structures (Gaiseanu, 
2020a, this work) and corresponding fundamental circuits in philosophy/neuroscience, information as a solution 
for the nature/nurture problem, the oldest debated in psychology (Gaiseanu, 2019h), sharp definition and 
evaluation/quantification of attitude in cognitive and behavioral sciences (Gaiseanu, 2020h; 2021e), the 
neuropsychological response to information of brain Beauty/Ugly and “Beauty-is-Good” circuits (Gaiseanu, 
2021g)—some more recent not understood problems in neuropsychology, the info-relational cognitive 
operability of the posterior cingulate cortex, a problem not understood in brain sciences (Gaiseanu, 2020g), 
informational neuro-connections of the brain with the body in neurology and neurosciences (Gaiseanu, 2019d), 
hierarchical brain organization/evolution in neurology/neurosciences/life sciences (Gaiseanu, 2020c), 
epigenetic information-body interaction and information-assisted evolution in biomedical engineering and 
biotechnology/life sciences (Gaiseanu, 2019g), multitask music-based therapy optimization in aging 
neurorehability (Gaiseanu, 2020i), informational modeling of the living structures (Gaiseanu, 2020a; 2020d), 
information as an essential component of the biological structures and their informational organization in 
biology (Gaiseanu, 2021e), mental aggressive operability from informational perspective in neuro/behavior 
sciences (Gaiseanu, 2021f), pathological expression and circuits in addiction and mood disorders in psychiatry 
(Gaiseanu, 2021d), mind-body equilibrium and health from informational perspective and the anterior cingulate 
cortex in psychology/psychiatry (Gaiseanu, 2020f). 
The science of information, initiated on the basis of the development of the electronic/microelectronic 
devices and technology, enters now with high efficiency in the living domain, for a better understanding of the 
functionality of the human body, human mind/consciousness (Gaiseanu, 2020c), and of the biological structures 
on the entire scale (Gaiseanu, 2020a; 2020d; 2021h, this work). The actual advances of artificial intelligence, 
concerning the memory device development (Stefan, 1998), big data analysis on the basis of learning machines 
technology (Filip, 2020), as well as the progressive and firm penetration in the field of living systems in 
agriculture, zootechnics and veterinary applications (Filip, 2021), is a promising way for mutual development. 
The increasing role and diversity of biomedical and biocompatible devices with applications in the detection 
and treatment of various disorders in human body, is a natural consequence of the fruitful collaboration 
between the informational domains in medicine, and engineering science and technology (Gaiseanu et al., 1998; 
Gaiseanu, 2020c).  

FROM PHILOSOPHY TO NEURO/LIFE SCIENCES 
 
618 
The actual philosophic culture is more and more interested of informational contribution for a deeper 
understanding of reality, both on the computational thinking area (Tsoukalas, 2021) and on the philosophical 
ontology in a general system theory (Cui, 2021). 
Conclusions 
The analysis of the involvement of information in universe, both at the quantum and cosmic scale, reveals 
the fundamental role of information in the constitution/structuration of reality, justifying the 
understanding/settlement of reality, as an interchangeable whole composed and described by an 
information-matter-energy trinomial, according to the model of the Universal Triangle of Reality. 
The same model of the Universal Triangle of Reality applied to the living systems reveals the deep 
involvement of information in this world, connected to reality by Informational System of the Human Body and 
the Living Structures, according to the same organizational structure on the entire living scale, from the 
simplest to the more complex organisms. The involvement of information in such systems is high, as a basis of 
their dynamic functionality, necessary both to maintain their internal organization and the inter-connection with 
reality. The epigenetic processes allow the integration of environment information as the matter-related 
information in the body informational structure, explaining the adaptation process and the species evolution. 
The involvement of informational concepts in the structuration of the living creatures, particularly in that of 
human, allowed a significant/revolutionary advance in understanding/resolution of various older and more 
recent problems in philosophy, neuroscience, neuropsychology, neurology, psychology, psychiatry, geriatrics, 
behavioral sciences, biology and life science, with the perspective to potentiate a parallel/collaborative 
development of mimic artificial systems and to improve the human health. 
Acknowledgment 
To the Science and Technology of Information in Romanian Academy. 
To Adrian Gaiseanu and Ana-Maria Gaiseanu, with love.  
With grateful thanks to this journal for the professional work and publication. 
In the memory of my loved parents and brother, Distinguished Professors Emanoil, Florica and Constantin 
Gaiseanu. 
References 
Aharonov, Y., Popescu, S., Rohrlich, D., & Skrzypczyk, P. (2013). Quantum Cheshire cats. New Journal of Physics, 15(11), 1-5.  
Bekenstein, D. J. (1974). Generalized second law of thermodynamics in black-hole physics. Physical Review D, 9(12), 
3292-3300. 
Cui, W. C. (2021). On the philosophical ontology for a general system theory. Philosophy Study, 11(6), 443-458, 
doi:10.17265/2159-5313/2021.06.002 
Denkmayr, T., Geppert, H., Sponar, S., Lemmel, H., Matzkin, A., Tollaksen, J., & Hasegawa, Y. (2013). Observation of a 
quantum Cheshire cat in a matter wave interferometer experiment. Retrieved from http://www.arxiv.org/pdf/1312.3775 
Draganescu, M. (1990). Informatia materiei (Information of matter). Bucuresti: Editura Academiei Române. (in Romanian) 
Faria, L. C. B., Rocha, A. S. L., & Palazzo, R. Jr. (2014). Transmission of intra-cellular genetic information: A system proposal. 
Journal of Theoretical Biology, 358, 208-231. 
Filip, F. G. (2020). DSS—A class of evolving information systems. In G. Dzemyda, J. Bernatavičienė, and J. Kacprzyk (Eds.), 
Data science: New issue, challenges and applications (pp. 253-277). Springer. 
Filip, F. G. (Coordinator). (2021). Inteligenta artificiala/machine learning si tehnologia informatiei in agricultura, silvicultura, 
zootehnie simedicina veterinara (Artificial intelligence/machine learning and information technology in agriculture, forestry, 

FROM PHILOSOPHY TO NEURO/LIFE SCIENCES 
 
619
animal husbandry and veterinary medicine). Meeting of Scientific Communications in Science and Technology of Information, 
June 11, Romanian Academy. 
Gaiseanu F. (2021h). Evolution and development of the information concept in biological systems: From empirical description to 
informational modeling of the living structures. Philosophy Study, 11(7), 501-516. doi:10.17265/2159-5313/2021.07.001 
Gaiseanu, F. (2013). Contributions to the modelling and simulation of the atomic transport processes in silicon and polysilicon 
and applications. Proceedings of the Romanian Academy, Series A, 4(4), 376-384. Retrieved from http:// 
www.acad.ro/sectii2002/proceedings/doc2013-4/15-Gaiseanu.pdf  
Gaiseanu, F. (2016). Consciousness as informational system of the human body. Consciousness and Life Physics, Cosmology and 
Astrophysics Journal, 16(1), 14-25. Retrieved from http://physics.socionic.info/index.php/physics/article/view/227/182 
Gaiseanu, F. (2017a). Quantum-assisted process of disembody under near-death conditions: An informational-field support model. 
NeuroQuantology, 15(1), 4-9. Retrieved from http://www.neuroquantology.com/index.php/journal/article/view/971 
Gaiseanu, F. (2017b). An information based model of consciousness fully explaining the mind normal/paranormal properties. 
NeuroQuantology, 15(2), 132-140. Retrieved from https://www.neuroquantology.com/index.php/journal/article/view/1040 
Gaiseanu, F. (2017c). Modeling and simulation of the impurity diffusion and related phenomena in silicon and polysilicon systems in 
microfabrication and micromachining technologies. Annals of the Academy of Romanian Scientists, Series on Science and 
Technology of Information 2017a, 10(1), 41-78. Retrieved from http://aos.ro/wp-content/anale/IFVol10Nr1Art.4.pdf 
Gaiseanu, F. (2018a). Information: From philosophic to physics concepts for informational modeling of consciousness. 
Philosophy Study, 8(8), 368-382. Retrieved from http://www.davidpublisher.org/Public/uploads/Contribute/5c06323653cd2.pdf 
Gaiseanu, F. (2018b). Destiny or free will decision? A life overview from the perspective of an informational modeling of 
consciousness Part II: Attitude and decision criteria, free will and destiny. Gerontology & Geriatric Studies, 4(1), 1-7. 
Retrieved from https://crimsonpublishers.com/ggs/pdf/GGS.000576.pdf 
Gaiseanu, F. (2018c). Near-death experiences and immortality from the perspective of an informational modeling of consciousness. 
Gerontology & Geriatric Studies 2018a, 2(3), 1-4. Retrieved from https://crimsonpublishers.com/ggs/pdf/GGS.000538.pdf 
Gaiseanu, F. (2019a). Language patterns and cognitive-sentient reality: Certainty/uncertainty in cognitive-sentient exploration of 
reality. Retrieved from https://www.igi-global.com/gateway/chapter/229328 
Gaiseanu, F. (2019b). Human/humanity, consciousness and universe: Informational relation. NeuroQuantology, 17(5), 60-70. 
Retrieved from http://www.neuroquantology.com/index.php/journal/article/download/2122/1376 
Gaiseanu, F. (2019c). Informational model of consciousness: From philosophic concepts to an information science of 
consciousness. 
Philosophy 
Study, 
9(4), 
181-196. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.davidpublisher.org/Public/uploads/Contribute/5d1c009c3567e.pdf 
Gaiseanu, F. (2019d). Informational neuro-connections of the brain with the body supporting the informational model of 
consciousness. Archives in Neurology & Neuroscience, 4(1), 1-6. Retrieved from https://irispublishers.com/ann/pdf/ANN.MS. 
ID.000576.pdf 
Gaiseanu, F. (2019e). The informational model of consciousness: Mechanisms of embodiment/disembodiment of information. 
NeuroQuantology, 17(4), 1-17. Retrieved from https://www.neuroquantology.com/index.php/journal/article/view/2009  
Gaiseanu, F. (2019f). Destiny or free will decision? A life overview from the perspective of an informational modeling of 
consciousness Part I: Information, consciousness and life cycle. Gerontology & Geriatric Studies, 4(1), 1-7. Retrieved from 
https://crimsonpublishers.com/ggs/pdf/GGS.000586.pdf  
Gaiseanu, F. (2019g). Epigenetic information-body interaction and information-assisted evolution from the perspective of the 
informational model of consciousness. Archives in Biomedical Engineering & Biotechnology, 2(2), 1-6. Retrieved from 
https://irispublishers.com/abeb/pdf/ABEB.MS.ID.000532.pdf 
Gaiseanu, F. (2019h). The silent voice of those who are no longer: Transgenerational transmission of information from the 
perspective of the informational model of consciousness. Gerontology & Geriatric Studies, 5(1), 482-488. Retrieved from 
https://crimsonpublishers.com/ggs/pdf/GGS.000604.pdf 
Gaiseanu, F. (2020a). Informational structure of the living systems: From philosophy to informational modeling. Philosophy 
Study, 10(12), 795-806. Retrieved from http://www.davidpublisher.com/Public/uploads/Contribute/5feac331230ba.pdf 
Gaiseanu, F. (2020b). Information-matter bipolarity of the human organism and its fundamental circuits: From philosophy to 
physics/neurosciences-based modeling. Philosophy Study, 10(2), 107-118. Retrieved from http://www.davidpublisher.com/ 
Public/uploads/Contribute/5e5b3d8e74433.pdf  
Gaiseanu, F. (2020c). Fizica Constiinteisi a Vietii: Modelul Informational al Constiintei—Informatia in Neurostiinte, 
Bioconductor si Biosisteme (Physics of consciousness and life: Informational model of consciousness: Information in 

FROM PHILOSOPHY TO NEURO/LIFE SCIENCES 
 
620 
neurosciences, biocomputers and biosystems. GlobeEdit (OmniScriptum International Group): Forewords by M. Pregnolato 
and 
S. 
Schafer. 
Closure 
Endorsement 
Words: 
D. 
Radin 
and 
A. 
A. 
Attanasio. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.amazon.com/Fizica-Constiintei-Vietii-Informational-Neurostiinte/dp/6139421705 (in Romanian)  
Gaiseanu, F. (2020d). What is life: An informational model of the living structures. Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 5(2), 
18-28. Retrieved from http://www.sciencepublishinggroup.com/j/bmb  
Gaiseanu, F. (2020e). Information based hierarchical brain organization/evolution from the perspective of the informational model 
of consciousness. Archives in Neurology & Neuroscience, 7(5), 1-9. Retrieved from https://www.academia.edu/42766159/ 
Information_Based_Hierarchical_Brain_Organization_Evolution_from_the_Perspectie_of_the_Informational_Model_of_Co
nsciousness  
Gaiseanu, F. (2020f). Informationally-assisted equilibrium and health: Specific ACC contribution from the perspective of the 
informational model of consciousness. EC Psychology and Psychiatry, 9(5), 37-49. Retrieved from https:// 
www.ecronicon.com/ecpp/ECPP-09-00692.php  
Gaiseanu, F. (2020g). Info-relational cognitive operability of the posterior cingulate cortex according to the informational model 
of consciousness. International Journal of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 5(4), 61-68. Retrieved from 
http://www.sciencepublishinggroup.com/journal/paperinfo?journalid=170&doi=10.11648/j.ijpbs.20200504.12  
Gaiseanu, F. (2020h). Attitude as an expressible info-operational reaction to a perceived/purposed object/objective. International 
Journal on Neuropsychology and Behavioral Sciences, 1(1), 12-16.  
Gaiseanu, F. (2020i). Multitask music-based therapy optimization in aging neurorehability by activation of the informational 
cognitive centers of consciousness. Gerontol & Geriatric Study, 6(3), 621-625.  
Gaiseanu, F. (2021a). Informational model of consciousness and life, information as a constitutive element of the living systems: 
From philosophy to modeling and applications. Colocviile Mihai Draganescu: Presentation on Science and Technology of 
Information, March 18, Romanian Academy.  
Gaiseanu, F. (2021b). Solution to the mind-body relation problem: Information. Philosophy Study, 11(1), 42-55. Retrieved from 
http://www.davidpublisher.com/index.php/Home/Article/index?id=44889.html  
Gaiseanu, F. (2021c). Information as an essential component of the biological structures and their informational organization. 
Journal of Microbiology & Biotechnology, 6(2), 1-9. Retrieved from https://medwinpublishers.com/OAJMB/information-as- 
an-essential-component-of-the-biological-structures-and-their-inform ational-organization.pdf  
Gaiseanu, F. (2021d). Pathological expression and circuits in addiction and mood disorders: Informational relation with the brain 
and info-therapy. EC Neurology, 13(8), 1-12. 
Gaiseanu, F. (2021e). Evaluating attitude and behavior: An info-operational procedure related/supported by the cognitive centers 
of mind. International Journal on Neuropsychology and Behavioural Sciences, 2(1), 1-5. 
Gaiseanu, F. (2021f). Mental aggressive operability from informational perspective: A deterrence manifesto. EC Neurology, 13(4), 
31-39. Retrieved from https://www.ecronicon.com/ecne/pdf/ECNE-13-00879.pdf 
Gaiseanu, F. (2021g). Neuropsychological response to information of beauty/ugly brain circuits according to the informational 
model of consciousness. International Journal on Neuropsychology and Behavioural Sciences (IJNBS), 2(2), 55-59. 
Gaiseanu, F., Postolache, C., Dascalu, D., Esteve, J., Tsoukalas, D., Jachowicz, R., … Vasile, E. (1998) Material and device 
characterization for process optimization of the capacitive pressure sensors for biomedical application. Romanian Journal of 
Information Science and Technology (Romanian Academy), 1(1), 85-104. 
Hajdukovic, D. S. (2011). Do we live in the universe successively dominated by matter and antimatter? Astrophysics and Space 
Science, 334, 219-223.  
Hajdukovic, D. S. (2012). Quantum vacuum and dark matter. Astrophysics and Space Science, 337, 9-14. 
doi:10.1007/s10509-011-0938-9 
Hawking, S. (1975). Particle creation by black holes. Communications in Mathematical Physics, 43(3), 199-220.  
Hawkins, S. (2005). Information loss in black holes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 
Jain, R., & Hauswirth-Jain, K. (2017). Hatha yoga for teachers and practitioners: A comprehensive guide. White Road Publications. 
Karunamuni, N. D. (2015). The five-aggregate model of the mind. SAGE Open, 5(2), 1-7. doi:10.1177/2158244015583860 
Kraut, R. (2016). Plato. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved from https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/plato/  
Laloë, F. (2020). A model of quantum collapse induced by gravity. The European Physical Journal D, 74(25), 1-9. Retrieved 
from https://doi.org/10.1140/epjd/e2019-100434-1 
Loss, D., & DiVincenzo, D. P. (1998). Quantum computation with quantum dots. Physical Review A, 57(1), 120-126. 
Nielsen, A. M., & Chuang, L. I. (2000). Quantum computation and quantum information. Cambridge: Cambridge University 

FROM PHILOSOPHY TO NEURO/LIFE SCIENCES 
 
621
Press.  
Penrose, R. (1965). Gravitational collapse and space-time singularities. Physical Review Letters, 14(3), 57. 
Raphals, L. (2020). Chinese philosophy and Chinese medicine. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved from 
https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/chinese-phil-medicine/  
Rechenberg, H. (1987). Erwin Schrödinger and the creation of wave mechanics. Acta Physica Polonica B., 19(8), 683-695. 
Schrödinger, E. (1944). What is life? The physical aspect of the living cell. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
Shannon, C. E. (1948). A mathematical theory of communication. Bell System Technical Journal, 27, 379-423, 623-656.  
Shields, C. (2020). Aristotle. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved from https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/aristotle/  
Siderits, M. (2016). Buddha. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved from https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/buddha/  
Stefan, G. (1998). The Connex memory: A physical support for tree/list processing. Romanian Journal of Information Science 
and Technology, 1(1), 85-104. 
Stephens, C. R., Hooft, G., & Whiting, B. F. (1994). Black hole evaporation without information loss. Classical and Quantum 
Gravity, 11(3), 621.  
Susskind, L. (1995). The world as a hologram. Journal of Mathematical Physics, 36(11), 6377-6396. doi:10.1063/1.531249 
Susskind, L. (2008). The black hole war: My battle with Stephen Hawking to make the world safe for quantum mechanics. New 
York: Back Bay Books, 
Szilard, L. (1929). On the decrease of entropy in a thermodynamic state by the intervention of intelligent beings. Zeitschrift für 
Physik, 53, 840-856.  
Toyabe, S., Sagawa, T., Ueda, M., Muneyuki, E., & Sano, M. (2010). Experimental demonstration of information-to-energy 
conversion and validation of the generalized Jarzynski equality. Nature Physics, 6(12), 988-992. doi:10.1038/NPHYS1821  
Tsoukalas, K. D. (2021). On affective states in computational cognitive practice through visual & musical modalities (Doctoral 
dissertations, 
Virginia 
Polytechnic 
Institute 
and 
State 
University, 
2021). 
Retrieved 
from 
https://vtechworks.lib.vt.edu/handle/10919/104069  
Van der Waal, C. H., terHaar, A. C. J., Wilhelm, F. K., Schouten, R. N., Harmans, C. J. P. M., Orlando, T. P., … Mooij, J. E. 
(2000). Quantum superposition of macroscopic persistent- current states. Science, 290, 773-777. 
Vopson, M. V. (2019). The mass-energy-information equivalence principle. AIP Advances, 9(9), 1-5. doi:10.1063/1.5123794 

