Framework theories in science
by
Leah Henderson
B. Sc., University of Auckland (1994)
M. Sc., University of Auckland (1997)
DPhil, University of Oxford (2000)
Submitted to the Department of Linguistics and Philosophy
in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy
at the
MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
September 2010
© Leah Henderson. All rights reserved.
The author hereby grants to MIT permission to reproduce and to distribute
ARCHIVES
MASSACHUSETT51NSl
OF T ECo'su-v
puC T l4 p 
r?
publicly paper
and electronic copies of this thesis document in whole or in part in any medium now
known or hereafter created.
Signature of
author..............................
Certified by.........&.........
Accepted by...................
Department of Linguistics and Philosophy
1 September, 2010
Robert Stalnaker
Laurance S. Rockefeller Professor of Philosophy
Thesis supervisor
1 72
I 
Alex Byrne
Chairperson, Departmen \Committee on Graduate Students

Framework theories in science
by
Leah Henderson
Submitted to the Department of Linguistics and Philosophy
on 1" September 2010, in partial fulfillment of the
requirements for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy
Abstract
This thesis consists of three papers on the nature of scientific theories and inference.
In many cases, scientific theories can be regarded as organised into hierarchies, with
higher levels sometimes called 'paradigms', and lower levels encoding more specific or
concrete hypotheses. The first chapter uses hierarchical Bayesian models to show that the
assessment of higher level theories may proceed by the same Bayesian principles as the
assessment of more specific hypotheses. It thus shows how the evaluation of higher level
theories can be evidence-driven, despite claims to the contrary by authors such as Kuhn.
The chapter also discusses how hierarchical Bayesian models may help to resolve certain
issues for Bayesian philosophy of science, particularly how to model the introduction of
new theories.
The second chapter discusses the relationship between Inference to the Best Explanation
(IBE) and Bayesianism. Van Fraassen has raised the concern that the explanatory
considerations in IBE go beyond the Bayesian formalism, making IBE incompatible with
Bayesianism. The response so far has been that the explanatory considerations can be
accommodated within the Bayesian formalism by stipulating that they should constrain
the assignment of the probabilities. I suggest a third alternative, which is that the extra
explanatory considerations have their origins in the relationship between higher and
lower level theories and can be modelled in Bayesian terms without directly constraining
the probabilities.
The third chapter discusses an aspect of the debate over scientific realism. The No
Miracles argument and the Pessimistic Induction are often seen as the primary arguments
for and against scientific realism. Yet recently it has been alleged that both of these
arguments commit the base-rate fallacy. I argue that both arguments can be formulated in
a non-fallacious manner, so neither should be dismissed on the grounds of faulty form
alone.
Thesis supervisor: Robert Stalnaker
Title: Laurance S. Rockefeller Professor of Philosophy

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Bob Stalnaker, my primary advisor, for his guidance with this
thesis. It has been enormously improved by his insightful criticisms. Thanks also to my
other advisors -- to Agustin Rayo for raising the big questions, and to Roger White for his
very helpful comments.
Chapter 1 is the result of a collaborative effort with Josh Tenenbaum, Noah Goodman
and Jim Woodward. I was very fortunate to work with this very stimulating team. I owe a
particular intellectual debt to Josh Tenenbaum for inspiring many interesting thoughts.
The project was funded in part by the James S.McDonnell Foundation Causal Learning
Collaborative and was supported and encouraged by Alison Gopnik. Thanks to Zoubin
Ghahramani for providing the code which we modified to produce the results and figures
in the section on Bayesian curve-fitting. Thanks to Charles Kemp for his contributions,
especially helpful discussions of HBMs in general as well as in connection to philosophy
of science. I am grateful to Franz Huber, John Norton, Ken Schaffner and Jiji Zhang for
reading versions of the manuscript and making helpful criticisms.
Ideas gleaned from Kevin Kelly's seminar on simplicity have made their way into this
thesis. I would also like to thank Jonah Schupbach, Richard Holton and Sylvain
Bromberger for useful discussions. Many thanks to Judy Thomson, Ned Hall, Steve
Yablo, Alex Byrne and Selim Berker who all read early drafts of Chapter 2 and gave very
helpful comments. Special thanks to Bernhard Nickel who read drafts of both Chapter 2
and 3 and provided general guidance as well as specific comments. I am grateful to
Robert Nola for arranging that I could present a version of Chapter 3 in Auckland.
My husband Patrick van der Wel assisted with some of the figures. But he did far more
than that. He discussed the ideas, read drafts and gave detailed comments. Most
importantly though he provided the support, encouragement and interest which has
allowed this thesis to be written.
I owe special thanks to my mother for her heroic efforts with childcare while I worked
on this thesis, and to my father for enduring her absence while she was in the US helping
me.

To my parents

Contents
1 Framework theories and Bayesian inference 
8
1.1 
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2 
Hierarchical Bayesian Models (HBMs) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.3 
Preference for stronger theories 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
1.4 
Curve-fitting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
1.4.1 
Inference at lowest level: Bayesian model-fitting . . . . . . .
24
1.4.2 
Inference at second level: Bayesian model selection 
. . . . .
26
1.4.3 
Inference at higher levels: Bayesian 'framework theory' selec-
tion 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3 1
1.5 
The problem of new theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
1.6 
Broader implications for theory change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
2 
Bayesianism and Inference to the Best Explanation 
47
2.1 
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .
. . . .
47
2.2 
IB E 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
2.3 
Bayesianism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
2.4 
The incompatibilist view . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
2.5 
The composite view . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55

2.5.1 
Explanatory considerations as a constraint on Bayesian prob-
abilities 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
2.5.2 
The context of discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
2.5.3 
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
2.6 
Seeds of another approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
2.7 
Further analysis of IBE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
2.7.1 
Accounts of explanation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
2.7.2 
Explanation from the core . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
2.7.3 
Copernicus vs Ptolemy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
2.7.4 
Group vs individual selection 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
2.7.5 
Simplicity and unification 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
2.7.6 
Other explanatory virtues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
2.7.7 
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
2.8 
Bayesian representation of IBE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
2.8.1 
A concern over objectivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
2.8.2 
Bayesian simplicity and unification . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
2.8.3 
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
2.9 
Implications for IBE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
2.10 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
3 No Miracles, No Fallacies 
100
3.1 
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
100
3.2 
The base-rate fallacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
102
3.3 
The scientific realism debate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
104
3.4 
The NMA ....... 
................................ 
106
3.4.1 
Retail and wholesale NMA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
107

3.4.2 
Probabilistic formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
109
3.5 
The NMA and the base-rate fallacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .111
3.5.1 
The allegation .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..
111
3.5.2 
Amending the probabilistic formulation of the NMA . . . . .
112
3.5.3 
Defence of additional premise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
114
3.6 
The PI and the base-rate fallacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
120
3.7 
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
125

Chapter 1
Framework theories and Bayesian
inference
1.1 
Introduction
Although there has been considerable disagreement over specifics, it has been a
persistent theme in philosophy of science that scientific theories are hierarchically
structured, with theoretical principles of an abstract or general nature at higher
levels, and more concrete or specific hypotheses at lower levels. 
This idea has
been particularly emphasised by such historically oriented writers as Kuhn, Lakatos
and Laudan, who have used terms such as 'paradigms', 'research programs' or
'research traditions' to refer to higher levels in the hierarchy (Kuhn (1996); Lakatos
(1978); Laudan (1978)). In this tradition, the mutual dependence and interactions
of different levels of theory in the process of theory change has been explored in a
predominantly qualitative way.
Meanwhile, confirmation theories have tended to ignore the hierarchical struc-
ture of theories. On a Bayesian view, for example, as in other formal accounts,

scientific theories have typically been regarded as hypotheses in an unstructured
hypothesis space of mutually exclusive alternatives, and there has been a tendency
to focus exclusively on confirmation and testing of specific hypotheses.
However, Bayesian models with a hierarchically structured hypothesis space are
now widely used for statistical inference (Gelman et al. (2004)), and have proved
particularly fruitful in modelling the development of individuals' 'intuitive theories'
in cognitive science.1 In this paper, we suggest that such Hierarchical Bayesian
Models (or HBMs) can be helpful in illuminating the epistemology of scientific the-
ories.2 They provide a formal model of theory change at different levels of abstrac-
tion, and hence help to clarify how high level theory change may be rational and
evidence-driven. This has been a central topic of debate following the appearance
of Kuhn's Structure of Scientific Revolutions.
HBMs also help to resolve a number of philosophical worries surrounding Bayesian-
ism. They can explain why logically stronger or simpler theories may be preferred
by scientists and how learning of higher level theories is not simply parasitic on
learning of lower level theories, but may play a role in guiding learning of spe-
cific theories. They also give a new and more satisfactory Bayesian model of the
introduction of new theories.
In this paper, we first introduce HBMs in section 1.2, and argue that they
capture essential features of the evaluation of scientific theories. The following three
sections explain how HBMs may be used to resolve issues in Bayesian philosophy
of science. Section 1.3 discusses the objection that Bayesians cannot account for
a preference for logically stronger theories. Section 1.4 deals with the Bayesian
'Tenenbaum et al. (2007); Griffiths and Tenenbaum (2007); Mansinghka et al. (2006); Kemp
et al. (2004); Kemp (2007); Kemp and Tenenbaum (2008)
2Parallels between intuitive theories and scientific theories are explicitly drawn in Carey and
Spelke (1996), Giere (1996) and Gopnik (1996).

treatment of simplicity. Section 1.5 explains how HBMs can overcome many of the
problems that the introduction of new theories presents to Bayesians. As well as
discussing particular issues, two of these sections also introduce different examples
of HBMs, in order to illustrate the variety of scientific theories to which HBMs may
be applicable. Section 1.4 gives the example of curve-fitting while section 1.5 shows
how HBMs may be used for learning about causal relations. In the final section 1.6,
we consider the implications of HBMs for some general aspects of theory change.
1.2 
Hierarchical Bayesian Models (HBMs)
The Bayesian model standardly used in philosophy of science operates with a hy-
pothesis space H, which is just a set of mutually exclusive alternative hypotheses.
A 'prior' probability distribution is defined over the hypothesis space p(T), T C X.
On observing data D, the prior distribution is updated to the posterior distribution
according to the rule of conditionalisation:
p(T) -+ p(TID) 
(1.1)
The posterior distribution can be calculated using Bayes' rule to be
p(T ID) = p(~(I)(1.2)
p(D)
Here p(DIT) is the 'likelihood' of theory T, given data D, and p(D) is the prior
probability of the observed data D which serves as a normalisation constant ensuring
that p(TID) is a valid probability distribution that sums to 1.'
3This may be expressed as:
p(D) 
p(DIT)p(T)
10

In a hierarchical Bayesian model, or HBM, the hypothesis space has a hierar-
chical structure. Given a particular theory at the i + ith level, one has a hypothesis
space 'Hi of hypotheses or theories at the ith level which are treated as mutually
exclusive alternatives. One defines a prior probability for a theory T E T at level
i which is conditional on the theory at the next level up, as p(TlTi+1) for T c RZ,
and T+1 C Hi+1. This distribution is updated by conditionalisation in the usual
way to give a posterior distribution, again conditional on T+1
p(T IT+ 1) -+ p(TIlD, Ti1) 
(1.4)
As in the non-hierarchical case, the posterior can be found using Bayes' rule as
p(Tl ID, Ti+1) = p(DITi, Tj± 1)p(ThTj±i) 
(1.5)
p(DTi+1 )
In many cases, one can assume that p(DITi,Ti+ 1 ) = p(DITi), that is, T+1 adds
no additional information regarding the likelihood of the data given T. (T+1 is
'screened off' from D, given T). 4
Theories at higher levels of the hierarchy may represent more abstract or general
knowledge, whilst lower levels are more specific or concrete. For example, the prob-
lem of curve-fitting can be represented in a hierarchical model. Finding the curve
which best represents the relationship between two variables X and Y, involves not
only fitting particular curves from some given hypothesis space to the data, but also
making 'higher' level decisions about which general family or functional form (lin-
(the sum is replaced by an integral if the hypotheses T are continuously varying quantities).
4The normalisation constant is calculated in a similar way to before as:
p(DlTi+1) = E 
p(DITj)p(TjjT
1±) 
(1.6)
Again, it is assumed that Ti+1 is screened off from D, given Ti.

ear, quadratic etc.) is most appropriate. There may be a still higher level allowing
choice between expansions in polynomials and expansions in Fourier series. At the
lowest level of the hierarchical model representing curve-fitting, theories To specify
specific curves, such as y = 2x +3 or y = x2 - 4, that we fit to the data. At the next
level of the hierarchy, theories T1 are distinguished by the maximum degree of the
polynomial they assign to curves in the low level hypothesis space. For instance,
T1 could be the theory Poly1 with maximum polynomial degree 1. An alternative
T1 is Poly 2 with maximum polynomial degree 2, and so on. At a higher level, there
are two possible theories which specify that T theories are either polynomials, or
Fourier series, respectively. The model also specifies the conditional probabilities
p(TofT1) and p(T|T2). At each level of the HBM, the alternative theories are mutu-
ally exclusive. In this example, Poly1 and Poly 2 are taken to be mutually exclusive
alternatives. We will see soon how this should be understood.
We now suggest that HBMs are particularly apt models in certain respects of
scientific inference. They provide a natural way to represent a broadly Kuhnian
picture of the structure and dynamics of scientific theories.
Let us first highlight some of the key features of the structure and dynamics of
scientific theories to which historians and philosophers with a historical orientation
(Kuhn (1996); Lakatos (1978); Laudan (1978)) have been particularly attentive and
for which HBMs provide a natural model. It has been common in philosophy of
science, particularly in this tradition, to distinguish at least two levels of hierarchical
structure: a higher level consisting of a paradigm, research program or research
tradition, and a lower level of more specific theories or hypotheses.
Paradigms, research programmes and research traditions have been invested
with a number of different roles. Kuhn's paradigms, for instance, may carry with
them a commitment to specific forms of instrumentation, and to general theoretical

goals and methodologies, such as an emphasis on quantitative prediction or a dis-
taste for unobservable entities. However, one of the primary functions of paradigms
and their like is to contain what we will call 'framework theories',5 which comprise
abstract or general principles specifying the possible alternative hypotheses which
it is reasonable to entertain at the more specific level - for example, the possible
variables, concepts, and representational formats that may be used to formulate
such alternatives, more general classes or kinds into which more specific variables
fall, and possible relationships, causal and structural, that may obtain among vari-
ables. More generally, framework theories provide the raw materials out of which
more specific theories may be constructed and constraints which these must satisfy.
We will summarise this idea by saying that the relation between levels of theory
is one of 'generation' where a lower level theory T is said to be generated from a
higher level theory Ti+1 when Ti+1 provides a rule or recipe specifying constraints
on the construction of Ti .
Framework theories are generally taken to define a certain epistemic situation
for the evaluation of the specific theories they generate, since they help to deter-
mine the alternative hypotheses at the specific level and how likely they are with
respect to one another. Confirmation of theories is relative to the framework which
generates them. This type of idea may be illustrated even in the simple case of
5In discussing the application of HBMs to what we call 'framework theories', we intend to
suggest relevance to several related notions. In cognitive development, the label 'framework theory'
has been used to refer to the more abstract levels of children's intuitive theories of core domains
- the organizing principles that structure knowledge of intuitive physics, intuitive psychology,
intuitive biology and the like (Wellman and Gelman (1992)). In an earlier era of philosophy of
science, Carnap introduced the notion of a 'linguistic framework', the metatheoretical language
within which a scientific theory is formulated, which is adopted and evaluated on pragmatic or
aesthetic grounds rather than being subject to empirical confirmation or disconfirmation. 
To
the extent that there is common ground between Carnap's 'linguistic frameworks' and the later
notions of 'paradigms', 'research programmes', or 'research traditions', as some have suggested
(Godfrey-Smith (2003)), the term 'framework theory' also recalls Carnapian ideas.
13 -

curve-fitting. We can think of a scientist who fits a curve to the data from the
set of alternatives characterized by or generated from Poly1 as in a different epis-
temic or evidential situation from an investigator who fits a curve from the set of
alternatives generated by Poly 2, even if the same curve is selected in both cases.
The first investigator selects her curve from a different set of alternatives than the
second and has more free parameters to exploit in achieving fit. This in turn affects
the evidential support the data provides for the curve she selects. In part, Kuhn's
concept of incommensurability reflects the idea that scientists working in different
paradigms are in different epistemic situations. But the epistemic difference in the
two situations need not be realized only in the minds of two different scientists.
It applies also when a single scientist approaches the data from the standpoint
of multiple paradigms or higher-level theories, weighing them against each other
consciously or unconsciously, or when a community of scientists does likewise as a
whole (without any one individual committing solely to a single framework).
Our thesis that HBMs provide a suitable model for the structure and dynamics
of scientific theories, and particularly of this Kuhnian picture, rests on three core
claims about how HBMs represent the scientific situation. First, we claim that the
hierarchical hypothesis space in an HBM is appropriate for modelling scientific the-
ories with hierarchical structure. Second, the notion of generation between levels of
theory can be modelled formally in terms of the conditional probabilities p(TIlT+1)
linking levels of theory in an HBM. The conditional probabilities p(TlTi+ 1) reflect
the scientific assumptions about how T is constructed out of Ti+1, explicitly mark-
ing how the subjective probability of a lower-level theory is specified relative to,
or with respect to the viewpoint of, the higher-level theory that generates it. And
third, updating of the conditional probabilities p(TilTi+ 1) of theories at level i with
respect to a particular theory at the i + 1 level represents confirmation of the level

i theory with respect to the class of alternatives generated by the i + 1 level theory.
Before developing these claims in more detail, we first consider a few motivat-
ing examples of how higher-level framework theories may be structured and how
they function to constrain more specific theories. The constraints which framework
theories provide may take a variety of more specific forms: for example, they may
reflect causal, structural, or classificatory presuppositions, or assumptions about the
degree of homogeneity or heterogeneity of data obtained in different circumstances.
In the causal case, a framework theory could provide a 'causal schema', rep-
resenting more abstract causal knowledge, such as that causal relations are only
allowed between relata of certain types. A biological example is provided by the
abstract description of the general principles that are now thought to govern gene
regulation (eg. see Davidson (2006)). For example, current biological understand-
ing distinguishes between structural and regulatory genes. These are organised into
networks in which the regulatory genes influence the expression of both structural
and other regulatory genes. Regulatory genes are also capable of changing inde-
pendently of structural genes (e.g. by mutation). This represents a causal schema,
which needs to be filled in with particular regulatory genes in order to yield a spe-
cific theory about the expression of any particular structural gene. Any alternative
to this abstract schema (e.g. an alternative according to which gene expression is
controlled by some other biological agent besides regulatory genes) will be repre-
sented by a competing higher level theory, which is inconsistent with the regulatory
gene schema.
Another biological example is the so-called Central Dogma of Molecular Biol-
ogy, suggested by Crick (1958) as a heuristic to guide research. According to this
principle (in its universal, unqualified form) information flows from DNA to RNA
to proteins but not vice versa. This can be represented by the abstract schema

DNA -
RNA -- protein. Specific lower level theories would fill in the details of
the precise molecules involved. Competing high level theories to the central dogma
would include schemas which also allow information to flow from RNA -+ DNA or
Protein -+ DNA. In fact, the discovery of reverse transcriptase led to the replace-
ment of the central dogma with an alternative schema, allowing information flow
from RNA to DNA in certain cases. An example of the application of HBMs to
causal networks is given in section 1.5.
In other applications, the specific theories of interest may be classifications or de-
scriptions of a certain domain. Then a framework theory might specify the structure
of the classification or description, for example whether the entities are organised
into a tree, a lattice, or clusters, etc. Classification of living kinds was once thought
to be a linear structure - each kind was to be placed in the great chain of being.
Later Linnaeus discovered that the data were better organised into a tree, with
branching structure. The linear structure and the tree structure were competing
higher level theories, which were compared indirectly via how well specific theories
of each type could account for the data.
Higher level theories may also specify how homogeneous data obtained from dif-
ferent trials or experimental settings are expected to be. Homogeneity assumptions
can be represented as a higher level theory which can be learned, and they can help
to guide further inference. For example, to a surprising extent genetic and molecu-
lar mechanisms are shared among different species of animals. This helps to make
it plausible that say, results about the molecular mechanisms underlying synaptic
plasticity in the sea slug (aplysia) can be generalised to give an understanding of
synaptic plasticity in humans.
'Kemp and Tenenbaum (2008) and Kemp (2007) discuss these and other examples of structural
frameworks, as well as showing how they can be learned in a HBM.

These examples illustrate that framework theories may take a wide range of
representational forms. For instance, they, and the theories they generate, may be
directed graphs, structural forms like trees or lattices, or multidimensional spaces.
In principle, HBMs may be applied to theories of any kind of representational
form, and current research is making these applications practical for such diverse
representations as grammars, first order logic, lambda calculus, logic programs and
more. 7
We now turn to a more detailed discussion of how HBMs represent the structure
and dynamics of scientific theories. Any model of scientific inference will take certain
assumptions as given in the set-up of the model. These assumptions are then used
as fixed points or common presuppositions in the evaluation of rival theories. For
example, standard non-hierarchical Bayesian models presuppose a hypothesis space
of rival candidate theories. We may think of this space as specified by the back-
ground assumptions that characterise a particular problem area - for example, that
the hypotheses under consideration have a particular representational form, such
as polynomials in curve-fitting or directed graphs in causal contexts. In an HBM,
what has to be fixed in the set-up of the model is a hierarchical structure compris-
ing the highest level hypothesis space and the conditional probabilities p(TIT41)
at each level. As we shall see in section 1.4.3, the background assumptions behind
the highest level hypothesis space can be considerably more general and abstract
than would typically be the case for a non-hierarchical Bayesian model. For this
reason, in many cases, these background assumptions will be less demanding than
the presuppositions required by non-hierarchical Bayesian models. The conditional
probabilities p(TilTi+ 1) can be thought of as reflecting scientists' judgments about
how likely various lower level theories T are, given the higher level theory Ti+1 . As
7This is current research by J. B. Tenenbaum and N. D. Goodman at MIT.

we will see in an example discussed in section 1.5, the higher level theory might
specify the types of entities or relations involved in the lower level theories, and
the conditional probability p(TlTi+1) may be put together out of the probabilities
that each entity or relation will take some particular form. The overall probability
p(TjjT+ 1 ) then reflects scientists' understanding of the principles governing how the
lower level theories are to be cognitively constructed from the higher level theories.
In other words, some assumptions about how T+1 generates T are built into the
set-up of the HBM.
As we mentioned earlier, updating of the conditional probabilities p(TjlT+i)
of theories at level i with respect to a particular theory at the i + 1 level may
be thought of as representing confirmation of the level i theory with respect to
the class of alternatives generated by the i + 1 level theory. For instance, the
probability p(2x + 1|Polyi) tells us about how likely the curve 2x + 1 is relative
to a hypothesis space of lines of the form y = 0o + 01x. On the other hand, the
probability p(0x 2 + 2x + I |Poly 2) tells us about how likely Ox2 + 2x + 1 is with
respect to the hypothesis space of quadratic curves y = O0 + 01x + 022. The fact
that p(2x + i|Polyi) and p(0x 2 + 2x + ifPoly 2) may differ, even though we may
recognise 2x + 1 and Ox2 + 2x + 1 as representing the same curve, reflects the
framework relativity of confirmation mentioned earlier, namely that evaluations of
theories may depend on the background knowledge, or higher level theory which
frames the inquiry.
Thinking of higher level theories as generators of lower level theories contrasts
with a certain traditional picture of higher level theories. According to this tradi-
tional approach, a hierarchy of theories can be regarded as a hierarchy of nested
sets. On this view, there is a base set of all possible lowest level hypotheses, such as
the set of all possible curves. In this base set, curves such as 2x + 1 and Ox 2 +2x+1

are taken to be the same hypothesis, so that the set contains only mutually exclu-
sive hypotheses. The base set can be grouped into subsets sharing some common
feature, such as the set of all nth order polynomials. Such subsets are then re-
garded as 'higher-level theories'. Thus, the set LIN of all linear hypotheses of the
form y = 00 +0 1x could be one higher level theory, and the set PAR of all quadratic
hypotheses of the form y = 60 + 01x + 622 would be another. On this view, higher
level theories like LIN and PAR are not mutually exclusive. For example, the curve
represented by 2x + 1 would be contained in both sets LIN and PAR.
By contrast, on the generative picture, higher level theories are mutually exclu-
sive alternatives - this is a point stressed by Kuhn (Kuhn (1996), Ch. IX). This
is also the case in an HBM, where theories at level i are treated as mutually ex-
clusive alternatives, given a particular theory at the i + ith level. For instance,
the model Poly1, together with the conditional probability p(To Polyi), represents
one way that scientists might think of specific theories To as being constructed,
or 'generated', whereas the model Poly 2 and probability p(To|Poly2) represents an
alternative, and quite distinct way of producing specific theories. It is true that the
sets of curves that each generates may overlap. However, the higher level theories
Poly1 and Poly 2 are not identified with the subset of curves that they generate.
In this particular case, the HBM may be thought of as assigning probabilities to
a tree-like hierarchy of theories, with arrows indicating a generation relation be-
tween a higher level theory and lower level theories that it generates (see Fig. 1).In
some circumstances, one wants to evaluate theories without reference to a partic-
ular higher level theory. In the curve-fitting example, one might want to assign
probabilities to specific curves from the base set of all possible curves. These form
a mutually exclusive set. This can be done using the HBM by summing over the

Polynomial 
Fourier
/
-~
Poly,
Models
To
Specific
curves
D 
.
Data
points
Pol~y
2  
POIY
3
. ..........
Jr
0 
--
0 
0'
0 
0 
0
0 
K
Figure 1-1: Hierarchical Bayesian Model for curve-fitting. At the highest level of the
hierarchy, T2 may represent either an expansion in a Fourier basis or in a polynomial
basis. The polynomial theory generates theories, or models, T of different degrees.
Each of these then generates specific curves To - quadratic curves are depicted. And
each specific curve gives rise to possible data sets.
20
T2Bases

higher level theories which may generate the particular low level theory
p(T) = 
p(To T1)p(T1|T 2)...p(TU-1|TU)p(TU) 
(1.7)
Here U indexes the highest level of the HBM. Probabilities for subsets of the base
set, which on the traditional view comprise higher level theories, can also be calcu-
lated in this way.
1.3 
Preference for stronger theories
We now turn to ways in which HBMs help to resolve certain challenges to Bayesian
philosophy of science. The first problem we will consider was originally posed by
Karl Popper (Popper (1959)). It has recently been repeated by Forster and Sober
in the context of curve-fitting (Forster and Sober (1994); Forster (1995)).
The problem is the following. If one theory, T1, entails another, T2, then the
following inequalities are theorems of the probability calculus:
p(T1) < p(T 2) 
(1.8)
p(T1|D) < p(T2|ID) 
(1.9)
for any data D. It would seem then that the Bayesian would always have to assign
lower probability to the logically stronger theory. However, arguably scientists often
do regard stronger theories as more probable.
Forster and Sober advance the argument in the context of curve-fitting (Forster
and Sober (1994)). They define LIN to be the family of equations or curves of the

form:
Y = oZ 
+ a1X + UU 
(1.10)
and PAR to be the family of equations:
Y = 
+#1X+ 
X2 + U(1.11)
where oU is a noise term. The family LIN is then a subset of PAR, since 'if the true
specific curve is in (LIN), it will also be in (PAR)' (p. 7, Forster and Sober (1994)).
Forster and Sober claim that since LIN entails PAR, the Bayesian cannot explain
how LIN can ever be preferred to PAR, because prior and posterior probabilities
for LIN must always be less than or equal to the probabilities for PAR.
As we saw in the previous section, there are two ways to think of higher level
theories: a set-based way, and a generative way. Forster and Sober assume that
when scientists show a preference for a stronger theory, they are comparing sets of
specific theories, such as LIN and PAR. However, the picture of high level theories
involved in HBMs offers an alternative. The theories Poly1 and Poly2 considered
at the T level are mutually exclusive polynomial models, so it is quite legitimate
to assign higher probabilities, whether prior or posterior, to Poly1 as opposed to
Poly2. Therefore it is possible to prefer the linear theory Poly1 over the quadratic
theory Poly 2.
This is not in conflict with the assignment of lower probability to the theory
LIN as opposed to PAR. Suppose Poly1 has probability 0.6 in the HBM, and Poly2
has probability 0.4 (assuming for the sake of simplicity that Poly1 and Poly 2 are
the only alternatives). The probability of LIN is the probability that the system
is described by a linear hypothesis. A linear hypothesis could either be generated

by Poly1, with probability 1, or by Poly 2 , with some probability p < 1 depending
on what weight Poly2 gives to linear hypotheses (i.e. those quadratic hypotheses
with 02 = 0). Suppose p = 0.1. Then the probability for LIN is given by summing
the probabilities for each generating model multiplied by the probability that if
that model was chosen, a linear hypothesis would be drawn. Thus in this example,
p(LIN)= 0.6 x 1 + 0.4 x 0.1 = 0.64. Similarly, the probability for PAR is p(PAR)=
0.6 x 1 + 0.4 x 1 = 1, since no matter whichever way the lower level hypothesis
is generated, it will be a quadratic curve. Thus p(LIN)< p(PAR), as expected.
However, the theories which are compared in an HBM are not LIN and PAR, but
Poly1 and Poly 2. This is because higher level theories are not regarded simply as
sets of lower level possibilities, but are alternative generative theories.
The alleged failure of Bayesians to account for a preference for stronger theories
has been associated with another alleged failure: to account for the preference for
simpler theories. This is because the stronger theory may be the simpler one, as in
the curve-fitting case. In the next section, we- will argue that not only do HBMs
allow preference for simpler theories, they actually automatically incorporate such
a preference.
1.4 
Curve-fitting
In fitting curves to data, the problem of fitting parameters to a function of a spec-
ified form, such as a polynomial of a certain degree, can be distinguished from the
problem of choosing the right functional form to fit. There are statistical techniques
of both Bayesian and non-Bayesian varieties for the latter problem of 'model se-
lection'. It has already been suggested in the philosophy of science literature that
particular versions of these methods may give a precise formalisation of the role

of simplicity in theory choice.' This section will give a more detailed account of
Bayesian inference in the curve-fitting HBM introduced in section 1.2, describing
inference at the three levels depicted in Figure 1. We will also show that Bayesian
model selection, and hence a certain kind of preference for simplicity, arises auto-
matically in higher level inference in HBMs.
At each level of the hierarchy, the posterior distribution is computed for hy-
potheses in the hypothesis space generated by the theory at the next level up the
hierarchy.
1.4.1 
Inference at lowest level: Bayesian model-fitting
At the lowest level of the hierarchy, the hypothesis space 'Ho comprises specific
curves To of the form
fo,M(X) = 
0o + 01x + ... + 0MXM + E 
(1.12)
(where E-N(O, a2) is the noise term), generated by PolyM at the T level. Let
0 
(0, ..., OM) be a vector representing the parameters of the curve to be fitted.
For simplicity, we treat the variance o2 
as a fixed quantity, rather than as a
parameter to be fitted.
The posterior probability for the parameters 0 is
p(D|6, Polym)p(6 IPolym)
p(I|D, Polym) = 
(I~lm 
(1.13)
PkIO M) 
-
p(DIPolyg)
8Forster and Sober (1994) suggest this for the non-Bayesian method based on the Akaike
Information Criterion (or AIC) and Dowe et al. (2007) for Minimum Message Length (or MML),
which is a Bayesian form of model selection.

X 104
M = 0M
X
4
.
2
0
2
* 
4
6
0 
10 
20
0 
10 
20 
0 
10 
20
X04
x 104
M = 4
x10 4
M = 5
4 
4 
4
2 
2 
2
0 
0 
0
2 
2 
2
4 
4 
4
6 
6 
.
0 
10 
20 
0 
10 
20 
0 
10 
20
Figure 1-2: The polynomial of each degree with highest posterior (dark grey), with
other polynomials sampled from the posterior (light grey). (Data is sampled from
the polynomial f (x) = 100(x - 3)(x - 12)(x - 17), plus normally distributed noise.)
x 104
M = 3
M =I3
M = 2

The denominator is given by
p(DIPolym) = 
p(D IN, Polym)p(N IPolym) d 
(1.14)
Figure 2 shows the polynomial of each degree with highest posterior probability
for a small data set, together with samples from the posterior which illustrate the
'spread' of the posterior distribution.
The posterior is used by the Bayesian for the task of fitting the parameters to
the data, given a model - the problem of 'model-fitting'. Strictly speaking, Bayesian
assessment of hypotheses involves only the posterior probability distribution. How-
ever, one could also 'select' the best hypothesis, for example by choosing the one
with the highest posterior probability.
1.4.2 
Inference at second level: Bayesian model selection
At the next level of the hierarchy, the hypothesis space 'H1 consists of the polynomial
models {PolyM= 1 with different degrees M. These models may be compared by
calculating their posterior probabilities, given by9
P(PolyM|D) cx P(Polym)P(DIPolym)
where
P(DIPolym) = 
P(DIN)P(|Polym)d6 
(1.15)
Computing the posterior distribution over models in this way is the way models
at the second level of the HBM are assessed, and it is also the standard Bayesian
'Once the parameters I of the polynomial are defined, so is the maximum degree of the
polynomial. 
Therefore the screening off assumption mentioned after equation 1.5 holds and
p(DIb,Polym) = p(DIO).

approach to the problem of model selection (or 'model comparison', if the Bayesian
strictly restricts herself to the posterior probability distribution). Although the
posterior indicates the relative support for a theory Polym, the model is not directly
supported by the data, but is indirectly confirmed through support for the specific
functions fo,m(x) that it generates.
It has been observed by a number of authors that, with a certain natural choice of
priors, the Bayesian posterior over models reflects a preference for simpler models,
and Bayesian model selection involves a trade-off between the complexity of the
model and fit to the data similar to that seen in other non-Bayesian approaches to
model selection. 0
We illustrate this in Figure 3, which shows the posterior probabilities for each
model and how they change as data accumulates (this is shown for both polynomial
and Fourier models). The prior probability over models has been assumed to be
uniform, and the probability has also been distributed uniformly between specific
polynomials in each hypothesis space. This choice does not imply equal probability
for specific polynomials generated by different theories: individual polynomials have
prior probability that decreases as degree increases, since they must 'share' the
probability mass with more competitors." With these priors, when the amount of
data is small, the linear model Poly, is preferred over the higher order polynomial
models. As the amount of data increases, the higher order models become more
probable. If linear models may be regarded as 'simpler' than higher order models,
1 0Rosenkrantz (1977) discusses the role of simplicity in Bayesian evaluations of families of curves
and other examples (see his discussion of what he calls 'sample coverage'). 
Similar ideas are
discussed for a simple case in White (2005). 
Jefferys and Berger (1992) and MacKay (2003)
highlight the trade-off between simplicity and fit in Bayesian model selection.
"Results shown in Fig. 3 were produced using a uniform prior over a finite number of models.
If the number of model classes is countably infinite, one could use a geometric or exponential
distribution over model classes.

2 data points. 3 data points. 4 data points. 5 data points. 7 data points. 9 data points.
* 
1 -
- - . -
1 
1 
1 - - - - . -
1 
1
Cl,
Cn
0 0.8 
.8 
.8 
.8 
.8 
0.8
0
E 0.6 
.6 
.6 
.6 
.6 
0.6
0 0.4 
.4 
.4 
.4 
14 
0.4
LL
0 0.2 
.2 
12 
.2 
.2 
0.2
00
00 
-
0 
0 
0 
0
0 012345 
012345 
012345 
012345 
012345 
012345
0.8 
-18 
1.8 
1.8 
0.8 
.0.8
0
0.61 
16 
16 
16 
1. 
1.
E
-~0.6 
D.6 
16 
.6 
0.6 
0.6
0c0.4 
.4 
.4 
.4 
0.4 
0.4
0 0.2 
.2 
.2 
.2 
0.2 
0.2
0 
0 
0 
0 
0
O 012345 
012345 
012345 
012345 
012345 
012345
0a_
Figure 1-3: Posterior probability of models with different M (horizontal axis) for
both the polynomial case, and the Fourier case discussed in section 1.4.3. The
Bayesian Occam's razor is evident in the favouring of simpler models when the
amount of data is small.

then the Bayesian posterior has a tendency to favour simpler models, at least until
there is an accumulation of data supporting a more complex theory. This is a
Bayesian Occam's razor: when there are only a few data points, the data can be
fitted either by a line or by a quadratic (cubic, etc.), however the linear model Poly1
is preferred because it is 'simpler'.
This simplicity preference arises because the posterior on models, Equation 1.15,
involves an integral over all the polynomials generated by the model, not just
the best fitting. Since there are more quadratics that fit poorly than there are
lines (indeed, there are more quadratics than lines, period) the quadratic model is
penalised.
This effect is manifested generally in the posterior probability for a higher level
theory Ti. The likelihood p(DITi) for this theory is obtained by integrating over all
the possible specific models T_1 that T generates:1 2
p(D I T) = Jp(DITi_1)p(TiITi)dTii 
(1.16)
That is, the likelihood of a high level theory is the expected likelihood of the specific
theories that it generates. This will be large when there are relatively many specific
theories, with high prior, that fit the data well-since complex higher level theories
tend to have many specific theories which fit the data poorly, even when they have
a few that fit the data very well, simplicity is preferred. For this preference, it
is not essential that the priors p(TiT) be exactly uniform, as they were in our
illustration. All that is needed is that the priors for lower level theories are not
weighted heavily in favour of those theories which fit the data best. Intuitively, the
likelihood p(DIT) penalises complexity of the model: if the model is more complex,
12If screening off does not hold, p(DITi_1) should be replaced by p(DITi- 1, Tj).

p(DIH 3)
p(DIH 2)
p(DIH 1)
D*
Figure 1-4: Probability distributions p(DIH,) over a one-dimensional data set D for
three different theories. The more complex theory H1 spreads the probability mass
over a wider range of possible data sets than the simpler theories H2 and H3. For
the observed data D*, the complex theory H1 has lower likelihood than H2. The
simpler theory H3 doesn't spread its mass so widely, but misses the observed data
D*. In this case, the theory of intermediate complexity, H2, will be favoured.

then it will have greater flexibility in fitting the data, and could also generate a
number of other data sets; thus, the probability assigned to this particular data
set will be lower than that assigned by a less flexible model (which would spread
its probability mass over fewer potential data sets) - see Figure 4. This simplicity
preference balances against fit to the data, rather than overriding it: as we see in
Figure 3, an initial simplicity bias can be overcome by the accumulation of data
supporting a more complex theory.
1.4.3 
Inference at higher levels: Bayesian 'framework the-
ory' selection
We have seen how at the second level of the HBM, we can compare or select the
appropriate degree M for a polynomial model.
Each polynomial model Polym generates a set of specific hypotheses differing
only in parameter values. All the polynomial models are expansions to different
degrees in terms of polynomial functions. However, this is not the only way that
models could be constructed. Models could also be expansions to degree M in terms
of Fourier basis functions. The model FouriM, for example, would generate specific
functions of the form fom(x) - Oo + 01 sin(x) + ... + Om sin(Mx) + E.
In an HBM, comparison between the type of basis functions used can take place
at a third level of the hierarchy. The principles are the same as those behind
comparison of models at the second level. One finds the posterior probability:
P(Basis|D) oc P(Basis)P(D|Basis)

20
-
10-
0
0-
CL
.ID -10
0
U_
0-20
C,,
0
L_
0
-
-40
-501
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12
Number of data points observed.
Figure 1-5: The log-posterior probability ratio between bases for curve-fitting (pos-
itive numbers indicate support for Fourier basis, negative for polynomial basis).
Error bars represent standard error over twenty data sets randomly sampled from
the polynomial f (x) = 100(x - 3)(x - 12)(x - 17) (plus normally distributed noise).
When the number of observations is small the Fourier basis is favoured, eventually
enough evidence accumulates to confirm the (correct) polynomial basis.

with
P(DIBasis) = 
P(DIModel)P(ModellBasis)
ModelGBasis
where Model will be one of the PolyMor FouriM, depending on the basis." Just as
the models receive support from the evidence through the specific functions below
them, the curve-fitting bases receive support through the models they generate.
In Figure 5 the posterior probability values for each basis are plotted against the
number of data points observed (the data is actually sampled from a cubic poly-
nomial with noise). Note that there is a great deal of uncertainty when only a few
data points are observed-indeed, the Fourier basis has higher posterior-but the
correct (polynomial) basis gradually becomes confirmed. Since there are only two
hypotheses at the highest level (polynomial or Fourier), we have made the natural
assumption that the two are a priori equally likely: P(Basis) = 0.5.
In some respects, the choice of a basis in this simple curve-fitting example is
analogous to a choice between 'framework theories' (see section 1.2). Framework
theories frame the possibilities for how theories are expressed at lower levels. They
may even be, as in Carnap's picture of linguistic frameworks, something like a
language for expressing theories. In this example, we have a natural comparison
between the 'language of polynomials', with a simple 'grammar' built from vari-
ables and constants, addition, multiplication and exponentiation and an alternative
'Fourier language', built from trigonometric functions, addition, constants, and vari-
ables. Since any function may be approximated arbitrarily well by polynomials or
sinusoids (a standard result of analysis), the two languages are equally powerful in
allowing fit to the data, so the main determinant of choice between them is sim-
plicity as reflected in the likelihood of the framework theories. Simplicity here is a
"Once the model is specified, the basis is also given, so p(DIModel) = p(DIModel, Basis).

criterion which arises naturally from assessing the empirical support of a high-level
hypothesis.
1.5 
The problem of new theories
One of the most pressing challenges for Bayesian philosophy of science is to account
for the discovery or introduction of new theories. When a genuinely new theory is
introduced, the hypothesis space changes, and the Bayesian will have to reassign the
prior distribution over the new hypothesis space. This has been called the 'problem
of new theories' for Bayesians, because the adoption of a new prior is not governed
by conditionalisation and so is strictly speaking a non-Bayesian process (Earman
(1992)).
The main Bayesian proposal to deal with the problem has been to use a 'catch-
all' hypothesis to represent as-yet-unformulated theories, and then 'shave off' prob-
ability mass from the catch-all to assign to new theories. This is an unsatisfactory
solution since there is no particularly principled way to decide how much initial
probability should be assigned to the catch-all, or how to update the probabilities
when a new theory is introduced.
Given 
the 
inadequacy 
of 
this 
proposal, 
even 
would-be-full-time
Bayesians like Earman have given up on a Bayesian solution and turned to a quali-
tative account of the introduction of new theories, such as that proposed by Kuhn.
Earman appeals to the process of coming to community consensus, and suggests
that the redistribution of probabilities over the competing theories is accomplished
by a process of 'persuasions rather than proof' (Earman (1992), p. 197).
Difficulties in describing changes to the hypothesis space have also led to an-
other alleged problem. Donald Gillies claims that Bayesians must limit themselves

to situations where the theoretical framework - by which he means the space of
possible theories - can be fixed in advance. 'Roughly the thesis is that Bayesianism
can be validly applied only if we are in a situation in which there is a fixed and
known theoretical framework which it is reasonable to suppose will not be altered
in the course of the investigation', where 'theoretical framework' refers to 'the set of
theories under consideration' (Gillies (2001), p. 364). Gillies claims that this poses
an enormous problem of practicality, since it would not be feasible to consider the
'whole series of arcane possible hypotheses' (p. 368) in advance. He thinks that
for the Bayesian to 'begin every investigation by considering all possible hypotheses
which might be encountered in the course of the investigation' would be a 'waste of
time' (p. 376). This claim is motivated by consideration of the potentially enormous
size of adequate hypothesis spaces, even for simple examples.
We will argue that both the problem of new theories and the practicality prob-
lem for large hypothesis spaces are alleviated if assignment of a prior probability
distribution does not depend on an explicit enumeration of the hypothesis space.
As we said in section 1.2, just as the application of non-hierarchical Bayesianism is
restricted to a particular fixed hypothesis space, so HBM Bayesianism can be validly
applied only if we are in a situation in which there is a fixed and known hierarchy
which it is reasonable to suppose will not be altered in the course of the investi-
gation. However, part of this hierarchy (the conditional probabilities p(TIlT4 1))
represent background assumptions about how lower level theories are generated
from higher level theories. Given these assumptions, there is no need to enumerate
the lower level theories. In fact Bayesian inference in an HBM can be performed
over very large, and even infinite hypothesis spaces. These considerations provide
a solution to the problem of practicality which Gillies raises. Also, there can be
theories implicit in the hypothesis space, initially with very low probability, which

come to get high probability as the data accumulates. This provides a way of ef-
fectively modeling the introduction of theories that are 'new' in the sense that they
may be regarded as implicit in assumptions about how the lower level theories are
generated although not explicitly enumerated or recognized as possible hypotheses.
To illustrate, we will use an example of an HBM that represents scientific theo-
ries about causal relations (Tenenbaum and Nigoyi (2003); Griffiths and Tenenbaum
(2007)). The example also serves to illustrate another application of HBMs. Di-
rected graphs where the arrows are given a causal interpretation are now a popular
way to represent different possible systems of causal relationships between certain
variables. These are called 'causal graphs'. More abstract causal knowledge may be
represented by a 'causal graph schema' which generates lower level causal graphs.
Consider a family of causal graphs representing different possible systems of
causal relationships among such variables as smoking, lung cancer, heart disease,
headache and cough where an arrow from one variable or node X directed into
another Y means that X causes Y. Compare the graphs in Figure 6. The three
graphs No, N1 and N2employ the same set of variables. Although these graphs posit
different causal links among the variables, they differ in a systematic way from graph
N3. In No, N1 and N2, the variables fall into three more general classes which might
be described as behaviours, diseases and symptoms. Furthermore there is a more
abstract pattern that governs possible causal relationships among variables in these
classes. Direct causal links run only from behaviours to diseases and from diseases
to symptoms. Other possible causal links (e.g. direct causal links from behaviours
to symptoms or causal links between symptoms) do not occur. By contrast, N3
does not follow this pattern - in this graph, for example, the disease variable, flu,
causes the behaviour variable, smoking.
The particular graphs No, Ni and N2 (but not N3) are generated by a more

Figure 1-6: Causal networks illustrating different possible relationships between
behaviours, diseases and symptoms. No, N1 and N2 are based on the same abstract
graph schema Gd, 
whereas N3 is not. The network N 2 contains an extra disease
node.

abstract graph schema Gdas which is characterised by the following features:
i) There are three node classes B, D and S into which specific nodes fall. Each
node class is open in the sense that additional variables may be added to that class.
ii) Possible causal relationships take the form B -+ D and D -+ S only
i) and ii) thus represent structural features that characterise an entire class of
more specific theories. These structural features have to do with causal relationships
(or their absence) that are determined by the classes into which variables fall.
In an HBM we may regard GdaS as a general theory, T1, generating specific
networks Ni as specific theories To. It divides the variables of interest into classes
or kinds and specifies that only a limited set of causal relationships may hold among
these variables, in much the same way that the Central Dogma of molecular biology
restricts the set of possible informational relationships among DNA, RNA, and
proteins. In order to specify the HBM completely, we need to define the prior
p(NjlGd,), (i.e. p(TolT1)), which encapsulates probabilistic information about how
the specific networks Ni depend on, or are generated by, the causal schema Gai,.
As an illustration, in Griffiths and Tenenbaum (2007), the prior p(Nj|Gdi) 
was
specified by giving probability distributions for the number of nodes in each class
(B, D, or S) in the network Ni, and distributions for the probability of causal links
between pairs of nodes from classes B and D, and from classes D and S. More
specifically, the number of nodes in each class was assumed to follow a power law
distribution p(N) ~ 1 with an exponent specific to each class (so that, other
things being equal, graphs with more nodes have lower prior probability). There
was also assumed to be a fixed probability TBD of a causal link from b to d for any
nodes b E B, and d C D, and a fixed probability 77DS of a causal link from d to s
for any nodes d E D, and s E S. Thus the probability of a causal link depends only
on the classes to which the nodes belong. A specific causal graph such as No may

then be generated by randomly drawing individual nodes from each node class and
then randomly generating causal links between each pair of nodes. The result is
a probability p(NilGdi,) for each specific causal graph Ni, which is non-zero if and
only if Gd, generates Ni.
At the outset of the investigation, the range of graphs to be considered need
not be explicitly enumerated. The range of hypotheses is implicitly determined
by the causal schema (or schemas) under consideration and the 'instructions' we
have just given for building hypotheses and their prior probabilities at the lower
level based on the schema. At first, a high probability is assigned to certain of the
possible causal graphs - for instance those with fewer disease variables. However,
a causal network containing a new disease can be discovered, given the right data,
even though initially all the networks with non-negligible prior probability do not
contain this disease. Suppose for example that a correlation is observed between
a previously known behaviour b like working in a factory and a previously known
symptom s like chest pain. To accommodate this correlation, the logically simplest
possibility is simply to add another causal link directly from b to s, but the schema
Gd, 
rules out this possibility: any link between a behaviour and symptom must
pass through a disease as an intermediate link. Another possibility which is allowed
by Gdis is to add links from b to one of the known diseases and from this disease to
s. This has the advantage that no new disease node needs to be introduced. But
it may be that any new links from working in a factory to existing disease nodes
and from these to symptoms generate correlations that are inconsistent with what
is observed. In such circumstances, one will eventually learn that the correct causal
graph is one which introduces a new disease node Y which is causally between b and
s as shown in N2. The rules associated with the graph schema Gdi, for constructing
specific graphs tell us what the prior is for this new graph and as we update on the

basis of the data, this new graph may acquire a higher posterior than any of its
competitors Griffiths and Tenenbaum (2007).
In general, HBMs can provide a Bayesian model of the introduction of new
theories." 
New theories which were implicit in the hypothesis space, but which
initially received very low prior probability, can be explicitly introduced and come to
receive high posterior probability as the appropriate supporting data accumulates.
The example also illustrates how the higher level theory may play a role in guiding
the construction of more specific theories. What Gi in effect does is to provide a
sort of abstract recipe for the construction or generation of more specific theories.
By restricting the range of possible hypotheses among which the learner has to
search, Gdas makes it possible to learn the correct hypothesis from a much smaller
body of data than would be required if one were instead searching a much larger
space of possible alternatives. So the adoption of the schema represented by Gdi,
greatly facilitates learning.
The lack of need to explicitly enumerate hypotheses also removes the practical
problem for large hypothesis spaces posed by Gillies. In the context of HBMs, one
might be concerned that the evaluation of posterior probabilities, although in prin-
ciple possible, is too computationally challenging. However, Bayesian inference in
large HBMs is made practical by the existence of algorithms for producing good
"Earman suggests distinguishing 'weak revolutions', which involve the introduction of theories
where the new theory is a possibility that was within the space of theories, previously unartic-
ulated, from revolutions proper, or 'strong revolutions', where a completely new possibility is
introduced. HBMs provide a Bayesian treatment of weak revolutions. This is important for at
least two reasons. First, given the ubiquity of weak revolutions in day-to - day science it would
be a serious limitation if the Bayesian account could not deal with them without making the
implausible assumption that all weakly new hypotheses need to be explicitly enumerated before
inference begins. Second, it is far from clear how common 'pure' strong revolutions are. Detailed
investigations of putative examples of such revolutions typically reveals a major guiding role from
previously accepted frameworks, suggesting that at least some aspects of such episodes can be
modeled as weak revolutions.

approximations to the posterior probabilities. Indeed, there are a number of ways
to efficiently approximate Bayesian inference that appear, prima facie, very differ-
ent from the usual method of explicit enumeration and computation that Gillies
criticises. For instance, in Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) the posterior dis-
tribution is approximated by sequentially sampling hypotheses as follows. From the
current hypothesis a 'proposal' for a new hypothesis is made using some heuristic-
usually by randomly altering the current hypothesis. Next, the current hypothesis
is compared to the proposed hypothesis, resulting in a stochastic decision to accept
or reject the proposal. This comparison involves evaluation of the ratio of prior and
likelihood functions, but not the (properly normalised) posterior probability. With
a proper choice of proposals, the resulting sequence of hypotheses is guaranteed to
comprise a set of samples from the posterior distribution over hypotheses which can
be used to approximate the distribution itself."
In the case of an HBM in which one level of theory generates the hypotheses
of a lower level, each step of sequential sampling which changes the higher level
can allow access to entirely different hypotheses at the lower level. Thus, while an
arbitrary variety of alternative specific theories is available, only a small portion
need be considered at any one time. Indeed, the sequence of local moves used to
approximate posterior inference may never reach most of the hypothesis space -
though in principle these hypotheses could be accessed if the evidence warranted.
It has been demonstrated that MCMC provides an effective way to imple-
ment Bayesian learning in a computational model of the disease-symptom example
(Mansinghka et al. (2006)). The MCMC method is used to learn both the specific
causal graph and the division of variables into the classes which appear in the higher
level graph schema. For instance, to learn the causal schema Gdi, it would have to
"For more details, see eg. MacKay (2003).

be discovered that the variables can be divided into three classes ('behaviours' B,
'diseases' D and 'symptoms' S) with causal links from B to D and from D to S.
The size of the hypothesis space is extremely large in this example, but the model
can still effectively find an appropriate theory in reasonable time.
The MCMC method can even be regarded as a suggestive metaphor for the
process of scientific discovery. It highlights two ways in which the Bayesian ap-
proach to science may be more realistic than has often been assumed. First, as
just described, it is possible to efficiently approximate Bayesian models, even over
infinite hypothesis spaces, without 'wasting' an inordinate amount of time consider-
ing very unlikely hypotheses. These approximation methods provide for an orderly,
rule-governed process by which new possibilities are introduced and considered.
Second, such approximation can have a qualitative character that is very different
from exact Bayesian computation: the approximate search may look locally arbi-
trary, even irrational, mixing elements of hypothesis testing and heuristic change,
but it still arrives at the rational Bayesian answer in the long run.
1.6 
Broader implications for theory change
We have argued so far that HBMs help to resolve certain issues for Bayesian phi-
losophy of science. In particular, they give a Bayesian account of high level theory
change and of the introduction of new theories. In addition, they allow us to resolve
puzzles associated with the preference for stronger or simpler theories.
HBMs also have implications for general discussions of theory construction and
theory change which are not specifically Bayesian. A number of traditional accounts
of how abstract knowledge may be learned proceed 'bottom-up'. For instance, in the
logical empiricist tradition, more 'observational' hypotheses must be learned first,

with the acquisition of the more theoretical level following, rather than guiding
learning at the observational level. Such a bottom-up picture has led to puzzle-
ment about why we need theories at all (Hempel (1958)). It has been alleged that
this is a particularly pressing problem for a Bayesian, since a theory presumably
should always receive lower probability than its observational consequences (Gly-
mour (1980b), pp. 83-84).
This problem is dissolved in the HBM analysis, which validates the intuition -
central in Kuhn's programme but more generally appealing - that higher level the-
ories play a role in guiding lower level learning.16 In section 1.5 we saw how higher
level theories may guide the search through a large lower level hypothesis space
by 'spot-lighting' the particular subset of lower level hypotheses to be under active
consideration. In both the curve fitting and causal network problems discussed in
previous sections, it is possible for a hierarchical Bayesian learner given a certain
sample of evidence to be more confident about higher level hypotheses than lower
level knowledge, and to use the constraints provided by these higher-level hypothe-
ses to facilitate faster and more accurate learning at the lower level. In one repre-
sentative case study, Mansinghka, Kemp, Tenenbaum, and Griffiths (Mansinghka
et al. (2006)) studied learning of a causal network with 16 variables according to
a simple 'disease theory' schema (variables divided into two classes corresponding
to 'diseases' and 'symptoms', with causal links connecting each disease to several
symptoms). A hierarchical Bayesian learner needed only a few tens of examples to
learn this abstract structure. It was found that after only 20 examples, the correct
schema dominated in posterior probability - most of the posterior probability was
16Also, since the relation between levels in a HBM is not logical entailment, but generation,
probability assignments are not constrained by entailment relations between levels. Indeed, the-
ories at different levels of an HBM are not in the same hypothesis space, and so are not directly
compared in probabilistic terms.

placed on causal links from diseases to symptoms - even though specific causal
links (between specific pairs of variables) were impossible to identify. After seeing
a few more examples, the hierarchical Bayesian learner was able to use the learned
schema to provide strong inductive constraints on lower level inferences, detecting
the presence or absence of specific causal links between conditions with near-perfect
accuracy. In contrast, a purely bottom-up, empiricist learner (using a uniform prior
over all causal networks) made a number of 'false alarm' inferences, assigning sig-
nificant posterior probability to causal links that do not exist and indeed should
not exist under the correct abstract theory - because they run from symptoms to
diseases, or from one symptom to another. Only the hierarchical Bayesian learner
can acquire these principles as inductive constraints and simultaneously use them
to guide causal learning. 7
HBMs illuminate aspects of theory change which have been controversial in the
aftermath of Kuhn's The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. A number of commen-
tators have contended that on Kuhn's characterization, high level theory change, or
paradigm shift, was a largely irrational process, even a matter of 'mob psychology'
(Lakatos (1978), p. 91). Considerable effort was devoted to providing accounts
which showed that such changes could be 'rational'. However, these accounts were
handicapped by the absence of a formal account of how confirmation of higher level
theories might work. HBMs provide such an account.
HBMs also help to resolve an ongoing debate between 'one-process' and 'two-
process' accounts of scientific theory change (as described in Chap. 7, Godfrey-
Smith (2003)). If scientific knowledge is organised into levels, this opens up the
possibility that different processes of change might be operative at the different
levels - for example, the processes governing change at the level of specific theo-
17See Mansinghka et al. (2006), particularly Figure 4.

ries or the way in which these are controlled by evidence might be quite different
from the processes governing change at the higher levels of theory. Carnap held
a version of this 'two-process' view - he held that changes to a 'framework' were
quite different from changes within the framework. Similarly, Kuhn thought that
the processes at work when there was a paradigm change were quite different from
the processes governing change within a paradigm (that is choice of one specific
theory or another). Part of the motivation for two-process views has been the idea
that change at lower levels of theory is driven by empirical observations whereas
change at higher levels is driven more by pragmatic, social or conventional criteria.
Carnap, for example, thought that changes to a 'framework' were mostly governed
by virtues like simplicity which were primarily pragmatic, not empirical.
On the other hand, there have been those who favour a single general account of
theory change. Popper and Quine may plausibly be regarded as proponents of this
'one-process' view. According to Popper, change at every level of science from the
most specific to the most general and abstract proceeds (or at least as a normative
matter ought to proceed) in accord with a single process of conjecture and refutation
(Popper (1959), Popper (1963)). 
According to Quine, all changes to our 'web of
belief' involve the same general process in which we accommodate new experience
via a holistic process of adjustment guided by considerations of simplicity and a
desire to keep changes 'small' when possible (Quine (1986)).
HBMs allow us to make sense of valuable insights from both the one-process and
two-process viewpoints, which previously seemed contradictory. Within the HBM
formalism, there is a sense in which evaluation at higher framework levels is the
same as evaluation at lower levels, and also a sense in which it is different. It is
the same in the sense that it is fundamentally empirical, resting on the principle
of Bayesian updating. This reflects the judgment of the one-process school that

all theory change ultimately has an empirical basis. Yet evaluation of framework
theories is different from that of specific hypotheses in the sense that it is more
indirect. In HBMs, framework theories, unlike more specific hypotheses, cannot be
directly tested against data. Instead they are judged on whether the hypotheses
they give rise to do well on the data - or more precisely, whether the specific theo-
ries they generate with high probability themselves tend to assign high probability
to the observations. As we have seen, when this Bayesian principle of inference is
applied to higher levels of a hierarchy of theories, it can lead to effects that would
seem to depend on ostensibly non-empirical criteria such as simplicity and prag-
matic utility. Thus, HBMs also reflect the judgment of the two-process school that
criteria like simplicity can be the immediate drivers of framework change, although
in this picture those criteria are ultimately grounded in empirical considerations
in a hierarchical context. In place of the 'one process' versus 'two process' debate
that animated much of twentieth-century philosophy of science, we might consider
a new slogan for understanding the structure of scientific theories and the dynamics
by which they change: 'Many levels, one dynamical principle'.

Chapter 2
Bayesianism and Inference to the
Best Explanation
2.1 
Introduction
There are different philosophical theories about how scientific theories are evaluated
in the light of available evidence. 
Such accounts attempt both to capture key
features of scientific practice and to identify principles on which scientific theory
assessment should rest. In this chapter I will consider the relationship between
two of the most influential philosophical accounts of theory assessment. One is
Bayesianism, according to which we believe different hypotheses to differing degrees;
these degrees of belief are represented by probabilities; and the probabilities are
updated in the light of new evidence by a certain rule, known as 'conditionalisation'.
Another is 'Inference to the best explanation' or 'IBE', according to which scientific
theory assessment involves inferring the theory which provides the best explanation
of the available evidence.
How are these two accounts related? Although it is traditional to characterise

IBE as specifying the theory in which one should believe, the comparison with
Bayesianism can be facilitated by formulating IBE also in terms of degrees of belief.
In this version, one has greater degrees of belief in hypotheses which provide better
explanations of the given evidence. Is this version of IBE then compatible with
Bayesianism?
Bas van Fraassen has claimed that the answer to this question is 'no'. IBE and
Bayesianism are, on his view, incompatible alternatives, since IBE is a rule which
adds extra 'bonus' probability onto more explanatory hypotheses, over and above
what they would have received from Bayesian conditionalisation alone.
In response to van Fraassen, several authors have proposed what I call the
'composite view' of the relationship between IBE and Bayesianism (Okasha (2000),
Lipton (2004), Weisberg (2009)). According to this view, IBE and Bayesianism are
compatible, and the best account of scientific inference is a composite of elements of
IBE and elements of Bayesianism. In particular, Bayesianism supplies the rule for
updating probabilities, and explanatory considerations determine the probabilities
that one starts with.
In this chapter, I will argue that van Fraassen has not established that Bayesian-
ism is incompatible with IBE. However, I also claim that the composite view lacks
independent motivation beyond the desire to establish compatibility between IBE
and Bayesianism. I propose an alternative way in which IBE and Bayesianism could
go together compatibly. This is based on isolating in the concept of IBE certain core
considerations which determine how the explanationist assigns degrees of belief, and
then showing how these core considerations can be represented in Bayesian terms.
On this account of the relationship between IBE and Bayesianism, there is no need
for explanatory considerations to explicitly constrain the assignment of Bayesian
probabilities, as in the composite view.

2.2 
IBE
Better explanation is often cited by scientists themselves as a reason for giving a
certain theory extra weight. For example, in On the origin of species, Charles Dar-
win argues for his theory of natural selection on the grounds that it explains 'large
classes of facts' in a more satisfactory manner than its rivals, in particular special
creationism (Darwin (1962)). IBE appears prominently in recent philosophical ac-
counts of scientific method1 , and is part of a long-standing tradition of describing
the scientific method in qualitative terms.
Since IBE is intended as an account of theory assessment, it should be in-
terpreted in the following way: out of a range of candidate theories each of which
provides some explanation of the data, select the theory which provides the best ex-
planation. The explanations provided by these candidate theories are, in Hempel's
sense, 'potential explanations' (Hempel (1965), p. 338). That is, unlike in an 'actual
explanation', the explanans does not have to be true.
In attempting to spell out the IBE account, an obvious first question is: what
does it mean to provide the best, or a better, explanation? Peter Lipton, one of the
main proponents of IBE, says that 'the best explanation is the one which would, if
correct, be the most explanatory or provide the most understanding'. He calls this
the 'loveliest' explanation (Lipton (2004), p. 59). To the extent that an account of
what constitutes better explanation or loveliness is offered in the IBE literature, it
is usually what might be termed the 'virtues view'. A theory is judged to provide a
better explanation if it possesses some optimal combination of 'explanatory virtues'
in relation to the phenomena. Explanatory virtues which are commonly mentioned
are simplicity, unification, precision, scope, and fruitfulness.
1See for example Harman (1965), Day and Kincaid (1994), Niiniluoto (1999) and references
therein.

Theories of inductive inference may be more or less restrictive in what they
regard as permissible inductive inferences, given particular hypotheses and data.
IBE is generally taken to be towards the more restrictive end of the spectrum, with
not much room for intersubjective disagreement between explanationists over which
theories provide better explanations.
In the following, I will follow the practice in the literature of using the term
'explanationist' to refer both to an agent who performs IBE and to someone who
espouses IBE as an account of inference. A similar double usage applies in the case
of 'Bayesian'.
2.3 
Bayesianism
Bayesians assume that belief comes in degrees. A minimalistic version of Bayesian-
ism, which I will call 'Min Bayes', tells you how to represent these degrees of belief
and how to update them as more evidence is gathered. Min Bayes has two tenets.
First, the coherence postulate says that degrees of belief in the different hypotheses
should be represented by a probability distribution (or density) over the hypotheses.
Second, updating is conducted according to the rule of conditionalisation. According
to this rule, when evidence or data D is obtained, the probabilities are updated by
replacing the 'prior' probability in hypothesis T, p(T), with a 'posterior' probability
which is given by the conditional probability, p(T|D). The conditional probability
p(T|D) can be computed from the prior probability p(T), the 'likelihood' p(DIT),
and the initial probability of observing the evidence, p(D), using Bayes' rule:
p(T|D) = 
D 
(2.1)
p(D)

The probability p(D) is essentially a normalisation constant which ensures that the
posterior distribution is a valid probability distribution which sums to 1.2
Versions of Bayesianism which hold that Min Bayes is close to the complete
story about rational constraints on inductive inference are known as 'subjective'
forms of Bayesianism. According to subjective Bayesianism, there is a wide range
of rationally permissible assessments of a set of hypotheses in the light of certain
evidence.
Rather than being viewed as a complete account of inference, Min Bayes may
also be viewed as an 'inductive framework', which can be filled in in various ways to
produce a more restrictive account of what counts as a permissible inductive infer-
ence. 3 The inductive framework is filled in by adding constraints on the assignment
of priors and likelihoods. The constraints may be provided by other accounts of
inference which could in some cases be regarded as more fundamental.
Bayesians have also proposed further constraints of their own which result in
what are known as more 'objective' forms of Bayesianism. One such constraint is
that the Bayesian probabilities representing 'subjective' degrees of belief should sat-
isfy a chance-credence principle, such as David Lewis's 'Principal Principle' (Lewis
(1986)). A simple version of this is:
The subjective probability that A is the case, on the supposition that
the objective chance of A equals x, equals x. i.e. p(Alch(A) = x) = x. 4
2It can be computed from the 'likelihood function' which is a function of the hypotheses T,
giving the likelihood for each T given particular D, as:
p(D) = (: p(D|T)p(T) 
(2.2)
TE?
(the sum is replaced by an integral if the hypotheses T are continuously varying quantities).
3The terminology here is used by Strevens (2004), who contrasts an 'inductive framework' with
the filled in framework he calls an 'inductive logic'.
4Van Fraassen refers to this version of the Principal Principle as 'Miller's principle' (Van

In practice, there are few Bayesians of the completely subjective variety. Most
would accept at least this principle as a constraint on probabilities.
More objective Bayesians have traditionally invoked the Principle of Indifference
to constrain prior probabilities. This principle says that if there is no evidence
to distinguish one hypothesis from another, they should be assigned equal prior
probabilities.5 Although objections have been raised to more objective forms of
Bayesianism, there are also strategies and approaches which have been proposed to
get around the alleged difficulties. I will mention a few of these in section 2.8.
2.4 
The incompatibilist view
Van Fraassen interprets IBE as a rule for updating which is incompatible with
Bayesian conditionalisation (Van Fraassen (1989)). Consider a scenario where we
have hypotheses T .. .T which are mutually exclusive and exhaustive, and some
prior distribution over these. By conditionalising on evidence D we obtain a poste-
rior probability distribution. Van Fraassen's claim is that IBE should be understood
as a rule which assigns greater probability to the more 'explanatory' hypotheses
than they would receive in the posterior distribution obtained by conditionalising.
This is because the explanationist takes into account 'not only on the initial prob-
abilities and the series of outcomes', but also a factor we might call 'explanatory
success' (Van Fraassen (1989), p. 166). Van Fraassen does not fill in the details
of how this rule is supposed to work. The claim is simply that it assigns extra
bonuses to explanatory hypotheses over and above what they would receive from
conditionalisation.
Fraassen (1989), p.82)
5Objective Bayesian positions are set forth in Jeffreys (1998), Jaynes and Bretthorst (2003),
and Rosenkrantz (1977). They are widely criticised, for example in Seidenfeld (1979).

Van Fraassen casts his argument in the form of a dialogue between an 'orthodox
Bayesian' whom he calls 'Peter', and an itinerant Preacher of IBE. The Preacher
tries to convert Peter to infer to the best explanation. The discussion takes place
surrounding the particular example of an 'alien die' (that is, a die which is dis-
covered on another planet). There are a number of hypotheses T .. .T, concerning
the bias of the die. The hypothesis T says that the chance of throwing an ace on
any given toss is g. Peter assigns equal prior probabilities to the different bias hy-
potheses, and assigns likelihoods in accordance with the Principal Principle. That
is, he takes p(ace|Ti) =. 
He throws the die and observes a series of aces. He then
forms a posterior probability distribution by conditionalisation on this evidence.
The Preacher comes and tells Peter that hypotheses of high bias are a better ex-
planation of throwing a series of aces than hypotheses of lower bias. Therefore, the
Preacher says, 'you should raise your credence in the more explanatory hypotheses.
"What?" exclaims Peter. "More than I would anyway?" "Yes" says the Preacher'
(Van Fraassen (1989), p. 166).
How we interpret van Fraassen's argument here depends on exactly what kind
of Bayesian Peter is. Suppose he is a follower of Min Bayes, but accepts no further
constraints on his probability assignments. In this case, he has assigned a prior
and likelihood in accordance with the Principle of Indifference and the Principal
Principle, but he could just as easily have done something else and been none the
less rational for it. Then if IBE involves assigning higher probabilities to more ex-
planatory hypotheses, Peter could have assigned priors and likelihoods which would
result in these probabilities on conditionalisation. There is no need to interpret IBE
as a non-conditionalising rule.
On the other hand, suppose Peter is an objective Bayesian. It wasn't just a
whim which made him assign the prior and likelihood that he did. He didn't think

there were any other rational options than to satisfy the Principle of Indifference
and the Principal Principle. Peter has a strong sense of what he would 'do anyway',
if the Preacher were not about. He is not just waiting on Preachers to tell him how
to fix his probabilities. If Peter follows the Preacher's recommendations then, this
will require him to violate some of his own principles: either conditionalisation, or
one of the principles which he has used to fix priors and likelihoods.
The basic problem with van Fraassen's proposal is that it is actually not clear
that there has to be a divergence between the Bayesian posterior and the probability
distribution produced by IBE. Peter may not need to do anything differently in
order to conform with IBE. Although it is logically possible for the probability
distribution assigned by the Bayesian and by the explanationist to diverge in the
way van Fraassen suggests, nothing about the example he gives inclines us to think
they do. In fact, it seems rather easy to understand the alien die example without
conflict between IBE and Bayesian conditionalisation. As more and more aces are
thrown, the explanationist regards high bias hypotheses as increasingly clearly the
best explanation. But this is just in accordance with the increase in Bayesian
posterior probabilities. Why should we think that IBE involves assigning any more
probability to the 'explanatory' hypotheses than conditionalisation would? One
might regard van Fraassen's model as a misinterpretation of IBE in the probabilistic
context.6 Rather, IBE and Bayesianism could still go together compatibly. The
'One might think that van Fraassen has simply produced an 'idiosyncratic' interpretation of
IBE in the probabilistic context (Okasha (2000), p. 703). However, in my view, van Fraassen's
interpretation is not so much idiosyncratic as based on the way IBE is put to use in certain contexts
as an argument against anti-realism. One of the key arguments against the underdetermination
of theories by evidence is that explanatory considerations provide extra evidence for the truth
of a theory which go beyond any evidence we may have for a theory's empirical adequacy (van
Fraassen (1980), pp. 153-155). On this view, IBE would be expected to contain extra elements
which cannot be fitted into a standard Bayesian story about confirmation. Van Fraassen claims
that if this is what is meant by IBE, it will fall foul of the dynamic Dutch-book arguments which
justify Bayesian conditionalisation, and will thus be unsuitable to use as a rule of inference (Van

question is how.
2.5 
The composite view
To date, the most common view of how IBE and Bayesianism go together compat-
ibly is the 'composite view'. According to this view, IBE and Bayesianism comple-
ment one another, both making a contribution to the correct account of inference.
The view is predicated on the idea that Bayesianism is not a complete or adequate
picture of inference on its own, and it needs to be helped out or supplemented by
IBE.
The composite view appears to have several attractions. For proponents of
IBE, it is attractive because it preserves a key role for explanatory considerations
in inference. They can make use of the 'powerful and well-studied framework' that
Bayesianism provides (Weisberg (2009), p. 14). On the other hand, the view is
also supposed to be beneficial to Bayesianism, by filling in gaps in the Bayesian
framework.
2.5.1 
Explanatory considerations as a constraint on Bayesian
probabilities
All versions of the composite view have in common the proposal that explanatory
considerations play a role in assigning the Bayesian probabilities that enter into
conditionalisation. They differ however in their claims about exactly which ex-
planatory considerations constrain which probabilities. I will now briefly outline
Fraassen (1989), pp. 166-169). If one is not motivated to preserve the particular philosophical
application of IBE to the realism argument, one is free to adopt a different interpretation of IBE
than van Fraassen does.

the different approaches.
On Jonathan Weisberg's view, the priors and likelihoods are constrained by ex-
planatory considerations via constraints on the conditional probabilities p(T|D).
These probabilities p(TID) are constrained to agree with the explanationist rank-
ing of hypotheses in the light of evidence D. If T provides a better explanation
of D than T', then p(T|D) > p(T'lD). Weisberg says that explanationist thinking
should fix these probabilities 'either in conjunction with, or in place of existing
objectivist principles. Ideally, explanationist considerations would complement ex-
isting objectivist principles like the Principle of Indifference' (p. 14). He gives the
following example of how explanatory constraints could go together with existing
objective Bayesian constraints. He suggests that a theory's ability to systematize
the evidence should be seen as an explanatory virtue. Suppose a theory T provides
a better systematization of certain evidence D than another theory T'. If more
systematized theories are preferred as more explanatory, this constrains the condi-
tional probabilities such that p(TID) > p(T'ID). If the likelihoods are taken to be
fixed by the Principal Principle, this inequality can be seen as imposing a certain
constraint on the priors p(T) and p(T').
On Lipton's view, people actually employ explanatory considerations in order
to determine what priors and likelihoods to assign. 7 He suggests that explanatory
virtues, including simplicity, unification and scope 'guide' the assignment of the
prior probability. He also suggests that 'although likelihood is not to be equated
with loveliness, it might yet be that one way we judge how likely D is on H is
by considering how well H would explain D'. He notes that this would require
7Lipton puts his claim in this way because he thinks that it is possible to regard theories such
as Bayesianism and IBE as having a descriptive function which is distinct from their normative
role. The descriptive function is to describe what people actually do when they make inferences.
Lipton restricts his claims about the relationship between IBE and Bayesianism to the descriptive
domain.

that loveliness is 'reasonably well correlated' with likelihood, so that we could 'use
judgements of loveliness as a barometer of likelihood'. Specifically, he suggests that
considering the mechanism linking cause and effect in a potential causal explanation
may help us to form a judgment of how likely the cause would make the effect
(Lipton (2004), p. 114).
Samir Okasha's account of how explanatory considerations play a role in assign-
ing the probabilities is given with the aid of the following example:
'A mother takes her five-year old child to the doctor. The child is
obviously in some distress. On the basis of the mother's information,
the doctor forms two competing hypotheses: that the child has pulled
a muscle, and that he has torn a ligament; call these H1 and H 2 respec-
tively. A keen advocate of IBE, the doctor examines the child carefully,
and decides that H2 offers the better explanation of the observed symp-
toms ...' (Okasha (2000), p. 703)
Okasha suggests that the doctor might justify her reasoning by appeal to two
considerations. First, that 'preadolescent children very rarely pull muscles, but
often tear ligaments'. And second, that the symptoms, 'though compatible with
either diagnosis, are exactly what we would expect if the child has torn a ligament,
though not if he has pulled a muscle'. Okasha claims that the first consideration is
an aid to determining the prior probabilities. The prior probability of H2 is higher
than that of H1 because H2 is the more initially plausible hypothesis. The second
consideration is a way to determine the likelihood. The likelihood of H2 is also
greater than that of H1 , because H2 makes the observed evidence more expected
than H1.
In claiming that explanatory considerations determine the assignment of Bayesian
probabilities, proponents of the composite view essentially treat Bayesianism as an

inductive framework which can be filled in to represent other forms of inference. If
a minimalistic version of Bayesianism is regarded as an inductive framework, then
it can be constrained by explanatory considerations in such a way as to yield a
Bayesian representation of IBE. This is trivial in the sense that any form of in-
ductive inference resulting in a probability distribution, including Inference to the
Worst Explanation, can be represented by the Bayesian framework by appropriating
setting constraints on the probabilities.
The general problem with the composite view is the lack of independent moti-
vation for using explanatory considerations as constraints on priors and likelihoods
rather than any other type of constraints. In fact, the idea that explanatory con-
siderations play the role of constraining probabilities is actually quite unconvincing
when it comes to the prior probabilities. Most explanatory considerations, includ-
ing virtues like unification and simplicity, are not just properties of the hypothesis
T, but of the relationship between T and the data D. Priors, on the other hand, are
supposed to represent the epistemic situation before the new data D is taken into
account. This makes it difficult to see how Lipton can be right that explanatory
virtues like simplicity and unification are a guide to the priors.
One could, like Weisberg, argue that the priors are constrained indirectly via
constraints on the conditional probabilities p(TID). As we saw, Weisberg's idea is
that p(TID) is constrained to agree with the explanationist ranking on hypotheses,
and this then sets some constraints on the priors and likelihoods. The story cannot
be quite this simple, however, since one should be able to assign the prior before
knowing which way the data will turn out. It could well be that different evidence
D' would lead to different constraints on p(TID'). It could be, for instance, that
relative to D, T is a better systematization than T', but the reverse is true with
respect to evidence D'. One could, of course, hypothetically consider each possible

way that the evidence might turn out, and then find prior probabilities which will
agree with the explanationist assessment no matter which evidence they are con-
ditionalised on. However, it is no longer clear that this procedure of considering
all the possible outcomes, their explanatory consequences and then backtracking to
find initial probabilities which will work for all outcomes is either particularly easy
for the 'inquirer on the street' or to be recommended as a normative procedure. 8
Notice however, that this difficulty concerning the priors does not arise for
Okasha because the explanatory consideration that he takes to determine the prior
is the non-relational notion of plausibility of the hypothesis alone.
2.5.2 
The context of discovery
In addition to claiming that explanatory considerations help to assign Bayesian
probabilities, Lipton and Okasha also claim that explanatory considerations are able
to help the Bayesian by saying something about how scientific theories are generated
- the so-called 'context of discovery'. The process of inferring hypotheses is often
taken to involve two stages: generating candidate hypotheses to put in a 'short-list'
and then selecting from them according to some criteria. Philosophers of science
have traditionally been inclined to leave the first stage relatively uncharacterised,
regarding it as the domain for scientific creativity, rather than evaluative principles.
Bayesianism, for example, has generally been thought of as purely defining the
selective criteria in the second stage. Lipton and Okasha suggest that one advantage
that IBE has over other methods of inference is that it does have something to say
about the first stage as well as the second. Thus, this provides another way in
which IBE may allegedly supplement the Bayesian framework. Lipton and Okasha
8Lipton suggests that explanatory considerations are 'more accessible ..to the inquirer in the
street' than Bayesian probabilities (Lipton (2004), p. 114).

again have slightly different proposals concerning the details.
For Okasha, IBE allows us to explain why new hypotheses are sometimes in-
vented. He says 'In those cases where agents respond to new evidence by invent-
ing new hypotheses, the Bayesian model is silent. But IBE provides a useful, if
schematic account of what is going on: the agents are trying to explain the new
evidence' (Okasha (2000), p. 707).
Lipton, on the other hand, draws an analogy with biology. There are two
processes involved in evolution of particular biological traits: the process of generat-
ing variants via mutations and the process of eliminating some of these variants by
natural selection. It might seem that these processes of generation and selection are
fundamentally different from one another. However, Lipton points out that in the
process of generation, the mutations occur in the reproduction of creatures which
were already subject to natural selection. Thus, selection may be said to play a role
in the generation of variants, as well as in selection amongst them. Similarly, Lipton
claims, IBE figures in the process by which scientists determine which hypotheses
to put in their short-list of candidates, since the candidates to consider are those
which seem plausible according to background beliefs and those background beliefs
are themselves selected by IBE. Thus the plausibility judgments that determine the
candidates depend implicitly on explanatory considerations - namely, how well the
background beliefs explained the past data.
I will now argue that Bayesianism is less silent in the context of discovery than
Lipton and Okasha have suggested, and in fact offers an account which is remarkably
parallel to what IBE is supposed to provide.
Okasha claims that IBE can give a reason for the invention of new hypotheses,
whereas Bayesianism has nothing to say. The explanationist will say that scien-
tists invent a new hypothesis because they think the new one will give a better

explanation. However, a Bayesian could just as well say that scientists invent new
hypotheses because they think that there may be a novel hypothesis which would
have better support (higher posterior) than the other hypotheses, if the hypothesis
space were enlarged to include it.
Lipton's account of the origin of the hypothesis space is also sufficiently general
that it is not specific to IBE. As his analogy to natural selection makes clear, the
same point can be made for any two stage process of generation and selection where
candidates for selection are created by variation on entities which were selected in
the past. Then it can be said that the production of candidates for the short-list
involves the criteria of selection. But this explanation is not sensitive to specific
details concerning the criteria of selection. The selection process could be natural
selection, or it could be selection according to IBE or Bayesianism. Lipton takes
background beliefs, themselves the result of explanatorily based selection, to serve as
'heuristics' which restrict the range of actual candidates. In other words, candidates
must be plausible according to the background beliefs. We have seen a parallel story
based on hierarchical Bayesian models in Chapter 1. There the candidates must also
be plausible (have reasonably high prior probability) with respect to the higher level
theory which generates them. And higher level theories are themselves selected by
Bayesian updating. Again the Bayesian has been able to capture the same insights
concerning the process of discovery as the explanationist.
The arguments presented by Okasha and Lipton do not succeed in showing that
in the context of discovery IBE fills in where Bayesianism has nothing to say. Rather
the Bayesian has just as much to say as the explanationist, since the same type of
account can be given either in terms of IBE or of Bayesianism.

2.5.3 
Summary
Overall, then, the composite view is based on the idea that there are certain 'gaps'
in the Bayesian account of inference which IBE may fill. This view is only plausible
to the extent that a) there really are gaps to be filled, and b) it is explanatory
considerations which should fill them. There have been two proposals about what
the gaps are. One is the assignment of probabilities which enter into Bayesian
conditionalisation. This is only genuinely a gap if one espouses something close to
Min Bayes. More objective Bayesians have their own proposals about how to fill
this gap. I have argued that proponents of the composite view have not provided
us with independent grounds to fill this gap, if there is one, with constraints on
probabilities based on explanatory considerations. I have suggested that explana-
tory considerations (with the exception of the plausibility of the hypothesis) are
actually the wrong kind of thing to constrain the priors.
The composite view also proposed a gap in the context of discovery. Here I
argued that there is no gap, and Bayesianism has something to say in this domain
which is actually not dissimilar to what the explanationist proposes.
I conclude then that the composite view is not a very convincing account of the
relationship between IBE and Bayesianism.
2.6 
Seeds of another approach
I now want to suggest that there is more to Okasha's account than I have so far
indicated. Some of what he says suggests that he sees himself as adopting quite
a different strategy, which is essentially the approach I will recommend in the fol-
lowing sections. That is to provide an independently motivated analysis of the
concept of IBE and then show how its different components may be represented in

probabilistic terms.
Okasha's analysis of IBE is quite simple. He factors goodness of explanation into
two components. One is the plausibility of the hypothesis providing the explanation,
and the other is how expected the explanandum is, given the hypothesis. The first of
these components is represented by the Bayesian prior probability of the hypothesis
and the second is represented by the likelihood of the hypothesis, given the evidence.
For simple cases such as Okasha's doctor example, this two component model
of IBE is quite convincing. It seems right that explanatory thinking involves not
just finding a 'lovely' explanation, but must also take into account a relatively
independent consideration of plausibility of the hypothesis, which acts as a kind
of 'sanity check' on the explanation. A conspiracy theory might, if true, provide
a great deal of understanding but be also wildly far-fetched, so that no-one would
sensibly assess it to be the best explanation. It also seems right that the theory
should make the explanandum expected. Suppose, in the doctor case, that the
symptoms were only somewhat, rather than exactly, to be expected, if the ligament
hypothesis were true. Then, intuitively, we would regard the ligament hypothesis
as providing a less good explanation. The explanatory relation between a certain
theory T and evidence D is generally regarded as based on deductive or causal
relationships. This is made explicit in various specific models of explanation such
as the Deductive-Nomological (DN) model, according to which an explanation is a
deductive argument containing laws which leads to the explanandum (Hempel and
Oppenheim (1948)), or the Causal-Mechanical (CM) model, according to which
an explanation provides information about the causal history of the explanandum
(Salmon (1984)). But at the same time, it is recognised in discussions of explanation
that such deductive or causal links should help to make D more expected, given T.
For example, Hempel says 'a DN explanation answers the question "Why did the

explanandum-phenomenon occur?" by showing that the phenomenon resulted from
certain particular circumstances ... in accordance with the laws ... By pointing this
out, the argument shows that, given the particular circumstances and the laws in
question, the occurrence of the phenomenon was to be expected' (Hempel (1965), p.
337).
The problem with Okasha's proposal is that, in moving beyond simple examples,
the two-component analysis of IBE does not seem to capture all its relevant aspects.
Okasha attempts to suggest that it does by referring to the second component of
explanatory thinking in more general terms as an 'appropriate relation' between the
explanans and explanandum, and linking it to Lipton's 'loveliness'. However, there
seems to be more to these concepts than just making the explanandum expected.
Loveliness involves how intelligible the hypothesis makes the explanandum, not just
how expected. In fact, we may feel that the two-component model is too thin to
capture the richness of the notion of IBE. I suggest that we should go further in
analysing what other explanatory considerations are involved in IBE in the hope
of uncovering how they may be represented in probabilistic terms. This is the task
that I will address in the next section.
2.7 
Further analysis of IBE
What more is there to the concept of IBE? As we saw in section 2.2, IBE is often
spelled out in terms of the virtues view of better explanation. That is, an explana-
tion is better than another if it has a better combination of 'explanatory virtues'.
The virtues view is somewhat promising for making a connection with Bayesian-
ism, since several of the key virtues have already been analysed in Bayesian terms.
Simplicity is associated with the likelihood in Rosenkrantz (1977), Jefferys and

Berger (1992) and MacKay (2003) (see also section 1.4), and a Bayesian account of
unification is given by Myrvold (2003).
However, the virtues view is still relatively undeveloped. There has been little
work, for example, on how the virtues should be traded off against one another, and
it remains unclear whether some of the virtues are more fundamental than others, or
even whether some reduce to essentially the same concept. In addition, in the IBE
literature, there has been a certain desire to keep the account of IBE independent of
the particular model of explanation which is employed.9 This has led to a tendency
to treat what makes one explanation better than another as a completely separate
matter from what makes them potential explanations at all. This independence
from the basic notion of explanation, though perhaps convenient in allowing one to
avoid the thickets of the explanation literature, is in some respects a weakness, since
it makes it hard to see how the view is truly to do with explanation per se. It makes
it difficult to distinguish IBE from accounts which characterise theory assessment
in terms of optimally combining 'inferential virtues' of theories, where these virtues
are not regarded as particularly tied to explanatoriness, (Kuhn (1977), McMullin
(2008)). The lists of virtues may be quite similar on these accounts. For example,
Thomas Kuhn lists 'accuracy, consistency, scope, simplicity and fruitfulness' as
inferential virtues (Kuhn (1977), p. 322), which is not unlike a list of 'explanatory'
virtues.
I suggest therefore that the notion of better explanation should be more closely
connected to the basic notion of explanation itself. In fact, I will argue that a
comparative notion of better explanation can be derived from the notion of what it
means for a theory to explain at all. It is not at first sight obvious how to connect the
9Lipton, for example, distinguishes between specific models of explanation and the 'actual
explanation relation itself, whatever its correct description turns out to be' (Lipton (2004), p.
57), suggesting to concentrate on the latter.

notion of better explanation to basic ideas about explanation. There are a number
of accounts of what an explanation is. Some of the main candidates are the DN
model (Hempel and Oppenheim (1948)), the CM model (Salmon (1984)), and the
unificationist model according to which explanation consists of providing a unified
account of various phenomena (Friedman (1974), Kitcher (1989)). These accounts
were generally intended as criteria for what an explanation consists of, perhaps even
to provide necessary and/or sufficient conditions for explanation, rather than being
particularly amenable to coming in degrees. 10 However, I will suggest in the next
section that there is a way of distinguishing two broad approaches to explanation
which is helpful in seeing our way through the multiplicity of accounts." 
Then in
section 2.7.2, I will propose an account of the explanation relation and a derivative
comparative concept of better explanation, which attempts to combine insights
from these two approaches.
2.7.1 
Accounts of explanation
One approach to explanation is based on the idea that what is distinctive about
the explanatory relation is that it connects the explanandum to a hypothesis or
hypotheses with some kind of special status. There are several versions of this
type of view, depending on what the special status is taken to be. One simple
version is that explanations relate the explanandum to elements with which we are
so familiar that we do not question them. For example, the kinetic theory of gases
might derive its explanatory power from relating an unfamiliar explanandum, such
'Although it seems natural that the ability to unify phenomena could come in degrees, as
Woodward (2003) points out, unificationists have in fact adopted a 'winner-takes-all' approach
according to which only the most unified theory is explanatory at all.
"Something close to this distinction is made in Friedman (1974).

as the Boyle-Charles law, to a familiar one, such as the movement of billiard balls.1 2
However, the notion of familiarity involved in scientific explanation cannot just
be everyday familiarity with ordinary macroscopic objects, since often phenomena
are explained in terms of rather arcane principles of theories. Rather, it may be the
familiarity of a scientist, trained in a particular paradigm, who attempts to relate
novel and unexplained phenomena to certain exemplary and understood cases which
are taken to be canonical. Such a view is expressed by Stephen Toulmin, who takes
scientific explanation to involve explaining phenomena in terms of certain 'ideals
of natural order', which scientists treat as self-explanatory (Toulmin (1963)). He
gives the example of Copernicus' 'principle of regularity' that all the heavenly bodies
should move uniformly in a circle, because that is thought to be their natural form
of motion. Copernicus tried to explain planetary motions in terms of this principle
and he treated it as self-explanatory, or absurd to deny (Copernicus (1939), p. 57).
Another version of the special status view is given by Clark Glymour, who
suggests that a very common pattern of explanation in science is to explain some-
thing by showing that it follows from a necessary truth (Glymour (1980a), Glymour
(1985)).13 There are no further scientific questions to be asked about why a math-
ematical truth holds, so the explanation is regarded as complete and satisfying.
The Deductive-Nomological model of explanation may also be seen as a species
of special status view. There the explanandum is derived, not from mathematical
necessities, but from laws. According to this view, laws have a special status in
explanation not because they are natural stopping points for explanation. Rather
12This example is given by Friedman (1974), p. 9.
"For example, the observed relation between synodic and sidereal periods expressed by equation
2.3 is a mathematical truth for any two objects that move in closed orbits about a common centre
with the inner object moving faster than the outer. Glymour claims that the Copernican theory
provides a good explanation of the observed regularity because it reduces the regularity to a
mathematical truth.

if an observation such as the apparent bending of a stick underwater is derived from
a general law, such as the law of refraction, one can go on to ask why the law of
refraction holds. The answer will be that it follows from an even more general law,
such as those of the wave theory of light (Hempel and Oppenheim (1948), p. 136).
All these accounts of the explanatory relation have in common that they charac-
terise explanation as a relationship between the explanandum and some hypothesis
which has some special status - psychological self-explanatoriness, mathematical
necessity, or lawlike nature.
A second approach to characterising the explanatory relation is to focus on
finding some essential property of the relation itself. The main suggestion here has
been that what is essential to the explanatory relation is that it unifies different
phenomena. There are several attempts to characterise explanatory unification, due
to Friedman (1974) and Kitcher (1989). Friedman says it is essentially a reduction
in the 'total number of independent phenomena that we have to accept as ultimate
or given' (Friedman (1974), p. 15). For example, he says, kinetic theory is an ex-
planation of phenomena involving the behaviour of gases, such as the Boyle-Charles
law because it 'also permits us to derive other phenomena involving the behaviour
of gases, such as the fact that they obey Graham's law of diffusion and (within cer-
tain limits) that they have the specific heat-capacities that they do have, from the
same laws of mechanics' (p. 14). Where previously there were three 'independent
brute facts', now there are only the laws of mechanics to accept. Kitcher has raised
difficulties concerning how such independent facts can really be counted (Kitcher
(1976)). He stresses rather the idea that unification is achieved by using similar
arguments in deriving different phenomena (Kitcher (1989)). Arguments are taken
to be similar insofar as they instantiate the same 'argument pattern', which is a
kind of schematic form or type of argument. Thus unification, on Kitcher's view,

is based on repeatedly using a relatively small number of types of argument.
On these unificationist views, there does not need to be any special epistemic
status, in terms of familiarity, paradigm, necessity or lawlikeness to the types of
argument or basic laws to which the explanandum is related." 
They just have to
be unifying, and the underlying intuition is that they have the power to generate
more from less. They explain a variety of phenomena in terms of relatively few core
laws or patterns of argument.1 5
2.7.2 
Explanation from the core
I now propose an account which may be seen as combining aspects of the special
status and unificationist approaches to explanation. On this account, as in the
special status approach, explanation does involve connecting the explanandum to
some particular kind of hypotheses. These hypotheses comprise the part of the
explaining theory which are most central to the theory. They are its 'core'.
The identification of core aspects of theories should be seen as a fundamental
component of scientific theorising. The typical presentation of a scientific theory
involves setting forth the elements that the author regards as its basic components.
Consider for example, Newton's 'axioms or laws of motion' at the outset of the
Principia (Newton (1687)), the principle of relativity and the light postulate in
Einstein's theory of special relativity (Einstein (1905)), or Copernicus' seven as-
sumptions about the planets (Copernicus (1939)). The identification of a theory's
core principles should not be seen as solely the responsibility of the original author
of the theory. Once a theory is proposed, certain scientists, usually regarded as
"Friedman (1974) makes this point, p. 18.
15This is a key intuition behind the idea of explanation as information compression (Rosenkrantz
(1977), Chapter 8).

towards the more theoretical or foundational end of the spectrum, tend to concen-
trate their efforts on producing reformulations of theories, and 'experimenting' with
new reaxiomatisations.
The core principles of a theory are not generally put forward as such because they
are regarded as particularly familiar or self-explanatory from the outset, though that
would perhaps be thought an advantage if it were true. Copernicus' assumptions
include the claim that 'All the spheres revolve about the sun as their mid-point,
and therefore the sun is the centre of the universe' (Copernicus (1939), p. 58),
which was certainly not a familiar thought at the time. Nor need the core aspects
of a theory be seen as in no need of explanation themselves. For example, towards
the end of Principia, Newton says 'Thus far I have explained the phenomena of the
heavens and of our sea by the force of gravity, but I have not yet assigned a cause
to gravity' (Newton (1687), p. 943). Thus he acknowledges the possibility of an
explanation of one of his core postulates, though admitting he does not currently
have one.
If a theory becomes accepted and entrenched due to its confirmatory and ex-
planatory success, its core principles may come to seem natural to scientists ac-
customed to working with the theory. They may come to seem familiar, through
habituation, and a tendency may develop to treat the core of the dominant theory
as an explanatory stopping point. Explanations are often regarded as providing un-
derstanding by relating phenomena to things which are familiar, and as satisfying
if they connect the explanandum to things which are taken to require no further
explanation. Once a theory becomes entrenched, perhaps as a part of a reigning
paradigm, its core components may come to take on these psychological roles.
Components of the core are very often given the title of 'law'. However, I wish
to remain non-committal about whether elements of the core have any necessity of a

metaphysical nature. Thus, although like special status views, I characterise expla-
nation as a relation between the explanandum and a distinctive type of hypothesis,
I do not regard special familiarity, or necessity, or lawfulness, as the distinguishing
feature of that type.
This account also shares some insights with the unificationist view. If one con-
nects various phenomena to certain core principles of a theory, this results in uni-
fication of the phenomena, which are all now explained in terms of a small set of
core elements. Is the core then just that which produces unification? Certainly, sci-
entists often justify their choice of core principles according to how well they bring
together or explain different phenomena. Copernicus presents his assumptions as
reasonable because they enable him to solve the problem of the planets 'with fewer
and much simpler constructions than were formerly used' (Copernicus (1939), p.
58). Newton justifies his use of the force of gravity by its explanatory effectiveness
- the fact that it is 'sufficient to explain all the motions of the heavenly bodies and
of our sea' (ibid, p. 943). Part of the point of reformulating theories by giving
them different foundations is to find ways of casting the theory which will be more
explanatory in the sense of unifying more phenomena.
However, the ultimate justification for any identification of the core of a theory is
how well it works, not just in terms of how well it facilitates explanation of different
phenomena, but also in terms of how well it is confirmed by the evidence. As we
will see in section 2.8, this is the basis for our connection with Bayesianism.
So far, I have talked about the nature of the explanatory relation and suggested
that it involves connecting the explanandum to the core of a theory. How can we
turn this into a comparative concept of one theory explaining phenomena better
than another theory? My proposal is this: a theory provides a better explanation
of a certain phenomenon than another theory, the more it relates that phenomenon

to its core. This means that the theory does not accomplish explanation of the
phenomenon by utilising 'auxiliary hypotheses' which are brought in just for the
purpose of aiding the explanation of particular phenomena.
I will attempt to illustrate and justify this proposal with two case studies. The
first is the comparison of how well the Copernican and Ptolemaic theories, which
were rivals in the 16th century, explained observations of planetary positions in the
sky. The second is the biological question of whether altruistic traits are better
explained by invoking natural selection at the level of groups, as opposed to natural
selection on individual organisms alone. These case studies are more complex than
those typically discussed in the literature on IBE and its relation to Bayesianism.
This will help us to get a richer picture of what is involved in IBE.
2.7.3 
Copernicus vs Ptolemy
Both the Copernican and the Ptolemaic theories were capable of predicting and ex-
plaining to some extent observations of planetary positions in the sky. The Coperni-
can system did this by placing the sun at the centre of the planetary orbits, whereas
the Ptolemaic system placed the earth at the centre. Since the predictive advantage
of the Copernican theory was not obvious at the time, Copernicus and his followers
stressed what we might now regard as the explanatory advantages of his theory.
They emphasised the 'harmony' and 'elegance' of the Copernican explanation, and
its ability to unify all the phenomena under a common framework. For example,
Rheticus says:
With regard to the apparent motions of the sun and moon, it is
perhaps possible to deny what is said about the motion of the earth,
although I do not see how the explanation of precession is to be trans-

ferred to the sphere of the stars. But if anyone desires to look either to
the principle end of astronomy and the order and harmony of the sys-
tem of the spheres or to ease and elegance and a complete explanation
of the causes of the phenomena, by the assumption of no other hypothe-
ses will he demonstrate the apparent motions of the remaining planets
more neatly and correctly. For all these phenomena appear to be linked
most nobly together, as by a golden chain; and each of the planets, by
its position and order and every inequality of its motion, bears witness
that the earth moves... (Rheticus (1539), pp.164-165) 16
The explanatory merits of the Copernican and Ptolemaic theories can be il-
lustrated with respect to the following phenomena. Every night a visible planet
appears in a slightly different position in the sky than it did the night before. Rela-
tive to the stars, the planet generally moves in an eastward direction, though every
now and again it reverses direction and moves westward for a while before moving
eastwards again. This phenomenon of doubling back is called 'retrograde motion'.
In quantitative terms, the motion of a planet can be measured either with respect
to the stars, or with respect to the sun. The time it takes for a planet to return to
the same longitude with respect to the stars is called its 'sidereal period'. The time
it takes to return to the same position with respect to the sun is called its 'synodic
period'. For example, if it is a 'superior' planet, that is, one which is further from
the sun than the earth, it will at times be observed to be at an angle of 1800 from
the sun. Then it is said to be 'in opposition' to the sun. The synodic period is the
time between successive oppositions. 'Inferior' planets, which are closer to the sun
than the earth, are never observed in opposition to the sun, but they can be 'in
16I thank Jonah Schupbach for drawing my attention to this quotation in the context of the
relationship between the virtues of simplicity and unification.

conjunction' with it - that is, appearing at the same angle as the sun, either in front
of it (inferior conjunction), or behind it (superior conjunction). The synodic period
for inferior planets can be measured as the time between successive conjunctions of
the same type.
Consider first how retrograde motion is explained by the Ptolemaic theory. In
this context, retrograde motion is explained by having the planet move in a small
circle, or 'epicycle', whose centre moves in a larger circle (the 'deferent'), in the
same direction around the earth. When traversing the epicycle, at some points
the planet is moving backwards with respect to the deferent - when this happens,
according to the theory, retrograde motion occurs (see Figure 2-1).
Retrograde motion is explained quite differently by the Copernican theory. At
certain times planets may overtake each other in their orbits around the sun. When,
for example, the earth overtakes a planet which is further from the sun, the planet
will appear to be moving 'backward' for a certain amount of time: this is the
retrograde motion (see Figure 2-2).
According to the Copernican theory, there is a close relationship between the
sidereal and synodic periods of each planet. Consider the motion of a superior
planet, which we assume moves more slowly around the sun than the earth. Let the
time between successive oppositions (the synodic period) be S, and let the orbital
period of the earth around the sun be D and the orbital period of the planet be
P. At opposition, the earth, sun and planet all lie on a line. The planet will again
be in opposition when it is 'overtaken' by the earth at a time when the earth has
completed one more orbit around the sun than the planet has. The planet is moving
at an angular velocity of 3 
and the earth is moving at angular velocity 3. 
When
opposition occurs again, the planet has moved through an angle 3S, 
and this is
equal to the angle through which the earth has moved 'S 
minus 3600 (see Figure

Figure 2-1: In the Ptolemaic theory, retrograde motion of the planets is explained
by epicycles.
75

Mars
Earth
Sun
Figure 2-2: In the Copernican theory, the explanation of the observation of ret-
rograde motion is that the outer planet is overtaken by the faster moving inner
planet.

1.42 years 
2.14 years
Figure 2-3: When 2.14 years have elapsed since the last opposition, Earth and
Mars will be in opposition again. In the meantime, Earth has completed one more
complete orbit around the sun than Mars.
2-3). Equating these angles yields the following relation:
1 
1 
1(2.3)
P 
E 
S
(For inferior planets, similar considerations yield the relation: 
= 
+ 
).
What this means is that in the Copernican framework, once the synodic periods
of the planets are given one can calculate the sidereal periods, or vice versa. We
do not need independently adjustable parameters for sidereal and synodic periods.
In the Ptolemaic system, on the other hand, the synodic period is given by the
period of the epicycle. This can be adjusted independently of the period of the
deferent, which corresponds to the sidereal period. Also, evidence from one planet
has implications for other planets, which it does not on the Ptolemaic view.
It is essential to the Copernican theory, part of its core, that the planets orbit
around the sun, though there may be many ways to build Copernican models by
giving planets different sizes of orbits or different speeds. The Ptolemaic theory
makes a different core assumption that the earth is at the centre of the planetary
0 years 
0.71T years

orbits. Epicycles are not part of the fundamentals of either theory. Hypotheses
about epicycles are auxiliary assumptions which allow the theories to provide models
which fit the observations well.
In the Copernican explanation, the observation of retrograde motion appears as
a consequence of placing the sun at the centre. Then the earth and planets are both
orbiting the sun and it is inevitable that there will be overtaking of one planet by
another as long as the planets are not moving at exactly the same angular velocity.
In fact, Copernicus makes the auxiliary assumption that planets closer to the sun
move more rapidly than planets further away.
In the Ptolemaic case, on the other hand, retrograde motion is not accounted
for by the core of the theory. Rather the explanation relies on auxiliary hypotheses
about epicycles. We can say then that the Copernican theory provides a better
explanation of retrograde motion because it explains it in terms of its core principles,
whereas the Ptolemaic explanation rests heavily on hypotheses which are not part
of its core.
2.7.4 
Group vs individual selection
Another example concerns how to give the best explanation of the existence or
prevalence of altruistic traits in biology. Altruistic traits are those which are good
for the group to which the organism belongs, but detrimental to the organism pos-
sessing them. There are many cases in biology, including signalling to warn others
of threats, exercising restraint on one's own reproduction, caring for others' young
and self sacrifice in defence of the group. Generally, the prevalence of certain traits
in biology is explained by invoking natural selection. The trait is prevalent because
organisms without it were less fit and were therefore selected against. Natural
selection favoured those who possessed the trait.

The problem is that this appeal to the selection of individual organisms does
not, at least at first sight, seem to explain the prevalence of altruistic traits. This
is because the possession of altruistic traits bestows a fitness disadvantage, relative
to other organisms in the community, and therefore altruistic organisms should
have been selected against. Some biologists have proposed that altruistic traits
persist in populations because natural selection is operative not just at the level
of individual organisms, but also at the level of groups of organisms. That is,
different groups may have different fitness from one another and may be more
fit the more their members cooperate with one another and engage in altruistic
behaviour. Groups, like organisms, may reproduce themselves by splitting into
'colonies', and these colonies will tend to inherit traits from the founder group,
particularly if these are determined by the levels of altruistic behaviour within the
group. However, reproduction of groups, like that of individuals, also produces
some variation. Colonies are not necessarily exactly like their founders. Some by
chance might get a greater share of altruistically inclined individuals than others,
which would make them more fit. Then fitter groups are selected. This will tend
to favour altruistic behaviour since groups with greater altruistic cooperation are
generally fitter than groups without it.
For example, this type of explanation can be given for a specific altruistic trait
such as the defensive behaviour of musk oxen. This is an example given by Williams
(1966), (pp. 218-220), and discussed by Sober (1990). When attacked by wolves,
musk oxen form a circle with the males on the outside and the females and young
on the inside (this is called 'wagon-training'). It appears that stronger members
of a group protect the weaker members from attack, even if they are unrelated to
them (see Figure 2-4). An explanation in terms of group selection would say that
groups of musk oxen where this trait exists are selected over other groups where it

does not. Thus the reason for the existence of the trait in the male musk ox is its
benefit to the group rather than to the ox himself.
On the other hand, some biologists have resisted invoking group level selection to
explain phenomena such as these, and attempt to explain them with reference only
to natural selection of individual organisms. For example, Williams attempts to
explain a number of apparent examples of altruism in terms of individual selection
alone (Williams (1966)). He offers the following alternative explanation of musk
oxen wagon-training. The defensive formation is the result of a 'statistical effect'.
What is really going on is that the threat felt by an ox depends on its size relative
to a predator. There is some threshold of predator size which determines whether
the ox responds with 'counterthreat or with flight'. For predators of a certain size,
larger oxen will be more inclined to stand their ground than to flee and the result
is that they will end up in a more exposed position, seemingly protecting weaker
members of the herd. He suggests that this case is one of a number of others
which may also be explained in terms of different adaptive responses of individuals
according to their own strengths.
In this case the explanatory advantage of one theory over the other is less obvious
than it was in the Copernican example and the case is much more controversial.
Nonetheless, we can diagnose what makes the choice difficult in terms of the account
of better explanation delineated above. We need to compare the way in which each
explanation relies on core aspects of the theory as opposed to auxiliary hypotheses.
Where both explanations invoke auxiliary hypotheses of quite different natures, it
can be hard to assess which has the greater reliance on auxiliary hypotheses.
Williams gives a parsimony argument against group selection which may be
seen as stemming from his concern that the group selection hypothesis depends on
too many auxiliary hypotheses in its explanation of altruistic behaviour. Williams

4k~ 
-
N
Figure 2-4: Musk oxen in defensive formation.
Service, Adams)
(Credit: U.S. Fish and Wildlife
look

sees group selection as a possible evolutionary process, but one which is rather
'onerous', and which should only be invoked when 'simpler' (genic or individual)
forms of natural selection failed to give an explanation. Part of the reason for the
perceived onerousness is that group selection can only account for altruistic behav-
iour under rather particular circumstances. Selection of one group over another is
always opposed by selection of individuals within each group. Within the group,
selfish individuals will generally have an advantage over altruists. With no other
constraints, they would eventually take over, and eliminate altruists from the pop-
ulation. The process of group selection therefore has to be fast enough to occur
before individual selection within groups gets a chance to dominate. This imposes
a number of constraints on acceptable rates of group reproduction and other pa-
rameters. More detailed study of mathematical models of group selection has led
to the conclusion that 'although group selection is possible, it cannot override the
effects of individual selection within populations except for a highly restricted set
of parameter values' (Wade (1978), p. 101). Thus the fact that the explanation
of altruistic traits in terms of group selection depends heavily on the particular
auxiliary hypotheses about these parameters forms the basis for regarding it as a
less good explanation.
On the other hand, the explanation in terms of individual selection offered by
Williams is subject to the same kinds of objections. At first sight, it would appear
that there could be ways that a male musk ox could protect himself from the wolves
at the expense of the group. For example, he could make a run for it, or he could
actually stand behind the young, so making it more likely that the wolves will go
for them rather than himself. For the individual selection theory to provide an
adequate explanation, we have to make auxiliary hypotheses about what it is in the
individual musk ox's best interest to do. In particular we have to assume that it is

better for a musk ox to stand in defensive formation than to adopt any of the other
possible group-sacrificing strategies.
Determining which of the two explanations is better is not so easy in this case,
but it seems clear that intuitively the factors to be taken into account involve
assessing the way in which the explanation depends on auxiliary assumptions.
One reason why an explanation is better if it explains the explanandum more in
terms of the core of the theory rather than auxiliary hypotheses is that it promotes
a certain desirable property of explanations, namely robustness or modal stability.
An explanation is more stable, and hence better, if slight changes to the conditions
it asserts would not have destroyed its explanatory qualities. If the explanation of
a fact depends on the conjunction of a large number of auxiliary assumptions, then
it is too finely tuned to fit the particular facts it aims to explain. For example, in
Copernicus' theory, it is to be expected that retrograde motion of a superior planet
occurs when the planet appears in opposition to the sun; it is because overtaking
happens when the planet, sun and earth lie on the same line (see Figure 2-3). The
observation that retrograde motion coincides with opposition can be reproduced in
Ptolemy's theory, by adjusting the epicycle rates in such a way that a line from
the planet to the centre of its epicycle is always parallel to the line from the earth
to the sun (see Figure 2-1). However, changes to the epicycle rates would mean
that retrogression and opposition no longer coincided. Thus, Ptolemy's theory has
been finely tuned to fit phenomena which arise as a more natural consequence of
Copernicus' theory.
2.7.5 
Simplicity and unification
I have suggested that explanation should connect the explanandum to the core of the
theory, and a theory provides a better explanation to the extent that it is possible to

give an explanation in terms of its core, rather than relying on auxiliary hypotheses.
This feature of minimal dependence on auxiliaries appears to be what is often meant
by 'simplicity' in science. Thagard (1978) proposes this explicitly. He says 'the
explanation of facts F by a theory T requires a set of given conditions C and also
a set of auxiliary hypotheses A'. Conditions C are accepted independently of T or
F, whereas 'an auxiliary hypothesis is a statement, not part of the original theory,
which is assumed in order to help explain one element of F, or a small fraction of the
elements of F'. Thagard proposes that 'simplicity is a function of the size and nature
of the set A needed by a theory T to explain facts F'. He gives several scientific cases
which seem to support this analysis. One is Lavoisier's oxygen theory of combustion
which replaced the phlogiston theory. Lavoisier explains various phenomena such
as combustion and calcination of metals, saying
I have deduced all the explanations from a simple principle, that
pure or vital air is composed of a principle particular to it, which forms
its base, and which I have named the oxygen principle, combined with
the matter of fire and heat. Once this principle was admitted, the main
difficulties of chemistry appeared to dissipate and vanish, and all the
phenomena were explained with an astonishing simplicity.' 7
Lavoisier claims that his theory provides simpler explanations of the different
phenomena because they are all made in terms of his basic oxygen principle, and
do not need to invoke particular assumptions, such as that the phlogiston given off
in combustion has 'negative weight' (see Thagard (1978), pp. 77-78).
17Thagard's translation. French original is: 'J'ai deduit toutes les explications d'un principe
simple, c'est que l'air pur, l'air vital, est compos6 d'un principe particulier qui lui est propre, qui
en forme la base, et que j'ai nomme principe oxygine, combine avec la matiere du feu et de la
chaleur. Ce principe une fois admis, les principales difficult6s de la chimie ont paru s'evanouir
et se dissiper, et tous les ph6nomenes se sont expliques avec une 6tonnante simplicit6' (Lavoisier
(1783)).

Perhaps the most dominant intuition in the philosophy of science literature
regarding the simplicity of a scientific theory has been that adding adjustable pa-
rameters makes a theory less simple (Popper (1959), Rosenkrantz (1977), Howson
and Urbach (2006)). This does not necessarily mean that one can compare the
simplicity of theories by simply counting parameters. But if one adds an additional
adjustable parameter to an existing theory, it will make it more complex. For exam-
ple, let theory T be the theory that the relation between two quantities is linear.
A line is described by y = 01x + 60, which has two parameters. We could add
another adjustable parameter, 02, to get quadratic curves. Let T2 be the theory
that the relation between the quantities is quadratic. Intuitively, the linear theory
T1 is simpler than the quadratic theory T2, or any higher order polynomial theory.
As another example, suppose that T is the theory that planets move in circular
orbits, and T2 is the theory that planets move in elliptical orbits. Circular orbits
can be described by an equation with three parameters, namely (x--" 
=1
whereas the ellipse (-X)
2 
+ 
("'c"
2 = 1 has four parameters. Again, the idea is
that intuitively T is simpler. Specifying the values of adjustable parameters in a
theory may be seen as a special case of auxiliary hypotheses. If a theory relies on
setting these parameters in particular ways in order to explain phenomena, then the
explanations are not based on the core of the theory, but on auxiliary hypotheses.
If the phenomena to be explained belong to various domains, then the explana-
tion is better - and may be called 'simpler' - the less it relies on particular auxiliaries
for each domain. In this case, the relevant explanatory virtue may also be called
'unification'. For example, the Newtonian theory of light treated it as a stream of
corpuscles. It could explain diffraction phenomena, but it invoked different auxil-
iary hypotheses for different types of diffraction. The pattern of light observed on
a screen as the result of shining light on a hair was explained in terms of an ether

surrounding the hair whose variation in density produced the pattern on the screen.
The observation of rings between two pieces of glass was explained by postulating
that by passing through a medium such as glass, corpuscles of light acquire a dis-
position to either reflect or transmit through a subsequent surface. Newton called
these dispositions 'fits of easy transmission and easy reflection'. The corpuscular
explanation of thin slit diffraction relied on yet further auxiliary hypotheses. By
contrast, the wave theory of light could use the same basic principles to explain all
these different phenomena of diffraction. Therefore it was a more unifying theory
with respect to these observations than the corpuscular theory.
The Copernican explanation of retrograde motion may also be seen as more
unifying, due to its greater dependence on core principles, than the Ptolemaic ex-
planation. The Copernican theory relates different phenomena, such as the sidereal
and synodic periods, which are unrelated in Ptolemy's theory. It also relates the
different motions of the planets in that they all depend on the common factor of
the earth's motion with respect to the sun.
When it comes to explaining just one phenomenon, rather than phenomena
from various domains, the notion of unification does not apply, but a theory can
still possess the explanatory virtue of simplicity in relation to this phenomenon if
it explains it in terms of core principles, rather than auxiliary hypotheses. The fact
that, when it comes to explaining diverse phenomena, simplicity and unification
essentially amount to the same consideration explains why it can sometimes be
hard to distinguish which virtue people are invoking. For example, the quotation
from Rheticus in section 2.7.3 could be seen as an appeal to either simplicity or
unification.

2.7.6 
Other explanatory virtues
So far we have considered comparing theories which provide explanations of the
same set of phenomena, either in a single domain, or in various domains. One
theory can be better than another at explaining these given phenomena. However,
another aspect of providing a better explanation is providing an explanation of
more phenomena or more various phenomena. This virtue, which is sometimes
called 'scope' or 'consilience' typically trades off against the virtue of simplicity or
unification, since it may be necessary to bring in more specific auxiliary hypotheses
in order to- allow the theory to provide explanations across a wider range of domains.
The explanatory performance of a theory may also be judged over time. Thus
some theories have the virtue of 'fruitfulness', meaning that they are able to provide
simple explanations of an increasingly wide range of phenomena as more evidence
is collected.
2.7.7 
Summary
I suggest then that there is a certain conceptual 'skeleton' of IBE which governs
how it assigns degrees of belief. The considerations which go into making a theory
a better explanation of certain phenomena than another are first that it is more
plausible, second, that it makes the explanandum more expected, and third that it
does so in terms of its core principles. I have illustrated the third consideration in a
couple of complex examples. In simple cases, where the theories in question are just
simple hypotheses with no structure, the third consideration does not play a role.
That is why the two-component picture proposed by Okasha was quite convincing
in simple cases like the doctor's diagnosis.

2.8 
Bayesian representation of IBE
This skeleton of IBE can readily be represented in Bayesian terms. The Bayesian
represents the component of IBE which involves plausibility of the theory by the
prior probability for the theory. And the component of how expected the hypothesis
makes the evidence is represented by the likelihood of the hypothesis, given the
evidence.
What about the concern with explaining in terms of the core? How is this repre-
sented in Bayesian terms? In Chapter 1, I gave an account of Bayesian confirmation
of theories which are structured into framework theories consisting of more abstract
or general claims, and more specific models. The framework theories compete in a
'higher level' hypothesis space, whereas the more specific parts compete in a 'lower
level' hypothesis space. I now suggest that the scientific practice of identifying core
elements of a theory to serve in explanation and identifying framework theories
to serve in confirmation is one and the same. Thus, the core of one theory forms
a higher level hypothesis that competes against the core of another theory. For
instance, we may consider the higher level hypothesis space consisting of Tcop, the
core of the Copernican theory, and Tpt,0 , the core of the Ptolemaic theory.
Now consider how the Bayesian assesses the support for high level theories such
as Tc,, and Tpt,0 . The Bayesian computes the posterior probability, which depends
on the priors p(Tc,,) and p(Tpt,0 ) and the likelihoods p(D|Tc,,) and p(DITpt,0 ). The
likelihood, say of Tcop, is an average of the the likelihoods for specific Copernican
models generated by Tcp. Suppose these models are parametrised by 0, which may
represent variables like the number of planets, the periods of their orbits and any
epicycles, the ordering of the planets and so on. Then

p(D|Tco,) 
J p(D|6, Tco,)p(6|Tco,)d6 
(2.4)
Tco, will not necessarily have a high likelihood just because it is able to generate
a specific model which fits the data extremely well. It also matters what the pro-
portion of well-fitting specific cases to ill-fitting ones is. If a higher level theory
generates a relatively large number of specific models which don't fit well at all,
then the ill-fitting models bring the average down. It will generally do better if a
good fit can be achieved across a wider range of specific models. This means that
the good fit is due to Tco, itself, and not just to specific values of parameter settings.
The fact that the Bayesian likelihood for TcO, is an average of lower level likeli-
hoods represents the explanatory concern that the theory should explain in terms of
its core. There is no need for the assignment of priors and likelihoods to be directly
governed by explanatory considerations such as simplicity. Rather, the priors are
regarded, in the usual Bayesian way, as representing plausibility judgments.
For example, consider how to represent Williams' parsimony argument against
group selection in Bayesian terms. Sober has suggested a representation based on
taking the prior for the group selection theory to be lower based on its lack of
simplicity. This is a representation, such as the composite view advocates, where
explanatory considerations are put in charge of assigning Bayesian probabilities.
I suggest an alternative way to represent this example in which priors are still
assigned in the usual way to represent plausibility of the theory. The group selec-
tion core theory TGS and the individual selection core theory TIs may initially be
regarded as equally plausible. But we saw that scientists were concerned that the
range of parameter values for which group selection can override individual selection
is very small. This may be thought of as the claim that the likelihood of altruistic
traits is only high for a small region of parameter values. If we don't know before-

hand that the natural system falls in this parameter range, we will not concentrate
all the prior probability p(O|TGs) in that range. Thus, this will mean a low average
likelihood for the theory." 
This gives us a Bayesian account of Williams' parsi-
mony argument which reflects the concern that the group selection theory needs
to be overly fine-tuned in order to accommodate the data. It says that the group
selection theory is penalised by the likelihood, even if it is initially given the same
prior probability as the individual selection theory. 9
2.8.1 
A concern over objectivity
Some may be concerned about taking IBE to depend in part on a judgment of the
plausibility of the theory in question. IBE is generally regarded as a fairly 'objective'
rule, in the sense that it has a limited range of permissible assessments of certain
hypotheses in the light of given evidence. However, plausibility judgments could be
subject to a great deal of intersubjective disagreement. Doesn't this undermine the
objectivity of IBE?
My answer is that insofar as IBE shares this component of a plausibility judg-
ment with Bayesianism, it shares the same issues over its objectivity. If one regards
IBE as an objective rule, it may be best married with more objective forms of
Bayesianism, according to which more constraints are placed on which judgements
of plausibility are rational. Then, to be admitted, similar objections to the con-
straints imposed by objective Bayesianism would apply. In particular, there are
"If we had independent reason to believe that the natural system is likely to have parameters
in the region which gives a high likelihood for the selection of altruistic traits, then the likelihood
p(E|TGS) would be much higher.
19As I mentioned in section 2.7.4, the explanation provided by the individual selection theory
also depends on auxiliary hypotheses. Once these are taken into account, one would have to
investigate in more detail which of the two theories has a lower likelihood, given the evidence for
altruism.

certain classic objections to the Principle of Indifference. 
These objections are
based on the idea that there is no principled way to decide what we should be
indifferent with respect to.
For example, consider someone who takes a trip of 100 miles in between 1 and 2
hours. 20 What is the probability that the trip took between 1 hour and 1! hours?
2
If we assign a uniform probability density over times, we might say j, since the
interval between 1 hour and 11 hours is half of the interval from 1 to 2 hours. But
2
equally, we know that the average speed on the trip was between 50 and 100 miles
per hour, and and we have no evidence to favour any one speed over any other within
that interval. The trip took between 1 hour and 1! hours if the average speed was
2
between 661 miles per hour and 100 miles per hour. The interval between 661 miles
per hour and 100 miles per hour is 1 of the interval of possible speeds. Therefore, if
3
we employ the Principle of Indifference with respect to speeds, we get a probability
of 3 which is different from the 2 obtained by applying the Principle of Indifference
to times.
What this problem indicates is that the tempting first thought that a non-
informative prior should be uniform over the parameter space does not work because
it is no longer uniform on reparametrisation. This can be seen in general terms in
a simple case where there is just one parameter 0, and we reparametrise in terms of
another parameter # = f(0). To convert the measure between the two coordinate
systems, we must multiply by the Jacobian, which in this case is 
o. That is,
p(O) is equivalent to p(#) d 
in the new parametrisation. Thus, a prior which is
uniform in 0 is not uniform in #.
There is a large literature on better ways to construct 'informationless priors'.2 1
20This example is discussed in Huemer (2009), pp. 349-350.
21See for example Bernardo and Smith (1994), Kass and Wasserman (1996) and references
therein.

One may, for example, use a construction such as Jeffreys'. Jeffreys proposed that
a reparametrisation-invariant prior can be defined as p(9) cx VJ(O) where J(9) is
the 'Fisher information', defined as J(O) 
-E[ 
log p(yo)] (Jeffreys (1961)). This is
invariant to reparametrisation in the sense that p(#) = 
J(#) = VJ(O) 
do .
I do not want to enter into a discussion of this type of approach here. Indeed the
extension of Jeffreys' priors to multi-variable situations may be quite non-trivial. I
merely bring it up in order to indicate that there are potentially options available to
both objective Bayesianism and objective IBE, despite the well-known objections
to the Principle of Indifference. My concern here is to show how the key concepts
involved in IBE can be represented in Bayesian terms. I have suggested that IBE
and Bayesianism share a dependence on plausibility judgements, and may thus also
share both concerns over whether these judgements should be further constrained,
and possible strategies for constraining them.
2.8.2 
Bayesian simplicity and unification
I have suggested that a theory provides a better explanation of certain phenomena if
it explains more in terms of its core, and that this is essentially what the explanatory
virtues of simplicity and unification amount to. Thus, the Bayesian account of
better explanation I have just given is what has been offered as a Bayesian account of
simplicity by various authors (e.g. Rosenkrantz (1977), Jefferys and Berger (1992),
MacKay (2003)). 
If, as I have claimed, the virtues of unification and simplicity
essentially coincide for phenomena which extend across multiple domains, we would
expect the Bayesian account of unification to have the same basis as the Bayesian
22Kass (1989) and Myung et al. (2000) have given an interpretation of the Jeffreys' prior as the
measure associated with the metric on the space of probability distributions given by the Fisher
information. There are various arguments in favour of taking Fisher information as the natural
metric on this space.

account of simplicity. However, the Bayesian account of unification by Myrvold
(1996) has been presented as something quite different. Myrvold claims that it
is unification which has epistemic significance, not simplicity - according to him,
Ockham's razor is disposable.2 3
However, once one takes into account the various ceteris paribus conditions that
Myrvold imposes, it turns out that his account really does rely on the more unifying
theory having a higher likelihood than the less unifying one, and hence it does have
the same Bayesian underpinning as the preference for simpler theories. 2 4 I will now
show how this works in more detail.
Consider an explanandum consisting of two different phenomena, D1 and D2,
which may at first sight appear to have little to do with each other. Myrvold aims
to capture in Bayesian terms, the key intuition that a theory possesses the virtue
of unification with respect to certain evidence if it makes one phenomenon yield
information about some other phenomenon. In the case of the Copernican theory,
for example, the synodic period of a planet yielded information about its sidereal
period, and also information about one planet yielded information about another
planet.
Myrvold measures how unifying a theory is by the extent to which it increases the
probabilistic correlation between different pieces of evidence (Myrvold (1996)). The
pieces of evidence D1 and D2 are positively correlated if learning D1 raises the proba-
bility of D2, p(D 2|DI) > p(D 2). They are negatively correlated if p(D 2|D1 ) < p(D 2),
and probabilistically independent if p(D 2 D1 ) = p(D 2). Given certain reasonable
23This claim was made in a talk entitled 'Simplicity and Theory Choice: Ockham's disposable
razor', presented by Myrvold at Pittsburgh-CMU graduate student conference, Pittsburgh, 2010.
Myrvold also distances his account of unification from Forster and Sober's account of simplicity
in terms of the Akaike Information Criterion (Forster and Sober (1994)), which is closely related
to the Bayesian account of simplicity (Myrvold (1996), pp. 664-665).
2 4Schupbach (2005) makes a closely related point.

requirements on a measure of degree of informational relevance of D1 to D2, the
following measure can be derived (Myrvold (1996)):
I(D1 , D2) = 
p(D2oDg) 
(2.5)
p(D2)
= 
log p(D1 , D 2 ) 
(2.6)
p(D1)p(D2)
which is > 0 if D1 and D2 are positively correlated, = 0, if they are independent,
and < 0 if they are negatively correlated. The informational relevance may be
different when conditionalised on the theory T, and the conditional informational
relevanceis given by
p(D2D1, T)
I(D 1 , D2 |T) = log 
2 T
= log 
p(D 1 , D 2 IT)
p(DIT)p(D 2 T)
Myrvold proposes that the unifying power of theory T is the extent to which theory
T increases the informational relevance of D1 to D2. Thus it may be measured by
U(D1 , D2 ; T) = I(D1, D2 T) - I(D1, D2)
Myrvold argues that one can use this measure to demonstrate that the Coper-
nican theory has greater unifying power than the Ptolemaic theory with respect to
the phenomena given by the sidereal period and the synodic period of a particular
planet. He takes pm to be the statement that Mars traverses the sphere of fixed
stars with a period that, within small observational error, is 1.88 years, and rm as
the statement that Mars retrogresses within a period equal to 2.14 years (within
observational error). On the Copernican theory rm and pm are related by the equa-

tion 2.3 above, so pm holds just when rm does. This means that p(pmlIrm, Tco,) = 1,
and hence I(pm, 
mITcop) = - log( p(pmTcop)). 
Since the probability for any par-
ticular value of the synodic period is quite small, p(pmTcop) is small, and hence
I(Pm, rmTcop) is reasonably large. By contrast, on the Ptolemaic theory, rm yields
no information about pm and so I(pm, rm|TptoI) ~ 0. Thus, the unifying power of
the Copernican theory with respect to these phenomena is greater than that of the
Ptolemaic theory U(pm, rm; Tco,) > U(pm, rm; Tptol).
The claim that the unifying power of the Copernican theory is greater than that
of the Ptolemaic theory is based on I(pm, rmITcop) > I(pm, rm|Tptoi) since I(pm, rm)
is the same quantity subtracted from each. The basic reason why this inequality
holds is that the Copernican theory makes the phenomena more correlated
p(pm, rm|TcoP) > P(Pm|Tcop)P(rm|Teop)
whereas the Ptolemaic theory does not
P(Pm , rm|Tptoi) = P(PmITptol)P(rm|Tptol)
Myrvold suggests (p. 414), that the evidential support lent to Tco, by pm is ap-
proximately the same as the evidential support lent to Tto by pm (and similarly
for rm). Presumably just learning the synodic period of one planet, or the sidereal
period of that planet, doesn't give much, if any, support to either hypothesis. That
is, we take p(pm|Tcop) - p(pm|TptoI) and p(rmlTcop) - p(rm|Tptol). Then the greater
unifying power of the Copernican theory rests on the Copernican theory having a
greater likelihood for producing these two pieces of evidence than the Ptolemaic
theory
P(Pm, rm|Tco) > P(Pm, rm|Tptol)

Thus, Myrvold's Bayesian account of unification and the Bayesian account of
simplicity both have a common basis. Given the data, the likelihood of the simpler
or more unifying theory is higher than that of the theory which is less simple or
unifying.
2.8.3 
Summary
I have argued that there is more to the concept of IBE than in Okasha's simple
breakdown into two components corresponding to prior and likelihood. 
I have
proposed that the further considerations in IBE arise from the desire that the
theory explain the phenomena in terms of its core principles. That is, ideally the
theory should make the explanandum expected no matter how the details of the
theory are filled in. This preference is naturally represented by the Bayesian who
computes the likelihood for the core of the theory by averaging over the specific
models that it generates.
2.9 
Implications for IBE
The significant idea behind IBE as an inductive method is that explanation is
the driving force in inference. In this chapter, I have attempted to extract the
key features of IBE - its conceptual 'skeleton' - by thinking about the motivating
concept of explanation. I then showed how this conceptual skeleton maps onto the
probabilities involved in inference according to Bayesian principles. What is the
upshot of this for IBE? Should the conceptual skeleton be simply identified with its
Bayesian representation? Is what I have provided an eliminative reduction of IBE
in terms of Bayesianism?
I am not claiming that the concept of IBE should be identified with the Bayesian

representation. Thinking about inference in terms of explanation still remains a
distinct way of conceptualising it than thinking about it in terms of Bayesian prob-
abilities. In particular, as we have seen, thinking about explanation may involve
more of a focus on the details of deductive or causal relationships than is captured
by conditional probabilities alone. IBE and Bayesianism might be regarded as dif-
ferent levels of description of the inference process, where IBE describes the gross
phenomena of inferential thinking captured by IBE, whereas the quantitative detail
which gives rise to these explanatory features is captured by the Bayesian model. As
a suggestive analogy, consider the different levels of description provided by ther-
modynamics and statistical mechanics, where thermodynamics describes thermal
phenomena at the macroscopic level and statistical mechanics provides a lower-
level description of the molecular underpinnings. Thermodynamic concepts like
heat, entropy and energy are not made redundant by statistical mechanics. Rather
they are taken to refer to certain properties of collections of molecules, properties
which may themselves be represented in terms of probabilities. Similarly, explana-
tory concepts like simplicity, scope and unification are not made redundant by the
Bayesian account. They refer to certain properties of the relationship between a
theory and the evidence, properties which may in turn be represented in terms of
probabilities.
Although I admit that there may be more to the concept of IBE, I want to
suggest that the skeleton of IBE I have identified may be sufficiently inclusive to
capture all that is epistemically relevant about IBE. That is, there are no other
explanatory considerations which affect the degrees of belief that an explanationist
should assign to the various hypotheses. This does not rule out the possibility of
fleshing out the skeleton with further considerations of a pragmatic nature. These
considerations could be represented by a Bayesian using a full decision theoretic

model with the pragmatic considerations represented by utilities.
2.10 
Conclusion
In this chapter I have considered two existing pictures of the relationship between
IBE and Bayesianism. The first is the incompatibilist view that IBE and Bayesian-
ism are mutually exclusive alternatives. The second is the composite view, which
says that IBE can be represented in Bayesian terms by virtue of explanatory con-
siderations playing the role of determining the priors and likelihoods. I argued that
neither of these pictures is particularly appealing.
I proposed a third alternative, which is that IBE can be represented in Bayesian
terms without explanatory considerations providing any special constraints on the
priors and likelihoods. I attempted to isolate within the concept of IBE a skeleton
which can be represented in Bayesian terms. The skeleton is the following: a
theory provides a better explanation of certain evidence to the extent that a) it
is initially plausible, b) it provides a connection to the evidence which makes that
evidence expected, and c) it does so without that connection relying too heavily
upon auxiliary hypotheses. This skeleton is then readily represented in Bayesian
terms. Plausibility is represented by the prior, expectedness of the evidence by the
likelihoods, and the concern about reliance on auxiliary hypotheses is reflected in
the Bayesian practice of averaging over specific hypotheses generated by the theory
to get the likelihood of the theory. To the extent that the conceptual skeleton
I have identified captures all the considerations which affect the degrees of belief
assigned by an explanationist, IBE will be compatible with Bayesianism. But it is
a different picture of compatibility than that proposed by the composite view, since
there is no need for explanatory considerations to play a role in assigning priors and

likelihoods. Rather explanatory virtues emerge as considerations naturally taken
into account in Bayesian updating. If the two methods are compatible in this sense,
they may be mutually illuminating. IBE provides a way to describe in qualitative
terms what is going on in Bayesian inference, and the Bayesian account provides a
way to explain why explanatory virtues are preferred in IBE.

Chapter 3
No Miracles, No Fallacies
3.1 
Introduction
Is it reasonable to think that theories in mature science are true, or at least approx-
imately true? That is, should one be a scientific realist? Or is it better to take the
anti-realist view that scientific theories just 'save the phenomena'? On this view,
scientific theories are roughly right about what could be observed, but we need not
believe their more theoretical claims about the world behind the phenomena.
If a theory makes a successful prediction, perhaps this is a reason to think it is
approximately true. After all, wouldn't it be a miracle if a theory that was nowhere
close to the truth nonetheless managed to hit upon a successful prediction? We have
no need to accept such miracles, so we are better to conclude that a predictively
successful theory is close to the truth. This is the thought behind one of the most
compelling arguments for scientific realism: the 'No Miracles' argument (NMA)
(Putnam (1975), Boyd (1983)).
On the other hand, in the history of science, there are many theories which were
predictively successful at the time, yet which, by the standards of today's theories,
100

made theoretical claims which were nowhere close to the truth. Absent any reason
to think that there is a salient difference between the past and the present, these
counterexamples in the past should make us doubt that the success of a currently
held theory gives us any indication of its approximate truth. This, roughly speaking,
is the argument against realism which has been called the 'Pessimistic Induction'
(PI) (Laudan (1981)).
The NMA and the PI are often seen as articulating the central considerations for
and against scientific realism. However, recently there have been attempts to dis-
miss either or both arguments on the grounds that they involve the common fallacy
of neglecting the 'base-rate' (Howson (2000), Lipton (2004), Lewis (2001), Magnus
and Callender (2004)). Allegedly, the realist making the NMA ignores the fact that
before taking its success into consideration, a scientific theory is very unlikely to be
approximately true (Howson (2000), Lipton (2004)). And the proponent of the PI
stands independently accused of this very same neglect (Lewis (2001)).
In this paper, I will argue that, despite these allegations, both the NMA and the
PI can be reconstructed in a non-fallacious manner. In the NMA, the realist does
not neglect the low base-rate, but instead denies that it is very low. This denial
can be expressed as an explicit premise of the argument. I will sketch a possible
defence of this extra premise and indicate its weaknesses. The claim that the PI
involves the base-rate fallacy is based on misconstruing what the target of the PI
is. When correctly construed, it becomes clear that no fallacy is involved in the PI
either.
101

3.2 
The base-rate fallacy
Suppose that doctors conduct a test for a rare disease that occurs in 1 in a thousand
patients. There is virtually no chance that a person with the disease will test
negative (i.e. the false negative rate can be regarded as zero). On the other hand,
the chance of a person without the disease testing positive is about 5% (i.e. the
false positive rate is 5%). A patient takes the test and his result is positive. What
is the probability that the patient has the disease?'
It is a surprise to many people that the correct answer to this is just under 2%.
Although we should judge the probability that the patient has the disease as higher
now than before he took the test, it is still quite unlikely that he actually has the
disease. He is more likely to be one of the false positives. Out of 1000 patients, say,
there will be approximately 50 false positives (5% of 1000), but only one true case
of the disease. Therefore the fraction of those with a positive result who actually
have the disease is 1 or just under 2%.
The result can be derived more formally using Bayesian analysis. Let P represent
'the patient tests positive for the disease' and D represent 'the patient has the
disease'. The information that was given in the problem is:
(i) p(PID) = 1 (the false negative rate is zero)
(ii) p(Pl-iD) = 0.05 (the false positive rate is 5%)
(iii) p(D) = 
'
The question is what is p(DIP), that is, the probability that the patient has the
'This example is cited by Howson (2000) (p. 52), as a problem which was actually given to
students and staff at Harvard Medical school.
102

disease given that he tests positive for it. This can be calculated using Bayes' rule
DIP = 
p(PID)p(D)
p(PID)p(D) + p(PID)p(-D)
p(D)
p(D) + BF.(1 - p(D))
where BF is the 'Bayes factor' BF = p(PID) which in this case is 0.05. Combining
p(PjD)
this with p(D) = 
gives the correct conclusion that p(DIP) -
.
There is a tendency when presented with a problem like this for people to
overestimate the probability that the patient with the positive test has the disease.
Psychologists have demonstrated people's tendency to overestimate the probabilities
in a range of similar problem cases. These problems all require a subject to integrate
two types of probabilistic information: generic information about base rates in
a population - such as the rate of the disease - with specific information about
which scenario would make the particular result found more likely - such as the
probability that someone with the disease will test positive. One reason that people
may overestimate the probabilities is because they neglect the generic base-rates in
favour of the more specific information - this inappropriate neglect of base rates is
called the 'base-rate fallacy'. So, in the disease case, for instance, people ignore the
given information that the overall rate of disease in the population is low, and focus
on the information that a patient with the disease is very likely to test positive.
There are a number of psychological theories about the underlying reasons for
the base-rate neglect. The original idea, due to Kahneman and Tversky, was that
people failed to follow the Bayesian norms, because they instead followed heuris-
tics, such as judging 'representativeness'. The idea roughly is that people judge
that a positive test is more characteristic or representative of someone who has the
disease and hence the person is more likely to have the disease (Kahneman and
103

Tversky (1972), Kahneman and Tversky (1973)). Other psychologists have argued
that people do perform Bayesian inference, but the manner in which the probabilis-
tic information is presented to subjects in the standard experiments on base-rate
neglect obscures this.2
3.3 
The scientific realism debate
Before explaining how the NMA and the PI might be regarded as instances of
the base-rate fallacy, I will first attempt to clarify what is at stake in the issue of
scientific realism. Scientific theories describe many things, some of which can be
relatively easily observed, such as the times of tides or the behaviours of animals,
and others which are so theoretical that they are impossible to observe at the current
time and quite possibly also in principle. Examples in the latter category might
include the curvature of space-time or the forces between fundamental particles.
Nonetheless, it is common to think that the unobservable parts of reality do exist
and furthermore that scientific theories attempt to describe them and can be right
or wrong in what they say about them. This much is common ground in the current
debate over scientific realism, at least that part of the dispute in which the NMA and
PI figure.3 There are several different ways to characterise the difference between
the realist and the anti-realist, and as we shall see in the next section, these will
result in slightly different formulations of the NMA.
One way to characterise the difference between a realist and an anti-realist is in
terms of what they say about the aim of science. For example, on Bas van Fraassen's
2See, for instance, Gigerenzer and Hoffrage (1995), Krynski and Tenenbaum (2007).
3That is, the debate involving the NMA and the PI takes for granted both 'metaphysical
realism', the thesis that there is a mind-independent world, and 'semantic realism', the view that
scientific theories may be read 'literally', so that theoretical claims may be true or false, and not
just via a reduction to an observation language.
104

view, realism makes the claim that 'Science aims to give us, in its theories, a literally
true story of what the world is like' (van Fraassen (1980), p. 8), whereas his brand of
anti-realism, constructive empiricism, claims that 'Science aims to give us theories
which are empirically adequate' (ibid, p. 12). A theory is empirically adequate if
'what it says about the observable things and events in this world is true - exactly
if it "saves the phenomena"' (ibid, p. 12). That is, it is a weaker claim to say that
a theory is empirically adequate than to say that it is true, since the empirically
adequate theory is only right about the observable aspects of the world, but does
not need to also be right about unobservable matters, as the true theory does.
Indeed an empirically adequate theory could, in principle, be radically false in what
it says about the unobservable. Thus, according to the realist, science concerns
itself with getting the right story about the unobservable as well as the observable,
whereas according to the anti-realist, it concerns itself only with the observable.
It can be difficult to pin down what is meant by the 'aim' of science (Rosen
(1994)), so a number of authors prefer to pose the realist view as a claim about
what the scientific method actually achieves. The realist may claim, for example,
that the 'theories accepted in mature science are typically approximately true' (Put-
nam (1975), p. 73). This may be thought of as a 'global' claim that the scientific
method is generally reliable in finding approximately true theories. The qualifica-
tion 'approximately' is included, because the realist realises that it would be too
strong to claim that theories are typically true, given the extent of idealisation,
approximation and indeed error, in science. There have been attempts to give for-
mal theories of what approximate truth amounts to (Niiniluoto (1998)), but some
philosophers suggest that an intuitive notion is sufficient (Psillos (1999), Chapter
11). 
In contrast to the realist, the anti-realist claims that 'theories accepted in
mature science are typically approximately empirically adequate'. A theory is ap-
105

proximately empirically adequate just if what it says about the observable things
and events in the world is approximately true. Thus the anti-realist claims that the
achievements of science are more modest than the realist does.
Another way to distinguish between realism and anti-realism is to see them as
making different 'local' claims about how to regard a particular theory in a mature
science - this may be a theory which one 'accepts'. The realist will say that such
a theory is approximately true, whereas the anti-realist will say it is approximately
empirically adequate. Some may prefer to claim more cautiously that the theory
is probably approximately true, or probably approximately empirically adequate.
Whilst the realist may recommend an attitude of belief in the theory, there are two
possible attitudes that the anti-realist could adopt. One is that the theory is unlikely
to be approximately true, since there can be so many ways to be approximately
empirically adequate without being approximately true. However, in practice, anti-
realists do not commonly recommend low credence or disbelief in the theory, but
rather suspension of belief in the unobservable parts of the theory - an attitude of
agnosticism.
3.4 
The NMA
The NMA is an argument that predictive success in science provides reason to be a
realist. The NMA is not generally presented as an a priori philosophical argument,
but is rather put forward as part of a naturalistic epistemology according to which
the thesis of realism has a similar status to ordinary scientific hypotheses. The
argument basically has the following form. If realism were not true, predictive
success would be a great coincidence or miracle. We should rule out such miracles,
at least if we have a non-miraculous alternative, and we do, since on the realist
106

view, predictive success would be just what was expected. Therefore we should
infer that realism is true.
3.4.1 
Retail and wholesale NMA
In section 3.3, we saw several different ways of formulating the thesis of realism. We
distinguished in particular between the local claim that a particular theory is ap-
proximately true, and the global claim that the theories accepted in mature science
are typically approximately true. The NMA can be formulated as an argument for
either one of these realist claims.
According to what has been called the 'retail' version of the NMA,4 the predic-
tive success of a particular theory is a reason for adopting the local realist claim
that the theory is (probably) approximately true. A classic case of the type of
success in question is the prediction of the Poisson spot by Augustin-Jean Fresnel's
wave theory of light. In the early 19th century, the wave theory emerged as a rival
to Newton's theory according to which light consisted of a stream of particles. One
task was to explain diffraction patterns, where dark and light bands were observed
when light was shone through slits or around obstacles. According to the corpus-
cular theories, the explanation involved postulating forces exerted by the obstacle
on the particles, whereas wave theories allowed one to calculate intensities on the
screen by adding up contributions from different points of the wavefront, imagining
each point as a little source. In a well-known piece of scientific history, when Fresnel
presented his theory, Simeon-Denis Poisson, a proponent of corpuscular theories,
pointed out that according to Fresnel's theory, if an opaque disk was placed between
a light source and a screen, a bright spot would appear at the centre of the disk's
4The 'retail' terminology is due to Magnus and Callender (2004), and is contrasted with
'wholesale'.
107

shadow on the screen. No-one expected that this could be true, but then the exper-
iment was performed, and what is now known as the 'Poisson spot' was observed.
Thus Fresnel's theory experienced a striking predictive success. The intuition be-
hind the retail NMA is that Fresnel's theory could not have been so successful in
prediction if it was not somehow latching onto the correct story about the unobserv-
able nature of light. John Worrall expresses the intuition in the following way: 'it
seems implausible that such a "nice" theory as the wave theory of light should get
such a striking phenomenon as the white spot correct and yet not be somehow "on
the right lines" concerning what it says about "deep structure"' (Worrall (2005),
p. 24). According to this thinking, the alternatives to local realism - such as that
the theory in question is approximately empirically adequate (but not necessarily
approximately true), or that the theory is not even empirically adequate - would
not explain the success - they would make it a miracle.
The 'wholesale' version of the NMA is an argument for the global claim that the
'theories accepted in mature science are typically approximately true'. The success
invoked in this version is that of science as a whole - the fact that so many scientific
theories do make successful predictions. The classic formulation of this version of
the argument is due to Putnam:
'The positive argument for scientific realism is that it is the only phi-
losophy that does not make the success of science a miracle. That terms
in a mature science typically refer (this formulation is due to Richard
Boyd), that the theories accepted in a mature science are typically ap-
proximately true, that the same terms can refer to the same even when
they occur in different theories - these statements are viewed not as nec-
essary truths but as part of the only scientific explanation of the success
of science, and hence as part of any adequate description of science and
108

its relations to its objects' (Putnam (1975), p. 73).
The intuition here is that scientists would not manage to come up with successful
theories if their method were not generally reliable in reaching approximately true
theories. If, on the other hand, the scientific method tends to produce theories
which are only approximately empirically adequate, rather than approximately true,
it would be very surprising if those theories were so often successful in prediction.
3.4.2 
Probabilistic formulation
It has recently been suggested that the retail version of the NMA can be formulated
in terms of probabilities (Howson (2000), Lipton (2004)). The suggestion is that
the argument has the form NMARl:
(i) if T is approximately true, it is quite likely that the theory is predictively
successful
(ii) if T is not approximately true, it is extremely improbable that the theory
would be predictively successful
Conclusion: given that the theory is successful, we should infer that it is ap-
proximately true. Or, in probabilistic terms: the probability that the theory is
approximately true is very high, given that it is successful.
Let R be the realist claim that 'theory T is approximately true', and S be the
claim that 'theory T is predictively successful'. Then NMARi can be written as:
(i) p(SIR) high
(ii) p(S|-,R) relatively low
C: p(RIS) is high
The first premise is not very controversial.5 It may even be taken to impose a
5Laudan takes issue with the claim that 'if a theory were approximately true, it would de-
109

constraint on what is meant by approximate truth that any adequate account must
satisfy (Howson (2000), p. 56).
There is an interpretation of the second premise which raises difficulties. If one
thinks of the probability in the second premise as a 'chance', defined by the ratio
of the cases where T is successful and false to the total number of cases where T is
false, then, for a number of reasons explained in Howson (2000), it seems impossible
to justify. The total number of ways that T could be false is surely infinite, and
there is no natural metric structure on the space of possibilities. Therefore, there
can be no determinate value for the chance. Not only this, but one would also need
to assume something about how probable it is that each possible world is the true
world, and there seem to be no grounds for knowing this. Thus trying to establish
even that there is a definitive chance, let alone that its value is low, seems like a
hopeless task.
However, one may also think of probabilities in Bayesian terms as representing
the degrees of belief which it is reasonable to hold. Since they represent reasonable
degrees of belief, they are not entirely subjective, but rather any assignment must
be supported by an argument. Now it seems possible to give an argument that the
probability p(S-R) is low. The realist will say that, in the world, unobservable
parts of reality may be causally connected to observable events, just as other ob-
servable parts of reality are. Part of the reason that a scientific theory manages to
give a successful prediction is that it correctly captures some of the causal structure
behind the predicted event, and these causal relations may be unobservable as well
as observable. Since unobservable causal structure plays a role in determining what
predictions a theory will make, it would be very surprising if the actual unobserv-
ductively follow that the theory would be a relative successful predictor and explainer of the
observable phenomena' (Laudan (1981), p. 30), but this is a stronger claim than that approxi-
mate truth makes success likely.
110

able causal structure was very different from what the theory says, yet the theory
still managed to predict correctly. This is one way that the realist might argue for
premise (ii).
3.5 
The NMA and the base-rate fallacy
3.5.1 
The allegation
According to Colin Howson, all the philosophers who use the No-Miracles argument
commit the base-rate fallacy (Howson (2000), p. 54), and the idea that philosophers
of science are particularly susceptible to this 'blindspot' is also put forward by Peter
Lipton (Lipton (2004), p. 197). The allegation that the argument involves the base-
rate fallacy involves, not the justification for premises (i) and (ii), but the move from
these to the conclusion. In assessing the base-rate fallacy allegation, we may take
premises (i) and (ii) as given.
The argument that this step of the NMA is fallacious is based on drawing a
parallel with the disease problem we saw in section 3.2. A theory being approx-
imately true is analogous to the patient having the disease. Being successful in
prediction is analogous to testing positive for the disease. Thus, premise (i) is the
analogue of the information that the patient is almost certain to test positive if they
have the disease (the false negative rate is negligible). Premise (ii) is the analogue
of the information that the patient is unlikely to test positive if they don't have
the disease (the false positive rate is low). Concluding that the theory is probably
approximately true, given that it is successful, is like concluding that the patient
is very likely to have the disease, given a positive test result. In the disease case
this was a fallacy because, at least allegedly, it involved neglecting the very low
base-rate of the disease in the overall population. In the case of the NMA the idea
111

must also be that the realist neglects the very low base-rate that there are very few
approximately true theories amongst all possible theories.
3.5.2 
Amending the probabilistic formulation of the NMA
As it stands, argument NMARi is not valid. To make it valid, one needs an extra
premise that
(iii) p(R) is not small compared to p(S|-,R)
Similarly, in the diseases case, it is only valid to draw the conclusion that p(D IP)
is high if one accepts the premise that the prior probability p(D) is not small
compared to p(PI-,D). The problem in the diseases case was that this premise was
explicitly denied in the set-up, yet people failed to pick up on the information that
p(D) was actually extremely small. Therefore it was reasonable to interpret those
people's responses as involving base-rate neglect.
In the NMA case, on the other hand, premise (iii) was not explicitly denied. No-
one gave realists the appropriate base-rate. Therefore the realists did not ignore
something which was explicitly available to them.
Rather an alternative interpretation seems more natural. That is, the NMA was
not adequately represented by NMARi. It should have been formulated, including
premise (iii), as NMAR2:
(i) p(S|R) high
(ii) p(S|-,R) relatively low
(iii) p(R) is not small compared to p(Sj-iR)
Conclusion: p(RIS) is high.
It is not unreasonable to amend the argument in this way. Psychological ex-
periments which find a tendency to commit the base-rate fallacy constitute quite
a different context from the philosophical context in which the NMA is put for-
112

ward. The psychological experiments aim to elicit people's initial judgments, not
their considered opinion after reflection and debate. It is of course possible that
the initial attraction of the NMA is derived in part from a seductive fallacy. But
people are attracted to arguments for many different reasons. The concern in the
philosophical context is whether the argument can be posed in a non-fallacious
manner. Consider what would be typical advice in the philosophical context on
what to do if you discover a fallacy. As Stephen Toulmin puts it in an introductory
textbook on reasoning: 'the perpetrator of a fallacy does not have to withdraw from
the discussion in disgrace but simply must restate the argument with modifications
that eliminate the fallacy' (Toulmin et al. (1984), p. 178). That is what the above
formulation has done.
It is in fact reasonable to see premise (iii) as implicit in the No Miracles reasoning
because dismissing the possibility of a mere coincidence is something that one should
only do if one thinks that the alternative has a reasonable chance of being true.
For example, consider a murder investigation. Suppose DNA from Mr X is found
on the victim's clothing. The chance of this match if Mr X is the murderer is very
high, but it is extremely low if Mr X was not involved in the murder. We conclude
that Mr X is probably the murderer, dismissing the possibility that the match was
a mere coincidence. Implicitly we are assuming that it is not out of the question
that Mr X was involved, even before seeing the DNA evidence. However, if Mr X
had come up with an excellent and well-corroborated alibi, this would have meant
that we had a much lower prior probability for his involvement, and in this case,
it may no longer be reasonable to dismiss the possibility of a merely coincidental
match.
Similarly, suppose a child develops spots characteristic of measles. You conclude
on this basis that the child probably has measles. It is unsurprising that the child
113

has spots if she does indeed have measles, but on the other hand, if she doesn't have
measles, the spots would be quite a coincidence - a minor miracle for which we have
no explanation. We rule out such coincidences or miracles, so we conclude that she
probably does have measles. It was only reasonable to rule out the coincidence if
there was a reasonable chance that the child had somehow contracted measles. If
we happened to know that she had absolutely not been in any situation where she
could have caught them, we might be inclined to take the resemblance to spots
produced by measles as just a coincidence.
Or suppose that a German octopus named Paul manages to accurately predict
a sequence of outcomes of German World Cup matches. If Paul were psychic, his
success would be quite likely, but if he were not psychic, it seems implausible that
he could have got so many games right by chance. However we are still reluctant
to conclude that he is psychic, because we have such a low prior probability for the
existence of psychic powers, especially in German octopi.
Thus, it seems to be a prerequisite for ruling out the coincidence or 'miracle'
that the alternative hypothesis which would make the observations non-miraculous
is not extremely unlikely a priori. Therefore it makes sense to incorporate this
prerequisite explicitly into the argument above as premise (iii).
3.5.3 
Defence of additional premise
Our attention is now refocused on the premises, rather than the validity of the
NMA. We have added an additional premise to the probabilistic formulation of the
NMA. What is its status? How would the realist defend it?
One line of thinking which seems to cast doubt on the premise goes as follows.
There are enormously many possible theories, and only a very small fraction of
them can be approximately true. Admittedly, the probability of a theory being ap-
114

proximately true depends on what is meant by approximate truth: the more liberal
the notion of approximate truth, the more theories would count as approximately
true. However, so the thought goes, no reasonable account of approximate truth
can be liberal enough that a large proportion of possible theories would count as ap-
proximately true. Surely they must always be vastly outnumbered by false theories,
since there are so many ways to go wrong and comparatively few to go right.
This argument suffers from the same objections which attended the attempt to
spell out premise (ii) in terms of the ratio of successful to all possible cases. If
the relevant set of theories is all possible theories, this is an infinite and metrically
unstructured space of possibilities in which we will have a hard time pinning down
any measure. Also, since many of these possible theories are currently unimagined,
we have no grasp of what the space consists of (Howson (2000), Worrall (2005)). It
would not be unreasonable for the realist to reject this type of argument.
What alternative can the realist offer? Consider again the diseases case. To
get a prior probability for the patient having the disease, you will have to assume
something about how the patient was drawn from the population at large. Even if
you know that the disease is indeed very rare in the population at large, you might
nonetheless think that the patient is more likely to have the disease just because
he has presented himself as a patient to be tested for the disease. Probably he
experienced some symptoms which led to him being tested. Thus the patient is not
randomly drawn from the population. This is a reason that you might legitimately
think that the prior probability of the patient having the disease is higher than the
base-rate in the general population.
Similarly, the theories which are candidates for novel predictive success are not
a random sample of all possible theories. Rather these are the theories which
are deemed best-confirmed by scientific methods in their particular domain. The
115

realist may at least partially base a higher prior probability that a particular theory
is approximately true on their assumption that the proportion of best-confirmed
theories which are approximately true is high.
In the diseases case, even if the probability that a patient has the disease is
different from the probability that a random member of the population has it, there
is still room for disagreement about whether the process of selecting someone as a
patient tends to produce a high proportion of individuals with the disease or whether
it tends to produce a low proportion. Similarly, there can be disagreement over
whether the process of selecting theories as well-confirmed tends to produce a high
or low proportion of approximately true theories. This is exactly what divides the
realist from the anti-realist with respect to the global version of realism. The realist
thinks that the theories accepted in mature science are typically approximately true,
whereas the anti-realist thinks they are typically only approximately empirically
adequate, and hence not so often approximately true, since the vast majority of
approximately empirically adequate theories are not approximately true.
How would we decide in the diseases case whether or not a large proportion
of the patients have the disease? We could look at the overall proportion of the
patients testing positive for the disease. If we get a large proportion testing positive,
we might conclude that a large proportion of the patients have the disease.
Similarly, in the case of theories, we might consider how many successful theories
there are amongst the theories accepted in mature science. If science is mostly
successful, this might be reason to think that most theories are approximately true.
This is essentially an appeal to the wholesale version of the NMA. That is, the
fact that scientists so often succeed in coming up with successful theories is a reason
to think that the scientific method generally produces approximately true theories.
In section 3.5.2, I argued that the retail NMA could be formulated in probabilistic
116

terms as NMAR2.
I now suggest that the wholesale version NMAw takes the
same form as the retail version:
(i) p(SIRw) high
(ii) p(S|-,Rw) relatively low
(iii) p(R.) is not small compared to p(SwI--R.)
Conclusion: p(RwISw) is high.
Here R, stands for the realist claim that theories accepted in mature science
are typically approximately true. It may be seen as the claim that the scientific
method typically gives rise to approximately true theories - thus, it is a claim that
the scientific method is reliable with respect to approximate truth. S. stands for
the claim that science is on the whole successful - that is, scientists often manage
to come up with predictively successful theories.
If this argument succeeds, it makes R, likely, given overall scientific success Sw.
Rw in turn can provide a reason to think that the prior probability of any particular
accepted theory is approximately true is reasonably high, since it was produced by
a method which tends to produce approximately true theories. Thus it supports
premise (iii) of the retail version of the NMA.
But doesn't this just push the problem one step back? We now have to justify
premise (iii) in the wholesale argument. Granted, but perhaps this is a premise
which the realist could admit to simply assuming. What is needed is that the prior
probability allotted to the realist alternative is not very small (compared to the
small p(S.I-,R)). That is, the reliability of the scientific method with respect to
approximate truth is not extremely unlikely to start off with. If someone refuses that
starting point, and insists that the scientific method is very likely to be unreliable,
they will not be convinced by the wholesale NMA, and hence retail NMAs, to opt
for realism.
117

Although premise (iii) in either version is needed for the validity of the argument,
one might wonder if assumptions about the prior probabilities are really so critical
in the NMA. If it is repeated and varied successes that drive the NMA conclusion,
not just one-off successful predictions, then it doesn't matter much whether the
prior probability is high or low. If we update our prior probability for the realist
claim R (or R,) in the light of success of the theory, it will, as long as the theory
continues to predict successfully, get higher and eventually we will end up with a
high value for p(RIS) (or p(R.|S.)). Thus, even someone who starts with a very
low prior probability for the realist claim, will potentially end up a realist if enough
success is gathered.
The realist will not necessarily want to rely on this convergence of priors, since
we don't know how long we will have to wait before the realist claims accrues
substantial posterior probability. The strategy risks weakening the realist position
since we cannot say confidently at any given moment that the theory is probably
approximately true. We can only say that it is getting more likely that it is. Thus
most realists will still want to make an argument for premise (iii).
Nonetheless, some anti-realists have found the lack of an in-principle barrier to
conversion to realism to be sufficiently concerning that they have adopted a specific
strategy for dealing with it. They argue that the anti-realist position is not reflected
in assigning a low prior probability to R (and R,), but rather in adopting an agnos-
tic attitude towards R (and R,). The anti-realist is skeptical about the reliability
of scientific method with respect to finding the truth about unobservable matters.
Presumably, any claims about approximate truth must fall into the unobservable
category. Therefore, the anti-realist will be agnostic about whether R (and also
R,) is true. In probabilistic terms, it has been proposed that this agnostic attitude
should be represented by a 'vague' probability - that is, a probability interval of the
118

form [0, x], rather than a sharp value (Van Fraassen (1989), p.194). This represents
the lack of commitment as to whether the probability is zero, or any other value
up to x. The very fact that the anti-realist represents her opinions in this way
means that she cannot be moved away from agnosticism by conditionalisation on
any evidence, including scientific success. This means that there is no need for the
anti-realist to engage with the other premises of the NMA, since she has simply
ruled out the possibility that success could be a reason for adopting realism by fiat.
In summary, then, we have seen that premise (iii) of the retail version can be
supported by appeal to the wholesale version of the NMA. A higher prior that
a particular theory is approximately true may be appropriate if that theory is
produced by a method which is reliable in producing approximately true theories.
However, it is necessary to assume that it is not extremely unlikely that scientific
method is reliable in this way. The antirealist could resist this either directly by
denying the assumption, or by refusing to assign R sharp-valued probabilities at
all.
Neither of these are perhaps the most effective way for the anti-realist to resist
the NMA. It has been more common to take issue with premise (ii) - that is, to deny
that the success would be very unlikely if the theory were not approximately true.
Anti-realists have suggested alternative explanations of success which are allegedly
better than the explanation provided by realism. One suggestion along these lines
is van Fraassen's idea that the success of theories can be explained by the way in
which they are selected, just as the adaptedness of organisms can be explained by
their past history of natural selection (van Fraassen (1980), pp. 39-40). Another is
that the success of a theory can be explained by what Leplin calls 'surrealism', the
view that the world is just as if the theory is true.6
6This view is outlined and criticised in Leplin (1987), who sees it as inspired by Fine (1986).
119

In the next section we will see that the allegation that the PI is an instance
of the base-rate fallacy is based on taking it to be an argument against premise
(ii), whereas I claim that it is supposed to be an argument directly against the
conclusion of the NMA.
3.6 
The PI and the base-rate fallacy
In Laudan (1981), Larry Laudan critiques No-Miracle style arguments to the ef-
fect that realism constitutes the best explanation for the success of science. The
most widely discussed section of this paper is that entitled 'Approximate truth and
success: the upward path' which presents the argument which has subsequently be-
come known as the 'Pessimistic Induction'. Laudan's declared target in this section
is the claim he calls 'T2' : 'if a theory is explanatorily successful, then it is probably
approximately true' (Laudan (1981), p.33).7 He combats this claim with a series
of historical examples of theories, which he argues are now regarded as not even
approximately true, but which were nonetheless successful at some time in the past.
Laudan thinks that no realist would want to say a theory was approximately true
if its central theoretical terms failed to refer (Laudan (1981), p. 33), and therefore
a number, though not all, of his examples are theories now thought to contain non-
referring terms. Among the examples he lists are the crystalline spheres of ancient
and medieval astronomy, the phlogiston theory of chemistry and the optical ether.
After itemising his list of examples, Laudan says 'I daresay that for every highly
successful theory in the past of science which we now believe to be a genuinely
A version of it is endorsed in Kukla and Walmsley (2004).
'As we saw above, there may be different versions of what constitutes success of a theory.
Laudan poses the argument in terms of explanatory, rather than predictive, success. This will not
affect the points I am making here.
120

referring theory, one could find half a dozen once successful theories which we now
regard as substantially non-referring' (Laudan (1981), p. 35). Thus his claim is that
the proportion of successful theories in the past which were approximately true is
very small. Absent any reason to think we are in a better epistemic situation now
than in the past, we might assume the proportion of approximately true theories
amongst currently successful theories is also small. This should give the realist
pause about inferring from the success of a theory to its truth, according to T2.
Peter Lewis's claim that Laudan's PI is an instance of the base-rate fallacy is
based on the following reconstruction of the argument, P11:
(1) Assume that the success of a theory is a reliable test for truth.
(2) Most current scientific theories are successful.
(3) So most current scientific theories are true.
(4) Then most past scientific theories are false, since they differ from
current theories in significant ways.
(5) Many of these false past theories were successful.
(6) So the success of a theory is not a reliable test for its truth.
(Lewis (2001), p. 373)
Lewis understands a test to be reliable if it has low error rates, in other words if
the rates of false positives and false negatives are both low. In particular, he takes
Laudan to be trying to show that the test is in fact unreliable because the false
positive rate is high rather than low. This would mean that the proportion of false
theories which are successful is high.
Lewis then complains that Laudan's historical evidence does not establish this.
Rather, he claims, Laudan's evidence tells us about the proportion of successful
theories which are false. Lewis takes Laudan's claim to be that in the past, successful
121

false theories outnumber successful theories which are approximately true. However,
Lewis claims, even if this were established, it is quite consistent with a low error
rate. Just as in the disease case, even if the test has a low false positive rate, there
could still be more people without the disease than with it amongst those who
tested positive. This can happen if the disease is sufficiently rare. Similarly, even if
relatively few of the false theories are successful, there could still be more successful
false theories than successful approximately true ones. This could happen if the
truth is sufficiently rare amongst theories. Thus, according to Lewis, to draw the
conclusion that the test has a high error rate and hence is unreliable would be to
commit the base-rate fallacy.
To put this in terms of probabilities, for reliability one needs p(S|-,T) (the
false positive rate) and p(-,SIT) (the false negative rate) to be low. Showing that
p(TIS) is low does not mean that p(SIT) is high. Rather it could be that p(T) is
particularly low.
In my view, Lewis has not established that the PI involves the base-rate fallacy,
because he has incorrectly reconstructed what is going on in Laudan's argument. As
we saw, Laudan's ostensible concern is with the success-to-truth inference expressed
in T2, not with reliability in Lewis's sense. In fact Lewis accepts that 'Laudan's
evidence does indeed undermine (T2) for certain times in the past' (Lewis (2001),
p. 377).
A better way to reconstruct the argument is as a reductio not of the reliability
of success as a test for truth, as in Lewis's version, but of T2. It may be written as
P12:
(1) Assume that if a theory is successful, then it is probably approx-
imately true.
(2) Then, there is a high proportion of currently successful theories
122

which are approximately true.
(3) By the lights of these approximately true current theories, the
proportion of past successful theories which are approximately true is
low (because in many cases, current successful theories postulate radi-
cally different ontology than their predecessors).
(4) By induction from the past to the present, there is a low propor-
tion of current successful theories which are approximately true.
Since (4) contradicts (2), we have a reductio of the assumption that if a theory
is successful, then it is probably approximately true. (3) is established by a sub-
argument, which involves giving a series of counterexamples to retail versions of
the NMA. For example, the retail NMA for Fresnel's theory concludes that since
Fresnel's theory is successful, it is probably approximately true. Laudan argues
that if we assume that the current theory of light is approximately true, then there
is no mechanical ether. Since this key part of Fresnel's theory was non-referring,
Laudan argues that the theory cannot be approximately true, despite its success.
His other counterexamples follow a similar pattern. The overall observation is that
supposedly there are more examples where the past successful theory is false, than
there are where it is approximately true.
This reconstruction is preferable to Lewis's not just because it is more faithful
to Laudan's explicitly declared target. It also means that the assumption up for
reductio is not a premise of the NMA, but its conclusion. The historical evidence
is supposed to tell us about the proportion of successful theories which are approx-
imately true. In probabilistic terms, this bears on p(T|S), the probability that a
theory is approximately true, given that it is successful. Thus, the historical ex-
amples Laudan presents are supposed to undermine the conclusion of the NMA,
which we presented above, by indicating that p(TIS) is low, rather than high. If
123

Laudan's historical evidence has indeed undermined the conclusion of the NMA, it
is unclear why there would be any need to argue backwards from problems with the
conclusion to problems with one particular premise.
Realists have resisted the Pessimistic Induction using several strategies. One is
to question whether past theories are really false in the light of current theories, or
whether common elements between past and current theories can be found. Such
common elements can then be regarded as the part of the theory which got things
approximately right. There have been different suggestions as to what the common
elements are. For some, what is preserved through theory change is 'structure'
(Worrall (1989)). For others, it is those theoretical constituents which 'contribute
essentially to, or "fuel"' the successes (Psillos (2007), p. 110). 
Either way, this
strategy aims to undermine (3) of P12. (3) can also be undermined by denying that
some of Laudan's examples do consist of genuinely 'successful' past theories.
An alternative type of realist response has been to resist the inductive step from
the past to the present (i.e. resist (4) in P12). Some realists have suggested that
perhaps the inductive base is not big enough, or should be restricted in some way,
for instance by confining examples to those of 'mature' sciences. One might also
try to find reasons to think that we are in a better epistemic position now than we
were in the past.
Other comments that Lewis makes suggest that he is actually advocating some
version of this second familar realist strategy. He accepts that Laudan's historical
evidence shows that the proportion of successful theories which are approximately
true, p(T|S), is low for theories in the past. He then argues that the realist could
claim that the difference between the past and present is that in the past false theo-
ries vastly outnumber true theories, whereas this is no longer true. In probabilistic
terms, this would mean that the proportion of theories p(T) which are approxi-
124

mately true is very low in the past, meaning that p(TIS) is also low, whereas in
the present p(T) is not low and so neither is p(TIS) currently. The real question of
course is to address why there is such a change in what proportion of theories are
approximately true and Lewis does not offer any explanations here.
Lewis's argument that the PI commits the base-rate fallacy is based on a mis-
representation of the argument. The inference that he claims to be fallacious is in
fact not part of the PI. Furthermore, Lewis's recommendations to the realist suggest
that he is not so much uncovering a new fault in the logic of the PI, as advocating
a version of a familiar realist rejection of one of the premises.
3.7 
Conclusion
In this chapter I have argued that both the NMA and the PI may be stated in a way
which does not involve the base-rate fallacy. The discussion of the case of the NMA
has helped to clarify the relationship between the retail version of the argument,
which concerns the status of a particular theory, and the wholesale version, which
concerns the reliability of the scientific method overall. The allegation that the
NMA is an instance of the base-rate fallacy has been made for the retail version of
the argument. The worry is that the realist neglects the very low probability that
the theory in question is approximately true. I have argued that the realist does not
neglect this low probability, but rather denies that it is particularly low. The reason
for the denial is that the scientific method is fairly reliable in finding approximately
true theories. The scientific method is taken to be reliable because of the general
success of science as a whole. Thus the justification for taking a higher prior in the
retail NMA rests on the wholesale NMA. I have suggested that the wholesale NMA
has the same form as the retail NMA. Thus, it also needs to be the case that the
125

prior probability in the wholesale argument is not too low. The wholesale NMA,
and hence the retail NMAs also, rest on the assumption that it is not extremely
unlikely to start out with that the scientific method reliably finds approximately
true theories. Denying this assumption is one way that an anti-realist could resist
the NMA. Another is to deny that the prior probabilities are sharp-valued at all.
However, rather than taking issue with the priors in either of these ways, the
anti-realist could deny that success is unlikely when the realist claim is false (this
is to deny premise (ii) in the NMA). The usual way to do this is to offer alternative
explanations for success which don't rely on realist claims. Peter Lewis has been
tempted to think that the PI is also an argument against premise (ii) of the NMA.
The historical evidence presented in the PI ostensibly provides grounds to reject
the conclusion of the NMA. Lewis locates the base-rate fallacy in an inference from
the denial of the conclusion of the NMA to the denial of premise (ii). I claim that
the PI should simply be seen as rejection of the conclusion of the NMA based on
counterexamples. There is no need to see the PI as providing a specific diagnosis
of which premise is at fault.
The possibility that the NMA and the PI were based on a common fallacy
seemed to make it possible to reject them relatively easily, in a way which would
not involve us in the usual travails of engaging with the premises or analysing
concepts like approximate truth and success. I have shown that these arguments
cannot be dismissed on the grounds of faulty form alone. This should return our
focus to the task of deciding whether the premises on which they rest are true.
126

Bibliography
Bernardo, J. M. and A. F. M. Smith (1994). Bayesian Theory. John Wiley and
sons.
Boyd, R. N. (1983). On the current status of the issue of scientific realism. Erken-
ntnis 19, 45-90.
Carey, S. and E. Spelke (1996). Science and core knowledge. Phil. Sci. 63, 515-533.
Copernicus, N. (1878 (1939)). Commentariolus. In E. Rosen (Ed.), Three Coperni-
can Treatises, pp. 55-90. New York: Columbia University Press.
Crick, F. H. C. (1958). On protein synthesis. Symp. Soc. Exp. Biol. XII, 139-163.
Darwin, C. (1859 (1962)). The Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection (6th
ed.). New York: Collier.
Davidson, E. (2006). The Regulatory Genome: Gene Regulatory Networks in De-
velopment and Evolution. Burlington, MA: Academic Press.
Day, T. and H. Kincaid (1994). Putting inference to the best explanation in its
place. Synthese 98, 271-295.
Dowe, D. L., S. Gardner, and G. Oppy (2007). Bayes not bust! Why simplicity is
no problem for Bayesians. Brit. J. Phil. Sci. 58, 709-754.
Earman, J. (1992). Bayes or Bust? A Critical Examination of Bayesian Confirma-
tion Theory. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Einstein, A. (1905). 
On the electrodynamics of moving bodies. 
Ann. der
Physik XVII, 891-921.
Fine, A. (1986). Unnatural attitudes: Realist and instrumentalist attachments to
science. Mind 95, 149-179.
127

Forster, M. (1995). 
Bayes and bust: Simplicity as a problem for a probabilist's
approach to confirmation. Brit. J. Phil. Sci. 46, 399-424.
Forster, M. R. and E. Sober (1994). How to tell when simpler, more unified, or less
ad hoc theories provide more accurate predictions. BJPS 45, 1-35.
Friedman, M. (1974). Explanation and scientific understanding. J. Phil. 71, 5-19.
Gelman, A., J. B. Carlin, H. S. Stern, and D. B. Rubin (2004). Bayesian Data
Analysis. Chapman and Hall.
Giere, R. N. (1996). The scientist as adult. Phil. Sci. 63, 538-541.
Gigerenzer, G. and U. Hoffrage (1995). How to improve Bayesian reasoning without
instruction: Frequency formats. Psych. Rev. 102, 684-704.
Gillies, D. (2001). 
Bayesianism and the fixity of the theoretical framework. In
D. Corfield and J. Williamson (Eds.), Foundations of Bayesianism, pp. 363-380.
Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Glymour, C. (1980a). Explanations, tests, unity and necessity. Nous 14, 31-50.
Glymour, C. (1980b). 
Theory and Evidence. New Jersey: Princeton University
Press.
Glymour, C. (1985). Explanation and realism. In P. Churchland (Ed.), Images of
Science, pp. 173-192. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Godfrey-Smith, P. (2003). Theory and Reality: An Introduction to the Philosophy
of Science. University of Chicago Press.
Gopnik, A. (1996). The scientist as child. Phil. Sci. 63, 485-514.
Griffiths, T. and J. B. Tenenbaum (2007). Two proposals for causal grammars. In
A. Gopnik and L. Schulz (Eds.), Causal Learning: Psychology, Philosophy and
Computation. Oxford University Press.
Harman, G. (1965). The inference to the best explanation. Phil. Rev. 74, 88-95.
Hempel, C. G. (1958). The theoretician's dilemma. In H. Feigl, M. Scriven, and
G. Maxwell (Eds.), Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science II: Concepts,
Theories and the Mind-Body Problem, pp. 37-99. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.
128

Hempel, C. G. (1965). Aspects of Scientific Explanation. New York: Free Press.
Hempel, C. G. and P. Oppenheim (1948). Studies in the logic of explanation. Phil.
Sci. 15, 135-175.
Howson, C. (2000). Hume's Problem: Induction and the Justification of Belief.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Howson, C. and P. Urbach (2006). Scientific Reasoning: The Bayesian Approach.
Chicago and La Salle, Illinois: Open Court.
Huemer, M. (2009). Explanationist aid for the theory of inductive logic. Brit. J.
Phil. Sci. 60, 345-375.
Jaynes, E. T. and G. L. Bretthorst (2003). Probability Theory: The Logic of Science.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Jefferys, W. H. and J. 0. Berger (1992). Ockham's razor and Bayesian analysis.
Amer. Scientist 80, 64-72.
Jeffreys, H. (1961). Theory of Probability. London: Oxford University Press.
Jeffreys, H. (1998). 
Theory of Probability (3rd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University
Press. First edition 1939.
Kahneman, D. and A. Tversky (1972). On prediction and judgment. Oregon Re-
search Bulletin 12.
Kahneman, D. and A. Tversky (1973). On the psychology of prediction. Psych.
Rev. 80, 237-251.
Kass, R. E. (1989). The geometry of asymptotic inference. Statistical Science 4,
188-234.
Kass, R. E. and L. Wasserman (1996). The selection of prior distributions by formal
rules. J. Am. Stat. Ass. 91, 1343-1370.
Kemp, C. (2007). The Acquisition of Inductive Constraints. Ph. D. thesis, MIT.
Kemp, C., T. L. Griffiths, and J. B. Tenenbaum (2004). Discovering latent classes
in relational data. MIT AI Memo 2004-019.
Kemp, C. and J. B. Tenenbaum (2008). The discovery of structural form. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 105, 10687-10692.
129

Kitcher, P. (1976). Explanation, conjunction and unification. J. Phil. 73, 207-212.
Kitcher, P. (1989). Explanatory unification and the causal structure of the world. In
P. Kitcher and W. Salmon (Eds.), Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science:
Scientific Explanation, Volume 13, pp. 410-505. University of Minnesota Press.
Krynski, T. R. and J. B. Tenenbaum (2007). The role of causality in judgment
under uncertainty. J. Expt. Psych. 136, 430-450.
Kuhn, T. S. (1962/1996). 
The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (3rd ed.).
Chicago/London: University of Chicago Press.
Kuhn, T. S. (1977). Objectivity, value judgment and theory choice. In The Essen-
tial Tension: Selected Studies in Scientific Tradition and Change, pp. 320-339.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kukla, A. and J. Walmsley (2004). Predictive success does not warrant belief in
unobservables. In C. Hitchcock (Ed.), Contemporary Debates in Philosophy of
Science, pp. 133-148. Oxford: Blackwell.
Lakatos, I. (1978). 
Falsification and the methodology of scientific research pro-
grammes. In J. Worrall and G. Currie (Eds.), The Methodology of Scientific
Research Programmes, pp. 8-101. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Laudan, L. (1978). Progress and its Problems. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Laudan, L. (1981). A confutation of convergent realism. Philosophy of Science 49,
19-49.
Lavoisier, A. (1783). Reflexions sur le phlogistique. Mdmoires de l'Acadsmie des
Sciences, 505-538.
Leplin, J. (1987). Surrealism. Mind 96, 519-524.
Lewis, D. (1986). A subjectivist's guide to objective chance. In Philosophical Papers
Volume II, Chapter 19, pp. 83-113. Oxford UK: Oxford University Press.
Lewis, P. J. (2001). 
Why the pessimistic induction is a fallacy. Synthese 129,
371-380.
Lipton, P. (2004). 
Inference to the Best Explanation (2nd ed.). London, UK.:
Routledge.
130

MacKay, D. J. C. (2003). Information Theory, Inference and Learning Algorithms.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Magnus, P. D. and C. Callender (2004).
Phil. Sci. 71, 320-338.
Realist ennui and the base-rate fallacy.
Mansinghka, V. K., C. Kemp, J. B. Tenenbaum, and T. Griffiths (2006). Structured
priors for structure learning.
in Artificial Intelligence.
Proceedings of the 22nd conference on uncertainty
McMullin, E. (2008). The virtues of a good theory. In S. Psillos and M. Curd (Eds.),
The Routledge Companion to the Philosophy of Science, pp. 498-508. New York:
Routledge.
Myrvold, W. (1996). Bayesianism and diverse evidence: A reply to Andrew Wayne.
Phil. Sci. 63, 661-665.
Myrvold, W. (2003). A Bayesian account of the virtue of unification. Phil. Sci. 70,
399-423.
Myung, I. J., V. Balasubramanian, and M. A. Pitt (2000). Counting probability
distributions: Differential geometry and model selection. PNAS 97, 11170-11175.
Newton, I. (1687). The Principia: Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Niiniluoto, I. (1998).
1-31.
Truthlikeness:
The third phase.
Brit. Jour. Phil. Sci. 49,
Niiniluoto, I. (1999). Defending abduction. Phil. Sci. 66, S436-S451.
Okasha, S. (2000).
Van Fraassen's critique of inference to the best explanation.
Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci., 691-710.
Popper, K. R. (1934/1959). 
The Logic of Scientific Discovery.
Hutchinson and co. First edition 1934.
London, UK:
Popper, K. R. (1963).
Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scientific
Knowledge. London, UK: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Psillos, S. (1999). Scientific Realism: How Science Tracks Truth. New York: Rout-
ledge.
131

Psillos, S. (2007). The fine structure of inference to the best explanation. Phil. and
Phen. Res. LXXIV, 441-448.
Putnam, H. (1975). 
Mathematics, Matter and Method. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Quine, W. V. (1970/1986). Philosophy of Logic. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer-
sity Press.
Rheticus, G. J. (1539). 
Narratio prima. In E. Rosen (Ed.), Three Copernican
Treatises, pp. 107-196. New York: Columbia University Press.
Rosen, G. (1994). What is constructive empiricism? Phil. Stud. 74, 143-178.
Rosenkrantz, R. D. (1977). Inference, Method and Decision: Towards a Bayesian
Philosophy of Science. Dordrecht, Holland / Boston, USA: Synthese Library.
Salmon, W. (1984). Scientific Explanation and the Causal Structure of the World.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Schupbach, J. N. (2005). On a Bayesian analysis of the virtue of unification. Phil.
Sci. 72, 594-607.
Seidenfeld, T. (1979). 
Why I am not an objective Bayesian; some reflections
prompted by Rosenkrantz. Theory and Decision 11, 413-440.
Sober, E. (1990). Let's razor Ockham's razor. In D. Knowles (Ed.), Explanation
and its Limits, pp. 73-93. UK: Cambridge University Press.
Strevens, M. (2004). Bayesian confirmation theory: Inductive logic, or mere induc-
tive framework? Synthese 141, 365-379.
Tenenbaum, J. B., T. L. Griffiths, and S. Nigoyi (2007). Intuitive theories as gram-
mars for causal inference. In A. Gopnik and L. Schulz (Eds.), Causal Learning:
Psychology, Philosophy and Computation. Oxford University Press.
Tenenbaum, J. B. and S. Nigoyi (2003). Learning causal laws. Proc. 25th Annual
Conf. of Cog. Sci. Soc., 1152-1157.
Thagard, P. R. (1978). The best explanation: Criteria for theory choice. J. Phil. 75,
76-92.
Toulmin, S. E. (1963). Foresight and Understanding. New York: Harper and Row.
132

Toulmin, S. E., R. Rieke, and A. Janik (1984). An Introduction to Reasoning. New
York: Prentice-Hall.
van Fraassen, B. C. (1980). The Scientific Image. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Van Fraassen, B. C. (1989). Laws and Symmetry. Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press.
Wade, M. J. (1978). A critical review of the models of group selection. Quarterly
Rev. Biol. 53, 101-114.
Weisberg, J. (2009). Locating IBE in the Bayesian framework. Synthese 167, 125-
144.
Wellman, H. M. and S. A. Gelman (1992). Cognitive development: Foundational
theories of core domains. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 43, 337-375.
White, R. (2005). Why favour simplicity? Analysis 65.3, 205-210.
Williams, G. C. (1966). 
Adaptation and Natural Selection: A Critique of some
Current Evolutionary Thought. New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Woodward, J. (2003). Scientific explanation. Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy.
Worrall, J. (1989). Structural realism: The best of both worlds? 
Dialectica 43,
99-124.
Worrall, J. (2005). Miracles, pessimism and scientific realism. LSE webpage.
133

