G. Facchini et al., 2024 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.86843.3
1 of 20
Physics of Living Systems
Substrate evaporation drives
collective construction in termites
G. Facchini
, A. Rathery, S. Douady, D. Sillam-Dussès, A. Perna
Life Sciences Department, University of Roehampton, London SW15 4JD, United Kingdom • Service de Chimie et
Physique Non Linéaire, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels 1000, Belgium • Laboratoire Matière et Systèmes
Complexe, Université Paris Cité, Paris 75205 Paris Cedex 13, France • Laboratoire d’Ethologie Expérimentale et
Comparée, LEEC, UR 4443, Université Sorbonne Paris Nord, Villetaneuse 93430, France • Networks Unit, IMT School
for Advanced Studies Lucca, Piazza San Francesco 19, 50100, Lucca, Italy
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_access
Copyright information
Abstract
Termites build complex nests which are an impressive example of self-organization. We
know that the coordinated actions involved in the construction of these nests by multiple
individuals are primarily mediated by signals and cues embedded in the structure of the nest
itself. However, to date there is still no scientific consensus about the nature of the stimuli
that guide termite construction, and how they are sensed by termites. In order to address
these questions, we studied the early building behavior of Coptotermes gestroi termites in
artificial arenas, decorated with topographic cues to stimulate construction. Pellet collections
were evenly distributed across the experimental setup, compatible with a collection
mechanism that is not affected by local topography, but only by the distribution of termite
occupancy (termites pick pellets at the positions where they are). Conversely, pellet
depositions were concentrated at locations of high surface curvature and at the boundaries
between different types of substrate. The single feature shared by all pellet deposition regions
was that they correspond to local maxima in the evaporation flux. We can show analytically
and we confirm experimentally that evaporation flux is directly proportional to the local
curvature of nest surfaces. Taken together, our results indicate that surface curvature is
sufficient to organize termite building activity, and that termites likely sense curvature
indirectly through substrate evaporation. Our findings reconcile the apparently discordant
results of previous studies.
eLife assessment
This valuable study investigates the environmental drivers behind termite
construction, focusing, in particular, on pellet deposition behavior, with the
conclusion that termites likely sense curvature indirectly through substrate
evaporation. The findings reconcile discrepancies between previous studies through
experimental and computational approaches. While the strength of the evidence
supporting these claims is compelling, the authors do not discuss how their results
affect our understanding of insect nest construction or animal-built structures more
broadly.
Reviewed Preprint
Revised by authors after peer
review.
About eLife's process
Reviewed preprint version 3
February 8, 2024 (this version)
Reviewed preprint version 2
October 12, 2023
Reviewed preprint version 1
May 15, 2023
Posted to preprint server
February 21, 2023
Sent for peer review
February 17, 2023

G. Facchini et al., 2024 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.86843.3
2 of 20
Introduction
Termites are known for their ability to build some of the most complex nests and shelters found in
nature (Hansell, 2005     ; Perna and Theraulaz, 2017     ). The construction of these structures is
achieved through the collective actions of multiple individual workers (up to thousands or
millions in large termite colonies) each performing the collection, transportation and deposition of
elementary pellets. In order to produce functionally meaningful structures, it is essential that all
these different workers operate in a coordinated, coherent way, each continuing the work started
by their colony mates, rather than undoing it.
Termites rely on individual memory and proprioception to guide their behavior (see e.g.
Bardunias and Su, 2009a), but these individual abilities are considered not sufficient to explain
nest construction more generally. Instead, it is believed that building activity is largely guided by
signals and cues embedded directly in the structure of the nest itself, through a regulation
principle identified for the first time by Grassé, who named it stigmergy (Grassé, 1959     ;
Camazine et al., 2001     ). In stigmergy-mediated nest-building, the probability for an individual
insect to pick or to drop a pellet at a particular location is modulated by stimuli encountered at
that location, such as the geometry of a growing pillar, or the presence of a chemical signal
released by the queen or by other workers.
However, several years since Grassé’s early observations, there is still not a consensus on the exact
nature of the stigmergic stimuli involved in regulating termite construction. Pheromones might be
implicated in this regulation. Bruinsma (1979     ) found evidence for the role of a building
pheromone released by the queen in the construction of the royal chamber of the termite
Macrotermes subhyalinus. Computer simulation studies, aimed at reproducing the building
behavior of termites and ants, also assume the existence of a “cement pheromone” added to the
building material (Khuong et al., 2011     , 2016     ; Heyde et al., 2021     ). In these simulation
studies, the main and essential role of a cement pheromone is to allow initial pellet depositions to
continue growing by differentiating them from regions of pellet collection, through differential
pheromone marking. Experimental evidence in support for such cement pheromone in termite
construction is weak: while individual workers can recognize freshly deposited nest material, they
could simply be attracted to an unspecific colony odor while exhibiting the same behavioral
patterns that they would exhibit also in the absence of chemical marking (Petersen et al., 2015     ).
In other words, it is not clear if cement pheromones are required to drive termite building
activities, or unspecific chemical cues would be sufficient, and it is also unclear if chemical stimuli
modulate the building behavior of termites directly, or only indirectly, by affecting their density of
presence.
Recent experimental studies by various authors have indicated that morphological and
environmental features associated with some nest structures are strong stimuli that could by
themselves guide termite construction activity. These include elevation (Fouquet et al., 2014     ),
humidity gradients (Soar et al., 2019     ), and surface curvature (Calovi et al., 2019     ). The strong
attractiveness of digging sites for termite aggregation means that in all these studies digging and
deposition actions mostly come in pairs, which prevents us from identifying the genuine cues for
pellet collection and deposition (Bardunias and Su, 2009b, 2010; Fouquet et al., 2014     ; Green et
al., 2017     ). For example, in Calovi et al. (2019     ) termites are shown to preferentially aggregate
in concave regions of a surface and they would simply rearrange nest material (both digging and
building) at those locations. Even if digging sites provide a template for pellet deposition (Fouquet
et al., 2014     ; Green et al., 2017     ), and for this reason digging and construction often co-localize
in space, it is clear that building and digging cannot completely overlap, or the two activities
would simply cancel one the effect of the other: termites must be able to differentiate between the
sites of these contrasting activities through digging- or building-specific cues.

G. Facchini et al., 2024 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.86843.3
3 of 20
Some of the published computer simulation models of termite nest-building do not require a
specific construction pheromone and assume instead that termites respond to cues naturally
embedded in the nest structure itself. For example, the model proposed in Ocko et al. (2019     )
indicates that a generic “colony odor” undergoing advection and diffusion within the nest could
provide a sufficient cue for determining the overall mound shape, so leaving a possible role of a
construction pheromone only for the structuring of small scale nest features such as pillars and
walls. Facchini et al. (2020     ) further proposed a model in which also small scale nest features can
be produced in the absence of a construction pheromone, by assuming that termites respond to
the local curvature of these emerging nest features. While these models reproduce a number of
structures observed in real termite nests, the building rules implemented in the models are not
empirically validated from direct observations of the building behavior of termite workers. As it
stands, there is no conclusive evidence that the rules implemented in these models reflect the
actual nest-building strategies of termites.
Here we aim to test whether geometric and physical cues embedded in the nest material are
sufficient to explain termite construction. Specifically we want to disentangle how elevation,
surface curvature, and substrate evaporation affect pellet deposition and collection. We do this by
combining three different approaches. (i) We perform building experiments in which populations
of termites are confronted with pre-existing building cues such as pillars, walls, and pre-made
pellets of building material unmarked with pheromones. Using video-tracking, we monitor the
presence of individual termites and we implement high throughput video-analysis to detect the
time and location of individual pellet collection and deposition events. These experiments allow us
to test the specific role played by each cue on stimulating pellet collection, pellet deposition, or
termite aggregation. (ii) By running a computational model of nest building (Facchini et al.,
2020     ) directly on the same structures that we provide to termites (obtained from 3D scans of
our experimental setups), we can test exactly what building patterns we should expect under the
simple assumption that termite depositions are driven by the local curvature of nest surfaces as
the only construction cue. (iii) Finally, we develop a “chemical garden” experiment, on identical
setups to those offered to termites, that allow us to visualize the sites of stronger water
evaporation on the surface of the built structure. Overall, our approach allows us to demonstrate,
both analytically and experimentally, the relation between deposition probability, surface
curvature, and evaporation.
Results
Below, we report the observations of de novo building experiments performed with small
experimental groups of Coptotermes gestroi termites confronted with a thin disk of humid clay
covered with pre-made pellets unmarked with pheromones and decorated with pre-prepared clay
features. In the first series of experiments the pre-prepared features were two pillars at the center
of the clay disk as shown in figure 1     .
Pellet collection activity was distributed homogeneously all over the clay disk that we provided at
the center of the experimental arena. Conversely, deposition activity was concentrated at the tips
of pre-existing pillars, and along the edges of the clay disk itself. Figure 2A      reports the heatmap
of cumulative depositions P (D) and collections P (C) for one experiment (E66) with two pillars as
topographic cues. A snapshot of the same experiment is reported in figure 3A     . In figure 2B     ,
we also report the same results for five experiments for which our analyses were most reliable
because of the absence of spontaneous digging. Across all experiments, collections were widely
distributed across the clay disk (i.e. where initial pellets are) while depositions were peaked at
radii R ∼ 0.4 cm and R ∼ 2.5 cm which correspond to the top of pillars and to the edges of the
experimental arena. Thus, termites do not show a preference for where they collect pellets while
they target specific regions when depositing, which suggests that those regions must express a
strong stimulus for deposition.

G. Facchini et al., 2024 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.86843.3
4 of 20
G. Facchini et al., 2024 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.86843.3
4 of 20
Figure 1.
Sketch of the experimental setup (left) and snapshot of one experiment (E66) before termites were added to the setup
(right). The white marks on the picture give the scale of the setup, with the distance between successive marks being 1, 3,
and 5 cm.
Figure 2.
Top: (A) cumulative heatmaps of deposition (P (D); red) and collection activity (P (C); green) normalized by their respective
mean values for one experiment (E66), colorbars are the same as in panel (E); (B) cumulative depositions (top) and
collections (bottom) per unit area as a function of the Petri dish radius for experiments E58, E63, E65, E66, and E76, all
histograms have been normalized and sum up to 1; (C) comparison among experimental depositions (in red), surface
curvature (in blue) shown in Fig. 3C     , and depositions predicted by simulations (black) shown in Fig. 3C     , all the quantities
are computed along the radial cut shown in panel (A), depositions are normalized by their maximum value and curvature is in
mm−1; (D) cumulative occupancy heatmap normalized by its mean value for E66; (E) depositions (P (D|O); red) and collections
(P (C|O); green) conditional to cumulative normalized occupancy for E66.

G. Facchini et al., 2024 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.86843.3
5 of 20
G. Facchini et al., 2024 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.86843.3
5 of 20
Figure 3.
Top row: snapshots of a building experiment with “pillars” cue (E66) (A) and a building experiment with “wall” cue (E78, in B).
Bottom row: snapshots of 3D simulations initiated with copies of the experimental setup E66 (C,D) and E78 (E,F) in which nest
growth is entirely determined by the local surface curvature (based on our previously described model (Facchini et al.,
2020     )). Snapshots C and E refer to t=0, D and F refer to t=9 (dimensionless). The color map corresponds to the value of the
mean curvature at the interface air-nest. White indicates convex regions and black indicates concave regions. The scale bars
correspond to 1 cm.

G. Facchini et al., 2024 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.86843.3
6 of 20
To validate this hypothesis, we analyzed how building activity is related to the termite occupancy
in the experimental setup. In figure 2D     , we report the normalized cumulative occupancy of
termites P (O) in the experimental setup. Occupancy is high close to the pillars and to the Petri dish
walls, has intermediate values within the clay disk, and drops at the top of the pillars and right
outside of the clay disk (i.e. precisely where deposits are recorded). To estimate how position and
building activity are related, we report the conditional probabilities of depositing P (D|O) and
collecting P (C|O) given termite occupancy. They are defined as the ratio between P (D) to P (O)
and P (C) to P (O) as reported in figure 2E     , and explained in section S.III of the Supplementary
Information (SI). The probability P (D|O) reaches values 10 times larger than P (C|O) which
confirms that our topographic cues and the clay disk edges specifically drive early building
activity.
Focusing on topographic cues, we observe that pillar tips are the most curved part of the
topography but also the most elevated one. In order to disentangle the respective roles of
curvature and elevation in guiding pellet deposition, we considered a different setup where a thin
wall replaced the two pillars in the center of the arena as shown in figure 3B     . This way, the top
edge of the wall is still a region of both high elevation and high surface curvature but elevation is
constant everywhere while curvature has local maxima at the tips. We report that the top edge
attracted many deposits, but pellet deposition focused at the wall tips pointing to curvature, rather
than elevation, as the dominant cue in 7 out of 11 experiments (SI table S1).
We wanted to further test to what extent the patterns that we observe are consistent with termites
only responding to local substrate curvature, as opposed to responding also to other cues. To this
end, we ran a model of nest construction that we have previously developed (Facchini et al.,
2020     ) using 3D scans of the experimental arena – before the introduction of termites – as a
starting template for the simulations (see Materials and Methods for simulation details). The
simulation model implements one single construction rule which is a building response to local
surface curvature and as such informs us about the possible building outcome that we could
expect under the simplified assumption that construction is driven by surface curvature only, in
the absence of any other cues. We should note that our model is phenomenological, and having
one single parameter -that broadly defines the scale at which curvature is sensedis not intended to
predict quantitative details such as the speed of the building process, or fine details of the shape of
pillars and other structures. These simulations yielded the results shown in figure 3C-F     .
Experiments and simulations show a fair agreement as pellet depositions and initial growth
concentrate in the same regions which are those where the surface is the most convex, as depicted
in white in figures 3C-F     . To make our comparison more readable in Fig. 2C      we report a
radial cut of the deposition heatmap (red), the surface curvature (blue) and the amount of
depositions predicted by the simulations (black; see SI section S.VII for technical details of this
analysis). The three curves show a good agreement and they all are peaked close to R = 4 mm
which corresponds to the pillar tips. The qualitative agreement between experimental results and
curvature-based simulations supports the idea that, at least on a first approximation, surface
curvature alone is a sufficient cue that could guide termite depositions.
The edges of the clay disk were not included in the simulations because we could not characterize
them properly with our scanning device (see SI, section S.III). However, in additional experiments
with no topographic cues (SI, Fig. S4) most depositions happened precisely at the edges of the clay
disk. It is possible that the very small edge of the clay disk provided a sufficient stimulus, in terms
of local curvature, to elicit pellet depositions. However, the curvature cue was likely very weak at
those locations as edges were smoothed out to gently match the surface of the Petri dish. Thus, we
expect this region to bear a cue other than curvature (or elevation) which is also attractive for
pellet depositions.

G. Facchini et al., 2024 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.86843.3
7 of 20
Trying to identify this additional building cue, we recall that the clay disk is maintained constantly
humid. The edges of the disk arena mark then the limit between a humid region and the
surrounding dry periphery. Also, the clay tone remained unchanged during experiments which
suggests that moisture is constantly evaporating from the clay disk while being replenished in
water from below, and that the overall process is stationary. To confirm this hypothesis, we
measured the value of humidity and temperature both in the central and peripheral regions. We
observed a net increase in humidity and a net decrease in temperature coming from outside to
inside the clay disk which is the footprint of evaporation (SI, Fig. S5). Inside and outside the clay
disk, both quantities remained relatively stable indicating that the system is roughly in a steady
state. Evaporation is a complex process, but close enough to the evaporating substrate, humidity
transport happens by diffusion (Langmuir, 1918     ; Hisatake et al., 1993     ) and it is hence fully
determined by the humidity gradient. In agreement with previous studies (Soar et al., 2019     ), we
can show with scaling arguments that our termites live in such a viscous boundary layer (see SI,
section S.IX). We can hence focus our attention on this specific region without loss of generality.
For example, the humidity transition at the edges of the clay disk implies that the humidity
gradient must be pronounced there and evaporation with it. In the diffusive regime, the
evaporation flux is directly proportional to the surface curvature of the evaporating substrate (see
SI, section S.VIII for a mathematical proof). As a demonstration for our topographic cues, we have
computed the steady state solution for the humidity field h in a cubic volume bounded by pillars
and wall experimental templates at the bottom. In the diffusive regime, this corresponds to solving
the Laplace equation Δh = 0 while imposing a relative humidity h = 100% at the bottom boundary,
and h = 70% at the top boundary (see S.VI in the SI for details) which was the average value of h in
our experimental room. In figures 4A      and 4B      we have reported the contour plot of the
magnitude of the humidity gradient |∇h| for this stationary solution. We can observe that the
humidity gradient is maximum at the tip of pillars and at the lateral tips of the wall top edge, that
are the most curved parts in the two different cues (see figures 3C      and 3E      for a direct
comparison). As such, curvature and evaporation are two completely interchangeable stimuli
everywhere except at the edge of the clay disk, where the transition between clay and perspex
material corresponds to a strong humidity gradient in spite of weak surface curvature. We then
propose that evaporation flux can explain by itself the deposition patterns observed in our
experiments.
To support this hypothesis we designed a chemical garden experiment that allows us to visualize
the evaporation field in our setup. We prepared identical experimental setups as those used with
termites, but this time we did not put any termites in the experimental arena. Instead we replaced
the deionized water that was used to humidify the clay in the termite experiments with a
saturated saline solution of water and NaHCO3. In this configuration, water evaporation is
accompanied by the deposition of salt, which allows to build a chart of evaporation flux. Typical
results are shown in figures 4C      and 4D     . Salt deposits appear in the form of white traces or
bumpy deformations of the clay surface. Remarkably the distribution of the salt deposits matches
very closely the regions of highest building activity by termites, both being more pronounced at
the edge of the clay disk and at the top of topographic cues (pillar and walls). This result indicates
that termite deposition probability covaries with the evaporation flux, which is consistent with
our hypothesis of evaporation as the strongest cue for deposition. One may notice that salt traces
are less pronounced on the wall (Fig. 4D     ) than on the pillars (Fig. 4C     ). This is consistent with
the amplitude of the humidity gradient in a stationary diffusive regime as shown in figures 4B     
and 4A      respectively: the maximum amplitude of the gradient is weaker in the wall case. Also,
one observes that while having its maxima at the lateral tips (|∇h| ∼ 0.13 mm−1), the humidity
gradient is strong all over the top edge of the wall (|∇h| ∼ 0.10 mm−1). Possibly, this could explain
why in the case of wall cues there is a comparatively much larger variability in the patterns of
termite construction (see SI Fig. S3). When termites are confronted with the ‘wall’ cue they are
likely to start pellet depositions at the wall tips, but initial pellet depositions started at other

G. Facchini et al., 2024 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.86843.3
8 of 20
G. Facchini et al., 2024 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.86843.3
8 of 20
Figure 4.
Top row: contour of the humidity gradient ∇h obtained solving the Laplace equation Δh = 0 in a cubic domain with a humid
bottom boundary h = 100% (in brown) which is mapped from 3D scans of the experimental setup in E66 (A) and E78 (B). At
the top boundary h is fixed to h = 70% which was the average value of humidity in our experimental room. Note that h is the
relative humidity, thus the magnitude of the humidity gradient |∇h| is measured in mm−1, i.e |∇h| = 0.1 mm−1 means a
humidity variation of 10% over 1 mm. Each contour corresponds to a variation of 0.015 mm−1. Pillar tips are associated with a
strong humidity gradient; the top of the wall is also associated with a strong humidity gradient, although not as strong as at
the pillar tips. Also note that humidity gradient at the top corners of the wall is 30% stronger than on the rest of the top edge.
Bottom row: snapshots of chemical garden experiments initiated with “pillars” cue (C), and with “wall” cue (D). All the scale
bars correspond to 1 cm.

G. Facchini et al., 2024 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.86843.3
9 of 20
locations on the top edge do occur. Whatever the initial choice, depositions are then preserved and
reinforced by positive feed-back mechanisms which can lead to tightly selected deposition
patterns also in the case of the ‘wall’ cue.
Note that, in the picture of depositions being attracted by evaporation flux, depositions observed
at the edges of the clay disk, also agree with our previous growth model driven only by curvature
(Facchini et al., 2020     ). In fact, the edge of the clay disk is almost flat (weak convexity) for a
termite walking across, but it is also a thin cusp (high convexity) of humid material which is
strongly evaporating, similarly to what happens at the edge of a liquid drop and causes the
formation of well known coffee stains (Deegan et al., 1997     ). For a better comprehension, this
apparent contrast is explained in the sketch of figure S7 (SI).
Discussion
Several experimental studies have tried to identify the cues that mediate termite construction,
alternately indicating elevation (Fouquet et al., 2014     ), digging activity (Green et al., 2017     ),
humidity transitions (Soar et al., 2019     ; Bardunias et al., 2020     ), or surface curvature (Calovi et
al., 2019     ) as the relevant stimuli to drive pellet depositions. However, the fact that termites
often concentrate their building activity in the immediate proximity of digging sites (Fouquet et
al., 2014     ; Green et al., 2017     ; Bardunias and Su, 2009b, 2010) did not allow identifying which
of these stimuli were specific digging and building cues, or simply generic cues for termite activity
and aggregation. The cues themselves identified by different studies were different, leaving it
unclear which, if any, were the relevant ones sensed by termites.
Here, by providing loose and unmarked pellets, we were able to prompt building activity without
digging and to quantify collections and depositions as separate actions. We observed that all
pellets are progressively displaced and that collections happened in a relatively random fashion.
On the contrary, depositions concentrated at specific parts of the experimental arena which are
the tips of the topographic cues and the edges of the clay disk. The conditional probability of
deposition given termite occupancy is high there, indicating that those regions precisely drive
termite depositions rather than generically attracting termite aggregation. The alternative use of
pillars and walls as topographic cues allowed us to disentangle the role of elevation and curvature
and pointed towards curvature as the most attractive stimulus for deposition. By simulating the
building process with a model in which construction activity is driven by curvature only (Facchini
et al., 2020     ), we obtained a good match with experimental results, indicating that curvature
alone is sufficient to explain pellet depositions on topographic cues (pillars and walls).
Surface curvature is a powerful morphogenetic organizer for 3D structure formation as it can
drive the formation of pillars, walls and convoluted surfaces (Facchini et al., 2020     ), all features
that are observed in the nests of various termite species. Here, we are able to demonstrate a close
coupling between surface curvature and the flux of evaporation from a surface, so providing a
link to a possible stimulus sensed directly by termites. This also allows us to reconcile previous
discordant results pointing alternately to curvature (Calovi et al., 2019     ; Facchini et al., 2020     )
or to humidity (Soar et al., 2019     ; Bardunias et al., 2020     ) as the relevant stimuli. The idea itself
of a relation between curvature and evaporation is not new, as already a century ago, Langmuir
(1918     ) showed that close enough to the surface of a water droplet, evaporation scales as the
inverse of the radius (i.e. as the mean curvature) of the droplet (SI, section S.VIII.A). Our system is
more complex than isolated spheres but our calculations in S.IX (SI) show that a relation between
evaporation and curvature still holds at the termite scale.
As a further, direct, confirmation of our hypothesis, our chemical garden experiments clearly
show that the correspondence between surface curvature and evaporation flux is relevant in our
experimental setup.

G. Facchini et al., 2024 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.86843.3
10 of 20
It is well known that termites are particularly sensitive to the humidity of their environment,
because their small size and soft cuticle put them in constant danger of desiccation. Coptotermes
termites in particular are wetwood termites that can only survive in high-humidity environments
such as moist wood or soil. For example, in laboratory experiments Zukowski and Su (2017     ), C.
formosanus termites died within a few days when maintained at 72.9% or less relative humidity,
but survived well when humidity was 98%. It is hence not surprising that they can sense and
respond to humidity with their behavior, for example (Arab and Costa-Leonardo, 2005     ) tested
the digging behavior of Coptotermes gestroi in wet sand with different levels of moisture and
showed that tunnel length and the number of secondary branches changed when soil moisture
increased from 5% to 15%. Coptotermes gestroi were also able to discriminate between chambers
with different relative humidity and, after 12 hours, almost all termites were in the highest
humidity chamber (98%), leaving the other chambers with 75% or less relative humidity empty
(Gautam and Henderson, 2011     ). These results (which are similar also to other results testing
termite response to chambers with different soil moisture) indicate that -given a sufficient amount
of timetermites can detect a difference of humidity from 75% to 98% over a spatial scale of
centimeters. Recent field and laboratory experiments have shown that humidity can affect termite
behavior also in the context of building activity (Carey et al., 2019     ), by triggering nest expansion
events (Bardunias et al., 2020     ; Carey et al., 2021     ). Even more interestingly, Soar et al.
(2019     ) showed that moisture flux affects termite building activity (both in terms of pellet
collection and deposition). Our experiments confirm this trend and suggest that moisture
variations not only prompt or inhibit termite building activity, but constitute a local blueprint for
construction.
One may question if the humidity gradient in our experimental setup was strong enough for
termites to sense it. Below, we use simple arguments to show that this condition was very likely
fulfilled. Indeed, one can estimate that the value of the humidity gradient far from the disk edges
and the topographic cues was |∇h|0 = δh/δ ∼ 0.15 mm−1, where δ = 2 mm is the thickness of the
diffusive boundary layer (see S.IX, SI), and δh = 30% is the humidity variation between the clay
disk surface and the experimental room.
Then, using the qualitative results of chemical gardens shown in 4C and 4D, one can conclude that
|∇h|0 represents an estimation of the lower boundary of the humidity gradient experienced by
termites in our experimental setup. Using diffusive simulations reported in figures 4A      and
4B      (see also S.VI SI), one can then quantify the relative importance of the humidity gradient at
the tips of the topographic cues as 10 times larger, which gives an upper boundary |∇h|max ∼ 1
mm1.
As our termites are millimetre size, the estimated lower and upper boundary correspond to
humidity variation of 10 to 100% across a distance not larger than their body length. We then
expect that such variations must be sensed by termites, as they are larger than those that
Coptotermes gestroi termites were shown to be able to discriminate over much larger spatial
scales in the experiments reviewed above.
Our experiments do not support a role for a putative cement pheromone, added by termites to the
building material, which would stimulate pellet depositions. In fact, construction occurred reliably
on our provided building cues, even if they only comprised fresh clay and sterilized pellets with no
pheromone markings. Our simulations further indicate that qualitatively similar construction
results can be obtained without assuming a role for construction pheromone. We can hence
exclude the influence of a cement pheromone, at least during the early choice of the deposition
sites, in agreement with recent experiments by other authors (Fouquet et al., 2014     ; Petersen et
al., 2015     ; Green et al., 2017     ). We should point to the fact, however, that in our experiments
the building substrate was constantly moist throughout the entire duration of the experiments. It
is possible that in some occurrences of nest building behavior, including in termites’ natural
environment, moisture may not constantly replenish the porous wall of the growing structure. We

G. Facchini et al., 2024 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.86843.3
11 of 20
suggest that under these conditions the evaporation flux is maintained by the humidity that is
naturally embedded in recently dropped pellets, which makes the construction process self-
sustainable and is consistent with the hypothesis of a viscous boundary layer extending with
termite activity (Soar et al., 2019     ). In practice, it would be very hard to distinguish between such
a scenario and one which involves a putative cement pheromone added directly to manipulated
pellets by termites. More generally, while we do not rule out a possible role of pheromones in
termite building behavior (mediating for instance termite aggregation), we have shown that
pheromones are not necessary to explain the early deposition patterns that we see in our
experiments.
In this study, we have focused on understanding how termites respond to well-controlled
predefined stimuli. However, collective nest construction is a dynamic process and the deposition
of new pellets by termites constantly changes the shape and the porosity of the evaporating
substrate, potentially affecting nest growth through positive or negative feedback. Recent studies
have shown that termites can control the size of the pellets used for nest construction, and
indirectly also the porosity of nest walls (Zachariah et al., 2017     ). In turn, substrate porosity is
known to play an important role for ventilation and drainage of the nest (Singh et al., 2019     ) and
the moisture content of pellets can also affect the mechanical properties of the mound itself
(Zachariah et al., 2020     ). In relation to our own experiments, however, our scaling analyses (SI
S.IX) indicate that our conclusions are relatively robust to changes in substrate porosity and
moisture content. For example, porosity only controls the time scale of water uptake from the
reservoir by capillary rise, which must be small enough to keep the clay disk hydrated, and this
assumption remains valid up to mm-size pores in the new construction. Similarly, for local
curvature, the addition of new pellets to regions of high convexity is likely to make the surface less
smooth than the initial topography, and such additional “roughness” can only increase the effect of
focusing evaporation at those locations.
Previous work by Calovi and collaborators (2019) had pointed to an effect of surface curvature on
termite construction behavior. While our two studies emphasize the same point, we should note
that our results and the results reported in Calovi et al. (2019     ) are not entirely consistent,
because in our experiments, pellet depositions are attracted by convex features, while in Calovi et
al. (2019     ) termite activity was concentrated at regions of maximum concavity. As this previous
study did not distinguish digging from deposition activity, we believe that their measure is a
correlation between concavity and digging activity, not building. The fact that concave regions
should attract digging activity is predicted by our model (SI, section S.V) and was visible also in our
experiments where concavity (Fig. 3D     ) attracted digging at the base of wall-like cues (SI, Fig. S3).
Note that such behavior can be interpreted as termites digging along the humidity gradient, i.e.
toward the most humid region. Accordingly, in many preliminary experiments we observed that,
in the absence of loose pellets, spontaneous digging usually started right above the hydration holes
of our setup (Fig. 3B     .)
In our study, we have outlined a general mechanism capable of organizing termite building
activity: termites would focus pellet depositions at regions of strong evaporation flux. In turn,
evaporation flux co-varies with surface curvature, which implies that the building rule is
embedded in the shape itself of the nest internal structure.
One may wonder to what extent the simple building rule that we identify here generalizes to
explain the nest-building behavior of larger termite colonies in the field, and whether the same
building rules are shared across different termite species. The nests built by termites of different
genera or species show a large diversity of forms (see e.g. Grassé, 1984     ), which indicates that the
nest-building process should also be different. Arguably, the nest building behavior of termites,
shaped by millions of years of evolution, must rely on more complex “building rules” than the
simple ones highlighted here. Nonetheless, it is interesting to notice that the nests built by all
species rely on a small number of architectural elements such as pillars and branching surfaces.

G. Facchini et al., 2024 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.86843.3
12 of 20
We can imagine that, perhaps, simple variation of the basic building pattern described here,
coupled with variation of the substrate evaporation itself (e.g. under the effect of air currents, the
properties of the building material, and heat produced by the colony itself) would still be sufficient
to explain a large part of termite nest diversity. Ocko and collaborators (2019) have already shown
that a single mechanism can be responsible for determining the overall shape of nests made by
various species: perhaps an equally simple general mechanism can account for the even larger
variation of internal nest structure.
Beyond the field of termite architecture, many other biological structures, particularly at the
microscopic scale, present convoluted structures that appear via tip growth and branching
phenomena. Similar to termite nests, the morphogenesis of these structures may rely on the
coupling between the local curvature of the growing substrate and the localization of cues that
stimulate the growth. Generally, there is a growing consensus today on the fact that local
curvature can affect cell migrations, cell patterning and tissue growth typically by direct
mechanical sensing through the cytoskeleton (Pieuchot et al., 2018     ; Callens et al., 2023     ).
However, analog mechanisms to those described here can also explain tip growth and branching
in mammal lungs, Clément et al. (2012     ), and reconnections in the gastrovascular networks of
jellyfishes Song et al. (2023     ), the common feature being that curvature guidance acts indirectly,
by focusing the gradient of a diffusing quantity that promotes the substrate growth.
Methods and Materials
In our experiments, we monitor the building behavior of small experimental groups of
Coptotermes gestroi termites confronted with a thin layer of clay and pre-prepared clay features.
We image experimental trials for their entire duration and we analyze termite activity with
custom made digital image processing routines. In parallel we run two types of control
experiments without termites to obtain a non-intrusive estimation of temperature, humidity and
evaporation field in our experimental setup. These experiments are described at the end of this
section.
Experimental setup
The experimental setup is sketched in Fig. 1      (left) and can be described as follows. A fixed
quantity (2.8 g) of red humid clay paste is flattened to form a disk (ø 5 cm) and placed in the center
of a Petri dish (ø 8.5 cm). A system of 40 small holes (ø 0.8 mm) drilled in the bottom of the Petri
dish keeps the clay paste hydrated sucking distilled water from a patch of wet cotton below the
Petri dish. Two types of topographic cues molded in clay, can then be added at the center of the
disk: 2 pillars 6 mm high and 8 mm apart or 1 wall 6 mm high and 12 mm long. The pillars are
obtained pressing clay in a small eppendorf tube. The walls are obtained by smoothing a wedge of
clay generated by rolling out a piece of clay in the dihedron between the table and the edge of a
plastic ruler. Finally, in a circular band (1 cm large) halfway between the clay disk center and its
edge, we add 0.12 g of sparse pellets of gray clay. To ensure the good size distribution, pellets are
obtained from previous experiments and sterilized at 100 ?C for one hour to remove any possible
chemical marker. Before the start of each experiment, a surface scan of the setup was taken using
a NextEngine 3D Scanner ULTRA HD.
Termite colonies
Experimental groups were collected from a master captive colony of Coptotermes gestroi hosted at
the LEEC laboratory (Villetaneuse, France) in a tropical room with constant temperature (26±2 °C)
and relative humidity (70±10%), imitating their natural environment (see SI section S.I for a
description of the termite species). Workers were attracted with humid towels and gently shoveled
with a pencil on a plastic tray. Groups of 50 workers and 5 soldiers were then formed using an

G. Facchini et al., 2024 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.86843.3
13 of 20
insect forceps and added to an experimental setup. While the procedure might be potentially
stressful to termites, mortality was negligible throughout all the experiments. We ran 16
experiments with pillar cues, 11 with a wall and 6 with no cues, as summarized in table S1 (SI). An
example of the structures spontaneously built by these termites within the plastic barrel which
hosts the captive colony is shown in figure S1 (SI).
Recordings
A led lamp constantly lightened the setup from above. Top view pictures of the experimental
setups were taken at regular intervals of 20 seconds during at least 24 hours using a reflex camera
Nikon D7500. By subtracting the initial images and applying a median filter, we get rid of termites
and the background as detailed in SI section S.III. Then, the color contrast between the clay disk
and the pellets allowed identifying where pellets were collected (dark spots) and deposited (bright
spots) and building the heatmap of both activities as a function of time. A subset of the
experiments was recorded continuously using a 12 Mp usb-Camera (MER2-1220-32U3C) at 7fps.
Videos were then analyzed using the open-source tracking tool Trex (Walter and Couzin, 2021     )
and the occupancy frequency of termites computed in each part of the experimental setup.
Temperature and humidity measurements
Temperature and humidity were measured using a commercial temperature-humidity probe
(DHT22) connected to a Raspberry Pi. To not interfere with termites behavior, our temperature
and humidity measurements were performed in a control experiment which was prepared using
the same protocol as the others but where no termites were added. The probe was kept at two
different positions that are i) at center of the experimental setup sitting on the clay disk and ii) at
the periphery of the Petri dish, sitting on the bare plastic.
Growth model
Our growth model is the same described in Facchini et al. (2020     ) which consists in one single
non-linear phase field equation:
where the scalar f takes values between 0 and 1 and identifies the presence of the nest wall (f < 0.5)
or the empty space (f > 0.5), and n = ∇f/|∇f| is the normal vector at the wall surface f = 0.5. One
recognizes a growth term proportional to the surface curvature −∇ ⋅ n/2 which translates our main
hypothesis on construction behavior, and a curvature diffusion term Δ∇⋅ n which mimics the
smoothing behavior shown by termites (see Facchini et al., 2020     , and citations inside) and the
fact that there is a cutoff to the size of pellets added by termites. Finally, the non linear prefactor f
(1−f) restricts the growth process to the wall surface, which is also coherent with termites
behavior. Note that the simulations shown here are obtained approximating ∇ ⋅ n ≈ Δf as in
Facchini et al. (2020     ). The parameter d selects the typical length scale of the expressed pattern
and the cutoff scale below which features are smoothed out. At present, our model is still
phenomenological and we cannot provide an estimation of d based on the experimental
measurements of a limited set of physical quantities. Thus, we tune the parameter d to select a
typical length scale which matches that of our topographic cues, that is the thickness of our clay
pillars and walls (3 mm), which in turn was chosen to be of the same order of the termite size.
Our simulation are initialized using 3D copies of the experimental setups at time zero that are
obtained as it follows. First, we obtain a surface scan of the experimental setup in the form of a 3D
mesh using a surface 3D scanner (see section S.III in the Supplementary Information). Then, we
interpolate the mesh on a 3D regular grid and assign the initial value of the scalar field f, setting f =
1 for the points that are below the clay surface and f = 0 for the points that are above the clay
surface. Finally, a Gaussian filter is applied to unsharp the transition of f at the surface. Similarly

G. Facchini et al., 2024 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.86843.3
14 of 20
to our previous publication, we also assume that the voxels where f > 0.85 at t = 0 cannot change in
the following. This translates the fact that structures built by termites are not observed to be
rearranged after they have dried and that in our experiments termites are prompted to collect
pellets instead of digging.
Numerical simulations of the humidity field
In order to characterize the humidity field around the building substrate, we implemented
simulations using the finite elements platform COMSOL Multiphysics. The simulations are based
on the assumption (see section X.VI in the SI for a discussion) that humidity transport is diffusive
within a cubic domain of side 18 mm whose bottom face is replaced by a 3D copy of the
experimental setup. The boundary conditions on the humidity field h were no-flux on the lateral
boundaries and Dirichlet on the bottom and top plate where the relative humidity h was fixed to
100% and 70%, to mimic the experimental value of h respectively at the clay disk surface and in
the air (far from the disk surface) of our experimental room.
At a given temperature, relative humidity and absolute humidity are proportional, so assuming
here that temperature is constant, we always refer to relative humidity and our simulations
measure the humidity gradient at any position in units of mm−1 (exactly like curvature).
Saline solution experiments
We performed control experiments with no termites and hydrating the clay disk with a saline
solution instead of distilled water to map the distribution of evaporation flux. Saline solution was
prepared adding 8 g of NaCHO3to 100 ml of tap water.
Acknowledgements
We thank Paul Devienne at the LEEC laboratory for his help in taking care of termite colonies. We
thank Baptiste Piqueret at LEEC laboratory for inspiring discussions. We thank Anand Douady for
his inspiring experiments with salt and evaporation. This work was supported by a Royal Society
Newton International Fellowship NIF\R1\180238 and by a Leverhulme Research Project Grant RPG-
2021-196.

G. Facchini et al., 2024 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.86843.3
15 of 20
References
Ab Majid AH, Ahmad A. (2015) Define colony number of subterranean termites
Coptotermes gestroi (Isoptera: Rhinotermitidae) in selected infested Sains Malaysiana
44:211–216
Acheson DJ (1990) Elementary Fluid Dynamics. Oxford
Arab A, Costa-Leonardo AM (2005) Effect of biotic and abiotic factors on the tunneling
behavior of Coptotermes gestroi and Heterotermes tenuis (Isoptera: Rhinotermitidae)
Behavioural processes 70:32–40
Bardunias P, Su NY (2009) Dead Reckoning in Tunnel Propagation of the Formosan
Subterranean Termite (Isoptera: Rhinotermitidae) Annals of the Entomological Society of
America 102:158–165
Bardunias P, Su NY (2009) Opposing Headings of Excavating and Depositing Termites
Facilitate Branch Formation in the Formosan Subterranean Termite Animal Behaviour
78:755–759 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anbehav.2009.06.024
Bardunias PM, Calovi DS, Carey N, Soar R, Turner JS, Nagpal R, Werfel J. (2020) The Extension
of Internal Humidity Levels beyond the Soil Surface Facilitates Mound Expansion in
Macrotermes Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 287 https://doi.org/10.1098
/rspb.2020.0894
Bardunias PM, Su NY (2010) Queue Size Determines the Width of Tunnels in the Formosan
Subterranean Termite (Isoptera: Rhinotermitidae) Journal of Insect Behavior 23:189–
204 https://doi.org/10.1007/s10905-010-9206-z
Bruinsma OH (1979) An Analysis of Building Behaviour of the Termite Macrotermes
Subhyalinus (Rambur)
Callens SJP, Fan D, van Hengel IAJ, Minneboo M, Díaz-Payno PJ, Stevens MM, Fratila-Apachitei
LE, Zadpoor AA (2023) Emergent Collective Organization of Bone Cells in Complex
Curvature Fields Nature Communications 14 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-36436-w
Calovi DS, Bardunias P, Carey N, Scott Turner J, Nagpal R, Werfel J. (2019) Surface Curvature
Guides Early Construction Activity in Mound-Building Termites Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 374 https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2018.0374
Camazine S, Deneubourg JL, Franks NR, Sneyd J, Theraulaz G, Bonabeau E. (2001) Self-
Organization in Biological Systems https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctvzxx9tx
Carey NE, Bardunias P, Nagpal R, Werfel J. (2021) Validating a Termite-Inspired Construction
Coordination Mechanism Using an Autonomous Robot Frontiers in Robotics and AI 8 https://
doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2021.645728
Carey NE, Calovi DS, Bardunias P, Turner JS, Nagpal R, Werfel J. (2019) Differential
Construction Response to Humidity by Related Species of Mound-Building Termites The
Journal of Experimental Biology 222 https://doi.org/10.1242/jeb.212274

G. Facchini et al., 2024 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.86843.3
16 of 20
Clément R, Blanc P, Mauroy B, Sapin V, Douady S. (2012) Shape Self-Regulation in Early Lung
Morphogenesis PLoS ONE 7 https://doi.org/10.1371/jour-nal.pone.0036925
Cussler EL (1997) Diffusion: Mass Transfer in Fluid Systems
Deegan RD, Bakajin O, Dupont TF, Huber G, Nagel SR, Witten TA (1997) Capillary Flow as the
Cause of Ring Stains from Dried Liquid Drops Nature 389:827–829 https://doi.org/10.1038
/39827
Diamond S. (1970) Pore Size Distributions in Clays Clays and Clay Minerals 18:7–23 https://doi
.org/10.1346/CCMN.1970.0180103
Facchini G, Lazarescu A, Perna A, Douady S. (2020) A Growth Model Driven by Curvature
Reproduces Geometric Features of Arboreal Termite Nests Journal of The Royal Society
Interface 17 https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2020.0093
Fouquet D, Costa-Leonardo AM, Fournier R, Blanco S, Jost C. (2014) Coordination of
Construction Behavior in the Termite Procornitermes Araujoi: Structure Is a Stronger
Stimulus than Volatile Marking Insectes Sociaux 61:253–264 https://doi.org/10.1007/s00040
-014-0350-x
Fuchs N. (1947) Concerning the Velocity of Evaporation of Small Droplets in a Gas
Atmosphere
Gautam BK, Henderson G. (2011) Relative humidity preference and survival of starved
Formosan subterranean termites (Isoptera: Rhinotermitidae) at various temperature
and relative humidity conditions Environmental entomology 40:1232–1238
Grassé PP. (1959) La reconstruction du nid et les coordinations interindividuelles chez
Bellicositermes natalensis et Cubitermes sp. la théorie de la stigmergie: Essai
d’interprétation du comportement des termites constructeurs Insectes Sociaux 6:41–
80 https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02223791
Grassé PP. (1984) Termitologia Tome 2. Fondation des sociétés, construction
Green B, Bardunias P, Turner JS, Nagpal R, Werfel J. (2017) Excavation and Aggregation as
Organizing Factors in de Novo Construction by Mound-Building Termites Proceedings of
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 284 https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2016.2730
Hansell M. (2005) Animal Architecture. Oxford Animal Biology Series
Heyde A, Guo L, Jost C, Theraulaz G, Mahadevan L. (2021) Self-Organized Biotectonics of
Termite Nests Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118 https://doi.org/10.1073
/pnas.2006985118
Hisatake K, Tanaka S, Aizawa Y. (1993) Evaporation Rate of Water in a Vessel Journal of
Applied Physics 73:7395–7401 https://doi.org/10.1063/1.354031
Khuong A, Gautrais J, Perna A, Sbaï C, Combe M, Kuntz P, Jost C, Theraulaz G. (2016) Stigmergic
Construction and Topochemical Information Shape Ant Nest Architecture Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 113:1303–1308 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1509829113
Khuong A, Theraulaz G, Jost C, Perna A, Gautrais J. (2011) A Computational Model of Ant Nest
Morphogenesis In: ECAL https://doi.org/10.13140/2.1.1334.1122

G. Facchini et al., 2024 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.86843.3
17 of 20
Langmuir I. (1918) The Evaporation of Small Spheres Physical Review 12:368–370 https://doi
.org/10.1103/Phys-Rev.12.368
Li HF, Su NY, Wu WJ (2010) Solving the hundred-year controversy of Coptotermes
taxonomy in Taiwan American Entomologist 56
Malkus WVR, Thayer MC (1964) Notes on the 1964 Summer Study Program in Geophysical
Fluid Dynamics at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution
Ocko SA, Heyde A, Mahadevan L. (2019) Morphogenesis of Termite Mounds Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 116:3379–3384 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1818759116
Perna A, Theraulaz G. (2017) When Social Behaviour Is Moulded in Clay: On Growth and
Form of Social Insect Nests The Journal of Experimental Biology 220:83–91 https://doi.org/10
.1242/jeb.143347
Petersen K, Bardunias P, Napp N, Werfel J, Nagpal R, Turner S. (2015) Arrestant Property of
Recently Manipulated Soil on Macrotermes Michaelseni as Determined through Visual
Tracking and Automatic Labeling of Individual Termite Behaviors Behavioural Processes
116:8–11 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beproc.2015.04.004
Pieuchot L et al. (2018) Curvotaxis Directs Cell Migration through Cell-Scale Curvature
Landscapes Nature Communications 9 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-06494-6
Singh K, Muljadi BP, Raeini AQ, Jost C, Vandeginste V, Blunt MJ, Theraulaz G, Degond P. (2019)
The Architectural Design of Smart Ventilation and Drainage Systems in Termite Nests
Science Advances 5 https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aat8520
Soar R, Amador G, Bardunias P, Turner JS (2019) Moisture Gradients Form a Vapor Cycle
within the Viscous Boundary Layer as an Organizing Principle to Worker Termites Insectes
Sociaux 66:193–209 https://doi.org/10.1007/s00040-018-0673-0
Song S, Żukowski S, Gambini C, Dantan P, Mauroy B, Douady S, Cornelissen AJM (2023)
Morphogenesis of the Gastrovascular Canal Network in Aurelia Jellyfish: Variability and
Possible Mechanisms Frontiers in Physics 10
Su NY, Ban P, Scheffrahn RH (2003) Resistance of insecticide-treated foam board insulation
against the eastern sub-terranean termite and the Formosan subterranean termite
(Isoptera: Rhinotermitidae) Journal of Economic Entomology 96:1526–1529
Su NY, Chouvenc T, Li HF (2017) Potential hybridization between two invasive termite
species, Coptotermes formosanus and C. gestroi (Isoptera: Rhinotermitidae), and its
biological and economic implications Insects 8
Vallis GK, Parker DJ, Tobias SM (2019) A Simple System for Moist Convection: The Rainy–
Bénard Model Journal of Fluid Mechanics 862:162–199 https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2018.954
Walter T, Couzin ID (2021) TRex, a Fast Multi-Animal Tracking System with Markerless
Identification, and 2D Estimation of Posture and Visual Fields eLife 10 https://doi.org/10
.7554/eLife.64000
Zachariah N, Das A, Murthy TG, Borges RM (2017) Building Mud Castles: A Perspective from
Brick-Laying Termites Scientific Reports 7 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-04295-3

G. Facchini et al., 2024 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.86843.3
18 of 20
Zachariah N, Murthy TG, Borges RM (2020) Moisture Alone Is Sufficient to Impart Strength
but Not Weathering Resistance to Termite Mound Soil Royal Society Open Science 7 https://
doi.org/10.1098/rsos.200485
Zukowski J, Su NY (2017) Survival of termites (Isoptera) exposed to various levels of
relative humidity (RH) and water availability, and their RH preferences Florida
Entomologist 100:532–538
Article and author information
G. Facchini
Life Sciences Department, University of Roehampton, London SW15 4JD, United Kingdom,
Service de Chimie et Physique Non Linéaire, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels 1000,
Belgium
For correspondence: giuliofacchini@gmail.com
ORCID iD: 0000-0003-4500-5748
A. Rathery
Life Sciences Department, University of Roehampton, London SW15 4JD, United Kingdom
S. Douady
Laboratoire Matière et Systèmes Complexe, Université Paris Cité, Paris 75205 Paris Cedex 13,
France
D. Sillam-Dussès
Laboratoire d’Ethologie Expérimentale et Comparée, LEEC, UR 4443, Université Sorbonne Paris
Nord, Villetaneuse 93430, France
A. Perna
Life Sciences Department, University of Roehampton, London SW15 4JD, United Kingdom,
Networks Unit, IMT School for Advanced Studies Lucca, Piazza San Francesco 19, 50100, Lucca,
Italy
ORCID iD: 0000-0001-8985-3920
Copyright
© 2023, Facchini et al.
This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License,
which permits unrestricted use and redistribution provided that the original author and
source are credited.
Editors
Reviewing Editor
Gordon Berman
Emory University, Atlanta, United States of America
Senior Editor
Aleksandra Walczak
École Normale Supérieure - PSL, Paris, France

G. Facchini et al., 2024 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.86843.3
19 of 20
Joint Public Review:
In this manuscript the authors performed experiments and simulations which showed that
substrate evaporation is the main driver of early construction in termites. Additionally, these
experiments and simulations were designed taking into account several different works, so
that the current results shine a light on how substrate evaporation is a sufficient descriptor of
most of the results seen previously.
Through simulations and ingenious experiments the authors have shown how curvature is
extremely correlated with evaporation, and therefore, how results coming from these 2
environmental factors can be explained through evaporation alone. The authors have
continued to use their expertise of numerical simulations and a previously developed model
for termite construction, to highlight and verify their findings. On my first pass of the
manuscript I felt the authors were missing an experiment: an array of humidity probes to
measure evaporation in the three spatial dimensions and over time. Technologically such an
experiment is not out of reach, but the author's alternative (a substrate made with a saline
solution and later measuring the salt deposits on the surface) was a very ingenious low tech
solution to the problem.
The authors agree that future experiments should tackle finely controlled humidity levels
and curvature in order to have a more quantitative measure termite behaviour, but the work
done so far is more than sufficient to justify their current claims.
In the revised text, the authors have added more clarity into different biological systems in
which these results could be applied. Perhaps what it would have been beneficial to also add
more information on how the resulting algorithms of constructions can be used in swarm
robotics with collective construction, both macro and micro, but I acknowledge that the style
of the paper does focus more on the biological aspects
The results presented here are so far the best attempt on characterizing multiple cues that
induce termite construction activity, and that possibly unifies the different hypothesis
presented in the last 8 years into a single factor, resulting into a valuable addition to the field.
More importantly, even if these results come from different species of termites than some of
the previous works, they are relatable and seem to be mostly consistent, improving the
strength of the author's claims.
https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.86843.3.sa0
Author Response
The following is the authors’ response to the previous reviews.
This paper now provides a convincing presentation of valuable results of the drivers of
nest construction for one termite species, and they briefly discuss possible relevance to
other termite species. However, the authors have not yet addressed how their results may
be important outside the field of termite nest construction. I could imagine the
significance of the paper being elevated to important if there is a broader discussion
about the impact of this work, e.g., the relevance of the results, the approach, and/or
next steps to related fields outside of termite nest construction.
Reading our manuscript again, we have to agree with the reviewer that we mostly focused
the discussion of our results in the context of termite construction, without attempting to
generalise to other systems. To some extent we still defend this choice, as we prefer not to
make too many claims on the relevance of our results beyond what we can reasonably

G. Facchini et al., 2024 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.86843.3
20 of 20
support with our own experimental results. However, we thought that it would be
appropriate – as suggested by the reviewer – to add at least one paragraph to indicate how
our results could be extrapolated to other systems. This new paragraph is now at the end of
the discussion section.
Here we elaborate a bit further on this point: first of all, while termites certainly build the
most complex structures found in the natural world, there aren’t many other animals that
are capable of collectively building complex structures. Typically, collective building activity
is limited to highly social (typically eusocial) animals, but other social insects, such as ants
and wasps, are phylogenetically distant from termites, their nests are often different (the
large majority of ant nests only comprise excavated galleries with little construction, while
wasp nests tend to comprise multiple repeated patterns that could be produced from
stereotyped individual behaviour). Because of these differences, drawing a comparison
between the mechanisms that regulate termite architecture and those that regulate other
forms of animal architecture would be too speculative. One domain, however, where similar
mechanisms to those that we describe here could operate is that of pattern formation at the
cellular and tissue level, where surface curvature was shown to drive different phenomena
from cell migration to tissue growth. A comment on this is now added in the manuscript at
the very end of the discussion.
Similarly, on a related note, as someone not directly in the field of termite nest
construction but wanting to understand the system (and the results) presented here in a
broader context, I found the additional information about species and natural habitat
very helpful and interesting, though I was rather disappointed to find it relegated to
supplementary material where most readers will not see it.
We considered this suggestion to present more information about the natural nesting habits
of the termites that we study into the main text, but eventually we decided to leave it as
supplementary only. We feel that the nesting habits of the termites that we studied here are
not too central to the problem that we want to focus on, of how they coordinate their building
activity. In fact, there is a large variety of nesting habits across termite genera and species,
but we believe that, at a basic level, the mechanisms that we describe here would also apply
to species with different nesting habits, because our results are consistent with what is
described in the scientific literature for other termite species. As our introduction is already a
bit long, we left this description of Coptotermes nesting habits in the supplementary material,
where, hopefully, it will still be accessible and useful to readers interested in finding this
information.
When providing responses to reviewers, please directly address the reviewers’ comments
point-by-point rather than summarizing comments and responding to summaries.
We apologize for our previous way to respond to comments and thanks the reviewer for his
remark as we learn to navigate through the eLife reviewing system (where some comments
are repeated in the overall assessment and in the feed-back of individual reviewers).
Figure 2 colors: Panels A and E and maybe B do not seem colorblind-friendly. I suggest
modifying the colormaps to address this.
We have changed the colormaps of figures A,B and E which are now colorblind-friendly.
Line 180: This system is not in equilibrium. Perhaps the authors mean "steady-state?" I
suggest reviewing language to ensure that the correct technical terms are used.
We have now corrected this.

