Indeterminism and Determinism in Quantum Mechanics
307
I
Indeterminism and Determinism
in Quantum Mechanics
Brigitte Falkenburg and Friedel Weinert
It is an often repeated claim in the literature that quantum mechanics is indeter-
ministic and that it has put an end to the classical notion of causality. From the
impossibility of determining the exact spatio-temporal trajectory of an atomic sys-
tem, for instance, Heisenberg infers ‘the invalidity of the causal law’ in quantum
mechanics [1]. What is tacitly assumed in such views is a chain of reasoning,
which leads from determinism to causality. One form of determinism – predictive
determinism – is the view that a sufﬁcient knowledge of the laws of nature and
appropriate boundary conditions will enable a superior intelligence to predict the
future states of the physical world and to retrodict its past states with inﬁnite pre-
cision. Laplace attributes this capacity to his famous demon: for the demon the
physical world stretches out like the frames of a ﬁlmstrip. Each frame is caused by
an earlier frame and in its turn causes a later frame. From the present frame the
Laplacean demon is capable of predicting and retrodicting all other frames. Hence
the demon identiﬁes determinism and causality. ‘We ought to regard the present state
of the universe as the effect of its antecedent state and as the cause of the state that is
to follow’ [9]. Laplace assumes that these states are unique and can be determined
with mathematical precision such that prediction and retrodiction become possible.
The laws of physics are typically expressed in differential equations which describe
the evolution of some physical parameter, P, as a function of time, t. As one state
of a system, S1, evolves to another state, S2, where this temporal evolution is made
precise by the employment of differential equations, it becomes easy to think of
differential equations as precise mathematical representations of causal laws [10].
This is indeed how Einstein presented the matter: ‘The differential law is the only
form which completely satisﬁes the modern physicist’s demand for causality’ [2].
Although Russell [11] had argued that the ‘law of causality (. . .) is the product of a
bygone age’ he nevertheless admitted causal laws in the form of functional relations
and differential equations into physics.
This functional model of causality enjoyed great popularity amongst physicists.
But the experimental results from quantum mechanics – like the  double-slit ex-
periments – seemed to threaten the Laplacean identiﬁcation of determinism and
causality. Physicists reacted to this threat in three different ways.
1. An older generation of physicists (Einstein, von Laue, Planck) wished to re-
tain the notion of causality and its identiﬁcation with determinism. ‘An event
is causally determined when it can be predicted with certainty.’ [3] They
never abandoned the hope of a causal-deterministic understanding of quantum
mechanics.

308
Indeterminism and Determinism in Quantum Mechanics
2. A second group of physicists (Bohr, Heisenberg, Pauli) concluded that quantum
mechanics had become both indeterministic and acausal. Let us neglect for the
moment that the  Schr¨odinger equation is a deterministic differential equation
in an abstract  Hilbert space and concentrate instead on the decay law and on
 Heisenberg’s uncertainty relations (or indeterminacy relations). Rutherford’s
 radioactive decay law is statistical in nature; it expresses the probability of
the disintegration rate of an ensemble of atoms ( ensembles in quantum me-
chanics) rather than the disintegration rate of an individual atom. The latter is
unpredictable in the sense that it can only be expressed by the whole range of
the decay curve of the ensemble. James Jeans therefore concluded that causal-
ity had disappeared from the physical world picture. [4] Due to the discovery
of his indeterminacy relations, Heisenberg arrived at a similar conclusion. The
indeterminacy principle shows that neither the antecedent nor the consequent
conditions of the causality principle, as Heisenberg sees it, can be satisﬁed: ‘If
we know exactly the determinable properties of a closed system at a given point
in time, we can calculate precisely the future behaviour of the properties of this
system.’ [1] The indeterminacy principle excludes the simultaneous knowledge
of the antecedent conditions of an atomic system by non-commuting  operators
[x], [px], [x], [E], [t]; but it also excludes the precise knowledge of the future
behaviour of the individual system. Bohr [5] agreed with Heisenberg that the in-
determinacy relations spelt the end of the classical notion of causality. He argued
that his notion of  complementarity should be regarded as a generalization of
the notion of causality. Complementarity means that quantum mechanics must
employ both the particle picture  Franck–Hertz experiment and the wave pic-
ture  Davisson–Germer experiment; Stern–Gerlach experiment; Schr¨odinger
equation to describe the behaviour of atomic systems. But the indeterminacy re-
lations:
xp > ℏ
(1a)
Et > ℏ
(1b)
produce, according to Bohr, the following dilemma:
(i) The determination of the spatio-temporal location, x, of atomic particles, say
in a double-slit experiment, leads to an unavoidable disturbance of dynamic
variables, like momentum p.
(ii) The determination of the value of dynamic variables, like energy, E, or mo-
mentum, p, leads to an unavoidable loss of precise coordination regarding the
spatio-temporal location of the particles, i.e. t, x.
Quantum mechanics must employ both the particle and the wave picture but
each leads to a loss of information, as relations (1a,b) show, which prevents
the precise spatio-temporal determination known from classical particles.
Physicists like Bohr, Heisenberg and Pauli were content to conclude that the
indeterminacy relations implied the acausal nature of quantum mechanical sys-
tems. Their argument went through on the assumption of an identiﬁcation of
determinism with causality.

Indeterminism and Determinism in Quantum Mechanics
309
I
(3) This traditional identiﬁcation, however, harboured the conceptual possibility
of a third response. The philosopher Ernst Cassirer [6] maintained a func-
tional view of causality, claiming that causality (or determinism) is preserved
at the level of Schr¨odinger’s  wave function, whereas the individual quantum
events or measurement results were indeterministic. Physicists agree that the
 Schr¨odinger equation is a deterministic equation in Hilbert space. Max Born
[7] and Louis de Broglie [8], however, argued, unlike Cassirer that, the notion
of causality could be retained in quantum mechanics, despite its observable
indeterminism, even if the functional view of causality was abandoned. The
Born-de Broglie move had two consequences:
(i) The notions of determinism and causality became disentangled; it was pos-
sible to accept the indeterminism of quantum mechanics without giving up
the notion of causality.
(ii) The notion of causality needed to be modiﬁed in order to speak of causal
relations in quantum mechanics.
To illustrate these consequences, consider a schematic representation of the
Davisson–Germer experiment, i.e. de Broglie’s thought experiment. A beam of
 electrons is targeted at a crystal; call this phenomenon A. The encounter of the
beam with the surface of the crystal will lead to diffraction effects, B1, B2, B3,
which will be recorded at different points on a recording screen (Fig. 1).
As is well-known the rules of quantum mechanics do not permit a precise pre-
diction of the diffraction effects, i.e. their precise spatio-temporal location. Yet it
is possible to speak of a causal situation in this case for the experiments show that
the observable consequent effects, B1, B2, B3, are dependent on the antecedent con-
dition A. We can speak of a ‘conditional dependence’ because (a) the experimental
situation leads to the identiﬁcation of a cluster of relevant antecedent and consequent
conditions and (b) the distribution of the occurrence of the consequent conditions is
statistically dependent on the anterior conditions. Such a conditional dependence of
the consequent conditions, B, on the antecedent condition, A, is further emphasized
by the absence of B in the absence of A (indicated in Fig. 1). A conditional depen-
dence, indicated in de Broglie’s thought experiment, is clearly observable in many
of the classic experiments in quantum mechanics:  Davisson–Germer experiment,
 Frank–Hertz experiment,  Stern–Gerlach experiment,  large-angle scattering;
 scattering experiments;  which-way experiments.
B1
B3
B2
~A
~B1,2,3
Fig. 1 De Broglie’s causal thought experiment

310
Indeterminism and Determinism in Quantum Mechanics
A consequence of the acceptance of both indeterministic and causal relations
in quantum mechanics is a revised view of these relations: a conditional model
of causality [12]. According to such a conditional model, it is possible (here in
the context of quantum mechanical experiments) to specify a cluster of antecedent
conditions (further speciﬁed in terms of necessary and sufﬁcient conditions) and
a cluster of consequent conditions (observable effects in quantum mechanical ex-
periments). It is observed that between the antecedent and consequent conditions
lawlike statistical relations obtain, which specify the probability with which the
consequent conditions may be expected to occur. For instance in the Stern–Gerlach
experiments, when the silver atoms are in the ground state, there is a 50% chance
for the atoms to be deﬂected either upward or downward, a deﬂection which, un-
der these conditions, is due to the spin or the intrinsic angular momentum of the
spinning electron in the outer shell of the silver atoms in the atom beam.  Spin;
Stern–Gerlach experiment; Vector model. Hence, given the lawlike statistical de-
pendence between antecedent and consequent conditions, the distribution of the
observable events is speciﬁed. On such a conditional model of causality, experi-
ments in quantum mechanics reveal causal relations in the absence of deterministic
predictability of individual events and a traceable mechanism linking particular
causes and effects.
In the famous EPR argument [13], Einstein raised a further concept of causality.
( Causal Inference and EPR) According to it, there is no causal relation between
two space-like separated events. Hence, the wave function of a compound system
(functional causality) or the predictions obtained from it (probabilistic causal-
ity) come together with the a-causal correlation of events at a space-like distance
(Einstein causality or  Einstein locality). Therefore, quantum mechanics raises the
conceptual problem that there is no longer an unambiguous concept of causality
[14, pp. 316–319].
Primary Literature
1. W. Heisenberg: ¨Uber den anschaulichen Inhalt der quantentheoretischen Kinematik und
Mechanik. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 43, (1927), 174–79, 197; W. Heisenberg: Kausalgesetz und
Quantenmechanik. Annalen der Philosophie 2, (1931), 179–81; reprinted in W. Heisenberg:
Gesammelte Werke/Collected Works Abteilung C, Band I: Physik und Erkenntnis 1927–1955;
eds. W. Blum, H.P. D¨urr/H. Rechenberg, M¨unchen/Z¨urich: Piper (1984–5), 29–39
2. A. Einstein: Newtons Mechanik und ihr Einﬂuβ auf die Gestaltung der theoretischen Physik.
Die Naturwissenschaften 15, (1927), 273–6; reprinted in A. Einstein: Ideas and Opinions
(Alvin Redman, London 1954, 253–61)
3. M. Planck: Die Kausalit¨at in der Natur (1932), in Planck, Vortr¨age und Erinnerungen (Wis-
senschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, Darmstadt 1975, 252).
4. J. Jeans: Physics and Philosophy (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1943, 149–50). Ear-
lier Franz Exner, Vorlesungen ¨uber die Physikalischen Grundlagen der Naturwissenschaften
(1919) had already expressed the view that the micro-world is indeterministic. Historically, the
roots of indeterminism seem to reach beyond the emergence of quantum mechanics to the 19th
work on the 2nd law of thermodynamics and the problem of irreversibility. See St. G. Brush,
Irreversibility and Indeterminism: Fourier to Heisenberg, Journal of the History of Ideas 37,
(1976), 603–30.

Indistinguishability
311
I
5. N. Bohr: The Quantum Postulate and the Recent Development of Atomic Theory. Supple-
ment to Nature (April 14 1928), 580–90, reprinted in N. Bohr: Atomic Theory and the
Description of Nature (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1934, 52–91); N. Bohr: The
Atomic Theory and the Fundamental Principles underlying the Description of Nature (1929),
in N. Bohr: Atomic Theory and the Description of Nature (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge 1934, 103–119); N. Bohr: Wirkungsquantum und Naturbeschreibung. Die Natur-
wissenschaften 17 (1929), 483–6; N. Bohr: Kausalit¨at und Komplimentarit¨at. Erkenntnis 6,
(1936), 293–302; N. Bohr: Quantum Physics and Philosophy – Causality and Complemen-
tarity, reprinted in N. Bohr, Essays on Atomic Physics and Human Knowledge, 1958–1962
(Interscience Publishers, New York 1958, 1–7)
6. E. Cassirer: Determinismus und Indeterminismus in der Modern Physik (1936), in: E. Cassirer,
Gesammelte Werke 19. Ed. by B. Recki (Felix Meiner Verlag, Hamburg 2008); English trans-
lation: Determinism and Indeterminism in Modern Physics (Yale University Press, New Haven
1956)
7. M. Born: Natural Philosophy of Cause and Chance (Clarendon, Oxford 1949, 102, 124)
8. L. de Broglie: Continu et Discontinu en Physique moderne (Albin Michel, Paris 1941, 64–6)
Secondary Literature
9. P. Laplace: Th´eorie analytique des probabilities (Couvier, Paris 1820, Introduction VI–VII).
Translation quoted from E. Nagel: The Structure of Science (Routledge & Kegal Paul, London
1961, 281–2)
10. Ph. Frank: Das Kausalgesetz und seine Grenzen (Springer, Wien 1932, 142–46). Note that the
functional view was already held by Mach and Boltzmann, see M. St¨oltzner, Vienna Indeter-
minism: Mach, Boltzmann, Exner, Synthese 119, (1999), 85–111
11. B. Russell: On the notion of cause. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society XIII, (1912–13),
1–26; reprinted in B. Russell: On the Philosophy of Science, edited, with an Introduction, by
Charles A. Fritz (The Bobbs–Merrill Company, Indianapolis 1965, 163–186)
12. D. Bohm: Causality and Chance in Modern Physics (Routledge and Kegan Paul, London 1957)
J.L. Mackie: The Cement of the Universe (Clarendon Press, Oxford 1980); F. Weinert: The
Scientist as Philosopher (Springer, Berlin 2004, Chap. 5)
13. A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, N. Rosen: Can quantum-mechanical description of physical reality
be considered complete? Physical Review 47, (1935), 777–80
14. B. Falkenburg: Particle Metaphysics. A Critical Account of Subatomic Reality (Springer,
Heidelberg 2007)
Indistinguishability
Nick Huggett and Tom Imbo
In the considerable physical and philosophical literature,1 ‘indistinguishability’, and
the related concept of ‘identicality’, are used in many ways, and in the resulting
1 See [1] for a cross section of the philosophical literature, and a comprehensive bibliography of
the subject.

