Q
Quantification
CATARINA DUTILH NOVAES
ILLC and Department of Philosophy
University of Amsterdam
Amsterdam
The Netherlands
Abstract
Medieval authors approached the semantic phenomenon
now known as quantiﬁcation essentially by means of the
concept of supposition, more speciﬁcally the different
modes of personal supposition. The modes of personal
supposition were meant to codify the quantiﬁcational
behavior of what we now refer to as quantiﬁer expressions,
and what the medievals referred to as syncategorematic
terms. Perhaps the best way to understand the medieval
approach to these quantiﬁer expressions by means of the
notion of supposition is as a two-step procedure that
explicates their meaning and semantic behavior. First,
the syntactical structure of the proposition, that is, the
presence and order of its syncategorematic terms, deter-
mines the kind of personal supposition that each
categorematic term has. Then, the semantic deﬁnitions
of each mode of personal supposition determine the effect
of quantifying syncategoremata over the quantity of
objects involved in the assertion of a proposition. This
entry discusses both groups of rules, and the contrasting
thirteenth and fourteenth century approaches. The former
is based on the veriﬁcation of propositions and focuses on
the semantics of quantiﬁer expressions taken individually;
the latter focuses on the inferential relations of ascent and
descent between propositions with quantifying syncate-
gorematic terms and singular propositions of the form
‘‘This a is b,’’ and on the study of the global quantiﬁca-
tional effect of syncategorematic terms in wider proposi-
tional contexts.
The phrase ‘‘medieval theories of quantiﬁcation’’ is, prop-
erly speaking, an anachronism; medieval authors never used
the term ‘‘quantiﬁcation’’ in this sense, and even though
they did treat semantic phenomena similar to what we now
refer to as quantiﬁcation, their theories differ from modern
theories of quantiﬁcation in signiﬁcant aspects – to the
point that this approximation may even be unwarranted
(Matthews 1973). Nevertheless, their treatments of such
phenomena are often insightful and sophisticated, justifying
thus that we consider them from the viewpoint of modern
theories of quantiﬁcation, but provided that the term
‘‘quantiﬁcation’’ be understood very broadly.
Broadly understood, quantiﬁcation can be deﬁned as
a construct or procedure by means of which one speciﬁes
the quantity of individuals of the domain of discourse that
apply to or verify a given statement. Typical quantiﬁer
expressions are ‘‘Some,’’ ‘‘All,’’ ‘‘None,’’ and they usually
determine the quantity of individuals involved in an asser-
tion. Medieval authors approached quantiﬁcation and
quantiﬁer expressions essentially by means of the concept
of supposition, more speciﬁcally the different modes of
personal supposition.
Besides supposition, they also treated quantiﬁcational
phenomena from the vantage point of their theories of
syllogisms, following the traditional Aristotelian approach.
However, it is widely acknowledged that medieval authors
did not contribute much to the development of Aristotle’s
theory of syllogisms for assertoric propositions, and that
their main contributions concern modal syllogisms. There-
fore, the innovations proposed by medieval authors with
respect to quantiﬁcation are not to be found in their
theories of syllogisms, but rather in this typical medieval
development, theories of supposition.
The different modes of personal supposition are
indeed the closest medieval counterpart of our theories
of quantiﬁcation. The modes of personal supposition were
meant to codify the quantiﬁcational behavior of what we
now refer to as quantiﬁer expressions, and what the medi-
evals referred to as syncategorematic terms. Such analyses
can be found in virtually every later medieval textbook in
logic, but for reasons of space I shall focus on three
representative texts: William of Sherwood’s Introduction
to Logic, William of Ockham’s Sum of Logic (part I), and
Buridan’s Treatise on Supposition.
Perhaps the best way to understand the medieval
approach to these quantiﬁer expressions by means of the
Henrik Lagerlund (ed.), Encyclopedia of Medieval Philosophy, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9729-4,
# Springer Science+Business Media B.V., 2011

notion of supposition is as a two-step procedure that
explicates their meaning and semantic behavior. First,
the syntactic structure of the proposition, that is, the
presence and order of its syncategorematic terms, deter-
mines the kind of personal supposition that each
categorematic term has. Then, the semantic deﬁnitions
of each mode of personal supposition determine the effect
of quantifying syncategoremata over the quantity of
objects involved in the assertion of a proposition.
In other words, the various theories of supposition
presented by medieval authors typically have two groups
of rules for the modes of personal supposition: the syn-
tactic rules mapping terms in the propositional contexts
created by quantiﬁer expressions into modes of personal
supposition; and the semantic rules mapping modes of
personal supposition into speciﬁc semantic behaviors
(see Ashworth 1978). To illustrate this, let us ﬁrst discuss
the four Aristotelian classes of categorical propositions:
universal afﬁrmative (A), particular afﬁrmative (I), uni-
versal negative (E), and particular negative (O); and pro-
vide the two kinds of rules for these propositional forms.
(Notice that, even at early stages of its development,
supposition theory already recognized a wide variety of
quantiﬁer expressions – unlike modern quantiﬁcation
theory, which started out with the existential and univer-
sal quantiﬁers and only later developed into a theory of
generalized quantiﬁers. Notice also that, for medieval
logicians, following Aristotle, all afﬁrmative propositions
have
existential
import,
existential
and
universal
propositions alike.)
(A) Every a is b.
(E) No a is b.
(I)
Some a is b.
(O) Some a is not b.
Syntactical Rules
The syntactical rules for these four propositional forms are
easily enumerable, but in practice the enumeration of
rules becomes very long when authors attempt to cover
a wider range of propositional forms. The rules below can
be found in all of our authors (Sherwood, Introduction to
Logic, }5.13.1; Ockham, Summa logicae I chaps. 71–74;
Buridan, Summulae de suppositionibus, chaps. 4.3.7
and 4.3.8.):
●
The positive universal syncategorema ‘‘Every’’ (omnis)
causes the term immediately following it to have con-
fused and distributive supposition (a in (A)), and the
term mediately following it to have merely confused
supposition (b in (A)).
●
A negative term, ‘‘No’’ (nullus) or ‘‘not’’ (non), causes
all terms to its right to have confused and distributive
supposition (a and b in (E) and b in (O)).
●
The
particular
universal
syncategorema
‘‘Some’’
(alliquid) causes the term immediately following it to
have determinate supposition (a in (I) and (O)).
●
In the absence of syncategorematic terms immediately
preceding a term, and of universal terms affecting
a term mediately, a term has determinate supposition
(b in (I)).
Semantic Rules
Authors account for the semantic behavior of the various
modes of personal supposition in different ways, in par-
ticular with a clear cleavage between thirteenth and four-
teenth century approaches. In the thirteenth century, with
Peter of Spain, William of Sherwood, and Lambert of
Auxerre, there was a tendency toward deﬁning the
modes of personal supposition in terms of the veriﬁcation
of the proposition or the supposition of its terms:
●
Supposition is determinate when the locution can be
expounded by means of some single thing, which is the
case when the word supposits for some single thing.
(Sherwood, Introduction to Logic, }5.2.)
●
Supposition is distributive when [the word] supposits
for many in such a way as to supposit for any. (Sher-
wood, Introduction to Logic, }5.2.)
●
A
term
has
merely
confused
supposition
in
a categorical proposition when it can be taken there
for several of its supposita, not necessarily for all. (For
want of a satisfactory formulation of merely confused
personal supposition in our authors, this is Parsons’
(1997:45) ‘‘generic’’ version.)
By contrast, in the fourteenth century with Walter Burley,
William of Ockham, and John Buridan, it became cus-
tomary to deﬁne the modes of personal supposition in
terms of ‘‘ascent and descent,’’ that is, in terms of the
inferential relations that do or do not obtain between
a proposition and the singular propositions falling under
it, of the form ‘‘This a is b’’ (see Priest and Read 1977;
Spade 1996:chap. 9).
Let (S) and (Q) stand for any syncategorematic terms,
and the general form of a proposition P be ‘‘(Q) a is (S) b.’’
The generic deﬁnitions of the modes of personal supposi-
tion in terms of ascent and descent can be formulated as
(see Ockham Summa logicae I, chap. 70; Buridan,
Summulae de suppositionibus, chaps. 4.3.5 and 4.3.6.):
●
A
term
a
has
determinate
supposition
in
P ) A disjunction of propositions of the form ‘‘This
1094 Q
Quantification

a is (S) b’’ can be inferred from P but a conjunction of
propositions of the form ‘‘This a is (S) b’’ cannot be
inferred from P.
●
A term a has confused and distributive supposition in
P )A conjunction of propositions of the form ‘‘This a
is (S) b’’ can be inferred from P.
●
A term a has merely confused supposition in
P ) A proposition with a disjunctive term of the
form ‘‘This a, or that a etc. . . is (S) b’’ can be inferred
from P, but neither a disjunction nor a conjunction of
propositions of the form ‘‘This a is (S) b’’ can be
inferred from P.
The same applies mutatis mutandis to the predicate term.
Notice that among the (A), (E), (I), and (O) propositional
forms, merely confused supposition occurs only in pred-
icate position (in (A) propositions). But more generally, it
can also occur in subject position, such as in exceptive
propositions of the form ‘‘Only a is b.’’
By applying the two groups of rules successively (ﬁrst
the syntactical rules and then the semantic rules), one
obtains the desired result, that is, an account of the quan-
tity of individuals involved in a given assertion, and thus
of the semantics of quantiﬁer expressions. For example, in
‘‘Every man is an animal,’’ ‘‘man’’ has confused and dis-
tributive supposition and ‘‘animal’’ has merely confused
supposition, according to the syntactical rules for ‘‘every.’’
According to the semantic rules, this proposition asserts
that ‘‘man’’ supposits for all of the individuals falling
under it (men) and that ‘‘animal’’ supposits for several
individuals, but not (necessarily) for all of those falling
under it.
Terrence Parsons (1997) has made the compelling
suggestion that the differences between the thirteenth
and fourteenth century approaches can also be explained
on the basis of the distinction between the study of the
semantics of quantiﬁer expressions taken individually ver-
sus the study of global quantiﬁcational effect in wider
propositional
contexts.
Indeed,
fourteenth
century
authors had a keen interest in the effect of nested quanti-
ﬁer expressions, such as the effect of a negation over an
afﬁrmative universal quantiﬁer. Take ‘‘Not every man is an
animal’’: according to the thirteenth century authors,
‘‘man’’ would have distributive and confused supposition,
since it is preceded by ‘‘every.’’ But for fourteenth century
authors, the negation preceding ‘‘every’’ would have the
effect of suppressing its distributive effect, so that ‘‘man’’
would no longer have distributive and confused supposi-
tion but rather determinate supposition (see Karger 1993;
Dutilh Novaes 2008). In sum, ‘‘[w]hat distinguishes the
earlier theory from the later one is whether the mode of
supposition of a term in a proposition is something that
that term retains when its proposition is embedded in
further contexts’’ (Parsons 1997:43).
Further Developments
For reasons of space, I can only present the rough lines
of the approach to quantiﬁcation based on supposition.
But medieval authors developed it further in several dif-
ferent directions, such as: the deﬁnition of valid inferences
among different categorical propositions (see Karger 1993;
Dutilh Novaes 2004); an analysis of multiple quantiﬁcation
(of subject and predicate) and of other quantiﬁer expres-
sions (see Ashworth 1978); discussions on what are now
known as anaphoric pronouns (see Parsons 1994). Here
I have discussed thirteenth and fourteenth century authors
only, but ﬁfteenth and sixteenth century authors reﬁned
the framework even further, dealing in particular with the
difﬁculties that emerged from the earlier theories (see
Ashworth 1974, 1978; Karger 1997; Dutilh Novaes 2008).
The modes of personal supposition have been a topic
of heated debate in the literature, but a consensus as to
their purpose and some of the technical details involved
has not yet been reached. It is clear that they can be said to
be a general theory of quantiﬁcation, but one must bear in
mind that the overall approach is fundamentally different
from modern post-Fregean theories of quantiﬁcation.
See also: ▶John Buridan ▶Peter of Spain ▶Supposition
Theory ▶Syncategoremata ▶Terms, Properties of ▶Wil-
liam of Ockham ▶William of Sherwood
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Latin
Buridan John (1998) Summulae de suppositionibus, ed. van der Lecq R.
Ingenium, Nijmegen
William of Ockham (1974) Opera philosophica I, eds. Boehner Ph et al.
The Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
William of Sherwood (1995) Einfu¨hrung in die Logik, ed. and German
trans. Brands H, Kann C. Felix Meiner, Hamburg
English
Buridan John (2001) Summulae de dialectica, trans. Klima G. Yale Uni-
versity Press, New Haven
William of Ockham (1998) Summa logicae part I, trans. Loux M.
St. Augustine’s Press, South Bend
William of Sherwood (1966) Introduction to logic, trans. Kretzmann N.
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis
Secondary Sources
Ashworth EJ (1974) Language and logic in the post-medieval period.
Reidel, Dordrecht
Ashworth EJ (1978) Multiple quantiﬁcation and the use of special quan-
tiﬁers in early sixteenth century logic. Notre Dame J Formal Logic
19:599–613
Quantification Q
1095
Q

Dutilh Novaes C (2004) The Buridanian account of inferential relations
between doubly quantiﬁed propositions: a proof of soundness. Hist
Philos Logic 25(3):225–244
Dutilh Novaes C (2008) Logic in the 14th century after Ockham. In:
Gabbay D, Woods J (eds) The handbook of the history of logic,
vol 2. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 433–504
Karger E (1993) A theory of immediate inferences contained in Buridan’s
logic. In: Jacobi K (ed) Argumentationstheorie. Brill, Leiden,
pp 407–429
Karger E (1997) The 15th and early 16th century logicians on the quan-
tiﬁcation of categorical sentences. Topoi 16(1):65–76
Matthews G (1973) Suppositio and quantiﬁcation in Ockham. Nous
7:13–24
Parsons T (1994) Anaphoric pronouns in very late medieval supposition
theory. Linguist Philos 17:429–445
Parsons T (1997) Supposition as quantiﬁcation versus supposition as
global quantiﬁcational effect. Topoi 16(1):41–63
Priest G, Read S (1977) The formalization of Ockham’s theory of suppo-
sition. Mind 86:109–113
Spade PV (1996) Thoughts, words and things. http://www.pvspade.com
Qust:a ibn Lu¯qa¯
CECILIA MARTINI BONADEO
Dipartimento di Filosoﬁa
Universita` di Padova
Padova
Italy
Abstract
Qust:a ibn Lu¯qa¯ was a Melkite Christian translator of
Greek origin who took part in the Graeco-Arabic transla-
tion movement in the ninth century Baghdad.
Qust:a ibn Lu¯qa¯, called al-Tarjuman, ‘‘the Translator,’’ was
born in Ba‘albak in contemporary Lebanon in 860. Ibn al-
Nadı¯m in the Fihrist reports that he traveled to parts of the
Byzantine Empire and brought back to Baghdad – where
he spent most of his life – several Greek scientiﬁc manu-
scripts. Qust:a ibn Lu¯qa¯ was patronized by the ‘Abba¯sid
court; he was also in contact with al-Kindı¯ for medical–
philosophical questions, as well as with other scholars of
the time: he had an epistolary exchange with H˙ unayn b.
Ish:a¯q and the Muslim astronomer Abu¯ ‘Isa¯ ibn al-
Munajjim, who had invited him to embrace Islam. Qust:a
ibn Lu¯qa¯’s refutation of Ibn Munajjim’s proof of
Muh:ammad’s prophecy is extant. He retired in Armenia,
where he died in 912.
Qust:a ibn Lu¯qa¯ was a native Greek speaker and had of
course an excellent knowledge of Greek, but also of Syriac
and Arabic. He translated into Arabic many Greek texts on
natural science, mathematics, medicine, mechanics, and
astronomy. In particular, he translated some treatises that
in Late Antiquity were studied after Euclid’s geometry as
an introduction to Ptolemaic astronomy, and which
formed together the so-called Little Astronomy or Inter-
mediate Books (Kutub al-mutawassit:a¯t). Among these are
extant the versions of the Spherics (Kita¯b al-Ukar) by
Theodosius of Bithynia, the Rising and Setting of
the Fixed Stars (Kita¯b al-T˙ulu¯‘ wa-l-g˙uru¯b) by Autolycos,
and the Lifting-Screw (Kita¯b Raf‘ al-athqa¯l) by Hero of
Alexandria.
As for philosophy, Qust:a ibn Lu¯qa¯ probably took in
Baghdad and translated into Arabic a copy of Pseudo-
Plutarch’s Placita philosophorum. This doxography, edited
and translated by Daiber (1980) as the Aetius Arabus, was
the main source in the Arab world of the time for the
knowledge of the Presocratics and of Stoic philosophy.
Qust:a ibn Lu¯qa¯ is also recorded as the translator of
Aristotle’s Physics and Alexander of Aphrodisias’ and
Philoponus’ commentaries on it.
According to the lists of the biographers, Qust:a ibn
Lu¯qa¯ wrote more than 60 original works: commentaries
on Euclid; treatises on astronomy, like the extant Book on
the Use of the Celestial Globe (Kita¯b fı¯ l-‘amal bi-l-kura
al-nuju¯miyya) and the treatise On the Conﬁguration of
Celestial Bodies (Hay’at al-aﬂa¯k); works on medicine, as
the Medical Regime for the Pilgrims to Mecca (Fı¯ tadbı¯r
al-badan fı¯ l-safar) and the Book on the Reasons Why
People Differ in Their Character Traits, Their Way of Life,
Their Desires, and Their Preferences (Kita¯b fı¯ ‘ilal ikhtila¯f
al-na¯s fı¯ akhla¯qihim wa-siyarihim wa-shahawa¯tihim wa-
khtiya¯ra¯tihim); a treatise on the division of sciences, and
writings on natural science. In this ﬁeld, his treatise On the
Difference Between the Spirit and the Soul (Risa¯la fı¯ l-farq
bayn al-ru¯h: wa-l-nafs), in Latin translation (De differentia
spiritus et animae), was one of the books to be read within
the program on Natural Philosophy at the Faculty of Arts
in Paris in 1254.
See also: ▶Aristotle, Arabic ▶al-Kindı¯, Abu¯ Yu¯suf Yaʿqu¯b
ibn Ish:a¯q ▶Mathematics and Philosophy in the Arab
World ▶Medicine in the Arab World ▶Presocratics in
the Arab World ▶Translations from Greek into Arabic
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Bos Gerrit (1992) Qusta ibn Luqa’s medical regime for the pilgrims to
Mecca. Brill, Leiden
Daiber Hans (1980) Aetius Arabus. Die Vorsokratiker in arabischer
U¨ berlieferung. Franz Steiner, Wiesbaden
1096 Q
Qust:a ibn Lu¯qa¯

Daiber
Hans
(1990)
Qust:a¯
ibn
Lu¯qa¯
u¨ber
die
Einteilung
der
Wissenschaften. Z Gesch Arab-Islam Wiss 6:93–129
Gabrieli Giuseppe (1912) La Risa¯la di Qust:a¯ ibn Lu¯qa¯ ‘‘Sulla differenza tra
lo spirito e l’anima’’. Atti dell’Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei.
Rendiconti 5(25):622–655
Qust:a¯ ibn Lu¯qa¯ (1997) Kita¯b fı¯ ʿilal ma¯ yaʿridu fı¯ l-mara¯ya¯ min ikhtila¯f al-
mana¯z˙ir. In Rashed R (ed) Oeuvres philosophiques et scientiﬁques
d’al‐Kindı¯, vol 1. L’optique et la catoptrique. Brill, Leiden
Samir Khalil Samir, Nwyia Paul (1981) Une correspondance islamo-
chre´tienne entre Ibn al-Munagˇgˇim, H˙ unayn ibn Ish˙a¯q et Qust˙a¯ ibn
Lu¯qa¯. Patrologia Orientalis, 40:4, Brepols, Turnhout
Sbath Paul (1941) Le livre des caracte`res de Qosta ibn Louqa. Bull Inst
E´gypte 23:103–169
Biographers
Ibn al-Nadı¯m (1871–1872) Kita¯b al-Fihrist, ed. Flu¨gel G, Roediger J,
Mu¨ller A. Vogel, Leipzig
Secondary Sources
Brockelmann C (1943) Geschichte der arabischen Litteratur, 2nd edn,
vol 1. Brill, Leiden, pp 222–223
Gabrieli G (1912) Nota bibliograﬁca su Qust:a¯ ibn Lu¯qa¯. Atti della R.
Accademia dei Lincei: Rendiconti 21(5–6):341–382
Gutas D (1998) Greek thought, Arabic culture: the Graeco-Arabic trans-
lation movement in Baghdad and early ʿAbba¯sid society (2nd–4th/
8th–10th centuries). Routledge, London
Sezgin F (1970/1974/1978) Geschichte des arabischen Schrifttums, vol 3
(Medizin, 1970, 270–274); vol 5 (Mathematik, 1974, 285–286); vol 6
(Astronomie, 1978, 180–182). E.J. Brill, Leiden
Wilcox J (1985) The transmission and inﬂuence of Qusta ibn Luqa’s On
the difference between spirit and the soul. PhD dissertation, City
University of New York
Wilcox J (1987) Our continuing discovery of the Greek science of the
Arabs: the example of Qust:a¯ ibn Lu¯qa¯. Ann Scholarsh 4(3):57–74
Qut:b al-Dı¯n al-Shı¯ra¯zı¯
CECILIA MARTINI BONADEO
Dipartimento di Filosoﬁa
Universita` di Padova
Padova
Italy
Abstract
Qut:b al-Dı¯n al-Shı¯ra¯zı¯ was a thirteenth-century Persian
polymath, physician, mathematician, astronomer, philos-
opher, and Suﬁ.
Qut:b al-Dı¯n Mah:mu¯d ibn Mas‘u¯d al-Shı¯ra¯zı¯ was born
in Shira¯z in October 1236 in a family of Suﬁtradition.
He began studying medicine under his father, who
practiced and taught medicine at the Moz˙affari hospital
in Shı¯ra¯z. After his father’s death, his uncle and other
physicians of his time trained him in medicine: Qut:b
al-Dı¯n studied Ibn Sı¯na¯’s Qa¯nu¯n (the Canon) and its
commentaries including that of Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯.
Still young, he served at the Moz˙affari hospital as an
ophthalmologist.
Some time after 1260, Qut:b al-Dı¯n left Shiraz for
Maragha, where Nas:ı¯r al-Dı¯n al-T˙u¯sı¯ had established the
famous observatory, a point of attraction for many
scholars from all over the country. In Maragha, Qut:b al-
Dı¯n studied astronomy as well as Ibn Sı¯na¯’s philosophy
and medicine. He read under Nas:ı¯r al-Dı¯n al-T˙usı¯ Ibn
Sı¯na¯’s Isha¯ra¯t wa-l-tanbı¯ha¯t (Pointers and Reminders) and
the Kulliya¯t of the Qa¯nu¯n. He moved then to Khorasan,
and decided to study and work in Juwayn with Najm al-
Dı¯n ‘Alı¯ ibn ‘Umar al-Qazwı¯nı¯ al-Ka¯tibı¯, a cofounder of
the observatory in Maragha.
Qut:b al-Dı¯n traveled a lot, and some time after 1268
he went to Qazwı¯n, Is:faha¯n, and Baghdad; later on, he
traveled to Konya in Anatolia, where he probably met the
famous Persian poet Jala¯l al-Dı¯n Muh:ammad Balkhı¯ (al-
Ru¯mı¯). Then, Qut:b al-Dı¯n was named by the governor of
Konya judge of Sivas and Malatya.
In 1282, the Mongol Il-kha¯n Ah:mad Takuda¯r sent
Qut:b al-Dı¯n to the Mamluk ruler of Egypt. Qut:b al-Dı¯n
spent the rest of his life teaching Ibn Sı¯na¯’s philosophy and
medicine. He died in Tabriz in 1311 and was buried in the
Cˇ aranda¯b cemetery.
The encyclopedic knowledge of Qut:b al-Dı¯n is well
documented by his Persian and Arabic writings: he wrote
on philosophy following the illuminationist tradition, as
well as on medicine, mathematics, geometry, astronomy,
geography, Suﬁsm, theology, law, linguistics, and rhetoric.
Among his works are the Durrat al-ta¯j (The Pearly Crown),
an encyclopedic work on philosophy, natural science,
theology, logic, astronomy, mathematics, and music
written in Persian around 1306 for the ruler of the Iranian
land of Gilan; the Sharh: H˙ ikmat al-Ishra¯qı¯ Shaykh Shiha¯b
al-Dı¯n al-Suhrawardı¯ (Commentary on al-Suhrawardı¯’s
Philosophy of Illumination) written in Arabic; the Nuzha¯t
al-h:ukama¯’ wa-rawd˙at al-at:ibba¯’, a comprehensive com-
mentary in ﬁve volumes on Ibn Sı¯na¯’s Kulliya¯t written in
Arabic; the Ek¯tia¯ra¯t-e moz˙affari, a treatise on astronomy in
Persian; the Niha¯yat al-idra¯k fı¯ dira¯yat al-aﬂa¯k (The Limit
of Accomplishment Concerning Knowledge of the Heavens),
where Qut:b al-Dı¯n describes the planetary motions,
improving Ptolemy’s model and advancing the possibility
for heliocentrism.
See also: ▶Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯ ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯
(Avicenna) ▶Medicine and Philosophy ▶Nas:ı¯r al-Dı¯n
al-Tu¯s:ı¯ ▶al-Suhrawardı¯, Shiha¯b al-Dı¯n Yah:ya¯ al-Maqtu¯l
Qut:b al-Dı¯n al-Shı¯ra¯zı¯ Q
1097
Q

Bibliography
Primary Sources
al-Shı¯ra¯zı¯ Qut:b al-Dı¯n (1938–1941) Durrat al-ta¯j, ed. Mishka¯t SM. Majlis
(repr. H˙ ikmat, Tehran 2006) Tehran
al-Shı¯ra¯zı¯
Qut:b
al-Dı¯n
(2005)
Sharh:
H˙ ikmat
al-Ishra¯q,
ed.
Nu¯ra¯nı¯ ‘A, Muh:aqqiq M. Anjuman-i Ash‘ar wa-Mafa¯khir-i Farhanjı¯,
Tehran
Yah:ya¯ ibn H˙ abash Suhrawardı¯, Mah:mu¯d ibn Mas‘u¯d Qut:b al-Dı¯n
Shı¯ra¯zı¯, Muh:ammad ibn Ibra¯him Sadr al-Dı¯n Shı¯ra¯zı¯ (1986) Le
lirre de la sagesse orientale, ed. Corbin H, Jambet Ch, Verdier,
Paris
Secondary Sources
Pourjavady R, Schmidtke S (2004) Qut˙b al-Din al-Shı¯ra¯zı¯’s (634/1236–
719/1311) Durrat al-Ta¯j and its sources (Studies on Qut˙b al-Din al-
Shı¯ra¯zı¯, I), Journal Asiatique 29(2004):311–330
Walbridge J (1992) The science of mystic lights. Qut:b al-Dı¯n al-Shı¯ra¯zı¯
and the illuminationist tradition in Islamic philosophy. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge
1098 Q
Qut:b al-Dı¯n al-Shı¯ra¯zı¯

