K
Kabasilas, Nicholas Chamae¨tos
▶Nicholas Chamae¨tos Kabasilas
Kala¯m
FRANK GRIFFEL
Department of Religious Studies
Yale University
New Haven, CT
USA
Abstract
Kala¯m is a genre of theological and philosophical litera-
ture in Arabic that was actively pursued between the
eighth and nineteenth centuries. In its early period, the
genre employed a particular type of argumentative tech-
niques and developed a distinct method that is also
referred to as kala¯m. First produced by Muslim authors
in Iraq, the genre and its method was also employed by
Jewish and to a lesser degree Christian Arab theologians.
A practitioner of kala¯m is known as a mutakallim and, in
plural, as mutakallimu¯n. Often translated as ‘‘rationalist
theology,’’ kala¯m is in Islam among the most important
genres of theological literature. Muslim kala¯m can be
divided into three periods: an early period of development
as Muʿtazilite kala¯m, a middle period after the ninth
century when the discourse and its method were adopted
by Sunni Muslim theologians of the Ashʿarite and
Ma¯turı¯dite schools, and a late period after the eleventh
century when kala¯m appropriated many techniques and
teachings from the movement of Neoplatonized Aristote-
lian philosophy in Arabic (falsafa). In medieval European
philosophy and theology, we ﬁnd references to and
refutations of teachings developed during the second
period by Ashʿarite authors, who were known in Latin as
loquentes. In its third period, kala¯m engages in an active
reception of Aristotelian philosophy in Arabic, most
importantly the philosophy of Avicenna (Ibn Sı¯na¯,
d. 1038) and thus continued much of what had earlier
been undertaken in falsafa.
Development of the Genre and Its Methods
Kala¯m describes a particular genre of theological and
philosophical literature in Arabic. In its later period after
the fourteenth century it also appears in other Islamic
languages such as Persian or Ottoman Turkish, though
even then Arabic remains the main language of kala¯m. As
a genre of literature, kala¯m focuses on establishing and
defending certain theological positions through the use of
rational arguments. In doing so, mutakallimu¯n, that is, the
practitioners of kala¯m, have developed elaborate and sys-
tematic views in such ﬁelds as epistemology, the natural
sciences, metaphysics, ethics, and psychology, and it is
a matter of debate whether and to what degree kala¯m
should be considered part of philosophy in Islam (Frank
1979; Sabra 2006). The claim of kala¯m to be considered an
integral part of the history of philosophy in Islam is
clearest during its late period after the twelfth century,
when it appropriates and continues much of the earlier
discourse of falsafa. Kala¯m is often translated as ‘‘rational
theology,’’ although this neglects the philosophical ele-
ment particularly in its late period. Developed in Islam,
kala¯m also establishes itself as a genre of Jewish and
Christian Arabic literature (Wolfson 1979). It went
through signiﬁcant changes throughout its history,
which can be classiﬁed into three main periods: early
Muʿtazilite kala¯m, classical Sunni kala¯m particularly of
the Ashʿarite tradition, and the late kala¯m of the period
after the eleventh century that incorporates techniques
and teachings of falsafa.
As a genre of literature and a particular method of
argumentation, kala¯m establishes during the mid-eighth
century in Iraq. Although much about the early history of
kala¯m is unknown, it appears that it originates in public
religious debates (singular muna¯z˙ara) between members
of different religions and different Muslim denominations
that aimed at the conversion of one’s adversaries to one’s
own theological views (van Ess 1991–1997, 1:48–56).
Leading participants in these public disputes became
Henrik Lagerlund (ed.), Encyclopedia of Medieval Philosophy, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9729-4,
# Springer Science+Business Media B.V., 2011

known as mutakallimu¯n, ‘‘those who appear as speakers
(of a certain group).’’ Kala¯m (‘‘to appear as speaker’’) is the
verbal noun of that activity. During the earliest period it
need not be connected to theology or even rationalist
theology, as grammar and law were also subjects of
debate. By the mid-ninth century, however, a mutakallim
is a theologian who aims to convince his adversaries
through rationalist arguments. Public debates between
mutakallimu¯n remained a staple of kala¯m for many
centuries (van Ess 1976). The focus on rational evidence
(singular h:ujja) may result from the fact that scriptural
arguments are of little value in public disputes between
members of different religions. Another etymology of
kala¯m focuses on its original meaning as ‘‘speech,’’ and
on the verb takallama fı¯ (‘‘to speak about’’), from which
the name of its practitioners derives. Mutakallimu¯n spoke
about and publicly debated subjects such as God and His
attributes, where other, more traditionalist scholars in
Islam practiced self-imposed restraint (Abdel Haleem
1996). Kala¯m is therefore also translated as ‘‘speculative
theology,’’ in the sense of formal, conceptional, and theo-
retical reasoning into such subjects as God and questions
of ontology and ethics (Frank 1992:9–12). Such reasoning
was not unanimously accepted among the scholars of
Islam and there have always been groups who opposed
its practice and/or deemed it illegitimate.
During its early period up to the beginning of the tenth
century, kala¯m is largely synonymous to Muʿtazilite kala¯m
(see below) and even the Jewish and Christian theologians
who adopted kala¯m during this period should be regarded
as Muʿtazilite mutakallimu¯n (Adang et al. 2007). The rela-
tionship of early kala¯m to the contemporaneous move-
ment of translating Greek texts into Arabic is still unclear.
There is a signiﬁcant amount of common technical lan-
guage that is used in these two movements, although the
words do not always bear the same meaning. Both move-
ments, that of early kala¯m and the translation movement
from Greek into Arabic, are inﬂuenced by Aristotelian as
well as Neoplatonic undercurrents in the scientiﬁc and
religious scholarship that existed in pre-Islamic Iraq.
Unlike in falsafa, however, there was no direct inﬂuence
of Greek philosophical literature on early kala¯m and the
type of connections we see appear to be mediated by such
channels as the Christian Aramaic discourse on theology
or Persian natural sciences. Also unlike falsafa, there are
no textual connections of early kala¯m to any preceding
theological or philosophical literature of the wider region
and the lines of inﬂuences seem to go along oral
transmissions, possibly by imitating the argumentative
strategies and the technical language of non-Muslim
theologians in public debates.
Early kala¯m theologians refer to their method as ‘‘dis-
putation’’ (al-muna¯z˙ara) and ‘‘dialectic’’ (al-jadal) and
thus describe the dialogical character of their works
(Frank 1992). Most early kala¯m works cite the position
of an opponent or an interlocutor and then present the
model response to that position or challenge: ‘‘if someone
says . . . then I respond’’ (in qı¯la. . . fa-qultu) (van Ess
1970). Often an adversary’s position is refuted by showing
that one of its implications is either undesirable or leads to
an impossibility. Thus, early kala¯m texts frequently
employ the modus ponens where a position P is shown to
be wrong through the impossibility of one of its implica-
tions Q (P)Q; ¬ Q, therefore ¬ P). Kala¯m texts tend to
focus on a discussion of the implications of and the oppo-
sition to a given position, a practice that would lead
philosophers of the Aristotelian tradition in Arabic
(fala¯sifa) to criticize mutakallimu¯n for pursuing a non-
apodictic method of inquiry (Gutas 2005). One of its
methods is ‘‘exhaustive investigation and successive elim-
ination’’ (sabr wa-taqsı¯m), in which the presentation of
one’s own solution to a problem is accompanied by
a discussion and refutation of all known alternatives and
all possible objections. Many mutakallimu¯n were also
active in the ﬁeld of Islamic law and the dialectical
methods developed in that ﬁeld, particularly that of legal
analogy (qiya¯s), had a strong inﬂuence on kala¯m.
One of the most important literary vehicles of the
genre was the ‘‘kala¯m compendium,’’ a textbook or com-
prehensive summa where subjects discussed in kala¯m are
dealt with according to the same basic scheme. Kala¯m
compendia were produced up to the thirteenth century,
when Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯’s (d. 1210) activity changed this
basic scheme and adapted it to the literary genres of
falsafa. A classical kala¯m compendium would begin with
the discussion of questions of epistemology (al-ʿilm wa-l-
naz˙ar), then proceed to proofs for the existence of God,
then discuss the attributes of God and turn to the way God
relates to His creation. At the end of such a compendium
stood the discussion of prophecy (and thus revelation) as
well as the afterlife, sometimes followed by an inquiry into
the status of the individual and the order of society,
including its leadership (ima¯ma) (Frank 1992, 12f.).
The First Period: Muʿtazilite kala¯m
The development of kala¯m as a genre of Arabic literature
coincides with the formation of the ﬁrst group of system-
atic theologians in Islam, the Muʿtazilites. The Muʿtazilites
emerged from the earlier group of Qadarites, who engaged
in the Islamic theological dispute about human free will
versus divine predestination. Qadarites, who were active
in the Iraqi city of Basra, argued that humans have power
666 K
Kala¯m

(qadar) over their actions and are therefore morally
responsible for them. They argued against a traditionalist
group of scholars (the ahl al-h:adı¯th) who held that the
power to act lies with God, whose omnipotence deter-
mines human actions. Later Muʿtazilites claimed that
around the year 740, the Basrian scholar Wa¯s:il ibn ʿAt:a¯ʾ
(d. 748) disputed with his colleague ‘Amr ibn ‘Ubayd
(d. 761) and convinced him that the teaching of the
prominent Qadarite al-H˙ asan al-Bas:rı¯ (d. 728), namely
that a grave sinner is a ‘‘hypocrite,’’ is wrong. Wa¯s:il ibn
ʿAt:a¯ʾ together with ‘Amr ibn ‘Ubayd are credited to have
formed a new school of thought that called itself ‘‘those
who set themselves apart’’ (al-muʿtazila). Various posi-
tions of this group developed into a system of thought
that expressed itself in ﬁve principles: (1) God’s unity
(tawh:ı¯d), (2) God’s justice (‘ad˙l), (3) God’s absolute sin-
cerity regarding the promised rewards and punishments
for human actions (al-waʿd wa-l-waʿı¯d), (4) the claim that
a grave sinner is neither an unbeliever nor a believer, which
implies that he should not be subject to legal sanctions
while he should still be morally shunned and will certainly
be punished by God in the afterlife (al-manzila bayna
al-manzilatayn ‘‘the station between the two stations’’),
and (5) the obligation to command right and forbid
wrong (al-amr bi-l-maʿru¯f wa-l-nahy ʿan al-munkar).
After the ‘Abba¯sid dynasty took control of the Caliph-
ate in 750, the Muʿtazilites became the leading theological
school in Basra and the new capital Baghdad. The early
‘Abba¯sid Caliphs, particularly al-Maʾmu¯n (reg. 813–833)
and his successors, favored them over their traditionalist
and more scripturalist adversaries. Although he himself
was not committed to Muʿtazilite theology, al-Maʾmu¯n
invited prominent Muʿtazilites to his court. During the
so-called Inquisition (mih:na), al-Maʾmu¯n unsuccessfully
tried to compel acquiescence in the Muʿtazilite doctrine
that the Qurʾa¯n was created in time as opposed to being
eternal. The Inquisition excited great opposition among
prominent traditionalists and would become one reason
for the diminishing inﬂuence of Muʿtazilite theology dur-
ing subsequent centuries.
During the ﬁrst half of the ninth century, leading
proponents of the Muʿtazilites in Baghdad, most promi-
nently Abu¯ l-Hudhayl (d. 842) and al-Naz˙z˙a¯m (d. around
840), developed the school theology into a system that
included explanations of physical processes, God’s nature,
His relationship to creation, and ethics (van Ess 1991–
1997). A second intellectual peak was reached during the
early tenth century in Basra, where Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ al-Jubba¯ʿı¯
(d. 915–916) and his son Abu¯ Ha¯shim al-Jubba¯ʿı¯ (d. 933)
dominated the school tradition. The teaching tradition of
Abu¯ Ha¯shim (known as Bahsha¯miyya) became the most
inﬂuential expression of Muʿtazilite kala¯m. To it belonged
the Qa¯d˙ı¯ ʿAbd al-Jabba¯r (d. 1025), who in his Replete Book
(al-Mug˙nı¯) formulated the most comprehensive treatment
of the school’s theology and remains our most important
source for Muʿtazilite kala¯m. He created a circle of
Muʿtazilite theologians in Rayy (modern Tehran, Iran)
and had a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on Zaydı¯ Shı¯ʿite theology
and early 12er Shı¯ʿite theology.
Although Muʿtazilites continued to be inﬂuential in
regions on the edge of the Islamic world (in Khwarezm,
that is, modern Uzbekistan, and among the Zaydı¯ Shı¯ʿites
in Yemen), their inﬂuence on theological debates in the
center diminished during the eleventh century. One of
their last proponents was Ibn al-Mala¯h:imı¯ (d. 1141) in
Khwarezm and his student al-Zamakhsharı¯ (d. 1144),
author of an inﬂuential Qurʾa¯n commentary. Both were
inﬂuenced by the teaching tradition of Abu¯ l-H˙ usayn
al-Bas:rı¯ (d. 1044), a renegade student of ʿAbd al-Jabba¯r
who was educated in medicine and thus familiar with an
Aristotelian approach to the natural sciences.
Under the heading of God’s unity (tawh:ı¯d), the prin-
cipal Muʿtazilite concern was to uphold divine simplicity
and to defend God against anthropomorphism (tashbı¯h).
They taught that the relationship between God and His
attributes (s:ifa¯t) is totally unlike that of humans and the
attributes they have. Theirs was an austere view of God in
which the essential divine attributes were grounded
directly in His essence and were not afﬁrmed as distinct
entities. Thus, when one afﬁrms God to be living (h:ayy),
knowing (ʿa¯lim), or powerful (qa¯dir), one does not afﬁrm
a separate life (h:aya¯), knowledge (ʿilm), or power (qudra),
the way one does when talking about a human, in whom
such attributes are grounded in so-called entitative acci-
dents or maʿa¯nı¯ (sing. maʿna¯) (van Ess 1991–1997, 3:270–
276, 399f.; 4:425–445). God is believed ‘‘to be’’ the perfect
mode of essential divine attributes like ‘‘living,’’ ‘‘knowing,’’
or ‘‘powerful.’’ Al-Naz˙z˙a¯m taught that ‘‘God is by Himself
continuously knowing, living, powerful, hearing, seeing,
and eternal, not through a (separate) knowledge, power
etc. (that he has).’’ Although a similar range of attributes
can be predicated both of human beings and God, the
mode of their predication or entitlement (istih:qa¯q) differs
(Frank 1978).
The insistence on divine unlikeness under the princi-
ple of God’s unity (tawh:ı¯d) was nevertheless accompanied
by a different emphasis on divine likeness with regard to
the attributes themselves, particularly that of God’s justice.
In defending divine justice, the Muʿtazilites claimed that
the same standards of right and wrong apply to divine
actions as to human actions, arguing that these standards
are innately known to all human beings through reason
Kala¯m K
667
K

and constitute objective characteristics (wajh, pl. wuju¯h:
grounds or act descriptions) of actions (Hourani
1985:57–117). Any human action has one of four objective
characteristics: obligatory (wa¯jib), recommended (nadb),
permissible/morally neutral (muba¯h:), or bad (qabı¯h:).
Performing a morally relevant action creates a certain
‘‘desert’’ (istih:qa¯q) on the side of the human, either as
blame and punishment or as praise and reward. In his
dealings with humankind, God necessarily abides by the
moral code that results from these objective characteristics
and by the economy of deserts that it generates. He honors
claims of reward when they arise, punishes only the
deserving, and compensates for undeserved suffering.
This claim was complemented by the view that human
beings are free to act and responsible for their moral
failures or successes, and thus also with the view that
God gives every human being an opportunity to attain
salvation (Vasalou 2008). The view that God in His justice
administers no unjust punishment led to the admission
that destruction through natural disasters, for instance,
must either be compensated in the hereafter or is just
punishment for bad actions that could have been avoided.
Acting according to the morals of the one justice that is
both divine and human would, in turn, forces God to
grant salvation.
The Second Period: Sunni kala¯m
It was the heavily moralistic outlook of Muʿtazilite kala¯m
evident in this short account that made it vulnerable to
the attacks of Sunni theologians, mostly of the Ashʿarite
school, who argued that human conceptions of justice
were inapplicable to God and, more generally, that
human beings could have no full understanding of the
divine attributes. At the beginning of the tenth century,
al-Ashʿarite (d. 935–936), a renegade Muʿtazilite theolo-
gian from Basra, pointed to what he saw as a fundamental
incoherence at the heart of the Muʿtazilite attempt to give
a systematic rationalization of God’s justice, and the futil-
ity of efforts to reconcile God’s justice with His foreknowl-
edge: for assuming that God knows whether a given
human will go on to make the right or wrong moral
choices within his or her lifetime and assuming also that
God determines a person’s time of death, how could the
Muʿtazilites explain why an infant who dies without hav-
ing performed any actions, whether good or evil, has been
deprived of the chance to earn rewards in the afterlife,
while numerous wretched people are allowed to live long
lives in which they thoughtlessly waste their chances
to obey God – chances that the infant craved in vain?
Prompted by this objection, al-Ashʿarite developed an
alternative to Muʿtazilite kala¯m that would preserve the
Muʿtazilites’ technique of rational argumentation yet crit-
icize their extension of human rational principles into the
divine realm. He insisted, for instance, that when God
describes Himself in the Qurʾa¯n as ‘‘knowing’’ (ʿa¯lim)
this would imply – according to the rules of the Arabic
language – the existence of an entity (maʿna¯) of ‘‘knowl-
edge’’ that God has. Such knowledge is different from
human knowledge and humans cannot gain a full
understanding of divine attributes. With regard to the
entitative quality of the divine attributes (s:ifa¯t) and the
way they are grounded in God’s unity – as well as other
subjects of theology that would apparently defy human
reason – the Ashʿarites applied the principle of acknowl-
edging what they understood to be the teachings of reve-
lation ‘‘without asking how’’ (bi-la¯ kayf). Al-Ashʿarite’s
aim was to practice kala¯m in a way that would preserve
the outward wording of the text of revelation as much as
possible (Gimaret 1990). Unlike the Muʿtazilites, he
saw himself as part of the broader movement of tradition-
alist Sunni Islam that grew out of the opposition to
al-Maʾmu¯n’s Inquisition.
The Ashʿarites’ refusal of extending human rational
principles into the divine led in their ethics to the rejection
of the Muʿtazilite view that God’s justice follows a
moral code that is innately known to humans. Ashʿarites
acknowledged that humans have an innate understanding
of ‘‘good’’ and ‘‘bad,’’ but this does not reﬂect objective
ethical characteristics but is determined to be a mere con-
sideration of their innerworldly beneﬁts. These innate
judgments, however, are ultimately fallacious and cannot
be the basis of ethics or jurisprudence (ﬁqh). Ashʿarites
have a voluntarist understanding of ethical values, where
‘‘good’’ and ‘‘bad’’ are determined by God’s will. Good
actions are those that are rewarded by God (in this world
as well as in the afterlife) and bad actions are those that are
punished. The kind of connection between human actions
and divine reward or punishment can only be learned
from revelation (Hourani 1985:124–166).
While the Ashʿarites were the ﬁrst group of Sunni
mutakallimu¯n they were soon joined by a second group
that established itself in the border region between Iran
and Central Asia and took its inspiration from the work of
al-Ma¯turı¯dı¯ (d. c. 944), a contemporary of al-Ashʿarite
from Samarkand. Whereas Ashʿarite kala¯m adopted cer-
tain positions in a conscious effort to oppose Muʿtazilism,
Ma¯turı¯dite kala¯m was less driven by such an opposition
and is thus in general more rationalist than Ashʿarite
kala¯m in its approach and in this respect closer to
Muʿtazilism (Rudolph 1996).
Ashʿarite kala¯m developed in Basra and Baghdad,
where al-Ashʿarite taught, but moved to Khorasan in
668 K
Kala¯m

northwest Iran at the beginning of the eleventh century. Its
main proponents al-Ba¯qilla¯nı¯ (d. 1013), Ibn Fu¯rak
(d. 1015), al-Isfara¯ʾynı¯ (d. 1027), and al-Juwaynı¯ (d. 1085),
whose Guide to Conclusive Proofs (Kita¯b al-Irsha¯d) remains
a point of reference for this period, developed systematic
positions in many ﬁelds of the sciences. Initially only
a small movement, Ashʿarite kala¯m beneﬁted from the
patronage of rulers from the second half of the eleventh
to the thirteenth centuries and became the most inﬂuen-
tial branch of kala¯m in Islam. During this period,
Ashʿarite kala¯m also became institutionalized in the
newly formed madrasa, a seminary-type school or
college – often ﬁnancially independent – where kala¯m
was part of the curriculum (pace Makdisi 1981, 302f).
Central to early (or also: classical) Ashʿarite kala¯m was
a concern with the preservation of God’s omnipotence,
which provided the context for their systematic denial of
the Aristotelian concept of ‘‘natures’’ (Arab. t:aba¯ʾiʿ). Clas-
sical Ashʿarites denied that beings contained inherent
potentialities capable of determining their future states
and development and emphatically rejected the existence
of any true potentiality outside of God. Out of that posi-
tion grew an independent attempt to explain physical
change in this world and the performance of human
actions. Ashʿarites adopted their understanding of physi-
cal processes from earlier theories developed in Muʿtazilite
kala¯m. The Muʿtazilite movement was particularly rich in
attempts to explain physical processes (Dhanani 1994).
Some Muʿtazilites speculated that movements are not
continuous processes but consist of smaller leaps (singl.
t:afra) that our senses cannot detect and whose sum we
perceive as a continuously ﬂowing movement. This the-
ory, in turn, led other Muʿtazilite thinkers to suggest that
time itself is not a continuous ﬂow but is rather a fast
procession of ‘‘moments’’ (singl. waqt), which again is
concealed from our senses. Al-Ashʿarite adopted these
notions and created an explanation of physical change
known as occasionalism. Occasionalism assumes that no
element in the created world has any causal efﬁcacy over
any other. God is the only cause in this world and He does
not employ secondary agents or intermediaries to mediate
His creative activity. God creates each event immediately,
or rather, He creates this world anew at every moment and
arranges the relationship between the elements therein
anew without causal connection to a prior moment.
What we consider causal natural laws is merely God’s
custom (ʿa¯dat Alla¯h) in creating certain sequences of
events. God, however, can break His custom and He
does so when He creates a miracle in order to conﬁrm
the claim of one of His prophets (Perler and Rudolph
2000:23–62).
Moses Maimonides (d. 1204) gives a faithful yet crit-
ical report of the occasionalist teachings in classical
Ashʿarite kala¯m at the end of the ﬁrst part, in chapters
71–76, of his Guide of the Perplexed (Dala¯lat al-h:a¯ʾirı¯n,
121–162; English trans. 1:175–231). He presents 12 pre-
mises (muqaddima¯t) of Ashʿarite occasionalism and
explains their implications. While written in Arabic,
Maimonides’ Guide became known in Europe ﬁrst
through its Hebrew translation (Mo¯reh nevu¯khı¯m, trans-
lated c. 1200 by Samuel ibn Tibbon) and through a Latin
translation (Dux neutrorum or Dux perplexorum, trans-
lated c. 1240) of the Hebrew version, which renders the
Hebrew word medabberı¯m (for Arab. mutakallimu¯n) as
loquentes (Niewo¨hner 1974). Maimonides thus intro-
duced medieval European thinkers such as Thomas
Aquinas (d. 1274) to the occasionalist ontology of
Ashʿarite kala¯m. Aquinas discusses and refutes a number
of their assumptions in his Summa contra gentiles and in
other works (Perler and Rudolph 2000:131–153).
The Third Period: The Appropriation of
falsafa in kala¯m
Already Ibn Khaldu¯n (d. 1406) in his history of kala¯m
divides it into two main periods and distinguishes the
‘‘method of the later authors’’ (t:arı¯qat al-mutaʾakhkhirı¯n)
from those who preceded them in the classical period.
He characterizes the new method as ‘‘meddling with phil-
osophical works’’ and locates the turning point with
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (d. 1111) (Ibn Khaldu¯n 2005, 3:23–36, English
trans. 3:34–55). The Arabic philosophers of the Aristote-
lian tradition (fala¯sifa) had criticized the mutakallimu¯n
for their use of dialectical methods of argumentation and
their rejection of Aristotelian logic and the method of
demonstration (burha¯n). At the turn of the twelfth cen-
tury, their criticism is taken up by al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, who began his
career as an Ashʿarite mutakallim. In his Incoherence of
the Philosophers (Taha¯fut al-fala¯sifa), he employs the
method of kala¯m as well as arguments developed by earlier
mutakallimu¯n to show that many teachings held by the
fala¯sifa are not apodictically proven. Al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s Incoher-
ence aims to counter the philosophical accusation against
kala¯m that it constitutes a non-apodictic science by show-
ing that much of falsafa is equally non-apodictic. The
book also points the way to a new kind of kala¯m by
acknowledging that the teachings of the fala¯sifa, even if
they are unproven by demonstrative arguments, are not
necessarily wrong. Al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ accepts that Aristotelian logic
is superior to the logic of the mutakallimu¯n and should
be adopted by them (Rudolph 2005). Given the nature
of Aristotelian logic, any incorporation of its system of
deﬁnitions and syllogisms also implies a signiﬁcant
Kala¯m K
669
K

incorporation of Aristotelian ontology, and al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ was
not opposed to that. In the natural sciences, al-G˙ aza¯lı¯
appropriated the methods of the Aristotelian fala¯sifa and
adopted their results. Overall, while rejecting the Aristo-
telian claim of metaphysics as a demonstrative science, al-
G˙ aza¯lı¯ employs and adopts many philosophical teachings
in metaphysics as well as other branches of the sciences,
including, for instance, the psychology of Avicenna (Ibn
Sı¯na¯, d. 1038). These teachings are, for al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, not
the indubitable results of demonstrative arguments, as the
fala¯sifa claim, but merely sound explanations of phenom-
ena that we witness or that are mentioned in the Qurʾa¯n.
For al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, many teachings of the fala¯sifa are true
because they have derived them from the earlier revela-
tions of such prophets as Abraham and Moses. The fala¯sifa
later concealed this and falsely ascribed their origin to
Aristotle and other Greek philosophers (Griffel 2009).
Al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s critique of both falsafa and kala¯m leads to
a gradual rapprochement between these two genres of
Arabic literature. During the twelfth century, the Aristo-
telian tradition in Arabic performs a ‘‘dialectical turn,’’
most importantly in the work of Abu¯ l-Baraka¯t al-Bag˙da¯dı¯
(d. c. 1165). He dismisses earlier claims of apodeixis on the
side of the fala¯sifa and tries to conduct metaphysics, for
instance, as a dialectical science, using techniques similar
to those already established in kala¯m (Griffel forthcoming).
In kala¯m, Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯, who like al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ began
his career as an Ashʿarite mutakallim of classical outlook,
creates a synthesis of falsafa and kala¯m in his two inﬂuen-
tial textbooks Eastern Investigations (al-Maba¯h:ith al-
mashriqiyya) and The Summary in Philosophy and in
Logic (al-Mulakhkhas: fı¯l-h:ikma wa-l-mant:iq, MS London,
British Library, Or. 2360). These books establish a novel
division of the sciences that rejects the types of divisions
found earlier in philosophical literature according to the
books in the corpus Aristotelicum as well as the established
divisions in kala¯m literature. Instead, Fakhr al-Dı¯n creates
a new division – and thus a new curriculum of studies –
along the lines of the most basic ontological distinctions in
both falsafa as well as in kala¯m (Eichner 2009). Fakhr al-
Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯’s works execute an effective merger between
these two discourses in Arabic literature. Authors of post-
classical Ashʿarite kala¯m who were active at the madrasas
of the Muslim east were often equally familiar with the
works of earlier mutakallimu¯n as with those of the fala¯sifa,
most importantly that of Avicenna (Endress 2006).
Although driven by the overarching theological concerns
of Ashʿarite kala¯m, they made extensive use of concepts
and arguments developed by philosophers such as
Avicenna (Endress 2005; van Ess 1966). Often they made
small but signiﬁcant changes to these concepts and
arguments that reﬂect the different theological positions
of Ashʿarite kala¯m and Avicennan falsafa. Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-
Ra¯zı¯’s Summary in Philosophy and in Logic provided the
template for a group of theological and philosophical
summae that were produced during the Il-Kha¯nid period
(1256–1353) in Iran and Iraq. These works, such as al-
Bayd˙a¯wı¯’s (d. c. 1286) Risings Lights (T˙awa¯liʿ al-anwa¯r)
and ʿAd˙ud al-Dı¯n al-I¯jı¯’s (d. 1355) Book of Stations in
kala¯m (Kita¯b al-Mawa¯qif fı¯ ʿilm al-kala¯m), became center-
pieces of kala¯m instruction and were used for centuries.
Together with the commentaries and the supercom-
mentaries on these works, they were part of kala¯m educa-
tion in Muslim madrasas up to the mid-twentieth century
(Robinson 1997). Among the 12er Shı¯ʿites, Nas:ı¯r al-Dı¯n
al-T˙u¯sı¯ (d. 1274) adopted the synthesis of Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-
Ra¯zı¯ and established an intellectual tradition that includes
teachings and techniques of earlier kala¯m as well as earlier
falsafa. His student al-ʿAlla¯ma al-H˙ illı¯ (d. 1325) revived
the study of Muʿtazilite kala¯m, particularly the tradition of
Abu¯ l-H˙ usayn al-Bas:rı¯ (Schmidtke 1991). Subsequently,
12er Shı¯ʿite kala¯m was – and still is – open to inﬂuences
from Ashʿarite and Muʿtazilite kala¯m as well as falsafa
(Schmidtke 2000).
Among the three periods of kala¯m, this last one has
attracted the least attention among researchers and many
questions remain open. It is, for instance, not clear
whether all the books mentioned in the last section should
be regarded as works of kala¯m. Kala¯m, however, was
practiced throughout the centuries at intellectual centers
such as the al-Azhar seminary in Cairo, and some of these
works were used in the instruction. The literary activity of
this late period focuses mainly on commentaries and
supercommentaries to earlier works (Wisnovsky 2004).
One of the last productive mutakallim of al-Azhar in
Cairo was al-Ba¯ju¯rı¯ (d. 1860) who composed numerous
commentaries to earlier works of kala¯m. Muh:ammad
ʿAbduh’s (d. 1905) inﬂuential Epistle on Divine Unity
(Risa¯lat al-Tawhı¯d) of 1897 is still written in the tradition
of kala¯m although it no longer situates itself in the context
of earlier works in that genre and implicitly argues from
the background of the European Enlightenment. The
rediscovery of many texts of Muʿtazilite kala¯m during the
twentieth century led to renewed interest in kala¯m among
Muslim scholars and to partial efforts of reappropriating
Muʿtazilite doctrines (Hildebrandt 2007).
See also: ▶Abu¯ l-Baraka¯t al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ ▶Aristotle, Arabic
▶Ethics, Arabic ▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid Muh:ammad
▶Ibn Khaldu¯n, Abu¯ Zayd ʿAbdarrah˙ma¯n ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯,
Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Logic in the Arab and Islamic
World ▶Moses Maimonides ▶Nas:ı¯r al-Dı¯n al-T˙u¯sı¯
670 K
Kala¯m

▶Natural
Philosophy,
Arabic
▶Philosophy,
Arabic
▶Political Philosophy, Arabic ▶Saadia Gaon ▶Theology
Versus Philosophy in the Arab World
Bibliography
Primary Sources
ʿAbd al-Jabba¯r (1959–1966) al-Mug˙nı¯ fı¯ abwa¯b al-tawh:ı¯d wa-l-ʿadl,
16 vols, ed. al-Khud˙ayrı¯ M et al. Wiza¯rat al-Thaqa¯fa wa-l-Irsha¯d
al-Qawmı¯, Cairo
Abduh M (1979–1980) Risa¯lat al-Tawh:ı¯d. In: al-Aʿma¯l al-ka¯mila li-l-
Ima¯m Muh:ammad ʿAbduh, 3 vols, ed. ʿAma¯ra M. Muʾassasat
al-ʿArabiyya li-l-dira¯sa¯t wa-l-nashr, Beirut, vol 3, pp 349–552;
English trans: Masa’ad I, Cragg K (trans) (1966) The theology of
unity. Allen and Unwin, London
al-Bayd˙a¯wı¯ (1411/1991) T˙awa¯liʿ al-anwa¯r min mat:a¯liʿ al-anz˙a¯r, ed.
Sulayma¯n ʿA. Da¯r al-Jı¯l, Beirut; English trans: Calverley EE, Pollock
JW (trans) (2002) Nature, man and God in medieval Islam, 2 vols.
Brill, Leiden
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (2000) The incoherence of the philosophers/Taha¯fut al-fala¯sifa.
A parallel English–Arabic text, 2nd edn, ed. and trans. Marmura ME.
Brigham Young University Press, Provo
al-I¯jı¯ ʿAd˙ud al-Dı¯n (1417/1997) Kita¯b al-Mawa¯qif [fı¯ ʿilm al-kala¯m]
bi-sharh: (. . .) al-Jurja¯nı¯, 3 vols, ed. Umayra ʿA. Da¯r al-Jı¯l, Beirut
al-Juwaynı¯ (1416/1996) Kita¯b al-Irsha¯d, ed. Tamı¯m A. Muʾassasat
al-Kutub al-Thaqa¯ﬁyya, Beirut; English trans: Walker PE (trans)
(2000) A guide to conclusive proofs for the principles of belief.
Garnet, Reading
Ibn Khaldu¯n (2005) al-Muqaddima, 3 vols, ed. al-Shadda¯dı¯ ʿA. Khiza¯nat
Ibn Khaldu¯n, Casablanca; English trans: Rosenthal F (trans)
(1967) The Muqaddimah. An introduction to history, 2nd edn,
3 vols. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Maimonides Moses (5691/1930–1931) Dala¯lat al-h:a¯ʾirı¯n, ed. Munk S,
Joel I. Junovitch, Jerusalem; English trans: Pines S (1963) The guide
of the perplexed, 2 vols. University of Chicago Press, Chicago
al-Ra¯zı¯ Fakhr al-Dı¯n (1410/1990) al-Maba¯h:ith al-mashriqiyya, 2 vols, ed.
al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ MM. Da¯r al-Kita¯b al-ʿArabı¯, Beirut
Secondary Sources
Abdel Haleem M (1996) Early kala¯m. In: Nasr SH, Leaman O (eds) History
of Islamic philosophy, 2 vols. Routledge, London, vol 1, pp 71–88
Adang C, Schmidtke S, Sklare D (eds) (2007) A common rationality:
Muʿtazilism in Islam and Judaism. Ergon, Wu¨rzburg
Dhanani A (1994) The physical theory of kala¯m. Atoms, space, and void in
Basrian Muʿtazilite cosmology. Brill, Leiden
Eichner H (2009) The post-Avicennian philosophical tradition and
Islamic Orthodoxy – philosophical and theological summae in con-
text. Habilitationsschrift an der Philosophischen Fakulta¨t I der Mar-
tin-Luther-Universita¨t Halle-Wittenberg
Endress G (2005) Die dreifache Ancilla. Hermeneutik und Logik im Werk
des Sayfaddı¯n al-A¯midı¯. In: Perler D, Rudolph U (eds) Logik und
Theologie. Das Organon im arabischen und im lateinischen
Mittelalter. Brill, Leiden, pp 117–145
Endress G (2006) Reading Avicenna in the Madrasa: intellectual geneal-
ogies and chains of transmission of philosophy and the sciences in
the Islamic East. In: Arabic theology, Arabic philosophy. From the
many to the one: essays in celebration of Richard M. Frank, ed.
Montgomery JE. Peeters, Leuven, pp 371–422
Frank RM (1978) Beings and their attributes. State University of New York
Press, Albany
Frank RM (1979) Kala¯m and philosophy, a perspective from one problem.
In: Morewedge P (ed) Islamic philosophical theology. State Univer-
sity of New York Press, Albany, pp 71–95
Frank RM (1992) The science of kala¯m. Arabic Sci Philos 2(1):7–37
Gardet L (1970) ʿIlm al-kala¯m. In: Lewis B et al (eds) Encyclopaedia of
Islam, new edn, vol 3. Brill/Luzac, Leiden/London, pp 1141–1150
Gimaret D (1990) La doctrine d’al-Ashʿarite. Cerf, Paris
Griffel F (2009) Al-Ghaza¯lı¯’s philosophical theology. Oxford University
Press, New York
Griffel F (forthcoming) Between al-Ghaza¯lı¯ and Abu¯ l-Baraka¯t al-Bagh-
da¯dı¯: the dialectical turn in the philosophy of Iraq and Iran during
the 6th/12th century. In: Adamson P (ed) In the age of Averroes:
Arabic philosophy in the sixth/twelfth century. Warburg, London
Gutas D (2005) The logic of theology (kala¯m) in Avicenna. In: Perler D,
Rudolph U (eds) Logik und Theologie. Das Organon im arabischen
und im lateinischen Mittelalter. Brill, Leiden, pp 59–72
Hildebrandt T (2007) Neo-Muʿtazilismus? Intention und Kontext im
modernen arabischen Umgang mit dem rationalistischen Erde des
Islam. Brill, Leiden
Hourani GF (1985) Reason and tradition in Islamic ethics. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
Makdisi G (1981) The rise of colleges. Institutions of learning in Islam and
the West. Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh
Niewo¨hner F (1974) Die Diskussion um den kala¯m und die mutakallimu¯n
in der europa¨ischen Philosophiegeschichtsschreibung. Arch Begr
18(1):7–34
Perler D, Rudolph U (2000) Occasionalismus. Theorien der Kausalita¨t im
arabisch-islamischen und im europa¨ischen Denken. Vandenhoeck &
Ruprecht, Go¨ttingen
Robinson F (1997) Ottomans–Safavids–Mughals: shared knowledge and
connective systems. J Islam Stud 8(2):151–184
Rudolph U (1996) Al-Ma¯turı¯dı¯ und die sunnitische Theologie in Samar-
kand. Brill, Leiden
Rudolph U (2005) Die Neubewertung der Logik durch al-G˙ aza¯lı¯.
In: Perler D, Rudolph U (eds) Logik und Theologie. Das Organon
im arabischen und im lateinischen Mittelalter. Brill, Leiden, pp 73–97
Sabra A (2006) Kala¯m atomism as an alternative philosophy to Helleniz-
ing Falsafa. In: Arabic theology, Arabic philosophy. From the many to
the one. Essays in celebration of Richard M. Frank, ed. Montgomery
JE. Peeters, Leuven, pp 199–271
Schmidtke S (1991) The theology of al-ʿAlla¯ma al-H˙ illı¯ (d. 726/1325).
Klaus Schwarz, Berlin
Schmidtke
S
(2000)
Theologie,
Philosophie
und
Mystik
im
zwo¨lferschiitischen
Islam
des
9./15.
Jahrhunderts.
Die
Gedankenwelten des Ibn Abı¯ Gˇ umhu¯r al-Ah:sa¯ʾı¯. Brill, Leiden
van Ess J (1966) Die Erkenntnislehre des ʿAd˙udaddı¯n al-I¯cı¯. U¨ bersetzung
und Kommentar des ersten Buches seiner Mawa¯qif. Franz Steiner,
Wiesbaden
van Ess J (1970) The logical structure of Islamic theology. In: von
Grunebaum GE (ed) Logic in classical Islamic culture. Harrassowitz,
Wiesbaden, pp 21–51
van Ess J (1976) Disputationspraxis in der islamischen Theologie, eine
vorla¨uﬁge Skizze. Rev E´tudes Islam 44(1):23–60
van Ess J (1991–1997) Theologie und Gesellschaft im 2. und 3.
Jahrhundert Hidschra, 6 vols. de Gruyter, Berlin/New York
Vasalou S (2008) Moral agents and their deserts. The character of
Muʿtazilite ethics. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Watt WM (1973) The formative period of Islamic thought. Edinburgh
University Press, Edinburgh
Wisnovsky R (2004) The nature and scope of Arabic philosophical com-
mentary in post-classical (ca. 1200–1900 AD) Islamic intellectual
Kala¯m K
671
K

history: some preliminary observations. In: Adamson P, Baltussen H,
Stone MWF (eds) Philosophy, science and exegesis in Greek, Arabic
and Latin commentaries, 2 vols. Institute of Classical Studies, London,
vol 2, pp 149–191
Wolfson HA (1976) The philosophy of the kalam. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge
Wolfson HA (1979) Repercussions of the kalam in Jewish philosophy.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge
Kilvington, Richard
▶Richard Kilvington
Kilwardby, Robert
▶Robert Kilwardby
al-Kindı¯, Abu¯ Yu¯suf Yaʿqu¯b ibn
Ish:a¯q
PETER ADAMSON
Philosophy Department
King’s College London
London
UK
Abstract
Al-Kindı¯ (c. 800–870) was the ﬁrst ﬁgure in the Arabic
philosophical tradition to make explicit and extensive use
of Greek ideas. He is thus often described as the ﬁrst
philosopher of this tradition. He also oversaw the work
of translators who rendered works by Aristotle, Plotinus,
Proclus, and others into Arabic. His own writings, usually
in the form of epistles to patrons, range widely over the
topics of Greek philosophy, and science. His fusion of
Aristotelianism with Neoplatonism was intended to be
congenial to Islam, and this approach inﬂuenced several
other authors of the early Arabic philosophical tradition.
Abu¯ Yu¯suf Ya‘qu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q al-Kindı¯ was probably born
around 800 into an important family: his father was the
governor of Ku¯fa in Iraq, and al-Kindı¯ could trace his
lineage back to a companion of the Prophet. To highlight
his origins in the tribe of Kinda, and perhaps the failure of
the Arabs to produce other prominent philosophers, he
was later given the sobriquet ‘‘philosopher of the Arabs.’’
He himself was a highly placed intellectual, serving as
tutor to the son of the Caliph al-Mu‘tas:im (who reigned
from 833–842). We know that he died after 866, the date of
an event mentioned in one of his astrological works; his
death date is usually put at around 870–873.
Al-Kindı¯’s association with the caliphal family is
connected to his important role in the translation move-
ment (for which see Gutas 1998, Endress 1987/1992). He
was apparently not himself a translator, but coordinated
and revised the work of a translation circle whose mem-
bers seem to have been mostly Christians of Syrian extrac-
tion. This so-called ‘‘Kindı¯ circle’’ (see Endress 1997)
produced Arabic versions of Aristotle (for instance, the
ﬁrst translation of the Metaphysics), and famously, Ploti-
nus and Proclus. A redaction of their version of Plotinus
came to be known as the Theology of Aristotle, the most
important source for Neoplatonic ideas in the Arabic-
speaking world (see Adamson 2002b). Their version of
Proclus (on which see Endress 1973) would be inﬂuential
in the Latin world, in a version later called the Book of
Causes (Liber de causis: see D’Ancona 1995).
This circle of translators seems to have produced two
kinds of translations: painfully literal ones and remarkably
free paraphrase versions. Of the literal type, the most
signiﬁcant is their version of Aristotle’s Metaphysics,
ascribed to one Ust˙a¯th and preserved in the lemmata of
Averroes’ Long Commentary for some books of the Meta-
physics. The paraphrase translations, which include their
Arabic renderings of Plotinus and Proclus, revise and
rework the philosophical content of the texts and also re-
order the texts, though the extent to which the reordering
was done already in Kindı¯’s circle is a matter of contro-
versy. A part of the point of the reworking was to make
these works seem useful for a contemporary audience.
Most obviously, the Neoplatonic First Principle is assim-
ilated to a Creator, God.
The same motivation guides many of al-Kindı¯’s own
philosophical works, which are edited in Abu¯ Rı¯da
(1950, 1953) (see also Rashed and Jolivet 1998). These
philosophical treatises, usually written as epistles to the
caliphal family and other patrons or colleagues, constitute
a sizable corpus, especially if they are taken together
with extant works on a range of scientiﬁc topics. (Partic-
ularly well-represented are astrology, optics, mathematics,
meteorology, medicine, and music.) But much of his pro-
digious output is lost. We have a list of his works in the
Fihrist of the tenth century bookseller Ibn al-Nadı¯m. Like
the extant corpus, this list indicates that al-Kindı¯ worked
in an astonishing variety of ﬁelds, ranging from metaphys-
ics to the production of perfume and swords. This
672 K
Kilvington, Richard

eclecticism is in itself a sign of al-Kindı¯’s desire to satisfy
the needs of his cultivated audience (see Rosenthal 1942).
The most famous of al-Kindı¯’s more narrowly ‘‘philo-
sophical’’ works is On First Philosophy (translated in Ivry
1974 and Rashed and Jolivet 1998), which draws exten-
sively on Aristotle, especially the Metaphysics, but also
weaves in themes from Neoplatonic texts and borrows
arguments from John Philoponus. On First Philosophy is
only partially preserved: we possess the ‘‘ﬁrst part,’’ which
is divided into four sections. Al-Kindı¯’s best-known phil-
osophical ideas are contained in this work.
In section one, al-Kindı¯ mounts a spirited defense of
the utility and acceptability of using ideas drawn from the
Greek tradition, and criticizes detractors of ‘‘foreign’’ phi-
losophy. It is unclear who these detractors might be,
though Ivry 1974 speculates that it might be contempo-
rary theologians, such as those collectively described as
‘‘Muʿtazilite.’’ Adamson (2006:25) suggests that the oppo-
nents are more likely to be traditionalists who took
a literalist attitude towards scriptural descriptions of
God. One reason to think this is that al-Kindı¯’s patrons
in the caliphal court supported the Muʿtazilites in their
argument against the traditionalists over the question of
the eternity of the Qurʾa¯n (see further Adamson 2003).
That debate may be somehow related to the topic of
section two, where al-Kindı¯ argues at length that the
created world is not eternal. Here al-Kindı¯ uses and
reworks arguments drawn from John Philoponus’ attack
on Aristotle (see Davidson 1969). The thrust of these
arguments is that if the cosmos were eternal a parte ante
(i.e., if it has existed for an inﬁnite time), then this would
make the cosmos an ‘‘actual inﬁnity,’’ analogous to an
inﬁnitely large body. Al-Kindı¯ thus argues, for instance,
that if the cosmos is ﬁnite in magnitude, it cannot have an
inﬁnite quantity predicated of it. But time is a quantity, so
only a ﬁnite amount of time can be predicated of the
cosmos. Now Aristotle too regarded the actual inﬁnite as
impossible. He held, however, that an eternity of time
would constitute only a potential inﬁnity (the sort of
inﬁnity involved in counting up through the integers:
the process is indeﬁnite, but never actually reaches an
inﬁnite number). Thus al-Kindı¯, following Philoponus,
disagrees with Aristotle primarily in that he believes an
ex parte ante eternal cosmos would constitute an actual,
rather than potential, inﬁnity.
In sections three and four, al-Kindı¯ gives a complex
argument for a ‘‘true One’’ who is the cause of unity in all
other things. As is made explicit at the close of the extant
text, this true One is the God of Islam. Al-Kindı¯ also
argues that this true One transcends characterization by
the maqu¯la¯t, that is, things that can be said. These terms
include the predicables from Porphyry’s Isagoge, and also
part, whole, relation, motion, and soul. Finally, the true
One is higher than intellect: this is a departure from
Aristotle, but agrees with Plotinus. The reason given for
denying all these terms to God is that they imply both
multiplicity and unity. Indeed, the argument for God’s
existence given in section three is based on the claim that
all created things are characterized by both unity and
multiplicity. Al-Kindı¯ then argues that some cause is
required to explain this association of unity and multi-
plicity. The cause must be entirely one and not many at all,
so that it is outside the set of things that are both one
and many.
Al-Kindı¯ also expresses this idea by saying that while
God is ‘‘essentially’’ one, that is, one but not at all many,
other things are ‘‘metaphorically’’ one, that is, both one
and many. A similar idea is found in a very short, perhaps
fragmentary text called On the True Agent (for a transla-
tion of this and several other works by al-Kindı¯, see
McGinnis and Reisman 2007). Here the point is that
only God is truly an Agent, because other things are
acted upon, even if they also act. Al-Kindı¯ thus describes
God’s ﬁrst effect as an intermediary for God’s creative
action. This too may be an inheritance from the Neopla-
tonic translations produced in his circle.
On the other hand, in works on cosmology al-Kindı¯
presents not a Plotinian intellect, but the heavenly bodies,
as the chief instrument by which God indirectly brings
about a providentially ordered cosmos. Al-Kindı¯ follows
the Aristotelian tradition in seeing the world below the
sphere of the moon as consisting of the four elements, air,
earth, ﬁre, and water. The heavenly bodies, by contrast, are
made of an indestructible ﬁfth element. Al-Kindı¯devotes an
epistle to arguing for this claim, apparently unconcerned or
unaware that it was a key part of Aristotle’s arguments for
the eternity of the world, and was attacked by Philoponus in
his Against Aristotle. He does, however, add the caveat that
the heavens exist without being generated or destroyed,
but only for as long as their Creator ordains.
Because heavenly motion brings about the mixture of
the four sublunary elements, it is the heavens which are
directly responsible for the well-ordered world we live in.
As al-Kindı¯ puts it, they are the ‘‘proximate cause of
generation and corruption,’’ while God is the remote
cause, excercising His providence by commanding the
heavens to move in the appropriate way. Though al-Kindı¯
draws these ideas from Aristotle and his commentator
Alexander of Aphrodisias, he extends the theory in several
ways. For example, he uses the theory to interpret a verse
from the Qurʾa¯n which states that even the stars ‘‘prostrate’’
themselves before God. Al-Kindı¯ also discusses in detail
al-Kindı¯, Abu¯ Yu¯suf Yaʿqu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q K
673
K

how the cosmological theory can work in practice, arguing
for the effects of heavenly motions on weather and the
tides. His extensive work in astrology presupposes the cos-
mology described in his more Aristotelian epistles. The
same theory is used by his associate, the great astrologer
Abu¯ Ma‘shar (see further Adamson 2002a, 2006, chap. 8).
By contrast, al-Kindı¯is not clear on how God’s creative
activity relates to immaterial things, notably the human
soul. He does describe the soul as a ‘‘light from the light of
the Creator’’ in a doxographical work, the Discourse on the
Soul. But the emphasis in this and other works of psychol-
ogy is usually on the immateriality of the soul and its
essentially intellective nature. In one short epistle, for
example, he uses ideas from Aristotle’s Categories to
prove that the soul is immaterial. The argument turns on
an identiﬁcation between soul as the form of the body and
the form that is the species of mankind. Since, in general,
species are immaterial substances (this follows Aristotle in
the Categories, though al-Kindı¯ omits the point that spe-
cies are only ‘‘secondary’’ substances), the soul too will be
an immaterial substance.
In the more famous Letter on the Intellect, a forerunner
of works on the intellect by al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Avicenna and others,
al-Kindı¯ classiﬁes intellect (‘aql) into four types: ‘‘ﬁrst,’’
potential, actual, and acquired. The ‘‘ﬁrst’’ intellect is
separate from human soul and is apparently to be identi-
ﬁed with the maker intellect of Aristotle, De anima III.5
(we know from On First Philosophy that this is not to be
identiﬁed with God). The other three are aspects or states
of the human intellect. Humans think by taking on an
intellectual form which is seated in the ﬁrst intellect.
Before they do this, they have a merely potential intellect.
Actual intellect refers to the human intellect when it is
actually grasping such an intellectual form. For al-Kindı¯
the term ‘‘acquired intellect’’ means simply the intellectual
forms which one has already learned, and can then think
about at will – like a storehouse of intelligibles within the
soul. This is in contrast with al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s use of the term to
mean the full attainment of all the intelligibles.
A puzzle about al-Kindı¯’s epistemology is how this
theory of intellect relates to his acceptance of the Platonic
theory of recollection, which he discusses in a short epistle
(see Endress 1994). More generally there is an unclarity
about the role of sense experience in al-Kindı¯’s epistemol-
ogy. It usually seems that for him there is a strong divide
between the intelligible and sensible realms, and that the
human soul properly belongs on the intelligible side. This
picture is basically conﬁrmed, though with greater nuance,
in texts dealing with faculties between intellection and
sensation. The most important of these is a work on
prophetic dreams, based closely on the Parva naturalia.
Al-Kindı¯ here makes dreams a product of the imaginative
faculty, and discusses the interaction of this faculty with
the body. But signiﬁcantly, and unlike Avicenna for
instance, he argues that the imagination does not use the
brain or indeed any organ directly. Instead, it belongs to
the immaterial soul. It is able to receive signs about the
future precisely because it is ontologically closer to intel-
lect than to body. Despite these differences from Avicenna,
he does anticipate the latter’s theory of the internal senses,
but only in a classiﬁcation found in a work on music
(Adamson 2006:142).
Music is one area where al-Kindı¯ deploys his expertise
in mathematics. This is unsurprising since music was
considered part of the mathematical curriculum already
in antiquity. More distinctive is his use of mathematical
methods of argument in purely philosophical contexts; on
this see Gutas 2004. Aside from methodology, one might
think of the Pythagorean ﬂavor of his portrayal of God as
a pure One (though he is careful to contrast God to the
one that generates number). Al-Kindı¯ also uses mathe-
matics in discussing cosmology, for instance to demon-
strate that the cosmos consists of concentric spheres (the
heavens and elements), and in explaining why the ancients
associated the heavens and elements with the Platonic
solids. This latter point is clearly indebted to the Timaeus,
though the means of inﬂuence is unclear. We do know that
one Pythagorean work on mathematics was known to and
used by al-Kindı¯, namely, Nicomachus of Gerasa’s Intro-
duction to Arithmetic.
He also brings his mathematical sensibilities to bear
on medicine, in an inﬂuential work on calculating the
effects of compound drugs (translated into Latin as De
Gradibus). He applies geometry to problems of optics, in
this following the tradition of mathematical optics already
explored by Euclid and Ptolemy. His theory of light is an
important precursor of the visual theory of Ibn al-
Haytham (d. 1040). The success of geometry in optics
may have encouraged him to extend a theory of ‘‘rays’’ to
deal with a broad array of physical phenomena. We ﬁnd
such a theory on De radiis, a work preserved only in
Latin and inﬂuential on medieval theories of magic.
Though this work is ascribed to al-Kindı¯, its authentic-
ity is disputed. (For further discussion of al-Kindı¯’s
mathematically inspired works, see Travaglia 1999 and
Adamson 2006, chap. 7. For his works on optics see
Rashed 1997.)
We know from the Fihrist that al-Kindı¯ wrote exten-
sively on practical philosophy, but unfortunately most of
this output is lost. We are left with only a few relevant
works, the longest and most inﬂuential of which is On
Dispelling Sorrow (see Druart 1993; Mestiri and Dye 2004;
674 K
al-Kindı¯, Abu¯ Yu¯suf Yaʿqu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q

Adamson 2006, chap. 6). In general, al-Kindı¯’s ethical
outlook is simple and uncompromising: turn away from
the things of the body and concentrate on the ‘‘world of
the intellect.’’ This is already clear from the aforemen-
tioned Discourse on the Soul. But in On Dispelling Sorrow
al-Kindı¯ adds to the intellectualist picture familiar from
his psychological works, giving the reader encouragement
with an abundance of anecdotes and maxims. A couple of
these are drawn from his anthology of sayings and witti-
cisms ascribed to Socrates, which is an early example of
so-called
‘‘Wisdom
Literature,’’
an
often-overlooked
means of cultural contact between literary Arabic and
the Greek philosophical tradition.
Finally, mention should be made of two propaedeutic
works by al-Kindı¯ or his circle, which are intended as
guides to the Greek philosophical tradition for his Arabic-
speaking audience. First, On the Quantity of Aristotle’s
Books, which provides a picture of al-Kindı¯’s knowledge
of the Aristotelian corpus. The structure into which he
puts his overviews of each Aristotelian work tells us some-
thing about how he saw the Greek philosophical curricu-
lum: he follows the tradition of seeing theoretical science
as divided into three parts, dealing with bodies, immate-
rial things that are related to bodies (i.e., souls or mathe-
matical entities), and wholly immaterial things (notably
God). His summaries show an uneven knowledge of
Aristotle’s corpus, to the point where he can at times add
nothing beyond the title. But there are longer discussions
of the Categories and Metaphysics, for instance, works
which we know he used in his own writings.
Second, there is On the Deﬁnitions and Descriptions of
Things, a work preserved in several very different versions.
Each version comprises a list of philosophical terms with
deﬁnitions. The terms deﬁned seem to be drawn from
Greek sources, but the terms themselves are Arabic. This
shows that al-Kindı¯ and his circle realized the need to
produce a new Arabic technical vocabulary based on the
Greek vocabulary of their source texts. They realized also
that this new Arabic terminology would not be easily
understood by their audience. On Deﬁnitions can thus be
seen as a guide to the new language of philosophy in
Arabic, or falsafa (which, as it happens, is one of the two
terms with the longest deﬁnitions, the other being ‘‘vir-
tue’’). The terminological innovations of the Kindı¯ circle
had mixed success. Some of their technical words were
taken up in the later tradition, while others were dropped.
But as mentioned above, the translations they produced
were inﬂuential.
The inﬂuence of al-Kindı¯’s own thought was conﬁned
largely to a group of authors who might be called the
‘‘Kindı¯an tradition’’ (see Adamson 2007). These include,
in the ﬁrst instance, attested students and associates of
al-Kindı¯ himself: al-Sarakhsı¯ (d. 899), Abu¯ Zayd al-Balkhı¯
(d. 934), and the aforementioned astrologer Abu¯ Ma‘shar
al-Balkhı¯(d. 886). Abu¯ Zayd was an important conduit for
the Kindı¯an tradition, since he taught the well-known
philosopher Abu¯ l-H˙ asan al-‘A¯mirı¯ (d. 922), and the
more obscure Ibn Farı¯g˙u¯n (tenth century). Apart from
ﬁrst- and second-generation students, ﬁgures inﬂuenced
by al-Kindı¯ include the Jewish thinker Isaac Israeli
(d. c. 907) and the historian and Neoplatonist Miskawayh
(d. 1030), both of whom quote from al-Kindı¯ and texts
produced in his circle.
The Kindı¯an tradition is distinctive, ﬁrst of all, geo-
graphically: most of the thinkers just mentioned were
from central Asia (e.g., Balkh and Sarakhs). Intellectually,
they are distinguished by their openness to a wide range of
disciplines,
including
Muslim
speculative
theology
(kala¯m) and the ﬁner literary arts. In both respects they
can be contrasted to the tenth century circle of Aristotelian
thinkers in Baghdad, who included the famous al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯.
But perhaps because of Avicenna’s disdain for the Kindı¯an
thinkers, al-Kindı¯’s inﬂuence seems to peter out around
the end of the tenth century.
See also: ▶al-ʿA¯mirı¯, Abu¯ l-H˙ asan ▶Aristotle, Arabic
▶al-Balkhı¯, Abu¯ Zayd ▶Ibn Farı¯g˙u¯n ▶Isaac Israeli
▶John Philoponus ▶al-Kindı¯, Latin Translations of
▶Miskawayh, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ ▶Philoponus, Arabic ▶Philoso-
phy,
Arabic
▶Plotinus,
Arabic
▶Porphyry,
Arabic
▶Proclus, Arabic ▶Proofs of the Existence of God
▶al-Sarakhsı¯, Ah˙mad ibn al-T˙ayyib
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Abu¯ Rı¯da M (ed) (1950/1953) Al-Kindı¯. Rasa¯’il al-Kindı¯ al-falsaﬁyya.
2 vols. Da¯r al-Fikr al-‘Arabı¯, Cairo
Ivry A (1974) Al-Kindı¯’s Metaphysics. SUNY, Albany
McGinnis J, Reisman, DC (ed and trans) (2007) Classical Arabic philos-
ophy: an anthology of sources. Hackett, Indianapolis
Mestiri S, Dye G (2004) Al-Kindı¯: Le moyen de chasser les tristesses et
autres textes e´thiques. Fayard, Paris
Rashed R (1997) Oeuvres philosophiques & scientiﬁques d’al-Kindı¯: vol 1:
L’Optique et la catoptrique. Brill, Leiden
Rashed R, Jolivet J (1998) Oeuvres philosophiques & scientiﬁques d’al-
Kindı¯: vol 2, Me´taphysique et cosmologie. Brill, Leiden
Ritter H, Walzer R (1938) Uno scritto morale inedito di al-Kindı¯. Reale
Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei, Rome
Secondary Sources
Adamson P (2002a) Abu¯ Ma‘shar, al-Kindı¯ and the philosophical defense
of astrology. Rech Philos The´ol Me´die´v 69:245–270
Adamson P (2002b) The Arabic Plotinus: a philosophical study of the
Theology of Aristotle. Duckworth, London
al-Kindı¯, Abu¯ Yu¯suf Yaʿqu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q K
675
K

Adamson P (2003) Al-Kindı¯ and the Mu‘tazila: divine attributes, creation
and freedom. Arabic Sci Philos 13:45–77
Adamson P (2006) Al-Kindı¯. Oxford University Press, New York
Adamson P (2007) The Kindian tradition: the structure of philosophy in
Arabic Neoplatonism. In: D’Ancona C (ed) The Libraries of the
Neoplatonists. Brill, Leiden, pp 351–370
D’Ancona C (1995) Recherches sur le Liber de causis. Vrin, Paris
Davidson HA (1969) John Philoponus as a source of medieval Islamic and
Jewish proofs of creation. J Am Orient Soc 89:357–391
Druart T-A (1993) Al-Kindı¯’s ethics. Rev Metaphys 47:329–357
Endress G (1973) Proclus Arabus. Zwanzig Abschnitte aus der Institutio
theologica in arabischer U¨ bersetzung. Steiner, Beirut
Endress G (1987/1992) Die wissenschaftliche Literatur. In: Ga¨tje H (ed)
Grundriss der arabischen Philologie. Ludwig Reichert, Wiesbaden,
vol 2, pp 400–506, vol 3 (supplement), pp 3–152
Endress G (1994) Al-Kindı¯ u¨ber die Wiedererinnerung der Seele. Oriens
34:174–221
Endress G (1997) The circle of al-Kindı¯. In: Endress G, Kruk R (eds) The
ancient tradition in Christian and Islamic Hellenism. Research
School CNWS, Leiden, pp 43–76
Gutas D (1998) Greek thought, Arabic culture: the Graeco-Arabic trans-
lation movement in Baghdad and early ‘Abba¯sid society (2nd-4th/
8th-10th centuries). Routledge, London
Gutas D (2004) Geometry and the Rebirth of Philosophy in Arabic with
al-Kindı¯. In Arnzen R, Thielmann J (eds) Words, texts and concepts
cruising the Mediterranean Sea: studies on the sources, contents and
inﬂuences of Islamic civilization and Arabic philosophy and science.
Peeters, Leuven, pp 195–209
Jolivet J (1971) L’Intellect selon Kindı¯. Brill, Leiden
Rosenthal F (1942) Al-Kindı¯ als Literat. Orientalia 11:262–288
Travaglia P (1999) Magic, causality, and intentionality. the doctrine of
rays in al-Kindı¯. Micrologus, Turnhout
al-Kindı¯, Latin Translations of
CHARLES BURNETT
The Warburg Institute
London
UK
Abstract
Al-Kindı¯ was known in the Latin West as an expert on
astrology, weather forecasting, medicine, philosophy, and
the theory of magic. In university contexts he ranked
alongside al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Avicenna, al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, and Averroes as
an Arabic philosophical authority, as a result of the trans-
lation of three of his philosophical ‘‘letters.’’ Two Latin
works, not extant in Arabic, became classical texts in two
practical subjects: weather forecasting and magic. Con-
spicuous in his Latin works is the application of mathe-
matics to natural science.
Because of the selection of texts written by al-Kindı¯ and
translated into Latin, and, in particular, because two texts
popular in Latin (De radiis and De mutatione temporum)
have no identiﬁed equivalent in Arabic, the ﬁgure of al-
Kindı¯ in the Latin West is rather different from that in the
Islamic world. It is fairer to say that we ﬁnd different
ﬁgures in the Latin tradition. There is al-Kindı¯ the astrol-
oger, al-Kindı¯ the principal authority on weather forecast-
ing, al-Kindı¯ the doctor, al-Kindı¯ an interpreter of, and
commentator on, philosophy, and al-Kindı¯ an expert on
the theory of magic. There is some overlap between these
different personae, but distinctions remain, partly due to
the different routes of transmission of al-Kindı¯’s texts.
It is debatable whether ‘‘Alchandreus,’’ the Arabic
authority whose name is associated with the earliest
Arabic astrological texts translated into Latin (late tenth
century), is a corruption of ‘‘al-Kindı¯.’’ Nevertheless it is in
the ﬁeld of astrology that al-Kindı¯ ﬁrst became known in
the Latin West. In the mid-twelfth century, the translator
Robert of Ketton quotes Hermann of Carinthia as saying
that he is the ‘‘preeminent authority in astrology’’ (preface
to Robert’s translation of al-Kindı¯’s Forty Chapters).
His substantial work on astrological judgments known as
The Forty Chapters, extant in Arabic, was translated into
Latin both by Robert of Ketton (ﬂ. 1141–1143) and, in
all probability, by Hugo of Santalla (ﬂ. 1145). The latter
translator also promised a translation of al-Kindı¯’s com-
mentaries on Ptolemy’s Almagest and Tetrabiblos, but
there is no evidence that this promise was fulﬁlled.
We do, however, have a Latin work on weather forecast-
ing (De mutatione temporum), which is probably the
translation of a lost Arabic summary of two letters on
the theory and practice of forecasting the weather from
the movements of the heavenly bodies which have sur-
vived in a double translation in Hebrew (On the Causes
Attributed to the Higher Bodies Which Indicate the Origin of
Rains and On Moistures and Rain). The De mutatione
temporum brings together astrological doctrine on the
lunar mansions, of purported Indian origin, with specu-
lation on how the heavenly bodies inﬂuence sublunar
events, which matches the theories in al-Kindı¯’s Letter on
the Proximate Efﬁcient Cause of Generation and Corrup-
tion. In conformity with the Aristotelian account of the
ﬁfth essence, al-Kindı¯ denies that the heavenly bodies
are themselves hot, cold, dry, and moist, but claims
that they are rather states that cause variations in temper-
ature by their movement. The Latin translator of
De mutatione temporum (called ‘‘Azogont’’ in two of the
30 odd extant manuscripts) has not been identiﬁed; of
the Hebrew versions one was made by Kalonymus ben
676 K
al-Kindı¯, Latin Translations of

Kalonymus in 1314, the other is anonymous. The com-
prehensive and scientiﬁc nature of the text ensured that it
remained the most important authority on weather fore-
casting until the early modern period. Girolamo Cardano
praised weather forecasting as ‘‘the most noble part of
philosophy,’’ and al-Kindı¯ as one of the 12 ‘‘outstanding
men in the scientiﬁc disciplines’’ (De subtilitate, bk XVI,
Nuremburg 1550, pp 310–311 and 317), while Bernardino
Baldi (1588) singled out for mention the De mutatione
temporum in his account of al-Kindı¯ as a mathematician
(Le vite de’ matematici, pp 120–121).
A small selection from al-Kindı¯’s numerous ‘‘letters’’
(rasa¯’il) on philosophical topics was translated in Toledo
by Gerard of Cremona (d. 1187) in conjunction with
Aristotle’s libri naturales and their Arabic commentaries.
These are De ratione (On the Intellect), De quinque essentiis
(On the Five Essences), and De somno et visione (On Sleep
and Dreams). A second Latin version of De Ratione, called
De intellectu, also exists. The Arabic original of De quinque
essentiis has not been identiﬁed. These three letters take up
questions raised in Aristotle’s De anima, bk. 3, Physics
bk. 4, and De somno et vigilia, respectively. Other Latin
sources refer to a commentary by al-Kindı¯ on De
generatione et corruptione (a reference in a rubrication in
Baltimore, Walters Art Museum, Ms. W. 66, fol. 82r:
Aristoteles Latinus, Codices, no. 3) and ‘‘proofs and objec-
tions’’ concerning De anima, bk 3 (Cracow, Bibl. Jag., 742,
fol. 193v: probationes et improbationes Jacobi Alkindı¯), but
the existence of such texts in Arabic or in Latin cannot be
veriﬁed. These works gave al-Kindı¯ a place, alongside al-
Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Avicenna, Algazel, and Averroes, among Arabic
authorities on Peripatetic philosophy.
Gerard of Cremona also translated a systematic trea-
tise on optics by al-Kindı¯ (De aspectibus). This is
a mathematical text, dealing with the geometry of the
projection of rays of light, rather than the physiognomy
of vision. It is complementary to another treatise called
the De radiis, which deals with rays at a cosmic and
metaphysical level, and is also known as the Theorica
artium magicarum (which we might translate as ‘‘the the-
ory behind the arts of magic’’). The origins of the Latin
text are obscure: no Arabic original has been found, and
the Latin shows no sign of the inﬂuences of the Arabic
language, which are characteristic of the literal translations
of the time, though a parallel in terminology and style has
been noted in an anonymous translation from Arabic
of the ﬁrst few paragraphs of Aristotle’s Metaphysics
(Martini 2001). The De radiis follows the traditional Peri-
patetic line of ascribing all sublunar movement and
change to the movement of the celestial bodies. However,
al-Kindı¯ takes up an astrological concept – the projection
of rays – and tries to apply this universally. In astrology,
the projection of rays refers to the inﬂuence exerted by one
planet on another when the two planets are in a certain
geometrical relation to each other (i.e., in one of the
astrological ‘‘aspects’’). Although hinting at these relations
by using the usual technical term for aspect (respectus) and
referring to the celestial ‘‘harmony,’’ which is traditionally
achieved by these geometrical relations, al-Kindı¯conceives
of the rays as being cast on whatever object – celestial or
elemental – falls within the range of the star’s light. But he
goes further: the objects in the world of the elements,
containing the ‘‘species’’ of the sidereal world, also trans-
mit rays. Sounds and colors, too, emit rays. Recalling the
traditional deﬁnition of sound, the author writes that ‘‘the
collision of bodies’’ makes a sound that ﬂows out in all
directions by the rays belonging to its kind. Above all, man
produces rays; for he is a microcosm since the species of all
mundane things are imprinted in his imagination, and
therefore his ‘‘imagining spirit’’ (spiritus ymaginarius)
has rays that conform to the rays of the world, and hence
he achieves the power to move things outside him by his
rays just as the world (both upper and lower) moves things
into different motions by its rays. Hence, when man con-
ceives something corporeal in his imagination, that thing
receives actual existence according to species in his imag-
ining spirit. This accounts for the ability of the spirit to
move objects outside it by its rays. Similarly, the voice can
effect change in the outside world, through incantations.
The De radiis provided the most philosophical and scien-
tiﬁc justiﬁcation for the effectiveness of magic in the
Middle Ages, and as such was the object of attack of
Giles of Rome in his chapter on al-Kindı¯ in his Errores
philosophorum.
Another area of inﬂuence of al-Kindı¯ in Latin was due
to his text on how to calculate the ‘‘degrees’’ in compound
medicines (De gradibus), also translated by Gerard of
Cremona. According to Galenic medicine, every simple
medicine (be it a plant, animal part, mineral or ‘‘water’’)
was classiﬁed according to a range of one to four degrees of
heat, coldness, dryness, and moisture. In his De gradibus
al-Kindı¯ explains how one should work out the effects of
the combinations of simple medicines. His system was
accepted by the inﬂuential Catalan medical authority,
Arnald of Villanova.
If there is a leitmotif in the Latin works of al-Kindı¯ it
is the application of mathematics to natural sciences.
The calculation of degrees of quantities appears in both
De gradibus and De mutatione temporum. Weather fore-
casting itself cannot be approached unless one has
al-Kindı¯, Latin Translations of K
677
K

a thorough grounding in the mathematical sciences. The
effects of the projection of rays (De radiis) cannot be
understood unless one ﬁrst has a grounding in optics
(De aspectibus).
See also: ▶Aristotle, Arabic ▶Arabic Texts: Natural Phi-
losophy, Latin Translations of ▶Astronomy and Astrology
in the Arab World ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r ▶Gerard of
Cremona
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Jolivet Jean (ed) (1971) L’intellect selon Kindı¯. Leiden
al-Kindı¯ (1975) De radiis. In: Hudry Franc¸oise, d’Alverny Marie-The´re`se
(eds) Arch Hist Doctrin Litt M-Aˆ ge. 49:139–259
al-Kindı¯ (1975) De gradibus. In: Michael McVaugh (ed)
Arnaldi
de Villanova Opera Medica Omnia II, Aphorismi de Gradibus.
Granada
al-Kindı¯ (2000) De mutatione temporum. In: Bos Gerrit, Burnett
Charles (eds) Scientiﬁc weather forecasting in the Middle Ages: the
works of al-Kindı¯. London/New York
Nagy Albino (ed) (1897) De intellectu, De ratione, De quinque essentiis,
De somno et visione. Beitra¨ge zur Geschichte der Philosophie des
Mittelalters, 2.5, Mu¨nster
Secondary Sources
Adamson P (2007) Al-Kindı¯, Oxford
Akasoy A (2006) Die lateinischen U¨ bersetzungen der Risa¯la fı¯’l-‘aql al-
Kindı¯s. In: Intellect et imagination dans la Philosophie Me´die´vale,
Actes du XIe Congre`s International de Philosophie Me´die´vale de la
Socie´te´ Internationale pour l’E´tude de la Philosophie Me´die´vale,
Porto, du 26 au 31 aouˆt 2002. Turnhout, pp 689–701
Baldi B (1998) In: Nenci E (ed) Le vite de’ matematici. Milan
Burnett C (1993) Al-Kindı¯on judicial astrology: the Forty Chapters.’ Arab
Sci Philos 3:77–117
Burnett C (1998) Al-Kindı¯ in the Renaissance. In: Blum PR (ed)
Sapientiam amemus: Humanismus und Aristotelismus in der
Renaissance (Festschrift Eckhard Kessler). Munich, pp 13–30
Martini C (2001) The Arabic version of the book Alpha Meizon
of Aristotle’s Metaphysics and the testimony of the MS Bibl.
Apostolica Vaticana, ott. Lat. 2048, In: J. Hamesse (ed.), Les
traductcur travail. Leurs manuscripts et leurs me´thodes, Brepols,
Turnhout, pp 173–206
Travaglia P (1999) Magic, causality and intentionality: the doctrine of rays
in al-Kindı¯. Florence
Knowledge
▶Certainty
Kydones, Demetrios
▶Demetrios Kydones
Kydones, Prochoros
▶Prochoros Kydones
678 K
Knowledge

