10
Anyons
13. R. Haag: Local Quantum Physics: Fields, Particles, Algebras (Springer, Heidelberg 1992)
14. R.V. Kadison & J.R. Ringrose: Fundamentals of the Theory of Operator Algebras. Vol. 1:
Elementary Theory; Vol. 2: Advanced Theory (Academic, New York 1983, 1986)
15. N.P. Landsman: Mathematical Topics Between Classical and Quantum Mechanics (Springer,
New York 1998)
16. N.P. Landsman: Between classical and quantum, in Handbook of the Philosophy of Science
Vol. 2: Philosophy of Physics, ed. by J. Butterﬁeld and J. Earman, pp. 417–554 (North-Holland,
Elsevier, Amsterdam 2007)
17. H. Primas: Chemistry, Quantum Mechanics and Reductionism, Second Edition (Springer,
Berlin 1983)
18. M. Redei: Why John von Neumann did not like the Hilbert space formalism of quantum me-
chanics (and what he liked instead). Stud. Hist. Phil. Mod. Phys. 27, 493–510 (1996).
19. G.L. Sewell: Quantum Mechanics and its Emergent Macrophysics (Princeton University Press,
Princeton 2002)
20. F. Strocchi: Elements of Quantum mechanics of Inﬁnite Systems (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore
1985)
21. M. Takesaki: Theory of Operator Algebras. Vols. I-III. (Springer, New York 2003)
22. W. Thirring: Quantum Mathematical Physics: Atoms, Molecules and Large Systems, Second
Edition (Springer, New York 2002)
Angular Momentum
 See Spin; Stern–Gerlach experiment; Vector model.
Anyons
Jon Magne Leinaas
Quantum mechanics gives a unique characterization of elementary particles as be-
ing either bosons or fermions. This property, referred to as the  quantum statistics
of the particles, follows from a simple symmetry argument, where the  wave func-
tions of a system of identical particles are restricted to be either symmetric (bosons)
or antisymmetric (fermions) under permutation of particle coordinates. For two
spinless particles, this symmetry is expressed through a sign factor which is as-
sociated with the switching of positions
ψ(r1, r2) = ±ψ(r2, r1) ,
(1)
with + for bosons and −for fermions. From the symmetry constraint, when ap-
plied to a many-particle system, the statistical distributions of particles over single
particle states can be derived, and the completely different collective behaviour of
systems like  electrons (fermions) and photons (bosons) ( light quantum) can be
understood.

Anyons
11
A
The restriction to two possible kinds of quantum statistics, represented by the
sign factor in (1), seems almost obvious. On one hand the permutation of parti-
cle coordinates has no physical signiﬁcance when the particles are identical, which
means that the wave function can change at most by a complex phase factor eiθ.
On the other hand a double permutation seems to make no change at all, which fur-
ther restricts the phase factor to a sign ±1. This is the standard argument used in
textbooks like [14].
However, there is a loophole to this argument, as pointed out by J.M. Leinaas and
J. Myrheim in 1976 [1]. If the dimension of space is reduced from three to two the
constraint on the phase factor is lifted and a continuum of possibilities appears that
interpolates between the boson and fermion cases. In [1] these unconventional types
of quantum statistics were found by analysis of the wave functions deﬁned on the
many-particle conﬁguration space. Other approaches by G.A. Goldin, R. Menikoff,
and D.H. Sharp [2] and by F. Wilczek [3] lead to similar results, and Wilczek in-
troduced the name anyon for these new types of particles. As a precursor to this
discussion M.G.G. Laidlaw and C.M. DeWitt had already shown that a path integral
description applied to systems of identical particles reproduces standard results, but
only in a space of dimensions higher than two [4].
The difference between continuous interchange of positions in two and three di-
mensions can readily be demonstrated, as illustrated in Fig. 1a. In two dimensions
a two-particle interchange path comes with an orientation, and as a consequence a
right-handed path and its inverse, a left-handed path, may be associated with dif-
ferent (inverse) phase factors. In three and higher dimensions there is no intrinsic
difference between orientations of a path, since a right-handed path can be continu-
ously changed to a left-handed one by a rotation in the extra dimension. Therefore,
in dimensions higher than two the exchange phase factor has to be equal to its in-
verse, and is consequently restricted to ±1. This explains why anyons are possible
in two but not in three dimensions. Since the statistics angle θ in the exchange fac-
tor eiθ is a free parameter, there is a different type of anyon for each value of θ. For
time
eiθ
e−iθ
a
b
Fig. 1 Switching positions in two dimensions. (a) The difference between right-handed and left-
handed interchange may give rise to quantum phase factors e±iθ that are different from ±1.
(b) When many particles switch positions the collection of continuous particle paths can be viewed
as forming a braid and the associated phase factor can be viewed as a representing an element of
the braid group

12
Anyons
systems with more than two particles the different paths deﬁne more complicated
patterns (Fig. 1b), which are generally known as braids, and in this view of quan-
tum statistics the corresponding braid group is therefore more fundamental than the
permutation group. The generalized types of quantum statistics characterized by the
parameter θ is often referred to as fractional statistics or braiding statistics.
Since anyons can only exist in two dimensions, elementary particles in the world
of three space dimensions are still restricted to be either fermions or bosons. But in
condensed matter physics the creation of quasi-twodimensional systems is possible,
and in such systems anyons may emerge. They are excitations of the quantum sys-
tem with sharply deﬁned particle properties, generally known as quasiparticles.
The presence of anyons in such systems is not only a theoretical possibility, as
was realized after the discovery of the fractional  quantum Hall effect in 1982.
This effect is due to the formation of a two-dimensional, incompressible electron
ﬂuid in a strong magnetic ﬁeld, and the anyon character of the quasiparticles in
this system was demonstrated quite convincingly in theoretical studies [5, 6]. Al-
though theoretical developments have given further support to this idea, a direct
experimental evidence has been lacking. However, experiments performed by V.J.
Goldman and his group in 2005, with studies on interference effects in tunnelling
currents, have given clear indications for the presence of excitations with fractional
statistics [7].
The discovery of the fractional quantum Hall effect and the subsequent de-
velopment of ideas of anyon superconductivity [15] gave a boost in interest for
anyons, which later on has been followed up by ideas of anyons in other types
of systems with exotic quantum properties. One of these ideas applies to rotating
atomic  Bose-Einstein condensation, where theoretical studies have lead to pre-
dictions that at sufﬁciently high angular velocities a transition of the condensate to
a bosonic analogy of a quantum Hall state will occur, and in this new quantum state
anyon excitations should exist [8].
Topology is an important element in the description of anyons, since the focus
is on continuous paths rather than simply on permutations of particle coordinates
[1]. This focus on topology and on braids places the theory of anyons into a wider
context of modern physics. Thus, anyons form a natural part of an approach to
the physics of exotic condensed matter systems known as topologically ordered
systems, where the two-dimensional electron gas of the quantum Hall system is a
special realization [9]. The braid formulation also opens for generalizations in the
form of non-abelian anyons. In this extension of the anyon theory, the phase factor
associated with the interchange of two anyon positions is replaced by non-abelian
unitary operations (or matrices). This is an extension of the simple identical particle
picture of anyons, since new degrees of freedom are introduced which in a sense are
shared by the participants in the braid. In the rich physics of the quantum Hall effect
there are indications that such nonabelions may indeed exist [10], and theoretical
ideas of exploiting such objects in the form of topological  quantum computation
[11] have gained much interest.
The topological aspects are important for the description of anyons, but at the
same time they create problems for the study of many-anyon systems. Even if no

Anyons
13
A
additional interaction is present such systems can be studied in detail only when the
particle number is small. There are also limitations to the application of standard
many-particle methods. For these reasons the physics of many-anyon systems is
only partly understood. One approach to the many-anyon problem is to trade the
non-trivial braiding symmetry for a compensating statistics interaction [1], which is
a two-body interaction that is sensitive to the braiding of particles, but is independent
of distance. The same type of statistics transformation has also been used in ﬁeld
theory descriptions of the fractional quantum Hall effect, where the fundamental
electron ﬁeld is changed by a statistics transmutation into an effective bosonic ﬁeld
of the system [12].
Even if anyons, as usually deﬁned, are particles restricted to two dimensions,
there are related many-particle effects in one dimension. The interchange of parti-
cle positions cannot be viewed in the same way, since particles in one dimension
cannot switch place in a continuous way without actually passing through each
other. Nevertheless there are special kinds of interactions that can be interpreted as
representing unconventional types of quantum statistics also in one dimension [13].
The name anyon is often applied also to these kinds of particles.
For further reading see [15] and [16].
Primary Literature
1. J.M. Leinaas, J. Myrheim: On the theory of identical particles. Il Nuovo Cimento B 37, 1
(1977).
2. G.A. Goldin, R. Menikoff, D.H. Sharp: Representations of a local current algebra in nonsimply
connected space and the Aharonov-Bohm effect. J. Math. Phys. 22, 1664 (1981).
3. F. Wilczek: Magnetic ﬂux, angular momentum and statistics. Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 1144 (1982).
4. M.G.G. Laidlaw, C.M. DeWitt: Feynman integrals for systems of indistinguishable particles.
Phys. Rev. D. 3, 1375 (1971).
5. B.I. Halperin: Statistics of quasiparticles and the hierarchy of fractional quantized Hall states.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 52, 1583 (1984).
6. D. Arovas, J.R. Schrieffer, F. Wilzcek: Fractional statistics and the quantum Hall effect. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 53, 722 (1984).
7. F.E. Camino, W. Zhou, V.J. Goldman: Realization of a Laughlin quasiparticle interferometer:
Observation of fractional statistics. Phys. Rev. B 72, 075342 (2005).
8. N.K. Wilkin, J.M.F. Gunn: Condensation of composite bosons in a rotating BEC. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 84, 6 (2000).
9. X.G. Wen: Topological orders in rigid states. Int. J. Mod. Phys. B 4, 239 (1990).
10. G. Moore, N. Read: Nonabelions in the fractional quantum Hall effect. Nucl. Phys. B. 360, 362
(1991).
11. A.Yu. Kitaev: Fault-tolerant quantum computation by anyons. Ann. Phys. (N.Y.), 303, 2 (2003).
12. S.C. Zhang, T.H. Hansson, S. Kivelson: Effective-ﬁeld-theory model for the fractional quantum
Hall effect. Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 82 (1989).
13. J.M. Leinaas, J. Myrheim: Intermediate statistics for vortices in superﬂuid ﬁlms. Phys. Rev. B
37, 9286 (1988).

14
Aspect Experiment
Secondary Literature
14. L.D. Landau, L.M. Lifshitz: Quantum Mechanics: Non-Relativistic Theory (Elsevier Science,
Amsterdam, Third Edition 1977).
15. F. Wilczek: Fractional Statistics and Anyon Superconductivity (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore,
1990).
16. A. Khare: Fractional Statistics and Quantum Theory (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, Second
Edition 2005).
Aspect Experiment
A.J. Leggett
In 1965, John S. Bell proved a celebrated theorem [1] which essentially states that
no theory belonging to the class of “objective local theories” (OLT’s) can reproduce
the experimental predictions of quantum mechanics for a situation in which two cor-
related particles are detected at mutually distant stations ( Bell’s Theorem). A few
years later Clauser et al. [2] extended the theorem so as to make possible an experi-
ment which would in principle unambiguously discriminate between the predictions
of the class of OLT’s and those of quantum mechanics, and the ﬁrst experiment of
this type was carried out by Freedman and Clauser [3] in 1972. This experiment,
and (with one exception) others performed in the next few years conﬁrmed the pre-
dictions of quantum mechanics. However, they did not deﬁnitively rule out the class
of OLT’s, because of a number of “loopholes” ( Loopholes in Experiments). Of
these various loopholes, probably the most worrying was the “locality loophole”:
a crucial ingredient in the deﬁnition of an OLT is the postulate that the outcome
of a measurement at (e.g.) station 2 cannot depend on the nature of the measure-
ment at the distant station 1 (i.e., on the experimenter’s choice of which of two or
more mutually incompatible measurements to perform). If the space-time interval
between the “event” of the choice of measurement at station 1 and that of the out-
come of the measurement at station 2 were spacelike, then violation of the postulate
under the conditions of the experiment would imply, at least prima facie, a viola-
tion of the principles of special relativity, so that most physicists would have a great
deal of conﬁdence in the postulate. Unfortunately, in the experiments mentioned, the
choice of which variable to measure was made in setting up the apparatus (polariz-
ers, etc.) in a particular conﬁguration, a process which obviously precedes the actual
measurements by a time of the order of hours; since the spatial separation between
the stations was only of the order of a few meters, it is clear that the events of choice
at 1 and measurement at 2 fail to meet the condition of spacelike separation by many
orders of magnitude, and the possibility is left open that information concerning the
setting (choice) at station 1 has been transmitted (subluminally) to station 2 and

