F
Fermi–Dirac Statistics
Simon Saunders
Fermi–Dirac statistics are one of two kinds of statistics exhibited by  identical
quantum particles, the other being  Bose-Einstein statistics. Such particles are
called fermions and bosons respectively (the terminology is due to Paul Adrien
Maurice Dirac (1902–84) [1]). In the light of the  spin-statistics theorem, and
consistent with observation, fermions are invariably spinors (of half-integral spin),
whilst bosons are invariably scalar or vector particles (of integral spin). See  spin.
In general, in quantum mechanics, the available states of a homogeneous many-
particle system in thermal equilibrium, for given total energy, are counted as
equiprobable. For systems of exactly similar (‘identical’) fermions or bosons, states
which differ only in the permutation of two or more particles are not only counted
as equiprobable – they are identiﬁed (call this permutivity). Fermions differ from
bosons in that no two fermions can be in exactly the same 1-particle state. This fur-
ther restriction follows from the Pauli  exclusion principle. The thermodynamic
properties of gases of such particles were ﬁrst worked out by Enrico Fermi (1901–
54) in 1925 [2], and, independently, by Dirac in 1926 [3].
To understand the consequences of these two restrictions, consider a system of
N weakly-interacting identical particles, with states given by the various 1-particle
energies ϵs together with their degeneracies – the number Cs of distinct 1-particle
states of each energy ϵs. From permutivity, the total state of a gas is fully speci-
ﬁed by giving the number of particles with energy ϵs in each of the Cs possible
states, i.e. by giving the occupation numbers ns
k for each s, k = 0, 1, , , , Cs.
We suppose all possible states of the same total energy E and, supposing par-
ticle number is conserved, of the same total number N, are available to the N
particles when in thermal equilibrium, i.e. all sets of occupations numbers that
satisfy:
k=Cs

s,k=1
ns
k =

s
Ns = N;

s
Nsϵs = E.
(1)
Since this is quantum mechanics, we suppose that  superpositions of such states
are available to the system as well.
Imposing Pauli’s restriction that no two particles can be in the same 1-particle
state, it follows that the occupation numbers are all zeros and ones and that Cs ⩾Ns.
D. Greenberger et al. (eds.), Compendium of Quantum Physics: Concepts, Experiments,
230
History and Philosophy, c⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

Fermi–Dirac Statistics
231
F
The number of distinct sets of occupation numbers ns
0, ns
1, .., ns
Cs that sum to Ns
satisfying this condition is:
Cs!
Ns!(Cs −Ns)!.
Since the occupation number states span the subspace of the total  Hilbert space
to which the Ns particles are conﬁned, this is the dimensionality – the ‘volume’– of
the available spate space for fermions of energy s.
For comparison, if the exclusion principle is not obeyed, the number of distinct
sets of {ns
k} that sum to Ns is rather:
(Cs + Ns −1)!
Ns!(Cs −1)!
the state-space measure that applies to bosons of energy s. The total number of
distinct sets of occupation numbers for N = 
s
Ns particles is then for fermions:
P−=
4
s
Cs!
Ns!(Cs −Ns)!
and for bosons:
P+ =
4
s
(Cs + Ns −1)!
Ns!(Cs −1)! .
By conventional reasoning, the equilibrium coarse-grained distribution is that for
which P± is a maximum. The equilibrium entropy is proportional to the logarithm
of this number, S± = k log P±, where k is Boltzmann’s constant. Using the Stirling
approximation for x ≫1, log x! ≈x log x −x, the two entropy functions are:
S± = k log P± ≈k

s
[∓Cs log Cs −Ns log Ns −(∓Cs −Ns) log(Cs ± Ns)].
If this is to be stationary under independent variation of the numbers Ns →Ns +
δNs, subject to the constraints (1), then
0 = δ log P± =

s
[−δNs log Ns −δNs log(Cs ± Ns)].
Were the variations δNs completely independent each term in this summand would
have to vanish. Introducing undetermined Lagrange multipliers a, β, for each of the
constraints (1), conclude rather that for each s:
−δNs log Ns −δNs log(Cs ± Ns) −α −βϵs = 0.

232
Fermi–Dirac Statistics
Rearranging:
Ns = Cs(eα+βϵs ± 1)−1.
(2)
In the case of light quanta, there is no constraint on particle number and the
multiplier α does not occur. The multiplier β meanwhile has its usual meaning,
β = 1/kT , where T is the absolute temperature. Cs is the number of distinct
1-quanta states in the energy range [ϵs, ϵs + dϵs] , where ϵs = hνs. It is given by:
Cs = 8πV ν2
s dνs/c3
(3)
(obtained either classically, from the wave theory, or by Bose’s method). From (2)
and (3) the Planck  black-body radiation law follows immediately. The numbers
Ns, of (2) are proportional to the radiation energy density in the frequency range
[νs, νs + dνs], which can be directly measured.
The contrast with the statistics of non-identical particles is that in the latter case
(failing permutivity) there is the further question of which of the Ns particles is in
which of the Cs one-particle states (CNs
s
possible distributions in all). There is also
the question of how the N particles are partitioned into the occupation numbers
N1,N2, ...Ns, ... . Taking both into account, the total number of distinct states P0
with occupation numbers N1, ..., Ns, .. is:
N!
N1!..Ns!....
4
s
CNs
s .
(4)
By a similar calculation as before, this yields:
Ns = Cse−α−βϵs
(5)
Evidently (2) (for either sign) and (5) are approximately the same for Cs ≫Ns
(equivalently, when α + βϵs ≫1), and the difference in the statistics for identical
and non-identical particles disappears.
At the other extreme, for bosons for which Cs ≪Ns, from (2) it follows:
Ns = Cs(α + βϵs).
(6)
For α = 0, and Cs as given by (3), (6) is the Rayleigh–Jeans black-body distribu-
tion; (5) is the Wien distribution. The discovery of  Planck’s constant began with
the puzzle of how to understand these distributions, which yielded the observed
long (Cs ≪Ns) and short (Cs ≫Ns) wavelength behaviour respectively, and with
Planck’s black body formula (2) (with negative sign), obtained by interpolating be-
tween them [10]. The method of counting (4) is associated with Maxwell–Boltzmann
or classical statistics. It was derived, using speciﬁcally quantum-mechanical meth-
ods, by Paul Ehrenfest (1880–1933) and George Uhlenbeck (1900–88) immediately
after the discovery of Fermi’s statistics. They concluded that ‘ wave mechanics

Fermi–Dirac Statistics
233
F
does not yet per se imply the refutation of Boltzmann’s method’ [4, p. 24]. The
difference, in quantum mechanics, resides solely in the assumption of permutivity.
It is an easy slide to think, since classical statistical mechanics delivers the same
statistics as quantum mechanics for non-identical particles, that classical particles
likewise are non-identical (and do not satisfy permutivity), i.e. that the correct clas-
sical count of states P0 is (4). But Josiah Williard Gibbs (1839–1903) had argued
for the permutivity of classical particles long before [6], and for a non-quantized
classical phase space, permutivity makes no difference to the statistics [11]. That is,
computing the volume of classical phase space, subject to permutivity, rather than a
count of equiprobable states, one should use:
P0 =
4
s
CNs
s
Ns!
(7)
rather than (4). The logarithm of P0 as given by (7) yields an extensive entropy
function, as required [12].
Fermi in 1924 was led to assume that no two  electrons could occupy the same
elementary volume in phase space, because only thereby could he obtain agree-
ment with the Sarkur–Stern expressions for the chemical potential and absolute
entropy [5]. That was enough, the following year, to get out a new equation of state,
but little more. Dirac, a few months later, had many more fragments of the nascent
theory of quantum mechanics to hand. He considered the question of how to formu-
late permutivity in terms of  matrix mechanics directly. He was led to the question
by Heisenberg’s dictum: the new mechanics was to be restricted to observable
quantities. In matrix mechanics the observable quantities were the matrix elements,
corresponding to the intensities of the various transition processes giving rise to line
spectra. In the still unresolved problem of the helium atom, the question arose of
how to treat a transition involving both electrons in one-particle states ψn, ψm, of
the form (mn) →(m′n′), and its relation to the transition (mn) →(n′m′). Only
the sum of the two, Dirac noted, was observable. ‘Hence, in order to keep the essen-
tial characteristic of the theory that it shall enable one to calculate only observable
quantities, one must adopt the second alternative that (mn) and (nm) count as only
one state.’ [3, p. 667].
Incorporating this into the matrix mechanics (and in particular in terms of his
theory of uniformizing variables) presented certain technical difﬁculties, whereas in
wave mechanics the way forward was much easier (an early indicator for Dirac that
Schrodinger’s wave theory may have deﬁnite advantages over the matrix mechan-
ics). In the two particle case the state (mn) of the composite system of electrons,
labelled 1 and 2, must be of the form
ψmn = amnψm(1)ψn(2) + bmnψn(1)ψm(2)
(8)
where anm = ±bnm (and superpositions of such). Dirac observed that the antisym-
metric case (anm = −bnm) leads to Pauli’s principle and the symmetric case to the
Bose–Einstein statistical mechanics. He went on to deduce the theory just sketched;

234
Fermi–Dirac Statistics
he thought, as had Fermi, that the new statistics, applying as it did to electrons in
the atom, was likely to apply to material gases as well.
Dirac shortly after remarked on the possibility of alternative (‘more complicated’)
representations of the permutation group, other than the completely symmetrized
(boson) and antisymmetrized (fermion) representations (in 1930, in the ﬁrst edition
of his Principles). These alternatives lead to a variety of different statistics –
parastatistics – that are not realized in nature (or not in 3+1 dimensions; special
considerations apply to particles effectively restricted to two spatial dimensions). It
was thought, for a time, that they might offer an alternative to the quark model of
deep inelastic scattering, but without success [13].
Werner Heisenberg (1901–76)as well as Dirac had been preoccupied with the he-
lium problem. His earlier papers in 1926 on the helium and related 2-electron spectra
had made use of the Pauli exclusion principle and, for the ﬁrst time, the Schr¨odinger
wave mechanics (albeit only as a calculational tool). He too arrived at the two classes
of states (8), but under a somewhat different interpretation from Dirac’s, and with no
understanding of the fact that they gave rise to different statistics. He was led, rather,
to an idea absent from Dirac’s paper – that a two-electron system, each with identi-
cal allowed energies Em(1) = Em(2), En(1) = En(2) (with En > Em), would in
wave-theoretic terms be subject to resonance, with energy En −Em passing from
one electron to the other under the transition (mn) →(nm) (states that Dirac had
identiﬁed). Likewise the perturbation due to the electron charge ‘will in general con-
tain terms corresponding to transitions in which the systems 1 and 2 switch places
(‘den Platz tauschen’)’ [7, p. 417].
Thus did the idea of exchange forces ﬁrst arise. A similar interpretation was
advanced by Walter Heitler (1904–81) and Fritz London (1900–54) the following
year in their treatment of the homopolar bond [8]. But by this time, as Heitler went
on to remark, this question of interpretation had become closely wed to disputes over
other interpretative issues in quantum mechanics, notably over Schr¨odinger’s con-
tinuous beat picture of emission and absorption processes as compared to Born’s
statistical interpretation [14]. What was being exchanged, Heitler concluded, ‘re-
mained completely unclear.’ ([9, p. 48]).
What was clear was that in any of the symmetric, triplet states of spin, for which
the spatial  wave function must be antisymmetric, the norm of the wave-function
for electron coordinates close together is extremely small (and for coinciding co-
ordinates, vanishes). In this sense electrons in bound states with correlated spins
effectively repel one another. Those with anticorrelated spins, in the antisymmetric
singlet state, have greater amplitudes for small relative distances, for their spa-
tial wavefunction must then be symmetric – the amplitude is much greater than if
there were no overall symmetry requirement on the state (the case of non-identical
fermions). This effect is independent of the Coulomb force altogether, and plays
a key role in ferromagnetism as well as in the chemical bond, as Heisenberg was
shortly to show, again with reference to ‘electron exchange’, and ‘exchange forces’.
Whether interpreted as an exchange force involving the  identity of quantum
particles over time, or as a consequence of permutivity and the Pauli exclusion prin-
ciple, Fermi–Dirac statistics is fundamental to the whole of quantum chemistry and
throughout the physics of the solid state.

Feynman Diagrams
235
F
Primary Literature
1. P.A.M. Dirac: The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, 3rd edition, Oxford: Oxford University
Press (1945)
2. E. Fermi: Aur Quantelung des idealen einatomigen Gases, Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 36, 902–912
(1926)
3. P.A.M. Dirac: On the theory of quantum mechanics, Proceedings of the Royal Society
(London) A112, 281–305 (1926)
4. P. Ehrenfest and G. Uhlenbeck: Die wellenmechanische Interpretation der Botzmannschen
Statistik neben der neueren Statistiken, Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik, 41, 24–26 (1927)
5. E. Fermi: Considerazioni sulla quantizzazione dei sistemi che contegno degli elementi identici,
Nouvo Cimento 1, 145–152 (1924)
6. J. Gibbs: Elementary Principles in Statistical Mechanics, Woodbridge, Connecticut: Ox Bow
Press (1981)
7. W. Heisenberg: Merhrkorperproblem und Resonanz in der Quantenmechanik, Zeitschrift f¨ur
Physik, 38, 411–426 (1926)
8. W. Heitler and F. London: Wechselwirkung neutraler Atome und hom¨oopolare Bindung nach
der Quantenmechanik, Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 44, 455–472 (1927)
9. W. Heitler: St¨orungsenergie und Austausch beim Merhk¨orprobleme, Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 46,
47–72 (1927)
Secondary Literature
10. F. Hund: Geschichte der Quantentheorie (Manheim: Bibliographisches Institut. Translated as
The History of Quantum Theory, G. Reece (trans.), London, Harrap 1974)
11. N. Huggett: Atomic metaphysics, Journal of Philosophy, 96, 5–24 (1999)
12. S. Saunders: On the explanation for quantum statistics, Studies in the History and Philosophy
of Modern Physics 37, 192–211 (2006)
13. S. French: The separable uberty of quantum chromodynamics, Studies in the History and Phi-
losophy of Modern Physics 26, 87–105 (1995)
14. C. Carson: The peculiar notion of exchange forces I: origins in quantum mechanics, 1926–28,
Studies in the History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 27, 23–45 (1996)
Feynman Diagrams
David Kaiser
Feynman diagrams are a powerful pictorial tool for making calculations in quantum
theory. They were invented by the American theoretical physicist Richard Feynman
(1918–88) during the late 1940s, in the context of  quantum electrodynamics
(QED), physicists’ quantum-mechanical theory of electric and magnetic forces. The
diagrams were intended to provide a shorthand for the famously unwieldy mathe-
matics of QED calculations, in which it had become common, since the 1930s,

