170
Diffeomorphism Invariance
Diffeomorphism Invariance
Christian Heinicke
Diffeomorphism invariance refers to the form invariance of tensor(-equations)s un-
der diffeomorphisms ([5], see also  covariance).
A diffeomorphism  is a one-to-one mapping of a differentiable manifold M
(or an open subset) onto another differentiable manifold N (or an open subset).
Moreover,  (and its inverse −1) is differentiable. The concept of a diffeomor-
phism is intrinsically tied to the concept of a differentiable manifold. Here, we
are mainly concerned with the four-dimensional spacetime manifold. The curves
in Fig. 1 correspond to coordinate lines. There are two interpretations of the action
of a diffeomorphism. A passive diffeomorphism changes one coordinate system to
another one, like a cartesian to a polar coordinate system. Thus, one just changes the
description of one and the same manifold (M = N). An active diffeomorphism cor-
responds to a transformation of the manifold which may be visualized as a smooth
deformation of a continuous medium.
Now let a (tensor) ﬁeld T be a solution of a diffeomorphism invariant ﬁeld equa-
tion. By applying a diffeomorphism we obtain a transformed ﬁeld ˜T which still is a
solution to the ﬁeld equation.
Passively interpreted, T and ˜T describe one and the same ﬁeld in different co-
ordinate systems. Passive diffeomorphism invariance is achievable by formulating
the fundamental differential equations of a theory in a coordinate free way. One
may argue that this is a purely mathematical task and involves no physics, i.e.
means no restriction to a theory (Kretschmann, 1917 [2]). But even if the “de-
coordinatization” may seem quite “harmless” the interpretation of the basic terms
of the theory is modiﬁed. Moreover, in speciﬁc cases, such as in the development of
general relativity, there can emerge substantial generalizations.
Interpreted as active transformation T and ˜T describe two distinct ﬁelds in
the same coordinate system. “Distinct” here means that the ﬁeld is “redistributed”
(or “spread differently”) over the manifold. From this point of view one would
say that the ﬁeld equation has the property to allow for (local) symmetry or gauge
transformations of the ﬁeld ( symmetries). Such local symmetries are not ensured
automatically by a coordinate free formulation but have to be enforced dynami-
cally ( gauge theories). Invariance under active diffeomorphisms raises important
Fig. 1 Passive vs.
active diffeomorphism:
re-coordinatization vs.
deformation
Φ
Φ−1
M
N

Dirac Equation
171
D
interpretational questions. Do the (“gauge equivalent”) ﬁelds T and ˜T represent
distinct physical situations? If so, does the (diffeomorphism invariant) theory fail
to prescribe the dynamics of the ﬁeld uniquely? These questions are addressed in
the famous hole-argument, originally put forward by Einstein in 1913 in the con-
text of his search for the theory of general relativity [1]. Later, these difﬁculties
were circumvented by focusing on (gauge-) invariant observables. Nevertheless, the
values of ﬁelds alone can not be used to individuate points of the manifold. This
makes a realistic interpretation of the manifold as spacetime less tenable. Therefore,
diffeomorphism invariance (general covariance) plays an important role in the con-
text of the spacetime structuralism-realism debate [3].
Earman, Stachel, Norton revived the hole argument in view of modern develop-
ments in spacetime and gauge theories. The discussion still continues [4].
Literature
1. A. Einstein: Die formale Grundlage der allgemeinen Relativit¨atstheorie.. . . Sitzungsber. Preuss.
Akad. Wiss. Phys.-math. Klasse, 2 (1914) 1030–1085
2. E. Kretschmann: ¨Uber den physikalischen Sinn der Relativit¨atspostulate . . . Ann. Phys.
358, 575–614 (1918)
3. J. Earman: World Enough and Spacetime (MIT, Cambridge, MA 1989)
4. J.D. Norton: The hole argument. In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/spacetime-holearg/ (2004)
5. T. Frankel: The Geometry of Physics (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1997)
Dirac Equation
Helge Kragh
The Dirac equation is a fundamental wave equation that satisﬁes the requirements
of the special theory of relativity. Shortly after the appearance of the  Schr¨odinger
equation, several physicists attempted to extend it to the relativistic domain. The
result – known as the Klein-Gordon-equation  relativistic quantum mechanics –
was however unable to describe  electrons correctly. Paul A.M. Dirac realized that
the formal structure of the Schr¨odinger equation, the form Hψ = i ℏ∂ψ/∂t, had to
be retained also in a relativistic theory, implying that the  Hamilton operator must
be of the ﬁrst order in the space derivatives. By “playing around with mathematics”
he derived in late 1927 a wave equation which was linear in both space and time
derivatives. For a free electron he wrote it as (W/c + α · p + βm0c)ψ = 0, where
the quantities α and β were 4×4 matrices. In later literature the matrices were often
designated γμ(μ = 1, 2, 3, 4).

