U
Ulrich of Strasbourg
IRENE ZAVATTERO
Dipartimento di Filologia Classica e Scienze Filosoﬁche
Universita` del Salento
Lecce
Italy
Abstract
The German Dominican Ulrich of Strasbourg (1220–
1277) was a pupil of Albert the Great in Cologne,
a lecturer in theology at the monastery of Strasbourg and
a prior of the German Dominican province. He wrote the
De summo bono, a voluminous theological–philosophical
summa composed between 1262 and 1272. Long consid-
ered to have been a fervent disciple of Albert the Great and
the compiler of a work based largely on his teacher’s
doctrine, Ulrich has instead been shown, through recent
studies and the critical edition of his work, to have been an
autonomous thinker who developed on his maestro’s ideas
in a personal way, often subtly diverging from them.
He placed Albert the Great’s doctrines, including the
more strictly philosophical ones such as the theory of
the divine intellect, into a theological framework, in keep-
ing with his aim of highlighting possible concordism
between philosophy and theology. The De summo bono
was widely circulated, and its reception followed two dis-
tinct lines of thought: a speculative one, particularly with
the fourteenth-century brothers of the Cologne studium
(Dietrich of Freiberg, Berthold of Moosburg and perhaps
Meister Eckhart) and the ﬁfteenth-century ‘‘Albertists’’ of
Cologne, and another moral–pastoral one that originated
with John of Freiburg, a pupil of Ulrich’s, and spread
through the German–Polish area until the ﬁfteenth
century.
Ulrich Engelbrecht (the family name, according to ancient
historiographers) was born around 1220. He entered the
Dominican order in 1245, studied under Albert the Great
probably in Cologne, and later became a lecturer in the-
ology at the monastery of Strasbourg. In 1272, he was
elected provincial prior of the German Dominicans. Five
years later, he was relieved of this duty in order to continue
his theology studies in Paris, where he was to ﬁll the role of
bacalarius sententiarum, the obligatory step toward
becoming a master of theology. However, once in Paris,
Ulrich died just before beginning lessons. Thus the Ger-
man Dominicans lost their opportunity to see one of their
representatives in the chair reserved for ‘‘foreign’’ – that is,
non-Parisian – professors.
The earliest testimony of Ulrich’s activity and scien-
tiﬁc proﬁle is offered by one of his pupils, John of Frei-
burg (1250–1314) who, in the preface to the Summa
confessorum, describes his teacher as a man of science
and of action. So, although his premature death kept
him from earning the title of magister theologiae, Ulrich
had a reputation as a wise man, as well as an astute
administrator of the German province (Teutonia) of the
Dominican order. The work that consolidated his fame
was the De summo bono, a voluminous theological–
philosophical summa composed between 1262 and 1272.
In addition, we have 27 letters, conserved in a codex in
Berlin, mainly concerning administrative and disciplinary
provisions, and a sermon in vernacular on John 20.29.
According to historical catalogue sources, Ulrich also
wrote comments on Aristotle’s Sentences and Meteorology,
both lost.
The De summo bono, as the title indicates, deals with
the supreme Good and is divided into six books using the
following structure: I) preliminary questions regarding the
supreme Good, or theology; II) the essence of the supreme
Good; III) Divine Persons; IV) the Father and creation; V)
the Son and the Incarnation; and VI) the Holy Spirit, grace
and virtues. As Ulrich indicated in the preamble to the
work, the summa was intended to contain seventh and
eighth books as well, regarding the sacraments and beat-
itude, respectively. However, these books appear in no
known codex, and were probably never written. The
sixth book ends abruptly without providing an explicit,
leaving the treatise on virtues incomplete.
The critical edition of the De summo bono, having
arrived at its seventh volume and almost fully realized,
demonstrates that Ulrich was a signiﬁcant scientiﬁc ﬁgure
and that his imposing summa was something new in the
Henrik Lagerlund (ed.), Encyclopedia of Medieval Philosophy, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9729-4,
# Springer Science+Business Media B.V., 2011

literary panorama of his day. Unlike Albert the Great and
Thomas Aquinas, Ulrich chose to draw up a systematic
treatise rather than adopt the scholastic method of
contrasting pro and contra arguments. His book is con-
ﬁgured as a work for consultation, to be kept in the
monastery library and used for monastery-based teaching.
In the De summo bono, the inﬂuence of the teaching of
Albert the Great is evident, as Ulrich makes constant and
attentive use of it, especially the Metaphysica, the De causis
et processu universitatis, and the De intellectu et intelligibili.
Ulrich has thus been deﬁned as ‘‘Albert the Great’s favorite
pupil’’ (The´ry 1922) and ‘‘co-founder of Rhenish theol-
ogy’’ (de Libera 1984), underlining the relationship that
ties him to his teacher. But these labels run the risk of
reducing his ideas to a mere re-proposal of Albert the
Great’s doctrines, and of characterizing Ulrich as an
unoriginal author. In reality, as the most recent studies
on Ulrich demonstrate (Beccarisi 2006; Palazzo 2005,
2006a), he was an independent thinker who frequently
and subtly diverged from his teacher’s ideas. He did not
share Albert the Great’s methodological decision to make
theology and philosophy two separate sciences, each with
speciﬁc methods and objects. In fact, Ulrich championed
concordism between theology and philosophy: philosoph-
ical speculation thus became the basis and presupposition
of
theological
research.
His
concordistic
approach
manifested itself in his attempt to minimize the differences
between Platonic and Aristotelian thinkers. According to
Ulrich, peripatetic philosophy is subordinate to Platonic
philosophy because the ﬁeld of action of the former is
limited to empirical–scientiﬁc consideration of the uni-
verse, while that of the latter concerns knowledge of divine
properties and of God. Thus Ulrich twisted the meaning of
the famous page written by Albert the Great (Metaphysica
XI 3 7) that contrasted the ‘‘way of Aristotle’’ with the
‘‘way of Plato’’ and clearly showed his Platonic inclination,
although he cites Aristotle liberally and acknowledges the
fundamental role of his authority.
One of the principal doctrines Ulrich examines in his
summa is the theory of the divine intellect. This is one of
the
most
characteristic
philosophical
doctrines
of
Albertist teaching, but Ulrich places it in the declaredly
theological framework of the De summo bono. Ulrich’s
reﬂection on man springs from the hermetic assumption
drawn from the ﬁrst chapter of
Albert the Great’s
Metaphysica: ‘‘man is the link between God and the
world.’’ Man is such because he has within him something
earthly, that is, the body, and something divine, that is, the
intellect. Man’s intellect is divine because ‘‘God is intel-
lect’’ (De summo bono II 4 1 4; II 3 5 5; IV 1 2 7), therefore
man, by nature, resembles God. This innate faculty of
man, which philosophical tradition calls the intellectus
agens (active intellect) and theological tradition calls ‘‘the
image of God’’, allows man to intellectually become one
with God. Thus, Ulrich underlines the purely natural
aspect of the intellect, which is the principle of the nobility
of the soul for reasons of a physical nature, independent
from grace and from Revelation. The process that leads
man to contemplative beatitude is also natural: the human
intellect intellectually ascends by successive stages of
knowledge until it becomes ‘‘divine intellect’’, the activity
of which is the contemplation of God and of separate
substances. Beatitude lies in this cognitive union with God.
The theory of intellectual knowledge of God, which
for Albert the Great was valid only in a strictly philosoph-
ical realm, in the De summo bono assume an absolute
validity on a par with knowledge by faith. The doctrine
of contemplative beatitude played an important role in the
historical development of so-called ‘‘German mysticism’’
and demonstrates that Ulrich’s mysticism can be deﬁned
as ‘‘philosophical’’ (Sturlese 1996), even though the theo-
logian overlays theological and philosophical arguments
in his texts and frames the doctrine of the divine intel-
lect in the mystical theology of Pseudo-Dionysius the
Areopagite.
The doctrine of the divine intellect is also found in the
ethics section of the De summo bono, that is, the sixth, still
unpublished book, where Ulrich explains that the divine
component present in man, the active intellect, being
separate and free from material nature, gives man control
over his own actions and is thus the instigator of the entire
process of the production of virtue (Zavattero 2008). Just
as through the act of cognition, man is capable of intel-
lectually knowing God, independent of grace and Revela-
tion, by means of the process of perfecting the intellect, so
he is capable in practice of producing his own natural
moral excellence, without the intervention of any princi-
ple extrinsic to the soul (God or fate). That is, man brings
what is inherent in his nature to perfection through the act
of reason, which informs all moral acts.
Studies on reactions to the De summo bono show that
Ulrich’s ideas were utilized not only by his confreres from
the Cologne studium (Dietrich of Freiberg, Berthold of
Moosburg, and perhaps Eckhart), but also played
a decisive role in the formation of the ﬁfteenth-century
line of thought known as ‘‘Albertism,’’ which referred
back to the doctrine of Albert the Great. Heymeric of
Camp, the most important representative of Albertism in
Cologne, explicitly cited Ulrich’s summa in his works.
Additionally, circulation of the De summo bono at the
University
of
Cologne
in
the
ﬁfteenth
century
is
documented by the fact that at least 5 of the 26 surviving
1352 U
Ulrich of Strasbourg

manuscripts of the summa belonged to scholars who
taught and studied there. Even Denys the Carthusian,
a student and later professor of arts in Cologne, was
a scrupulous and devoted reader of Ulrich, as demon-
strated by the frequent citations from the De summo
bono, especially in his Commentary on the Sentences
(Palazzo 2004a, 2006b).
In
addition
to
this
reception,
which
indicates
a speculative interest in Ulrich’s doctrines, there was
another one that privileged the doctrines of moral theol-
ogy, pastoral care, and penitential law contained in the
sixth book of the summa (Palazzo 2008a, 2008b). These
doctrines, collected in manuals for confessors, like the
Summa confessorum by John of Freiburg, and dissemi-
nated in vernacular, were widely circulated in German–
Polish areas in the late Middle Ages (thirteenth to ﬁfteenth
centuries). Their reputation extended beyond the bounds
of the university and academic world, as they concerned
above all parish priest directly involved in pastoral activ-
ities and the ministry of confession.
See also: ▶Albertism ▶Albert the Great ▶Berthold of
Moosburg ▶Denys the Carthusian ▶Dietrich of Freiberg
▶Heymeric of Camp ▶Meister Eckhart ▶Pseudo-
Dionysius, the Areopagite ▶Thomas Aquinas
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Ulricus de Argentina (1987–2008) De summo bono, I–IV, ed. Beccarisi
A et al. Corpus philosophorum teutonicorum medii aevi I, vols 1–4.
Meiner, Hamburg
Secondary Sources
Backes I (1975) Die Christologie, Soteriologie und Mariologie des Ulrich
von Straßburg. Paulinus-Verlag, Trier
Beccarisi A (2006) La ‘scientia divina’ dei ﬁlosoﬁnel De summo bono di
Ulrico di Strasburgo. Riv stor Filos 61:137–163
Breuning W (1959) Erhebung und Fall des Menschen nach Ulrich von
Strassburg. Paulinus-Verlag, Trier
Daguillon J (1930) Ulrich de Strasbourg, O. P. La ‘‘Summa de bono’’. Livre
1: Introduction et e´dition critique. Vrin, Paris
de Libera A (1984) Introduction a` la mystique rhe´nane d’Albert le Grand a`
Maıˆtre Eckhart. O.E.I.L., Paris, pp 99–162
de Libera A (1985) Ulrich de Strasbourg, lecteur d’Albert le Grand. In:
Imbach R, Flu¨eler C (eds) Albert der Grosse und die deutsche
Dominikanerschule.
Universita¨tsverlag
Freiburg,
Fribourg,
pp
105–136
Malovini L (1998) Noetica e teologia dell’immagine nel ‘‘De summo
bono’’ di Ulrico di Strasburgo. Riv Filos neoscol 90:28–50
Palazzo A (2004a) Ulrich of Strasbourg and Denys the Carthusian: textual
analysis and doctrinal comments. Bull Philos Me´die´vale 46:61–113
Palazzo A (2004b) Le fonti ermetiche nel ‘‘De summo bono’’ di Ulrico di
Strasburgo. In: Lucentini P, Parri I, Perrone Compagni V (eds) Her-
metism from late antiquity to renaissance. Brepols, Turnhout, pp
189–202
Palazzo A (2005) La ‘sapientia’ nel ‘‘De summo bono’’ di Ulrico di
Strasburgo. Quaestio 5:495–512
Palazzo A (2006a) Le apparizioni angeliche e demoniache secondo
Alberto il Grande ed Ulrico di Strasburgo. G crit Filos ital 26:237–253
Palazzo A (2006b) Ulrich of Strasbourg and Denys the Carthusian (II):
doctrinal inﬂuence and implicit quotations. Bull Philos Me´die´vale
48:163–208
Palazzo A (2008a) Ulricus de Argentina. . . theologus, philosophus, ymmo
et iurista. Le dottrine di teologia morale e di pastorale penitenziale
nel VI libro del ‘‘De summo bono’’ e la loro diffusione nel tardo
Medioevo. Freib Z Philos Theol 55:64–97
Palazzo A (2008b) La dottrina della simonia di Ulrico di Strasburgo:
De summo bono VI 3 19–20, Freib Z Philos Theol 55:434–470
Sturlese L (1996) Storia della ﬁlosoﬁa tedesca nel Medioevo. Il secolo XIII.
Olschki, Firenze, pp 159–180
The´ry G (1922) Originalite´ du plan de la ‘Summa de bono’ d’Ulrich de
Strasbourg. Rev thomiste 27:376–397
Zavattero I (2008) I principi costitutivi delle virtu` nel ‘‘De summo bono’’
di Ulrico di Strasburgo. In: Beccarisi A, Imbach R, Porro P (eds) Per
perscrutationem philosophicam. Neue Perspektiven der Mittelal-
terlichen Forschung. Loris Sturlese zum 60. Geburstag gewidmet.
Meiner, Hamburg, pp 111–126
Universals
ANDREW W. ARLIG
Department of Philosophy
Brooklyn College of The City University of New York
Brooklyn, NY
USA
Abstract
Medieval discussions of universals are some of the most
sophisticated and sustained discussions in the history of
philosophy. This article focuses on medieval discussions of
the ontological status of universals. Speculations about the
existence of universal things were prompted by what was
said (and what was not said) in ancient Greek treatises on
logic and metaphysics. Throughout the medieval period,
philosophers divided roughly into those who believed that
there was some mind-independent reality that was com-
mon to many particulars (i.e., realism) and those who
believed that universality was a mind-dependent property
(i.e., anti-realism, or nominalism). Anti-realists critiqued
contemporary versions of realism. Realists responded to
the anti-realists with ever more sophisticated accounts of
the real basis for predication and classiﬁcation.
Preliminaries
Although it is quite common for scholars to refer to the
problem of universals, this way of speaking is deceptive.
Universals U
1353
U

There are in fact a cluster of problems in the ﬁelds of logic,
philosophy of language, epistemology, and metaphysics.
Medieval philosophers speculated about universals in all
these contexts. This article will focus primarily, but not
exclusively, upon the ontological problems associated with
universals. (For a survey of medieval discussions of uni-
versals with an emphasis on the semantic and epistemo-
logical aspects, consult Klima 2008.)
Medieval philosophers developed their theories of
universals in light of developments in late ancient philos-
ophy. One important locus for the discussion of the nature
and existence of universals was Aristotle’s Categories.
In this work, Aristotle distinguished between two types
of predication: ‘‘being said of some subject’’ or ‘‘being
in some subject.’’ The items that are neither said of
some subject nor are in some subject were interpreted
to be individual substances. Everything else is predicated
(Gr. kategoreisthai) of these individuals or the properties
of these individuals. Aristotle’s analysis of the phrase ‘‘x is
said of y’’, together with his claim in De interpretatione that
the universal is that which is predicable of many (7, 17a39–
40), suggested to late ancient commentators that those
items that were said of something were universals.
Late ancient commentators wondered what the subject
matter of the Categories was. Were the predicables things,
words, or concepts? In general, it was felt that since the
Categories was a logical work, the treatise was primarily
about words. But these words were meaningful; they
somehow stood for or referred to things and the properties
of things. The simplest way for a universal term to signify
would be for it to signify a universal thing. Thus, for many
interpreters, Aristotle’s logic implied the existence of uni-
versal things.
In his ‘‘Introduction’’ (Isagoge) to Aristotle’s logic,
Porphyry claimed that there were ﬁve basic types of uni-
versal predications: the genus, the species, the differentia,
the proprium, and the accident. But Porphyry famously
refused to determine whether universality applies to any-
thing besides words. He began his Isagoge by announcing
that he would not address three questions, since they
belonged to a deeper inquiry (1.9–14, [trans. Spade
1994:1]). First, he would not consider whether universals
‘‘subsist’’ – that is, exist outside the mind – or whether
they only manifest in bare conceptions. Second, he would
not consider whether they are corporeal or incorporeal, if
they subsist. Third, he would not consider whether they
exist separately or subsist only in perceptible things.
Many medieval discussions of universals can be found
in commentaries on Porphyry’s opening remarks. The
Greek Neoplatonic commentators often used this text as
an appropriate place to elaborate a threefold classiﬁcation
of the universal: (1) the universal before the many, (2) the
universal in the many, and (3) the universal after the many.
Latin-speaking philosophers prior to the end of the
twelfth century did not know this classiﬁcation of the
universal. However, it was known in the medieval Arabic
world, and the scheme was picked up by many later Latin-
speaking philosophers.
In the medieval tradition, the universals before the
many were identiﬁed with the Divine Ideas in God’s
mind. They were the archetypes from which God created
everything. No medieval philosopher denied the existence
of the Divine Ideas. Hence, medieval philosophers never
defended certain forms of anti-realism. No medieval phi-
losopher would deny that abstract objects exist. Even
thoroughgoing non-realists such as Abelard and Ockham
believed in the existence of at least some forms, although
these forms would be particulars.
The universals after the many were concepts in the
human mind, often formed by a process of abstraction.
Most medieval philosophers believed that these items were
universals properly speaking, since they could be associ-
ated with many things.
From the ontological perspective, the main dispute
among medieval philosophers was whether there is any
mind-independent thing or reality that is common to
many individuals – that is, whether there are any univer-
sals in re. For something to be a universal in re, it would
seem that it must be present simultaneously and as a whole
in each of many individuals in such a way that it contrib-
utes to the substance of each individual (cf. Boethius,
In Isag. 2nd ed., I, 10, 161.16–19). Adam and Eve would
not share a universal, essential constituent if they merely
shared portions of that constituent in the way that they
might share a cake, or if they shared all of it in the way that
two people can each wholly own a horse (as when the ﬁrst
sells the horse to the other), or if they both participated in
all of it as spectators each take in the whole play. But is it
possible for any thing to be essentially and entirely present
in many individuals at the same time? Many medieval
philosophers – even many who are traditionally labeled
‘‘realists’’ – thought that this could not happen.
Boethius
In his second greater commentary on Porphyry’s Isagoge,
Boethius developed a series of intriguing arguments in
favor of the conclusion that universals do not exist outside
the mind (In Isag. 2nd ed., I, 10–11, 159–167, [trans. Spade
1994:21–23]; cf. Spade 1996). The main thrust of these
arguments was that something exists outside the mind
only if it is a unity; yet, it is impossible for something to
be one and also wholly present in each of its instantiations
1354 U
Universals

in such a manner that it contributes to each individual’s
substance. Hence, universals cannot subsist.
Boethius, then, posed a dilemma for the anti-realist,
who believes that universals do not exist outside the mind.
We surely have concepts that are universal. In particular,
we believe that the concept human applies to Adam and
Eve and that this is true because Adam and Eve are natu-
rally similar to one another and to all other humans. But if
Adam and Eve have no thing in common, then these
attributions and classiﬁcations do not represent the
world as it truly is. In short, if there are no universal things,
then our concepts appear to be empty and false.
Boethius offered a solution that he attributed to the
third-century
Aristotelian
philosopher
Alexander
of
Aphrodisias. The mind is capable of considering things
in a manner different from that in which they exist.
In particular, the mind is able to consider and compare
the features of concrete particulars without reference
to the particular, even though these features cannot actu-
ally be separated from the particulars. By abstracting
features in this manner, the mind is able to construct
universal concepts. Hence, while universals do not exist
in things as something common to many, the concept of
a universal – since it is abstracted from things in the right
way – can be truthfully attributed to many things. It is not
clear that Boethius’ Alexandrian solution resolved his
aporia, for it is unclear what the mind abstracts from
individuals. Nevertheless, the notion that the mind con-
tributed universality to whatever it is that is abstracted
from many individuals would be very popular in suc-
ceeding generations.
Realism, Vocalism, and ‘‘Nominalism’’
In the eleventh and twelfth centuries, the Latin-speaking
world possessed a limited set of source material. For most
of this period, philosophers possessed Aristotle’s Catego-
ries and De interpretatione, Porphyry’s Isagoge, and Boe-
thius’ commentaries on these works. These texts were
supplemented by Boethius’ introductory handbooks on
logic, his theological treatise, and a few other minor
sources of logic and metaphysics from other later Roman
authors. It is little wonder that philosophy in this period
focused heavily upon logic. And, indeed, it was in treat-
ments of logic that we ﬁnd the most sustained early medi-
eval discussions of universals.
There was a lively debate in the later part of the
eleventh century (if not earlier) over the subject matter
of logic (cf. Marenbon 2004:28–30). Some thought that
logic dealt with things (res); others argued that logic is
about utterances (voces). It is not clear that the early
advocates of the in voce approach to logic inferred any
metaphysical theses from their stance, let alone the speciﬁc
thesis that universals are merely words. (For that matter,
the in re approach to logic did not commit one to the
existence of universal things.) The thesis that only utter-
ances are universal has been attributed to a few shadowy
ﬁgures from the last decades of the eleventh century, most
notoriously Roscelin; yet, so little of Roscelin’s work sur-
vives that it is difﬁcult to determine what he really believed
(Picavet 1911; Kluge 1976; Jolivet 1992:114–128). We do
know that Roscelin’s brilliant pupil, Peter Abelard, devel-
oped a series of remarkable arguments against all the main
‘‘realist’’ positions of his day (Logica ingredientibus I, 10.8–
16.18, [trans. Spade 1994:29–37]; Logica ‘‘nostrorum’’
515.10–521.17; cf. Tweedale 1976:95–129; King 2004:66–
72). Abelard concluded from these investigations that
universality belonged to words alone.
A word of caution is in order. A ‘‘realist’’ in Abelard’s
sense of the word is not necessarily committed to the
existence of a thing that is entirely present in many indi-
viduals simultaneously. Abelard applies the label ‘‘realist’’
to any position that identiﬁes the universal with a real
thing (res), including theories that identify the universal
with an individual or with a collection of individuals. For
this reason, Abelard will call some theories ‘‘realist,’’ which
a contemporary metaphysician might prefer to call ‘‘anti-
realist’’ or ‘‘nominalist.’’
According to Abelard, the dominant realist theories of
his day were ‘‘material essence’’ realism, and several theo-
ries that deﬁned universals in terms of ‘‘indifference.’’
Material essence realism was the view that universal
forms constituted the material essence of individual
things. The generic form animal and the differentia irra-
tional constituted the material essence of Browny the
donkey. The very same animal and rational constituted
the material essence of Socrates. Socrates and Plato shared
the very same material essence (animal + rational, or
human), but were differentiated by accidental forms.
As for the indifference theories, one version claimed
that the universal thing is the mereological sum (collectio)
of all those individuals that are indifferent to one another
in some respect (Freddoso 1978; Henry 1984:235–259).
A second version was the identity theory, which asserted
that the universal is identical to the individual insofar as
that individual is indifferent from other individuals in
some respect. A third version, status realism, held that
individuals are indifferent in some respect because they
share a status, that is, they agree in being f. This version of
the indifference theory was a form of realism because its
advocates thought that a status was a thing.
Abelard reported that his old teacher William of
Champeaux initially subscribed to material essence
Universals U
1355
U

realism. Abelard’s criticisms of the theory forced William
to give up material essence realism and propose, instead,
the identity theory. As Abelard tells the tale, he reduced
William’s second theory to absurdity, and having been
humiliated twice in a row, William gave up the teaching
of logic altogether. But others were apparently persuaded
that some version of the indifference theory was correct.
We possess a treatise, possibly by Walter of Mortagne
or one of his students, which defends status realism
(Dijs 1990:93–113). And it seems that several philosophers
were attracted to revised versions of the collectio theory.
For example, Gilbert of Poitiers and his followers asso-
ciated the universal with a group of absolutely similar
individual forms (Ha¨ring 1966:269 and 312; cf. Martin
1983:xli–xlii). More strikingly, the anonymous author of
De generibus et speciebus defended a sophisticated version
of the collectio theory, in part by responding to some of
Abelard’s objections (although he does not explicitly men-
tion Abelard) (}} 85–143, [Cousin 1836:524–537]).
Abelard also tried to distance himself from Roscelin’s
position, which he deemed to be too crude, by drawing
a distinction between an utterance (vox) and a word
(sermo). The utterance is the physical air insofar as it is
merely considered as that which is emitted from the
mouth. A vox could not possess the property of universal-
ity. The word is that same air insofar as it is the bearer of
meaning. Many words can have the property of universal-
ity, for they are predicable of many words.
Abelard felt compelled to account for the semantic
properties of words. In particular, he tried to account for
how an utterance acquired a meaning, and hence, became
a word, and more speciﬁcally, how some utterances
acquired the property of being predicable of many. As it
turned out, universality was not a matter of convention; it
had its foundation in nature. Every substance and every
form is particular, but there is a sense in which some
things are naturally indifferent to one another. Abelard
even claimed that Socrates and Plato share a status, that is,
they agree in that they are both human, but in contrast to
the status realists, Abelard insisted that status is no thing at
all (Log. ingr. I, 20.7–9).
Ibn Sı¯na¯
Whereas early Latin-speaking philosophers possessed an
impoverished collection of resources, philosophers in the
Arabic-speaking world had at their disposal the full Aris-
totelian corpus as well as select Neoplatonic works, all of
this being the fruits of an enormous translation project
from the Greek originals into Arabic in the eighth and
ninth centuries. Not surprisingly, Arabic theories of uni-
versals had a broadly Aristotelian character. Nevertheless,
many of the Arabic philosophers made some creative
reﬁnements to the Aristotelian framework. Perhaps the
most signiﬁcant of these was the theory developed by
Ibn Sı¯na¯, known to the Latin-speaking world as Avicenna.
A distinction between essence and existence had been
drawn prior to Ibn Sı¯na¯. But in contrast to many of his
predecessors, this distinction became a fundamental feature
of Ibn Sı¯na¯’s metaphysical system. In everything other than
God, there is a distinction between that thing’s essence, or
nature, and its existence. Ibn Sı¯na¯ adamantly denied Plato-
nism, and hence, he did not think of essences as separable
and potentially uninstantiated Forms. An essence was
always instantiated, either as a notion in the mind or as
a constituent of a concrete individual thing. Nevertheless,
one could consider an essence in itself and separately from
its existence. When considered as such, one considered only
that essence’s deﬁnition, and not any of the features that
come with the essence when it exists. The things that one
must bracket include all the necessary concomitants of
existence, including being one and being many, and univer-
sality and particularity. Hence, for Ibn Sı¯na¯, an essence such
as horseness inasmuch as it is horseness is neither particular
nor universal, and it is neither one nor many (al-Shifa¯’: al-
Ila¯hiyya¯t (the Metaphysics), bk. V, ch. 1, } 4).
Ibn Sı¯na¯ used an ingenious argument to establish this
claim about essences (al-Shifa¯’: al-Mant˙iq (Logic): al-
Madkhal (Isagoge), bk. I, ch. 12; translation in Marmura
1979). If an essence were universal, then universality
would be part of the deﬁnition of that essence. Let us,
for example, suppose that humanity is a universal. But if
universality were part of the deﬁnition of humanity, then
if anything were human, that thing would necessarily be
universal. Given that Adam is human, it would follow
of necessity that Adam is universal. But that is false.
So, essences are not in and of themselves universal. But
neither are they particular. For if humanity itself was
particular, then humanity could only be this individual,
say, Adam, and no other individual could be a human.
Therefore, horseness, humanity, and animality in and of
themselves are neither universal nor particular. Universal-
ity is an ‘‘accident’’ of horseness when horseness exists in
the mind. Particularity is an accident of horseness when
horseness exists in an individual that is a horse.
The universal horse is never in many concrete individ-
uals. Nevertheless, the essence horseness can be said to be
‘‘in’’ individual horses given that horseness is a constituent
of the particular horse form that is in an individual horse
(al-Ila¯hiyya¯t, V, 1, } 20). Thus, even though there is no
thing that is wholly shared by many concrete individuals,
there is a common, and objective, feature of reality that
determines that each individually existing horse is a horse.
1356 U
Universals

Realism in the Scholastic Period
Ibn Sı¯na¯’s notion of the nature considered in itself had
a tremendous inﬂuence on western medieval philoso-
phers, once his works were translated into Latin in the
latter half of the twelfth century. The notion of a neutral
nature allowed Scholastic philosophers to avoid the com-
mitment to a thing that is itself numerically one but
simultaneously present in many individuals; yet, in the
same stroke, it allowed them to locate some extra-mental
basis for predication and classiﬁcation.
The theories that thirteenth-century philosophers devel-
oped in response to the newly translated works of Aristotle
and Ibn Sı¯na¯ are often referred to as versions of ‘‘moderate’’
realism. Moderate realism is routinely contrasted with
‘‘extremer’’ forms of realism. Medieval philosophers mostly
knew of Plato’s ideas secondhand. As they understood him,
Plato believed that universal forms could exist separately
from all particulars and from all minds. Scholastic philoso-
phers roundly rejected this form of Platonism.
There was one troubling feature of Ibn Sı¯na¯’s notion of
a nature in itself. Ibn Sı¯na¯ seemed to grant the nature in
itself some measure of being (esse), yet he denied that the
nature had any degree of unity. But it was a commonplace
in Scholastic philosophy that something has being only in
so far as it has unity. In other words, unity was considered
to be a necessary concomitant of esse. Scholastic philoso-
phers were, therefore, presented with a choice: either
remove all esse from the nature as such, or grant that the
nature as such has some measure of esse and, thus, some
degree of unity (Owens 1957:4).
Thomas Aquinas chose the ﬁrst of these options (De
ente et essentia, ch. 3; cf. Owens 1957:5–7). The nature in
itself had no being at all. It only had being in the mind,
where it was truly universal, or in individuals, where it was
a particular nature. Thus, if we were to take Adam and Eve
and really strip away (not abstract with the mind) their
matter, their accidents, their substantial forms, and their
individual esse, we would ﬁnd neither one nature nor two
natures; we would ﬁnd no nature at all. Nevertheless, in
a very real sense, it is the same nature in numerically
distinct individuals, and it is the same nature in the indi-
vidual and in the mind. As one commentator puts it,
numerically distinct individuals have the same nature
because they are ‘‘numerically distinct realizations of the
same information-content’’ (Klima 2008:}7). It is the same
nature in the mind and in the individual because the mind
is grasping the same information-content that is realized
in the external world. To see what Aquinas is after, con-
sider Klima’s analogy. There is no universal Moby Dick in
addition to all the individual copies of Moby Dick. Never-
theless, it is true that all the copies of Moby Dick are the
same book, because they share the same information. And
if one were to memorize a copy of Moby Dick verbatim, it
would be true that one’s physical copy and one’s mental
copy are the same book.
John Duns Scotus chose the second option (see
Ord. II, d. 3, pars 1, q. 1, [Spade 1994:57–68]; cf. Owens
1957:7–13). The nature in itself had some measure of being,
and hence, it had some degree of real unity. But it has less
than numerical unity – that is, the unity characteristic of
being an individual. The nature must have real unity, for if
its unity were merely a product of the mind, then our
natural inclination to group Adam and Eve together and
call them both human would have no foundation in the
order of things. The unity of the nature as such must be less
than numerical, for if the nature were itself numerically one,
then it would be this particular nature or that one. But if it
were, say, Adam’s nature and Eve were also human, then Eve
would in fact be Adam as well. Scotus knew that his brand of
realism depends upon the intelligibility of a mode of unity
that is real but less than numerical. Hence, he provided
a series of arguments for the claim that there are real but less
than numerical unities (op. cit., [Spade 1994:59–63]).
Moderate Realism and Individuation
Given that the nature was the principle of commonality
between individuals, there was a need to locate the princi-
ple that made individuals numerically distinct instances of
the same kind. The realists of the Scholastic period pro-
posed a number of principles of individuation (see the
articles on various thinkers in Gracia 1994). Some Scho-
lastic philosophers thought that matter was the principle of
individuation. Aquinas proposed that it was not prime
matter, but ‘‘designated’’ matter that individuated material
substances (De ente et essentia, ch. 2). Others, such as
Bonaventure, argued that it was the actual combination
of matter and form that individuated substances. Duns
Scotus argued that none of these principles would do.
What was needed was a positive individual differentia, or
haecceity, which was only formally, not really, distinct from
the common nature (Ord. I, d. 3, pars 1, q. 6, [Spade
1994:101–107]).
Ockham
William of Ockham insisted that no universal exists out-
side the mind. In his lecture on the Sentences of Peter
Lombard, Ockham presented his most thorough and
sustained treatment of the subject (Ordinatio I, d. 2, qq.
4–7). Ockham engaged several realist positions, moving in
descending order from what we might consider to be the
most realist position – namely, that the universal is truly
something outside the soul and really distinct from
Universals U
1357
U

particulars (q. 4) – to the least realist position – namely,
that the same thing under one concept is universal and
under another concept is singular (q. 7).
Ockham singled out Scotus’ position for special con-
sideration, painstakingly presenting Scotus’ views prior to
attacking them (q. 6; cf. Summa logicae I, 16). Ockham
pursued two strategies when attacking Scotus’ position.
First, he attacked the notion of formal distinction, for if he
could show that the formal distinction was incoherent,
then Scotus would be forced back into a version of realism
that Ockham though he had already dismantled. Second,
Ockham argued that even if one granted for the sake of
argument that created things can be formally distinct,
Scotus’ position was internally inconsistent.
Ockham concluded from this sequence of attacks that
‘‘no thing outside the soul is universal, either through
itself or through anything real or rational added on, no
matter how it is considered or understood’’ (Ord. I, d. 2,
q. 7, pp. 248–249, [Spade 1994:204]). There were univer-
sals, but these universals were found only in the soul. In
particular, Ockham thought that some mental terms (i.e.,
concepts) are signs for several things, and hence, universal.
Uttered words (voces), which are conventional signs refer-
ring back to concepts, are derivatively universal (Summa
logicae I, 14). Ockham changed his mind about whether
any thing corresponded to these concepts (see Adams
1987, vol. 1:71–107). At ﬁrst, it seems, he identiﬁed the
mental word with a thing or quality in the mind. But he
abandoned this theory for, ﬁrst, the ﬁctum theory, and
ﬁnally, for the thesis that concepts are identical to mental
acts, and not things.
Like all anti-realists in the medieval period, Ockham
was eager to avoid the accusation that if there are no
universals, then the way that we think about the world
has no basis in reality. No matter what ontology of con-
cepts he embraced, Ockham maintained that the universal
concept was itself singular, but ‘‘naturally’’ capable of
being a sign for many. Signiﬁcation was ultimately based
on real relations between things. Ockham did not think
that a commitment to real relations forced him back into
a realist position, for these real relations were themselves
not things (Adams 1987, vol. 1:111–121).
Realism Resurgent
It was not clear that Ockham had considered all possible
realist positions. Even if he had done so, as some com-
mentators have argued, many of Ockham’s arguments
failed to show any contradiction or outright falsehood.
At best these arguments showed that some forms of real-
ism had some unexpected consequences (see, e.g., Adams
1987, vol. 1:31–38).
Walter Burley agreed with Ockham that the only dis-
tinction that can hold between two created things is a real
distinction. Hence, universals are really distinct from par-
ticulars. Burley also asserted that the whole universal exists
in each of its particulars, but that this does not imply that
the universal is numerically multiplied by its existence in
numerically distinct particulars (Adams 1982:422–423).
Ockham thought that the latter thesis implied that the
universal that is in particulars is numerically one. But how
can one thing exist in many numerically distinct individ-
uals without being divided into many? Furthermore, if all
of human were in Adam, then if Adam were annihilated
(i.e., every part of Adam utterly ceased to exist), human
also would be annihilated. But Burley never claimed that
the universal that is in the particulars is itself numerically
one, he merely denied that it was numerically many.
Moreover, he replied, no particular has anything but par-
ticulars for its parts. Accordingly, human is not a ‘‘part’’
of Adam, and the annihilation of Adam would not entail
the annihilation of human (Tractatus de universalibus,
pp. 32–36; cf. Adams 1982:424–426).
Many realists considered Burley’s position to be too
‘‘extravagant.’’ For one thing, Burley seemed to be multi-
plying entities at an alarming rate. For example, Burley
thought that there was both an individual form, which is
a part of the individual, and a universal form. But what is
the relation between the individual form and the universal
(see Boh in Gracia 1994:351–356)? Moreover, to many,
Burley appeared to be ﬂirting with Platonism (Conti
2008:386). If the universal is really distinct from particu-
lars, then it seems possible that God could create
a universal that exists separately from all particulars.
A number of later realists reacted to Burley’s extrava-
gance by returning either to a broadly Thomist position or
to a broadly Scotist position (Conti 2008:386–403).
Dominicans such as Franciscus de Prato and Stephanus
de Reate insisted that universal forms have no being out-
side of the being of their individual instances, and that real
identity comes in degrees. The limit case of real identity is
being ‘‘convertibly,’’ or entirely, the same. A universal and
one of its individuals is really identical, but not entirely
identical (Conti 2008:387–388). Wyclif and the so-called
Oxford realists defended the view that the universal is
formally, and not really distinct from the particular (see,
e.g., Wyclif, Tractatus de universalibus cap. 4, p. 87).
See also: ▶Boethius ▶Categories ▶Essence and Existence
▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶John Duns Scotus
▶Mereology ▶Metaphysics ▶Peter Abelard ▶Platonism
▶Thomas
Aquinas
▶Walter
Burley
▶William
of
Champeaux ▶William of Ockham
1358 U
Universals

Bibliography
Primary Sources (Editions and Translations)
Anonymous [Pseudo-Joscelin] (1982) De generibus et speciebus, ed.
King P. Peter Abailard and the problem of universals, 2 vols.
Unpublished PhD dissertation, Princeton University, vol 2, pp
143–185; An older edition can be found in Cousin Victor (ed)
(1836) Ouvrages inedits d’Abe´lard. Imprimerie Royale, Paris, pp
507–550
Abelard Peter (1919) Logica ‘ingredientibus’, pt. 1: Glossae super
Porphyrium. In: Geyer B (ed) Peter Abaelards Philosophische
Schriften. I. Die Logica ‘Ingredientibus’. 1: die Glossen zu Porphyrius.
Beitra¨ge zur Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters 21, pt 1.
Aschendorffshen Buchhandlung, Mu¨nster, pp 1–109
Abelard Peter (1933) Logica ‘nostrorum petitioni sociorum’: glossula
super Porphyrium. In: Geyer B (ed) Peter Abaelards Philosophische
Schriften. II. Die Logica ‘nostrorum petitioni sociorum’: die Glossen
zu Porphyrius. Beitra¨ge zur Geschichte der Philosophie und
Theologie des Mittelalters 21, pt 4. Aschendorffshen Buchhandlung,
Mu¨nster, pp 505–580
Aquinas Thomas (1976) De ente et essentia. In: Opera omnia. Iussa Leonis
XIII P. M., vol 43. Editori di San Tommaso, Rome
Boethius (1906) In Isagogen Porphyrii commentorum, ed. Brandt S.
Corpus scriptorum ecclesiasticorum Latinorum, vol 48. F. Tempsky,
Vienna
Burley Walter (1999) Tractatus de universalibus, ed. Wo¨hler H-U.
Abhandlungen der Sa¨chsischen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu
Leipzig – Philologisch-historische Klasse bd. 75, 5. Verlag der
Sa¨chsischen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig/S. Hirzel,
Leipzig/Stuttgart
Duns Scotus John (1973) Ordinatio, II, distinctio 3, pars 1. In: Opera
omnia, vol 7. Vatican Polyglot Press, Vatican City
Ibn Sı¯na¯ [Avicenna] (2005) The metaphysics of ‘‘The Healing’’ ed. and
trans. Marmura ME. Brigham Young University Press, Provo
Porphyry (1887) Isagoge. Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca, vol 4, part
1, ed. Busse A. George Reimer, Berlin
Spade PV (trans) (1994) Five texts on the mediaeval problem of univer-
sals. Hackett, Indianapolis
William of Ockham (1970) Scriptum in librum primum Sententiarum
Ordinatio, distinctiones II–III. Opera theologica, vol 2, ed. Brown S,
Ga´l G. Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
William of Ockham (1974) Summa logicae. Opera philosophica, vol 1, ed.
Boehner P, Ga´l G, Brown S. Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
Wyclif John (1985) Tractatus de universalibus, ed. Mueller IJ. Clarendon
Press, Oxford
Secondary Sources
Adams MM (1982) Universals in the early fourteenth century. In:
Kretzmann N, Kenny A, Pinborg J (eds) The Cambridge history of
later medieval philosophy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
pp 411–439
Adams MM (1987) William Ockham, 2 vols. University of Notre Dame
Press, Notre Dame
Conti AD (2008) Categories and universals in the later Middle Ages. In:
Newton LA (ed) Medieval commentaries on Aristotle’s ‘‘Categories.’’
Brill, Leiden, pp 367–408
de Libera A (1996) La querelle des universeaux: De Platon a` la ﬁn du
Moyen Age. E´ditions du Seuil, Paris
Dijs J (1990) Two anonymous twelfth-century tracts on universals. Vivar-
ium 28:85–117
Freddoso A (1978) Abailard on collective realism. J Philos 75:527–538
Gracia JJE (ed) (1994) Individuation in Scholasticism: the later Middle
Ages and the counter-reformation (1150–1650). State University of
New York Press, Albany
Ha¨ring NM (ed) (1966) The commentaries on Boethius by Gilbert of
Poitiers. Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto
Henry DP (1984) That most subtle question (Quaestio subtilissima): the
metaphysical bearing of medieval and contemporary linguistic dis-
ciplines. Manchester University Press, Manchester
Jolivet J (1992) Trois variations me´die´vales sur l’universel et l’individu:
Roscelin, Abe´lard, Gilbert de la Porre´e. Revue de Metaphysique et de
Morale 97:111–155
King P (2004) Metaphysics. In: Brower J, Guilfoy K (eds) The Cambridge
companion to Abelard. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp
65–125
Klima G (2008) The medieval problem of universals. In: Zalta EN (ed) The
Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy (Winter 2008 edition). http://
plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2008/entries/universals-medieval/
(originally published 2000)
Kluge E-HW (1976) Roscelin and the medieval problem of universals.
J Hist Philos 14:405–414
Marenbon J (2004) Life, milieu, and intellectual contexts. In: Brower JE,
Guilfoy K (eds) The Cambridge companion to Abelard. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, pp 13–44
Marmura M (1979) Avicenna’s chapter on universals in the Isagoge
of his Shifaˆ. In: Welch T, Cachia P (eds) Islam past and present
challenge: studies in honor of W. M. Watt. Edinburgh University
Press, Edinburgh, pp 34–56 (repr. Marmura ME. Probing in Islamic
philosophy: studies in the philosophies of Ibn Sina, al-Ghazali
and other major Muslim thinkers. Global Academic, Binghamton,
pp 33–59)
Martin CJ (1983) The compendium Logicae Porretanum: a survey of
philosophical logic from the school of Gilbert of Poitiers. Cahiers
de l’Institut du Moyen-age Grec et Latin 46:xviii–xivi
Owens J (1957) Common nature: a point of comparison between Tho-
mistic and Scotistic metaphysics. Mediaev Stud 19:1–14
Picavet F (1911) Roscelin: philosophe et the´ologien d’apre`s la le´gende et
d’apre`s l’histoire. Alcan, Paris
Spade PV (1996) Boethius against universals: the arguments in the second
commentary on porphyry. Unpublished. Available as PDF ﬁle from
http://www.pvspade.com/Logic/index.html
Tweedale M (1976) Abailard on universals. North-Holland, Amsterdam
Universities and Philosophy
MAARTEN J. F. M. HOENEN
Philosophisches Seminar
Universita¨t Freiburg
Freiburg im Breisgau
Germany
Abstract
During the period from 1200 to 1500, philosophy was to
a large extent located at the Arts faculties of the various
universities, of which there were more than 50 by the
Universities and Philosophy U
1359
U

beginning of the Modern Age. Its main concern was the
reading of Aristotle, whose works were commented upon
according to analogous procedures at each of the univer-
sities. These similarities facilitated the exchange of stu-
dents and masters, who through the inﬂux of new ideas,
stimulated debates about the interpretation of Aristotle’s
texts as well as the implications of his thought. Time and
again, questions about the relationship between philoso-
phy and theology led to serious conﬂicts, which had
important consequences for the teaching of philosophy
at the universities, most signiﬁcantly exempliﬁed by the
Wegestreit in the late-medieval period.
The Faculty of Arts
Since their emergence around 1200, the universities had
formed the most important centres of philosophy, where
philosophers met and practiced until the end of the
Middle Ages. Philosophy’s proper place was the Arts
faculty, one of the four faculties that comprised the typical
medieval university, along with Theology, Medicine, and
Law – although not every university had all four.
Philosophical subjects or subjects with a philosophical
relevance were also discussed at the other faculties,
especially in the faculty of Theology, but it must be
emphasized that the medievals themselves opted for
a division of their universities into independent faculties,
each
possessing
its
own
statutes,
curriculum,
and
administration.
Despite their widespread use in the Middle Ages, the
titles Arts faculty (facultas artium) and Liberal Arts faculty
(facultas artium liberalium) are misleading, as the syllabus
at these faculties had almost nothing to do with the
traditional programme of the seven liberal arts. Of
these liberal arts, only logic and to a lesser extent gram-
mar still played a prominent role in the educational
system of the Arts faculty. Other main components of
the syllabus, however, such as physics and metaphysics,
were not considered liberal arts, as Albert the Great had
argued and whose position on the matter was accepted
and reiterated over the years. Nevertheless, the designa-
tion Liberal Arts faculty was used throughout the medi-
eval period, mainly to stress the propaedeutic role of
philosophy in relation to the other academic disciplines.
In this sense, for example, the statutes of the Arts faculty
of Freiburg im Breisgau maintained that the Arts faculty
is the ‘‘devout nurse’’ (pia nutrix) of the higher faculties. It
was only in the sixteenth century that the term philosophy
became itself part of the denomination, in combinations
like facultas artium seu philosophiae, or even replaced it, as
in facultas philosophica, which was used in 1560 in
Ingolstadt.
The Basic Texts
The practice of philosophy at medieval universities was
intimately connected to its teaching programme, the key-
stone of which was a standard set of texts that were read
and commented upon in the classroom. These texts also
determined the division of subjects treated at the Arts
faculty. In their classes, masters did not so much discuss
general philosophical topics, like epistomology or philos-
ophy of science, as they read and commented upon stan-
dard books such as Aristotle’s Physics or Metaphysics,
which were discussed again and again over many years,
each time by new masters. They did not always read the
complete works, but only signiﬁcant parts of them, and
here again standard practices were followed. As a rule, for
example, the ﬁrst book of Aristotle’s On the Soul was left
out, as well as the thirteenth and fourteenth books of his
Metaphysics.
It was around the middle of the thirteenth century
that the corpus aristotelicum became the root of the sylla-
bus. Of course each master had his own focus when
reading the texts. For example, in the fourteenth century
much more stress was placed on methodological issues
than in the thirteenth and ﬁfteenth centuries. However,
the starting point for their philosophical reﬂections was
always the same. Apart from the works of Aristotle,
a number of others’ texts were commented upon, such as
those of classical authors like Boethius and Euclid, and
those of medievals like Albert the Great and Marsilius of
Inghen. However, precisely which and how many of these
texts were taught varied in the syllabi of the different
universities.
Because teaching focused on standard texts, these were
instrumental in determining the issues to be dealt with by
the master. Thus, it could happen that one and the same
subject would be treated in different classes by different
masters, depending on the texts being read and the inter-
ests of the master. For example, the nature of universals
was not only dealt with in commentaries on the opening of
Porphyry’s Isagoge, which was the locus classicus, but also
in those on the ﬁrst book of the Physics, where Aristotle
said that man ﬁrst has general knowledge and only
afterward particular, as well as in those on second
book of De anima, in which Aristotle argued that univer-
sals are the object of the intellect and particulars that of the
senses.
This is not as chaotic as it may seem at ﬁrst glance,
since the structure of the corpus aristotelicum was stable,
remaining the same over the years at all universities. For
modern research this has the advantage that it is relatively
easy to locate and identify the topics that were discussed in
the different commentaries on Aristotle and to make
1360 U
Universities and Philosophy

comparisons between commentaries written at different
universities at different times.
The Teaching Programme
In general, the teaching programme for philosophy was
constructed as follows. During the ﬁrst stage, primarily the
logical works of the corpus aristotelicum were studied, then
the physical works, followed by the Metaphysics and ﬁnally
the Ethics. Additional works in the ﬁeld of grammar, logic,
rhetoric, mathematics, or astronomy were included, but
played a less central role.
The programme was divided into three consecutive
stages. The ﬁrst stage lasted from the beginning of study
until achievement of the ﬁrst academic grade, that of
bachelor. During this time, study consisted primarily of
the logical and some parts of the physical works of Aris-
totle. The student at this stage was called scolaris. Once he
passed his ﬁrst exam, which happened generally after two
to three years of study, he was called baccalareus and
prepared himself for the next exam, that of the licentiate.
During this period he principally followed courses on the
remainder of the physical works, the Metaphysics and the
Ethics. This phase lasted longer, sometimes up to 5 years.
After he had been awarded his licentiate, the student then
applied for the title of master, which was normally
awarded within the year. The master’s title granted him
the ius ubique docendi, that is, right to teach at all univer-
sities, although in practice this was not always accepted. At
the end of the Middle Ages, for instance, when the Arts
faculties were divided into a via moderna and via antiqua,
some universities that followed only the via moderna
refused to accept masters who had been educated in the
via antiqua.
Commentary, Exercises, and Disputations
The process of studying and discussing the texts of the
syllabus was threefold: ordinary lectures on the texts
presented by the master, exercises to deepen the students’
knowledge of those texts, and disputations on their con-
tent. Lectures normally took place in the morning. The
text was read aloud by the master, who also explained the
division of the text and its content. This was done either in
a cursory fashion, with the master sticking close to the
text, or more extensively, using the text as a starting point
for questions that he then discussed with the students.
Most commentaries that have come down to us in manu-
scripts or early printed editions only partially reﬂect what
was actually taught in the classroom, having been adapted
for publication by the master. Occasionally, lecture notes
written by students survived, and these present a different,
far less structured picture. Apart from these, statutes,
protocols, colophons, and illuminations also help to
reconstruct the teaching situation at the Arts faculties.
After lectures, students attended exercises in the after-
noon in which the same texts presented earlier that day
were dealt with once more. These exercises were given by
masters, although not necessarily by the same ones who
had given the morning lecture on the subject. Some infor-
mation about the form of these exercises can be drawn
from the statutes of the various Arts faculties; however,
their actual content remains unclear. It is possible that the
exercitia, puncta, and reparationes which have survived in
a number of late-medieval manuscripts are the product of
such exercises.
Finally, disputations played an important role in the
educational programme, and were considered necessary for
sharpening the minds of students and masters. To be sure,
these disputations cannot be compared to those in the
Theology faculties, which had a much more solemn char-
acter; nevertheless, they played a similarly central role. In
the late-medieval period, an ordinary disputation was held
once a week under the presidency of one of the masters,
who posed questions to the bachelors and other masters,
against whose solutions he then argued. In addition to this,
short, daily disputations were held in the colleges. All those
living in the college were required to be present, masters as
well as students. The subjects of the ordinary disputations
varied, yet basically took their starting point from those
texts read in the lectures and exercises. The daily disputa-
tions primarily treated logical subjects.
Colleges and Bursae
Since at least the fourteenth century, it was typical for
students to live together with masters in colleges or bursae,
which were owned and run by the latter. In these colleges,
not only disputations, but also exercises were held. Toward
the end of the Middle Ages, a substantial part of the
educational programme was delivered in the colleges,
including, most importantly, some of the ordinary lec-
tures. This shift had enormous impact on the schooling of
students. The increased closeness of the master–student
relationship facilitated the emergence of different schools
of thought, each expressing the preferences of their respec-
tive master. An example of great historical import is
Cologne, founded in 1388, where attached to the Arts
faculty were a number of bursae, each with their own
reading of the corpus aristotelicum. The thomistae at the
bursa montana commented upon Aristotle on the basis of
the works of Thomas Aquinas, whereas the albertistae at
the bursa laurentiana preferred the commentaries of
Albert the Great. School traditions linked to institutions
closely connected to the Arts faculty are a phenomenon
Universities and Philosophy U
1361
U

typical of the ﬁfteenth century, which does not appear in
the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.
The Wegestreit
Also characteristic of the late-medieval period is the
so-called Wegestreit: the debate between the via antiqua
and via moderna which took shape in the second decade
of the ﬁfteenth century and determined the educational
programme at many universities until the beginning of the
sixteenth century. The bone of contention was the correct
interpretation of Aristotle – whether it was that exempli-
ﬁed by Thomas Aquinas, Albert the Great, and John Duns
Scotus (the via antiqua), or that exempliﬁed by William of
Ockham, John Buridan, and Marsilius of Inghen (the via
moderna). That the debate became so intense was due
largely to the fact that it bore upon the relationship between
philosophy and theology. According to representatives of
the via antiqua, there is a necessary connection between
the two, most signiﬁcantly demonstrated by Thomas
Aquinas, and therefore Aristotle must be interpreted in
a way that does not conﬂict with Christian Faith.
Defenders of the via moderna denied this and referred,
for example, to Marsilius of Inghen, who had argued that
for Aristotle the human soul is mortal and creation from
nothing an impossibility, and therefore that Aristotle’s
thought cannot be completely reconciled with Revelation.
At many universities, masters and students of both
‘‘ways’’ lived in different colleges. Consequently, the
same texts of Aristotle were read at the same time by two
different masters, each according to their own via. Exams
were also held separately, so as to avoid students being
failed because they did not respond to the question in an
appropriate way. This situation interfered with the opera-
tion of the Arts faculty in many ways, and the protocols of
the various Arts faculties testify to the plethora of difﬁcul-
ties that emerged from this state of affairs. Only toward the
beginning of the sixteenth century did circumstances
eventually change.
Channels of Exchange
The number of Arts faculties grew continually from the
thirteenth century onward, with peaks in the second half
of the fourteenth century (Prague, Vienna, Erfurt, Heidel-
berg, Cologne) and the second half of the ﬁfteenth century
(Greifswald, Uppsala, Tu¨bingen, Freiburg, Basel). There
was a signiﬁcant exchange of teachers and students
between these institutions. Some students were attracted
by the presence of a particular master to take their degree
at a foreign university, as was the case when Marsilius of
Inghen taught at Paris in the early 1360s. Others followed
their master when he moved from one place to another, as
when Heymeric of Camp arrived in Cologne in 1422.
Naturally, these academic peregrinations were closely
tied to political circumstances. The Hundred Years’ War,
which began in the 1330s, impeded exchange between
England and Paris, and this had an immediate impact on
academic debates on the continent. The imbroglio of the
Schism in 1378, which in Paris subjected those who
opposed the University’s ofﬁcial support of Clemens VII
to boycotts, forced in particular German masters to leave
the city and seek academic positions elsewhere. Some of
these played a signiﬁcant role at the newly established
German universities, such as Marsilius of Inghen, who
was rector of the University of Paris in 1367 and 1371,
but left the city in 1378 to become the ﬁrst rector of the
University of Heidelberg in 1386.
When designing their statutes, the Arts faculties of the
newly erected universities often used Paris as a model, as
well as Vienna, though to a lesser degree. Consequently, the
structures of the different Arts faculties were more or
less similar, making the exchange of students and masters
easier. Some faculties drew their masters from privileged
universities, as in Leuven professors from Cologne were
preferred. In the early years of Freiburg University, a signif-
icant number of masters came from Heidelberg, which had
an immediate effect on the way Aristotle was read there,
since these masters were trained in the via moderna.
It goes without saying that the movements of masters
and students facilitated the exchange of ideas and thus
substantially enhanced the level of academic debate with a
constant inﬂux of new ideas. For example, the views of the
Parisian master Henry of Ghent were already discussed at
a very early stage in England, where they had a substantial
impact on John Duns Scotus. The exchange of manu-
scripts also played an important role. Not only did the
universities and faculties possess signiﬁcant collections,
but individuals as well. As is apparent from university
documents and private letters, manuscripts were often
borrowed to be read or copied, sometimes over a period
of several years.
Controversies
Within the limits of this article, it is hardly possible to
provide an accurate account of those controversies that
were central to the philosophical debates held at medieval
universities. Generally, they belonged to the ﬁelds of logic
(universals, signiﬁcation, supposition), natural philoso-
phy (motion, time, inﬁnity), metaphysics (substance,
being, ﬁrst cause), and ethics (virtues, happiness, friend-
ship). The bottom line was the correct interpretation
1362 U
Universities and Philosophy

of Aristotle, whose writings stood at the centre of the
educational programme; yet, this did not in any way
prevent original thought. Even Ockham, whose views
were rejected by some contemporaries as new inventions,
repeatedly stressed that what he said was precisely that
which Aristotle expressed in his writings. And although
Aristotle himself was sometimes attacked, especially by
theologians (some of whom, such as Francis of Meyronnes
in his commentary on the Sentences, called him the worst
metaphysician) he nonetheless remained the virtually
undisputed starting point of philosophical reﬂection at
medieval universities.
Signiﬁcantly, Aristotle was considered the best exam-
ple of what human beings are able to achieve through the
use of natural reason alone, that is, without the aid of
Christian Revelation. This led to repeated conﬂicts with
representatives of the Theology faculty and even the
Church, when philosophers underlined in their classes
that Aristotle, and thus natural reason, came to conclu-
sions opposed to those of Christian Faith. Landmarks
were the Condemnation of 1277, when Bishop Stephen
Tempier banned a number of philosophical theses
discussed in the Arts faculty at Paris, and the aforemen-
tioned late-medieval Wegestreit.
Conclusion
In the eyes of many sixteenth-century intellectuals, the
debates at late-medieval universities had demonstrated
that philosophy practiced in this way could hardly attain
its goal, namely, to ﬁnd the truth, but would always dis-
solve into endless battles between schools. This belief
had a twofold effect on the practice of philosophy. On
the one hand, at some universities an effort was made to
produce new teaching materials, designed to represent
a common view acceptable to all parties, as for example
those made by Johannes Eck at the request of the Univer-
sity of Ingolstadt. On the other hand, philosophical move-
ments outside the universities began to gain inﬂuence
during this time, questioning scholastic philosophy on
the whole and paving the way for future philosophers
like Hobbes, Descartes, and Spinoza, who had no univer-
sity afﬁliation. To be sure, universities in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries continued to play a signiﬁcant role
in the production of philosophical texts. But in contrast
to the Middle Ages, crucial developments took place
increasingly outside the lecture halls.
See also: ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶Categories, Commentar-
ies on Aristotle’s ▶De caelo, Commentaries on Aristotle’s
▶De
generatione
et
corruptione,
Commentaries
on
Aristotle’s
▶Nicomachean
Ethics,
Commentaries
on
Aristotle’s ▶Parisian Condemnation of 1277 ▶Prior
Analytics, Commentaries on Aristotle’s
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(1886) Urkundenbuch der Universita¨t Heidelberg, Urkunden, vol 1, ed.
Winkelmann E. Regesten, vol 2. Carl Winter’s Universita¨tsbuch-
handlung, Heidelberg
(1891–1899) Chartularium Universitatis Parisiensis, 4 vols, ed. Deniﬂe H,
Chatelain E. Delalain, Paris (repr. Impression Anastatique Culture et
Civilisation, Bruxelles, 1964)
(1894–1964)
Auctarium
Chartularii
Universitatis
Parisiensis,
sub
auspiciis Consilii Generalis Facultatum Parisiensium, 6 vols, ed.
Deniﬂe H, Chatelain E. Delalain, Paris
(1964) The mediaeval statutes of the Faculty of Arts of the University of
Freiburg im Breisgau, ed. Ott H, Fletcher JM. The Mediaeval Insti-
tute, Notre Dame
(1968) Acta Facultatis Artium Universitatis Vindobonensis 1385–1416,
ed. Uiblein P. Bo¨hlaus, Graz
(1973) Die Universita¨t Ingolstadt im 15. und 16. Jahrhundert. Texte und
Regesten, ed. Seifert A. Duncker & Humblot, Berlin
(1999) La Condemnation Parisienne de 1277, ed. Piche´ D. J. Vrin, Paris
(2006) Students and teachers at the University of Paris. The generation of
1500. A critical edition of Bibliothe`que de l’Universite´ de Paris
(Sorbonne), Archives, Registres 89 and 90, ed. Farge JK. Brill, Leiden
Secondary Sources
Bianchi L (ed) (1997) La ﬁlosoﬁa nelle universita`. Secoli XIII–XIV. La
Nuova Italia, Firenze
Courtenay WJ (1987) Schools and scholars in fourteenth-century
England. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Courtenay WJ (1988) Teaching careers at the University of Paris in the
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. Unites States Subcommission
for the History of Universities, Notre Dame
Courtenay WJ, Miethke J (eds) (2000) Universities and schooling in
medieval society. Brill, Leiden
de Ridder-Symoens H (ed) (1992) Universities in the Middle Ages, vol 1.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Hamesse J (ed) (1994) Manuels, programmes de cours et techniques
d’enseignement
dans
les
universite´s
me´die´vales.
Universite´
Catholique de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve
Hoenen MJFM (2003) Via antiqua and via moderna in the ﬁfteenth
century: doctrinal, institutional, and church political factors in the
Wegestreit. In: Friedman RL, Nielsen LO (eds) The medieval heritage
in early modern metaphysics and modal theory 1400–1700. Kluwer,
Dordrecht, pp 9–36
Hoenen MJFM, Schneider JHJ, Wieland G (eds) (1995) Philosophy and
learning. Universities in the Middle Ages. Brill, Leiden
Kibre P, Siraisi NG (1978) The institutional setting: the universities. In:
Lindberg DC (ed) Science in the Middle Ages. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, pp 120–144
Maieru` A (1994) University training in medieval Europe. Brill, Leiden
Miethke J (2004) Studieren an mittelalterlichen Universita¨ten. Chancen
und Risiken, Gesammelte Aufsa¨tze. Brill, Leiden
Pinborg J, Kenny A, (1982) Medieval philosophical literature. In:
Kretzmann N, Kenny A, Pinborg J (eds) The Cambridge history of
Universities and Philosophy U
1363
U

later medieval philosophy from the rediscovery of Aristotle to the
disintegration of scholasticism 1100–1600. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, pp 11–42
Schwinges RCh (1999) Artisten und Philosophen. Wissenschafts- und
Wirkungsgeschichte einer Fakulta¨t vom 13. bis zum 19. Schwabe,
Jahrhundert, Basel
Teeuwen M (2003) The vocabulary of intellectual life in the Middle Ages.
Brepols, Turnhout
Tewes GR (1993) Die Bursen der Ko¨lner Artisten-Fakulta¨t bis zur Mitte
des 16. Jahrhunderts. Bo¨hlau, Ko¨ln
Uiblein P (1995) Mittelalterliches Studium an der Wiener Artisten-
fakulta¨t. Kommentar zu den Acta Facultatis Artium Universitatis
Vindobonensis 1385–1416, 2nd ed. Universita¨tsverlag, Wien
Van Engen J (2000) Learning institutionalized. Teaching in the medieval
university. University of Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame
Weijers O (1987) Terminologie des universite´s au XIIIe sie`cle. Edizioni
dell’Ateneo, Roma
Weijers O (1995) La ‘disputatio’ a` la Faculte´ des arts de Paris (1200–1350
environ). Esquisse d’une typologie. Brepols, Turnhout
Weijers O, Holtz L (eds) (1997) L’enseignement des disciplines a` la
Faculte´ des arts (Paris et Oxford, XIIIe - XVe sie`cles). Brepols,
Turnhout
Weisheipl JA (1964) Curriculum of the faculty of arts at Oxford in the
early fourteenth century. Mediaev Stud 26:143–185
Weisheipl
JA
(1966)
Developments
in
the
arts
curriculum
at
Oxford in the early fourteenth century. Mediaev Stud 28:151–175
1364 U
Universities and Philosophy

