Quantum Gravity (General) and Applications
565
Q
Quantum Gravity (General) and Applications
Claus Kiefer
What is Quantum Gravity?
Quantum theory is a general theoretical framework to describe states and interac-
tions in Nature. It does so successfully for the strong, weak, and electromagnetic
interactions. Gravity is, however, still described by a classical theory – Einstein’s
theory of general relativity, also called geometrodynamics. So far, general relativity
seems to accommodate all observations which include gravity; there exist some phe-
nomena which could in principle need a more general theory for their explanation
(Dark Matter, Dark Energy, Pioneer Anomaly), but this is an open issue.
Quantum gravity would ultimately be a physical theory, both mathematically
consistent and experimentally tested, that accommodates the gravitational interac-
tion into the quantum framework. Such a theory is not yet available. Therefore, one
calls quantum gravity all approaches which are candidates for such a theory or suit-
able approximations thereof. The following sections will ﬁrst focus on the general
motivation for constructing such a theory, and then introduce the approaches which
at the moment look most promising.
Why Quantum Gravity?
No experiment or observation is known which deﬁnitely needs a quantum theory of
gravity for its explanation. There exist, however, various theoretical reasons which
indicate that the current theoretical framework of physics is incomplete and that one
needs quantum gravity for its completion. Here is a list of such reasons:
• Singularity theorems: Under general conditions, it follows from mathematical
theorems that spacetime singularities are unavoidable in general relativity. The
theory thus predicts its own breakdown. The two most relevant singularities are
the initial cosmological singularity (‘Big Bang’) and the singularity inside black
holes. Since the classical theory is then no longer applicable, a more compre-
hensive theory must be found – the general expectation is that this is a quantum
theory of gravity.
• Initial conditions in cosmology: This is related to the ﬁrst point. Cosmology
as such is incomplete if its beginning cannot be described in physical terms.
According to modern cosmological theories, the Universe underwent an era of
exponential expansion in its early phase called inﬂation. While inﬂation gives a
satisfactory explanation for issues such as structure formation, it cannot give, by
itself, an account of how the Universe began. Nor is it clear how likely inﬂation

566
Quantum Gravity (General) and Applications
indeed is. A thorough understanding of initial conditions should shed some light
on this as well as on the origin of irreversibility, that is, on the arrow of time.
• Evolution of black holes: Black holes radiate with a temperature proportional
to ℏ, the Hawking temperature, see below. For the ﬁnal evaporation, a full the-
ory of quantum gravity is needed since the semi-classical approximation leading
to the Hawking temperature then breaks down. This ﬁnal phase could be of as-
trophysical relevance, provided small relic black holes from the early Universe
(‘primordial black holes’) exist.
• Uniﬁcation of all interactions: All nongravitational interactions have so far been
successfully accommodated into the quantum framework. Gravity couples uni-
versally to all forms of energy. One would therefore expect that in a uniﬁed theory
of all interactions, gravity is described in quantum terms, too.
• Inconsistency of an exact semi-classical theory: All attempts to construct a fun-
damental theory where a classical gravitational ﬁeld is coupled to quantum ﬁelds
have failed up to now. Such a framework is here called an ‘exact semi-classical
theory’; it corresponds to the limit where the quantum ﬁelds propagate on a clas-
sical background spacetime.
• Avoidance of divergences: It has long been speculated that quantum gravity may
lead to a theory devoid of the ubiquitous divergences arising in quantum ﬁeld
theory. This may happen, for example, through the emergence of a natural cutoff
at small distances (large momenta). In fact, modern approaches such as string
theory or loop quantum gravity (see below) provide indications for a discrete
structure at small scales.
Quantum gravity is supposed to be a fundamental theory which is valid at all scales.
There exists, however, a distinguished scale where one would expect that typical
quantum-gravity effects can never be neglected. This scale is found if one combines
the gravitational constant (G), the speed of light (c), and the quantum of action
(ℏ) into units of length, time, mass (and energy). In honour of Max Planck, who
presented these units ﬁrst in 1899, they are called Planck units. Explicitly, they read
lP =
 
ℏG
c3 ≈1.62 × 10−33 cm ,
(1)
tP =
 
ℏG
c5 ≈5.40 × 10−44 s ,
(2)
mP =
 
ℏc
G ≈2.17 × 10−5 g ≈1.22 × 1019 GeV/c2 .
(3)
They are called Planck length, Planck time, and Planck mass, respectively.
Structures in the Universe usually occur at scales which are simple powers of the
gravitational ‘ﬁne-structure constant’
αg =
Gm2
pr
ℏc
=
mpr
mP
2
≈5.91 × 10−39 ,
(4)

Quantum Gravity (General) and Applications
567
Q
where mpr denotes the proton mass. Stellar masses and stellar lifetimes can be de-
rived, in an order-of-magnitude estimate, from this number. Its smallness is respon-
sible for the irrelevance of quantum gravity in usual astrophysical considerations.
Structural Issues of Quantum Gravity
Quantization of gravity means quantization of geometry  quantization. But which
structures should be quantized, that is, to which structures should one apply the
 superposition principle? Following Chris Isham, one can do this at each order of
the following hierarchy of structures:
Point set of events →topological structure →differentiable manifold →causal
structure →Lorentzian structure.
Those structures that are not quantized remain as absolute (nondynamical) enti-
ties in the formalism. One would expect that in a fundamental theory no absolute
structure remains. This is referred to as background independence of the theory.
Still, however, most of the approaches to quantum gravity contain at least the ﬁrst
three structures as classical entities.
A particular aspect of background independence is the ‘problem of time,’ which
arises in any approach to quantum gravity. On the one hand, time is external in or-
dinary quantum theory; the parameter t in the  Schr¨odinger equation is identical
to Newton’s absolute time – it is not turned into an operator and is presumed to be
prescribed from the outside. This is true also in special relativity where the absolute
time t is replaced by Minkowski spacetime, which is again an absolute structure.
On the other hand, time in general relativity is dynamical because it is part of the
spacetime described by Einstein’s equations. Both concepts cannot be fundamen-
tally true, so a theory of quantum gravity would entail important changes for our
understanding of time.
Experimental Status
One of the main problems in searching for a theory of quantum gravity is the lack of
a direct experimental hint. For example, in order to probe the Planck scale directly,
present-day accelerators would have to be of galactic size. Direct tests are therefore
expected to arise from astrophysical or cosmological observations. However, some
speculative theories with higher dimensions allow for the possibility of an experi-
mental test at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), which starts to operate at CERN in
2009.
Experiments are available only for the level of external Newtonian gravity inter-
acting with micro- or mesoscopic systems ( Mesoscopic Quantum Phenomena).
Examples are neutron and atom interferometry. On the level of quantum ﬁeld the-
ory on a curved spacetime, a deﬁnite, but not yet tested prediction was made: black

568
Quantum Gravity (General) and Applications
holes emit thermal radiation. This is the Hawking effect, named after the physicist
Stephen Hawking (*1942) who derived it in 1974. For a Schwarzschild black hole
of mass M, the temperature is
TBH =
ℏc3
8πkBGM ≈6.17 × 10−8
M⊙
M

K ,
(5)
where kB denotes Boltzmann’s constant. The black hole shrinks due to Hawking
radiation and possesses a ﬁnite lifetime. The ﬁnal phase, where γ -radiation is be-
ing emitted, could be observable. The temperature (5) is unobservably small for
black holes that result from stellar collapse. One would need primordial black holes
produced in the early Universe because they could possess a sufﬁciently low mass.
For example, black holes with an initial mass of 5 × 1014 g would evaporate at the
present age of the Universe. In spite of several attempts, no experimental hint for
black-hole evaporation has been found.
Since black holes radiate thermally, they also possess an entropy, the
‘Bekenstein–Hawking entropy,’ which is given by the expression
SBH = kBc3A
4Gℏ= kB
A
4l2
P
,
(6)
where A is the surface area of the event horizon. For a Schwarzschild black hole
with mass M, this reads
SBH ≈1.07 × 1077kB
 M
M⊙
2
.
(7)
Since the Sun has an entropy of about 1057kB, this means that a black hole resulting
from the collapse of a star with a few solar masses would experience an increase in
entropy by twenty orders of magnitude during its collapse. It is one of the challenges
of any theory of quantum gravity to provide a microscopic explanation for this en-
tropy, that is, to derive (6) from a counting of microscopic quantum gravitational
states.
Due to the equivalence principle, there exists an effect related to (5) in ﬂat
Minkowski space. An observer with uniform acceleration a experiences the stan-
dard Minkowski vacuum not as empty, but as ﬁlled with thermal radiation with
temperature
TDU =
ℏa
2πkBc ≈4.05 × 10−23 a
cm
s2

K.
(8)
This temperature is often called the ‘Davies–Unruh temperature,’ named after the
physicists Paul Davies (*1946) and William Unruh (*1945). It, too, has not yet been
experimentally tested, but efforts are being made in this direction.

Quantum Gravity (General) and Applications
569
Q
What are the Main Approaches?
The main present approaches to ﬁnd a theory of quantum gravity can be classiﬁed
according to the following scheme.
• Quantum general relativity: The most straightforward attempt, both conceptu-
ally and historically, is the application of ‘quantization rules’ to classical general
relativity. One further distinguishes the following subapproaches:
– Covariant approaches: These are approaches that employ four-dimensional
covariance at some stage of the formalism. Examples include perturbation
theory, effective ﬁeld theories, renormalization-group approaches, and path
integral methods (such as Regge calculus or dynamical triangulation). For ex-
ample, in the path integral one sums over all suitable four-dimensional metrics
in order to arrive at a quantum gravitational Green function or wave func-
tional. Pioneers of the covariant approach include L´eon Rosenfeld, Matvei
Bronstein, and Bryce DeWitt.
– Canonical approaches: Here one makes use of a Hamiltonian formalism and
identiﬁes appropriate canonical variables and conjugate momenta. Examples
include quantum geometrodynamics (where gravity is described in metric
form) and loop quantum gravity (where gravity is described by a connec-
tion integrated around a closed loop). They are characterized by a constraint
equation of the form
H = 0 ,
(9)
where H denotes the full Hamilton operator for the gravitational ﬁeld as
well as all nongravitational ﬁelds;  is the full wave functional for these de-
grees of freedom. In the geometrodynamical approach, this equation is called
the Wheeler–DeWitt equation, in honour of the physicists John Archibald
Wheeler (1911–2008) and Bryce DeWitt (1923–2004), who ﬁrst discussed
this equation in detail. The loop approach goes mainly back to work by Ab-
hay Ashtekar (*1949), Lee Smolin (*1955), and Carlo Rovelli (*1956).
As can be recognized from the stationary form of equation (9), these the-
ories are explicitly timeless, that is, devoid of any classical time parameter.
They thus solve the ‘problem of time’ by getting rid of time at the fundamen-
tal level. This should happen in the other approaches, too, but the situation is
there much less clear.
• String theory: This is the main approach to construct a unifying quantum frame-
work of all interactions. The quantum aspect of the gravitational ﬁeld only
emerges in a certain limit in which the different interactions can be distinguished
from each other. All particles have their origin in excitations of fundamental
strings. The fundamental scale is given by the string length; it is supposed to be
of the order of the Planck length, although the Planck length is here a derived
quantity.
String theory was originally developed as a theory of hadrons. While its un-
suitability in this ﬁeld became soon clear, it was later devised as a theory for the

570
Quantum Gravity (General) and Applications
physics at the Planck scale. Among the pioneers who introduced string theory in
the gravitational context are Jo¨el Scherk and John Schwarz.
• Other attempts such as the quantization of topology or the theory of causal sets.
In perturbation theory, the important concept of the graviton emerges. In this
approximation one decomposes the metric, gμν, into a background part, ¯gμν, and a
‘small’ perturbation, fμν,
gμν = ¯gμν +
 
32πG
c4
fμν.
(10)
Only the perturbation is being quantized. The important assumption is the presence
of an (approximate) background with respect to which standard perturbation theory
(formulation of Feynman rules, etc.) can be applied. In this approximate framework
the quantum aspects of gravity are encoded in a spin-2 particle propagating on the
background – the graviton, which arises from fμν. The ensuing perturbation theory
is, however, nonrenormalizable: at each order in the expansion with respect to G,
new types of divergences occur which have to be absorbed into appropriate param-
eters that in turn have to be ﬁxed by measurement. Nevertheless, one can derive in
the low-energy limit concrete effects from perturbation theory. One is the quantum
gravitational correction to the Newtonian potential between two masses m1 and m2,
V (r) = −Gm1m2
r

1 + 3G(m1 + m2)
2rc2
+ 41
10π
Gℏ
r2c3

.
(11)
Another is the decay rate of excited states in atomic physics through emission of
gravitons; for example, the decay rate in hydrogen from the 3d level to the ground
state is
g = Gm3
ecα6
360ℏ2
≈5.7 × 10−40 s−1,
(12)
where α is the ﬁne-structure constant and me the electron mass. This corresponds to
a life-time of
τg ≈5.6 × 1031 years,
(13)
which is too large to be measurable. The problem of nonrenormalizability in pertur-
bation theory is avoided by string theory.
Quantum general relativity as well as string theory have found applications
for quantum black holes and for quantum cosmology. Both approaches have,
for restricted situations, proposed a microscopic explanation for the black-hole
entropy (6). The corresponding microscopic states are either those of spin networks
(in loop quantum gravity) or D-branes (in string theory). On the other hand, a clear
picture of black-hole evaporation is elusive, although there is strong evidence in
all approaches that there is no fundamental loss of information during this process.
As for quantum cosmology, preliminary results exist for a wide range of topics:
singularity avoidance, initial conditions, origin of structure, and the arrow of time.
Direct effects may be seen in the anisotropy spectrum of the cosmic background

Quantum Gravity (General) and Applications
571
Q
radiation, but the situation is presently unclear. It should also be mentioned that
both string theory and loop quantum gravity predict that space is discrete at very
small scales (near the string length or the Planck length, respectively), with possible
observational relevance.
A central issue is also the recovery of established physical theories as approx-
imations from quantum gravity. Quantum geometrodynamics gives at least on the
formal level a picture of how a semi-classical time parameter and the limit of quan-
tum ﬁeld theory in a background spacetime emerge as approximations (using a type
of scheme similar to the Born–Oppenheimer approximation in molecular physics).
This includes the classical behavior of spacetime due to decoherence ( decoher-
ence, experimental observation of decoherence; time in quantum mechanics). The
situation in loop quantum gravity is not yet fully clear. As for string theory, it has
not yet succeeded to achieve one of its major goals – the recovery of the Standard
Model of  particle physics.
Primary Literature
1. L. Rosenfeld, ¨Uber die Gravitationswirkungen des Lichtes. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik, 65, 589–599
(1930).
2. M. Bronstein, Quantentheorie schwacher Gravitationsfelder. Physikalische Zeitschrift der
Sowjetunion, 9, 140–157 (1936).
3. B. S. DeWitt, Quantum theory of gravity. I. The canonical theory. Physical Review, 160,
1113–1148 (1967).
4. B. S. Dewitt, Quantum theory of gravity. II. The manifestly covariant theory. Physical Review,
162, 1195–1239 (1967).
5. B. S. Dewitt, Quantum theory of gravity. III. Applications of the covariant theory. Physical
Review, 162, 1239–1262 (1967).
6. J. Scherk and J. H. Schwarz, Dual models for non-hadrons. Nuclear Physics B, 81, 118–144
(1974).
7. A. Ashtekar, New variables for classical and quantum gravity. Physical Review Letters, 57,
2244–2247 (1986).
General Introductions
8. S. Carlip, Quantum gravity: a progress report. Reports on Progress in Physics, 64, 885–942
(2001). A related online version is http://arxiv.org/abs/gr-qc/0108040.
9. C. Kiefer, Quantum Gravity. Second Edition (Oxford University Press, Oxford 2007).
10. C. Kiefer, Quantum gravity: general introduction and recent developments. Annalen der
Physik, 15, 129–148 (2006). A related online version is http:arxiv.org/abs/gr-qc/0508120.
Special Topics
11. D. Coule, Quantum cosmological models. Classical and Quantum Gravity, 22, R125–R166
(2005). A related online version is http://arxiv.org/abs/gr-qc/0412026.
12. C. Kiefer and C. Weber, On the interaction of mesoscopic quantum systems with grav-
ity. Annalen der Physik, 14, 253–278 (2005). A related online version is http://arxiv.org/
abs/quant-ph/0408010.

572
Quantum Hall Effect
13. C. Rovelli, Quantum Gravity (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2004).
14. H. D. Zeh, The Physical Basis of the Direction of Time. Fifth Edition (Springer, Berlin, 2007).
See also http://www.time-direction.de.
15. B. Zwiebach, A First Course in String Theory (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2004).
16. Review articles by various authors in the online journal Living Reviews in Relativity, see
http://relativity.livingreviews.org/
Collections of Essays on General and Special Topics
17. Quantum Theory of Gravity, edited by S. M. Christensen (Adam Hilger, Bristol, 1984).
18. Quantum Concepts in Space and Time, edited by R. Penrose and C. J. Isham (Clarendon Press,
Oxford, 1986).
19. Conceptual Problems of Quantum Gravity, edited by A. Ashtekar and J. Stachel (Birkh¨auser,
Boston, 1991).
20. Quantum Gravity: From Theory to Experimental Search, edited by D. Giulini, C. Kiefer, and
C. L¨ammerzahl. Lecture Notes in Physics 631 (Springer, Berlin, 2003).
21. The Structural Foundations of Quantum Gravity, edited by D. Rickles, S. French, and J. T.
Saatsi (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 2006).
22. Quantum Gravity: Mathematical Models and Experimental Bounds, edited by B. Fauser,
J. Tolksdorf, and E. Zeidler (Birkh¨auser, Basel, 2007).
Popular Books
23. J. B. Barbour, The End of Time (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2000).
24. B. Greene, The Elegant Universe (Vintage, London, 2005).
25. L. Smolin, Three Roads to Quantum Gravity (Perseus Books Group, 2002).
Quantum Hall Effect∗
Rolf R. Gerhardts, J¨urgen Weis, and Klaus von Klitzing
In 1980, Klaus von Klitzing made the unexpected discovery that, at sufﬁciently low
temperatures and high magnetic ﬁelds, the Hall resistance of a two-dimensional
electron system assumes quantized values, which turned out to depend only on fun-
damental constants and integer numbers. For this discovery, which nowadays is used
to reproduce the unit of the electrical resistance with an unprecedented accuracy, he
was honored in 1985 with the Nobel Prize in Physics. A coherent explanation of the
∗This contribution is based on an original German article by Klaus von Klitzing, Rolf Gerhardts,
Juergen Weis, ‘25 Jahre Quanten Hall-Effekt’, in Physik Journal (June 2005, pp. 37–44). It was
translated by Rolf Gerhardts and is reprinted by permission of the authors and Physik Journal.

