546
Quantum Eraser
Literature
1. B. Schumacher: Quantum coding. Phys. Rev. A 51(4), 2738–2747 (1995)
2. M. Nielsen and I. Chuang: Quantum Information and Computation. (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge 2000)
3. W. Zurek: Algorithmic randomness and physical entropy. Phys. Rev. A 40, 4731–4751 (1989)
4. C. Mora, H. Briegel, and B. Kraus: Quantum Kolmogorov complexity and its applications.
arXiv.org:quant-ph/0610109.
5. T. Cover and J. Thomas: Elements of Information Theory. (Wiley, New York 1991)
6. R. Omnes: The Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics. (Princeton University Press, Princeton
1994)
7. J. Jauch: Foundations of Quantum Mechanics. (Addison Wesley, New York 1968)
Quantum Eraser
Basil James Hiley
To understand the notion of a quantum eraser we need ﬁrst to consider the inter-
ference produced when light falls on a pair of slits. As long as we think of light
as being a wave phenomenon, there is no problem in understanding how the phase
difference between the wave arriving at a point on the screen from one slit and the
wave arriving from the second slit gives rise to the interference effects.
The problem arises when we learn that the wave consists of photons ( light
quantum), a problem that becomes more acute when the incident beam consists only
of a few photons arriving per second. If the photon is a localised packet of energy
then the question as to which slit the photon passed through becomes inevitable.
This question becomes even more pertinent when one realises that particles like
 electrons, neutrons and even atoms produce exactly the same interference patterns
using pairs of slits of the appropriate size.
The obvious way to explore this situation further is to see if we can set up some
form of experiment to ﬁnd through which slit each particle actually passes. In this
way we might be able to understand how the interference pattern arises. Unfortu-
nately what we ﬁnd is that for all experiments that give a deﬁnite answer for each
particle, the interference pattern disappears. This means that once we know which
way the particle goes, we lose the interference pattern. Alternatively if we have no
means of knowing which way the particles go, then we get a sharp interference
pattern. This phenomenon is known as  ‘wave-particle’ duality.
One of the earlier ways of explaining the loss of interference was to argue that
any attempt to determine which way the particle went would induce a series of
random phase changes in the beam. These phase changes arise because in order to
‘see’ where the particle is, some form of scattering would have to be used. It is this
scattering that produces the random phase changes which would clearly destroy the
interference pattern [1].

Quantum Eraser
547
Q
Fig. 1 Two-slits with cavity in place
This explanation underwent a radical reappraisal when it was discovered that it
was possible to store which-way information in a microwave cavity without induc-
ing any random phases into a beam of atoms. ( which-way experiments) Thus,
rather than subjecting the atoms to a scattering process, they are simply allowed to
give up any internal excitation energy to the microwave cavity through which they
pass. This process does not produce any phase change to the centre of mass  wave
function. Will we see any interference effects in this case? The answer is ‘no’. [2].
This new experimental arrangement allowed for a new possibility. Would it be
possible to erase the which-way information? If this is possible, would we then
recover interference? Scully and Dr¨uhl [3] were the ﬁrst to show that it should in-
deed be possible to recover interference effects. The principle is as follows: suppose
a pair of microwave cavities are placed in front of the two-slit system as shown in
the ﬁgure. As an excited atom passes through one of the cavities it will give up its
internal energy leaving the cavity in an excited state. If we now repeat this for many
atoms we will potentially know through which slit each atom has passed. The result
of such an experiment shows that there are no interference fringes.
Suppose now we want to ‘erase’ the which-way information. We can do this
by removing the common wall of the microwave cavities and inserting a radiation
detector as shown in the ﬁgure. The function of this detector is to become excited
when the cavity state is a symmetric combination of the two individual cavity ﬁelds,
and becomes de-excited when this combination is anti-symmetric. In both cases the
which-way information is lost.
Let us repeat the ﬁrst experiment, recording the arrival position of each atom on
the screen. Now at any time after noting the atom’s ﬁnal position, we can remove the

548
Quantum Eraser
common wall of the cavities and insert the radiation ﬁeld detector. Once the detec-
tor responds, we lose the which-way information for that particular atom. We note
whether the cavity detector is excited or de-excited in each case. By repeating this
procedure we can produce two ensembles of atoms, one corresponding to the po-
sitions of the atoms arriving at the screen when the cavity detector is found to be
excited and the other corresponding to those positions where the cavity detector is
in its de-excited state.
We ﬁnd each of these  ensembles exhibit interference fringes, the maxima of
one set corresponding to the minima of the other set. In other words by erasing the
which-way information we have regained the interference. Furthermore if we super-
impose these two patterns, we ﬁnd the fringes exactly ‘cancel’ each other, producing
a uniform distribution with no evidence of interference. A clear illustration of these
effects has been brought out using the Bohm model [4].
This example illustrates a general principle that when which-way data is known,
interference disappears, but as the which-way data becomes unavailable, interfer-
ence appears. It is the process of the destruction of this which-way information that
is referred to as the ‘quantum erasure’.
In this brief account, we have only discussed the two-slit experiment, but the
principle applies to any system that offers binary alternatives such as the Stern–
Gerlach magnet ( Stern–Gerlach experiment), polarised light, the Mach-Zehnder
interferometer ( Consistent Histories) and so on. A more detailed discussion of
these other examples, together with a detailed quantitative account of this type of
experiment can be found in Englert and Bergou [5]. In this paper the practical use
of the eraser to maximise fringe visibility, is discussed.
We conclude this discussion with a ﬁnal word of warning about the meaning of
the words ‘eraser’ and ‘delayed choice’ which have been misunderstood. The situ-
ation has not been helped by statements like ‘the past is undeﬁned and undeﬁnable
without the observation [in the present]’ [7]. These words, ambiguous at best, have
sometimes been mistakenly taken to mean that somehow the past dynamical be-
haviour of the atoms can be affected by what we decide to do at some later time.
This is not the case. Bohr [6] himself makes this very clear. He stresses that when
we come to interpret experimental results predicted by the quantum formalism “it is
essential that the whole experimental arrangement be taken into account”.
In the cases we have discussed above, we have two distinct experimental arrange-
ments: (1) the arrival of atoms with two distinct separate cavities in place and (2) the
arrival of atoms with one large cavity containing a radiation ﬁeld detector. The fact
that we can remove the common wall cavities and insert a ﬁeld detector in the ﬁrst
experiment at a later time still means we have two distinct experiments. The word
‘eraser’ arises simply because we have changed the experimental conditions, the
change, of course can be ‘delayed’ indeﬁnitely provided the cavity modes remain
stable. There is no question of the dynamics of the atoms being changed as a result
of any delay in changing the experimental conditions.

Quantum Field Theory
549
Q
Literature
1. R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton, M. Sands: The Feynman Lectures on Physics (Addison-Wesley,
Reading, MA 1965, Vol. III, sec. 3)
2. M. O. Scully, B.-G. Englert, H. Walther: Quantum optical tests of complementarity. Nature 351,
111–116 (1991)
3. M. O. Scully, K. Dr¨uhl: Quantum eraser: a proposed photon correlation experiment concerning
observation and the “delayed choice” in quantum mechanics. Phys. Rev. 25A, 2208–2213(1982)
4. B. J. Hiley, R. E. Callaghan: What is erased in the quantum erasure? Found. Phys. 36, 1869–1883
(2006)
5. B. -G. Englert, J. A. Bergou: Quantitative quantum eraser. Optics Commun. 179, 337–355
(2000)
6. N. Bohr: Atomic Physics and Human Knowledge (Science Editions, New York, 1961, p. 50)
7. J. A. Wheeler: The ‘Past’ and the ‘Delayed Choice’ Double-slit Experiment, in Mathematical
Foundations of Quantum Theory, ed. A. R. Marlow (Academic Press, New York, 1978, pp. 9–48)
Quantum Field Theory
Frank Wilczek
Quantum ﬁeld theory is the application of quantum mechanics to systems whose
degrees of freedom depend continuously on space and time. In the quantum me-
chanics of a point particle, states are speciﬁed by  wave function ψ(x), which
gives the probability amplitude to ﬁnd the particle at the position x. In quantum
ﬁeld theory, states are speciﬁed by a wave function (φ(x)) which speciﬁes the
probability amplitude for the ﬁeld φ to be in the conﬁguration φ(x).
Quantum ﬁeld theory was ﬁrst developed to enable the application of quan-
tum mechanics to theories that obey the special theory of relativity, speciﬁcally
Maxwell’s electrodynamics and Dirac’s electron theory. Relativistic theories of in-
teracting point particles are awkward to construct. The limiting speed of propagation
c means that the inﬂuence felt by a given particle due to a second particle depends
on where that second particle was in the past. Thus to evolve the state of set of par-
ticles, it is not sufﬁcient to know their present positions. Fields avoid this difﬁculty,
because the state of the ﬁeld reﬂects the propagating inﬂuences as they propagate.
Quantum ﬁeld theory is the framework in which the regnant theories of the elec-
troweak and strong interactions, which together form the Standard Model  particle
physics, are formulated.  Quantum Electrodynamics (QED), besides providing a
complete foundation for atomic physics and chemistry, has supported calculations of
physical quantities with unparalleled precision. The experimentally measured value
of the magnetic dipole moment of the muon,
(gμ −2)exp. = 233 184 600 (1680) × 10−11,
(1)

