Biomimetic Approaches Towards Device-Tissue
Integration
Catalina Vallejo-Giraldo, Martina Genta, Josef Goding,
and Rylie Green
Contents
1
Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
262
2
Biomimetics to Control Speciﬁc Properties. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
263
2.1
Mechanical Modiﬁcation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
263
2.2
Topographical Cues. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
264
2.3
Biological Functionalization. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
267
3
Emerging Biomimmetic Technologies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
271
3.1
Living Electrode Devices. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
271
3.2
ECM Mimicking Neural Probes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
274
3.3
Genetic Engineering. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
275
3.4
Optogenetics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
279
4
Conclusion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
281
References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
282
Abstract
The application of biomimetic technologies to neural interfaces seeks to improve
the long-term safety and performance of implantable systems. These biomimetic
approaches encompass methods that alter the biological environment through
mechanical, topographical and biological approaches. This chapter examines
recent developments in bioinspired soft and functional materials designed
for neural interfaces and their application to neuroprosthetic devices. Further
approaches to engineering the neural interface, such as the application of tissue
engineering and genetic engineering technologies, including their role in the
development of next-generation neuroprosthetic devices are assessed.
C. Vallejo-Giraldo · M. Genta · J. Goding · R. Green ()
Department of Bioengineering, Imperial College London, London, UK
e-mail: c.vallejo-giraldo@imperial.ac.uk; m.genta18@imperial.ac.uk; j.goding@imperial.ac.uk;
rylie.green@imperial.ac.uk
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023
N. V. Thakor (ed.), Handbook of Neuroengineering,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-5540-1_97
261

262
C. Vallejo-Giraldo et al.
Keywords
Biomimicry · Bionics · Device interfaces · Neural interfaces · Biomaterials ·
Biofunctionalisation
Abbreviations
3D
Three Dimensional
Ascl1
Achaete-Scute Homolog 1
AV8
Adeno-Associated Viral Vector
AVV2
Adeno-Associated Viral Vector
BAC
Bacterial Artiﬁcial Chromosome
Brn2
Bearskin 2
ChR2
Channelrhodopsin2
CHs
Conducting Hydrogels
CNS
Central Nervous System
CPs
Conducting Polymers
DCX+
Doublecortin
Dlx2
Distal-Less Homeobox 2
ECM
Extracellular Matrix
EL222
Erythrobacter Litoralis Protein
GAGs
Glycosaminoglycans
GABA
Gamma-Aminobutyric Acid
GFAP
Anti-Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein
GFP
Green Fluorescent Protein
LED
Light Emitting Diode
Myt1l
Myelin Transcription Factor 1-Like
NeuroD1
Neuronal Differentiation 1
Neurog2
Neurogenin-2
Pax6
Paired Box Protein-6
PBS
Phosphate-Buffered Saline Solution
Pt
Platinum
1
Introduction
The biomaterial-tissue interface is not a simple description of a boundary but rather
a dynamic interface involving both the localized reaction of the surrounding tissue
to the materials, and the material adaptations within the physiological environment.
Current neural interface research has focused on both the foreign body reaction
and the chronic performance of biomaterials, in a combined effort to drive the
functionalization of next generation implantable devices. As a result, the improved
functionalization of electrode systems is expected to prompt advancements in the
design and development of implantable bioelectronics and medical therapies for
neurological disorders.
Research has shown that within 4 weeks of implanting a neural interfacing device
the formation of ﬁbrotic encapsulation occurs and becomes the dominant factor
at the neural interface [1, 2]. To address this limitation, biomimetic approaches
have been developed to attenuate inﬂammatory responses and improve cellular

Biomimetic Approaches Towards Device-Tissue Integration
263
integration at the neural interface in an attempt to improve chronic performance
of implantable systems. Biomimicry uses inspiration from biological systems to
develop structural, mechanical, topographical, or biochemical factors to fundamen-
tally alter the interactions between biomaterials and living tissue. The challenge
from a materials science perspective is to apply biomimetic functionalization
strategies to biomaterials and devices to improve their biological performance
without compromising the safety and efﬁcacy of the material’s components. These
approaches are discussed within this chapter with a focus on their contributions
towards developing next generation neural interfaces.
2
Biomimetics to Control Speciﬁc Properties
2.1
Mechanical Modiﬁcation
Neuroelectrode devices are typically fabricated from metallic conductors such as
gold, platinum, iridium and its oxides. These materials are chemically inert and
excellent electrical conductors, however they do not promote integration with neural
tissues and can generate damaging chemical species under certain use conditions
[3]. For the majority of neural electrode applications, a threshold material stiffness
must be achieved to enable penetration of the neural tissue to the ﬁnal insertion
point [4]. While the insertion process is associated with an acute tissue response,
the material stiffness can exacerbate the chronic inﬂammatory response. This is due
to a mechanical mismatch at the interface and the persistent micromotion that occurs
between the neural tissues and the device [5].
The brain’s shear modulus is reported to be in a range between 0.2–1.5 kPa [6].
Metallic electrodes display a high stiffness with a shear modulus more than six
orders of magnitude larger than brain tissues, resulting in a signiﬁcant mechanical
mismatch at the interface [6]. Elastomeric and viscoelastomeric polymers may offer
a viable strategy to reduce the mechanical mismatch at the neuroelectrode interface
[7, 8], promoting improved chronic electrode performance and enhanced integration
of the device with the adjacent tissue. McClain et al. [9] have produced electrodes
composed of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) and thin-ﬁlm gold with a high-level
of mechanical compliance well suited for neural in vivo applications. In this work
a microcable geometry gives the electrodes a similar footprint to traditional wire
and microwire neuroelectrodes, while reducing the mechanical mismatch with the
nervous tissue, with a Young’s modulus of 1.81 MPa [9]. Electrophysiological
recording was demonstrated by wrapping the electrode around a peripheral nerve,
utilizing the compliance and string-like proﬁle of the electrode for effective record-
ing in nerve tissue [9]. Interfacial micromotion can also be reduced using ﬂexible
materials [10] which can accommodate relative movement, maintaining electrodes
in close contact with the target tissue and improving the charge transfer properties.
An elastic, stretchable microelectrode array (SMEA) has been reported by Yu
et al. [11] with a design that allows stimulation and recording of electrical activity
from cultured brain tissue (hippocampal slices), under large biaxial deformations.

264
C. Vallejo-Giraldo et al.
However, these approaches are simply engineering conventional synthetic materials
in clever ways. Biomimicry provides a new philosophy for design and fabrication of
novel material and device systems, with a focus on reﬂecting features of the natural
biological environment as components of devices.
In the pursuit of enhanced biomimicry to promote improved cell integration
and long-term performance of electrodes, hydrogels have emerged as a promising
material. Hydrogels have been used extensively in tissue engineering and devices
which contact the soft tissues, such as contact lenses. Importantly, hydrogels
encompass a wide variety of polymer systems that can be tailored to achieve speciﬁc
mechanical properties, including neural tissues across both the PNS and CNS.
Conducting hydrogels (CHs) [12, 13] have been explored as three-dimensional
polymeric networks to modulate mechanical properties of neural electrodes, while
preserving the conductivity required for electrode functionality. Blending hydrogels
with conductive components such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs) or conducting
polymers (CPs) has provided an avenue for maintaining or even improving upon the
desired electrical characteristics of a coated electrode while imparting a signiﬁcant
reduction in material stiffness [12]. Green et al. [14] showed a hybrid system
composed of two hydrogel variants, one a co-polymer of 18 wt % poly(vinyl
alcohol)-methacrylate (PVA-MA) with a 2 wt % heparin methacrylate (HepMA)
component crosslinked into the polymer mesh, and one a 30 wt % HepMA
homogeneous hydrogel. The HepMA bound into the hydrogel structure provided
a covalently bound dopant via its highly sulfated backbone. Electrodeposition of
the CP poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene) (PEDOT) through the hydrogel mesh
resulted in CP-hydrogel hybrids. Both CH variants demonstrated a modulus close to
2 MPa, signiﬁcantly lower than the CP modulus, which is around 40 MPa and two
orders of magnitude lower than platinum (Pt), depicted in Fig. 1. Both homogeneous
hydrogels had a similar modulus of approx. 0.5 kPa. This value is in fact within
the range of the cortex neural tissue elastic modulus (0.2–1.5 kPa). It is clear that
the hydrogel component imparts the required mechanical softness and elasticity
required to dampen the effects of the metallic electrodes [14]. More widely, the
general shift in bioelectronics towards softer and more ﬂexible materials represents
an increased awareness of the importance of mechanical interactions at the tissue-
device interface.
2.2
Topographical Cues
Historically, electrodes have been produced with smooth surfaces, due to the
potential for corrosion within metallic crevasses. With the advent of more controlled
surface modiﬁcation and development of polymeric technologies, modiﬁcation of
surface architecture has been explored to improve cell integration with implantable
neural devices. This has included increasing the surface area and roughness of
the electrode through topographical means [15, 16]. It is known that cells can
attach to material substrates and form connections known as focal adhesions when
presented with appropriate topographies. This process can be bolstered by utilizing

Biomimetic Approaches Towards Device-Tissue Integration
265
Fig. 1 Hybrid conﬁguration hydrogel system. (a) Schematic representation of the formation of
an interpenetrating network (IPN) by employing an anionic hydrogel component to dope the
conducting polymer (CP) component, and effectively form a conducting hydrogel hybrid system.
(b) Experimentally calculated elastic moduli (calculated from Derjaguin-Muller-Toporov model)
under hydrated conditions of the hybrid hydrogel systems. All values were compared to platinum
(Pt), homogeneous CPs and cortex neural tissue (literature value). (Figure adapted and reproduced
with permission from [14])
topographies which reﬂect local architecture common to the biological environment.
A range of techniques have been explored to create deﬁned microstructures on
electrode surfaces including laser ablation [17], focused ion beam milling [18], hot
embossing [19], and electron beam lithography [20]. Not only do these approaches
result in surfaces that promote cell attachment, they inherently increase the real
surface area relative to the geometric area deﬁned by the device [15]. This can
provide additional beneﬁts through increasing the efﬁciency of charge transfer.
Systematic studies have been performed as a strategy to reduce gliosis, using
topographies to control astrocyte adhesion to substrates while promoting high neu-
ron coverage [21]. It has been shown that features spanning the nano- to micro-scale
can be used to selectively alter the attachment of glial cells and neurons. A study by
Seker et al. [21] demonstrated, through a focal adhesion study, that feature sizes less
than 170 nm reduced the adhesion of astrocytes while maintaining neural presence
on nanoporous gold (np-Au) surfaces. Similarly, Turner et al. [22] presented the use
of microscale isotropic topographies such as pillars and wells as modulatory cues for
astrocyte adhesion. Their ﬁndings showed that using micro-wells of 1 μm in depth
resulted in less astroglial cell adhesion. While it is clear that topographies can alter
astrocyte adhesion, they have also been shown to modulate neuronal growth and
differentiation. Qi et al. [23] showed that the use of micro-patterned topographies
with linear, circular and dot features (widths of 2 μm and 10 μm, depth of 4 μm)
could inﬂuence the in vitro differentiation of adult neural stem cells (ANSCs) into
neurons but may discourage the differentiation into astrocytes. While these ﬁndings
provide insight into cell adhesion and differentiation through topographical cues,
further studies are needed to assess the capability of this approach to attenuate

266
C. Vallejo-Giraldo et al.
astroglial scarring while promoting neural outgrowth in vivo. Critically, a neural
interface should support both cell types, but with appropriate cues to manage cell
ratios and phenotypes that are reﬂective of healthy neural tissue.
Interfacial biocompatibility and electrical charge transfer can be increased by
using biomimetic and adaptive electrode materials that can seamlessly integrate
with tissues once implanted [24]. Templating approaches have demonstrated that
the microstructure of polymeric electrode materials can be modiﬁed by cells,
dissolvable inert particles [25] and biodegradable polymer ﬁbers [26]. An innovative
approach to templated cell placement through CP topographies, as seen in Fig. 2,
was described by Richardson-Burns et al. [24]. PEDOT was electrochemically
deposited around living neural cells cultured on an electrode site. The cells were
Fig. 2 Cell-shaped holes and neurite-templated channels following removal of cells from the
PEDOT matrix. (a) Optical image of neural cell-templated PEDOT ﬁlm on gold electrode. (b) A
new monolayer of neuroblastoma cells (SH-SY5Y) stained for F-actin (Phalloidin-Green) cultured
on the neuron-templated PEDOT ﬁlm. (c) Merged image shows new cells present preferential
adhesion to neuron-templated PEDOT and some cells re-populate the cell-shaped holes in the
polymer composite (red arrowheads). (Figure reproduced with permission from [24])

Biomimetic Approaches Towards Device-Tissue Integration
267
subsequently removed from the deposited polymer to produce a surface with cell
shaped cavities resulting in a cell attracting, biomimetic neuron-templated coating.
Control of topography from the micro [27, 28] to the nanoscale range [29, 30]
has shown promise for improving neural interface interactions. Topographical
modiﬁcation imparts a large effective surface area [15, 31], and can be critical in
inﬂuencing cell adhesion of speciﬁc cell types [32–34]. One major limitation of
topography-based modulation of cell behaviour is that due to the encapsulation
of implanted neuroprosthetic devices as well as the presence of a ﬂuid gap at the
interface, there is minimal interaction between the native cell population and the
actual device surfaces. As such, it is difﬁcult to translate beneﬁts observed in in
vitro conditions over to in vivo beneﬁt of clinical relevance.
2.3
Biological Functionalization
Biomimicry can also be achieved through the incorporation of biological com-
ponents within materials. From a materials science perspective the challenge is
to develop materials which incorporate small amounts of speciﬁc biological cues
that can actively promote neural cell integration and/or minimize the inﬂammatory
response [8, 12]. This has given rise to various material functionalization strategies
using biomolecules [35, 36] to elicit biomimetic responses at the tissue interface.
A common approach for biofunctionalizing materials involves entrapment or
surface functionalization with components native to the biological environment
[37, 38]. These have been paired with anti-inﬂammatory drugs [39, 40], moving
the ﬁeld towards the use of combinational strategies to reduce gliosis [26]. In
the ﬁeld of neural interfaces, polymer components and speciﬁcally CPs are more
readily modiﬁed than conventional metals. As such the incorporation and deliv-
ery of therapeutic agents through carriers such as vesicles, micelles, nanotubes,
nanospheres and nanocapsules have been widely employed as functional modiﬁers
to CPs [41, 42].
The ability to mediate the release of biomolecules in a biomimetic manner is
expected to provide a superior interface in comparison to materials that passively
release biomolecules. Conductive and semi-conductive polymers are able to deliver
molecules in an actively controlled manner. In vitro and in vivo studies compiled by
Yue et al. [43] show the release kinetics and the elution proﬁle of peptides, neural
factors and drugs from conducting and semi-conducting polymers used as coatings
for stimulating interfaces. Local delivery of biological molecules through device
stimulation can maintain a stable neural interface through on-demand delivery
of bioactive molecules, promoting favourable electrode integration and reducing
local inﬂammation [44]. Cui et al. [41] showed an electrically controlled drug
delivery nanocomposite composed of graphene oxide (GO) deposited inside a
poly(pyrrole) (PPy) CP scaffold. The nanocomposite was loaded with an anti-
inﬂammatory molecule, dexamethasone. In response to voltage stimulation, the
nanocomposite released drug with a linear release proﬁle and a dosage that could be
adjusted by altering the magnitude of stimulation. Under an aggressive stimulation

268
C. Vallejo-Giraldo et al.
Fig. 3 Drug loading into and release from the GO/PPy-DEX nanocomposite system. (a)
Schematic representation of the DEX release from the GO/PPy nanocomposite in response to
electrical stimulation. (b) Cumulative release proﬁle of the GO/PPy-DEX nanocomposite in
response to stimulation (−0.5 V for 5 s, followed by 0.5 V for 5 s) and in the absence of
electrical stimulation (passive diffusion). Electrical stimulation has great promise for maintaining
on-demand delivery of Dexamethasone. No drug passively diffused from the composite when no
voltage stimulation was applied. (Figure adapted and reproduced with permission from [44] (https:/
/pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/nn406223e). Further permissions should be directed to the ACS)
paradigm of two volts over 2 h, it was observed that the PPy nanocomposites
when co-doped with GO nanosheets, elicited 2.3 times the amount of drug release
when compared to conventional PPy composites without GO (209.7 μg cm2 c.p.
88.9 μg cm2). CP mediated drug release is thought to be a surface area dependent
process, with drug releasing more efﬁciently from the surface than the bulk of the
composites [41] (depicted in Fig. 3). Despite the vast research on the incorporation
of biomolecules in CP-based polymers for neural applications [26, 45], concepts
such as optimal concentrations for a physiological response, use of immobilized
concentration gradients versus homogeneous concentrations, loading and release
efﬁciencies, and stability and pharmacokinetics of released molecules continue to
be the subject of experimental investigation. Further, it is important to note that
chemical elution is dependent on time, surface area, loading concentration and
depletion by electrical stimulation, and so direct comparison among studies might
not always be appropriate.
There has been substantial research exploring the interaction between cells and
their extracellular matrix (ECM) environment [46]. Cell behaviour has been shown
to be highly dependent on the mechanical and physical properties imparted by
the ECM [47], while cell fate (differentiation and phenotype) has been shown to
be directed by the biochemical properties [48]. Relevant components of the ECM
include adhesive peptide sequences [49], ligands [50],sulphated and non-sulphated
glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) [51, 52]. These components have been both isolated
from ECM and synthesized to impart biological properties to typically synthetic
materials and devices. A common material approach for delivery or biomimicry of
the ECM is in hydrogel technologies.

Biomimetic Approaches Towards Device-Tissue Integration
269
Hydrogels have several inherent properties which make them suitable to deliver
a variety of bioactive molecules to the implantation site. They inherently have
high water content that facilitates the loading of water soluble molecules, but also
enable tailored degradability. This latter feature facilitates controlled biomolecule
release. Importantly, hydrogels can be produced to reﬂect a range of mechanical
properties that span natural tissues. Thus, hydrogel functionalization can take a
variety of forms and a large number of different bioactive molecules have been
used in their modiﬁcation [12]. Hydrogels have also been explored in conjunc-
tion with CPs as three-dimensional and mechanically soft polymeric networks
[12]. PEDOT-based/hydrogel composite materials have been studied as scaffolds
to encourage cellular inﬁltration, nutrient diffusion and to deliver encapsulated
bioactive molecules, cells and drugs [53]. However, while polymer materials can be
modiﬁed to achieve biomimetic affects, the actual biological role they are intended
to mimic is also critical in the design of a biomimetic neural interface.
The ECM is a mixture of proteins and polysaccharides that provide biochemical
and biophysical cues to govern cell behaviour and biological cascades [54]. A
number of neural interface designs have employed ECM proteins such as collagen,
ﬁbronectin, and laminin to enhance cell attachment and promote neurite extension
[55, 56]. This has been particularly relevant for CP electrode coatings, where the
neat synthetic polymer does not typically support chronic neural network growth
and survival. For example, a PEDOT/collagen material studied by Xiao et al. [55]
supported superior growth of the neural-like PC12 cell when compared to the fully
synthetic PEDOT/LiClO4. It was shown that the coated collagen material promoted
cell adhesion, supporting a network structure with nanoﬁbrous surface morphology
[55]. Similarly, PEDOT-based brushes reported by Baek et al. [57] were used to
tailor the level of cell adhesion to the interface with pre-adsorption of ﬁbronectin.
Modulation of cell adhesion with brush composition was observed for very short
brushes, while the longest brushes had impaired cell adhesion. This was associated
with the ﬂexibility of the polymer chains that promotes suitable conformational
changes for ﬁbronectin interaction [57]. Proteins are robust biological components
for functionalization approaches, but by introducing these bulky side chains is
highly probable to cause detrimental changes to the mechanical and electrical
properties of the interface.
Peptide sequences have also provided a path for imparting bioactivity at the
neural interface without substantially impacting on the electrical performance of
a material. Laminin derived peptide sequences have been extensively studied as
bioactive CP dopants [12, 58]. Cui et al. [59, 60] and Green et al. [61] have shown
the efﬁcacy of peptide sequences that are concurrently used to dope PEDOT. As CP
dopants are typically anionic, modiﬁcations were undertaken to enable the peptides
to carry a net negative charge while maintaining an active sequence. YIGSR from
the β(1) and YFQRYLI from α(1) of laminin chains were used to dope PEDOT.
Results indicated improved neural cell adhesion relative to pristine PEDOT for all
peptide doped materials. However the DEDEDYFQRYLI molecule based on the
YFQRYLI peptide [62], 117 demonstrated that effects could be tuned not just for
cell attachment, but also to encourage neural cell growth. The YFQRYLI sequence

270
C. Vallejo-Giraldo et al.
supported a higher proportion of neurite outgrowth from PC12 cultures when
compared to the YIGSR sequence. This supports the importance and efﬁcacy of
ECM mimetics for neuroelectrode functionalization.
Glycanic ECM components have recently emerged as candidates for function-
alizing materials at the neural interface [12, 52, 63]. These anionic GAGs are
known to play essential roles in human physiology and pathology. GAGs are a
major class of polysaccharides [64] and are one of the main constituents of the
ECM. Proteoglycans and GAGs have elicited scientiﬁc interest due to the ample
amount of biological information that they enclose in their unique structures [64].
GAGs possess a vast variety of sulfation levels, ﬁnely controlled during their
biosynthesis in cells [64]. Four GAG sub-families have been identiﬁed including
heparan sulphates (HS) and heparin, chondroitin sulphates (CS), keratan sulphates
(KS) and hyaluronic acid (HA).The high sulphate content in GAGs has been shown
to beneﬁt their incorporation within CP based materials, as they can inherently serve
as dopants while retaining bioactivity [65, 66]. The use of GAGs within neural
electrodes is favourable as these naturally occurring molecules can bind and present
growth factors [67]. Asplund et al. [68] demonstrated that the incorporation of
heparin as a dopant for PEDOT enhanced the cytocompatibility and electrochemical
stability when compared to PEDOT/PSS composites [68]. Similarly, Green et al.
[25] demonstrated the fabrication of a CH from PVA-heparin hydrogel and PEDOT
which could bind and present the growth factor FGF-2 to cell populations [25].
Interfaces that contain naturally occurring GAG adhesion molecules may provide
robust cell attachment, but are subjected to denaturing by the body, rendering them
inactive.
New avenues in GAG functionalization through synthetic glycochemistry and
glycomimetics have recently emerged as a structural mimicry of speciﬁc carbohy-
drate moieties. This approach addresses the drawbacks of commercially available
carbohydrates by increasing stability and resistance to glycanase activity [69, 70].
A study done by Mehanna et al. [71]. showed the promotion of neural regeneration
after thoracic spinal cord injury in young adult C57BL/6 J mice using peptides
which functionally mimic polysialic acid (PSA). It was found to be beneﬁcial
when a PSA mimetic was applied immediately after compression injury. Improved
outcomes in PSA mimetic-treated mice was associated with higher numbers of
cholinergic and glutamatergic terminals and monaminergic axons in the lumbar
spinal cord, as well as better axonal myelination proximal to the injury site [71].
GAG-mimetic materials as functional coatings of neural electrodes remain an
experimental area of investigation. However, early work has identiﬁed this approach
as having strong potential to control tissue-device interfaces.
Despite the substantial number of approaches and studies conducted on the bio-
functionalization of neural interface, few have progressed to clinical investigation.
Biofunctionalized polymeric materials have been explored extensively in vitro, but
limitations and unknowns remain regarding the in vivo efﬁcacy and persistence over
chronic time periods. Understanding the beneﬁts and their potential to control the
glial response and neural survival is crucial to ensuring functionalized biomaterials
have signiﬁcant impact on a wide spectrum of bioapplications and therapies.

Biomimetic Approaches Towards Device-Tissue Integration
271
3
Emerging Biomimmetic Technologies
Recent research has brought together concepts from tissue engineering for regen-
erative medicine and bionic device technologies to pioneer bioinspired electronics.
This ﬁeld focuses on cellular and genetic technologies in combination with materials
to control cell behaviour and to monitor and manipulate the phenotype of cells at
the device-tissue interface [72–74]. This approach seeks to create functional neural
communication between the endogenous cells and the device, while preventing
scar formation. The most prevalent approaches include living devices that seek to
incorporate neural stem cells within electrodes, synthetic probes that mimic CNS
tissues and gene technologies that seek to alter the behaviour of cells at the device
interface [34, 75]. Speciﬁcally, gene technologies span the regulation of the neural
interface through altering cell expression related to inﬂammation and regeneration,
but also the development of cells that respond to alternate stimuli such as light
activation of action potentials in optogenetics. These bio-inspired systems present
unique solutions to the challenges in neural interfacing, and are inspired by an
improved understanding of the homeostatic role of neurons in combination with
glial cells and the extracellular environment across the nervous system [72, 76].
3.1
Living Electrode Devices
One of the main issues that limits long-term stability of neural devices is the
difﬁculty of maintaining direct contact with the target tissue [24]. Due to the smooth,
stiff surface of metal electrodes, the device-tissue interface is characterised by a ﬂuid
gap that hinders the integration of the device with the adjacent tissue [77]. Thus, the
need for a dynamic electrode technology which can grow, bridge the gap and create
functional device-neuron connections. The concept of integrating living cells with
electrodes was pioneered in 1980, when Ochiai et al. [78] proposed the idea of
integrating living components directly inside electrodes to improve the long term
performance of unstable electrical systems. The ﬁrst attempt involved immobilizing
living algae within an alginate gel to act as a solar-to-electric energy photoconverter.
The device showed stability of the biological components, but the power conversion
efﬁciency of the electrodes was very low. The latter limitation in efﬁciency restricted
further development of this concept [12, 78].
Richardson-Burns et al. [24] furthered this concept by integrating living com-
ponents within neural electrodes. The hypothesis behind their approach was that
instead of trying to reduce the glial scar surrounding the implant, the electrode
needed to be grown in situ to reach the healthy tissue beyond the glial scar. To assess
this approach PEDOT was electrochemically grown around neuroblastoma-derived
cell lines and primary mouse cortical cells. Cells showed initial high viability
to the electropolymerization process, but after 5 days the viability decreased by
70%. Interestingly, cells embedded in PEDOT showed permanent actin cytoskeleton
disruption compared to control samples that were exposed to the electrical current

272
C. Vallejo-Giraldo et al.
only. From in vitro cell culture tests, it was found that PEDOT mainly deposits
in the extracellular spaces between cells, which may induce cell apoptosis after
several days [24]. Later Ouyang et al. [79] showed the inﬂuence of the in vivo
polymerization of PEDOT in mice hippocampus. It was found that in vivo polymer-
ization typically formed an ∼500 μm spread of PEDOT cloud near the end of the
working electrode. The size of the cloud was considerably larger than the ∼150 μm
dimensions of a typical glial scar. Thus, this response, veriﬁed by the cell types near
the electrodes and depositions 2 weeks after the in vivo polymerization, showed a
remarkable astrocytic encapsulation blocking the ion diffusion [79]. Although not
tested in this study, it was demonstrated that the chronic immunoreaction is also
associated with a high concentration of reactive oxygen species (ROS), leading to
cell death. All these reactions may cause degradation of the PEDOT electrodes as
well as causing damage to cells during the electrodeposition process. Toxicity issues
caused by non-biocompatible CP monomers are still a challenge and need to be
thoroughly studied to ensure efﬁcacy and safety of these in-situ electrode systems
[24, 79].
A more recent living electrode concept [80] has proposed the potential of
directly combining bionic devices with tissue engineering constructs. The living
electrode device was constructed as a coating on a conventional Pt electrode. It
consisted of a CH layer and an overlying biosynthetic hydrogel which encapsulated
neuroprogenitor cells (Fig. 4a). The non-degradable CH was designed to reduce the
mechanical mismatch between the conventional metallic electrode and the target
tissue across chronic implant timeframes while improving the charge injection
characteristics of the underlying electrode. The cell containing “living” layer was
introduced to actively drive the integration of the endogenous tissue with the
device [80, 81]. This layered design has the advantage of exploiting established
coating methods to easily achieve a biomimetic neural interface. Results indicated
that the living layer did not detrimentally impact on electrical properties and
mixed neuronal populations could be grown within the electrode [82]. In vitro
results showed good cell viability and cell development, however there was limited
evidence of functional neural connections. A critical aspect to the development of
a living electrode is tailoring the degradation rate of the hydrogel carrier to the
formation rate of ECM by the encapsulated cells. The encapsulated cells should
create their own ECM while the hydrogel is degrading. However, if the degradation
rate of the hydrogel does not match the ECM formation, cells will lose critical
mechanical and physical support. This could result in loss of neurons or alternately
differentiation of stem cells into an unwanted phenotype. The in vivo development
of the implanted encapsulated cells requires more investigation. However, the
concept has merit when considered relative to other tissue engineering applications.
It has been shown that cell laden scaffolds can support the survival, growth and
regeneration of a variety of tissues, including bone, skin, cortex and peripheral nerve
[83, 84]. The most signiﬁcant challenge in this ﬁeld is to ensure that functional
synapses originating from the encapsulated neurons are able to develop the correct
biochemical communication with the endogenous neurons and can be maintained
across chronic time frames [81].

Biomimetic Approaches Towards Device-Tissue Integration
273
Fig. 4 Representation of different strategies to incorporate living components into neural devices -
living electrode concept. (a) Illustration of a living electrode construct produced by integrating
neural cells at the device interface as a tissue engineered electrode coating within a hydrogel
system. (b) Mechanism of neuronal stimulation of a living electrode compared to other electrode
systems. (Figure adapted and reproduced with permission from [12, 85]. Copyright © 2014
Aregueta-Robles, Woolley, Poole-Warren, Lovell and Green. This is an open-access chapter
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) or licensor
are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with
these terms)

274
C. Vallejo-Giraldo et al.
An alternate format of a living electrode proposes to separate the electrical device
from the cellular connection, using microstructures to support cell connections.
Serruya et al. [85] have described a micro-tissue engineered neural network (micro-
TENN) as an electrode platform to modulate neural circuits. Neurons were cultured
on hydrogel cylinders ﬁlled with ECM molecules (collagen and/or laminin) and
they were kept in culture until the development of unidirectional or bidirectional
axon networks (Fig. 4b). In vitro results showed the successful creation of synaptic
connections with the host neurons [85]. These living electrodes were electrophysi-
ologically active and thus present the potential to control the device externally via
electrical or optical interfacing [86]. This is a particularly important aspect as it
opens opportunities where stimulation and recording of neural activity is no longer
reliant on electrical current, but in the ionic exchange of synaptic connections [86].
Expanding the capacity of biodevices to directly stimulate target neural tissue via
novel electrode designs will support improved quality of life for implant recipients.
Novel living materials will provide a new method of communication between
devices and tissues providing physiologically based mechanism for neural cell
stimulation, which is more compatible with device integration, cell survival and
regeneration.
3.2
ECM Mimicking Neural Probes
To overcome the uncertainties involved in the use of cells in living electrodes,
acellular biomimetic approaches have been investigated [34, 75]. The structure
and mechanical properties of the electroactive tissues have been used to inspire
the design of biomimetic structures that reﬂect the ECM, but also carry electrical
pathways [75, 87–89]. Electroactive tissues, such as heart and neural tissue,
are characterized by stretchability and low stiffness [74]. To mimic this natural
environment and promote integration of the target tissue with bionic devices, this
approach integrates nanoscale electrical structures into ﬂexible and soft matrices
[90].
Nanoelectronics approach device design on a substantially smaller scale than
the current state-of-the-art. Tian et al. [90] have explored the concept of nanoelec-
tronics, using macroporous, ﬂexible and free-standing nanowires (nanoES). The
3D macroporous nanoES mimic the structure of natural tissue scaffolds and they
were formed by self-organization of coplanar reticular networks with built-in strain
and by manipulation of 2D mesh matrices. NanoES exhibited robust electronic
properties and have been used alone and combined with other biomaterials as
extracellular scaffolds for 3D culture of excitable cells. It was shown that neurons
developed a high density of spatially interconnected neurites that penetrated the
reticular nanoES, using embryonic rat hippocampal neurons. The processes were
note to pass through the macroporous structures, showing good integration with the
device. Notably, the widths of the scaffold elements were similar to those of the
neurite projections, demonstrating the combination of electronics with biological
systems at an unprecedented similarity in scale [90].

Biomimetic Approaches Towards Device-Tissue Integration
275
This concept of a cell-scale devices that mimic the neural tissue has been
progressed beyond ECM structural mimics to create devices with mechanical
and structural properties similar to that of single cells. Yang et al. [34] have
fabricated a bioinspired neural device, called neuron-like electronics (NeuE) that
takes advantage of neuron-scale dimensions to create an extremely ﬂexible probe.
This probe matches the mechanical behavior of subcellular components, while
having a total volume twenty times smaller than conventional probes. Results have
shown that NeuE is able to integrate within the target tissue with negligible immune
response and seamless interfacing with the brain in mouse models. Both the sham
insertion (phosphate buffer saline (PBS) injection) and the implanted device were
found to impart no detectable neuroinﬂammation or neurodegeneration (Fig. 5).
Importantly, this study demonstrated how the neurite-like topography can support
the migration of new born neurons within the mesh of the device as the nature
of the structures created full 3D interpenetrated neural networks. The recording of
individual cells with a constant value of impedance and signal-to-noise ratio shortly
after implantation to at least 3 months post implantation was reported. High spatial
integration for simultaneous recording of a larger number of neurons is stated as
future direction to pursue in the study [75]. Despite the advantages of nanoscale
acellular devices, there is still currently no solution for removal of the device, which
is a requirement for clinical application. A caveat of an integrated interface as that
removal would necessarily impart damage to the host tissue [85].
Nanoscale concepts in device design represent a new direction in merging
nanoelectronics with biological systems that is distinct from engineered tissue.
Different approaches can be expanded to incorporate nanoscale stimulators and
stretchable designs to provide electrical and mechanical stimulation to enhance
tissue device integration at the interface. While this opens an opportunity to explore
ways of introducing synthetic components to the body that substantially reduce
implantation damage and are potentially unrecognized by the inﬂammatory cells,
there is signiﬁcant development required in creating functional connections with
hardware and understanding the chronic performance of such devices.
3.3
Genetic Engineering
The ability to manipulate expression of genes in particular regions of living organ-
isms has profoundly transformed the way biomolecular processes involved in both
normal development and disease models are studied. Engineered expression systems
use sequences that include binding sites of distinct transcription factors (TF),
usually derived from viruses (CMV from cytomegalovirus), prokaryotes (LexAop-
LexA from Escherichia coli), yeast (UAS-Gal4 from Saccharomyces cerevisiae), or
artiﬁcially synthesized promoters [91]. Upon addition of these speciﬁc sequences,
such systems allow manipulation of genes in particular regions of living cells. Both
the intrinsic cell factors that regulate cell fate and the extrinsic signals to the cell
from the surrounding environment can be activated and controlled to incite the
numerous cascades needed to control cell function, proliferation and differentiation
[47].

276
C. Vallejo-Giraldo et al.
Fig. 5 (continued)

Biomimetic Approaches Towards Device-Tissue Integration
277
During development each cell type acquires speciﬁc epigenetic markers, making
it more difﬁcult to transdifferentiate into distantly related cell lineages [92].
However, genetic engineering approaches seek to alter the expression of cells,
including shifting the differentiation pathway to produce a distantly related or even
unrelated cell type. Neurons and glia in the CNS derive from the same population
of neural progenitor cells. However, it has been demonstrated that glial cells can be
successfully genetically engineered into neuron-resembling cells by the expression
of a small number of TF [93]. These factors include Paired Box Protein-6 (Pax6),
Neurogenin-2 (Neurog2) and Achaete-Scute Homolog 1 (Ascl1). Other combinations
of TFs, such as Bearskin 2 (Brn2), Ascl1, and Myelin Transcription Factor 1-Like
(Myt1l) [94] have also been found to be able to convert more distant cell types into
neurons. These studies indicate that it is possible to encourage cells to become a cell
type with a very different signature using appropriate gene TFs [93].
Genetic reprogramming technologies are being investigated for transforming the
cells within the glial scar towards functional neurons. This requires delivery of gene
TFs at the neural interface. A common delivery mechanism for gene technologies
are viral vectors, as these are easily taken up by the surrounding cells. Winter et al.
[72] have shown with their work that by vector delivery of Neurog2, Neuronal
Differentiation 1 (NeuroD1), Asclll, and Distal-Less Homeobox 2 (Dlx2), they
could entice primary rat cortical astrocytes into functional neurons in vitro (Fig. 6).
This approach was coupled with powerful perturbation tools, such as optogenetics
to promote the optical induction of the proneural genes for cell fate speciﬁcation in
a spatiotemporal fashion. The bacterial TF Erythrobacter Litoralis Protein EL222
was used to control the proneural gene expression. Even though this study proposed
to develop an integrated optoelectrode array for brain applications [72], and
demonstrated that the cells can be altered, the delivery mechanism is non-speciﬁc
and must be provided through a device. Further efforts [95] have shown through
multiple gene modiﬁcation techniques (silencing, conditional expression and Cre-
recombinase) on an implanted probe (single-shank “Michigan”-style microﬂuidic
device) that the gene expression could be varied depending on the depth of the
injury. Probes were implanted in the primary motor cortex of adult rats for 3 weeks
in a chronic setting. It was observed that a higher expression of the vectors was
localized at the deeper sections of the injury compared to the superﬁcial injuries
[95]. With this study it was demonstrated that genes showed a differential expression
at the device interface, which may result in new opportunities to identify relevant
candidate pathways at the interface.
◀
Fig. 5 Bio-inspired neural devices implanted in mouse brains. (a) Immunostained representation
of the NeuE device (red) showing integrated newborn neurons expressing the neural marker
Doublecortin (DCX+ yellow) 1 week post-implantation. Scale bar 100 μm. (b–c) Histological
results of NeuE showed neurons (green) and astrocytes (cyan) at the device interface (red) at 2 days
(I), 2 weeks (II) and 3 months (III) post-implantation, resulting in undetectable neuroinﬂammation
or neurodegeneration. Scale bars 100 μm. (Figure adapted and reproduced with permission from
[34])

278
C. Vallejo-Giraldo et al.
Fig. 6 Light-induced gene expression system. (a) Histological evidence of astrocytes conversion
into neurons showing β (beta) tubulin neural marker expression (red) together with the electro-
physiological evidence of the astrocytes conversion through single spikes response over time in
(b). Gene expression delivery was done by blue light stimuli as shown in (c), which drives optical
control of the proneural factors expression (d). (Figure adapted and reproduced with permission
from [72])
A study by Pinyon et al. [96], demonstrated gene delivery via a cochlear implant.
The gene was naked DNA and was used to transfect the cells adjacent to the
device, such that they produced brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF). The
gene technology was shown to transfect the epithelial cells within the cochlea,
and the resulting BDNF output successfully regenerated spiral ganglion neurites
in chemically deafened guinea pigs. Importantly, this study demonstrated localized
and controlled gene delivery through electroporation techniques, achieving spatial
control and cell driven delivery of growth factors to improve communication
at the neural interface. This technology, represents a mitigation of the safety
concerns related to viral vectors, although is uniquely applicable to bioelectronics,
as a device must be implanted to achieve gene delivery by close ﬁeld electrical
pulses. This development may broadly improve neural interfaces, but extension into

Biomimetic Approaches Towards Device-Tissue Integration
279
molecular medicine applications will be limited to tissues that are accessible through
minimally invasive techniques.
Genetic engineering approaches stress the need for a strong understanding of the
basic biological mechanisms which play critical roles at the tissue-device interface.
These approaches present exciting new opportunities to improve the chronic
performance of neuroprosthetic devices through engineering both the synthetic and
biological sides of the tissue-device interface.
3.4
Optogenetics
An adjunct to biomimetic gene technologies that try to restore function at the neural
interface, are gene technologies that seek to alter the function of a tissue at the
neural interface. Within the retina, the photoreceptors produce chemical outputs
in response to light, resulting in action potentials that are carried by the neurons
to the cortex, to perceive light. Gene technology developments have leveraged a
range of photosensitive proteins combined with gene delivery methods to impart
light sensitivity to other cells, which typically respond only to chemical and
electrochemical inputs. This genetic manipulation is known as optogenetics [91].
By exploiting genetically engineered photo-sensing proteins that respond to spe-
ciﬁc wavelengths, numerous molecular activities can be precisely controlled [91].
At the neural interface the transfection of deﬁned neurons or other supporting cell
populations can promote neural activity in a spatiotemporal fashion at the interface
[72]. This has been used to address the loss of cell function as a result of disease
or injury. Zhao et al. [97] achieved the recognition of GABAergic, cholinergic, and
serotonergic subtypes of neurons throughout the CNS using perturbation tools. They
designed electrodes that could stimulate single brain regions in shallow sites and
multiple brain structures located in deep anatomical sites. Their ﬁndings showed that
the conductive electrode arrays successfully recorded neuronal activity during the
occurrence of seizures, obtaining precisely timed analyses of neuron subpopulations
in freely moving animals (Fig. 7) [98].
To improve further the spatiotemporal control using optrode electrodes in bionic
devices, recent research reports on fabrication and design of stimulated multichannel
arrays using μ-LED [99].These are especially attractive as low power is desirable
for untethered stimulation systems and wireless studies. In the study conducted
by Khan et al. [100] the need for intensity boost from μ-LEDs was addressed by
the fabrication and characterization of multichannel electrodes with micro-reﬂector
coupled LED. The micro reﬂector improved spatiotemporal control in vitro and the
optical intensity of the array by 65%. This demonstrates that the genetic control
of the cells, coupled with technological developments in optics, electronics and
associated hardware can create new opportunities for interfacing with neurons. One
concern with these technologies is the longevity of the gene transfection. It is known
that cells can pass on the genetic manipulation through a few generations of cells,
but not indeﬁnitely. Ultimately, this technology requires further development to
create a chronic solution for implant intervention.

280
C. Vallejo-Giraldo et al.
Fig. 7 (continued)

Biomimetic Approaches Towards Device-Tissue Integration
281
The next generation of neural device design should account for the spatiotempo-
ral control at the interface. Optogenetics promises a better insight on this control but
thoughtful considerations into activating wavelengths, chromophore requirements,
reversibility are fundamental to successfully achieve photo regulation in a model of
interest. Thus, every set of optogenetic tools presents a unique group of features, to
consider depending on each research interests [91].
4
Conclusion
Chronic biocompatibility of implantable neural devices can be enhanced through
biomimicry strategies to recapitulate the physicochemical, mechanical and biologi-
cal properties of natural neural tissues. This approach aims to provide devices that
seamlessly integrate and communicate with target neural structures.
The availability of a great variety of synthetic materials in the neural interfaces
ﬁeld has invigorated their functionalization, aiming at multifunctional, innova-
tive manufacturing and polymer synthesis methods to facilitate the delivery of
bioactive molecules and drugs. Approaches have shown that biomolecules can be
immobilized and released from interfacial substrates to reduce neuroinﬂammation.
Furthermore, attention has been directed to hierarchically structured or composite
materials for integration of organic conductors with synthetic hydrogels and biolog-
ical materials to signiﬁcantly progress the development of biomimetic engineered
designs for electrode interfaces.
In the search for new approaches to bio-mimic neural interfaces and to control
the gliosis and ﬁbrosis response, in the CNS and PNS respectively, new technologies
and methods that alter signalling pathways and cellular structures at the interface
are emerging. These devices aim to dynamically change neuronal network patterns
through cell fate reprogramming methods that help to engineer neuron-device
communication. A new class of neural probes with neuron-like design that promotes
both the growth of endogenous neural progenitor cells and has an electrically active
platform has been developed for regenerative medicine. Living bionics and genetic
manipulation represent biomimetic platforms that can bridge the implant interface
with environmental, biological and stimulating cues that actively drive and seek to
◀
Fig. 7 Drivable optrode electrode array for optogenetic stimulation and recording in freely
moving mouse. (a, b) Photo of the optrode tip of the conducting array fabricated for optogenetic
stimulation and recording in moving animals. (c) Electrochemical impedance measurements at
1 kHz showed a considerable higher conductive proﬁle of the optoelectrode array compared
to bare platinum electrode. (d) Histological evidence of lower astrocytic population around the
implantation site when optrode array was used compared to bare platinum control electrode.
(Figure adapted and reproduced with permission from [98]. This article is distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the
Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made)

282
C. Vallejo-Giraldo et al.
maintain improved long-term connections to tissues. These developments highlight
a shift in engineering and design philosophy which recognizes the importance of the
interaction between devices, cells and their ECM environment.
References
1. Wang, M., et al.: Nanotechnology and nanomaterials for improving neural interfaces. Adv.
Funct. Mater. 28, 1700905 (2018)
2. Chaudhary, U., Birbaumer, N., Ramos-Murguialday, A.: Brain–computer interfaces for
communication and rehabilitation. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 12, 513 (2016)
3. Vallejo-Giraldo, C., et al.: Polyhydroxyalkanoate/carbon nanotube nanocomposites: ﬂexible
electrically conducting elastomers for neural applications. Nanomedicine. 11, 2547–2563
(2016)
4. Sofroniew, M.V.: Molecular dissection of reactive astrogliosis and glial scar formation. Trends
Neurosci. 32, 638–647 (2009)
5. Hamzavi, N., Tsang, W. & Shim, V.: Nonlinear elastic brain tissue model for neural probe-
tissue mechanical interaction. In: 2013 6th International IEEE/EMBS Conference on Neural
Engineering (NER), pp. 1119–1122. IEEE (2013)
6. Miller, K., Chinzei, K., Orssengo, G., Bednarz, P.: Mechanical properties of brain tissue in-
vivo: experiment and computer simulation. J. Biomech. 33, 1369–1376 (2000)
7. Palchesko, R.N., Zhang, L., Sun, Y., Feinberg, A.W.: Development of polydimethylsiloxane
substrates with tunable elastic modulus to study cell mechanobiology in muscle and nerve.
PLoS One. 7, e51499 (2012)
8. Kozai, T.D.Y., et al.: Ultrasmall implantable composite microelectrodes with bioactive
surfaces for chronic neural interfaces. Nat. Mater. 11, 1065 (2012)
9. McClain, M.A., et al.: Highly-compliant, microcable neuroelectrodes fabricated from thin-
ﬁlm gold and PDMS. Biomed. Microdevices. 13, 361–373 (2011)
10. Heo, D.N., et al.: Flexible and highly biocompatible nanoﬁber-based electrodes for neural
surface interfacing. ACS Nano. 11, 2961–2971 (2017)
11. Yu, Z., et al.: Monitoring hippocampus electrical activity in vitro on an elastically deformable
microelectrode array. J. Neurotrauma. 26, 1135–1145 (2009)
12. Aregueta-Robles, U.A., Woolley, A.J., Poole-Warren, L.A., Lovell, N.H., Green, R.A.:
Organic electrode coatings for next-generation neural interfaces. Front. Neuroeng. 7, 15
(2014)
13. Goding, J., Gilmour, A., Martens, P., Poole-Warren, L., Green, R.: Interpenetrating conduct-
ing hydrogel materials for neural interfacing electrodes. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 6, 1601177
(2017)
14. Green, R.A., et al.: Conductive hydrogels: mechanically robust hybrids for use as biomateri-
als. Macromol. Biosci. 12, 494–501 (2012)
15. Boehler, C., Stieglitz, T., Asplund, M.: Nanostructured platinum grass enables superior
impedance reduction for neural microelectrodes. Biomaterials. 67, 346–353 (2015)
16. Yiannakou, C., et al.: Cell patterning via laser micro/nano structured silicon surfaces.
Biofabrication. 9, 025024 (2017)
17. Chung, C.-K., Tseng, S.-F., Hsiao, W.-T., Chiang, D., Lin, W.-C.: Laser micromachin-
ing of PEDOT: PSS/Graphene thin ﬁlms by using beam shaping technology. J Laser
Micro/Nanoeng. 11, 395–399 (2016)
18. Bass, R.B., Clark, W.W., Zhang, J.Z., Lichtenberger, A.W.: Use of a focused ion beam for
characterizing SIS circuits. IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 11, 92–94 (2001)
19. Hof, L., Guo, X., Seo, M., Wüthrich, R., Greener, J.: Glass imprint templates by spark assisted
chemical engraving for microfabrication by hot embossing. Micromachines. 8, 29 (2017)
20. Hoshino, T., Miyazako, H., Nakayama, A., Wagatsuma, A., Mabuchi, K.: Electron beam
induced ﬁne virtual electrode for mechanical strain microscopy of living cell. Sensors
Actuators B Chem. 236, 659–667 (2016)

Biomimetic Approaches Towards Device-Tissue Integration
283
21. Chapman, C.A., et al.: Nanoporous gold biointerfaces: modifying nanostructure to control
neural cell coverage and enhance electrophysiological recording performance. Adv. Funct.
Mater. 27, 1604631 (2017)
22. Turner, A., et al.: Attachment of astroglial cells to microfabricated pillar arrays of different
geometries. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 51, 430–441 (2000)
23. Qi, L., et al.: The effects of topographical patterns and sizes on neural stem cell behavior.
PLoS One. 8, e59022 (2013)
24. Richardson-Burns, S.M., et al.: Polymerization of the conducting polymer poly (3, 4-
ethylenedioxythiophene)(PEDOT) around living neural cells. Biomaterials. 28, 1539–1552
(2007)
25. Yang, J., Martin, D.C.: Microporous conducting polymers on neural microelectrode arrays:
II. Physical characterization. Sensors Actuators A Phys. 113, 204–211 (2004)
26. Abidian, M.R., Kim, D.H., Martin, D.C.: Conducting-polymer nanotubes for controlled drug
release. Adv. Mater. 18, 405–409 (2006)
27. HajjHassan, M., Chodavarapu, V., Musallam, S.: NeuroMEMS: neural probe microtechnolo-
gies. Sensors. 8, 6704–6726 (2008)
28. Uppalapati, D., Boyd, B.J., Garg, S., Travas-Sejdic, J., Svirskis, D.: Conducting polymers
with deﬁned micro-or nanostructures for drug delivery. Biomaterials. 111, 149–162 (2016)
29. Kotov, N.A., et al.: Nanomaterials for neural interfaces. Adv. Mater. 21, 3970–4004 (2009)
30. Pancrazio, J.J.: Neural interfaces at the nanoscale. Nanomedicine. 3, 823–830 (2008)
31. Cui, X., Hetke, J.F., Wiler, J.A., Anderson, D.J., Martin, D.C.: Electrochemical deposition
and characterization of conducting polymer polypyrrole/PSS on multichannel neural probes.
Sensors Actuators A Phys. 93, 8–18 (2001)
32. Biggs, M.J.P., Richards, R.G., Dalby, M.J.: Nanotopographical modiﬁcation: a regulator of
cellular function through focal adhesions. Nanomedicine. 6, 619–633 (2010)
33. Ballester-Beltrán, J., Biggs, M.J., Dalby, M.J., Salmeron-Sanchez, M., Leal-Egaña, A.:
Sensing the difference: the inﬂuence of anisotropic cues on cell behavior. Front. Mater. 2,
39 (2015)
34. Yang, X., et al.: Bioinspired neuron-like electronics. Nat. Mater. 18, 510–517 (2019)
35. Zanganeh, S., et al.: Electrochemical approach for monitoring the effect of anti tubulin drugs
on breast cancer cells based on silicon nanograss electrodes. Anal. Chim. Acta. 938, 72–81
(2016)
36. Pacelli, S., et al.: Nanodiamond-based injectable hydrogel for sustained growth factor release:
preparation, characterization and in vitro analysis. Acta Biomater. 58, 479–491 (2017)
37. Collazos-Castro, J.E., Hernández-Labrado, G.R., Polo, J.L., García-Rama, C.: N-Cadherin-
and L1-functionalised conducting polymers for synergistic stimulation and guidance of neural
cell growth. Biomaterials. 34, 3603–3617 (2013)
38. Povlich, L.K., et al.: Synthesis, copolymerization and peptide-modiﬁcation of carboxylic
acid-functionalized 3, 4-ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOTacid) for neural electrode interfaces.
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-General Sub. 1830, 4288–4293 (2013)
39. Park, S.J., et al.: Functional nerve cuff electrode with controllable anti-inﬂammatory drug
loading and release by biodegradable nanoﬁbers and hydrogel deposition. Sensors Actuators
B Chem. 215, 133–141 (2015)
40. Boehler, C., et al.: Actively controlled release of Dexamethasone from neural microelectrodes
in a chronic in vivo study. Biomaterials. 129, 176–187 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.biomaterials.2017.03.019
41. Catt, K., Li, H., Hoang, V., Beard, R., Cui, X.T.: Self-powered therapeutic release from
conducting polymer/graphene oxide ﬁlms on magnesium. Nanomedicine. 14, 2495–2503
(2018)
42. Castagnola, E. et al.: Nanostructured microsphere coated with living cells and tethered with
low-stiffness wire: a possible solution to brain tissue reactions. In: 2015 7th International
IEEE/EMBS Conference on Neural Engineering (NER), pp. 390–393. IEEE (2015)
43. Yue, Z., Moulton, S.E., Cook, M., O’Leary, S., Wallace, G.G.: Controlled delivery for
neuro-bionic devices. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 65, 559–569 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.addr.2012.06.002

284
C. Vallejo-Giraldo et al.
44. Weaver, C.L., LaRosa, J.M., Luo, X., Cui, X.T.: Electrically controlled drug delivery from
graphene oxide nanocomposite ﬁlms. ACS Nano. 8, 1834–1843 (2014)
45. Boehler, C. et al.: In: Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. Conference Abstract: 10th World Biomate-
rials Congress. https://doi.org/10.3389/conf.FBIOE.2016.01.01475. FBIOE
46. Jian, W.-H., et al.: Glycosaminoglycan-based hybrid hydrogel encapsulated with polyelec-
trolyte complex nanoparticles for endogenous stem cell regulation in central nervous system
regeneration. Biomaterials. 174, 17–30 (2018)
47. Stevens, M.M., George, J.H.J.S.: Exploring and engineering the cell surface interface.
Science. 310, 1135–1138 (2005)
48. Song, I., Dityatev, A.J.B.: Crosstalk between glia, extracellular matrix and neurons. Brain
Res. Bull. 136, 101–108 (2018)
49. Righi, M., et al.: Peptide-based coatings for ﬂexible implantable neural interfaces. Sci. Rep.
8, 502 (2018)
50. Rodda, A.E., Meagher, L., Nisbet, D.R., Forsythe, J.S.: Speciﬁc control of cell–material
interactions: targeting cell receptors using ligand-functionalized polymer substrates. Prog.
Polym. Sci. 39, 1312–1347 (2014)
51. Kim, S., et al.: Versatile biomimetic conductive polypyrrole ﬁlms doped with hyaluronic acid
of different molecular weights. Acta Biomater. 80, 258–268 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.actbio.2018.09.035
52. Mantione, D., et al.: Poly (3, 4-ethylenedioxythiophene): GlycosAminoGlycan aqueous
dispersions: toward electrically conductive bioactive materials for neural. Interfaces. 16,
1227–1238 (2016)
53. Green, R.A., Baek, S., Poole-Warren, L.A., Martens, P.J.: Conducting polymer-hydrogels for
medical electrode applications. Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater. 11, 014107 (2010)
54. Frantz, C., Stewart, K.M., Weaver, V.M.: The extracellular matrix at a glance. J. Cell Sci. 123,
4195–4200 (2010)
55. Xiao, Y., Li, C.M., Wang, S., Shi, J., Ooi, C.P.: Incorporation of collagen in poly (3, 4-
ethylenedioxythiophene) for a bifunctional ﬁlm with high bio-and electrochemical activity.
J. Biomed. Mater. Res. A. 92, 766–772 (2010)
56. Wan, A.M.-D., et al.: 3D conducting polymer platforms for electrical control of protein
conformation and cellular functions. J. Mater. Chem. B. 3, 5040–5048 (2015)
57. Baek, P., Voorhaar, L., Barker, D., Travas-Sejdic, J.: Molecular approach to conjugated
polymers with biomimetic properties. Acc. Chem. Res. 51, 1581–1589 (2018)
58. Bhagwat, N., Murray, R.E., Shah, S.I., Kiick, K.L., Martin, D.C.: Biofunctionalization of
PEDOT ﬁlms with laminin-derived peptides. Acta Biomater. 41, 235–246 (2016)
59. Cui, X., et al.: Surface modiﬁcation of neural recording electrodes with conducting poly-
mer/biomolecule blends. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 56, 261–272 (2001)
60. Xiao, Y., Martin, D.C., Cui, X., Shenai, M.: Surface modiﬁcation of neural probes with
conducting polymer poly (hydroxymethylated-3, 4-ethylenedioxythiophene) and its biocom-
patibility. Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol. 128, 117–129 (2006)
61. Green, R.A., Lovell, N.H., Poole-Warren, L.A.: Impact of co-incorporating laminin peptide
dopants and neurotrophic growth factors on conducting polymer properties. Acta Biomater.
6, 63–71 (2010)
62. Green, R.A., Lovell, N.H., Poole-Warren, L.A.: Cell attachment functionality of bioactive
conducting polymers for neural interfaces. Biomaterials. 30, 3637–3644 (2009)
63. Eles, J.R., et al.: Neuroadhesive L1 coating attenuates acute microglial attachment to neural
electrodes as revealed by live two-photon microscopy. Biomaterials. 113, 279–292 (2017).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2016.10.054
64. Trowbridge, J.M., Gallo, R.L.: Dermatan sulfate: new functions from an old glycosaminogly-
can. Glycobiology. 12, 117R–125R (2002)
65. Asplund, M., et al.: Toxicity evaluation of PEDOT/biomolecular composites intended for
neural communication electrodes. Biomed. Mater. 4, 045009 (2009)
66. Cheong, G.M., et al.: Conductive hydrogels with tailored bioactivity for implantable electrode
coatings. Acta Biomater. 10, 1216–1226 (2014)

Biomimetic Approaches Towards Device-Tissue Integration
285
67. Papy-Garcia, D., et al.: Glycosaminoglycans, protein aggregation and neurodegeneration.
Curr. Protein Pept. Sci. 12, 258–268 (2011)
68. Asplund, M., von Holst, H., Inganäs, O.: Composite biomolecule/PEDOT materials for neural
electrodes. Biointerphases. 3, 83–93 (2008)
69. Wang, M., et al.: Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) and GAG mimetics regulate the behavior of
stem cell differentiation. Colloids Surf. B: Biointerfaces. 150, 175–182 (2017)
70. Wang, M., et al.: A new avenue to the synthesis of GAG-mimicking polymers highly
promoting neural differentiation of embryonic stem cells. Chem. Commun. 51, 15434–15437
(2015)
71. Mehanna, A., et al.: Polysialic acid glycomimetic promotes functional recovery and plasticity
after spinal cord injury in mice. Mol. Ther. 18, 34–43 (2010)
72. Winter, B. M. et al.: Control of cell fate and excitability at the neural electrode interface:
Genetic reprogramming and optical induction. In: 2017 IEEE Life Sciences Conference
(LSC), pp. 157–161. IEEE (2017). https://doi.org/10.1109/LSC.2017.8268167
73. Hong, G., Lieber, C.M.: Novel electrode technologies for neural recordings. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 20, 330–345 (2019)
74. Rivnay, J., Wang, H., Fenno, L., Deisseroth, K., Malliaras, G.G.: Next-generation probes,
particles, and proteins for neural interfacing. Sci. Adv. 3, e1601649 (2017)
75. Capadona, J.R., Shoffstall, A.J., Pancrazio, J.J.: Neuron-like neural probes. Nat. Mater. 18,
429–431 (2019)
76. Rajasethupathy, P., Ferenczi, E., Deisseroth, K.J.C.: Targeting neural circuits. Cell. 165, 524–
534 (2016)
77. Green, R.A., Lovell, N.H., Wallace, G.G., Poole-Warren, L.A.: Conducting polymers for
neural interfaces: challenges in developing an effective long-term implant. Biomaterials. 29,
3393–3399 (2008)
78. Ochiai, H., Shibata, H., Sawa, Y., Katoh, T.: “Living electrode” as a long-lived photoconverter
for biophotolysis of water. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 77, 2442–2444 (1980). https://
doi.org/10.1073/pnas.77.5.2442
79. Ouyang, L., Shaw, C.L., Kuo, C.-c., Grifﬁn, A.L., Martin, D.C.: In vivo polymerization of
poly (3, 4-ethylenedioxythiophene) in the living rat hippocampus does not cause a signiﬁcant
loss of performance in a delayed alternation task. J. Neural Eng. 11, 026005 (2014)
80. Goding, J.A., Gilmour, A.D., Aregueta-Robles, U.A., Hasan, E.A., Green, R.A.: Living
bioelectronics: strategies for developing an effective long-term implant with functional neural
connections. Adv. Funct. Mater. 28, 1702969 (2018)
81. Aregueta-Robles, U.A., Martens, P.J., Poole-Warren, L.A., Green, R.A.: Tailoring 3D hydro-
gel systems for neuronal encapsulation in living electrodes. J. Polym. Sci. B Polym. Phys. 56,
273–287 (2018)
82. Green, R. A. et al.: Living electrodes: tissue engineering the neural interface. Conference
proceedings: . . . Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Society. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. Annual Conference
2013, pp. 6957–6960, https://doi.org/10.1109/embc.2013.6611158 (2013)
83. Liu, Y., et al.: Human embryonic stem cell-derived retinal pigment epithelium transplants
as a potential treatment for wet age-related macular degeneration. Cell Discov. 4, 50
(2018)
84. Cai, L., Dewi, R.E., Heilshorn, S.C.: Injectable hydrogels with in situ double network
formation enhance retention of transplanted stem cells. Adv. Funct. Mater. 25, 1344–1351
(2015)
85. Serruya, M.D., et al.: Engineered axonal tracts as “living electrodes” for synaptic-based
modulation of neural circuitry. Adv. Funct. Mater. 28, 1701183 (2018)
86. Adewole, D.O., Serruya, M.D., Wolf, J.A., Cullen, D.K.: Bioactive neuroelectronic interfaces.
Front. Neurosci. 13, 269 (2019)
87. Li, H., Nguyen, V. H. & Zhang, H.: {Nature Inspired Conceptual Design of a Micro Neural
Probe for Deep Brain Stimulation}. In: International Conference on Sustainable Design and
Manufacturing, pp. 31–40. Springer (2018)

286
C. Vallejo-Giraldo et al.
88. Won, S.M., et al.: Recent advances in materials, devices, and systems for neural interfaces.
Adv. Mater. 30, 1800534 (2018)
89. Shoffstall, A.J., Capadona, J.R.J.C.: Bioinspired materials and systems for neural interfacing.
Curr Opin Biomed Eng. 6, 110–119 (2018)
90. Tian, B., et al.: Macroporous nanowire nanoelectronic scaffolds for synthetic tissues. Nat.
Mater. 11, 986–994 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat3404
91. de Mena, L., Rizk, P., Rincon-Limas, D.E.: Bringing light to transcription: the optogenetics
repertoire. Front. Genet. 9, 518–518 (2018). https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2018.00518
92. Vierbuchen, T., Wernig, M.J.: Molecular roadblocks for cellular reprogramming. Mol. Cell.
47, 827–838 (2012)
93. Meas, S.J., Zhang, C.L., Dabdoub, A.: Reprogramming glia into neurons in the peripheral
auditory system as a solution for sensorineural hearing loss: lessons from the central nervous
system. Front. Mol. Neurosci. 11, 77 (2018). https://doi.org/10.3389/fnmol.2018.00077
94. Chouchane, M., et al.: Lineage reprogramming of astroglial cells from different origins into
distinct neuronal subtypes. Stem Cell Rep. 9, 162–176 (2017)
95. Winter, B., Daniels, S., Salatino, J., Purcell, E.J.M.: Genetic modulation at the neural
microelectrode interface: methods and applications. Micromachines. 9, 476 (2018)
96. Pinyon, J.L., et al.: Close-ﬁeld electroporation gene delivery using the cochlear implant
electrode array enhances the bionic ear. Sci. Transl. Med. 6, 233ra254 (2014). https://doi.org/
10.1126/scitranslmed.3008177
97. Zhao, S., et al.: Cell type–speciﬁc channelrhodopsin-2 transgenic mice for optogenetic
dissection of neural circuitry function. Nat. Methods. 8, 745–752 (2011)
98. Wang, L., Huang, K., Zhong, C., Wang, L., Lu, Y.J.: Fabrication and modiﬁcation of
implantable optrode arrays for in vivo optogenetic applications. Biophys. Rep. 4, 82–93
(2018)
99. Goncalves, S.B., et al.: LED optrode with integrated temperature sensing for optogenetics.
Micromachines. 9, 473 (2018)
100. Khan, W., Setien, M., Purcell, E., Li, W.: Micro-reﬂector integrated multichannel μLED
optogenetic neurostimulator with enhanced intensity. Front. Mech. Eng. 4 (2018). https://
doi.org/10.3389/fmech.2018.00017

