444
Orthodox Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics
φ1, φ2, . . ., and βi = ∞
j=1 aijαj, i = 1, 2, . . . , is called the matrix representa-
tion of ψ = Aχ. One can write
+ β1
β2
...
,
=
+ a11 a12 . . .
a21 a22 . . .
...
...
...
, + α1
α2
...
,
where the column
vectors are elements of the Hilbert space l2 since ∥ψ∥2 = ∞
i=1 |αi|2 < ∞and
∥Aψ∥2 = ∞
i=1 |βi|2 < ∞.—If A is an unbounded operator with domain DA
dense in H, then ψ = Aχ, χ ∈DA, has a matrix representation w.r.t. φ1, φ2, . . .
whenever φ1, φ2, . . . belongs to DA as well as to DA∗. Moreover, φ1, φ2, . . . ∈DA∗
and φ1, φ2, . . . ∈DA entail that DA∗is dense in H, A∗∗= A exists, and
φ1, φ2, . . . ∈DA∗∗. So the action of A∗can also be represented in matrix form, the
matrix elements a∗
ij of A∗satisfy a∗
ij = aji. In particular, every symmetric or self-
adjoint operator enables a matrix representation of ψ = Aχ if χ, φ1, φ2, . . . ∈DA.
The matrix elements of a symmetric or self-adjoint operator satisfy aij = aji, i.e.,
the matrix elements constitute a Hermitian matrix.
Literature
1. F. Riesz and B. Sz.-Nagy: Functional Analysis (Frederick Ungar Publishing, New York 1955;
reprint Dover Publications, Mineola 1991)
2. M. Reed and B. Simon: Methods of Modern Mathematical Physics I: Functional Analysis (Aca-
demic, New York 1972, second edition 1980)
3. N. Dunford and J. T. Schwartz: Linear Operators (Interscience Publishers, New York), Part I:
General Theory (1958), Part II: Spectral Theory (1963)
4. W. Młak: Hilbert Spaces and Operator Theory (Springer, Dordrecht 1991)
5. D. Werner: Funktionalanalysis (Springer, Berlin 1995, third edition 2000)
6. G. Ludwig: Foundations of Quantum Mechanics I (Springer, New York 1983), Appendix IV
7. E. Prugoveˇcki: Quantum Mechanics in Hilbert Space (Academic, New York 1971, second edi-
tion 1981; reprint Dover Publications, Mineola 2006)
See also  Creation and Annihilation Operators
 Density Operator
 Projection
 Self-Adjoint Operator
 State Operator
 Unitary Operator
Orthodox Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics
Henry Stapp
Eugene Wigner, in a paper entitled The Problem of Measurement [1], used the
term “orthodox interpretation” to identify the interpretation spelled out in mathe-
matical detail by John von Neumann in his book Mathematische Grundlagen der

Orthodox Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics
445
O
Quantenmechanik [2]. Von Neumann, in the chapter on the measuring process,
shows how to expand the quantum mechanical description of a system to include
the physical variables of the measuring device, or, more generally, the physical vari-
ables of any system that interacts with an original system of interest. He then gives
a detailed analysis of the process of measurement.
Von Neumann calls the unitary evolution of the quantum state (or wave function)
generated by the  Schr¨odinger equation by the name “process 2”. The process-2
quantum mechanical evolution is a mathematical generalization of the deterministic
evolution of a dynamically closed system in classical physical theory. The quantum
mechanical process 2, like its classical counterpart, is deterministic: given the quan-
tum state at any time, the state into which will evolve at any later time via process 2
is completely ﬁxed.
Von Neumann considers an (idealized) situation involving a sequence of phys-
ically described measuring devices each performing a good measurement on the
outcome variables of the preceding device, leading eventually to the retina, then to
the optical nerves, and ﬁnally to the higher brain centers directly associated with
the consciousness of the observer. There is no apparent reason for the process 2 to
fail at any point, provided the full environment (essentially the entire physically de-
scribed universe) is included in the physical system. But in general the process 2
evolution will lead to a state in which the higher brain centers directly associated
with consciousness will have non-negligible components corresponding to different
incompatible experiences, such as seeing the pointer of a measuring device simul-
taneously at several distinct positions.
Von Neumann notes that “It is entirely correct that the measurement or the related
process of subjective perception is a new entity relative to the physical environment
and is not reducible to the latter. Indeed, it leads into the intellectual inner life of the
individual, which is extra-observational by its very nature (since it must be taken for
granted by any conceivable observation or experiment).”
To tie the quantum mathematics usefully to human experience von Neumann
invokes another process, which he called “process 1”. Process 1 partitions the state
into a particular collection of components each corresponding to a distinct possible
experience, but only one of which will survive the “ wave function collapse” or
the “reduction of the  wave packet” associated with process of measurement or
observation.
Wigner proves that process 1 can never be a consequence of process 2 alone:
some other process, not the quantum analog of the deterministic classical law of
evolution, must come in. As in the classical case, one must of course respect the
condition that the quantum system be dynamically closed. This means that if any
macroscopic element is included in the quantum mechanically described system
then one must effectively include the whole universe, due to the non-negligible
effects of the environment upon a macroscopic system.
Von Neumann notes that, in line with the precepts of the Copenhagen interpreta-
tion, “we must always divide the world into two parts, the one being the observed
system, the other the observer”, and that “quantum mechanics describes the events
which occur in the observed portion of the world, so long as they do not interact

446
Orthodox Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics
with the observing portion, with the aid of process 2, but as soon as such an in-
teraction occurs, i.e., a measurement, it requires an application of process 1.” (For
Copenhagen interpretation see  Born rule; Consistent Histories; Metaphysics in
Quantum Mechanics; Nonlocality; Schr¨odinger’s Cat; Transactional Interpretation.)
The von Neumann/Wigner approach is, in this regard, not identical to the Copen-
hagen interpretation speciﬁed by Bohr and Heisenberg, who, in keeping with their
pragmatic epistemological stance, resist treating the entire physical universe as a
quantum system obeying the linear deterministic unitary law. Bohr ties this limi-
tation in the applicability of the normal quantum rules to the fact that any attempt
to obtain sufﬁcient knowledge about any living organism, in order to enable us to
make useful predictions, would probably kill the organism. Hence “the strict appli-
cation of those concepts adapted to our description of inanimate nature might stand
in a relationship of exclusion to the consideration of the laws of the phenomena of
life” [3]. This argument is effectively a cautious suggestion that the breakdown of
process 2 might be associated with biological systems: i.e., with life. But von Neu-
mann says “there arises the frequent necessity of localizing some of these processes
at points which lie within the portion of space occupied by our own bodies. But
this does not alter the fact of their belonging to the ‘world about us’, the objective
environment referred to above.”
Wigner’s suggestion for dealing with this gross mismatch between the process-2
generated activities of our brains and the contents of our streams of conscious ex-
periences, evidently stems from a desire to have a rationally coherent ontological
understanding of nature herself; an understanding of the reality that actually exists.
Noting that process 1 is associated with the occurrence of observable events, and
hence the implied need for an observer, Wigner suggest that the breakdown of pro-
cess 2 is due to the interaction of the physically described aspects of nature with
the consciousness of a conscious being [4]. ( Wigner’s Friend) This physically
efﬁcacious consciousness stands outside the physically described aspects of nature
controlled by process 2. Von Neumann calls it the observer’s “abstract ego”.
Conscious experiences are certainly real, and real things normally have real ef-
fects. The most straightforward conclusion would seem to be that process 1 speciﬁes
features of the interaction between the brain activities that are directly associ-
ated with conscious experiences and the conscious experiences with which those
activities are associated.
This solution is in line with Descartes’ idea of two “substances”, that can inter-
act in our brains, provided “substance” means merely a carrier of “essences”. The
essence of the inhabitants of res cogitans is “felt experience”. They are thoughts,
ideas, and feelings: the realities that hang together to form our streams of conscious
experiences. But the essence of the inhabitants of res extensa is not at all that of the
sort of persisting stuff that classical physicists imagined the physical world to be
made of.
They are indeed represented in terms of mathematically described properties
assigned to space-time points, but their essential nature is that of “potentialities
for the psycho-physical events to occur”. These events occur at the interface be-
tween the psychologically and physically described aspects of nature, and the laws

Orthonormal Basis
447
O
governing their interaction are given by von Neumann. The causal connections be-
tween “potentialities for psychologically described events to occur” and such events
themselves are easier to comprehend and describe than causal connections between
the corresponding features of classical physics. For, both sides of the duality are
conceptually more like “ideas” than like “rocks”.
Primary Literature
1. E. Wigner: The Problem of Measurement. American Journal of Physics 31, 6–15 (1963)
2. J. Von Neumann: Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantnmechanik (Springer, Berlin 1932)
(Translated as Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, Princeton University Press,
1955)
3. N. Bohr: Atomic Theory and the Description of Nature (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
UK 1961, 22–23)
4. E. Wigner: Remarks on the Mind-Body Problem, in The Scientist Speculates, I. J. Good, ed.
(Heinemann, London; Basic Books, New York 1962, 284–302)
Secondary Literature
5. N. Bohr: Atomic Physics and Human Knowledge (Wiley, New York 1958)
Orthonormal Basis
Roderich Tumulka
Orthonormal basis (plural orthonormal bases): a set B of vectors in Euclidean or
Hilbert space such that every vector can be written as a (ﬁnite or inﬁnite) linear
combination of vectors from B, while all vectors from B have length 1 and any two
of them are orthogonal. The number of vectors in B then equals the dimension of
the space, which can be ﬁnite or inﬁnite.
In the inﬁnite-dimensional  Hilbert spaces considered in quantum physics, the
appropriate sense of linear combination is that of a convergent series
ψ =
∞

n=1
cn φn,
(1)
where B = {φ1, φ2, . . .} and cn are complex coefﬁcients, called the expansion
coefﬁcients of ψ relative to B. (A basis in the sense that linear combinations are

