Integrated Science   1
Nima Rezaei Editor
Integrated 
Science
Science Without Borders

Integrated Science
Volume 1
Editor-in-Chief
Nima Rezaei, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran

The Integrated Science Series aims to publish the most relevant and novel research
in all areas of Formal Sciences, Physical and Chemical Sciences, Biological
Sciences, Medical Sciences, and Social Sciences. We are especially focused on the
research involving the integration of two of more academic ﬁelds offering an
innovative view, which is one of the main focuses of Universal Scientiﬁc Education
and Research Network (USERN), science without borders.
Integrated Science is committed to upholding the integrity of the scientiﬁc
record and will follow the Committee on Publication Ethics (COPE) guidelines on
how to deal with potential acts of misconduct and correcting the literature.
More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/16554

Nima Rezaei
Editor
Integrated Science
Science Without Borders
123

Editor
Nima Rezaei
Universal Scientiﬁc Education
and Research Network (USERN)
Tehran, Iran
ISSN 2662-9461
ISSN 2662-947X
(electronic)
Integrated Science
ISBN 978-3-030-65272-2
ISBN 978-3-030-65273-9
(eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65273-9
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer
Nature Switzerland AG 2021
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether
the whole or part of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of
illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar
or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from
the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this
book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the
authors or the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained
herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard
to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

This book series would not have been possible without
the continuous encouragement of my family. I dedicate
this book series to my daughters, Ariana and Arnika,
hoping that integrated science could solve complex
problems and make a brighter future for the next
generation.

Preface
I start this book with a few words regarding the borders; the walls, we have
surrounded ourselves with our dark walls; as it seems that there is no light behind
these walls.
Initially, I would like to take you through the journey of a dark image. Have you
ever contemplated in a dark image? Where can this image be? Darkness? Honestly,
I myself don’t know where it is, but it could be a galaxy distant from us at
approximately 13 billion light-years.
Try to look deeper and magnify your view. The earth is seen; then my country,
but the image is still dark. Where can this image be? I asked myself once again.
Couldn’t it be where I am writing this preface? I magnify the image with a higher
power, and I see myself! You might think that this dark image is an underexposed
photo of me, but it is not! Only with a bit more magniﬁcation, a cell, some
chromatin, a chromosome, two DNA strands, bases, quark, and the Higgs boson are
revealed, and then, again, the same darkness.
Frankly speaking, this dark image expresses the universe from a mass of 1028 to
10−19, which was the product of hundreds of years of scientists’ from different
disciplines like astronomists, physicists, chemists, biologists, medical scientists, and
social scientists, who attempted to put the pieces of this puzzle together, therefore
bestowing a better perspective of the universe.
Nowadays, who knows what is going beyond the borders? I think our vision is
dark, not only for the walls that were built around us not only by others, but also the
walls that we have surrounded ourselves with in all sides and in all times.
Secondly, I want to begin the second journey and take you through time. In the
ﬁrst journey, we traveled from the outside inﬁnity to the inside inﬁnity. However,
on the second journey, I don’t want to take you from yesterday’s inﬁnity to
tomorrow’s inﬁnity. I just want to go back hundreds of years ago, when scientists
like Muhammad Ibn Zakariya al-Razi, Jabir Ibn Hayyan, Avicenna lived. You have
certainly heard about them, but do you know what they have been doing? It is
interesting that if you look at the accomplishments of Jabir Ibn Hayyan, for
example, you will see this person as an astronomer, physicist, chemist, physician,
pharmacist, and philosopher. Currently, is it possible to expect that one individual is
an expert in all disciplines? I think, no! Why not? Because science has been
specialized, super-specialized, and disciplines walked away from each other. If I am
a clinical immunologist, I don’t dialogue with a physicist, chemist, or psychologist.
vii

Mawlana, Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi, has a poem that says, “The elephant
was in a Dark Room …”. You have certainly heard about it. There are different
interpretations of it, and I have my own interpretation too. Mine is that in the world
that is small and dark, we are becoming super-specialized in several parts of this
elephant; I have become super-specialized in a small part of the elephant tusk, you
have been super-specialized in a small part of the elephant ear, and (s)he has been
super-specialized in a small part of the elephant tail, elephant body, elephant pie,
etc. All of these people do not really dialogue and cooperate; therefore, the whole
elephant remains ambiguous! What if we could have taken a step backward and
dialogued with each other exactly like what the scientists used to do in history? We
would have certainly had a better image of the whole elephant. Eventually, you are
the slave of these perennial walls.
Open the windows, my dark room is looking for fresh air.
Open your arms, my dark heart is looking for loving pair…
A little bit later in time, about thirty years ago, when I was a passionate child;
why I came to this world? I thought to myself. Probably I am going to do some-
thing, shouldn’t I invent something in the world? I asked myself. Everything has
been invented like electricity, the telephone, and the airplane. Is there anything left
to be invented? I asked myself again. The answer was yes, there were many other
unexplored or non-invented things.
Thirty years later, which is today, I thought to myself that we would certainly see
some cars that ﬂy in the sky. What if these cars crashed and fell down? Fortunately
and unfortunately, that hasn’t happened yet. I thought to myself that what if we had
a television that not only transfers the light and the sound, but also transfers the
odors of the scenes! This appears not to happen too. I knew someone who was
mentally disabled. I thought to myself in the current century; it would certainly be
possible to transplant one’s brain into another’s brain and treat him. This did not
happen, too. But a phenomenon occurred: “Networking”, which I haven’t even
thought about. Different networks came into existence, and humans became con-
nected, trying to become closer to each other. Indeed, I think in the present century,
if we don’t do networking, it would not be easy to move forward with our works.
Humans, I think, feel lonely, and to avoid distances, they are trying to become close
to each other and don’t come into their minds; they are getting far from the close.
Humans have begun building walls and borders. They have deﬁned borders
between cultures, thoughts, countries, states, cities, villages, homes, and even the
people who live in the same building don’t know who are living behind the walls!
In homes, there is a gap and a thick wall between the generations; so, parents cannot
dialogue with their children. On phones, they are staying closely connected with far
people while being apart from their close people. I am almost concerned that these
walls are extending to our cells, which means that the immune system comes and
builds thick walls between itself and other organs, including the central nervous
system, joints, etc., and causes multiple sclerosis, lupus, rheumatoid arthritis, and
diabetes. We hope this does not happen that cells become autonomous, which
viii
Preface

would become cancer. Whether we like it or not, ourselves, our relatives, or our
friends have to visit the hospital once day. We hope this does not happen that a
complex disease like cancer is present within a family. Then you would see how
much it changes the order of priorities, and life forms a different form.
After years, since I became a full professor at the university, published hundreds
of scientiﬁc papers, thousands of citations to my papers occurred, wrote tens of
books that were published by international publishers, and be selected as one of the
top scientist of the world, I wondered what is all this for? Why can’t we solve the
complex problems of mankind? And complex problems of mankind are not only
those related to medicine: climate change, a river ﬂoods somewhere, while some-
where is drying up. I don’t know how much your heart hurts when you see a child
who is full length scavenging something in the rubbish. Probably there is a thing
that this child is scavenging for. This is the problem of many countries, where you
can ﬁnd someone holding a plastic cup standing at the crossroads and near
restaurants and asking you something. Child abuse, drug abuse, addiction, pan-
demic and some other health issues are complex problems humanity could not solve
yet. Why? Because these problems are not single disciplinary problems. They are
the problems of every single one of us. Their solution lies in multiple disciplines.
I usually travel a lot. Traveling by plane has two advantages. One is when the
plane is taking off, you ﬁnd how small you are and also how small your problems
are. The other one is that in a world that has been fast-paced, you will ﬁnd the
opportunity to think. I was in my thoughts and wondered would it be possible to
have a solution for the complex problems of mankind? I thought that if we can
remove the borders, then it might be possible to make the world a better place for
life. These borders are not just geographical borders; borders between disciplines,
borders between the old and young people, and borders between people. Why?
Now that people are spending their time on virtual networks, why not taking
advantage of it for an Integrated Science Without Borders Platform? That’s when I
decided to create a scientiﬁc network, named “Universal Scientiﬁc Education and
Research Network (USERN)”.
So, the Integrated Science Series aims to publish the most relevant and novel
research in all areas of Formal Sciences, Physical and Chemical Sciences, Bio-
logical Sciences, Medical Sciences, and Social Sciences. We are especially focused
on the research involving the integration of two of more academic ﬁelds offering an
innovative view, which is one of the main focuses of USERN; science without
borders.
Life is too short. If one day you were ing heartbroken and lonely, keep in mind
when you were a child, you would like to ﬂy. If now you see yourself dealing with
everyday life and as I say “captured by water and seeds”, which means to only care
about your ﬁnancial and basic desires, bear in mind that water and seeds mean the
cage, and the cage means the death of the freedom. Do not determine a ﬂight-ceiling
neither for yourself nor for others. We should bear in mind that “The Sky Has Room
for Every Bird that Dares to Fly.”
I cannot end my words without thanking all, who made this initiative possible,
while USERN was nothing without them. Flying alone in the sky looks like a
Preface
ix

prison, without any sense of reunion, while the colorful ﬂying is impossible without
a companion Flying together, making the way easier, to go farther, in any weather
Flying higher, showing how much smaller, however still lier to be a true lover...
Tehran, Iran
Nima Rezaei, MD, Ph.D.
x
Preface

Acknowledgment
I would like to express my gratitude to the Editorial Assistant of this book series,
Dr. Amene Saghazadeh. Without a doubt, the book would not have been completed
without her contribution.
xi

Contents
1
Introduction on Integrated Science: Science Without Borders . . . .
1
Nima Rezaei and Amene Saghazadeh
2
The Human Person as an Integrated System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
Jan Kłos
3
On the Nature of Qualitative Research in Process
Transformations: The Changing Man in the Changing World . . . .
59
Ewa Rzechowska
4
Integrated Science: Ambitions, Practicalities,
Misunderstandings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
Henry H. Bauer
5
The Integration of the Sciences and Integral Human
Knowledge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
Chris van Haeften
6
The Indelible Stamp of Our Lowly Origins: An Epistemic
Architecture Between the Sciences and Humanities . . . . . . . . . . . .
109
Dustin Hellberg
7
Transdisciplinary Approaches to Understand and Facilitate
Transformations Towards Sustainability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
127
Ortwin Renn
8
Models and Integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
145
Henrik Thorén
9
Unlaws: The Missing “Dark Matter” in the Philosophy
of Science? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
161
Rory Allen
10
Life—Stabilization of the Unstable Through Controlling
Inﬂuence of Quantum Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
181
Thomas Görnitz
xiii

11
The Sustainable Humanist Concept in Art and Science
Synergies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
207
Silvia Nuere, Laura de Miguel Álvarez, Adela Acitores Suz,
and Raúl Díaz-Obregón Cruzado
12
From Being One to Being Many. Understanding the Diversity
of Bio-Life: Human, Nonhuman, and Liminal Beings
in Bio Art and Body Art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
235
Monika Michałowska and Karolina Żyniewicz
13
Composite Bodies in Times of Revolt. On Socio-Material
Assemblies in Social Uprisings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
257
Pedro E. Moscoso-Flores and Antonia Viu
14
Life, Complexity, Communication: Integrating Social Systems
Theory and Consciousness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
281
Tilia Stingl de Vasconcelos Guedes
15
Instrumentality Versus Awareness: Rethinking the Reverse Side
of Artiﬁcial Intelligence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
301
Žilvinas Svigaris
16
The Question of Transdisciplinarity Between Modern Science
and Critical Thought . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
321
Christopher Ryan Maboloc
17
Adaptive Networks at the Crossroad of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
and Formal, Biological, Medical, and Social Sciences . . . . . . . . . . .
335
Jan Treur
18
Are We Ready for “Them” Now? The Relationship Between
Human and Humanoid Robots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
377
Xiao Dou and Chih-Fu Wu
19
Integrating Computer Simulation and Social Theory
for the Planning and Managing Complex Problems . . . . . . . . . . . .
395
Leonardo G. Rodríguez Zoya
20
Rethinking Managerial Control in the Contemporary Context . . . .
419
Jean-Yves Le Corre and Thierry Burger-Helmchen
21
Innovation and Altruism: A New Paradigm Deﬁning
the Survival of Corporations? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
439
Sophie Bollinger and Marion Neukam
xiv
Contents

22
Integrated Science 2050: Science Without Borders . . . . . . . . . . . . .
461
Amene Saghazadeh, Adela Acitores Suz, Antonia Viu, Chih-Fu Wu,
Christopher Ryan Maboloc, Dustin Hellberg, Ewa Rzechowska,
Henrik Thorén, Henry H. Bauer, Jan Kłos, Jan Treur,
Jean-Yves LeCorre, Karolina Żyniewicz, Laura de Miguel Álvarez,
Leonardo G. Rodríguez Zoya, Marion Neukam,
Monika Michałowska, Ortwin Renn, Rory Allen,
Pedro E. Moscoso-Flores, Raúl Díaz-Obregón Cruzado, Silvia Nuere,
Sophie Bollinger, Thierry Burger-Helmchen, Thomas Görnitz,
Tilia Stingl de Vasconcelos Guedes, Xiao Dou, Žilvinas Svigaris,
and Nima Rezaei
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
479
Contents
xv

Abbreviations
ADP
Adenosine diphosphate
AI
Artiﬁcial intelligence
AMP
Adenosine monophosphate
ANT
Actor Network Theory
AOGCMs
Atmosphere‐ocean general circulation models
AQIs
Bits of absolute quantum information
ASD
Autism spectrum disorder
BBB
Blood‐brain barrier
BDNF
Brain‐derived neurotrophic factor
COVID‐19
Coronavirus disease 2019
CSP
Corporate social performance
CSR
Corporate social responsibility
DICE
Dynamic Integrated Climate Economy model
EPR
Einstein‐Podolsky‐Rosen
GBD
Global burden of diseases
HPA
Hypothalamic‐pituitary‐adrenal
HRI
Human–robot interaction
IASP
International Association of Science Parks and Areas of Innovation
ICT
Information and communication technology
IMMERS
Immunoemotional regulatory system
IMR
Indigenous Management Research
JAR
The Journal of Artistic Research
LHC
Large Hadron Collider
LIGO
Laser Interferometer Gravitational‐Wave Observatory
MSF
Médecins sans frontières
NCDs
Noncommunicable diseases
NGOs
Nongovernmental organizations
NHST
Null hypothesis signiﬁcance testing
NPIs
Non‐pharmaceutical interventions
OECD
The organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
RBA
Research based on the arts
RCAP
Rejection, contestation, adaptation, and anticipation
SOA
Sociology of Organized Action
SRL
Societal readiness level
xvii

SSE
Social and solidarity economy
SSI
Socio‐Scientiﬁc‐Issues
STEAM
Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Mathematics
STP
Science and Technology Parks
STS
Science-Technology-Society
STSE
Science‐Technology‐Society‐Environment
TRL
Technology readiness level
UN
United Nations
WFP
World Food Pogramme
WHO
World Health Organization
WWI
World War I
WWII
World War II
xviii
Abbreviations

1
Introduction on Integrated Science:
Science Without Borders
Nima Rezaei and Amene Saghazadeh
“We cannot solve our problems with the same thinking we used
when we created them”.
Albert Einstein
Summary
We argue that complexity is the nature of problems. The ﬁrst section of the
chapter moves from a simple beginning, complex problems, to an end that both
complex problems and complex problem-solving give birth to a depressed
thinking society. The next section addresses what science is, what non-science
(parascience and pseudoscience) is, what bad science is, what good science is,
and what science education is for. It is followed by tracing the demarcation of
science from non-science in philosophy, sociology, and history. Then, we see
global borders classiﬁed as important and more important borders by the
selective function of thinking. Also, we see how globalization has inﬂuenced
global borders to be classiﬁed as borders to connect and borders to divide. The
N. Rezaei (&)  A. Saghazadeh
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Tehran, Iran
e-mail: rezaei_nima@tums.ac.ir
N. Rezaei  A. Saghazadeh
Research Center for Immunodeﬁciencies, Children’s Medical Center, Tehran University
of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran
N. Rezaei
Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran
N. Rezaei
Children’s Medical Center Hospital, Dr. Qarib St., Keshavarz Blvd, 14194 Tehran, Iran
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
N. Rezaei (ed.), Integrated Science, Integrated Science 1,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65273-9_1
1

section on global issues recognizes ten burning questions and challenges on the
imperfection of the world that, if failed to be treated effectively, would result in
risks to humanity nobody wants to see. It would prepare us not to be surprised by
the fact that health issues that are difﬁcult to treat are those that are also difﬁcult
to deﬁne because they cross the borders between nations (infectious pandemics),
body systems (multisystem diseases), tissues (metastatic diseases), in the mind
and between the mind and environment (mental disorders), and even the borders
between brain and body (immunoemotional disorders). We see science
education when it is at cultural borders dealing with the duality of learning
science or living everyday life, and also when crossing borders yielding both
science and life. The importance of schools and universities without borders is
noted. Then, we understand how science and technology control each other
while both trying to come into a given society. Finally, we see the procedure and
practice of integrated science and conclude that a cross between disciplines and a
connection between scientists is a necessity for building metaknowledge and
proposing metaperspectives.
Integrated science
[Adapted with permission from the Association of Science and Art (ASA),
USERN; Made by Sepideh Sargoli, Shaghayegh Khodabakhshian, and Mahsa
Yousefpour].
The code of this chapter is 01000011 01110100 01101111 01101110
01101110 01101110 01100011 01101001 01100101 01101111.
2
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

1
Introduction
The changing world has placed the man to new complex problems, watching for
him at the garden between the era of complex national problems and complex
globalized problems. The garden looks beautiful. However, on the one hand,
focusing on the era of complex national problems might be trouble given the
awareness about globalized problems has already happened. On the other hand,
wandering alone in the garden cannot raise awareness of information required to
approach the complex globalized problems. So, what is the solution, then? The man
needs to move beyond boundaries, a movement that would help him to achieve
sustainable development and improve mental health and decision making.
1.1
Problems and Complexity
1.1.1
Problems: Well-Defined (Simple), Ill-Defined (Complex),
and Non-Defined (Undecidable)
Broadly, decidable problems are of two types: well-deﬁned and ill-deﬁned.
Well-deﬁned or simple problems can be solved by limited resources of time and
space. Ill-deﬁned or complex problems require a considerable amount of time and
space to be solved. There is another type of problem that is thought to require
unlimited sources to be solved. For example, many real-world problems remained
undecidable since they have been in the world. So, they pose a problem above the
complex level. If a problem lacks deﬁnition, then that would remain undecidable,
and it is for this that deﬁning a problem may be as difﬁcult as solving it.
1.1.2
Complexity Relates to the Value of Interconnections
the Observer Can Define
Complexity is said to be the nature of problems. In this view, each problem relates
to symptoms, and that which is seen is only a symptom of a deeper underlying
problem. Moreover, each problem has connections with other problems, and these
interconnections make problems complex. We agree that the problems are inter-
connected, as some authors have thought, but we have two reasons to argue that
complexity is inherent. First, if we suppose interconnections as the only law gov-
erning complexity, then the complexity would not be inherent given that inter-
connections an eye can draw are different from those the other eye can detect. As
Maulana’s Poet, Elephant in the Dark (Fig. 1), says, “Each of us touches one place
and understands the whole in that way.” Second, we believe that the complexity is
governed by laws other than interconnection, for example, the external conditions
of life; as the gap between different conditions of life worldwide has become
gradually expanded, so as the real-world problems get more and more complex.
“Some Hindus have an elephant to show.
No one here has ever seen an elephant.
They bring it at night to a dark room.
1
Introduction on Integrated Science: Science Without Borders
3

One by one, we go in the dark and come out.
saying how we experience the animal.
One of us happens to touch the trunk.
“A water-pipe kind of creature.”
Another, the ear. “A very strong, always moving.
back and forth, fan-animal.”
Another, the leg. “I ﬁnd it still,
like a column on a temple.”
Another touches the curved back.
“A leathery throne.”
Another, the cleverest, feels the tusk.
“A rounded sword made of porcelain.”
He’s proud of his description.
Each of us touches one place.
and understands the whole in that way.
The palm and the ﬁngers feeling in the dark are.
how the senses explore the reality of the elephant?
If each of us held a candle there,
and if we went in together,
we could see it.”
Translated by Coleman Barks.
Fig. 1 Elephant in the dark:
poetry by Jalal al-Din Rumi,
Maulana. The image shows
townspeople, who have never
seen an elephant, examine its
appearance in the dark
4
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

(Adapted from https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Jalal_al-Din_Rumi,_
Maulana_-_Townspeople,_Who_have_Never_Seen_an_Elephant,_Examine_its_
Appearance_in_the_Dark_-_Walters_W626117B_-_Full_Page.jpg).
1.2
Complex Problem-Solving
Therefore, the degree of the complexity of a problem corresponds to the number of
variables and the degree of the connectivity between variables in the system. The
solving of a complex problem requires (i) simpliﬁcation, by a reduction of all
variables to essential; (ii) modeling interconnections, to understand current con-
nections between all variables; (iii) time management, the consideration of system
dynamics and that the system will change over time (not stand for the solution and
decision of the problem solver); (iv) transparency, by supplying all the required
information and for the identiﬁcation of the system; and v, priority deﬁnition, to
choose the goal(s) of high priority (Fig. 2) [1].
The system and the individual(s) are the main parties involved in a complex
problem-solving situation (Fig. 3). Therefore, personal (processing capacity,
motivational parameters, emotion regulation capacities, system knowledge, control
knowledge, and strategic knowledge), situational (transparency, training, and
deadline), and system (the type of feedback, knowledge acquisition, and knowledge
implementation) aspects play a role in solving the problem.
Fig. 2 What does a complex situation demands from the problem solver? (Prepared with data
from [1])
1
Introduction on Integrated Science: Science Without Borders
5

1.3
The Best Solutions for the Complex Problems Give Birth
to the New Complex Problems
1.3.1
Technology, Computation, and Generational Conflict
With increasing complexity, the weight of uncertainty the people’s mind witnessed
about the world and life became heavier. It was heavy to the extent that motived the
man to increase exponentially investment in technology, computer, and machine
interfaces to facilitate effective communication and teamwork, transfer knowledge
dynamically, and promote systematic knowledge production. In this way, he could
(or at least felt it!) come nearer and nearer to certainty and know as much as
possible. The man could succeed, and looking at today’s world, that computation is
ubiquitous is a full proof of his success.
The ubiquitous technology is so pervasive that it is accepted as a fundamental
principle in our homes. Since the twentieth century, the six distinct generations of
the human species have been born, and conﬂict of interest is as much as two of
different generations might no longer live together. These generations have not
originated by themselves, but it is possible to attribute their origin to the difference
(in their skills and desire) to implement technology and computation methods in
everyday life. In this way, the increasing ubiquity of computation globally, in turn,
corresponds to the complex problem of the separation of the two generations.
Fig. 3 Two main approaches to complex problems: experimental and correlational (Prepared
with data from [1])
6
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

1.3.2
Specialization and Isolation in Science
Early cultures that focused on the human living on his home, the Earth’s surface,
evolved in the science we today see, which is highly specialized in terms of the
context and scale. The evolution of such a highly specialized academic study aims
at having a deeper and deeper view of the root problems. As the number and
complexity of problems we face in daily life have grown, so has the extent to which
we feel uncertainties in the science. Given this and the assumption that the more the
science becomes specialized, the greater the scale of vision, interest in the new
branches and disciplines of science would continue to increase.
Specialization is originated from complexity. The specialized working could
improve labor efﬁciency and labor productivity and help saving time, so [2]. It was
by means of new technologies that we today can see photos from 1019 to 1028 in
the scale of nature. However, a deeper scale is threatened with one-sidedness and
should not be mistaken by an extended view of point. Other common side effects of
overspecialization include monopoly, monotony, and isolation.
1.4
Complex Problem-Solving Give Birth to a Blue Thinking
Society
People who are depressed describe the sad mood, anhedonia, irritability, anxiety,
changes in sleep patterns and appetite, and less energy and interest in their daily
function. The rates of depression have increased and still are on the rise. Both older
adults and individuals with low-income are at about a two-fold increased risk of
depression than younger adults and high-income individuals [3, 4].
Recent research put forward a hypothesis of the origin of depression that it
should not be considered a disease, but depression is an adaptive state being
evolved when complex problem processing [5]. It is simple to be on this view;
complex problems are the action that forces the individual to react, and this reaction
is to sit ruminating on the nature and processing of complex problems. For this, the
individual had to ban himself/herself from the environment and any activities to
experience the pleasure that is anhedonia and commonly seen with depression.
Real-world problem solving is a process of creative thinking which comes with
the solution of the actual problem, but its bigger achievement is to promote the
formulation of other questions that are more profound and more important in the
real-world [6]. There is no conclusive evidence of how much light ruminating
thoughts might throw on the real-world problems.
The present chapter aims to brieﬂy introduce science, the problems of demar-
cation in science, global borders, global issues, complex health problems, science
education, and science and technology, and integrated science as a solution to the
problem.
1
Introduction on Integrated Science: Science Without Borders
7

2
Science
2.1
What is Science?
Applications of the word “science” are not the same in different languages [7]. In
English, the word “science” is applied to activities concerned with natural sciences
and similar ﬁelds of research. Political economy and sociology, but not literature
and history, fall under this deﬁnition of science. In German, the word “Wis-
senschaft,” which means science, is deﬁned as the “systematic pursuit of knowl-
edge, learning, and scholarship.” In this way, the word “science” incorporates all
academic activities moving onto the road of investigating critically and producing
knowledge systematically, and this would include social sciences and humanities as
well.
2.2
What is Non-science?
2.2.1
Pseudoscience
The preﬁx pseudo-means lying, false. The word “science” combines with the preﬁx
“pseudo-” to mark “a collection of beliefs or practices mistakenly regarded as
being based on scientiﬁc method” [8]. In 1796, the historian James Pettit ﬁrst wrote
the term “pseudoscience” when describing the fantastical pseudoscience of
alchemy. Since then, pseudoscience is characterized based on activities that are
non-scientiﬁc and overvalued as a basis for scientiﬁc purposes.
2.2.2
Parascience or Alternative Science
However, there are non-scientiﬁc activities that are not false. Such, for example,
contribute to the production of systematic knowledge related to metaphysics and
religion. Parascience is the recently developed word to use for non-scientiﬁc
activities which are not pseudoscientiﬁc. It became known as “the ﬁeld of study
concerned with phenomena assumed to be beyond the scope of scientiﬁc inquiry, or
for which no scientiﬁc explanation exists” [9].
2.3
What is Good Science, and What is Bad Science?
Transparency is what distinguishes good science from bad science. Science needs
to be committed to taking perfect transparency based on data, beyond results, and
publication bias. On the ground of bad science, the haziness of being clear about an
association versus causation and the misuse of non-signiﬁcant results makes
recurring errors in science frequently [10].
8
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

2.4
What is Science for?
It is a question of philosophy with different answers for each of the general pop-
ulation and scientists, depending on the experiences they have with science in the
general and selected scientiﬁc sense. Nevertheless, both scientists and other people
behave with science as a process of human activity aimed to “give correct answers
to questions that we feel have correct answers” [10], gather “knowledge and
answering questions about the world and how it works” [10], or “ﬁnd satisfactory
explanations of whatever strikes us as being in need of explanation” [11]. This
process is featured by collaboration, clarity and precision, open-mindedness,
impartiality, and reproducibility [10]. It uses multiple methods to discuss topics in
science, plan and implement investigations, and analyze and publish ﬁndings [12].
2.5
What is Science Education for?
Science education that works with the larger system of education is essential for
integrating science into society. As Maddock states in [13], “science and science
education are cultural enterprises which form a part of the wider cultural matrix of
society and that educational considerations concerning science must be made in the
light of this wider perspective.” In this sense, what a culture we live in determines
which science education needs to be built to connect science to society, including
major and minor cultural groups [14]. This makes nations to develop their own
science education standards in agreement with their culture and subcultures to
satisfy their goals. For example, standards for science education in schools in the
United States (Table 1) aim to provide a literate society and promote achievement,
understanding, learning, and science literacy for all students (equity) while con-
stantly moving on to improve the science education system [15].
3
Demarcation of Science from Non-science
It exists as the result of joined essentialists and constructive understandings of
science culture and its demarcation in social sciences [16]. The essentialist per-
spective is talking about science that to achieve all it wants, i.e., reliable and valid
measures for diagnoses and treatments of the real-world problems, it would require
features that are as “unique, necessary, and invariant” as the individual. The
constructive perspective sees demarcation as a result of the fact that the growth of
knowledge in science is context-dependent and that accomplishments expressed as
the pragmatic function of each context are clustered by attributes that might be
represented as ambiguous to the other contexts (Fig. 4). The origins of the de-
marcation of science from non-science occur in philosophy, sociology, and history.
1
Introduction on Integrated Science: Science Without Borders
9

3.1
Philosophy
It is easy to accumulate conﬁrmatory evidence, but how can change the future when
all related statements come from the past. This strategy, i.e., verifying statements, in
turn, gives birth to a new problem, the so-called problem of induction that comes
along with the generalization process of predicting future behavior based on past
and present observations.
Karl Popper thought that science should offer the most valid and reliable
knowledge if it is presumed that science is superior to other knowledge-producing
cultures. Knowledge is different from absolute claims and belief and certainty;
reliable knowledge is falsiﬁable and uncertain. And what makes science advance is
the falsiﬁability of statements that can be invoked by critical thinking, refuting
theories, and proposing conjectures. In this manner, falsiﬁcation is a good solution
to avoid cumulative repartition effects, and instead, can help identify errors and
serve as an error-eliminating system. For falsiﬁcation to operate, it would require
scientiﬁc, empirical evidence, pushing Karl Popper to deﬁne the problem of de-
marcation of science from non-science [16].
Table 1 National Science Education Standards (NSES) developed by the National Research
Council in the United States [15]
Principle
Goal
The principle of equity
All students regardless of gender, cultural or ethnic background,
physical or learning disabilities, aspirations, or interest and
motivation in science should have the opportunity to attain higher
levels of scientiﬁc literacy than they do currently
The principle of
achievement
All students will learn all science in the content standards
The principle of
understanding
All students will develop science knowledge as deﬁned in the
content standards and an understanding of science that enables them
to use their knowledge as it relates to scientiﬁc, personal, social,
and historical perspectives
The principle of
learning
Learning science is an active process
The principle of “less is
more”
For all students to understand more science, less emphasis must be
given to some science content and more resources, such as time,
personnel, and materials must be devoted to science education
The principle of science
literacy
School science must reﬂect the intellectual tradition that
characterizes the practice of contemporary science
The principle of
education reform
Improving science education is part of systematic education reform
10
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

3.2
Sociology
Popper’s essentialist perspective is seen in Merton’s thought of science when laying
out “the extension of certiﬁed knowledge,” that is, “empirically conﬁrmed and
logically consistent statements of regularities (which are, in effect, predictions)” as
the institutional goal of science. A frame structuring of this institutional goal of
science—which is what demarcates science from non-science in Merton’s view
[17], as falsiﬁability for Popper—critically involves technical (methodological) and
social (moral) norms. While technical norms are based on empirical evidence,
social norms are “held to be binding on the man of science.” Such a structure
entertains the man who is a scientist, contributing to the development of empirical
evidence, and simultaneously is a social being, reacting to social norm violations.
The four main norms as proposed by Merton are as follows; communicating the
work to other contributors to science (communism), the equal allocations of
resources to all contributors to science (universalism), not taking the actions out of
self-interests that might affect the institutional goal of science (disinterestedness),
and critically assessing the evidence and developing arguments with claims (or-
ganized skepticism). In this way, knowledge-producing activities are scientiﬁc if
and only if they are housed in this frame; otherwise, they are not-scientiﬁc practices,
e.g., politics [16].
3.3
History
Thomas Kuhn was the other pioneer who theorized demarcation, neither with fal-
siﬁability nor with social norms, but by deﬁning two puzzle problems and
proposing paradigmatic consensus as a solution to these problems [16]. One puzzle
appeared when he explored the arguments social and behavioral scientists make and
compared them with those of physicists, leading him to identify the importance of
agreement on ﬁrst principles endorsed by physicists, not by social and behavioral
scientists. A quest through history posed to Kuhn the other puzzle that challenges us
to handle the rejection of old facts and beliefs and good explanations accepted so far
in the science of nature, and can we call practices for rejecting these claims as
scientiﬁc activities. Accordingly, Kuhn put forward a paradigmatic consensus
considering historical trajectories associated with revolutionary changes in science
content and their inﬂuence on evaluating normal science. First principles and
models simplifying assumptions for working in the context are the key components
of a paradigm that seeks to deﬁne a problem and optimize solutions. The success of
such a paradigm varies over trajectories, and this makes mature science being
demarked from immature science and non-science.
1
Introduction on Integrated Science: Science Without Borders
11

4
Global Borders
Different dictionaries agree that the adjective “global” means “relating to or
involving the whole world.” A “border” is a “line,” “strip,” “margin,” “outer part,”
“edge,” or “boundary” that “divides one country from another,” “goes around or
along the edge of something, often as decoration,” or separates “two countries,
administrative divisions, or other areas” [18–20].
4.1
On the Selective Function of Thinking: Important
Borders Versus More Than Important Borders and Visible
Versus Non-Visible Borders
World-deﬁning borders are borders that deﬁne the edge of a nation-state but also
critically function to determine the geopolitical relationships of the given
nation-state with its neighbors. Among which are the Berlin Wall, the border
between the United States and Mexico, the “Great Wall of Europe,” the “Wall
around the West,” and the border between Israel and Palestine [21]. These are two
or more parties who think of such borders as borders and admit the fundamental
characteristics (location and form) of these borders [22]. Reaching a high level of
consensus would permit the world-deﬁning borders to occupy a geopolitical role
that is important or more than important. The important borders correspond to the
determination of divisions which are of local importance, while those borders which
are more important correspond to the (over)determination of divisions which are of
global importance. Moreover, there are borders on which some work, live, and play,
while others cannot see them. Such borders are accumulated by the selective
thoughts of them [22].
There are difﬁculties in the “world-deﬁning” character of borders, become
correlated with `world-deﬁning’ divisions resulting in the Cold War inertia from
cultural geopolitics that contrast the goals of globalization for which the world must
certainly be thought of as a whole place so that peace is purely kept in various parts
of the world.
4.2
On the Effect of Globalization: Contemporary Borders
(Borders to Connect) Versus Traditional Borders (Borders
to Divide)
On the theory, it should be kept in mind that globalization was to afford us a single
worth world culture to warrant a borderless world where networks, not divisions,
are everywhere, allowing the international ﬂow and mobility of cultures, students,
patients, health care workers, suppliers, employees, consumers, goods, supplies,
and ﬁnances to any target environment and to where they are needed. However, it
was found difﬁcult to take place when in the journey of raising awareness of the
12
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

degree of the connectivity between all, including the borders itself, in the world, the
man found joy in security and was guided to appreciate visible borders and, more
frequently, think of innumerable non-visible borders, so breaking through tradi-
tional divisions [21, 22]. Inevitably, an intermediate form of globalization program
must have existed, enabling us to at least reorder the traditional borders, adding a
new sort of borders. It seems that globalization, which aimed to solve global issues,
has multiplied global borders to become a new complex problem. Indeed, various
divisions of borders have turned into a world of borders.
5
Global Issues
There is no formal consensus on what is a global issue. There are different deﬁ-
nitions for the word “issue” as follows;
“a subject or problem that people are thinking and talking about” or “most
important in what is being discussed” in the Cambridge dictionary [23];
“a vital or unsettled matter,” “a matter that is in dispute between two or more
parties,” or “the point at which an unsettled matter is ready for a decision” in
Meriam-Webster dictionary [24]; and.
“an important topic or problem for debate or discussion” in the Oxford dic-
tionary [25].
It seems the third deﬁnition considers three main aspects of an issue, i.e., it is a
problem (or a matter), it is important (even vital), and it is unresolved (and therefore
under discussion or debate). In this way, a global issue can be deﬁned as an
important unresolved problem of the entire world. The literature contains various
short and long lists of global issues developed by different disciplines and orga-
nizations, of which some are available in [26]. For example, global catastrophic
risks include climate change, artiﬁcial general intelligence, biotechnology risk,
ecological collapse, molecular nanotechnology, global pandemics, overpopulation,
and nuclear holocaust. Also, the World Economic Forum [27] recognizes ten
burning questions and challenges on the imperfection of the world that, if failed to
be treated effectively, would result in risks to humanity nobody wants to see. The
recognized challenges would demand from the public and private organizations the
perfect power of global cooperation and action. These questions and potential risks
are as follows;
1. Question: “Which regions waste the most food?” and risk: “Malnutrition,
hunger, and even conﬂict;”
2. Question: “Why should growth be inclusive?” and risk: “Income inequality and
economic and social ills;”
3. Question: “What will the world of work look like?” and risk: “Hundreds of
millions of unemployed people around the world;”
4. Question: “Climate change: can we turn words into action?” and risk:
“Catastrophic climate change;”
1
Introduction on Integrated Science: Science Without Borders
13

5. Question: “What is the future of global ﬁnance?” and risk: “signiﬁcant drop in
levels of public trust and conﬁdence in ﬁnancial institutions;”
6. Question: “What is the future of the internet?” and risk: “not fulﬁlling the goal
of connecting all the world’s inhabitants to affordable internet;”
7. Question: “Will the future be gender equal?” and risk: “not achieving the
gender parity;”
8. Question: “What is the deal with global trade and investment?” and risk
“growing unease over globalization;”
9. Question: “Long-term investing: how can we plug the gap?” and risk “lack of
function in a difﬁcult ﬁnancial climate;” and
10. Question: “How can we make healthcare ﬁt for the future?” and risk “dealing
with pandemics to the rise of noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) to the pro-
hibitive costs of care, particularly in developing countries.”
6
Complex Health Pathologies Cross Borders
Progress in every key aspect of human health and sciences is affected by national
and intellectual borders [28]. However, health issues that are difﬁcult to treat are
those that are also difﬁcult to deﬁne because they cross the borders between nations
(infectious pandemics), body systems (multisystem diseases), tissues (metastatic
diseases), in the mind and between the mind and environment (mental disorders),
and even the borders between brain and body (immunoemotional disorders).
6.1
Emerging Infections
The ongoing battle of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is such a complex
problem. Approaching one year of the outbreak, there is no deﬁnite treatment and
prevention for the disease. Yet, the literature is amazingly welcomed to the
COVID-19; as of writing this, the number of published papers goes beyond one
million as much as the number of deaths associated with the condition. Different
factors—except its pathogenesis of not fully understood—come to play, among
which the publication of low-quality research papers—which cast doubt of ﬁndings
from high-quality papers and therefore lead the decision-making process deviating
from what it could be—and conducting golden time-consuming clinical research
that is far apart from what has already been recommended by fundamental research,
rather properly translating fundamental research into clinical research, are most
important [29, 30]. Instead, such a condition calls for public data sharing to shed
effective light on hitherto obscure aspects of COVID-19 [31].
An example of old is tuberculosis. The word “tuberculosis” goes back to 1834.
Much research is devoted to the ﬁghting against tuberculosis. Nevertheless, the
disease remained one of the top ten causes of death worldwide, with 1.5 million
victims worldwide in 2018. The World Health Organization (WHO) says that
14
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

developing countries bear to greater than 95% of new and death cases of tuber-
culosis. Such difference reveals that the mission of international groups created to
enhance health among people with tuberculosis is not working.
6.2
Multisystem Diseases
They are of unknown origin associated with a spectrum of manifestations of dif-
ferent body systems and response to therapy. The role of the immune system, as
well as genetic correlates, is widely appreciated in mediating multisystem diseases,
which mostly consist of immune deﬁciency disorders, and autoimmune diseases,
and infections. For example, congenital and genetic defects affecting the immune
system referred to as primary immunodeﬁciency disorders, can present with neu-
rological and gastrointestinal symptoms and increase vulnerability to infections,
autoimmune disorders, and malignancies [32]. Similarly, both COVID-19 and
tuberculosis, which earlier mentioned as examples, can involve multiple systems,
making patients difﬁcult to treat.
6.3
Metastatic Diseases
According to the Cancer Atlas [33], more than 18 million new cases of cancer
happened in 2018. It is projected to grow to about 30 million in 2040, given the
aging and growth of the population. Cancer has been ranked in ﬁrst or second place
in more than 130 countries in the ranking that evaluated premature mortality events
in 2016 [33].
Metastasis, which results from cancer cells trying to break away from the pri-
mary tumor, travel through intravasation, i.e., penetration into the circulatory and
lymphatic systems, and then extravasation, i.e., escaping from the circulatory
system, and proliferation into other organs [34]. In this way, the primary tumor can
invade surrounding tissues and even spread to distant organs, and we can explain
90% of deaths from cancer [35]. The origin of metastasis remains unknown, though
it is said that fusionicity hastens metastasis [34]. By the process of fusionicity, cells
can fuse and share their genetic material. This process essentially takes place to
make development and fertilization possible. However, the ability of tumoral cells
to fuse each other and also normal somatic cells would enable the primary tumor to
modify and act on surrounding and distant healthy cells [34].
6.4
Mental Disorders
Mental illnesses, including mental and substance use disorders, account for about
one-third of the global disability [36]. The Institute for Health Metrics and Eval-
uation states that a mental health disorder or substance use disorder is present in
nearly one billion people worldwide. The most common mental disorders are
1
Introduction on Integrated Science: Science Without Borders
15

anxiety disorders and depression, with a prevalence of 3.8 and 3.4% in the global
population [37], which along with schizophrenia, dysthymia, and bipolar disorder,
are among the top 20 causes of the global burden of diseases (GBD). The reports
say that suicide is the cause of death for about 1.5% of all deaths and that a mental
or a substance use disorder is present in about 90% of cases died from suicide [37].
Mental issues are more likely to affect old age, though they correlate with a con-
siderable burden in children and adolescents [38]. Therefore, mental disorders are
recognized as problems of global concern that matter both the youth and old age.
Patients with mental illnesses are difﬁcult patients. Many people present with
features that we can put into more than one disorder. Such a problem lies on the
same ground where both genetic and environmental factors and both internalizing
and externalizing dimensions promise to compose a spectrum of psychopatholo-
gies. In this manner, individual mental disorders co-occur with each other; the
internalizing-externalizing is the model of psychopathology that explains mental
disorders as borderless, justiﬁes their co-occurrence in multiple combinations, and
proposes a meta-structure to, along with the inclusion of the currently identiﬁed
disorders, deﬁne new disorders based on the integration of neurogenomic data into
psychiatry [39].
Another reason to treat mental disorders as complex problems is the high
prevalence of these disorders in the graduate population, as estimated to be about
40% for moderate to severe depression and anxiety separately [40]. Interestingly,
the study investigated the signiﬁcant effect of perceived quality of work-life balance
and relationships with their mentor. Between 47 and 56% of the graduate popu-
lation who suffered from anxiety and depression expressed their disagreement with
the statements, including “they have a good work-life balance,” “their PI or advisor
provides “real” mentorship,” “their PI or advisor provides “real” mentorship,”
“their PI/advisor positively impacts their emotional or mental well-being,” “their
PI/advisor is an asset to their career,” “they feel valued by their mentor.” It looks
like a crisis coming with the graduation, asking us if the education, in its current
state, is deteriorating the mental health of graduate students who are about to be the
next generation of faculty (so what is it for?). These ﬁndings pinpoint the problem
of borders between the trainer’s mind and trainee’s mind and, therefore, scientiﬁc
training, mental health, and well-being.
Mental problems can even get worse with any action in the conditions of life.
For example, during the pandemic of COVID-19, the whole society, especially
health care workers in the frontline, has been under great pressure, and we see that
the symptoms of depression, anxiety, insomnia, and distress have highly increased
to about 50, 45, 34, and 71% [41]. Moreover, the symptoms of mental illnesses are
strong enough to long-term resist and affect the different domains of functioning in
family and community. These pieces of evidence directly bear the question, why
mental illnesses that know no borders both at the global and individual level are
mostly treated unimodally, and also explain the fact that such unimodal approaches
offer limited efﬁcacy in practice. We cannot hope to see a mentally improved
humanity in the future unless knowledge, policy, and practice are integrated, and
this integration would apply to all medical, academic, and societal settings [42].
16
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

6.5
Immunoemotional Disorders
The brain and body are intertwined regardless of age, sex, race, ethnicity, nation,
and religion and are continually being absorbed in and affected by each other. There
have ever been interesting which pathways are responsible for and how they handle
this communication between two very different characters. The research proposes
an immunoemotional regulatory system (IMMERS) where the blood–brain barrier
(BBB), hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis, microbiota, and neuronal cir-
cuits serve as intermediates between the two main compartments, i.e., emotions and
immunity [43]. A little reﬂection reveals why mental illnesses occur to people with
immune-mediated conditions, e.g., allergic rhinitis and asthma, autoimmune dis-
eases, cardiometabolic diseases, old age, cancer, infections, neuroimmune diseases,
and following vaccination [44]. Also, this system would explain why immune
abnormalities occur to people with mental illnesses, making them prone to a variety
of medical conditions [45]. It implies the power of the brain and body to cross their
borders and constitutes an obligation for us to consider and provide solutions to
prevent mental issues when treating patients with physical diseases and vice versa.
7
Health Without Borders
History reveals to us once people have chosen to cross borders, they could develop
products and takes actions superior to the quality they usually obtain when keeping
borders.
7.1
Doctors Without Borders: Doctors of the World
In 1971, Doctors Without Borders, also known as Médecins sans rontiers
(MSF) (URL: https://www.msf.org/), was established as a humanitarian medical
non-governmental organization to provide assistance for caring emergencies to
people who have been the “victim of conﬂict, natural disasters, epidemics, or
healthcare exclusion.” Such cross-border collaboration could directly help improve
human health and well-being and was the winner of the 1999 Nobel Peace Prize for
pioneering humanitarian work in the world. Also is the United Nations (UN) World
Food Pogramme (WFP) (URL: https://www.wfp.org/), which is funded in 1961 and
woks in over 80 countries. The WFP could provide food assistance to about one
hundred million people worldwide. It was recently awarded the 2020 Nobel Prize in
Peace for its efforts to ﬁght hunger. The development of telemedicine could pave
the way for the practice of health promotion in conﬂict zones [46].
1
Introduction on Integrated Science: Science Without Borders
17

7.2
Patients Without Borders: Medical Tourism
The term “medical tourism” is referred to as “the practice of patients exercising
their personal reproductive choices in other less restrictive states” [47, 48].
According to the data from Patients Beyond Borders (URL: https://www.
patientsbeyondborders.com/media), the top countries designated for medical tour-
ism are Costa Rica, India, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Singapore, South Korea,
Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, and United States. The top specialties for patients
seeking medical care abroad are cosmetic surgery, dentistry, cardiovascular,
orthopedics, cancer, reproductive, weight loss, scans, tests, health screenings, and
second opinions. Medical tourism is a fast-growing market globally projected to
increase at a rate of 15–25%. Access to medical procedures and cost discrepancies
are the main reasons patients travel for medical care [48]. Although previously,
medical travelers were mostly of the upper social classes of the people, looking at
current trends, both middle and upper social classes hold a great deal of medical
tourism [49]. Trends that have eased medical tourism include improved quality of
care in developing countries, internet communication and signaling, privatization of
health care sectors abroad, and globalization of related industries in health care [48].
8
Science Education at and Across Borders
8.1
At Cultural Borders: Learning “Science for All” or Living
“Everyday”?
Some science teachers strictly adhere to the habit of scientism, that science is
“non-humanistic, objective, purely rational and empirical, universal, impersonal,
socially sterile, and unencumbered by the vulgarity of human bias, dogma, judg-
ments, or cultural values” [50]. This teachers’ habit would often give the students
nothing more than the advantage of the hidden habit of absorbing knowledge and
values [50]. At least the genesis of the character to identify the subjective language
in the school classroom, which is a response under the act of social environment, is
not expected [50]. Therefore, the equity base of science education is undermined
due to weak self-esteem to carry a socioculturally effective dialogue in society.
Instead, an enriched environment is essential for students to learn to implement
cognitive constructivism, i.e., to integrate the recently presented information into
their current knowledge to create personal meaning, and then to communicate their
constructivist ideas within the classroom—an effective classroom demands from
educators and teachers both cognitive and social constructivist methods [51].
Struggle for establishing an agenda to provide access to science learning across
subject areas and on a sustained direction is long-discussed under the slogan of
“science for all.” It is brief, but enough to include desires from diverse people,
particularly science educators and teachers, and satisfy the needs of diverse pro-
jects. However, research, particularly over the last two decades, has shown that
18
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

“science for all,” on itself, is an inadequate idea [52]. Many countries worldwide
have moved towards the reform of national education systems for providing “sci-
ence for all” curricula. However, they meet with variable success rates because
while the reform education programs have presented a conceptually different aspect,
they may ignore the essential characteristics of social constructivism. This igno-
rance would be costly and additive to the effect that multiple cultures (e.g., related
to the home, peers, school, and classroom) students must encounter with have on
the learning science and, therefore, students’ achievement in science.
8.2
Cultural Border Crossing: Learning “Science for All”
and Living “Everyday”
Accordingly, the world of school science is separated from the world of everyday
life by socio-cultural barriers, which can lead students to feel that school science is
going to happen in a foreign land [53]. Such a feeling is common to students living
in both developed and developing countries; however, being of more frequent
occurrence in developing countries. It can induce cognitive conﬂicts for students
when simultaneously negotiating the acquisition of the culture of science and the
culture of everyday life [54]. This negotiation can precede two main very different
processes (i) enculturation, the cross-bordering process of learning the culture of
science and its implementation in everyday life in a harmonious fashion; and
(ii) assimilation, the process of removing or moving everyday life concepts from
their place to put new scientiﬁc ways for conceptualization in their place. More
precisely, when coming back and forth from the school science to everyday life and
exploring the different cultural borders between these two worlds, students can be
categorized into the six groups (Table 2) according to how much they ﬁnd the
culture of the school, science, and everyday life congruent and to which extent they
can make the cultural transition smoothly and achieve understanding science [55].
When crossing cultural borders, it would be an opportunity for students to learn
collaterally [54]. Corresponding in type to the conﬂicting ideas, the degree of
interaction between them, and the degree of conﬂict resolution, collateral learning
occurs in a spectrum between two extremes. At one is the parallel type (compart-
mentalization technique), when neither interaction between conﬂicting ideas exists
nor integrates the school instruction into everyday life. At the other is the secured
type, when there is a conscious interaction between conﬂicting ideas, converging in
a new conception towards one idea; this point, in turn, acting on the other idea.
Besides observation and learning, students experience cultural awareness and
cross-cultural communication when working with groups of different cultures [56].
8.3
Cross-Cultural Unit of School Science Education
It cannot be doubted that it becomes difﬁcult to integrate both Western and First
Nations science systems in teaching when we expect students to preserve their own
1
Introduction on Integrated Science: Science Without Borders
19

traditional culture during the acquisition of Western knowledge, but also develop
their personal meaning to use outside the science classroom [50]. In these cases, the
scholars [57] suggest that science education in the First Nations context, by pro-
viding students with better educational experiences, would tend to be preserved,
and science education in the Western context would thus freely enter the education
program so that students going to view the Western science as “a repository to be
raided for what it can contribute to the achievement of practical ends.” The First
Nations and Western science follow different ends and how much students can
manufacture achievement in science and society depends on how much they can
constitute perception of behavioral control on career intentions [58], cognitive
ﬂexibility, and adaptation to the means, approaches, and strategies each of the First
Nations science and Western science can offer. Practical ends range from economic
growth, environmental responsibility, and cultural survival in the First Nations
context
to
working
on
a
job,
career
preparation,
decision-making
about
science-related issues and personal troubles, and sensemaking in one particular
community or nation in the Western context [57]. Innovative programs can moti-
vate and support students with cross-cultural science education, including Systems
or Programs to Support Under-Represented Groups, Situate the Science Curriculum
in the Context of Pupils’ Lives, Culturally Sensitive Instruction Strategies, Inclu-
sion of Scientiﬁc Contributions made Historically by Non-Western Scholars,
Demystifying Stereotype Images of Science, Science for Language Minority Pupils,
Table 2 Six groups of students according to how much they ﬁnd the culture of the school,
science, and everyday life congruent and to which extent they can make the cultural transition
smoothly and achieve understanding science (Prepared with data from [50, 55])
Cross-cultural
transition
The property of relations between cultures
Level of
understanding
science
The culture of
family and friends
relative to the
culture of the
school
The culture of
family and friends
relative to the
culture of the
science
Potent
scientists
Smooth
Congruent
Congruent
In-depth
I want to
know
students
Adventurous
Congruent
Inconsistent
Modest yet
effective
Other
smart
kids
Manageable
Congruent
Inconsistent
Memorization
I do not
know
students
Hazardous
Inconsistent
Inconsistent
Superﬁcial
Outsiders
Impossible
Discordant
Discordant
None
Inside
outsiders
frustratingly
difﬁcult
Irreconcilable
Potentially
compatible
None
20
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

Indigenous Knowledge and Technologies for Science to Explain, Compare and
Bridge the Worldview of Science and the Worldviews of Pupils, and Explore the
Content and Epistemology of Both Scientiﬁc and Indigenous Knowledge Systems
[54].
8.4
Schools Without Borders: Learning About the World
with the World
We hear from student teachers that students have the greatest interest in learning
lessons that are followed by changes that can be immediately reﬂected in the real
world [59]. In particular, such a reﬂection becomes globally meaningful when
students connect with each other, actively engage in communities of learners, make
relationships with their peers, and jointly work on a project, that if we had no
information and communication technology (ICT), it would not have been possible
to have developed global collaborative learning [59]. Also, the projects involving
real children and real-world issues would give rise to creative and critical thinking
about difﬁcult real-world problems that are otherwise difﬁcult to learn, for example,
wars and natural disasters [59]. In the meantime, there would be ample opportunity
for students to develop teaching skills when sharing the culture of their country with
their peers. Some examples of such projects can be found in [59]. It is worth
mentioning that teachers like their students are ﬁtted to beneﬁt from such global
collaborative learning as co-learners [59].
8.5
Why is International Higher Education Being Important?
With the increasingly globalized world, science education is more important than
ever for children and young people to being trained to act in society effectively. An
internationalized higher education can provide a multi-objective framework for
enhancing international education and exchanges, creating a global system of
cooperation and action, and conducting global research on complex real-world
problems [60]. Comparing students’ performance in different countries is another
opportunity that national educational systems can have using international assess-
ment to improve themselves [61].
From the students’ view, the internationalization of education is also important
for various general and speciﬁc reasons [62]. Doctoral students think that an
internationalized education reﬂecting on all dimensions of formality and informality
(political, economic, social, cultural, and technological) can bear with it the
strengthening
of
social
relations,
the
formation
of
new
interactions/
interdependences, the connection of people to join each other in information dis-
semination platforms, and the understanding of cultural sensitivity and diversity.
Equipped with the latest mission, vision, philosophy, and values of a given disci-
pline, students say that an internationalized education would encourage them to
understand that perspectives, experiences, and knowledge bases are imported into
1
Introduction on Integrated Science: Science Without Borders
21

the system from diverse backgrounds and that education and global practice are
intertwined. Students admire how internationalized education can be useful to
global society, including all, by providing networked information technologies,
information management resources, and organizational services. Finally, students
feel the beneﬁt of internationalized education in order to develop cross-cultural
communication, knowledge network, global partnerships and collaborations, global
markets, and cross-fertilization by the exchange of ideas, practices, benchmarks,
and knowledge [62].
However, the principles of internationalization are far from being perfectly
implemented in some universities, so that international students go with the feeling
of “being (un)welcomed to the host university” [63]. Of utmost importance is to
mentally prepare the host teachers and educators serving with the alliance across
multiple cultures and global education.
9
Science and Technology
9.1
The Control of Science Over Technology
Science in the triad, technology, and society (STS) are good enough and sufﬁcient
to treat each other while apart from each other by boundaries, which mostly occur
to indicate science as distinct from its non-science [16]. Science has control over
technology [16], when, on the one hand, technology fails to act effectively, we see
the science and scientists being demarcated from manufacturing systems and
making a decision in management, leaving technology alone in its failure, and on
the other hand, when technology works perfectly, we see that it is the science being
translated into technology, making its success.
9.2
The Technoscience
The social history of technoscience is not far back in time; many know about or
hear the echoes of the Atoms for Peace program, which was founded in the 1950s
of the twentieth century aimed at providing universal peace by the exchanges of
atomic technoscience between owners, producers, and consumers. It did not take
long that the promised exchanges halted with the agreement concerning the direct
and indirect consequences of atomic energy during the Cold War [64].
9.3
Integration of Science and Technology into Education
As mentioned in the previous section, the learning process is the continuous
acquisition of knowledge, waiting for other cultural processes to happen in different
conditions and relevant cultures, particularly the culture of everyday life. The
22
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

inclusion of technology in education programs would improve the process of
learning in a sensible manner. Beyond improvement, it is, however, necessary for
one, who may or want to act under speciﬁc situations practically, to have con-
structed his or her knowledge by contributions of various knowledge systems,
which can be an aid in deﬁning and solving problems rooted in the given situation
[57]. In the cases of economic growth, for example, it is proposed to integrate
(i) commonsense knowledge, which is “socially situated, context-dependent, and
human-centered;” (ii) Technology knowledge, which is “problem situated,
context-dependent, efﬁciency-centered;” and (iii) Science knowledge, which is
“puzzle situated, context-independent, and rationalistically-centered” into the par-
ent knowledge system. Other frameworks for integrated science and technology are
Science-Technology-Society
(STS),
Science-Technology-Society-Environment
(STSE), Socio-Scientiﬁc-Issues (SSI), and also the integration of STS, STSE, and
SSI [65].
9.4
Technological Zones: Defining Borders or Crossing
Borders?
The forms of scientiﬁc practices are often ranked as speciﬁc and local, and mea-
surements of this kind could not be recognized by other researchers solving similar
problems, but on different aspects or in different conditions, unless measurement
standards, calibration techniques, statistical methods, and common software and
instruments, had been approved. Technical zones are developed for this purpose.
A technological zone is deﬁned “as a space within which differences between
technical practices, procedures or forms have been reduced, or common standards
have been established” [66]. All the development and dynamics of research,
industry, government, and large technology-based corporations take advantage of
shared standards and technical practices provided by technological zones, which are
of three types:
1. A metrological zone that concerns with “the development of common mea-
surement standards and practices” that make “information comparable, in
principle, between different locations;”
2. An infrastructural zone that concerns with “the development of common con-
nection standards” that make “it possible to integrate systems of production and
communication, as well as to exclude consumers and producers who do not
conform to the standard;” and
3. A zone of qualiﬁcation that concerns with “the development of common regu-
latory or quality standards” that “has become critical to the government of
economic and political life.”
By these standards and practices, we can hope that technological zones have the
capacity to cross borders of some kinds affecting information dissemination, pro-
duction, communication, economic growth, and politics. Bearing in mind that
1
Introduction on Integrated Science: Science Without Borders
23

technological zones are structuring of relations united by and modiﬁed in relation to
the complex conditions, for both humans and non-human nature, and can make just
a representative of the sociology of global networks, not social societies. On these
principles, we can see while technological zones endeavor to keep together the
complexity of human and nature and economic and political life together, they are
not supposed to consider the complexity of social life.
10
Integrated Science Procedure
As the name implies, integrated science embraces knowledge from different dis-
ciplines, and integration is the procedure of all productions of such a science (
Fig. 5). The term “discipline” is deﬁned as “a ﬁeld of study,” “a particular area of
study, especially a subject studied at a college or university,” “A branch of
knowledge, typically one studied in higher education,” and “an area of knowledge
or teaching, especially one such as history, chemistry, mathematics etc. that is
studied at a university” in Cambridge, Merriam-Webster, Oxford, and LONGMAN
dictionaries. Academic disciplines are commonly divided into ﬁve groups,
including humanities, social sciences, natural sciences, formal sciences, and applied
sciences, that can be found in [67]. However, some consider an additional category
of integrated disciplines, by which disciplines fall into three main areas of infor-
matics (principles of informatics, human informatics, and frontiers of informatics),
environmental science (environmental analyses and evaluation, environmental
conservation, and sustainable and environmental system development), and com-
plex systems (design science, human lie science, science education/educational
technology, cultural assets study and museology, geography, social/safety system
science,
biomedical
engineering,
health/sports
science,
childhood
science,
biomolecular sciences, and brain sciences) [68].
10.1
Discipline
Deﬁnitions of the word “discipline” include “a particular area of study, especially
a subject studied at a college or university,” “a ﬁeld of study,” “the practice of
training people to obey rules or a code of behaviour, using punishment to correct
disobedience,” “a branch of knowledge, typically one studied in higher education,”
and “an area of knowledge or teaching, especially one such as history, chemistry,
mathematics etc. that is studied at a university” [69–73].
To deﬁne “discipline” seems to pose a problem in itself. Michel Foucault refers
to “disciplining” as a process “limiting the freedom of individuals and as a way of
constraining discourses.” As reviewed elsewhere [74], academic discipline can
produce strength according to speciﬁc research objectives, accumulated specialist
knowledge and relevant theories and concepts, specialized terminology, speciﬁc
research methodologies, and institutional manifestation. For any level of strength,
24
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

to reproduce itself from one generation to the next, that would depend on
institutionalization.
10.1.1
Disciplinary Knowledge, Metaknowledge,
and Metaperspective
Efforts to relate information about information are as valuable and necessary to
metaknowledge construction as the work of data collection is to information pro-
duction [75]. Before modern times one had to individually compile, categorize, and
relate information about information by his or her own hands and eyes. Digital-
ization has given the individual a more chance of doing such data curation by
saving hundreds of hours—it took 153 h for Maudc Dickinson to make her library
science degree project in the 1920s decade of the twenty-ﬁrst century. Also, by
connecting experts from different academic communities, digitalization has paved
the way for problem-solving by integrating knowledge rooted in multiple areas of
disciplinary expertise. During such communication, experts can share and critically
think across different types of perspectives (individual, role, and disciplinary),
leading to the development of a meta-disciplinary perspective, or a metaperspective,
to the issue under discussion [76].
10.2
Multidisciplinary
The preﬁx multi-means many or more than one. The term “multidisciplinary” is
deﬁned as “involving different subjects of study in one activity,” “combining or
involving more than one discipline or ﬁeld of study,” “Combining or involving
several academic disciplines or professional specializations in an approach to a
topic or problem,” and “involving people with different jobs or from different areas
of study” in Cambridge, Merriam-Webster, Oxford, and LONGMAN dictionaries.
As reviewed in [77], a multidisciplinary process works with more than two disci-
plines. It involves different professions working in parallel or in sequence who
independently set goals for the same project (individual goals). While participants
preserve their own disciplinary roles, they should be able to play individual,
interrelated roles so that they can learn about each other. The summation and
juxtaposition of disciplines are used to implement the process of multidisciplinary.
In graphic design, two separate circles can represent such a process. Disciplinary
boundaries are maintained in the multidisciplinary working, and the product is
nothing greater than the sum of individual parts (Fig. 6).
10.3
Interdisciplinary
The preﬁx inter- means among, between, mutual, or mutually. The term “inter-
disciplinary” is deﬁned as “involving two or more different subjects or areas of
knowledge,” “involving two or more academic, scientiﬁc, or artistic disciplines,”
“Relating to more than one branch of knowledge,” and involving ideas,
1
Introduction on Integrated Science: Science Without Borders
25

information, or people from different subjects or areas of study” in Cambridge,
Merriam-Webster, Oxford, and LONGMAN dictionaries. An interdisciplinary
process works between two disciplines. It involves different professions who jointly
set goals for the same project (shared goals). Participants play common roles, and
therefore, some aspects of their discipline-speciﬁc roles might need to be restricted.
The integration and synthesis of disciplines are used to implement the process of
interdisciplinary that can be graphically represented by two circles, which are
partially overlapping. Disciplinary boundaries are blurred in interdisciplinary
working, and the product is, therefore, greater than the sum of individual parts (
Fig. 7) [77].
10.4
Transdisciplinary
The preﬁx trans- means across, over, beyond, on the far side of, or through. The
term “interdisciplinary” is deﬁned as “interdisciplinary” in Merriam-Webster and
Oxford dictionaries and is not deﬁned at all in the other two dictionaries, Cam-
bridge and LONGMAN, we sought for it. A transdisciplinary process involves
scientists, stakeholders, non-scientists, and non-academic participants working
across and beyond different disciplines. The transdisciplinary work is based on a
shared framework, shared goals, and shared skills by which participants are allowed
to release and expand their roles. By such a process, we can expect that the inte-
gration, amalgamation, and assimilation of disciplines, incorporation, uniﬁcation,
and harmony of disciplines, views, and approaches do probably occur. In this
manner, disciplinary boundaries are transcended, and to graphically design; it
requires us to draw a third circle covering two circles, which are partially over-
lapping [77].
Such procedures, through coordination of different knowledge systems, will
account for the multiple functions of integrated science, including but not limited to
complex and real-world problem-solving, deﬁning problems, hypothesis making,
innovation, consensus development, and establishment of comprehensive services
[77].
11
Integrated Science Practice
11.1
Teamwork
Generally, a “team” is deﬁned as two or more people who work or compete
together. However, this deﬁnition varies depending on the context. For example, in
the health care system, a team is referred to as “a group who share common health
goals and common objectives, determined by community needs, to the achievement
of which each member contributes, in accordance with his or her competence and
skill and in coordination with the functions of others” [78]. The word “work” is
26
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

deﬁned as “an activity, such as a job, that a person uses physical or mental effort to
do, usually for money,” “activity in which one exerts strength or faculties to do or
perform something,” “Activity involving mental or physical effort done in order to
achieve a purpose or result,” or simply as “activity, job, duties, results, papers,
book/painting/music” in Cambridge, Merriam-Webster, Oxford, and LONGMAN
dictionaries. The word “teamwork” is deﬁned as “the activity of working together in
a group with other people, especially when this is successful,” “work done by
several associates with each doing a part but all subordinating personal promi-
nence to the efﬁciency of the whole,” “The combined action of a group, especially
when effective and efﬁcient,” or “when a group of people work effectively together”
in Cambridge, Merriam-Webster, Oxford, and LONGMAN dictionaries.
Highly-reliable organizations essentially involve teamwork [79], which broadly
is held in conventional (non-electronic) and modern (electronic) forms [77]. The
conventional form supports meetings and consultations as the method of interaction
between participants, while new communications technology, such as the Internet,
are applied in the modern form. Modern forms of teamwork have produced a
revolution in scientiﬁc collaboration [80].
11.2
Collaboration
Scientiﬁc collaboration, also known as “research collaboration,” “R&D collabora-
tion,” and “team science,” is deﬁned as an “interaction taking place within a social
context among two or more scientists that facilitates the sharing of meaning and
completion of tasks with respect to a mutually shared, superordinate goal” [81]. It
is a means of democracy promotion, sustainable development, understanding cul-
ture and diversity, and also integration [81]. The current literature proves that all
these characters of scientiﬁc collaboration could be of universal application, being
most useful to wide-ranging scientiﬁc disciplines, geographic areas, and countries
[81]. It is evident in the increasing number of co-authored publications [81].
However, despite methods, terminology designations, and publication forums are
very numerous in this context, yet there is great difﬁculty in processing the literature
search when investigating a scientiﬁc collaboration [81]. Which disciplines work on
the collaboration, from which locations collaborators are connected, and which
organizations and communities contribute to the collaboration are important for the
classiﬁcation of scientiﬁc collaboration. As the method of procedure for integrated
science, scientiﬁc collaboration can be characterized by the preﬁxes “intra-,” “inter-
,” “cross-,” “multi-,” and “trans-disciplinary” [81]. The following designations are
most commonly documented in the literature.
11.2.1
International Collaboration or Inter-Institutional
Collaboration or North–South Collaboration
It is a kind of remote collaboration that receives a mix collaboration of different
countries, involving both developing and developed countries [81]. We clearly see
this collaboration related to international border crossings. However, as long as the
1
Introduction on Integrated Science: Science Without Borders
27

culture of collaborators remains the same, we have reason not to rank that as a form
of universal scientiﬁc collaboration.
11.2.2
Scientific Collaboratories
It refers to “a (socio-technical interaction) network-based facility and organiza-
tional entity that spans distance, supports rich and recurring human interaction
oriented to a common research area, fosters contact between researchers who are
both known and unknown to each other, and provides access to data sources,
artifacts and tools required to accomplish research tasks” [81].
11.2.3
University-Industry Collaboration or Academic-Industry
Collaboration or Collaborative Practice Research
A collaboration between the representatives of universities and industry, i.e., sci-
entists and other professionals, leads to this type of collaboration, which would
certainly cross organizational borders, including borders between academia and
business and between government and non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
[81].
11.2.4
Participatory Action Research
or Investigator-Community Collaboration
or Science-Society Collaboration or Community
Collaboration
It seems to be the likely scientiﬁc collaboration narrowing the focus to real-world
problems and has been most effective to the community [81]. Participants,
including scientists and researchers from NGOs and citizen groups, are those
responsible for investigating the effectiveness of social action.
Scientiﬁc collaboration is, in general, composed of scientiﬁc foundation, for-
mulation of research vision, goals, and tasks, sustainment challenges, and suc-
cessful conclusion stages, within each of which different factors critically play a
role: (i) foundation, political, socio-economic factors, resource accessibility, and
social networks and personal; (ii) Formulation, leadership and organizational
structure, information, and communication technology, and intellectual property
and other legal issues; (iii) Sustainment, learning and communication; and
(iv) Dissemination of results [81].
12
Networking
The competitive advantage of an entity no doubt stands in its better and faster
innovations. Innovating is a complex process that demands from the innovator
knowledge and, so far, integrated knowledge. Knowledge processes take place
within the brain, which is constructed of different networks being dynamically
connected by different communication mechanisms [82], so as to enable the integral
human knowledge to move out of neurons and brain regions, though often not
28
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

enough to do so of geographical regions to the universe [83]. Yet, variation is
present, having been determined by individual differences [84].
12.1
Networking Managers
In today’s fast-paced technological world, it has been tough, if not impossible, for
an organization to hold innovation and technology on a stand-alone basis [85]. So,
networking, “networks of interorganizational relationships,” is an essential con-
sideration for information exchange, risk sharing, the acquisition of external
knowledge, learning about and from other organizations, and the development of
innovations. Networking might act largely through the competition of the organi-
zations with each other and consequently will produce better innovation outputs.
In 1950, Stanford University launched the initiative of science and technology
parks (STP) in California. This initiative evolved in 1986 under the umbrella of
Silicon Valley. This successful experience traveled from country to country. As of
writing this, the International Association of Science Parks and Areas of Innovation
(IASP) works in more than 70 countries in African, Asia Paciﬁc, Eurasia, European,
Latin American, North American, West Asia North Africa and involves more than
115000 companies [86]. The IASP has provided the following deﬁnitions for STP
[87]: “A science park is an organization managed by specialized professionals,
whose main aim is to increase the wealth of its community by promoting the culture
of
innovation
and
the
competitiveness
of
its
associated
businesses
and
knowledge-based institutions. To enable these goals to be met, a Science Park
stimulates and manages the ﬂow of knowledge and technology amongst universi-
ties, R&D institutions, companies and markets; it facilitates the creation and
growth of innovation-based companies through incubation and spin-off processes;
and provides other value-added services together with high quality space and
facilities.” In this manner, STPs stand at the center of networking innovations with
the formation of interorganizational linkages and close ties with appropriate part-
ners, which are of high importance in sustainability performance management [88].
12.2
Networking Scientists
Research and development correlate with the economic growth of a country. There
international scientiﬁc collaboration has a deciding inﬂuence. Internationally
co-authored papers receive citations two-fold more than single-country papers. By
allowing to share divisible equipment and ideas, the international scientiﬁc col-
laboration will charge interacting institutions for cost-saving and supercharge them
for creativity. On the pattern of scientiﬁc collaboration, a scientiﬁc interaction
spatially corresponds directly to a larger size of the scientiﬁc output of interacting
environments, decreased transportation efforts (travel time or general travel
expenses between interacting environments), language communality, and political
unitization between interacting environments [83]. By considering the cost-output
1
Introduction on Integrated Science: Science Without Borders
29

elasticity, a scientiﬁc institution is recommended to make a low-priced, large-size
circuit engaging multiple institutions.
Scientiﬁc prizes are universally recognized for their commitment to indicate
scientiﬁc credibility and achievements in science, which are of “greatest beneﬁt to
the mankind” [89]. Analysis of data from 1900 to 2020 shows a similar proliferative
rate in scientiﬁc prizes and subdisciplines up to 1980, while after 1980, scientiﬁc
prizes have proliferated faster than subdisciplines and increased more than two-fold
by 2015. In the prize network, we can see relationships between prizes to grow the
most between subdisciplines belonging to the same discipline and more interesting
to the subject is to observe disciplines as interconnected by their prizes on the
network, being most noticeable between in the case of physics and chemistry. This
latter would highlight the importance of scientiﬁc collaboration and interdisci-
plinary working in establishing science.
However, there are pieces of evidence against the views maintained above.
Analysis of data reveals that publishing high-quality papers, though so unexpected,
cannot be explained by persistent scientiﬁc collaboration, and further low-quality
papers are more likely to come from working persistently in large groups [90]. The
relation between persistent scientiﬁc collaboration and publishing high-quality
papers depends somewhat on the degree of scientiﬁc age and impact’s (as assessed
by H-index) heterogeneity among interacting collaborators [90]. These analyses, in
addition to the scientists’ view that social networks are immature [91], should be
taken into account when deﬁning scientiﬁc networks.
12.3
Networking Adaptive Hybrid Systems
Systems incorporating both humans and intelligent machines can handle the
coordination over larger areas and, in a shorter amount of time, under changing
conditions of life [92]. Such systems, the so-called hybrid systems, behaving in this
manner can be applied to managing critical conditions, such as crisis and public
safety. However, the existing hybrid systems are mostly tied to very speciﬁc
approaches and niggard in the inclusion of a comprehensive guide so [92].
13
Conclusion
The present chapter provides a brief introduction to science, the problems of
demarcation in science, global borders, global issues, complex health problems,
science education, and science and technology, and also to integrated science as a
solution to these problems. We can conclude that all complex problems, including
traditional, contemporary, and modern problems, are rooted in borders; so inte-
grated science would be the all-in-one system made up of systematists being per-
fected in diagnosis and treatment of the problems and introduction and
implementation of their solutions to and in the society (Figs. 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8).
30
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

Fig. 4 Essentialists’ thoughts versus constructivists’ thoughts on the same subject of demarcation
in science [16]
Fig. 5 The procedure of integration: transdisciplinary, multidisciplinary, and interdisciplinary
1
Introduction on Integrated Science: Science Without Borders
31

Fig. 6 Multidisciplinary: separately working disciplines under a control system
Fig. 7 Interdisciplinary: mutually working disciplines under a control system
32
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

Core Messages
• Both complex problems and complex problem-solving give birth to a
depressed thinking society (Fig. 8).
• There are difﬁculties in the “world-deﬁning” character of borders, become
correlated with ‘world-deﬁning’ divisions resulting in the Cold War inertia
from cultural geopolitics that contrast the goals of globalization for which
the world must certainly be thought of as a whole place so that peace is
purely kept in various parts of the world.
• Globalization, which aimed to solve global issues, has multiplied global
borders to become a new complex problem.
• Health issues that are difﬁcult to treat are those that are also difﬁcult to
deﬁne because they cross the borders between nations (infectious pan-
demics), body systems (multisystem diseases), tissues (metastatic dis-
eases), in the mind and between the mind and environment (mental
disorders), and even the borders between brain and body (immunoemo-
tional disorders).
Fig. 8 The bird looking at
the reﬂection of loneliness in
the sea
1
Introduction on Integrated Science: Science Without Borders
33

• Integrated science is a necessity for building metaknowledge and
proposing metaperspectives.
References
1. Funke J (2012) Complex problem solving. Encyclopedia of the sciences of learning. Springer,
Heidelberg, pp 682–685
2. Casadevall A, Fang FC (2014) Specialized science. Am Soc Microbiol
3. Sareen J, AﬁﬁTO, McMillan KA, Asmundson GJG (2011) Relationship between household
income and mental disorders: ﬁndings from a population-based longitudinal study. Arch Gen
Psychiatry 68(4):419–427. https://doi.org/10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2011.15
4. Roberts RE, Kaplan GA, Shema SJ, Strawbridge WJ (1997) Does growing old increase the
risk for depression
5. Andrews PW, Thomson JA Jr (2009) The bright side of being blue: depression as an
adaptation for analyzing complex problems. Psychol Rev 116(3):620
6. Okuda SM, Runco MA, Berger DE (1991) Creativity and the ﬁnding and solving of
real-world problems. J Psychoeducational Assess 9(1):45–53
7. Hansson SO (2008) Science and pseudo-science
8. Meaning of pseudoscience in English. Oxford English and Spanish Dictionary, Thesaurus,
and Spanish to English Translator
9. Meaning of parascience in English. Oxford English and Spanish Dictionary, Thesaurus, and
Spanish to English Translator
10. Campbell NR, Campbell NR (1952) What is science? Dover Publications New York
11. Miller D (1985) Popper selections
12. Oreskes N (2004) The scientiﬁc consensus on climate change. Science 306(5702):1686–1686
13. Maddock MN (1981) Science education: an anthropological viewpoint
14. Aikenhead GS (1996) Science education: border crossing into the subculture of science
15. National Research Council. National Committee on Science Education S, Assessment (1994)
National science education standards: draft for review and comment only. National Research
Council
16. Gieryn TF (1995) Boundaries of science. In: Science and the quest for reality. Springer,
pp 293–332
17. Merton RK (1968) Science and democratic social structure. Social theory and social structure,
pp 604–615
18. Dictionary C (2020) Border
19. Merriam-Webster.com (2020) Border
20. Press OOOU (2020) Border
21. Rumford C (2010) Global borders: an introduction to the special issue. SAGE Publications
Sage UK, London, England
22. Rumford C (2012) Towards a multiperspectival study of borders. Geopolitics 17(4):887–902
23. Dictionary C (2020) Issue
24. Merriam-Webster.com (2020) Issue
25. Press OOOU (2020) Issue
26. Contributors W (2020, Oct 2) List of global issues. Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia
27. Hutt R (21 January 2016) What are the 10 biggest global challenges? World Economic Forum
28. Oviatt S (2000) Multimodal interface research: a science without borders
34
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

29. Rzymski P, Nowicki M, Mullin GE, Abraham A, Rodríguez-Román E, Petzold MB,
Bendau A, Sahu KK, Ather A, Naviaux A-F (2020) Quantity does not equal quality: scientiﬁc
principles cannot be sacriﬁced. Int Immunopharmacol 86:106711
30. Mohamed K, Rezaei N (2020) COVID-19 pandemic is not the time of trial and error. Am J
Emerg Med
31. Liu S-L, Saif L (2020) Emerging viruses without borders: the Wuhan coronavirus.
Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute
32. Rezaei N, Notarangelo LD, Aghamohammadi A (2008) Primary immunodeﬁciency diseases.
Springer
33. ATLAS TC (2020) The burden of cancer
34. Seyfried TN, Huysentruyt LC (2013) On the origin of cancer metastasis. Crit Rev Oncog 18
(1–2):43–73. https://doi.org/10.1615/critrevoncog.v18.i1-2.40
35. Guan X (2015) Cancer metastases: challenges and opportunities. Acta Pharm Sin B 5(5):402–
418. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2015.07.005
36. Vigo D, Thornicroft G, Atun R (2016) Estimating the true global burden of mental illness.
The Lancet Psychiatry 3(2):171–178
37. Ritchie H, Roser M (2018) Mental health. Our World in Data
38. Baranne ML, Falissard B (2018) Global burden of mental disorders among children aged 5–
14 years. Child Adolesc Psychiatry Mental Health 12(1):19
39. Carragher N, Krueger RF, Eaton NR, Slade T (2015) Disorders without borders: current and
future directions in the meta-structure of mental disorders. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr
Epidemiol 50(3):339–350
40. Evans TM, Bira L, Gastelum JB, Weiss LT, Vanderford NL (2018) Evidence for a mental
health crisis in graduate education. Nat Biotechnol 36(3):282
41. Lai J, Ma S, Wang Y, Cai Z, Hu J, Wei N, Wu J, Du H, Chen T, Li R (2020) Factors
associated with mental health outcomes among health care workers exposed to coronavirus
disease 2019. JAMA Netw Open 3(3):e203976–e203976
42. Arango C, Díaz-Caneja CM, McGorry PD, Rapoport J, Sommer IE, Vorstman JA, McDaid D,
Marín O, Serrano-Drozdowskyj E, Freedman R (2018) Preventive strategies for mental health.
The Lancet Psychiatry 5(7):591–604
43. Saghazadeh A, Rezaei N (2019) The immunoemotional regulatory system. In: Biophysics and
neurophysiology of the sixth sense. Springer, pp 155–178
44. Saghazadeh A, Rezaei N (2019) The physical burden of immunoperception. In: Biophysics
and neurophysiology of the sixth sense. Springer, pp 137–154
45. Saghazadeh A, Haﬁzi S, Rezaei N (2019) The mental burden of immunoperception. In:
Biophysics and neurophysiology of the sixth sense. Springer, pp 111–135
46. Zachariah R, Bienvenue B, Ayada L, Manzi M, Maalim A, Engy E, Jemmy JP, Ibrahim
Said A, Hassan A, Abdulrahaman F (2012) Practicing medicine without borders:
tele-consultations and tele-mentoring for improving paediatric care in a conﬂict setting in
Somalia? Tropical Med Int Health 17(9):1156–1162
47. Knoppers BM, LeBris S (1991) Recent advances in medically assisted conception: legal,
ethical and social issues. Am JL & Med 17:329
48. Cortez N (2008) Patients without borders: the emerging global market for patients and the
evolution of modern health care. Ind LJ 83:71
49. Gray HH, Poland SC (2008) Medical tourism: crossing borders to access health care.
Kennedy Inst Ethics J 18(2):193–201
50. Aikenhead G (2001) Integrating western and aboriginal sciences: cross-cultural science
teaching. Res Sci Educ 31(3):337–355
51. Kalina C, Powell KC (2009) Cognitive and social constructivism: developing tools for an
effective classroom. Education 130(2):241–250
52. Mutegi JW (2011) The inadequacies of “Science for All” and the necessity and nature of a
socially transformative curriculum approach for African American science education. J Res
Sci Teach 48(3):301–316
1
Introduction on Integrated Science: Science Without Borders
35

53. Aikenhead GS, Jegede OJ (1999) Cross-cultural science education: a cognitive explanation of
a cultural phenomenon. J Res Sci Teach 36(3):269–287
54. Jegede OJ, Aikenhead GS (1999) Transcending cultural borders: implications for science
teaching. Res Sci Technol Educ 17(1):45–66
55. Aikenhead GS (2001) Students’ ease in crossing cultural borders into school science. Sci
Educ 85(2):180–188
56. Kratzke C, Bertolo M (2013) Enhancing students’ cultural competence using cross-cultural
experiential learning. J Cult Divers 20(3)
57. Aikenhead GS (1996) Towards a ﬁrst nations cross-cultural science and technology
curriculum for economic development. Environ Responsability Cult Survival
58. Moriano JA, Gorgievski M, Laguna M, Stephan U, Zarafshani K (2012) A cross-cultural
approach to understanding entrepreneurial intention. J Career Dev 39(2):162–185
59. Bickley M, Carleton J (2009) Students without borders: global collaborative learning connects
school to the real world. Learn Lead Technol 37(3):20–23
60. Arum S, Van de Water J (1992) The need for a deﬁnition of international education. In:
Klasek CB et al (ed) Bridges to the future: strategies for internationalizing higher education.
Association of International Education Administrators, Carbondale, IL, p 191
61. Grifﬁn P, Care E (2014) Assessment and teaching of 21st century skills: methods and
approach. Springer
62. Mehra B, Bishop AP (2007) Cross-cultural perspectives of international doctoral students:
two-way learning in library and information science education. Int J Progressive Educ 3(1):n1
63. Nada CI, Araújo HC (2019) ‘When you welcome students without borders, you need a
mentality without borders’ internationalisation of higher education: evidence from Portugal.
Stud High Educ 44(9):1591–1604
64. Suárez-Díaz E, Mateos G, Barahona A (2015) Across borders: science and technology during
the Cold War: an introduction. Dynamis 35(2):271–278
65. Chowdhury
MA
(2016)
The
integration
of
science-technology-society/science-
technology-society-environment and socio-scientiﬁc-issues for effective science education
and science teaching. Electron J Sci Educ 20(5):19–38
66. Barry A (2006) Technological zones. Eur J Soc Theor 9(2):239–253
67. Contributors W (2020) Outline of academic disciplines
68. Science JSftPo (2020) List of categories, areas, disciplines and research ﬁelds
69. Dictionary C (2020) Deﬁnition of discipline
70. Longman (2020) Deﬁnition of discipline
71. Merriam-Webster.com (2020) Deﬁnition of discipline
72. Press OOOU (2020) Deﬁnition of discipline
73. Hammarfelt B (2019) Discipline. ISKO Encyclopedia of Knowledge Organization
74. Krishnan A (2009) What are academic disciplines? Some observations on the disciplinarity
versus interdisciplinarity debate. NCRM Working Paper National Centre for Research Methods
75. Senchyne J (2016) Between knowledge and metaknowledge: shifting disciplinary borders in
digital humanities and library and information studies. Debates Digital Humanit 2016:368–376
76. Miller M, Mansilla VB (2004) Thinking across perspectives and disciplines. Harvard
Graduate School of Education, Boston, MA
77. Choi BCK, Pak AWP (2006) Multidisciplinarity, interdisciplinarity and transdisciplinarity in
health research, services, education and policy: 1. Deﬁnitions, objectives, and evidence of
effectiveness. Clin Invest Med 29(6):351
78. Xyrichis A, Ream E (2008) Teamwork: a concept analysis. J Adv Nurs 61(2):232–241
79. Baker DP, Day R, Salas E (2006) Teamwork as an essential component of high‐reliability
organizations. Health Serv Res 41 (4p2):1576–1598
80. Hagstrom WO (1964) Traditional and modern forms of scientiﬁc teamwork. Adm Sci Q 241–
263
81. Sonnenwald DH (2007) Scientiﬁc collaboration. ARIST 41(1):643–681
82. Avena-Koenigsberger A, Misic B, Sporns O (2018) Communication dynamics in complex
brain networks. Nat Rev Neurosci 19(1):17–33. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn.2017.149
83. Andersson ÅE, Persson O (1993) Networking scientists. Ann Reg Sci 27(1):11–21
36
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

84. Rezaei N, Saghazadeh A (2019) Biophysics and neurophysiology of the sixth sense. Springer
85. Basile A (2011) Networking system and innovation outputs: the role of science and
technology parks. Int J Bus Manage 6(5):3–15
86. Innovation IAoSPaAo (2020) IASP in a few words
87. Innovation IAoSPaAo (2020) Deﬁnitions. How IASP deﬁnes our key terms: Science park and
Area of Innovation
88. Eisingerich AB, Bell SJ (2008) Managing networks of interorganizational linkages and
sustainable ﬁrm performance in business‐to‐business service contexts. J Serv Mark
89. Ma Y, Uzzi B (2018) Scientiﬁc prize network predicts who pushes the boundaries of science.
Proc Natl Acad Sci 115(50):12608–12615
90. Bu Y, Ding Y, Liang X, Murray DS (2018) Understanding persistent scientiﬁc collaboration.
J Assoc Inf Sci Technol 69(3):438–448
91. Maxmen A (2010) Science networking gets serious. Cell 141(3):387–389
92. Kester L (2010) Method for designing networking adaptive interactive hybrid systems. In:
Interactive collaborative information systems. Springer, pp 401–421
Nima Rezaei gained his medical degree (MD) from Tehran
University of Medical Sciences (TUMS) in 2002 and subse-
quently obtained an M.Sc. in Molecular and Genetic Medicine
and a Ph.D. in Clinical Immunology and Human Genetics from
the University of Shefﬁeld, UK. He also spent a short-term
fellowship in Pediatric Clinical Immunology and Bone Marrow
Transplantation in the Newcastle General Hospital. Since 2010,
Dr. Rezaei has worked at the Department of Immunology and
Biology, School of Medicine, TUMS; he is now the Full
Professor and Vice Dean of International Affairs, School of
Medicine, TUMS, and the co-founder and Deputy President of
the Research Center for Immunodeﬁciencies. He is also the
founding
President
of
Universal
Scientiﬁc
Education
and
Research Network (USERN). He has edited more than 30
international books, has presented more than 500 lectures/posters
in congresses/meetings, and has published more than 800 articles
in international scientiﬁc journals.
Amene Saghazadeh gained her MD from the Tehran University
of Medical Sciences in 2019. She does research on clinical
immunology, genetics, epigenetics, and nutrition at the Research
Center for Immunodeﬁciencies, Children’s Medical Center,
TUMS.
1
Introduction on Integrated Science: Science Without Borders
37

2
The Human Person as an Integrated
System
Jan Kłos
“For, above all else, I am he who dwells. […]
And I ordain that every house shall have just such a heart
within it,
where a man may draw near to something
and whereto he may retreat from something.
A focal place of goings out and of comings back in.
Else, a man is nowhere. And there is no freedom in not-being.”
Antoine de Saint-Exupéry, Wisdom of the Sands
Summary
Mankind became interested in anthropological investigations in antiquity
following the period of natural philosophy. The ancient philosophers, apparently
frustrated with so many proposals as to the origin of the universe, had decided to
direct their interest towards humanity itself. Moreover, the ancient man was
subjected to a clash with the external world. This situation naturally gave rise to
some foundations as to what was certain and true. In other words, questions
arose about the true nature of the human being and the system of values they
should pursue. The modern era introduced dualism between mind and body, a
fact that made the whole situation even more complicated. This text basically
refers to John Henry Newman’s theory of personalism and seeks to show the
human person as a being that relies on a very complicated, delicate, and
idiosyncratic system. Persons are constantly called upon to consolidate the
J. Kłos (&)
The John Paul II Catholic University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland
e-mail: klosjan@kul.pl
J. Kłos
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Sandomierska 13, 20-726 Lublin, Poland
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
N. Rezaei (ed.), Integrated Science, Integrated Science 1,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65273-9_2
39

elements of the system and integrate it with their lives. Divided between notional
and real assent, and on the way to certitude, the person unites the discarded
elements of his and her life into one being.
The integrated person. The human person participates in various spheres of
life (professional, political, social, and familial). We need to combine them all
and understand that for our integrity, we need to realize that the person is one
being. Such understanding is universal, though how to achieve it varies across
cultures.
The code of this chapter is 01101110 01000011 01100101 01101111
01110011 01101110 01101111 01100001 01100011 01101110.
1
Introduction
After a period of interest in nature and questing for the founding principle of the
universe, antiquity turned to the human being and formulated its new task in the
famous maxim: “know thyself.” Socrates, the ideal sage of ancient Greece, was the
main representative of this turn. His decision seemed to have been induced by his
cultural context. This was the moment when the ancient philosophers, apparently
frustrated with so many proposals as to the origin of the universe, had decided to
direct their interest towards humanity itself. In clashes with the external world, the
40
J. Kłos

ancient man felt at a loss. Thus, anthropological considerations were brought to the
fore. However, what does it mean to know me? When do I know myself? More-
over, when can I say I have known myself? These questions lead to a more fun-
damental question: what is me? Or, to be more precise: when am I myself?
All these questions set off a long series of anthropological investigations. In their
course, the human being was variously deﬁned. In the pre-modern era, the man was
viewed as a composition of matter and form, with this theory being characterized by
Aristotelian hylomorphism and, with the advent of the Christian era, was called the
unity of body-and-soul. From that time onward, the man had lived in a kind of
harmony between the demands of the body and the requirements of the soul, as a
material and spiritual being. This model was demolished with the rise of modernity
and the dualism then introduced between mind and body. It was then that the
human being realized his sense experience could have deceived him, and so
resolved to not rely any longer on knowledge acquired by the senses. Instead, man
turned inward to ﬁnd the right mental representation of what he experienced. He
realized that he was dealing with different representations. The issue was thus to
arrive at the correct one.
Once mental representation appeared, the man began to deﬁne himself primarily
as someone who can create or recreate the world, or even recreate himself. At that
point, an answer to the question about the true self became all the more burning. If
everything can be elusive, perhaps I am not the way I should be, and shall never
ﬁnd my true self. What is even more confusing being that man realized that his true
self was a matter of choice, and that choice, if solid cultural foundations are
wanting, is made amidst open options. Therefore, with the rise of modernity, human
beings embarked on an unending and frustrating journey toward their true selves.
Another important question was the milieu in which these beings who quest for
their true selves found themselves. We are individual and social beings. We make
our decisions inside a particular social context and are affected by the past, the
present, and the future. We have received certain knowledge from our ancestors,
and we plan for our future. Therefore, we look to the past and the future.
When I am writing about a system in the context of a person, I do not thereby
mean any formal construction or political conception in the ﬁrst place invented by
this person. Rather, the system meant here is a very subtle structure composed of
explicit and implicit elements, the mixture of one’s beliefs and rational knowledge.
Moreover, it is the human person who is entrusted with the task of integrating all
these things into one whole. The person always speaks from the depths of a system,
from a certain vital background that brings sense to our choices, judgments,
decisions, and actions. Mastery over this system is not the same as when we rule
over certain components of a machine. It is a system in which what we know is
mingled with what we do not know, what we grasp with our intuition, and with
what we arrive at after a laborious process of mental exertion. Such a system may
be called personalism. This text is designed to provide some general outlines of
personalism with a special focus thereof on John Henry Newman’s doctrine.
2
The Human Person as an Integrated System
41

2
Functional Disarrangement—The Starting Point
Following the lessons of the past, we traditionally assume that the human being is
composed of the intellect and will. The intellect recognizes certain elements of
reality, and the will decides to pursue what has thus been recognized. Such is
classical—we may also say the pre-modern—picture of the human being. This
pre-modern vision agrees with what is commonly understood by the rational view
of the human being. The Enlightenment ﬁrmly believed that the human being is
governed by reason and experience, that the human being is rational and capable of
making rational choices. This optimistic view had brought forth many accom-
plishments in the area of science and politics. Later on, however, such a positive
view clashed with the romantic spirit. Romanticism realized that the human being is
a mystery, and reasoning itself is inadequate in practice. Reasoning is inadequate
because it can only deal with general cases and universal concepts, but what the
human agent deals with is always concrete and individual.
Jonathan Haidt, in his book The Righteous Mind, makes an interesting remark
when he says that reasoning is adaptive “because reasoning can take you wherever
you want to go” [1, p. 143]. The problem, however, is that we often do not know
where we want to go or, to be more precise, where we should go, especially if we
reduce human persons merely to their horizontal level without any recourse to what
is transcendent. Therefore, if one is left alone to rely on private judgment, one may
be led astray, especially when the man is surrounded by open options with no hint
as to where the fulcrum is, or which option is true and which is wrong. When man
reasons, he always reasons in a concrete manner, especially within the area of his
practical life. He has a concrete history that has brought him to a particular stage
and his concrete being, and this being needs such a system that is internal and
external at the same time, that is within and without. Therefore, Newman distrusts
“paper logic,” for it is “the concrete being that reasons […]” [2, p. 113]. In rea-
soning, we may, and indeed we do, make use of general concepts, especially when
we consider theoretical matters. In this case, we arrive at some general conclusions
which may be of no concern for our private lives. The point is to combine what is
general with what is concrete or, to take it differently, to redeﬁne the general in
terms of the concrete.
Following John Henry Newman (1801–1890), I take it as my starting point that
our faculties are under the process of development. We are affected by numerous
stimuli, numerous forces, “the human mind is at best in a very unformed or dis-
ordered state; passions and conscience, likings and reason, conﬂicting,—might
rising against right, with the prospect of things getting worse” [3, p. 263]. Inte-
gration in the case of the human being is not like, for instance, collecting all the
elements which have fallen out from someone’s basket; the physical elements are
explicit. If a person’s components were such elements, we would be able to pick
each of them until the basket is again full, if everything was granted explicitly. The
human being can only be integrated in a personal manner. Assuming that man is
composed of explicit and implicit elements; consequently, his integration is both
42
J. Kłos

explicit and implicit. In other words, there are decisions and views which such a
being can explain or even provide proof for, and there are still others that cannot be
explained. However, because of the claim of people that they are certain of these
decisions and views, those which cannot be explained (rendered in an explicit form)
are still personal. Let us observe that this understanding of personal integration
appeals to ontology rather than to psychology. The person combines discrete and
indiscrete elements. The person cannot calculate or innumerate all the components
of one’s self. Henceforth, integrating is entirely unlike the abovementioned activity
of collecting the dispersed contents of a basket. As a person, I integrate myself; I
embrace myself cross it out in a special manner.
Our thinking depends much on how we view the world, indeed on what kind of a
system we hold on to. If, for instance, we understand the world as a work, we hold
the theistic approach; if we treat the world merely as a machine, we advocate the
deistic approach. The latter is resulted from the turn of the modern world and
produces numerous consequences. Once we claim that the world is a complex
machine, we stick to tangible realities and imagine the world as an object of
manipulation in which each element can be removed or redeﬁned, for we are the
authors of everything there is [4, p. 143 ff]. Our view of the world is of utmost
importance and bears on our subsequent decision of whether we advocate the
deistic system or the theistic system. If we keep to the deistic system, the personal
dimension is reduced to what we call useful knowledge and utilitarian calculus.
3
The Structure of Assent
A merely utilitarian approach fails to render the complexity of the human person,
for once we agree that the person also bears implicit knowledge, there are elements
in the person which surpass what can be calculated. It sufﬁces to look at the way the
person acquires knowledge, that is, at human epistemology. In the process of
cognition, the person assents to words, images, examples, etc. Generally, let us say
that the person assents to words and realities. Thus, there are two kinds of assent:
notional and real. In other words, we can say that persons acknowledge proposi-
tions and images. Propositions affect our minds with their intrinsic train of thought;
while images affect us with their vividness and arouse certain connatural strings in
our very personhood. The mind is based on antecedent reasoning; that is, in our
reasoning, we never start from nowhere. The system we are alluding to maybe
vaguely comprehended, but is there. The point, therefore, is to recognize the pattern
of the system underlying our decisions.
Consequently, the interesting thing is that the person can be drawn to assent by
the logic of reasoning, by a series of premises, or else by what can be seen or
imagined (visualized before the eyes of the mind). More often than not, we emulate
someone else’s behavioral patterns, especially when they have become key ﬁgures
for us. Aside from our capacity of reasoning, that is, going through an arduous
process of inference, we have at our disposal what Aristotle called phronesis and
2
The Human Person as an Integrated System
43

what Newman called the illative sense. The latter cognitive capacity is gained as a
result of long acquaintance with a concrete matter at hand and has thus grown into a
habit. In this case, the cognitive capacity in question becomes connatural with our
character rather than it responds to our logical ability of ratiocination. Its natural
ethos is practical. Figure 1 shows different types of notional assents, the assents that
can be called the weakest (the letters P1, P2, P3, P4 denote premises). Their character
is such that they often produce a violent emotional response that quickly dies down;
it may also happen that they result from stereotypical reactions.
When we look at Fig. 1, we can say that, in a formal string of ratiocinations,
each premise may be treated as related to a degree of probability. Consequently, we
can entertain an opinion, presumption, conjecture, and eventually certainty. With
this, we can still add a profession.
As regards professions, Newman warns that “To make professions is to play with
edge [tools], unless we attend to what we are saying. Words have a meaning,
whether we mean that meaning or not; and they are imputed to us in their real
meaning, when our not meaning it is our own fault” [5, p. 972]. We “cannot frame
a language” [5, p. 972] for ourselves, since we participate in the meaning that is
already there. Newman is referring to the notional assent that, as he observed, was
very popular in his day. So too is it on our own. Ours is the time of profession.
People willingly articulate their political views, often change their political sym-
pathies, declare their attachment to this or that party, and take sides. They call
themselves democrats, conservatives, or liberals, often without any awareness of
what these declarations mean. When it is driven home to them what kind of a
political program is behind their declarations, they often easily abandon their
previous views. We may either assent prematurely or be completely mistaken in our
assenting; nevertheless, despite all these attendant elements, such professions may
still be personally genuine. Newman notes that man’s mind “is in the ﬁrst instance
in disorder, and runs wild; his faculties have their rudimental and inchoate state
and are gradually carried on by practice and experience to their perfection” [6,
p. 189]. He even concludes that “man is not a reasoning animal; he is a seeing,
feeling, contemplating, acting animal. He is inﬂuenced by what is direct and pre-
cise” [3, p. 294].
Depending on the degree of probability attendant upon propositions, our mind
can cherish certainty; but there is yet one more regularity in the function of our
minds. Namely, despite the formal degree of probability, our mind can experience
certitude irrespective of the number of premises and the level to which we
Fig. 1 Certainty, notional assent
44
J. Kłos

personally assent to something. Certainty, therefore, is not the same as certitude.
Figure 2 shows a series in which we assume that certainty 6¼ certitude.
Irrespective of the degree of probability, we may entertain certitude because the
latter is not entirely dependent on attendant probability, but is linked with the habit
of mind. Let us observe that there are even cases, as in the passage from P3 to P4, in
which certain elements of ratiocination are missing, and yet certitude is obtained. In
a related text, Newman notes that “mutilated and defective evidence sufﬁces for
persuasion where the heart is alive; but dead evidences, however perfect, can but
create a dead faith” [7, p. 200].
In order to illustrate what I have said so far, let me point to an interesting
example from Jacques Hadamard’s book, An Essay on the Psychology of Invention
in the Mathematical Field. In this book, the French psychologist and mathematician
describes what once happened to Friedrich Gauss. This prince of mathematicians
(as Gauss is called) had unsuccessfully been working on an arithmetical theorem for
a long time. Then, suddenly, he found a solution, a fact which surprised even
himself. As he acknowledged: “I succeeded, not on account of my painful efforts,
but by the grace of God. Like a sudden ﬂash of lightning, the riddle happened to be
solved. I myself cannot say what was the conducting thread which connected what I
previously knew with what made my success possible” [8, p. 15]. What happened to
Gauss was that owing to his practice with mathematical problems, he had obviously
gained a certain wordless ability to grasp the truth; Gauss’ example shows us the
illative sense in action, i.e., a long acquaintance with a subject fosters in us the
ability to grasp a whole without meticulous analysis of details. I may be mistaken in
my certitude, but the very act of certitude is still valid.
Now assent is an act that is congenial to the nature of someone’s mind, while this
mind is in progress. We may act emotionally either on the spur of the moment or
after a long and careful examination. This spontaneous assent may not necessarily
be wrong; much depends on the character of our intention and the degree of our
integrity. Some people have naturally grown to respond positively to a call to do
something good. We may, however, be only notionally drawn to a value. Thus, for
instance, one may hold an opinion because this opinion is commonly held.
Therefore, even the possessive adjective “my” can be understood differently,
depending on individual context. The question is then what I really mean when I
say: my opinion, and if indeed, whether I mean what I say.
I think this distinction between certainty and certitude is a very interesting
insight. Certitude is a habit of mind, while certainty is a quality of propositions.
Certitude is individual and implicit, while certainty is general and explicit. We can
Fig. 2 Certitude, real assent
2
The Human Person as an Integrated System
45

obtain certitude, although, in reality, we attain concurring and converging proba-
bilities. Probabilities may not reach logical certainty, but they sufﬁce for a mental
certitude, and this mental certitude may sufﬁce for a given person as a duty without
any strict demonstration. Impressions that are obtained from images are more
powerful than reasoning or deductions. Consequently, human examples are more
likely to initiate action than verbal persuasion.
Then what should be our point of reference when we consider integration:
evidential proofs or persons who claim to be certain? Logical reasoning or personal
testimonies? We are facing a dilemma between choosing formal certainties or
personal certitudes. Now the question is whether certainties can bring about inte-
gration. Do certainties lead to certitudes? If certitudes are redolent of integrity and
certainties of formal conclusions, then it is rather certitudes that symbolize or are
even co-equal to integration in a way more so than certainties. Certitudes become
part and parcel of personal endowments. If certainties alone were capable of inte-
gration, they would simply be mechanically interiorized by the knowing subject and
would be acted upon spontaneously. If we were all endowed with the same power
of reasoning in kind and degree, we could all be brought to the point of accepting
the same certainties. Hence the dream of ethical intellectualism would be fulﬁlled.
Meanwhile, this is not the way human beings build their certitudes, for there is an
essential incongruity that we often experience between external certainties and what
we are personally certain of.
The personal world is too complicated and idiosyncratic to be thus universally
integrated, to be brought to universal agreement, by external certainties. We are
persons, not mechanisms put into order by some logical watchmakers. If the person
is to be integrated in a personal manner, that is, with respect to the person’s freedom
and rational capacity, the process of integration can hardly be entirely provided
from without. Integration is more like growing into something than comprehending
something, and the persons can embrace more than they can comprehend.
4
Real and Unreal Worlds
If the starting point is functional disarrangement and we are called upon to real
assent and certitude, we need to have at least some hints on how to proceed.
Metaphorically speaking, we may say that we need to reunite homo sapiens and
homo sentiens, or in other words, to strive towards real words and avoid unreal
words. Margaret Archer rightly observed, “that our emotions are essential adjuncts
to the pursuit of the morally good life, not in terms of emotivism but by way of
vision and commitment” [9, p. 55]. Indeed, one can hardly imagine an integrated
being whose emotions are at odds with his words. Moreover, when the feeling is
hostile to conclusions drawn by reasoning, the human being is internally divided.
The choice that is expurgated of passions may perhaps be called rational,
assuming a narrow deﬁnition of rationality, but can hardly be called human. I think
we need to discern this approach from what is called polylogism. The fact that
46
J. Kłos

reasoning is connatural with our minds does not mean that we each have our own
logic, but that in certain areas, particularly in the areas of morality and religion, one
needs to grow into understanding the truths thereof. Thus, the various logics that
appear to emerge do not depend on class (as in Marx) or on race (as in National
Socialism) but depend on one’s moral character. Thus, we are not governed by
passions, sentiments, or pleasures, but by our moral characters. Ruling principles do
not come from any utilitarian considerations; rather, they come from the founda-
tions of characters.
As we have already said, man’s knowledge is based on the accumulation of
probabilities. For some minds, these probabilities turn into certitude; for others,
they are just conclusions of certain reasoning. As such, they do not come out of a
person’s inmost awareness. They are not integral parts of that person. Integration is
necessary, for obviously, in the case of formal reasoning, in which the components
thereof can be expressed in clear-cut premises, we follow a certain pattern. We
adjust our ratiocination in accordance with some external rules, but in moral action,
when so many motives rival for priority, the process is too complicated to be
ordained by formal principles. Therefore, we are often bewildered at someone’s
behaviour or obstinacy to facts that we so readily accept. The answer seems
obvious; other principles come into play here, principles we have negligently
bypassed.
This question of incongruity between words and feelings is important even in
literary criticism. Coombes notes in his book: “Another and more obviously
deplorable use or misuse of rhythm occurs when a writer claiming to express
sincere feeling uses a form manufactured for the occasion, a form which will be
found to betray a falsity or emptiness of feeling” [10, p. 20]. The key phrase in this
quotation is “manufactured for the occasion,” which stresses the fact that a sentence
which simply repeats what has been “manufactured” cannot be frank or sincere and,
therefore, cannot be said to be integrated with the writer. This is interesting because
sometimes this kind of objection seems to be off point. Do we expect to ﬁnd reality
in the world of literature? Do we not excuse writers when they make use of
metaphors and creative inventions for the sake of their ﬁctitious creation? Can one
even speak here of “a falsity or emptiness of feeling”? Another question is whether
we can easily identify in a work of art what is false and empty if our only means of
communication is the very work of art through which the writer communicates with
his or her readers. Is this not then a case of explaining idem per idem?
The twentieth-century French philosopher Jean Guitton, in his preface to Pas-
cal’s Pensées, stresses that one has to address both the intellect and the heart,
especially the heart. The heart is “the ﬁrst power; one has to wake up the inequity,
to work a gap in the indifference of the natural man, the friend of interest and
pleasures. Pascal shows a man who is an enigma for himself, chaos of contradic-
tions, what is worse: a prisoner condemned to death, the unfortunate wanting
happiness, and incapable of granting himself this happiness. Human wisdom is
helpless” [11, p. 14]. For Pascal, just like for Newman, neither interest nor pleasure
can compose human happiness. In other words, we can say that both interest and
pleasure fail to create a consistent system that could deﬁne the genuine character of
2
The Human Person as an Integrated System
47

human life. Interest or pleasure is not good enough for the foundation of human life.
Newman notes that: “No great work was done by a system; whereas systems rise
out of individual exertions” [2, p. 28]. Therefore, Margaret Archer rightly observes
that concepts do not have to be linguistic, and the sense of self has “its monological
form of emergence from our embodied practices” [9, p. 125].
Human words must grow from the depth of the whole person, or else they ﬂoat
to the surface of our common conceptual sphere. Newman describes this in his
words: “When we are told a thing, we assent to it, we do not doubt it, but we do not
feel it to be true, we do not understand it as a fact which must take up a position or
station in our thoughts, and must be acted from and acted towards, must be dealt
with as existing: that is, we do not realize it” [5, p. 1236]. A word that is designed
to move us to action must stand before us like an image. Only then can it penetrate
the practical sphere of our lives. Therefore, only words that correspond with images
are real words. One can see them.
5
Logic and Mathematics Versus Real Thinking
Human thinking, in reality, only perfunctorily resembles a deductive system in
which we proceed from some premises to others. It does not resemble a deductive
system, like that of logic and mathematics. Ludwig von Mises observes: “The
relations and implications of their system are coexistent and interdependent. We
may say as well that they are synchronous or that they are out of time. A perfect
mind could grasp them all in one thought. Man’s inability to accomplish this makes
thinking itself and action, proceeding step by step from the less satisfactory state of
insufﬁcient cognition to the more satisfactory state of better insight. But the tem-
poral order in which knowledge is acquired must not be confused with the logical
simultaneity of all parts of an aprioristic deductive system. Within such a system,
the notions of anteriority and consequence are metaphorical only. They do not refer
to the system, but to our action in grasping it. The system itself implies neither the
category of time nor that of causality. There is functional correspondence between
elements, but there is neither cause nor effect” [12, p. 99].
Let us note in passing that since the above remark is correct when considered
about a deductive system, we must make some reservations in the case of the person
and his personal system. The logical system and the praxeological system are
indeed both different from the epistemological system. In other words, the person
cognizes reality like a person, not like a deductive system.
We need to identify which system is underlying our actions. This system is not
the same as Kant’s categorical imperative, for the latter is formal while the personal
system is material. The personal system is yet a step forward. In a practical situ-
ation, the person must respond to a given circumstance with something that res-
onates in the circumstance. The categorical imperative is impersonal, but the
response must be personal and in accordance with justice. Once a person is ready to
48
J. Kłos

respond to a certain duty, which is individually addressed to him, this person
recognizes it as his individual duty.
6
Unreal Worlds in Political and Religious Life
We can interpret Newman’s warning against using unreal words as follows: do not
go too fast, do not utter words before you realize what they really mean. With this
comes Newman’s excellent metaphor of the ladder. As you mount up the heavenly
ladder, you should do so gradually, one step at a time [5, p. 1198]. Otherwise, we
might rightfully ask: there are words, but where is the person? A plethora of
semantic signs shields him. We can hardly reach the agent through words. Here is
the man, said Pilate, the essence of man—one might say—and yet no word is
spoken. The man, the essence of manhood, no longer produces words, a fact which
allegedly evokes so much hatred. The masses saw humanity in its pure form, in its
impenetrable depth. This is perhaps why they could not bear it, like people dazzled
by a strong light. The reality, in its purity, in its obvious nakedness, without any
shades or ambiguity, penetrates into the depths of man’s psyche, seeking an ade-
quate response. The sight without words is painful.
Now I would like to elaborate on this metaphor of ascending a ladder further. Let
us imagine that each rung is like a single word. This word can be uttered when you
place your foot on a rung. Thus, the word is where you are (neither below nor
above). In order to ascend the ladder safely, we need to watch the rung on which we
put our foot. Then we can proceed, one rung at a time. The rungs before me are not
yet mine; the rungs behind me are no longer mine. My reality is the rung that I am
putting my foot on at the moment. I need to take a sure hold of it. We should not
jump to conclusions because this is like worrying about a rung we have not reached
yet, or even may never reach. As I have won a foothold, I can feel its solidity, and I
have to make sure whether it can hold my weight or if it will give way. The rung
symbolizes the real world. This is what I understand by living through reality.
This process of ascending the ladder, with some rungs before and others behind,
resembles Kierkegaardian presence as set in opposition to the past and future.
Giving in to despair, the human being fails to concentrate on the present moment,
and he becomes an inauthentic being. He then either travels to the future or
bemoans the past. Neither the past nor the future belongs to him. In other words,
returning to my example, such a man is too concerned with the rungs before him or
his thoughts wander away to the rungs behind. Therefore, his steps become wobbly;
he is hesitating all the time and may easily slip and fall down. While lost in the past
or the future, our man hardly even feels the pressure of the current rung. Thus, the
moments of reality pass by while he is somewhere else, jumping forward or pro-
crastinating, all the while he could be acting. In fact, this is what Kierkegaard meant
by despair, i.e., never to be present in your grave, which is to evade one’s presence
forever. Now, if someone is constantly in the past or in the future, he is nowhere,
for neither the past nor the future exists at the moment. They are only mental
2
The Human Person as an Integrated System
49

representations. Of course, the consequences of the past are present with us, but
usually, if one wanders away to the past, one imagines himself different from what
he actually was. I would have done a certain thing if I had had another chance—
such is the mental representation of this state. Therefore, it is unreal.
In like manner, Newman warned his readers against the temptation to live
someone else’s life. But how can you live someone else’s life? Not, in reality, that
is, but one can be so ﬁxed on imagining how it would be ﬁne to live someone else’s
life. Even though this imagined life may otherwise be exemplary, the most
important issue is whether it is mine. We must be wary of imitating someone else’s
life so that we forget about ours. In his sermon on apostolic abstinence, Newman
writes: “We should be very much on our guard, when we are engaged in con-
templating the lives of holy men, against attempting just what they did; which might
be right indeed in them, and yet may be wrong in us” [5, p. 1198]; what Newman is
saying amounts to stating that we must live our own lives. Therefore, he continues:
“Profession by word of mouth, religious language, rebuking others, and the like,
may be natural and proper in them [i.e. holy men—J. K.], and forced and out of
place in us. We ought to attempt nothing but what we can do. […] We have often a
kind of misgiving, as if what we are tempted to do does not really belong to us. Let
us carefully attend to this inward voice” [5, p. 1198]. This is extremely interesting,
especially if we consider the simple fact that quite frequently, we tend to think that
exerting ourselves, or even going to extremes, is acceptable when the purpose of
our exertion is noble. Besides, even if I carefully imitate someone else’s life, their
life does not become mine. Consequently, we become unreal. Newman claims that
thus becoming unreal is very dangerous because “unreal” persons frequently grow
weary and abandon their religious practices altogether. They fail to make them
authentically theirs, although they sounded promising in the beginning.
I think that this warning is very much like the question of despair. Not only is
despair concerned with the ambiguity of past and future moments, but it also
concerns an ambiguity about me and someone else’s life. Those who yearn to be
someone else or are discontent with who they are despair of themselves [5, p. 1229.
I am not talking here about this natural feeling we might often experience when
dissatisﬁed with ourselves, or with what we have done. Rather, I am talking about
constant ego trips of imagination, a constant wandering into others’ circumstances.
7
Real Worlds—The Power of Integration
Real apprehension, something that Newman also calls absolute belief, is “the work
of long time.” As such, exaggerated declarations made on the spur of the moment
are sure to be unreal, for they outrun “the real inward existence of feeling” and we
thus become false and artiﬁcial [5, p. 975]. Such declarations are not, if I may say,
concurrent with what we actually feel, being always somewhere else than where we
are.
50
J. Kłos

Let us imagine the human being as a point in space. At the same time, this point
belongs to different planes, for the human being participates in many areas of
personal, social, economic, and political life. Now to make a real decision, to make
a committed choice would mean to integrate all the dimensions of the planes thereof
into one coherent point. This cannot be performed by a simple summation of all the
planes. Rather, it is carried out by means of some hidden method, the one which
Newman called natural reasoning or natural inference. I propose to present what I
have said so far in the following diagram (Fig. 3).
There is always a surplus of something else. One plane does not exhaust all
options; it is only one aspect of the person in question. When we look at the
intersection of the three planes (I, II, and III), we may ask: to which plane does the
small intersecting circle (symbolizing the human being) belong? The answer is
straightforward: to all three. The diagonals of the intersected rectangles show this; the
circle may belong either to the Ist, IInd, or IIIrd rectangle (or to yet another one).
Because we never know how many planes are thus intersected, it is best to presume
that there is an inﬁnite number of them. Therefore, we cannot simply add all the
planes in question together to arrive at their complete combination as we do in
mathematical equations, e.g., RP = P1 + P2 + … + Pn, for they are not so explicit as
P1…Pn. Consequently, these planes cannot be integrated by the power of our intel-
lect. We need a more powerful instrument, i.e., the power of the person. The small
circle in the middle belongs to all of the three planes, as is shown by the intersecting
diagonals. This is how I understand what Newman meant when he called the human
person an “abysmal inﬁnite.” Now real assent, as being the real response of the
person, is the response that combines all the planes in question in a personal manner,
i.e., not by summing up those planes that come into play. According to Newman, real
assent is resultant of the whole person, not meticulous stages of inference.
Thoughts are like a liquid, and words are vessels into which we pour our
thoughts. The structure of communication consists of a triad that is composed of
thought, word, and thing. We are forever doomed to inadequacy on the borders
between thoughts and words, between words and things. Words take into consid-
eration only aspects; therefore, they are always distant abstractions of things
Fig. 3 Planes of participation
2
The Human Person as an Integrated System
51

themselves. As Walter Jost rightly noted, “the concrete is contingent and (rela-
tively) indeterminate, requiring an interpenetration by persons using all the powers
of their mind—will, feeling, and intellect” [13, pp. 144–145]. The person, as it were,
delves into reality which is hidden beyond the words designed to represent it.
There, in its depths, the person combines the intricate richness of dispersed ele-
ments into a coherent whole. Comprehension and the assent resulting thereof must
therefore mean a kind of invitation into an intimate and profound communing with
what we clumsily attempt to express in words. Words are inadequate to thoughts
just as thoughts are inadequate to things.
When we utter a word that does have real meaning for others, while we use it
lightly without attaching to its respective meaning, we are taken to be false or
ambiguous. Some of these above planes are mere shadows. Once we pick the true
one, we have indeed come out of the shadow to the truth (ex umbris et imaginibus).
Often, we cling to others, as we cling to a false ethos. The following words from
one of Newman’s sermons especially ﬁt in this context, “every being in that great
concourse is his own centre, and all things about him are but shades […]. He has
his own hopes and fears, desires, judgments, and aims; he is everything to himself,
and no one else is really anything. He has a depth within him unfathomable, an
inﬁnite abyss of existence; and the scene in which he bears part for the moment is
but like a gleam of sunshine upon its surface” [5, p. 779]. The human being draws
out of himself, like from an inﬁnitely deep well, some shapes and forms to use in
his real life. Each plane colors the acting center and affects its individuality with
some respective hues.
8
Real Assent
Real assent seeks to reach facts, to be open to images, to see the realities behind the
“great truths” that “ﬂoat on the surface of society” [6, p. 78]. We need “to realize
them; to make the facts which they relate stand out before our minds as objects,
such as may be appropriated by a faith as living as the imagination which
apprehends them” [6, p. 79].
Images are important elements in our assenting to something because they have
a more persuasive power than words, but they are not necessary. In time, as we
grow in a moral sense, we become capable of mustering images out of words,
especially if they are real words if we mean what we say. We can really assent to
something of which we have no experience, and this is what happens in miracles
(resp. transgressions of the uniformity of the laws of nature) or else in some unique
events. Therefore, Newman stresses that if he has “no experience of a thing hap-
pening except in one way, is a cause of the intensity of [his] assent, if [he assents],
but not a reason for [his] assenting” [6, p. 81]. Images (experience) may enhance
the intensity of assent but do not cause its occurrence. Besides, we cannot dismiss
ourselves from abidance by “reason and duty” [6, p. 81]. Thus, the assignment to
use real words becomes related to real assent.
52
J. Kłos

Each doctrine is rooted in a system, and this system has its own rationale. We
shall fail to understand this if we start focusing on some isolated elements. Words
are embedded in sentences; sentences are embedded in systems. Systems provide a
concrete understanding of the world. If we claim that the main motor of our action
is personal (or social) gain, our system is called utility, and we then follow the
utility principle in our lives. Systems reﬂect our understanding of human nature.
Thus, if a utilitarian claims that human nature is ruled by pleasure or pain, and that
the driving motor is to seek pleasure and to avoid pain, then feliciﬁc calculus comes
as the only natural conclusion.
Now, if the human person is urged to seek a system, it must be such a system
that makes the person a whole. Bentham was a recluse and had no friends; Newman
had many friends, and he sought friendship. Kant resolved to seek the grounds of
morality in a priori imperative. As Haidt notes, both Kant and Bentham “accom-
plished miracles of systemization, boiling all of morality down to a single sentence,
a single formula” [1, p. 140]. Bentham resorted to arithmetic, Kant resorted to
logic, but none of them resorted to the person.
We are surrounded by uncertainty. The principle of uncertainty seems to rule our
world. Should we not deem it right to seek certitude from within and not from
without the human person? Certainty resides in propositions that compose theories;
certitude resides in persons.
9
The Two Meanings of a System
Newman wrote in his sermons: “Be sure, the highest reason is not to reason on
system, or by rules of argument, but in a natural way; not with formal intent to
draw out proofs, but trusting to God’s blessing that you may gain a right
impression from what you read. If your reasoning powers are weak, using argu-
mentative forms will not make them stronger. They will enable you to dispute
acutely and to hit objections, but not to discover truth. There is nothing creative,
nothing progressive in exhibitions of argument. The utmost they do is to enable us
to state well what we have already discovered by the tranquil exercise of our
reason. Faith and obedience are the main things; believe and do, and pray to God
for light, and you will reason well without knowing it.
Let us not then seek for […] clear, or strong, or compact, or original arguments;
but let us believe; evidence will come after faith as its reward, better than before it
as its groundwork. Faith soars aloft […]” [5, p. 1387].5, p. 1229] cross it out.
This text is indeed intriguing, or, at least, imbued with a more profound meaning
than it seems on the surface. We can single out certain key phrases that call for
more thorough scrutiny in order to ﬁnd their symbolic contents. Therefore, New-
man urges us “not to reason on system, or by rules of argument, but in a natural
way,” “not with formal intent to draw out proofs.” We should not strive for “ex-
hibitions of argument”, but rather rely on “the tranquil exercise of our reason”. In
another place, the same author criticizes people who “are guided mainly by
2
The Human Person as an Integrated System
53

pleasure and pain, not by reason, principle, or conscience; and they do not attempt
to interpret this world, to determine what it means, or to reduce what they see and
feel to system” “system” is used in two different meanings unless we have to
conclude that we have found an obvious contradiction here.
Newman claims that people should not act by way of a system and then rec-
ommends doing just this. Either the ﬁrst or second mode of action is true. I gather
that “system” is ﬁrst used here as an abstract set of rules which anyone can use. Just
like students of geometry who may ﬁnd it difﬁcult to visualize some individual
problems, once they are taught theorems, they can readily use them. Such a system
helps us consistently apply certain procedures. These rules have nothing to do with
us; they describe the steps we are supposed to take when regarded in view of what
is common or universal, just as we do in the case of ﬁgures or numbers.
The second understanding of “system,” the one which we are encouraged to
follow, comes to describe the integrated personal response to a given problem. In
this meaning, we are not talking about some abstract and external rules to apply, but
are talking about the person who is such a system and, therefore, reasons “in a
natural way.” This natural way is personal, indeed a natural personal reaction to
tasks. The person is thus ﬁlled with the principles of such a system and naturally
functions according to its rules without even being aware of their formal inscription.
As regards reality, we can attain probability. Our knowledge concerning reality
can attain as much as probability. The Austrian economist and Nobel prize laureate,
Ludwig von Mises, noted in his voluminous work Human Action: “Apodictic
certainty is only within the orbit of the deductive system of aprioristic theory. The
most that can be attained with regard to reality is probability” [12, p. 105]. In the
area of human action, when faced with probability, we decide with the certitude we
can attain. It is our personal system with which we assent to reality. It is our simple
assent, that momentous readiness we have managed to acquire in being rooted in
our system, which appears to be most important. Since there is a discrepancy
between certainty and certitude, the certainty of propositions is met with at most
probability. What can be decisive but our personal character?
In one of his university sermons, Newman said: “Truth is vast and
far-stretching, viewed as a system; and, viewed in its separate doctrines, it depends
on the combination of a number of various, delicate, and scattered evidences;
hence it can scarcely be exhibited in a given number of sentences” [7, p. 90]. As we
can see from these important and seminal words, they conﬁrm two meanings of the
word “system again.” Namely, let us repeat, “system” as a certain array of de-
ductive propositions inherently interrelated and coherent. And, secondly, “system”
as a set of views of the person. The person is the carrier of a system, or, rather, is
called upon to respond to the right system. Then this system is integrated with that
person, with this meaning that the person responds to a given situation as a whole.
He does not react in one way with one part of his personhood and in another way
with another part.
In this second sense, we are talking about the living system of a concrete person.
In this sense, such a system does not come from without but emerges from within.
A system must be mine in order to be the driving motor of my action. Such a
54
J. Kłos

system, metaphorically speaking, resembles breathing rather than thinking, for it
emanates from the person as a whole. Newman also mentions “unconscious holi-
ness” in this context. It would be difﬁcult to imagine someone acting on the basis of
a system that is entirely hostile to his person.
When this personal system is attained, man can grasp intuitively what is true.
Newman writes about “the instinctive power of an educated conscience, that is by
some secret faculty, and without any intelligible reasoning process, it seems to
detect moral truth wherever it lies hid, and feels a conviction of its own accuracy
which bystanders cannot account for […]” [7, p. 66]. This personal system is
created as an implicit act of reasoning. Thus, we rely on “the personal inﬂuence” [7,
p. 79] for the development of this internal system of perceiving the truth as an
individual effort. Conscience speaks, and its judgments are categorical inasmuch as
it is obeyed, “but having been triﬂed with, it does not tell truly; it equivocates, or is
irregular” [7, pp. 80–81]. In like manner, our internal system becomes spoiled. It is
no longer a system, but a malfunctioning mechanism of conﬂicting inclinations that
has no ﬁrm principle to which to refer. Another name for this internal system is a
habit. The point is to be involved in a more profound reﬂection, not accidental or
superﬁcial, of our very person on events. In this manner, we gain “the natural and
almost spontaneous result of the formed and ﬁnished character within” [7, p. 83],
i.e., the person’s system. The author of these words continues his exposition when
he stresses that the signiﬁcant point is “not to unfold a system for our intellectual
contemplation, but to secure the formation of a certain character” [7, p. 83].
We must understand the speciﬁc and idiosyncratic character of this system here.
This system reminds one of the Aristotelian views of ethics. It is not “for our
intellectual contemplation, but to secure the formation of a certain character” [7,
p. 83]. The integrated personal system we are talking about is unlike a theoretical
problem that must be rendered in an intersubjective language and explicit terms.
There is no external survey of this system. The metaphor of breathing becomes
useful here.
What is of utmost importance in this construction of an internal system of virtue
is that, for Newman, thinking cannot be considered in isolation from moral char-
acter, especially when it concerns moral matters. Thus, ethical intellectualism
would be out of the question. When we gain this intuitive knowledge of moral
matters, there is less chance for it to be spoiled in the process of intellectual debate.
The language is incommensurable, for—in being an artiﬁcial and conventional
system—it fails to render the internal and vulnerable system of intuition. Therefore,
Newman concludes: “Moral character in itself, whether good or bad, as exhibited
in thought and conduct, surely cannot be duly represented in words” [7, p. 85].
What does the anti-system approach consist in? It consists, primarily, of focusing
on some randomly selected aspects and treating them as a whole. Because these
aspects are taken from a larger whole, and in that whole, they make, they are likely
to be used for other purposes outside this whole. Let us also add that they are part
and parcel of a dynamic, not static, whole. This means that they are bound to
develop into various idiosyncratic interrelations. When they are separated from their
original whole, they can naturally be used for other developments, and they lose
2
The Human Person as an Integrated System
55

their sensible contact with other parts. Consequently, they form different wholes as
free variations divergent from their original source.
Let us imagine two different paintings. Then let us assume that we ﬁnd some
ﬁgures colored in red in both of them. Now, if we isolated a red spot from one
painting, we could try to attach it to any other painting, for we no longer know to
which painting it originally belonged. Metaphorically speaking, such is the sense of
the system that is meant here. The human person is the most complicated and
dynamic system, constantly on the move and under the process of dynamic changes.
Therefore, the human person cannot be looked upon as a punctual self (Locke),
but rather as a historical process. Metaphysically speaking, the human person is a
being with an inalienable dignity; but from the point of view of personality, man
has a history. In order to understand a person, we need to look upon him as he has
developed through time. All past and present decisions make up the overall sedi-
mentation of the way the person is. The person must be considered in himself and in
relation to others; he affects others and is affected by them.
In his Letters and Diaries, Newman wrote that the human person could attain “a
casting of heart and mind into a system, and investigating the truth by practice”
[14, pp. 214–215]. This citation stresses the fact that the human person should
approach problems in an integral manner, with the heart and mind combined. This
is what is meant by the words “a casting of heart and mind into a system”. Both the
mind and heart are not isolated in different places but are united in their tackling of
whatever comes to hand. Only such a person in whom the two spheres are united is
capable of judging appropriately, with the whole of one’s personality.
10
Conclusion
It appears from the above considerations that the human person is a very complicated,
say, cognitive system. He is much more than a mere combination of the intellect and
the will. Even if we were to put together these two components, the person transcends
them. In other words, it would not sufﬁce to add together the intellect and the will in
order to predict an end result, in the form of someone’s decision. Many more ele-
ments come to play here. We are brought up in various systems. The point is to
recognize a system vis-à-vis the person so that the person can be consonant with his
system on the way to full development. We can be surrounded by individualistic,
collectivistic, rationalistic, or personalist systems. Each of them offers a vital back-
ground for the person. There are true and false systems, for not every system is
conducive to human development, just like the composition of the air we breathe is
not always benevolent to our health. In our contemporary pluralist world, I ﬁnd an
urgent need to examine the systems in which we live thoroughly. The point is not to
adjust a system to whatever needs we can muster, but ﬁrst to introspect ourselves, to
know ourselves, and then to see if the system in which we live can help our true self
to develop. In our pluralistic world, the question of what kind of a system underlies
our actions will indeed become more and more fundamental.
56
J. Kłos

Core Messages
• For the sake of our integration, it is crucial to assent to realities, for
realities (images) move us within.
• Even if we assent to notions, as we often do, it is important to go beyond
notions to realities.
• We participate in various spheres of life (professional, political, cultural,
religious, and recreational) and we need to combine them altogether and
understand that for our integrity we need to realize that the person is one being.
• We are wholes who should understand what kind of systems stand beneath
what is proposed for us to accept.
• If we are systems, we are wholes, i.e. structured unities, we commit ourselves
to what we participate and we are aware of what we commit ourselves to.
References
1. Haidt J (2013) The righteous mind. Why good people are divided by politics and religion.
Penguin Books, London
2. Newman JH (1976) Apologia pro Vita Sua. Sheed and Ward, London
3. Newman JH (1924) Discussions and arguments on various subjects. Longmans, Green and
Co, London
4. Taylor C (1989) Sources of the self. The making of the modern identity. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge
5. Newman JH (1987) Parochial and plain sermons. Ignatius Press, San Francisco
6. Newman JH (1955) An essay in aid of a grammar of assent. Image Books, Garden City
7. Newman JH (1872) Fifteen sermons preached before the University of Oxford. Rivingtone,
London
8. Hadamard J (1945) An essay of the psychology of invention in the mathematical ﬁeld. Dover
Publications Inc., New York
9. Archer MS (2000) Being human: the problem of agency. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge
10. Coombes H (1963) Literature and criticism. Penguin Books
11. Guitton J (1962) Préface. In: Pascal B (ed) Pensées. Livre de Poche, Paris
12. von Mises L (1966) Human action. A treatise on economics. Contemporary Books Inc., Chicago
13. Jost W (1989) Rhetorical thought in John Henry Newman. University of South Carolina
Press, Columbia
14. Quoted after Vélez JR (2019) Passion for truth. The life of John Henry Newman. TAN Books,
Charlotte
2
The Human Person as an Integrated System
57

Jan Kłos is a professor at the John Paul II Catholic University of
Lublin. He studied philosophy and English there. He works at the
Faculty of Philosophy, Department of Ethics. His main ﬁeld of
interest is the philosophical thought of the nineteenth century,
especially John Henry Newman. He is particularly interested in
political and moral philosophy, especially how political decisions
call for moral maturity, the history of social and political
doctrines, and the mass media. He has published in Polish and
foreign journals, e.g., Faith, Freedom& Modernity. Christianity
and Liberalism in the Nineteenth Century, Acton Institute, Grand
Rapids 2010; Papers: Liberty—Progress—Individualism on the
Relationship between Christianity and Liberalism in the Nine-
teenth Century, in: “Journal des Economistes et des Etudes
Humaines,” vol. 13, No 2/3, Juin/Septembre 2003, pp. 197–212;
Spontaneous Order versus Organized Order, in: “Markets &
Morality,” vol. 6, no 1 (Spring 2003), pp. 161–176.
58
J. Kłos

3
On the Nature of Qualitative Research
in Process Transformations: The
Changing Man in the Changing World
Ewa Rzechowska
“We have to remember that what we observe is not nature
herself, but nature exposed to our method of questioning”.
Werner Heisenberg
Summary
The transformation of human activity with changing contexts becomes the object
of increasingly sophisticated research. The complexity of human behavior was
noticed by the classic authors in psychology who conceptualized phenomena as
processes and highlighted their qualitative attributes such as uniqueness,
individuality, speciﬁcity, changeability, and dynamics. In their view, processes
should be mapped holistically and dynamically, taking account of the genetic
nature of changes, and treated as indivisible, irreducible, and having an internal
organization. The contemporary authors who draw upon these concepts promote
the formulation of “meta-theories,” integrating the conceptual and methodolog-
ical aspects of deﬁning a problem with appropriate research procedures and
generalizations based on the qualitative studies of single cases. This chapter
presents an approach that, although developed from a different starting point, can
be viewed as the concretization of proposals formulated so far. The gathering of
data to reproduce one’s image and interpretation of self and world and analyzing
E. Rzechowska (&)
Department of Developmental Psychology, Faculty of Social Sciences, John Paul II Catholic
University of Lublin, Al. Racławickie 14, 20-950 Lublin, Poland
e-mail: ewa.rzechowska@kul.lublin.pl
E. Rzechowska
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Lublin, Poland
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
N. Rezaei (ed.), Integrated Science, Integrated Science 1,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65273-9_3
59

them using a data mining method makes it possible to reconstruct individual
courses of a phenomenon and build a model of its transformation in time and the
mechanisms and genesis of the process.
The calligraphy for the poem;
“In short, on Time’s permanency, rely not:
For this is the workshop wherein change they make.”
[Adapted with permission from the Association of Science and Art (ASA),
USERN; Contributor: Sepideh Shahkarami (calligraphy) and Khajeh Shamsed-
din Mohammad Hafez Shirazi (poem)].
The code of this chapter is 01101110 01100011 01101111 01101001
01110100 01110010 01100011 01110101 01110100 01100101 01110011
01101111 01101110 01010010.
60
E. Rzechowska

1
Introduction
Human activity is a function of changes that occur at different levels and in different
dimensions of life, in a variable environment of socio-cultural and technological
transformations to which generations respond in their own way. For instance, the
individualistic orientation of young people who assert their right to be independent
entities and to build their own identities morphs into a self-imposed imperative of
self-realization. In the pursuit of it, young people tend to replace close bonds with
broader and shallower ones and reject institutional limitations. At the same time,
their compulsive concern about being able to foster their autonomy and make
decisions and choices independently causes that, paradoxically, the freedom they
win turns into a burden that they frequently cannot handle. This complex picture of
young people becomes even more complicated because of the emergence of new
deﬁnitions of life roles and life tasks, the blurring of lines between working and
private lives, the progressing integration of virtual and real environments, and, last
but not least, the changing models of close relations, the fading of intergenerational
points of reference, values, meanings, etc. Studying this intricate system of changes
from the standpoint of individual and diverse life paths and trying to ﬁnd more
general relationships creates new opportunities to conceptualize developmental
problems and work out relevant research procedures.
A methodological reﬂection on the study of the activity of a changing man in a
changing world entails the following question: will further efforts to build
increasingly
sophisticated
procedures
for
verifying
increasingly
elaborate
hypotheses not be—after all—like trying to ﬁnd a ball hidden somewhere in the
corner of the house? A parallel between formulating hypotheses under incomplete
information and seeking a ball in an indicated place can be found in Borgatti [1]. If
the ball is not there, it does not mean that it is not in the house at all, but only that it
is not where it was supposed to be. Then, how can we deﬁne and solve research
problems when our knowledge of a phenomenon is insufﬁcient, and its complexity
is increasing? An attempt at answering the question is presented in this chapter.
2
What Science Do We Need?
Modern sciences started to achieve unprecedented successes only after asking
questions that they could not answer with the empirical data. According to Heller [2],
a Polish cosmologist, philosopher, and theologizer, leaving behind the traditional
(hard) rationality opens up opportunities for new explorations. What lies beyond the
boundaries does not (yet) belong to science but is a challenge for it, a promise of
success, and a risk of failure. A trial-and-error method is inherent in scientiﬁc
methodology. Also, the boundaries are an apparent temptation to cross them. Hence,
the methodological directive requires researchers not to give up in the face of new
questions and assume a priori that they are outside the domain of the scientiﬁc
method. Asked about whether a scientiﬁc method per se has limitations, Heller
3
The Changing Man in the Changing World
61

observed that science adopted some type of rationality that is deemed obligatory and
frequently the highest and only one, beyond which no other rationality exists.
Explaining whether a scientiﬁc method and rationality have common boundaries,
Heller pointed to types of rationality where the mathematical-empirical method
failed. He concluded that science should never use the word “never” and that it
should be considered in terms of questions that it does not answer. Heller’s
understanding of science harmonizes with Aristotle’s [3] acceptance that notions and
the degrees of certainty of knowledge are not precisely deﬁnable.
3
A Changing Man in the Changing World: Classic
Psychologists and the Advocates of Dynamic Systems
Wilhelm Wundt, the father of modern psychology, regarded processes as the sole
object of psychological study. A dynamic, holistic, and processual perspective on
human development can be found in works published as early as the turn of the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Many ideas presented in the pioneering works
of classic psychologists have been included in the contemporary concepts pre-
senting human development as a dynamic system. They have inspired the recent
calls to create meta-theories accounting for the qualitative aspects of the object of
research.
3.1
Holism and the Dynamic Approach to Phenomena
In The Principles of Psychology, James [4] presents thought as an ever-changing
process and uses this perspective to create a processual description of the human
mind and human behaviors. For Wundt [5], processes are the essence of psychology
study. He deﬁned psychical facts as ‘occurrences’ that occur in time and are never
the same as they were a moment ago. A holistic view of the inner and outer worlds
of an individual can already be found in Janet’s work, where it is explained as the
systemic unity of external behaviors and intra-psychic feelings and thoughts. A
holistic explanation of the psychological processes occurring in the (inner) and
outer worlds is also present in Külpe, who also emphasizes the moment of “be-
coming” in the course of human development as quoted in [6]. According to
Baldwin [7], a developing person’s environment and intra-psychic reality are
changeable because the world of the person varies due to the ﬂuidity of social
interactions. Baldwin views human development as an open process and deﬁnes it
as the emergence of new forms of activity and openness to change. Bergson [8], in
turn, points to mechanisms leading to the creation of new behaviors, which he calls
adaptation-as-ﬁt and adaptation-as-construction. The mechanisms consist of a
person transcending the direct requirements of the environment and creating new
forms of organization within the framework of the existing psychical functions. In
62
E. Rzechowska

the adaptation process, new mechanisms appear as the current state, and the
requirements of the context undergo alignment, which pre-adapt a person to new
conditions that they may encounter in the future.
3.2
Indivisibility and Irreducibility of Phenomena: The
Genesis of Changes
Baldwin’s axioms [9] are another attempt at describing human development.
According to the axioms, developmental phenomena are organized hierarchically.
As a result, complex developmental phenomena cannot be decomposed into simpler
elements, complex changes are irreducible to simpler changes, and qualitative
changes cannot be expressed in terms of quantitative changes. This deﬁnition of
human development requires a qualitative description of structural transformations
and cannot be reduced to counting up the elements of the structures. Quite the
contrary, it must be viewed as a process, and the causes of changes must be
identiﬁed.
3.3
The Internal Organization of a Process
The classical writings present the internal organization of a process as a dynamic
structure of increasing complexity.
3.3.1
Stable and Dynamic Elements of a Process
In James’s [4] view, a process is a sequence of partial changes that yield partial
effects; some of them are stable (substantive) while others are dynamic (transitive).
The role of the dynamic elements is to link successive stable elements.
3.3.2
Hierarchical Organization of Processes
According to Wundt [5], the hierarchy of processes should be analyzed in the
following order: (i) complex processes; (ii) relationships between elements identi-
ﬁed during earlier analyses; and (iii) laws governing the formation of relationships.
According to a relatively simple approach, psychical elements ﬁrst form psychical
compounds, i.e., simple combinations of separate elements that coexist in the
continual ﬂow of psychical processes. The interconnections of psychical com-
pounds constitute the second-order classes of processes that come into more
complex combinations, the components of which are ordered to some extent. These
third-order interconnections are referred to as psychical developments. To be able
to understand laws that describe psychical phenomena, all interconnections
occurring at different levels must be analyzed, i.e., relationships between the
compound elements as well as complex relationships underlying psychical
phenomena.
3
The Changing Man in the Changing World
63

3.3.3
A Phenomenon as a Changeable Hierarchical
Organization
Baldwin[7] concluded that the organization of developmental phenomena was both
hierarchical and dynamic and considered the genetic interconnections between
elements at three levels: phylogenetic (the relationships between animal organisms),
anthropologic (changes are occurring in the course of human evolution), and
psychogenetic (the basic experiences of an individual over lifetime). The levels are
hierarchically interconnected and evolve at all times.
3.3.4
A Phenomenon as a Dynamic Configuration
of Interconnected Elements
While Baldwin [7] worked on his genetic (developmental) logic, Völkelt, Krüger,
and other authors developed their concepts within Ganzheitpsychologie. They
jointly concluded that a study of separate elements was ineffective in psychology
because elements started to ‘live’ only when one understood their structural con-
ﬁguration (the temporal variations in the relationships between them and changes in
mutual relationships) and considered them within a bigger picture. The basis of
Ganzheitperspective is the assumption that a complex whole (a multi-level structure
that, in the case of a developmental phenomenon, is always in change) is func-
tionally more important than its part as quoted in [6].
3.4
How to Study Process Transformations? The Origins
of the Microgenetic Method
A quarter of a century later, the classical approaches to process conceptualizations
created a basis for the ﬁrst research strategies known as the microgenetic approach.
The approach has been designed to enable exploring (qualitative) data that could
not be reached by any other means. Thus, Werner’s [10] and Vygotsky’s [11]
works have become the primary point of reference for contemporary authors
studying processes.
3.4.1
Aktualgenese and the Progressive Nature of Direct
Experience
For Werner [10], every human activity is an unfolding process, with ‘unfolding’
meaning microgenesis. The unfolding follows an ordered sequence of states,
whether it lasts seconds, hours, or days. It proceeds from states of relative globality
to increasingly diverse, separate, and hierarchically integrated states (the ortho-
genetic principle). Werner posits that because changes are similar regardless of their
duration, a microscale phenomenon can be used to infer the path of developmental
changes.
64
E. Rzechowska

3.4.2
Microgenesis of Activity in the Context of Social
Interactions
A picture of the genesis of human activity organized by cultural factors can be
found in Vygotsky’s works. The double stimulation method (also known as an
experimental-developmental method or an experimental-genetic method) he pro-
posed is based on a detailed analysis of the paths of composite phenomena.
Therefore, it allows better insight into them and helps understand how notions are
shaped by signs directing intellectual operations. Vygotsky [11] posited that
studying the history of things was equivalent to considering them in the process of
change and that in order to understand a developmental process with all its phases
and alterations (from birth to death) by its very nature, its core must be
apprehended.
3.5
Contemporary Researchers and Changes in the Internal
Structure of Phenomena
The past quarter-century has witnessed a revival of interest in the microgenetic
method as reviewed in [12–14]. Contemporary researchers who use the method
stress
that
the
knowledge
of
phenomena
should
be
built
by
analyzing
micro-changes because exploring their nature is a prerequisite to understanding the
macro-changes. Data obtained in this process are instrumental in identifying the yet
unknown properties of phenomena, discovering their dynamic organization, and,
consequently, building the dynamic picture of a phenomenon that frequently has
many variants due to the diversity of its developmental paths [13, 15, 16].
Modern authors who organize their empirical studies around classic concepts
understand phenomena as dynamic systems and describe those using metaphors that
emphasize their changeability and differentiation (e.g., a mountain stream [17],
overlapping waves model [12], or a spider web [18]). Their explorations into the
internal organization of phenomena seek for change patterns, variability, and
transformations [14]. There is also a line of research relating to narrative psy-
chology, systems theory, and socio-cultural theories, where the object of qualitative
analyses is differently constructed as multifaceted “stories” about the course of
occurrences and their social contexts, and where special attention is given to the
transformations
of
meanings
(a
narrative-developmental
approach,
a
relational-historical approach). Both approaches use the identiﬁed microscale
changes and transformations to construct the macroscale models of developmental
processes (network diagrams [13], transformation maps [15], an equational model
of a phenomenon [19], and the continuous process model of communication [20]).
3
The Changing Man in the Changing World
65

4
The French Garden and the English Garden: Equivalent
or Extreme Approaches to Studying a Changing Reality?
Even the profound knowledge may not be sufﬁcient for a researcher to fully
understand a phenomenon because of the variety of available approaches and
theoretical inconsistencies, or when some new aspect of the phenomenon needs to
be explored, or when a new phenomenon is to be studied in terms of its relation-
ships with the context. The classical approaches stressing theoretical foundations
and hypothesis testing are useful for studying phenomena that are relatively stable
and independent of their contexts, deﬁned variables and indicators, and cleaned
databases. However, when applied to the internally diverse and dynamic phe-
nomena set in changing contexts, they produce an unhypothesisable “useless
noise.” Then, the researcher can only identify the areas of changeability and the
patterns of organization and build an empirical model reﬂecting the differentiation
of the phenomenon under consideration.
The differences between the research approaches described above and the
actions of the researchers using them can be well illustrated using the metaphor of
the French garden and the English garden [15]. While metaphors may seem
ambiguous and imprecise, they perfectly deliver the intended message if
well-selected (Fig. 1).
The French-style garden has a geometric axial design, where all elements are
interrelated and subordinated to the overall aesthetic impression. A visitor knows in
advance what types, arrangements, and combinations of plants they would see
there. As the spatial layout of the garden’s architecture must conform to the existing
standards, it too is easy to predict. A researcher who attempts to study a phe-
nomenon in the same way as the French garden is planned “knows” in advance
what they would want to ﬁnd because they start from the framework of established
Fig. 1 The French garden and the English garden as the metaphors of research approaches.
Adopted from https://www.shutterstock.com/pl/image-photo/traditional-french-garden-chateau-de-
villandry-83663962
and
https://www.shutterstock.com/pl/image-photo/english-country-garden-
june-2015-burned-284284793
66
E. Rzechowska

theories and their descriptive categories rather than from the phenomenon they
would study.
In contrast, the design of the English garden is irregular because it is to imitate a
natural landscape. For a visitor, the English garden constitutes a combination of
plants, trees, and bushes that vary in color and shape. A researcher who takes the
English-garden approach to study a phenomenon looks at the identiﬁed elements
repeatedly to ﬁnd out how they relate to each other rather than trying to match them
to the theoretical rules. As a result, a multidimensional network of descriptive
categories is created empirically to capture diverse elements and the relationships
between them, and, ﬁnally, to reproduce the phenomenon in its complexity. In this
case, the starting point for the researcher is the phenomenon and not theory. The
middle-range theory [21–23] and classical statistical procedures (the French garden)
has opened up new research opportunities.
5
In Search of a Meta-Theory and a New Research Formula
Efforts aimed to deepen the understanding of phenomena have resulted in original
conceptualizations that have signiﬁcantly contributed to developing the modern
science of psychology. The shift from testing hypotheses with standard procedures
to building theoretical models of phenomena has created new possibilities for
describing and understanding a human in the world. Researchers advocate that the
meta-theories should account for the exceptionality of human experiences and their
internal differentiation while enabling the more general conclusions to be drawn
[21–29]. The conceptualizations are reﬂected in studies of ontological and episte-
mological questions such as individuality, subjectivity, the intentionality of human
beings, and qualitative-quantitative, nomothetic-idiographical, subjective–objective
approaches to the subject matter.
Overton [23] relies on the notion of the meta-theory to capture concepts whose
scope is broader than any particular theory, and form the essential conceptual core
within which scientiﬁc theory and observation function. He recommends devel-
oping broad scientiﬁc research programs consisting of coherent nested layers of
meta-theoretical concepts, along with the speciﬁc theories they contextualize, and
the empirical hypotheses drawn from the theories.
According to Overton and Lerner [30], individuals develop as complex adaptive
systems. They propose, therefore, designing well-grounded conceptual tools and
new, well-grounded methodological tools to match the conceptual tools. The
acceptance of the exceptionality of human experience has revived interest in cre-
ating a universal, context-sensitive, and culture-inclusive science of psychology, as
well focus with qualitative data analyses of time-based processes, attention for the
phenomena under study, and an idiographic (single-system-based) approach in
empirical investigations. These three pathways restore the centrality of humans
experiencing culturally constructed worlds as the core of psychological science and
the presence of universal principles in all cases [29].
3
The Changing Man in the Changing World
67

The practice of science entails more than just repeated cycles of theory con-
struction,
hypothesis
generation,
and
empirical
investigation.
Broader,
meta-theoretical levels of conceptualization necessarily condition all aspects of the
research process, establishing the very meaning and sensibility of science’s
empirical and theoretical activities. When debate arises at these meta-theoretical
levels, it is the subject of conceptual analysis, not empirical investigation [31].
There is also an alternative approach to formulating meta-theories, which pro-
motes greater use of empirical research, in line with the Nullius in Verba motto
(“take nobody’s word for it”) of the Royal Society of London that emphasizes the
importance of empirically determined facts, while leaving aside for a while the
middle-range theory. This approach ensures a better insight and understanding of
how and why things work. It is based on analysis and explanations, which create
inputs for formulating theories.
6
From Processual Conceptualization and Empiricism
to a Phenomenon Transformation Model
In the processual approach, a theory is the ﬁnal result of a conceptualization process
utilizing an empirically constructed model of a phenomenon. The inspiration for the
processual approach was the need to understand the nature of phenomena.
Accordingly, questions probing into the internal organization, genesis, and mech-
anisms of phenomena are formulated with the awareness that they are changeable,
diverse, and dynamic and that they depend in many ways on context changes. This
intricacy of phenomena causes that the relatively narrow conceptualizations are
insufﬁcient to create a theoretical underpinning for a research process. The real-
ization of this prompted the author to conceptualize human development in the
framework of Whitehead’s philosophy of process [32] and appropriately design
procedures for capturing data characterizing individuals (case studies) in order to
build an empirical model of a phenomenon with its qualitative differentiation and
transformations.
6.1
The Concept of Potentiality in Human Development
and Its Methodological Consequences
According to the concept of developmental potentiality, the human beingis an entity
that goes beyond oneself in the process of “becoming”, and both shapes and is
being shaped by the environment. Human development is of the essence, refers to
the continual emergence of new forms of behavior as the internal potentiality of an
individual undergoes updates induced by an active context. Individual internal
potentiality is determined by interrelated dynamic elements, including biological
and genetic status, the dynamic “store” of personal experiences, and the readiness to
engage in activities that have so far seemed unachievable. An active context is
68
E. Rzechowska

comprised of situational elements that an individual is sensitive to, and which
prompt the individual to invent new forms of organizing behaviors. The processual
approach understands development as new forms of behavior emerge from the
existing ones [32].
Under such deﬁned development, the direct examination of a phenomenon is
impossible because only what has been updated can be studied. Every path of a
phenomenon is analyzed as a sequence of interrelated states, where the individual is
the relational element of different dynamic systems. When many elements of a
system and their dynamic relations are examined jointly and simultaneously, the
relations between individuals and their context change their status. They stop being
enigmatic interactions between the personal and contextual factors deﬁned as dy-
namic systems (see the relational approach), turning into real relations between an
individual and the object of their activity that changes depending on the situation.
The empirical reconstruction of relations reveals the “internal architecture” of the
individual path of a phenomenon, where the architecture is understood as a mul-
tifaceted relational picture of individual subjects allowing for the context of their
life paths and changing conditions.
6.2
The Recreation of Subjective Worlds: Designing
the “Map” of an Interview
Depending on the nature of the phenomenon to be examined, the “internal archi-
tecture” of its individual paths can be reconstructed from the video recordings of
group activities, open questionnaires, or based on the information collected during a
“trailing interview” [15, 33–36]. This section centers on a trailing interview to
explore individuals’ subjective worlds expressed through actions and meanings
they give to them and for collecting data that few other means can provide [37].
A trailing interview in the processual approach is designed to reproduce the
individual’s life path (or a part of it) as a process in order to gain an insight into the
nature of subjective experiences, actions, and feelings in different periods and
different contexts, to ﬁnd out about the quality of relations and the nature of
relations with others, and to help separate experiences from declarations. Its pur-
pose is, therefore, to explore more in-depth the natural, subjective space of
meanings, experiences, and contexts that the subject describes using their individual
code (featuring individual distribution of accents, an inclination to expose or leave
out some issues, etc.). The interview is also instrumental in determining where the
subject recounts facts and experiences as they were and where they are selected and
interpreted, understanding the subject’s perspectives during an internal dialogue or
in reporting conversations with other persons (whether they describe them in terms
of actions, words, or emotions, how they interpret them, and whether they think
about the correctness of their evaluations, decisions, and choices). It also enables a
meta-reﬂection on the nature of the subject’s experiences and their consequences
and establishes which contents the subject ﬁnds acceptable and to what degree (e.g.,
the patterns of behaviors). Lastly, the interview can provide answers to the
3
The Changing Man in the Changing World
69

questions raised by other researchers or relating to the theoretical foundations of
their or the researcher’s studies.
A trailing interview means to ‘enter’ the subject’s inner world and to understand
the events and spots that are unveiled to the researcher. The design of the interview
and the questions is to make the ‘entry’ possible. The interview is carried out based
on a predeﬁned ‘map’ of points, the exploration of which may improve the
knowledge of a given phenomenon. The role of the ‘map’ is to deﬁne the frame-
work of the interview without imposing its content, to stimulate the conversation, to
help the researcher follow the subject, and to open up new areas for exploration (by
asking neutral questions such as “and what happened then?”). If the subject has
omitted some topics or dealt with them cursorily, indirect questions about events,
interpretations, descriptions, etc., are asked at the end of the interview. The direct
questions can also be asked when the researcher needs to verify how the subject
understands notions such as responsibility, friendship, family, etc., if they were not
used or explained during the interview, or if the explanations were inconsistent
(Fig. 2).
Fig. 2 The content framework of the trailing interview
70
E. Rzechowska

In order to encourage the subject to start telling and continue their story, general
questions are asked. Following the subject is an opportunity to understand the issues
they raise, their interpretations, doubts, evaluations, etc. to guide their answers to
build a more in-depth picture of the problem under consideration (Table 1).
General questions also help the subject to produce a full picture as possible of
what has happened in their lives, including internal transformations and various
activities.
7
The Internal Architecture of Single Cases: Objectifying
the Subjective
The main purpose of the trailing interview is to compile a potentially large set of data
that are important for the subject and the researcher. The data are used to recreate the
individual life paths of the subject that are further used as a context for reconstructing
some area of the studied phenomenon and, ﬁnally, to build an empirical model of the
phenomenon accounting for its internal diversity. A detailed, yet ﬂexible network of
descriptive categories has to be created empirically to ensure that the reconstruction
is reliable. The baseline network of descriptive categories is constructed with
approximately one-fourth randomly selected descriptions of life paths.
7.1
The Network of Descriptive Categories
The purpose of constructing a network of descriptive categories is to accurately
represent the content and structure of the life paths, which are then used to create an
impartial description of the history of all analyzed cases, including their individual
characteristics. The categories making up the network describe the general and
speciﬁc characteristics that are crucial to the life path and nuances detected during
in-depth analyses, many of which are unreported in theoretical studies, despite their
importance as signs pointing to the emergence of new qualities. The nuances show
Table 1 An illustrative excerpt of an interview transcript
Researcher
You mentioned that in addition to your professional and family responsibilities,
you have time only for yourself. What do you do then?
Interviewee
… this is time for myself
Researcher
… time to do what?
Interviewee
… to read and it is time only for myself, not for my husband, children
Researcher
… for anything else?
Interviewee
… I like to go away somewhere sometimes… at work, we also have trainings
Researcher
… and what happens when you go away?
Interviewee
… I can always learn something, something new… sometimes we also have
trainings at work… these are rather useless things. Nobody likes them
3
The Changing Man in the Changing World
71

the yet unknown aspects of what tends to be considered in more general terms, what
can be deduced from the existing studies and theories, or what the existing theories
and studies fail to notice.
7.2
Reconstructing the Internal Architecture of Individual
Cases (A Case Study)
To reconstruct the life paths, the qualitative description of the subject’s engagements
on different planes and in different relationships in the changing socio-cultural and
technological conditions is necessary. Qualitative analysis involves two challenges.
When selecting the necessary characteristics from the network of descriptive cate-
gories, one has to make sure that nuances and micro-relations are captured without
losing sight of the multidimensionality and changeability of a life path that has to be
presented as a dynamic system. Individual sets of characteristics must be compiled to
describe each of the analyzed cases [33]. The sets are used to develop a baseline
matrix containing several hundred data with which the nature of the phenomenon
under consideration can be explained. The construction of the matrix begins with
recording and reconstructing to the possible extent the subject’s utterances in natural
language, after which they are ordered and structured by topic. The stage also
involves the creation of a network of descriptive categories, which will be used as a
unifying and objectifying tool for describing and recoding of the collected data.
8
From Single Cases to a Model Reflecting the Internal
Diversity of a Phenomenon
The data matrix contains multi-attribute descriptions of individual cases (life paths).
The sets of cases sharing common characteristics are created using the C4.5
induction algorithm [38], one of the data mining methods allowing the generation
of decision trees. The algorithm searches data sets for patterns that do not have
theoretical explanations and which may be unknown to the researcher [39]. The
rationale for creating the algorithm has been that in a large set of attributes
describing a phenomenon, there could be some latent knowledge that the classical
statistical procedures are unable to bring out. A data classiﬁcation criterion
appropriate to the studied problem is selected [40]. The application of the algorithm
leads to the creation of a decision tree.
The processual approach proposed by the author comes with her own inter-
pretation of the decision tree [15]. Namely, the attributes representing the branches
and leaves of the decision tree and their values are employed as criteria for selecting
groups of individuals sharing common characteristics functioning as particular
elements of the decision tree. An analysis of the conﬁguration of the attributes and
information in the database allows the nature of each group to be determined. With
that knowledge, it is possible to build the partial models (variants) of the studied
72
E. Rzechowska

phenomenon. The data extracted by the algorithm are grouped into what the
dressmaker might call the unique collections of seemingly different garments.
Individual variants of the life paths are considered with and against the background
of other variants. Appropriate interpretations of the characteristics that are formally
identical but belong to different systems cause that the variants become increasingly
detailed. The ﬁnal step is creating the model of transformations of the studied
phenomenon, which consists of the ordered spectrum of its states. The model is
used to explain the internal differences in the course of the phenomenon, its rela-
tions with the changing context, as well as the genesis and mechanisms (the
explanatory function). A special advantage of the process-oriented model is the
possibility of using it to prepare foresight forecasts [41] that construct theories.
9
Conclusion
We are living in a world where social-cultural and technological environments
change at an increasingly fast pace. We take part in or witness the emergence of
new phenomena, the existence of which we are not aware of until they send
identiﬁable signals. Even if we can deﬁne them to some extent, as researchers, we
still have some problems to solve.
A changing man in a changing context was reﬂected upon by the classic psy-
chologists, who conceptualized phenomena as processes and underscored their
qualitative attributes such as exceptionality, individuality, speciﬁcity, changeability,
and dynamics. They advocated that processes should be viewed as indivisible,
irreducible, and internally organized phenomena that should be mapped holistically
and dynamically, taking account of the genetic nature of their changes. The con-
cepts have inspired the contemporary authors who emphasize the need to create
“meta-theories”
encompassing conceptual and methodological approaches to
problem deﬁnition with appropriate research procedures and derive generalizations
from the qualitative analyses of individual cases. While their works are largely the
product of mostly independent studies, they constitute a source of inspiration and
references (for example, proposals mentioned in the chapter). It is important to
notice that the calls for building “meta-theories” have paved the way for intro-
ducing aspects of the process theory into the theoretical and methodological
framework, even though through the back door.
The author’s proposal presented in the chapter—although developed from a
different starting point—is, to an extent, the realization of proposals that have been
formulated for decades. Gathering data to recreate how a person perceives and
interprets self and world and applying a data mining method to analyze them
enables the reconstruction of individual paths of a phenomenon and, ﬁnally, cre-
ating a model explaining its genesis, mechanisms, and changes in time.
Heller [2] believes that science should be looked at “from the perspective of
questions that it does not give answer to.” In extending the research boundaries to
open up new areas for explorations, the following might be helpful:
3
The Changing Man in the Changing World
73

• taking a panoramic view of a problem (the idea of “meta-theories”);
• using qualitative analysis to probe into phenomena deeper than the standard
methods allow;
• creating theoretical frameworks for deﬁning a changing individual in a changing
context and appropriate methodological solutions, especially for the case of
phenomena that are incompletely conceptualized;
• recognizing that theory and/or a theoretical model of a phenomenon can be a
starting point for a researcher (when the phenomenon is relatively stable and
independent of the context) or an endpoint (when the phenomenon evolves and
is sensitive to the context);
• appreciating the value of qualitative descriptions, especially of models showing
the transformation a phenomenon together with its internal differentiation,
mechanisms, and genesis;
• realizing that a theory derived from an empirical model of phenomenon trans-
formation can be used to anticipate new phenomena or identify new aspects of
known phenomena, and not only to organize the knowledge of a phenomenon;
and
• adapting the artiﬁcial intelligence methods (data mining) to qualitative analyses
of the internal differentiation of phenomena.
The conceptualizations presented in the chapter show that the straight jacket of
theoretical and methodological constraints imposing research boundaries and
methods has been signiﬁcantly loosened now. What still has to be done is to
develop new rules or, perhaps, create a new research paradigm for those phenomena
that need to be analyzed, taking account of a changing individual in a changing
context.
Core Messages
• Human activity is becoming more and more involved in the changing
context and time.
• Each subject behaves individually, and this calls for deﬁning phenomena
in terms of processes and their qualitative transformations.
• The classical and contemporary psychologists have worked out some
solutions, which help create theoretical frameworks and appropriate
methodological solutions, especially in the case of phenomena that are
incompletely conceptualized.
• The generalized descriptions of cases can potentially become an empirical
basis for constructing multi-variant models giving an insight into the
changeability and internal diversity of phenomena.
74
E. Rzechowska

References
1. Borgatti
SP
(1996)
Thinking
theoretically.
https://www.analytictechcom/borgatti/
publications.htm. Accessed 11 Oct 2004
2. Heller M (2014) Granice nauki. CC Press
3. Aristotle
Nicomachean
Ethics
(trans:
Ross
WD).
https://classics.mit.edu/Aristotle/
nicomachaen.1.i.html. Accessed 3 July 2020
4. James W (1890) The stream of thought. In: The principles of psychology, vol I, pp 494–649.
https://library.manipaldubai.com/DL/the_principles_of_psychology_vol_I.pdf.
Accessed
2
Feb 2019
5. Wundt WM (1897) General survey of the subject. In: Outlines of psychology, pp 25–26.
https://psychclassics.yorku.ca/Wundt/Outlines/sec4.htm. Accessed 2 Feb 2019
6. Diriwächter R, Valsiner J (2006) Qualitative developmental research methods in their
historical and epistemological contexts. In: Forum qualitative Sozialforschung/Forum:
qualitative social research [On-line Journal], vol 7, no 1, Art 8. https://www.qualitative-
research.net/index.php/fqs/article/view/72/148. Accessed 21 Nov 2019
7. Baldwin JM (1906) Thought and things, a study of development and meaning of thought, or
genetic logic, volume 1: Functional logic, or genetic theory of knowledge. Swan
Sonnenschein, London
8. Bergson H (1911) Creative evolution. Henry Holt, New York
9. Baldwin JM (1930). James Mark Baldwin. In: Murchison C (ed) A history of psychology in
autobiography, vol 1. Clark University Press, Russell & Russell/Atheneum Publishers, pp 1–
30. https://doi.org/10.1037/11401-001. Accessed 21 Nov 2019
10. Werner H (1957) The concept of development from a comparative and organismic point of
view. In: Harris DB (ed) The concept of development: an issue in the study of human
behavior. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis
11. Vygotsky LS (1978) Mind in society: the development of higher psychological processes. In:
Cole M, John-Steiner V, Scribner S, Souberman E (eds) Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA
12. Siegler RS (2006) Microgenetic analyses of learning. In: Damon W, Lerner RM (eds) Hand-
book of child psychology, cognition, perception and language, vol 2. Wiley, New York,
pp 464–510
13. Fischer KW, Bidell TR (2006) Dynamic development of action, thought, and emotion. In:
Damon W, Lerner RM (eds) Theoretical models of human development: handbook of child
psychology, vol 1. Wiley, New York, pp 313–399
14. Rzechowska E (2007) Podejście mikrogenetyczne i procesualne w analizie rozwoju
[Microgenetic and Processual Approaches in the Analysis of Human Development].
Czasopismo Psychologiczne 13(2):109–123
15. Rzechowska E (2004) Potencjalność w procesie rozwoju: mikroanaliza konstruowania wiedzy
w dziecięcych interakcjach rówieśniczych [Potentiality in the process of development: a
microanalysis of knowledge construction during peer-child interactions]. Wydawnictwo KUL,
Lublin
16. Fogel A, Garvey A, Hsu H, West-Stroming D (2006) Change processes in relationships:
relational-historical research on a dynamic system of communication. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge UK
17. Thelen E (2005) Dynamic systems theory and the complexity of change. Psychoanal
Dialogues 15(2):255–283
18. Fischer KW (1980) A theory of cognitive development: the control and construction of
hierarchies of skills. Psychol Rev 87:477–531
19. van Geert P (1998) We almost had a great future behind us: the contribution of nonlinear
dynamics to developmental-science-in-the-making. Dev Sci 1:143–159
20. Fogel A (2006) Dynamic systems research on interindividual communication: the transfor-
mation of meaning-making. J Dev Process 1:7–30
3
The Changing Man in the Changing World
75

21. Valsiner J (2017) From methodology to methods in human psychology. Springer Briefs in
Psychology. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-61064-1
22. Overton WF (2015a) Process and relational developmental systems. In: Overton WF,
Molenaar PCM (eds) Handbook of child psychology and developmental science, vol 1:
Theory and method (7th ed) [Lerner RM (Editor-in-chief)]. Hoboken, Wiley, NJ, pp 9–62
23. Overton WF (2015) Taking conceptual analyses seriously. Res Human Dev 12:163–171.
https://doi.org/10.1080/1542760920151069158
24. Overton WF (2014) The process-relational paradigm and relational-developmental-systems
metamodel
as
context.
Res
Human
Dev
11:323–331.
https://doi.org/10.1080/
154276092014971549
25. Lerner RM, Overton WF (2017) Reduction to absurdity: why epigenetics invalidates all
models involving genetic reduction. Hum Dev 60(2–3):107–123. https://doi.org/10.1159/
000477995
26. Lerner RM (2019) Frontiers in theory-predicated research in youth development: a
commentary. J Youth Dev 14(1):1–23. https://doi.org/10.5195/jyd.2019.739
27. Lerner RM, Lerner JV (2019) The development of a person: a relational–developmental
systems perspective. In: McAdams DP, Shiner RL, Tackett JL (eds) Handbook of personality
development. The Guilford Press, pp 59–75
28. Valsiner J (2016) The nomothetic function of the idiographic approach: looking from inside
out. J Person Oriented Res 2(1–2):5–15. https://doi.org/10.17505/jpor201602
29. Valsiner J (2019) Generalization in science: abstracting from unique events. In: Højholt C,
Schraube E (eds) Subjectivity and knowledge: generalization in the psychological study of
everyday life. Springer, New York, NY
30. Overton WF, Lerner RM (2014) Fundamental concepts and methods in developmental
science: a relational perspective. Res Human Dev 11(1):63–73. https://doi.org/10.1080/
15427609.2014.881086
31. Witherington DC, Overton WF, Lickliter R, Marshall PJ, Narvaez D (2018) Metatheory and
the primacy of conceptual analysis in developmental science. Human Dev 61:181–198.
https://doi.org/10.1159/000490160
32. Whitehead AN (1968) Modes of thought. Free Press, New York
33. Rzechowska E (ed) (2010) Dojrzały pracownik na rynku pracy Jak zabezpieczyć przed
wykluczeniem społecznym osoby 50+? [A mature worker in the labour market how to protect
people aged 50+ from social exclusion]. Wydawnictwo Lubelskiej Szkoły Biznesu, Lublin
34. Rzechowska E (2014) 50-plussers at risk of redundancy, or what vocational counselors should
know: a psychological perspective. J Counsellogy 3:245–274
35. Rzechowska E, Dacka M (2016) Experiencing and the realization of motherhood by teenage
mothers. Health Psychol Report 4(1):24–40. https://doi.org/10.5114/hpr201551316
36. Rzechowska E, Szymańska A (2017) Wykorzystanie strategii RTP do budowy skali
psycholgicznej [Using the PTR strategy to construct a psychological scale]. In: Palu-
chowski WJ (ed) Diagnozowanie – wyzwania i konteksty. Wydawnictwo Naukowe WNS
UAM, pp 31–58
37. Schütze F (2007) Biography analysis on the empirical base of autobiographical narratives:
how to analyse autobiobiographical narrative interviews. Eur Stud Inequalities Soc Cohesion,
part I pp 153–242, part II pp 5–77
38. Quinlan JR (1993) C4.5: Programs for machine learning. Morgan Kaufman Publishers, Inc,
San Mateo, California
39. Nisbet R, Elder J, Miner G (2009) Handbook of statistical analysis and data mining
applications. Academic Press (Elsevier), Burlington MA
40. In a qualitative analysis, the data categorisation process is facilitated by computer
programmes that use predeﬁned theoretical or empirical criteria
41. Grupp H, Linstone HA (1999) National technology foresight activities around the globe:
resurrection and new paradigms. Technol Forecast Soc Chang 60:85–94
76
E. Rzechowska

Ewa Rzechowska works as an associate professor at the John
Paul II Catholic University of Lublin, Poland. She is the Head of
the Department of Developmental Psychology. Her scientiﬁc
work has focused on human development throughout one’s
lifetime in changing contexts and its theoretical and methodolog-
ical frameworks. Some of the outcomes of her research include:
(1) contributions to human development theory (the concept of
potentiality) and methodology of research (the strategy for
reconstruction of process transformation); (2) the creation of
procedures for the microanalysis of social interactions recorded
on ﬁlm during peer cooperation, and a series of meetings of a
therapeutic group; (3) the creation of procedures facilitating the
microanalysis of phenomena in changing socio-cultural and
technological environments (the multi-path models of changes);
(4) the adaptation of artiﬁcial intelligencemethods to the analysis
of the differentiation of phenomena; and (5) the formulation of
recommendations based on the results of her research.
3
The Changing Man in the Changing World
77

4
Integrated Science: Ambitions,
Practicalities, Misunderstandings
Henry H. Bauer
“For every complex problem, there is an answer that is clear,
simple, and wrong.”
H. L. Mencken
Summary
A fully integrated science would be readily achieved if every science were
simply a repository of objective factual knowledge. However, each science
developed in response to the speciﬁc demands posed by its particular subject
matter. That meant not only speciﬁc methodology, it also led over time to
idiosyncratic attitudes toward every aspect of seeking knowledge, for instance,
the appropriate interplay of empiricism and theorizing. As a result, the modern
sciences now have some of the characteristics of individual human cultures as
well as of intellectual disciplines; therefore, integrating the understanding gained
by individual sciences is no simple matter. The problem is made yet more
intractable by the degree to which science has become intertwined with many
other facets of society: vested interests from commerce and government and
other sectors of society support science but also want science to serve their
wishes. Integrating science will require an understanding of these complications
as well as of the nature of scientiﬁc activity, about which misunderstandings are
rife. Given the difﬁculties, integration of the sciences is likely to proceed slowly
and piecemeal as one or two or even three individual ﬁelds successively generate
bridging interdisciplinary ﬁelds.
H. H. Bauer (&)
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, 207 Woods Edge Court, Blacksburg, VA
24060-4015, USA
e-mail: hhbauer@spamarrest.com; hhbauer@vt.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
N. Rezaei (ed.), Integrated Science, Integrated Science 1,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65273-9_4
79

Ambiguous ﬁgures. The raw facts here are simply some black areas or lines
on a white background. According to the mindset of a human observer, however,
these might represent, in the left-most image a young lady with extravagant hair
and hat treatments looking away to the left—or an old crone with a large nose
looking downwards; the second outline drawing could be of a duck facing left—
or a rabbit facing to the right; the third image shows a white vase—or two faces
in proﬁle.
[The individual ﬁgures are in the public domain in many places in a variety
of versions].
The code of this chapter is 01110010 01101100 01100001 01101111
01110100 01100011 01000011 01110011 01110101 01110101 01101100
01110010 01110011.
1
Introduction
1.1
Historical and Intellectual Contexts
Modern science consensually dates back to the sixteenth century. From then until
the middle of the twentieth century, science could be described quite aptly as an
Ivory-Tower pursuit, a cottage industry of self-driven individuals motivated largely
by sheer curiosity, seeking reliable understanding by doing “pure” science. This
“pure” science made, however, interaction with the broader society in various ways
on discrete occasions. In particular, it interacted with the dye-stuff industry, the
ﬁxation of nitrogen in World War I (WWI) Germany (Haber process), the recog-
nition of the importance of vitamins in practical matters. The “pure” science also
interacted with intellectual discourse when the theory of evolution butted heads
with traditional religious teachings around the middle of the nineteenth century.
During and following World War II (WWII), the interaction of society and
science became universal, intricate, for example, sonar, radar, and above all, the
atomic bomb and nuclear reactors. Some who had worked on the Manhattan
80
H. H. Bauer

(atomic bomb) Project founded the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, a magazine
intended for general readership and reﬂecting the founders’ belief that scientiﬁc and
technical understanding brings with it a civic duty to participate in public and
political affairs.
The wartime successes of applied science also suggested that civic society, too,
could beneﬁt from major useful advances by supporting the scope and scale of
scientiﬁc activity [1]. The National Science Foundation was established, and
funding for the National Institutes of Health increased enormously.
At the same time, political scientists realized their need to acquire some famil-
iarity with matters of science; historians of science and philosophers of science
realized the need to expand their scholarship beyond purely history or philosophy,
respectively; and so, some new interdisciplinary intellectual endeavors came about
in academe. For example, Departments of History and Philosophy of Science, a
Center for the Study of Science in Society, a variety of multidisciplinary programs
emerged offering courses about various aspects of science. By the twenty-ﬁrst
century, those multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary ventures had coalesced into
the new discipline of Science and Technology Studies (STS), which can aptly be
described as an integration of humanities scholarship and social sciences research.
This chapter on the issue of Integrated Science is largely informed by what
scholarship in STS has so far achieved.
1.2
Integrity of Nature and Knowledge
It seems to be instinctively obvious, at least nowadays, to presume that the world,
the universe, is somehow a coherent whole and not a random collection of possibly
incongruous bits. Since science stands for knowledge and understanding of our
world, science should also be a coherent, seamless whole and not just a collection
of bits of knowledge about different aspects of the world. That the desire for such
consistent seamlessness is a robust ideal or ambition is illustrated or underscored by
our disdain for and criticism of the opposite, i.e., irreproducibility of results,
inconsistencies in theories.
In practice, however, the knowledge that we describe as science comes not as a
seamless whole but in an array of different compendia of individual sciences, e.g.,
physics, chemistry, biology, geology, and so on. Consequently, there has long been
an implicit and sometimes explicit ambition to integrate the understandings offered
by the individual sciences. We expect, even demand, that chemistry, physics, bi-
ology, geology, and all other sciences must complement one another, not disagree
with one another. It should, therefore, be possible to integrate them.
To date, however, it is mysticism or religion and not science that offers a holistic
view of our world and the whole universe. Mysticism, and also the prominent
religions, are top-down entities whereby detailed understanding relevant to human
beings can be deduced from an overarching central axiomatic Truth. Perhaps the
implicit desire for a monolithic seamless understanding of our world played some
role in the progression long ago from paganism to monotheism. Assuredly the
4
Integrated Science: Ambitions, Practicalities, Misunderstandings
81

monotheistic religions serve for many people as overarching faiths by which
problems of any sort can be assumed to be unequivocally resolvable (no matter that
the major monotheistic religions are rife with self-contradictions in their scriptures
and teachings).
At any rate, nowadays, science, rather than religion or mysticism, is almost
universally regarded as the proper and trustworthy source of knowledge about the
material world. Since it is presumed that scientiﬁc understanding should be a
seamless whole, it seems natural to envisage at least the eventual integration of all
the individual sciences. That this ambition seems pervasive in human society is
illustrated in such widely differing contexts as the Conferences on the Unity of the
Sciences sponsored by the Uniﬁcation Church or the attempt to seek unity between
the physical sciences and the humanities by E. O. Wilson in his books Sociobiology
and Consilience.
The fundamental difﬁculty is that science, by contrast to religion, is a bottom-up
venture in which tangible evidence from observations and experiments enables
inferences about general truths. In the widely popular view, science is a coherent
whole since all science is done by application of the scientiﬁc method. In other
words, all sciences proceed in the same manner using the same sort of approach no
matter what the topic of study may be. That is not, however, how scientists actually
behave and how science is actually done. Since observations and experiments focus
inevitably on speciﬁc particulars, science developed as a set of individual ventures
with their own methods and theories and presumptions. Inevitably, the individual
sciences at present relate to and interact with one another only to varying degrees
and under various circumstances.
There is not even a universal methodology within any given science. Observing
and experimenting both play some part in most sciences, and they call for some-
what different, perhaps even drastically different approaches; and different sciences
rely on them to different extents. To learn about the structure and history of the
solid Earth, one does very different things than when trying to learn about the nature
and motions of the heavenly bodies, but in both cases, one has to rely on obser-
vation with few if any opportunities for controlled experiment; in contrast to
geology or astronomy, chemistry and physics thrive on more-or-less-readily-
controlled experiments.
From the outside and at ﬁrst glance, the various sciences may appear to differ
only in what they study. Chemistry concentrates on what everything is made of and
how different substances interact with one another, while geology looks speciﬁcally
at the processes that shape the physical Earth. Physics focuses on how forces and
materials interact with one another, and so on. However, the behaviors of chemists,
physicists, geologists and other scientists reveal that chemistry and physics and
geology are not just intellectual endeavors seeking the same sort of knowledge. It is
as though every science had its own idiosyncratic view of what even constitutes
meaningful knowledge, genuine understanding. Every specialty in science has its
own particular methods and language and criteria of validity, its own paradigm and
discipline. The problem of integration is that the various sciences do not act on the
same presumptions about what knowledge is and how it is best obtained and
82
H. H. Bauer

validated, and in what way “plain” knowledge represents meaningful understand-
ing. These seemingly intellectual disciplines are pursued in ways that can make
them seem like distinctive cultures.
2
Scientific Disciplines as Cultures
Differences among those who work in various sciences and other ﬁelds of academe
have been described and discussed by several authors [2–6]. Some differences have
to do directly with the nature of the work. For instance, some sciences rely on
mathematics more than others, say physics, so that the training of physics students
includes necessary courses in mathematics. However, along with such substantive
differences come implicit value judgments, that quantitative results are more
desirable, better than only qualitative ones, entailing the prejudice (possibly but not
always subconscious) that sciences less reliant on quantitation are in some way
inferior.
Some sciences (much of chemistry, for example) allow experimentation rather
readily, with the consequence that data can often be obtained on demand and quite
rapidly, and uncertainties can often be resolved with a high degree of conﬁdence.
By contrast, research in such ﬁelds as astronomy or animal behavior has to rely on
observation, whereby data may come only slowly and irregularly, meaning that
some questions may remain unresolved for a long time.
Those differences are accompanied inevitably by associated differences in the
amounts of resources needed and how resources have to be obtained. Further, such
differences are reﬂected in the productivity that is expected by peers and patrons
and employers, in other words, the frequency and amount of publication; and the
sciences differ in whether publication typically involves smaller or larger numbers
of co-authors, and the valuation as meritorious of sole authorship or “ﬁrst”
authorship or “senior” (or “corresponding”) authorship.
There are somewhat more subtle differences, too, for example, that chemists and
physicists do not mean precisely the same when they refer to something as “stable”.
Again, physicists are inclined to look for simplicity and readily identiﬁable causes,
while geologists are accustomed to complexity in obtaining and analyzing and
explaining data. So it should not have been surprising that it was an eminent
physicist (Luis Alvarez, Nobel Prize 1968) who took the leading role in ascribing
the extinction of the dinosaurs to the single event of an asteroid colliding with the
Earth. In contrast, many paleontologists emphasized that the extinction occurred
over an appreciable length of geological time and was more likely owing primarily
to the many effects of the enormous volcanic explosions of the Deccan Traps in
India.
Experimenting and theorizing feature to quite different extents in different sci-
ences, reﬂecting to some extent the difﬁculty or ease of obtaining data. Within many
sciences, some may become specialists in experimenting while others specialize in
4
Integrated Science: Ambitions, Practicalities, Misunderstandings
83

theorizing. Experimentalists tend to judge the validity of theories by how well they
ﬁt the empirical results, whereas theorists will sometimes judge the validity of
experimental results by how well they ﬁt with accepted theory. Even practitioners in
sub-disciplines exhibit distinct differences that are perhaps as much cultural as
intellectual. Physical chemists and organic chemists differ, for instance, in how they
view experiment by contrast to theory.
All those differences can be traced more or less obviously to what the particular
science studies. Beyond that, sociology of science has revealed that scientists in the
various disciplinary cultures differ, of course on average only, statistically, over
such apparently unrelated, non-scientiﬁc, matters as politics and religion and social
behavior [7–11]. Thus, physicists are typically more liberal politically than engi-
neers, and social scientists, at least in the 1950s, were much more likely to be
divorced than those in the physical sciences. Such ﬁndings are at the root of
common stereotypes by which many scientists view those working in other ﬁelds of
science, and they underscore the degree to which working in a particular scientiﬁc
ﬁeld is often accompanied by mental or emotional attitudes that reveal that the
various intellectual disciplines are in some real sense also distinct human cultures.
That is to say that the integration of the sciences is no simple matter of rearranging
and coordinating different collections of objective knowledge. It is a matter of
enabling workers in various cultural circumstances to cooperate productively with
one another.
In addition to recognizing problems associated with the cultural nature of dis-
ciplinary differences, one can distinguish two somewhat different aspects of the
potential integration of human knowledge. One aspect is the integration internal to
the science of technical facts, methods, and theories. A second aspect is the inte-
gration of scientiﬁc understanding into the wider society and culture. The ﬁrst
aspect raises questions about interdisciplinarity by contrast to multidisciplinarity,
about criteria for the validity of scientiﬁc theories, about minority views in science,
and the nature and signiﬁcance of progress in science. The integration of science
into human culture as a whole inevitably also involves those questions while
bringing into the sharpest focus issues arising from the fact that scientiﬁc under-
standing changes over time, which makes critical the judging of the degree of
certainty that may be appropriate when offering scientiﬁc advice as to potential
public actions and commercial initiatives.
3
Internal, Technical, Integration of Science
How researchers in the individual sciences interact with one another has been
described on some occasions as interdisciplinary and on other occasions as
multidisciplinary.
84
H. H. Bauer

3.1
Interdisciplinarity by Contrast to Multidisciplinarity
In recent times, an aura of high desirability seems to have become attached to the
notion of interdisciplinary activity; perhaps this reﬂects a subconscious yearning for
a unity of science, a recognition that interdisciplinarity represents a step towards the
integration of the sciences overall. In practice, the label “interdisciplinary” tends to
be always applied whenever a project somehow involves contributions from more
than one of the recognized scientiﬁc disciplines, yet there is a useful distinction to
be drawn between interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary work. Truly interdisci-
plinary activities would be ventures that are, to some degree, distinct disciplines
themselves, or at least capable of becoming distinct idiosyncratic disciplines, and
yet recognizably not so far outside the parent disciplines as to be disowned by them.
Examples might include chemical physics, physical chemistry, biochemistry, and
molecular biology. Understanding that what are often regarded as purely intellec-
tual activities also have some of the characteristics of human cultures illuminates
what is involved in truly interdisciplinary ventures; one might say that an inter-
disciplinary ﬁeld has matured when its practitioners begin to differ distinctly from
the researchers in their parent disciplines in a variety of subtle as well as overt
respects. It is not only that there come into use novel and idiosyncratic method-
ologies and technical jargon but also a distinct approach to how to go about
expanding knowledge and how to judge what would be fruitful avenues for further
research.
Multidisciplinary activity, on the other hand, is illustrated by cooperation
between separate cultures without a new culture necessarily being in the process of
forming. Examples might be space travel and exploration, or the Manhattan Project
of WWII. In such multidisciplinary ventures, specialists from different ﬁelds con-
tribute their particular expertise toward a given practical aim. However, there is
nothing in the activity that requires or encourages the contributing experts to seek to
widen their expertise into some disciplines other than their own. The engineers
working toward an atomic bomb had no reason and no need to try to become even
part-time chemists, for example, nor did the mathematicians or the physicists.
Moreover, the chemists and the physicists could cooperate fruitfully without
abandoning or modifying their particular interpretation of what “stable” means.
Although this distinction between inter- and multi-disciplinary is substantively
meaningful and descriptively useful, in no sense could one or the other be regarded
as “better” in any practical way, say from the viewpoint of producing socially
desired applications. Space travel has been a notably successful multidisciplinary
activity that sparked progress in a number of directions, say miniaturization of
electronic gadgets, and the Manhattan Project was, of course, stunningly successful.
Indeed, some students of scientiﬁc activity have suggested that some of the most
spectacular advances in science stemmed from insights brought into a particular
discipline by outsiders, specialists from a different discipline (see Sect. 3.2). Indeed,
interdisciplinary work too, which culminates in the establishing of a new discipline,
4
Integrated Science: Ambitions, Practicalities, Misunderstandings
85

begins inevitably with one or more researchers venturing outside their discipline:
molecular biology, for example, owes its existence in large part to the chemist
Linus Pauling and the physicist Max Delbrück.
The notion that outsiders can sometimes accomplish what the insider experts
could not, in particular cases or particular ways, has also been suggested in other
activities than science. Serious players of chess, for instance, are likely to have
heard the old saw that kibitzers see more of the game than do the players them-
selves. However, it is not a common general phenomenon, even as there are notable
instances of outsiders sometimes spurring notable advances. Somewhat similarly,
important progress can sometimes be stimulated by insiders whose views are
unorthodox, heretical, distinctly in the minority within their disciplinary culture.
3.2
Unorthodoxies and Minority Views in Science
The misguided notion that there is a single scientiﬁc method no doubt contributes to
the mistaken notion that science speaks with a single voice that expresses a
monolithic scientiﬁc consensus. In reality, science is rife with differences of
opinion. On occasion, the differences become so pressing that the average,
more-or-less slow and steady progress of science is interspersed with episodes
described as scientiﬁc revolutions so drastic that a prevailing scientiﬁc consensus,
perhaps even of long standing, is overturned and replaced by something distinctly
different [12].
Before any such revolution, those who claim that the prevailing consensus is
somehow inadequate or wrong are typically ignored or dismissed or even perse-
cuted, but if they turn out to have been right, they will likely later, sometimes much
later, be described as modern-day Galileos.
Overall and in general, of course, the mainstream consensus is most often quite
reliable, and would-be Galileos are usually themselves wrong, rarely are they true
prophets. However, sometimes they do turn out to have been right, and when that is
the case, it tends to be of unusual signiﬁcance.
It is a shibboleth that hard cases make bad laws, but there is a little-noted
corollary: good laws miss the hard cases that can bring spectacular progress, as in
the periodic scientiﬁc revolutions. Whether such episodes are rare or not, they are
almost inevitably unpredictable and, therefore, surprising. That suggests that it
might be a good idea to listen always, albeit carefully and with appropriate skep-
ticism, to those who express minority views in science, even distinctly contrarian
ones.
Unfortunately, much about contemporary scientiﬁc activity discourages paying
any attention to minority opinion that goes signiﬁcantly against what is generally
accepted in a given ﬁeld. Adherence to a prevailing mainstream consensus is
promoted by a variety of quite strong inﬂuences.
From the very beginning, neophyte researchers will have learned, during their
education and apprenticeships, to take for granted the validity of the mainstream
consensus. After that, the system of peer review that has become virtually universal
86
H. H. Bauer

necessarily relies on the acceptance of the contemporary consensus as the accepted
benchmark, so funding of research and the publication of results are judged by how
well they ﬁt the contemporaneously accepted views.
On top of that, scientists, like other human beings, are subject to the strictures of
Groupthink [13, 14]. Every member of a group feels it to some degree important to
remain a member of that group, and every individual is also helped toward not
stepping out of line by the psychological processes that make it difﬁcult to rec-
ognize the signiﬁcance of evidence contradictory to what one already believes (the
classic reference here is [15]). Those inﬂuences lead to increasingly dogmatic
adherence to whatever the contemporary mainstream consensus happens to be.
Moreover, in recent times, adherence to the status quo is also promoted by the
increasing inﬂuences within science of vested outside interests of other social
sectors: business, industry, and private and public institutions. Those who fund
research exert quite major pressures toward what is to be studied, sometimes even
what may get published and what suppressed: those who pay the pipers also call the
tunes. Increasingly since about the middle of the twentieth century, scientiﬁc ac-
tivity has become less and less an independent, self-driven, Ivory-Tower activity
and more and more an associate or accomplice or even servant of other societal
activities [16]. As Ziman [17] pointed out, by the latter part of the twentieth century,
the traditional distinction between applied science and pure or basic science was no
longer substantively meaningful.
Dogmatism, together with the suppression of minority of views, has become
increasingly common across the sciences, as demonstrated by innumerable exam-
ples: concerning such socially important matters as the mechanisms of Alzheimer’s
disease and mental or emotional illnesses in general, or the possible dangers from
secondhand smoke, as well as such rather esoteric and specialized matters as the
mechanism of the sense of smell or the time and nature of the settling of the
Americas [18].
On at least two issues of prime public importance, the mainstream consensus has
become so powerfully entrenched as to comprise an utterly dogmatic hegemony:
one, that HIV is unquestionably the cause of AIDS, and two, that the human-caused
release of carbon dioxide through the burning of fossil fuels is the prime cause of
global warming and climate change. On both of these topics, some well-informed
and professionally qualiﬁed dissenters are simply not attended to by most of the
media and by policymakers, and dissenters ﬁnd their careers hindered, on occasion
quite drastically—consider, for example, on HIV/AIDS, the case of molecular bi-
ologist Peter Duesberg [18, Chap. 3; 19]; on climate change, the example of
political scientist Roger Pielke [20].
Irrespective of whether or not those minority views have any merit, these two
cases are of utmost importance in illustrating the degree to which political con-
siderations have come to play a signiﬁcant role in scientiﬁc activity and the
acceptance of scientiﬁc claims by the media and the conventional wisdom as a
whole. With both HIV/AIDS and climate change, there is a notable statistical
association between questioning the mainstream scientiﬁc consensus and adhering
to a right-leaning political ideology. That association was also prominent in 2020
4
Integrated Science: Ambitions, Practicalities, Misunderstandings
87

during the global hysteria over COVID-19. It was right-wing organizations and
activists around the world as well as in the United States that protested against the
“social distancing” and mask-wearing measures enforced in many places.
This apparent correlation is reminiscent of the statistical associations mentioned
earlier between researchers in a given scientiﬁc ﬁeld and such seemingly unrelated
matters as religious belief or likelihood of divorce. There is no apparent reason for
such statistical associations, but they are empirical facts; and the association of
political ideology with scientiﬁc belief poses a clear, present danger to society at
large through the effect on public policies and public actions. Political polarization
may then also hinder the merging of disciplinary cultures needed for the overall
integration of the sciences.
Science serves society best when public policies and programs take into account
reliable, objective, unbiased knowledge about things and people. Peer review and
Groupthink and the labeling of some scientiﬁc beliefs as “politically incorrect”
conspire toward a dogmatism that makes it difﬁcult for society’s political leaders to
obtain impartial assessments of scientiﬁc understanding. A proposal intended to
remedy this is the establishment of a speciﬁcally Science Court, discussed further
below.
The dismissal of contrarian views by proponents of a mainstream consensus
sometimes becomes so vigorously passionate that contrarians, even well qualiﬁed,
accomplished, distinguished scientists, are accused of purveying pseudo-science
reminiscent of Flat-Earth theory and the like [21, 22]. As there are no agreed-upon,
logically sound, workable general criteria for settling the philosophers’ “demarca-
tion problem” to distinguish genuine science from its pseudo doppelgänger [23], the
terms pseudo-science and pseudo-scientist are substantively unwarranted invective,
all too common in polemics. For example, some would label the social sciences as a
whole as pseudo-science [24].
At any rate, minority views are given very short shrift nowadays in science.
Researchers are typically unaware that unorthodox views should be attended to
because they might hint at important advances. One consequence is that progress
along unexpected lines may come from outsiders to a given specialty. Venturing
into unfamiliar territory, researchers are not pre-indoctrinated by the prevailing
specialist paradigm and the associated Groupthink. Therefore, they can sometimes
recognize problems and weaknesses and possibilities that have been ignored or
overlooked: “When good scientists step into a ﬁeld from the outside, their views, not
yet conditioned by the ﬁeld’s standard thinking, can sometimes really shake things
up. That was the case with this year’s winners of the Nobel Prize in physiology or
medicine, awarded to Australia’s Peter Doherty and Switzerland’s Rolf Zinker-
nagel for their insights into the inner mechanics of the immune system” [25]; see
also [26, 27].
Not, of course, that signiﬁcant advances have always been stimulated by out-
siders [28]; but some very consequential ones have been.
88
H. H. Bauer

3.3
Social Sciences and Medicine
E. O. Wilson, in his book Consilience, suggests that the physical and biological
sciences are already integrated, that they “blur into one another”, and that it remains
only to integrate the social sciences and humanities into the whole.
The trouble is that what we expect from science is meaningful knowledge. That
is to say, understanding that is sufﬁciently true to reality that plans and actions can
be safely based on it. We expect science to be true for all practical purposes.
However, that sort of certainty is not available in the social sciences or medicine,
because what we can learn there is probabilistic, meaningful statistically but not
deﬁnitely certain in any given instance.
The reliable degree of certainty that has given “science” its status and prestige
was gained in the study of relatively simple inanimate systems; relatively simple in
the sense that causes are few in number and independent of one another, so that the
relationships between causes and effects can be discovered and demonstrated
conclusively. Such demonstrations are available only when observations or
experiments are genuinely reproducible, precisely reproducible, and that sort of
reproducibility is not available with the matters that the social sciences deal with.
Economics, psychology, and sociology offer results not as “yes or no”, not as
proved or disproved, but in terms of statistical probability, be it from observations
or from experimentation (where that is even possible). In the physical sciences,
statistics are employed in a purely technical way to establish the range of possible
values of a deﬁnite universal constant, say, for example, the mass of an electron, or
the magnitude of Planck’s constant. By contrast, the social sciences lack the very
concept of universal constants or universal laws. Generalizations in the social
sciences are applicable only in a probabilistic, statistical fashion.
So too with medicine and “medical science”. The ambition to place medical
practices increasingly on a sound scientiﬁc basis is illustrated by the drive to
establish “evidence-based medicine”, as in reports by the Cochrane Collaboration.
Even a rapid scan of such reports shows that they feature statistical probabilities,
not yes/no conclusions. Inevitably so, since the topics of interest are in vivo phe-
nomena. The truly certain evidence can come only from knowledge generated
in vitro, in inanimate systems. Thus, biochemical studies can come to understand
with a high degree of certainty what happens in test-tubes, and that can guide
judgments about what to do in medical practice. However, a degree of certainty is
lost in bringing biochemical understanding into practical application in physiology.
Experimenting with living systems may already be impossible for ethical or
moral reasons, but even when it is carried on, as it is with mice or rats or dogs, the
results, just as in the social sciences, can only be expressed in statistical, proba-
bilistic terms. Physics and chemistry can deliver quite certain knowledge for two
reasons: all the objects of a given kind are exactly the same, and they do not change
over time; so the characteristics of an atom of hydrogen, say, can be discovered by
observing any number of hydrogen atoms, and hydrogen atoms behave in the same
way now as they did yesterday or last year. By stark contrast, living systems are
collections of idiosyncratic individuals: no two cats or no two dogs or no two
4
Integrated Science: Ambitions, Practicalities, Misunderstandings
89

rabbits, let alone no two human beings, are completely identical, not even so-called
“identical” twins. Moreover, living things learn from experience, so that no
observation and no experiment can be precisely reproducible; we do not react in
exactly the same way the second time something happens as we did on the ﬁrst
occasion.
In the practice of medicine, it is the individual patient that counts, but the best
so-called scientiﬁc evidence, for example, from double-blind, random, placebo-
controlled clinical trials, is probabilistic and statistical in nature. One’s doctor
cannot ever be absolutely certain whether a given drug or procedure, no matter how
standard and routinely used, will have the desired effect or whether it will induce
one of the so-called “side” effects, even a very rare one, that could be quite
damaging.
Could an Integrated Science have as full-ﬂedged members some disciplines that
can deliver only probabilistic, statistical information, in full company with the
traditional “hard” sciences that can deliver the highest degree of unequivocal cer-
tainty available to humanity? The hallmark of science, the basis of its high status
and prestige, is that it offers knowledge so trustworthy that practical applications of
it can be made safely. Integrated Science would naturally be expected to be just as
trustworthy. If the social and medical sciences are to be part of a fully Integrated
Science, then trustworthy knowledge will have to include understandings of a
probabilistic kind, not only the sort of deﬁnite knowledge delivered by physics or
chemistry. Toward that end, it is necessary to be aware of problems associated with
how statistical analysis is currently used in the social and medical sciences.
A large part of the problem is that it is so easy for non-statisticians to calculate
measures of “statistical signiﬁcance” without really understanding what they are
doing and should be doing.
3.3.1
Typical Inadequacies in Statistical Analysis
It is not only that statistical results offer only probabilistic information, and thereby
less than certain knowledge. Beyond that, the statistical approach most commonly
used in the social sciences and medicine delivers misleading estimates of the
probability that are typically too high. So, it is only natural that attempts to
reproduce results fail routinely, giving rise to the present widespread dismay over a
so-called “crisis of irreproducibility”, the many publicly deplored examples where
repeated observations or experiments on a given matter have failed to deliver
always the same apparent answer.
One reason for lack of reproducibility is ignoring what might be called the ﬁrst
law of statistics 101; namely, that correlation does not prove causation. When
statistical associations are implied to identify causes, as is common regarding diet,
for instance, it is natural that different research projects will seem to identify dif-
ferent causes. However, purely technical mistakes are also commonly made in
calculating the so-called “statistical signiﬁcance”.
The ﬂaws in this commonly applied statistical approach, the “frequentist” or
“Fisherian” or “p-value” methodology, have been pointed out by many authors for
90
H. H. Bauer

many years without bringing sounder methods into general use in the social sci-
ences and medicine (see, for instance, [29–34]).
The most salient reasons why the p-value methodology can be so misleading are:
• The research aims to test or establish a hypothesis or theory. When the nature of
the experiment or observation requires resort to statistics, one wants an estimate
of the probability that the obtained results support the hypothesis of interest.
However, that is not what the p-value approach delivers. Instead, it estimates
whether or not the results are owing merely to chance. A signiﬁcant result would
be that chance is an unlikely explanation. However, that is not what one wants to
know because the hypothesis one wants to test is not the only possible reason for
a non-chance result. This makes the p-value approach inappropriate a priori, and
its pervasive use is attributable to historical reasons and the ease with which
calculations can be made. A direct test of a previously stated hypothesis calls for
a Bayesian approach to statistical analysis. So far, however, that approach is too
little known outside the community of professional statisticians.
• The criterion is arbitrary, whether a given result is meaningful, “statistically
signiﬁcant”. How low does the probability have to be that the result can rea-
sonably be judged to be not merely owing to chance?
Almost universally in the social and medical sciences, p  0.05 is taken as the
test of statistical signiﬁcance: the probability is less than 5% that the result is a
chance one. Even at ﬁrst sight, this is a very weak criterion, apparently allowing
one result in 20 to be falsely considered probably true. In reality, however, it is
even worse: “If you use p = 0.05 to suggest that you have made a discovery, you
will be wrong at least 30% of the time” [31].
Matthews [34] has calculated what maximum p-value would be needed to avoid
being misled by a chance result; the more inherently unlikely a hypothesis is, the
lower the p-value would need to be (Table 1).
Table 1 Comparison of Bayesian and frequentist statistics
A priori level
of skepticism
Probability that
result is a ﬂuke
Compared to p  0.05 as a criterion for statistical
signiﬁcance, the ACTUAL p-value needed to avoid
being wrong
Agnostic
0.500
0.003—3  10–3
Mildly
skeptical
(say) 0.900
0.0002—2  10–4
Moderately
skeptical
(say) 0.990
0.000013—1.3  10–5
Inclined to
disbelieve
(say) 0.999
0.000001—1  10–6
The more inherently unlikely a hypothesis is, the more seriously misleading is the frequentist
(p-value) criterion
Prepared with data from [34]
4
Integrated Science: Ambitions, Practicalities, Misunderstandings
91

For a fuller discussion of these points, see [16, Chap. 8] and primary sources
cited there.
3.3.2
The Mind–Body Problem
The mind–body problem has preoccupied thinkers in general and philosophers in
particular for ever, as far as we can know. Is what we think determined by elec-
trochemical processes in the brain and body? Is freedom of will an illusion? When
we think that we are making a choice, is it, in reality, being made for us by reactions
in our material body?
If the social and medical sciences are to be fully integrated with the material
sciences, that would imply a solution to the mind–body problem. It seems unlikely
that such a solution could eventuate in any foreseeable future. However, that the
relation between the non-material mind and the tangible body remains mysterious
does not mean that its consequences can or should or need be ignored, quite the
contrary. The placebo response does play an important practical role in medicine,
albeit as yet not often harnessed deliberately; and the mind–body relationship is a
signiﬁcant issue in anthropology, where the very opposite of the placebo response,
namely the nocebo effect, reveals itself in such phenomena as the bone-pointing rituals
of the Australian Aborigines or the doll-tormenting rituals of the voodoo religion.
4
Integration of Science into Society and Culture
Science needs support, and gets it nowadays from a variety of sources, including
from society at large via governments. The implicit but clear expectation is that
science can and will bring good things to society as a whole as well as to its
particular patrons. An Integrated Science aims not for integration for its own sake,
but for the beneﬁts it will bring to humankind overall. To that end, it must be able to
offer impartial, unbiased, objectively correct understanding.
Science normally progresses toward better understanding, and it is normal and
not damaging that, at any given time on any given subject, some things may be
missing, inadequate, or wrong; time can be relied on for a cure. However, when
scientiﬁc advice plays a crucial role in public policies, it becomes of high impor-
tance that the underlying contemporary science be reliably trustworthy. That
implies impartiality, objectivity, and lack of bias. As already noted, although peer
review is almost universally regarded as guaranteeing trustworthiness, in reality it
serves only to entrench whatever happens to be the majority view, the “mainstream
consensus”; and that is far from infallible, as history teaches.
The damage that can follow from public policies based on unsound science may
be illustrated by the forced sterilization of tens of thousands of Americans over
many decades of the twentieth century because of a supposedly scientiﬁc basis
provided by theories of eugenics. An Integrated Science must avoid offering
unsound advice or having its advice misconstrued. Therefore, the nature of science
92
H. H. Bauer

needs to be appropriately understood, yet nowadays the conventional wisdom
incorporates a variety of misunderstandings about scientiﬁc activity.
4.1
Common Misunderstandings About Science
The actual nature of scientiﬁc activity, not the idealized model of the scientiﬁc
method, needs to be understood in considerable detail if society is to use scientiﬁc
understanding to the best effect and with the avoidance of undesirable, unfore-
seeable consequences. Here is a checklist of the most common damaging misun-
derstandings about science, discussed at length in [16].
• Science is not done by people following the so-called scientiﬁc method. That is
to say, the “hard” sciences, the physical sciences, are not done by the so-called
scientiﬁc method. The social sciences, however, make something of a fetish of
the scientiﬁc method, perhaps in order to demonstrate that they are truly sci-
entiﬁc [7]. Students of the physical sciences do not always learn about “the
scientiﬁc method”, and their textbooks may not even mention it, whereas text-
books in the social sciences typically describe and prescribe it.
• A common shibboleth holds that science is self-correcting. Admittedly, over
time each of the sciences has progressed toward a more authentic understanding
of reality by superseding mistaken theories and misleading observations; but the
“self-correcting” is anything but automatic or guaranteed, let alone prompt.
• Peer review is popularly thought to guarantee objectivity, freedom from bias,
and freedom from error. In reality, it serves merely to entrench the contemporary
mainstream consensus.
• Progress in scientiﬁc understanding cannot be forced at will. Serendipity, luck,
and being in the right place at the right time have played crucial parts in many of
the greatest advances [35].
• Not understanding that has led to such wasteful public policies as the so-called
War on Cancer, waged without success but at signiﬁcant cost for almost half a
century. The popular illusion is that science can accomplish anything we want if
we provide sufﬁcient resources, using as a model the Manhattan Project.
However, that practical mission to invent an atomic bomb began because the
basic scientiﬁc understanding already existed that such a thing might be feasible;
by contrast, we still do not understand what causes cancer.
• Facts do not speak for themselves. Scientiﬁc knowledge does not speak for itself.
The meaning, the signiﬁcance of what science discovers rests on inferences and
interpretations. The philosophy of science describes this as “the theory-ladenness
of facts”, often illustrated using ambiguous images.
For an illustration of how the very same scientiﬁc evidence can be interpreted in
opposite directions, about whether Loch Ness Monsters are real or not, see
Chaps. 1 (“The monster is a myth”) and 2 (“The monster exists”) in [36].
• Science is supposed to be always seeking new discoveries, but in reality, only
those discoveries are welcomed that ﬁt with what the contemporary consensus
4
Integrated Science: Ambitions, Practicalities, Misunderstandings
93

believes to be true. Thus, for example, the 1921 discovery of periodically
oscillating chemical reactions was simply not accepted in mainstream discourse,
a manuscript on the topic being rejected for publication as late as 1951. The
results were eventually accepted only after a theoretical discussion had shown
how such oscillations could come about [7: p. 23].
4.2
When Facts Are not Decisive
Society looks to science for a deﬁnitive factual basis for making personal and
collective decisions. An Integrated Science would increase this beneﬁt to society by
bringing the whole range of accumulated scientiﬁc understanding to bear on any
given issue. However, sometimes decisions have to be made even when the
available facts are insufﬁcient to determine clearly the most desirable among the
available potential practical actions.
That was the case soon after WWII when the question arose whether nuclear
reactors could be used safely for the generation of power for society at large.
Weinberg [37] has pointed out that this sort of question could not be answered
based on available scientiﬁc knowledge alone. To calculate the probability of an
accident of given proportions, it would be necessary to take a wide variety of factors
into account, including the probability of human error. Even an Integrated Science
drawing on available understanding from psychology, sociology, history, and
political science, together with purely technical understanding of nuclear reactors,
could not deliver a deﬁnite number for the probability of an accident of any given
magnitude, at best it might deliver a statistically estimated value for the probability
of such an accident. Since that probability would likely be small, there would also
be no way to test the validity of the calculation by carrying out actual experiments
on actual reactors.
Policymakers were faced with the dilemma that some technical experts believed
the probability of an accident to be so low that it could be ignored for all practical
purposes, while other equally qualiﬁed or distinguished experts were voicing the
opposite opinion. Kantrowitz [38] suggested that policymakers might be assisted
toward deciding if there were something like an Institution for Scientiﬁc Judgment
whose sole purpose would be to consider carefully the technical bases of the
opinions being voiced by the opposing experts and to present decision-makers with
the most objective, impartial, unbiased possible assessment of the relative merits of
the opposing viewpoints. The need for independent assessment arises because every
expert is inﬂuenced to some degree by non-technical considerations as well as
purely technical ones. For example, some years later, some of the same experts
were offering advice about the desirability of working to invent a hydrogen bomb,
and policymakers were being offered opposing opinions from experts inﬂuenced
heavily by political views, left-leaning, and right-leaning respectively.
That sort of problem persists nowadays. Section 3.2 cites other instances where
opinions about substantive matters seemed determined by political slant rather than
94
H. H. Bauer

scientiﬁc substance. The question of establishing an Institute for Scientiﬁc Judg-
ment has been discussed on some occasions since Kantrowitz ﬁrst proposed it, and
it is nowadays usually talked of as a possible Science Court. Some legal scholars
have pointed out that this could be of value to the legal system as a whole, which is
presently not well equipped to deal with legal issues where questions of scientiﬁc
fact and scientiﬁc expertise are critically involved, for example, in deciding who
can properly be given the status of “expert witness” [39], a constant dilemma when
there are strongly held minority views (Sect. 3.3). At present, public policies are
based routinely on advice from such mainstream sources as the National Research
Council or the Centers for Disease Control & Prevention or the like, whose
members represent the prevailing overt “scientiﬁc consensus”; while history teaches
that in the rare “hard cases” that could be of great importance, unorthodox minority
opinions may turn out to be closer to the truth.
The need for something like a Science Court is even greater now than it was
when Kantrowitz proposed it, given that scientiﬁc advice is nowadays being sought
on an increasing number of issues by an increasing range and variety of sectors of
society whose actions can signiﬁcantly affect national and international affairs, not
only governments and their agencies but also global commercial enterprises
(pharmaceutical companies, say) and non-proﬁt organizations (the Gates Founda-
tion, for example).
There are formidable practical problems to be resolved if a Science Court is to be
established. For instance: how to support it while allowing it the needed absolute
independence? How to choose permanent staff? How should the Court choose
issues to be adjudicated? How to present the available scientiﬁc evidence and the
variety of opinions about it? How to ensure that the Court’s assessment has useful,
practical consequences?
That the problems can be resolved, at least in principle, is suggested by the
existence of such publicly funded yet independent and largely successful institu-
tions as the United States Supreme Court, the Government Accountability Ofﬁce,
and the positions of Inspector-General in some federal agencies [16: Chap. 12].
5
Conclusion
If it were simple and straightforward to integrate all sciences, then it would have
happened by now. The chief difﬁculty may be that each of the sciences grew and
developed in idiosyncratic fashion, resulting in what are now as much different
cultures as different intellectual disciplines. Nevertheless, something like consid-
erable integration is shown when practical missions are accomplished by multi-
disciplinary teams. Perhaps an awareness and understanding of the cultural
differences could serve to make multidisciplinary cooperation easier and better.
Further, learning about these cultural differences might enable more genuinely
interdisciplinary ventures to form; and as such ﬁelds proliferate, exempliﬁed by
already existing merged ﬁelds, say chemical physics or molecular biology, the
4
Integrated Science: Ambitions, Practicalities, Misunderstandings
95

overall integration of science may indeed eventually come to fruition. Not all at
once or quickly, but piecemeal and as feasible.
Curricula of study for budding scientists do not presently incorporate what has
been learned by scholars of Science and Technology Studies. At best, science
students are exposed to fragments of the history of their subject and perhaps to such
outdated and misleading notions as that of a universal scientiﬁc method. If neophyte
scientists were to learn instead from a survey course in Science and Technology
Studies, in particular about the cultural aspects of scientiﬁc activities, they might in
their later professional work ﬁnd it easier to participate in multidisciplinary activ-
ities and interdisciplinary explorations that could accelerate the move toward an
overall integration of science.
Core Messages
• Misunderstandings about the nature of science are pervasive.
• Individual sciences are akin to distinct individual cultures.
• How to integrate social and medical sciences with physical and biological
sciences?
• Science is subject to conﬂicts of interest through many societal
interactions.
References
1. Bush V (1945) Science, the endless frontier. United States Government Printing Ofﬁce,
Washington (DC)
2. Adams H (1976) The academic tribes. Liveright, New York (Revised ed, 1988, University of
Illinois Press)
3. Bauer HH (1988) To rise above principle: the memoirs of an unreconstructed dean. University
of Illinois Press, Urbana & Chicago (under the pen-name ‘Josef Martin’), Chap. 16 (2nd ed.
with added material, Resource Publications [Wipf & Stock] 2012)
4. Bauer HH (1990) A dialectical discussion on the nature of disciplines and disciplinarity. Soc
Epistemology 4:215–227
5. Snow CP (1959) The two cultures and the scientiﬁc revolution. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge (UK)
6. Snow CP (1963) The two cultures and a second look [1959]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge (UK)
7. Bauer HH (1992) Scientiﬁc Literacy and the Myth of the Scientiﬁc Method. University of
Illinois Press, Urbana & Chicago
8. Halsey AH, Trow M (1971) The British academics. Faber, London
9. Ladd EC, Lipset SM (1972) Politics of academic natural scientists and engineers. Science 176
(4039):1091–1100
10. Ladd EC Jr, Lipset SM (1975) The divided academy: professors and politics. McGraw-Hill,
New York
96
H. H. Bauer

11. Roe A (1953) The making of a scientist. Dodd Mead, New York
12. Kuhn TS (1970) The structure of scientiﬁc revolutions. University of Chicago Press, Chicago
(2nd ed., enlarged; 1st ed. was 1962)
13. Janis IL (1972) Victims of groupthink: a psychological study of foreign-policy decisions and
ﬁascoes. Houghton Mifﬂin, Boston
14. Janis IL (1982) Groupthink: psychological studies of policy decisions and ﬁascoes. Houghton
Mifﬂin, Boston
15. Festinger L, Riecken H, Schachter S (1956) When prophecy fails. University of Minnesota
Press, Minneapolis
16. Bauer HH (2017) Science is not what you think: how it has changed, why we can’t trust it,
how it can be ﬁxed. McFarland, Jefferson (NC)
17. Ziman J (1994) Prometheus bound: science in a dynamic steady state. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge (UK)
18. Bauer HH (2012) Dogmatism in science and medicine: how dominant theories monopolize
research and stiﬂe the search for truth. McFarland, Jefferson (NC)
19. Bauer HH (2007) The origin, persistence and failings of HIV/AIDS theory. McFarland,
Jefferson (NC)
20. Pielke R Jr (2016) My unhappy life as a climate heretic. https://www.wsj.com/articles/my-
unhappy-life-as-a-climate-heretic-1480723518. Accessed 25 Apr 2020
21. Babich B (2015) Calling science pseudoscience: Fleck’s Archaeologies of Fact and Latour’s
‘biography of an investigation’ in AIDS denialism and homeopathy. Int Stud Philos Sci 29
(1):1–39
22. Gallo R (1991) Virus hunting: AIDS, Cancer, and the human retrovirus: a story of scientiﬁc
discovery. Basic Books, New York
23. Bauer HH (2001) Science or pseudoscience: magnetic healing, psychic phenomena, and other
heterodoxies. University of Illinois Press, Urbana & Chicago
24. Andreski S (1972) Social sciences as sorcery. Deutsch, London
25. Gura T (1996) Unraveling immune-cell mysteries. Science 274(5286):345–345
26. Harman O, Dietrich MR (2013) Outsider scientists: routes to innovation in biology.
University of Chicago Press
27. Baer D (2016) Psychology says that outsiders are the most innovative people, 20 Jan. https://
www.businessinsider.com/why-outsiders-are-the-most-innovative-people-2016-1
28. Gieryn TF, Hirsh RF (1983) Marginality and innovation in science. Soc Stud Sci 13(1):87–106
29. Altman DG (1990) Practical statistics for medical research. Chapman & Hall, London
30. Altman DG (1994) The scandal of poor medical research. BMJ 308:2831
31. Colquhoun D (2014) An investigation of the false discovery rate and the misinterpretation of
p-values. Royal Soc Open Sci 1(3):140216
32. Gigerenzer G (2004) Mindless statistics. J Socio-Econ 33(5):587–606
33. Matthews RAJ (1998) Facts versus factions: the use and abuse of subjectivity in scientiﬁc
research. European science & environment forum working paper; reprinted in (2000) Morris J
(ed) Rethinking risk and the precautionary principle, pp 247–82. Butterworth, Oxford (UK)
34. Matthews RAJ (1999) Signiﬁcance levels for the assessment of anomalous phenomena. J Sci
Explor 13(1):1–7
35. Stephan P, Levin S (1992) Striking the mother lode in science: the importance of age, place,
and time. Oxford University Press, Oxford (UK)
36. Bauer HH (1986) The enigma of loch ness: making sense of a mystery. University of Illinois
Press, Urbana & Chicago
37. Weinberg AM (1972) Science and trans-science. Minerva 10(2):209–222
38. Kantrowitz A (1967) Proposal for an institution for scientiﬁc judgment. Science 156
(3776):763–764
39. Jurs AW (2010) Science court: past proposals, current considerations, and a suggested
structure. Va J Law Technol 15:1
4
Integrated Science: Ambitions, Practicalities, Misunderstandings
97

Henry H. Bauer is Professor Emeritus of Chemistry & Science
Studies and Dean Emeritus of Arts & Sciences, Virginia
Polytechnic Institute & State University (“Virginia Tech”). He
had earlier served at the University of Sydney, the University of
Michigan, Southampton University, and the University of
Kentucky. He is Austrian by birth, Australian by education, and
a United States citizen since 1969. His publications, chieﬂy in
science studies and earlier in chemistry, comprise twelve books,
more than a hundred articles, and many book reviews. His latest
book is Science Is Not What You Think—how it has changed, why
we can’t trust it, how it can be ﬁxed (McFarland, 2017). Full
details and curriculum vitae are at www.henryhbauer.homestead.
com.
98
H. H. Bauer

5
The Integration of the Sciences
and Integral Human Knowledge
Chris van Haeften
“As we think, we live.”
Alfred North Whitehead
Summary
Quite naturally, the variety of special sciences leads to the problem of their
integration. At ﬁrst glance, this appears to be a mere methodological issue.
However, methodology is again a science. The search for integration, therefore,
requires a broader context. It touches on matters of truth in the broadest sense.
No doubt, this wider context will also have to be dealt with in a scientiﬁc
manner. This points to the complex nature of the problem to be discussed here.
This philosophic chapter inquires what this complication entails. It discusses real
knowledge, the nature of science, theoretical access to given reality, the
conditions for the possibility of science, objectivity and human agency,
ontology, the rationale for integration, cosmic experience, ipseity, integral
knowledge, and the absolutization of theoretical science.
C. van Haeften (&)
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Zilverschoon 74, Kampen 8265HB, The Netherlands
e-mail: haeft052@ziggo.nl
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
N. Rezaei (ed.), Integrated Science, Integrated Science 1,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65273-9_5
99

The concept map of the chapter
The code of this chapter is 01101110 01101001 01101111 01110100
01101110 01101001 01111010 01100001 01010101 01110100 01101001.
1
Introduction
This chapter does not discriminate between male and female. The terms “man,”
“he,” and “mankind” are meant to include all genders. The terms “theory” and
“theoretical” too are meant inclusively, as comprising the meanings of “science”
and “scientiﬁc.”
There are different kinds of philosophy. A business enterprise can be said to have
a philosophy. “Philosophy” can also point to a set of beliefs in a more or less
orderly arrangement of the reasonings concerning these beliefs. It has been made
clear that such a philosophy can easily be dogmatic. By contrast, critical philosophy
should at least give an account of its underlying presuppositions, if any, though that
is not enough. Scientiﬁc philosophy should be radically empirical. That is, it should
give an account of relations given in experience while not going beyond any of
them. If such critical-empirical philosophy, moreover, attempts to deal with the
integration of the sciences, it naturally follows that this leads to considerable
complications.
Scientiﬁc thought is generally viewed as having originated from the criticism of
mythical thought, some six centuries B.C. in Greece. Its development to the present
day has been complicated and full of vicissitudes. One of the most important events
in the history of thought occurred with Kant’s critique of theoretical thought. In the
centuries before him, scientiﬁc thinking had again taken on mythical characteristics.
Scholastic thinkers had operated on the basis of a twofold assumption: i, theoretical
thought can yield an understanding of “being” ; and ii, theoretical thinking is
dependent on metaphysical presuppositions. Kant’s critique showed that both these
assumptions are unwarranted. His critique contributed signiﬁcantly to the rise of the
100
C. van Haeften

modern sciences and the current understanding of the scientiﬁc practice and
thought. Science has to be based on empirical observation. However, with the
specialization of the sciences, their unity became a problem. This problem has
demanded attention for quite some time. Is there a unity to scientiﬁc knowledge?
What do we mean by knowledge? What can be the meaning of integration? Is it
possible?
2
Real Knowledge
Knowledge is supposed to be “true”. True knowledge can only be knowledge of
“reality,” no matter how the notions of truth and reality are interpreted. Therefore,
the integration of the sciences necessarily involves fundamental questions about
reality, truth, and knowledge. What is it to know? What is truth? What do we mean
by reality? Is there other true knowledge besides scientiﬁc knowledge? What is
scientiﬁc truth? If there are different kinds of truth and knowledge, how are they
related to each other?
No matter how we conceive of it, reality is believed to be coherent, and in that
sense, to be a unity or a totality. It is a common everyday assumption underlying
even our scientiﬁc practices; the search for an integration of the sciences issues
from the same belief.
Faust’s question “Wie alles sich zum Ganzen webt” (how does everything weave
itself into the whole?) may give us a clue to the sense in which the coherent totality
of reality is to be understood. If we take the “everything” in this question seriously,
as including individual and collective human agency, and if we take the “weaving”
seriously, as actually and continually occurring, we have raised the problem of
integration to an ontological level, where it appears to be quite problematic.
Some of the problems it entails are the following. Can integration of the sciences
be found in a superscience? What can be the meaning of a possible integration?
What, in the scheme of things, is scientiﬁc knowledge? How are the sciences
“related to” reality? Is science itself part of reality?
3
What is Science?
Do the sciences study reality? Of course, they do. However, this answer needs
speciﬁcation, since science is itself part of reality, and since all science excludes
much of reality from its scope of investigation. Science, as such, is based on and
deals with abstractions. No science studies the full reality of concrete facts, such as,
for example, that yesterday I had potatoes for dinner. Also, more signiﬁcant facts,
such as the protests in Hong Kong or a global pandemic, are in their concrete reality
beyond the scope of any science. Protests can be studied economically, sociolog-
ically, or historically. However, the full reality of them escapes every science. The
5
The Integration of the Sciences and Integral Human Knowledge
101

particular wounds of protesters and police ofﬁcers and all that they involve are
beyond the purview of any science. The full reality of concrete and individual facts
is never scientiﬁcally studied. It escapes science by its very concreteness.
However, what is the kind of reality that science studies? The beginning of an
answer to this question is that science deals with generalities. It deals with the
regularities of occurring facts. For example, economics deals with the question
under what general socio-economic conditions potatoes ﬁnd their way to a dinner
plate. Biology deals with the question of how potatoes are, in general, nutritious to a
human body. Physics and chemistry may deal with the structure of the molecules in
potatoes. Biological mathematics, too, may occupy itself with such general ques-
tions of circumstance, structure, and order. The pursuit of pure mathematics is
similar; arithmetic does not deal with the number of potatoes someone ate, but with
the general structure of the order of numbers; geometry deals with the general order
of extensive relations.
Every special science has a particular “take” on reality. For example, while
arithmetic takes the order and structure of numbers for its investigation, physics
takes the order of energy transmission, psychology takes the structural order of
feeling and awareness. There are many other sciences, and there are also inter-
disciplinary sciences. However, all scientiﬁc enterprise requires at least one such
particular “take” by which a general point of view is deﬁned. We may call it a
viewpoint or an aspect. What is the basis for the aspectual nature of the sciences?
Why are the objects of science necessarily abstract?
4
Theoretical Access to Given Reality
Descartes, who is generally considered to be the founder of modern philosophy,
described a thought experiment by which he intended to explain an ontic state of
affairs. When the temperature of a piece of wax is raised, its color, its smell, its
hardness, and its shape change as well. However, says Descartes, even when the
wax has completely melted, we know that it is still the same wax. The reality of the
wax remains unaffected by empirical changes. According to him, the reality of the
wax is not for objectifying perception. It is only known by the mind. It is what it is,
independent of external inﬂuences. Accordingly, he deﬁned substantial reality as
that which needs nothing besides itself in order to be what it is. This became a
widespread conception, according to which the reality of things is “behind” or
“under” their appearance as objects.
How is the possibility of such substantialism to be explained? Descartes iden-
tiﬁed the essence of the wax with its extension. Its shape may change, and its total
bulk may increase, but Descartes thought that it essentially remains extensive. He
identiﬁed this extension with its material density. Even in its ﬂuid state, the wax
takes up its space such that it cannot be penetrated by something else. Where the
wax is, there can be no wood.
102
C. van Haeften

Descartes ascribed properties to the substance conceived by him that were
derived from primary experience. We see things take up a certain amount of space,
and we see that where the wax is, there can be no wood, we feel that its weight does
not change, and so on.
Space, solidity, and weight indicate modes of our experience; the spatial mode,
the physical mode, and the psychical mode. These modes are given in our primary,
everyday experience. How else would Descartes have been able to ascribe anything
to the substance he supposed to be beyond perception? He had no other source for
what he attributed to the wax but the primary experience of given reality. There is
no other way to obtain any attribute. Modes of reality, if they have any mooring at
all, must be given. The “place” of their givenness is no other than primary
experience.
There are various other modes of primary reality and experience. Besides their
spatiality, we know the quantiﬁability of things (they can be counted), we know
their feeling quality (they can be touched or seen or heard), and we also know that
things have a logical character (they can be thought about). Some things have a
biotic character (they are alive). And there appear to be still other modes of given
reality as well. These modes appear to be irreducible to one another. For example,
what appears to us as the mere physical “attraction” of a solid body by the earth
represents a mode that is different from our feeling some weight or some pain.
We have no other possibility for scientiﬁc access to reality than according to the
given modes of our primary experience. The latter are the only basis for our
scientiﬁc aspects, while the abstract nature of scientiﬁc objects arises from the
limitation of the scientiﬁc viewpoint to a given mode of reality, or a combination of
such modes.
5
How Is Science Possible?
Science cannot exist apart from a variety of conditions. In the ﬁrst place, the
ultimate basis for science lies in the primary human experience with its implied
modes. In the second place, these modes need to be abstracted. This points to
human agency, and therefore to human existence. What, if any, is the signiﬁcance
of the abstracting scientist?
6
Objectivity and Human Agency
If every science is empirical in the sense that its access to reality is determined by at
least one given irreducible mode of primary experience, it follows that integration
of sciences in the form of another science requires some such mode again. Thus, it
would seem that a scientiﬁc integration of sciences needs either the modal view-
point of some particular science or the viewpoint of some superscience.
5
The Integration of the Sciences and Integral Human Knowledge
103

Is the integration of the sciences only a matter of objective scientiﬁc results?
Science should be objective in its method, its aim, as well as in its results. What
difference, if any, does it make that there is neither method nor aim, nor result, apart
from human agency?
It is a condition sine qua non that scientists suppress their individual predilec-
tions. The critical question is what we will ﬁnd if we take into account that the
required objectivity presupposes the human agency of abstraction. Any integration
of the sciences presupposes the same human agency. It cannot be excluded that the
viewpoint for an integration of the sciences is dependent on the integrating scientist.
The existence as such of objective science provides a reason for an ontological
investigation of the relation between the objectifying scientist and his science.
A fortiori, any sought-for integration requires such an investigation. However, is
ontology possible? If so, under what condition?
7
Ontology
If ontology is a science, and if all science is aspectual, we encounter the compli-
cation that an ontological take on reality is an aspect as well. Where would this
aspect be found? If it is an aspect of one of the special sciences, we are faced with
the question on what basis we elevate that special science to the rank of primus inter
pares. By ascribing primacy to a particular aspect, ontology would have lost the
status of special science. This is contradictory, for it is not possible that a science is
at the same time special and not special.
Is there another possibility? Or should we forget about ontology altogether? Its
problems may be too big for human consciousness, and, if we are not careful, we
could relapse into scholastic fallacies. Should we not instead take any integration of
scientiﬁc knowledge as a mere methodological problem?
However, then the same questions return. If methodology is again a science, we
are referred back to the problem of scientiﬁc truth. By which aspectual point of
view would methodology be qualiﬁed?
Scientiﬁc activity calls for basic questions about its conditions. These questions
are important because they touch on the meaning of science for human practice and
life. If ontology or any other superscience is impossible, we must at least investigate
the basis and the nature of this impossibility. The responsibility involved in sci-
entiﬁc activity requires a critical investigation of the possibility of their integration
and the limits thereof. “Science without borders” sounds exciting for a project, but
it asks for critical probing.
If the questions of ontology are under certain conditions indeed unanswerable,
an investigation of these conditions is required in order to avoid a mere pragmatic
approach to science. Such an approach leaves the backdoor wide open for dog-
matic, if even hidden, conceptions and practices.
104
C. van Haeften

8
The Rationale for Integration
The sciences appear to present us with a fragmented picture of reality. However, it
is impossible to accept that reality is fragmented. We noticed that the belief in its
coherence underlies our daily and scientiﬁc practices. What is more, our entire
existence is dependent upon such coherence. If we did not coherently “ﬁt” in our
cosmic reality, we could not even exist.
9
Cosmic Experience
Our existence is totally dependent upon the reality in which we coherently ﬁt.
However, this coherence is particular. We ﬁt in a speciﬁc way, namely in the way
by which our experience is human experience. Our experience is experience of our
world. A plant louse does not experience reality in the way we do, and neither does
a bat or a dolphin. That what we experience as things are things for us. And the
modes of our experience are modes-for-us. It would be speculation to go beyond
human experience.
For this reason, our experience may be called cosmic (the basic meaning of
cosmos is “well-ordered whole”). Our knowledge of the real world is only what it is
based on our modes and our structures of experience. Consequently, the idea of
reality as such, is only possible in human terms. Even the idea of a universe without
human beings presupposes humanity to uphold this idea, and it is always framed in
human experiential terms. “Being” is beyond our empirical grasp.
It appears that our cosmic experience comprises diverse kinds of data. In the ﬁrst
place, we experience things-for-us and events-for-us. Secondly, we experience them
according to the modes of our experience. In the third place, we have experience of
ourselves as cosmic realities. In the fourth place, we experience other human beings
as selves. Self-experience is the experience of a cosmic self by a cosmic self.
10
Ipseity
Selfhood, also known as ipseity, is how a human being is aware of himself. There
are many different theories about the self. However, it is beyond doubt that ipseity
is among the primary data of our cosmic experience. Moreover, the experience of
self involves an ultimate concern. Ipseity, as such, implies the experience of being
personally at stake. Therefore, the experience of ipseity involves the question of the
truth about our lives. What is it to be a self? Furthermore, does self-knowledge have
any signiﬁcance for the meaning and the truth of scientiﬁc knowledge?
The entire continuous stream of life and experience presupposes the self.
Somehow, I am identical to the one I was between my conception and my birth.
This has an important consequence for science’s ability to form a theoretical view
5
The Integration of the Sciences and Integral Human Knowledge
105

of totality: if the self-same ego is presupposed in all theoretical experience, it is not
possible to gain self-knowledge by way of theory.
To arrive at self-knowledge, all we can do is looking at the relation between the
self and its cosmic existence and experience. It then appears that our existence is a
life of passionate concern. The ultimate concern of man is existential. “To be or not
to be” is as true as it always was. The basic passions that drive us are existential.
Our life depends on them. When we experience desperation, our energy withers,
and our life is at stake. By contrast, if we have “faith, hope, and love” we expe-
rience meaning in the relativity of our lives.
Moreover, even these considerations are not enough to arrive at self-knowledge,
for they are still general and abstract. Real self-knowledge, by contrast, is neces-
sarily personal, individual, and concrete. It involves one’s dealing with adversity.
The question of how this is to be done exceeds the scope of this chapter.
11
Integral Knowledge
Existentially and personally, we are well beyond scientiﬁc abstraction and the
problems it involves. Nevertheless, a comprehensive conception of scientiﬁc truth
should take the self’s cosmic position and its concern into account. An inclusive
conception of reality does not allow for an absolutization of theoretical thought.
It may be thought that such an inclusive conception is irrelevant to the question
of scientiﬁc integration. It would not be unscientiﬁc to think so, yet this is an
assumption that cannot possibly be based on science itself. Such an assumption is of
the nature of ontological belief.
A personal world-view, even if implicit, is unavoidable. Every theoretical view of
totality necessarily depends on it. There is no integrality to our knowledge apart from
such a personal view. A fortiori, every conception of the nature of science is at least
implicitly conditioned by such a view. This shows the prime condition under which
the questions of ontology are unanswerable. They cannot be answered when sub-
jected to the condition that ontology must be based on science itself. Any explicit or
implicit answer to the ontological questions is de facto of the nature of belief.
12
Absolute Theoretical Science
However, there have been various proposals for a merely theoretical all-inclusive
view of reality. They all suppose that the integration of the sciences needs nothing
beyond scientiﬁc thinking itself. By way of example, I mention only Descartes. He
was right in his mistrust of scholastic thought. Nevertheless, he, too, had theoretical
thought for his starting point. He was then led to believe that reality is divided into
two original principles. According to his conception, there is, on the one hand, the
substance of theoretical geometrical thought, on the other hand, the extended
106
C. van Haeften

substance of the outer world. This view does not allow integration. It posits two
substances, each of which is what it is apart from the other. It is dualistic, and it
does not account for the existential nature of the self and its relation to our theo-
retical view of totality.
Every conception that does not relate theoretical knowledge to the self must be
expected to be non-integral since it has no other possibility for its access to reality
but to absolutize a given modal aspect. By the basic coherence of reality, such
absolutization will call forth a complementary absolutization, as the example of
Descartes shows. Rather than taking his starting-point in his full self and its con-
crete experience, he started from an abstraction. By taking nothing more than
theoretical reason for his starting point, he ended up with two substantialistic
principles, mutually exclusive of one another.
13
Conclusion
There is no scientiﬁc unity of scientiﬁc knowledge because every science presup-
poses an irreducible mode of our experience. However, some unity of knowledge is
required, for without it, we neither know what our existential situation is nor do we
know how science can contribute to the practice of life. A unifying view of reality
cannot in itself be of a scientiﬁc nature. It can only depend on a personal choice in the
center of our existence concerning the meaning of individual and collective human
life. The integration point must be “before” science; it cannot itself be a science.
Core Messages
• There is no scientiﬁc unity of scientiﬁc knowledge.
• Some unity of knowledge is required.
• An inclusive conception of reality does not allow for an absolutization of
theoretical thought.
• A comprehensive conception of scientiﬁc truth should take the self’s
cosmic position into account.
5
The Integration of the Sciences and Integral Human Knowledge
107

Chris van Haeften was born in Amsterdam, studied philosophy
at the Free University Amsterdam, taught philosophy for more
than 35 years in Zwolle. In 1991, he got his doctor's degree from
the Free University on presenting a dissertation with the title Zijn
en tijd in de ﬁlosoﬁe van A.N. Whitehead (Being and Time in the
Philosophy of A.N. Whitehead).
108
C. van Haeften

6
The Indelible Stamp of Our Lowly
Origins: An Epistemic Architecture
Between the Sciences and Humanities
Dustin Hellberg
“Thus, from the war of Nature, from famine and death, the most
exalted object which we are capable of conceiving, namely, the
production of the higher animals, directly follows. There is a
grandeur in this view of lie, with its several powers, having
been originally breathed into a few forms or into one; and that,
whilst this planet has gone cycling on according to the ﬁxed law
of gravity, from so simple a beginning endless forms most
beautiful and most wonderful have been, and are being,
evolved”.
Charles Darwin [1]
Summary
This article seeks to overlap the humanities and sciences by establishing a
Pragmatist foundation based on the work of John Dewey. It then examines the
differences and potential similarities in methodology and aims between the
disciplines through a plausible versus potential distinction as these relate to
fallibility and falsiﬁability. Though the aims of science and the aims of aesthetics
are distinct, they can be, per a Pragmatist foundation, brought into closer range.
The upshot of this is a more comprehensive understanding of human experience,
human values, and human lifeways.
D. Hellberg (&)
Department of English Studies, University of the Bahamas, Bahamas, USA
D. Hellberg
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education
and Research Network (USERN), Bahamas, USA
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
N. Rezaei (ed.), Integrated Science, Integrated Science 1,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65273-9_6
109

Humanities versus natural sciences
[Prepared with data from https://dornsife.usc.edu/careerpathways/major-2-
career/].
The code of this chapter is 01101001 01000110 01101001 01100010
01101100 01111001 01101001 01110011 01100110 01110100 01100001
01101001 01101100 01100001.
1
Introduction
In Darwin’s most famous and inﬂuential work, The Origin of Species, we readily
witness the magisterial awe, the wondrous quality of looking into Nature’s
machinery, and ﬁnding proof and pattern. So, too, does Darwin admit, when
speaking of our lowly origins, the humbleness that we must feel when admitting
that the same mechanism that gave rise to life on the planet ﬁtted our species with
the intelligence to root out these causal relations while also giving us the
self-awareness that we are not special in the animal world. We are chance accidents,
hapless victims of luck and circumstance, both as individuals and communities
stretching back to the shadowy origins of our species, one among a myriad. Evo-
lution, by the sheer and unlikely chance of our ancestors’ survival, endowed us with
brains big enough to contemplate themselves, to contemplate the deep past, to
110
D. Hellberg

contemplate at all. When we look at other animals, we speak of instincts and traits
that prescribe behavior. However, as we are part of this evolutionary continuum, are
there not instincts and traits that also guide at least some of human behavior? Some
in the scientiﬁc community (put broadly) may not even bat an eyelash at this
question. However, in the humanities, such a suggestion would be met with denial
and even hostility. According to the humanities, cultural inﬂuence, social inﬂuence,
and (most perniciously) linguistic inﬂuence account for all human behavior. These
construct human reality and human selves. Ask an English professor whether
evolution by natural selection is true, and they will likely agree. Ask them the
correlate question, ‘Do evolutionary forces necessarily inﬂuence human behavior’,
and there will be far less agreement. The orthodoxy in the humanities is quite
strong.1
What are the orthodoxies found in today’s humanities? In his book, Human
Diversity, Charles Murray outlines the humanities’ three main claims. These are: 1.
Gender is a social construct; 2. Race is a social construct; and 3. Class is a function
of privilege [2].2 To a scholar outside the humanities, these may seem somewhat
strange on their face. In the humanities, however, these three tenets are foundational
and mostly unquestioned. The present chapter aims to explore how and where these
tenets may overlap the empirical sciences in such a way that evolutionary forces can
be seen in concert with our species’ complex sociability.
The ﬁrst point to establish is that we must understand behavior (what we ﬁnd
humans doing as individuals and as social groups) in terms of tendency. A species’
behavior will necessarily have tendencies, sometimes readily on display and
sometimes not. Evolution does not ﬁt3 a species to necessarily act in a certain way
like a machine. The individual interacts with a complex environment, be it a pro-
toplasm, a rainforest, the ocean’s bottom, or an academic department.4 When
ethologists report that corvids use deception and counter-deception while caching
food from peers [3], that vervet monkeys use different signal cries for different types
of predators [3], or that bees enact their elaborate dances to direct their hive to
nectar resources [3], we see this behavior as proof of evolved forces driving
behavioral tendencies. However, when we turn our attention (or when the hu-
manities do) to ourselves, why is it so hard to imagine that evolution works through
our behaviors as well? A universal trait or behavior (call it convergent cultural
1In this chapter, I am using the sciences and humanities as broadly as possible. This is something
of a meta-analysis of the two ﬁelds. As an aside, I mean no hostility toward either. I am as
supportive of one as I am of the other.
2Murray is no stranger to controversy. An earlier book, The Bell Curve (written with Richard
Herrnstein) was branded racist for its assertions. Murray has even been physically attacked on
college campuses when asked to deliver speeches. To even cite him in a paper, to many humanities
scholars, was already an objection (to borrow from Nietzsche). I cite him here not to incite. Rather,
I simply ﬁnd his assessment of the humanities’ orthodoxy to be accurate.
3Here, I am careful to note that evolution by natural selection does not purposively act on species.
While this might be stating the obvious, there are numerous examples, even in scientiﬁc literature,
which speaks of evolution or of genes as directing behavior in species as if with agential intention.
4Though academic departments might best exemplify that view of nature as ‘red in tooth and
claw’.
6
The Indelible Stamp of Our Lowly Origins
111

processes) that is common across human communities must have an evolutionary
explanation and function. Human beings have a wide array of universals common
to all cultures. These universals are the aggregate body of cultural and natural forces
at work in individual contributions to their respective communities [4]. These
tendencies toward universals do not mean that every single human being neces-
sarily performs each act, behavior, or function. Instead, it means that individuals
tend to act in such a way that these universals show up in unrelated human com-
munities. Humans evolved to be vastly and complexly social, but we are not
separated from Nature simply because we can analyze it. Evolutionary forces must
work on us as cultural forces must as well. How could it be otherwise? Our lowly
stamp can coexist with our ability to simultaneously theorize about and (gaze at the
majesty) of Nature, the universe and ourselves. The current state of the humanities
would deny most evolutionary or scientiﬁc claims about human behavior, preferring
instead to explain these culturally, politically or linguistically. So, can the hu-
manities be put into concert with the sciences and, more importantly, is this desired
or even necessary?
2
Theory and Method in Science and the Humanities
The term ‘theory’ in the sciences and humanities is used in ways almost alien to one
another. Philosopher of science, Susan Haack, says this about scientiﬁc theory, “I
take scientiﬁc theories to be, as they appear to be, complex congeries of statements
or propositions, genuine candidates for truth or falsity” [5, 6]. In the sciences,
predictions are made, tests are replicated, and the theory gains credence as it resists
attempts to prove it wrong. The falsiﬁability criterion is a crucial and valuable part
of science’s epistemic growth. ‘Theory’ in the humanities is quite a different thing.
It refers to the aggregate coalition of du jour variations on the Orthodoxy noted
earlier by Morris. It has a dizzying range of subjects and positions. Without enu-
merating them, it is important to identify a few common attributes among them.
Theory5 in the humanities postulates that human selves (mind, identity, experience)
are inﬁnitely plastic in Nature. This plasticity is a result of language, so they say.
Because language suffuses all human experience, is the very medium through
which we orient ourselves in the world, it constructs the very essence of the human
self. The next leg to the argument is that language is arbitrary. Words do not adhere
to their referents in any rigorous way. Deﬁnitions shift, loan words enter from
foreign vocabularies, entire languages go extinct. Due to the arbitrariness of lan-
guage and its role as an intermediary between the mind and the world, the
5And, ‘Theory’, in the humanities, can refer to the wide array of unrelated methods of
interpretation. Theory is a catch-all word as I use it here to contrast with the way a theory works in
the sciences.
112
D. Hellberg

humanities scholar thus concludes that human beings are entirely subjective, mal-
leable constructs.6 It is a form of linguistic relativism that is, on its face, inherently
hostile to the aims and enterprises of science. It is an extension of Whorﬁanism,
named after Benjamin Whorf,7 and is often labeled linguistic relativism or linguistic
determinism. The premise is this: the language you speak fundamentally determines
the way the world is (to you), and since languages and persons differ subjectively,
there is no core human nature, no reality outside of language that we can point to,
and no foundation upon which knowledge can rest. This ‘radical skepticism of
being’ is not reﬂective of a person’s preferences or predilections but is a staunchly
held position. To anyone outside literary studies, cultural studies, gender studies,
et al., this may seem entirely strange. It would seem to deny the existence of
universals in human experience and, further, it would even call into question basic
scientiﬁc facts. It would seem to call the earlier orthodoxy of the humanities into
question. However, such is the state of the humanities.
The methodologies between the two disciplines are also very different. Science,
as noted earlier, must be predictive, testable, and replicable. The humanities’ main
method is retrodictive and, like it or not, ad hoc. The interpretation of a text and the
analysis of a piece of music are subjective, non-testable, and not predictive in any
serious sense. This is no critique of the humanities. It is simply the way that the
disciplines operate. However, there is a growing number of humanities scholars
who have shed the relativist trappings of ‘theory’. They now endeavor to apply
scientiﬁc ﬁndings to literary texts and artistic works. Some of these schools have
names like literary Darwinism, biocultural theory, or cognitive cultural studies.
They have as their ambition to take scientiﬁc ﬁndings and apply these to the arts.8
Each of these hybrid approaches has its merits and ﬂaws,9 but these are serious
attempts to rescue the humanities from their hyper-skeptical, linguistically rela-
tivistic positions. What I seek here is a method to undergird these approaches to see
whether compatibility between the disciplines is possible.
A lengthy but telling quote is needed here to elucidate this trend in the hu-
manities fully. Susan Haack quotes many prominent literary and cultural theorists in
the following passage. She discusses the growing distrust of the sciences among
humanities scholars once armed with their ‘linguistically/socially constructed
self-model’ so prominent today:
6This thumbnail sketch of theory in the humanities is woefully brief, though it is not an unfair
assessment. What the humanities essentially reject is essentialism, the notion that there are
deﬁnitive ‘ways’ in human existence. The legal and moral upshot of such a view is clear as it
resists categorizing human existence in ways that can lend preference to one type of ‘being’, be it
heterosexual, male, caucasian, etc. This is most admirable. The further consequence, however, is a
distrust of scientiﬁc ﬁndings from genetics, behavioral psychology, evolutionary biology, et al.
7Sometimes called the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis in deference to Edward Sapir’s mentorship of
Whorf.
8These groups include literary Darwinism, cognitive cultural theory, biocultural theory, et al.
9My book, World Enough, covers some of the ﬂaws in literary Darwinism and cognitive cultural
theory.
6
The Indelible Stamp of Our Lowly Origins
113

“But then radical sociologists, feminists and multiculturalists, radical literary theorists,
rhetoricians, and semiologists and philosophers outside strictly philosophy-of-science
circles began to turn their attention to science […] Feyerabend … promised to free us of
“the tyranny of …such abstract concepts as ‘truth’, ‘reality’, or ‘objectivity’.” Now New
Cynics10 like Harry Collins assure us that “the natural world has a small or non-existent
role in the construction of scientiﬁc knowledge;” and Kenneth Gergen that the “validity of
theoretical propositions in the sciences “is in no way affected by factual evidence.” Ruth
Hubbard urges that “feminist science must insist on the political nature and content of
scientiﬁc work;” and Sandra Harding asks why it isn’t “as illuminating and honest to refer
to Newton’s Laws as ‘Newton’s rape manual’ as it is to call them ‘Newton’s mechanics’.
Ethnomethodologist Bruno Latour announces that “all this business about rationality and
irrationality is the result of an attack by someone on associations that stand in the way;”
and rhetorician of science Steven Fuller proposes a ‘shallow’ conception … that locates the
authoritative character of science, “not in an esoteric set of skills or a special understanding
of reality, but in the appeals to its form of knowledge that others feel they must make to
legitimate their own activities.” Richard Rorty informs readers that “the only sense in which
science is exemplary is that it is a model of human solidarity,” and Stanley Fish that “the
distinction between baseball and science is not ﬁnally so ﬁrm” [6].
These highly skeptical and quasi- (if not outright) relativist viewpoints are
entirely common in the humanities. Call them constructivist, Idealist, postmodern,
poststructuralist, posthuman, or what have you.11 They remain hostile to the pro-
cess, function, and aim of science. Haack fully admits that science can get things
wrong, that social bias may sneak into objective research, that the knowledge of
science is not the only kind of knowledge, that ‘rationality’ is a tricky and
(sometimes) deceptive guiding principle, that science (to remain scientiﬁc) must
remain fallible. However, she says, “But it doesn’t follow that there is no such thing
as objectively stronger or weaker evidence, objectively better- and worse-conducted
inquiry, objectively true or false scientiﬁc claims and theories. And it isn’t true” [6].
There are standards and models, methods, and maneuvers that science utilizes
(broadly) to establish its claims. There are things we have learned from science that
we can say are objectively true.12 One of these is that evolution shapes and
inﬂuences a species’ behavior within its environment. It creates tendencies in
behavior, and it goes well beyond mere reﬂexes. Higher-level cognitive processes
and behaviors (sociability, mating rituals, conﬂict resolution and reconciliation, and
deception of peers) are readily evident in many species ranging from corvids to the
great apes to cetaceans to elephants. The human ability to categorize, denote, and
10A term Haack uses to denote those hostile to the actual workings and discoveries of science or
would seek to relativize scientiﬁc data.
11Some of this debate stretches back to the philosophical schism between realism and idealism.
The central idealist tenet states that we cannot ‘know’ reality beyond the mind because the
word/idea/representation is always implacably in the way.
12The term ‘true’ here would raise hackles in the humanities. I use it in a fallible way, as with all
terms. To paraphrase a later quote from Dewey, if there is no reason to debate or deny a claim, as
with the evolutionary machinations guiding life and species’ behavioral tendencies on the planet,
then we should accept its validity as settled. Note that this fallibilist ethos in no way ‘shuts the
doors to inquiry’ (as Peirce would put it).
114
D. Hellberg

record such amazing behavior (and instincts) in other species does not somehow
mean that our species, evolved as it is, is immune to the very same evolutionary
inﬂuences. It may seem bafﬂing that anyone would disagree, but that is the party
line in the humanities.13 As I will suggest, however, the philosophy of Pragmatism
may offer some way out of this bramble.
As an epistemological foundation and bridge, Pragmatism has several advan-
tages. First, it takes science seriously. Second, it is not a ‘philosophy’ per se but
rather a method. Third, it is anti-essentialist due to its fallibilist ethos, and therefore
it is open to discoveries, new evaluations, new interpretations. Fourth, in Dewey’s
work, he endeavors continuously to create a working union between the sciences
and aesthetics. Lastly, Pragmatism is a neutral ground that can mediate between the
disciplines. One cannot assail literary studies from the standpoint of the scientiﬁc
method and vice versa. They are methodologically and ideologically dissimilar.
However, as I will try to show, using speciﬁc frameworks like Dewey’s, which sees
these as commensurate through the human experiential continuum, and we might be
able to locate some (but certainly not all) harmonious notes between. The contrast
of this view is the ‘Strong Program’ (and responses to it) seen in the ﬁeld of
sociology of science. Basically, this perspective seeks to explain scientiﬁc work as
it relates to historical, social, or normative conditions. The Strong Program grew in
the 70′s to redeﬁne scientiﬁc progress/discovery concerning mere beliefs, incom-
mensurability, and language. As Peter Godfrey-Smith notes, however, “Despite
some differences within the ﬁeld, it is fair to say that the strong program is an
expression of a relativist position about belief and justiﬁcation” [7]. The relativism
of any stripe (as also held by much of the humanities)
would erase standards,
categories, and science itself. It is clearly an untenable viewpoint from which to
begin. It is in contrast with the Pragmatic view of cumulative knowledge combined
with a fallibilist ethos.
Now that the background has been roughed in, I will turn to ways that the
disciplines may overlap in meaningful and serious ways. To achieve this, I will
examine the work of the Pragmatist philosopher John Dewey. Later, I will segue to
the philosopher of science Susan Haack and then offer some novel terms of my
own.
13Neither do I hold that humans are merely gene replication machines. Our social and cultural
lives, the sheer breadth of artistic practice ranging back as far as we ﬁnd homo sapiens, are part of
what makes us human. Social, linguistic and cultural inﬂuences are critically important to study.
They are as important as social justice for the oppressed, equal treatment of all citizens in a legal
context and elimination of discriminatory policies aimed at any minority group in any community.
I simply don’t agree that language or culture has completely allowed humans to wriggle free from
evolution’s subtle nudges and tugs at human behavior.
6
The Indelible Stamp of Our Lowly Origins
115

3
Pragmatism and Science
Pragmatism’s maxim, as put by its founder, Charles Peirce,14 is as follows:
“Consider what effects, which might conceivably have practical bearings, we
conceive the object of our concept to have. Then, our conception of these effects is
the whole of our conception of the object” [8]. William James, Peirce’s student and
(sometimes) friend, put it a bit more clearly when he says: “To attain perfect
clearness in our thoughts of an object, then, we need only consider what con-
ceivable effects of a practical kind the object may involve –what sensations we are
to expect from it, what reactions we must prepare. Our conception of these effects,
whether immediate or remote, is then for us the whole of our conception of the
object, so far as that conception has positive signiﬁcance at all” [9].
The textbook example is to compare the Ptolemaic and Copernican views of
celestial motion. The Ptolemaic system does yield practical effects through its
predictive capacity. With better telescopes, observation, method, and math, we
understand that the Copernican system gave better predictions and more accuracy.
The practical effects of these predictions hang on the world a bit better, ﬁt the world
a little more closely, and ally with the data more conclusively. The idea in Prag-
matism is quite simple, in accord with common sense. If I know of two competing
theories to explain X, and I know that one theory has been tested more, yields better
predictions, and more accurately ﬁts the entire context of what I understand to be
true, then I simply ought to wield the stronger theory in lieu of the weaker. What,
then, if we turn our gaze from the heavens to human beings and call them the
‘object of our concept’? We know that humans are an evolved species, likely
200,000–300,000 years old, who migrated out of the African savannah around
50,000 years ago and populated the habitable continents in a quite rapid succession.
Let us take for granted that our conception of ‘human’ is ‘evolved (and evolving)
primate with capacity for the abstract-symbolic expression’. Let us take for granted
that our conception of evolution by natural selection is the process that has inﬂu-
enced the traits and behaviors of the myriad species on the planet the past 4.54
billion years. The effect, according to a Pragmatic understanding, is that our concept
of ‘human’ must include the cumulative understanding we have of our species.
Thus it is that we see ourselves as being inﬂuenced (but not entirely controlled) by
evolutionary forces in addition to cultural, social, and linguistic ones. To take the
view that ignores or denies this (as the humanities often do) is to operate in bad
faith, is to toss out empiricism, to eliminate reality itself. How could our species not
be inﬂuenced in some ways by the very force that has shaped all life on the planet?
However, this view is anathema in the humanities. Human aesthetic activity,
14Peirce, James and Dewey are considered the ‘classical’ Pragmatists. Later developments in the
ﬁeld intertwined with analytic philosophy. The work of Willard Van Quine, Donald Davidson,
Jurgen Habermas and Wilfred Sellers best exemplify this branch. Later Pragmatists, such as Richard
Rorty and Hilary Putnam have been labeled Neopragmatists. My choice to return to Dewey’s work
is a way of bypassing the debates and demarcations of the various modern Pragmatist camps.
Dewey and Peirce are rarely discussed outside of philosophy departments, though their work is
slowly beginning to ebb back into broader awareness.
116
D. Hellberg

cultural activity, self-awareness, and abstract symbolic expression are all part of an
evolved continuum in which we locate ourselves.15 When these factors are com-
bined with the cultural and linguistic, we have a much richer, fuller picture of
human life, art, and selves. The humanities may once again start speaking of human
beings rather than ‘human’ ‘beings’. This disciplinary intertwining ﬁnds a cham-
pion in the work of John Dewey.
Among the major Pragmatists, Dewey was very concerned about ﬁnding con-
nections between all human activity and inquiry, especially the sciences and the
arts. In order to understand Dewey’s program, we should quickly contrast Dewey
with a later, radical philosopher of science, Paul Feyerabend, an anarchic thinker
about the Nature and foundations of science. Godfrey-Smith says, “[Feyerabend]
argued for ‘epistemological anarchism’. The epistemological anarchist is opposed
to all systems of rules and constraints in science … The only rule that we can be
sure will not impede imagination and progress is this: anything goes” [7]. It is
important to note Feyerabend’s broad inﬂuence despite the anarchic war cry.
Dewey sees creativity and imagination, culture and aesthetics, science and logic, the
whole range of human activity, as connected and non-relativistic (or anarchic). It is
because Dewey’s thinking had to square Darwin’s ideas with those of aesthetics. To
do so would then require an evolutionary view of all human activity, one ordained
by, governed by, circumscribed by (but not restrained by) seeing humans as part of
Nature’s continuum. We are inﬂuenced in part by Nature, part by culture, with no
clear demarcation where these inﬂuences begin or end.
Dewey seeks an epistemology robust enough to accommodate science and aes-
thetics without succumbing to foundationalism (establishing core ‘Truths’) , scien-
tism (over-wrought faith in science), or relativism (as discussed earlier). However,
where to even begin such an undertaking? To say that humans evolved to have
aesthetic appreciation is no more an aesthetic theory than a color wheel is a theory of
painting. Dewey sees the world and human understanding as relational, as trans-
actional. Experience, aesthetics, art, and science are all interactions between the
mind and the various types of ‘environments’. He says, “Thought, intelligence,
science is the intentional direction of natural events to meanings capable of
immediate possession and enjoyment” [11]. In another book, Art as Experience,
Dewey says, “For the uniquely distinguishing feature of aesthetic experience is
exactly the fact that no such distinction of self and object exists in it, since it is
aesthetic in the degree in which organism and environment cooperate to institute an
15Contrast this with a passage from Susan Bordo who says, “Not chieﬂy through ideology, but
through the organization and regulation of the time, space and movement of our daily lives, our
bodies are trained, shaped and impressed with the stamp of prevailing forms of selfhood, desire,
masculinity, femininity” [10]. While anyone can fully admit that social, linguistic and legal
inﬂuences necessarily inﬂuence human life and experience, the appeal here to the historicity of the
self (following Michel Foucault) relies on a highly contingent/linguistic deﬁnition. The core issue
in the humanities aims to explain culture via culture as the primary and sole inﬂuence on human
selves. This creates an ironic juxtaposition. It views male, female, black, white, gay, straight, etc.
as monolithic groups. The irony of this constant division is that it quickly loses sight of the
connections between disparate cultures and groups, the very thing necessary to unify all people by
way of common understanding, which is (or should be) the main goal of the humanities.
6
The Indelible Stamp of Our Lowly Origins
117

experience in which the two are so fully integrated each disappears” [12]. Taken
together, we see that Dewey views science and art as types of experience, and all
experience further conditions the mind for more accurate and even novel experiences
in the future. Dewey saw these processes in an evolutionary light. While natural
selection works ‘toward’ promoting species’ survival, it does not ensure it. It is
teleologically ateological. Science, knowledge, aesthetics all work, for Dewey,
toward a clearer understanding of each subject/object without necessitating what that
future picture/goal/end will be. So, we see Michael Bacon says of Dewey that “there
are no absolute principles or ﬁrst beliefs. There are rather beliefs which we steer by,
and our conﬁdence in them is provisional”. But, like Peirce, [Dewey] emphasizes
that questioning them requires reason: “Unless there is some reason to doubt
whether presumptive knowledge is really knowledge, we take it as a net product …
Such objects, until we have occasion to doubt them, are settled, assured” [13].
I will brieﬂy sketch16 Dewey’s picture of science and aesthetics to map out
further epistemic intersections, which will then yield potential methodological
overlaps. In his chapter critiquing Richard Rorty’s17 views of Dewey, James
Gouinlock outlines Dewey’s philosophy of science. Gouinlock quotes Dewey, who
says, “Scientiﬁc conceptions are not a revelation of prior and independent reality.
They are a system of hypotheses, worked out under conditions of deﬁnite test, by
means of which our intellectual and practical trafﬁc with Nature is rendered freer,
more secure and more signiﬁcant” [14]. Rorty (a Neopragmatist heavily inﬂuenced
by postmodernism’s turn toward linguistic relativism) sees this passage as indi-
cating a break from foundations, methods, and means in science. However, keeping
in mind that Pragmatism’s main ‘method’ is fallibilism, one sees that Dewey is
offering an evolutionary view of science, not an anti-foundationalist version. To
drum up the old Being v Becoming debate from early Eleatic philosophy, Dewey
sees science, human understanding, aesthetics, everything, in fact, in a constant
process of becoming, moving incrementally toward a kind of unknown ‘Being’ or
end. As noted earlier, this model that Dewey proposes moves forward just as
evolution does, an ateleological teleology. Hypotheses, theories, and ideas are
drummed up in relation between the human mind and the environment (used
generally). These are tested, probed, called up, shot down, revised in due course.18
As the human mind evolved concerning its environment, eventually allowing for
abstract symbolic/linguistic expression, the correlate categories by which we label,
16For all the ‘sketches’ here, one might call this article a sketchbook, a book of sketches, a sheaf of
doodles.
17At Rorty’s height of fame, he was the grande dame of a highly charged (and thoroughly
enjoyable/readable yet sometimes laughable) brand of skepticism. He championed democratic
ideals, liberal principles and intellectual freedom unﬂaggingly. Though called a neo-pragmatist, he
never quite escaped (in my reading) the charges that he remained a relativist.
18Though Dewey began as a Hegelian and later changed his views, he never quite shufﬂed off that
particular Hegelian mantle. The similarity in process noted above is not the rote Hegelian ‘thesis,
antithesis, synthesis’ model. We should understand Dewey here as inﬂuenced by his teacher
Peirce. Peirce speciﬁcally worked against simply rebranding Pragmatism as an offshoot of
Hegelian philosophy because Hegel’s historicist angle wouldn’t work with the philosophy of
science that Peirce wanted to ally with his version of Pragmatism.
118
D. Hellberg

divide and understand the world could then become both more speciﬁc and more
general. The animal ‘horse’ could become the word ‘horse’ which could become
‘mammal’, ‘metaphor’, ‘tool’, ‘friendly animal’, ‘dinner’. Thus language can drive
innovation and social bonding while serving as a tool for categorization and
understanding, especially as a group-bonding tool for future-oriented planning and
coordination. As Gouinlock notes, “Language is a tool, and any tool”, Dewey says,
“is a thing in which a connection, a sequential bond with Nature is embodied. It
possesses an objective relation as its own deﬁning property … A tool denotes a
perception and acknowledgement of sequential bonds in nature” [14]. It is here that
we see a possible methodological and epistemic bridge from humanities to the
sciences in Dewey. There is a slow but steady winnowing out of those theories and
ideas that do not accurately square with the gathered cumulative knowledge. We
may have a million alternative theories about something, but in a Pragmatist line of
thought, only the one that gathers all prior knowledge and combines it with present
and future experience is the one we should stick to.
Rounding out Dewey’s views, Gouinlock notes, “[Dewey’s view of nature] is an
attempt to articulate a conception of reality such that our actual experience is made
intelligible, such that we can identify our resources and limitations, our opportu-
nities and liabilities in a changing and precarious world—yet a world that is
answerable to inquiry and intelligence, a world that can yield profoundly fulﬁlling
experience” [14]. As noted earlier, the humanities rest its inquiry in the contin-
gencies of language, of selves constructed as socio-cultural entities and nothing
more. It closes off inquiry from the ﬁndings of natural science. Though science has
previously been used (as has religion) to justify racist, sexist or discriminatory
views and policies, it is no longer the case that that one can couch a view as
‘scientiﬁc’ without scrutiny. The humanities serve an important role in policing
how ideas are implemented, why certain terms can be injurious when it is time to
change this or that policy, but the humanities can only risk further alienation by
ignoring the sciences. Dewey helps to place the disciplines in a continuum
amenable to one another while the fallibilist ethos of Pragmatism, in general, helps
to make sure that any efforts to combine the disciplines remain open-ended,
non-foundationalist, and non-scientistic. Science and artistic practice are human
creations, each peering into fundamental areas of human experience, each evolving
and self-correcting. As Gouinlock says, “Dewey frequently attacked the assumption
that art and science are utterly different. They share, in fact, a fundamentally
important trait: the are both forms of practice –the reconstruction of materials of
ordinary experience into a new order, in which the reordering is directed by a more
or less explicit plan” [14]. We humans, in our arts and sciences, in our lifeways and
cultures, our ideas and literature, do not know precisely where we are going; we
simply know that go we must.
6
The Indelible Stamp of Our Lowly Origins
119

4
Plausible and Potential Fallibility, Plausible
and Potential Falsifiability: Across the Bridge
Humans are strange. We resemble a hybrid mash-up of our primate cousins, the
chimpanzees and bonobos. We are intensely individualistic and intensely social.
Isolation for us is a form of torture, but too much time in ‘the maddening crowd’
and we need some alone time. We engage in sex recreationally, not merely for
procreation. We have hierarchical roles in groups, and we are extremely sensitive to
injustice. We desire conﬂict resolution when injustice occurs. We intuitively
understand when, for example, the proportion of justice does not meet or exceeds
the injustice.19 More interestingly, we spend inordinate amounts of time engaging
in aesthetic practice and appreciation. We revel in telling stories to delight, frighten,
and entertain ourselves. We make plans for the future, peer into the deep recesses of
history, out to the very edges of the known universe. We categorize, plot, enu-
merate, name, and label. We are alone among the known species to have the ability
to so fully repurpose our physical, cultural, and social environments in ways we see
ﬁt. To echo Dewey, there is no possible way this ability would exist were it not for
evolutionary nudges and tugs, and therefore we must see our intellect as part of that
same evolutionary continuum. We have our feet squarely in the evolved tendencies
of our Pleistocene ancestors and also squarely in the cultural and linguistic envi-
ronments that make up our complex social selves. The map of ourselves as humans
is more than an anatomical chart, but it is also more than just language or culture.
The human self is a bridge that spans the evolved tendencies and our unique
culturally. There is one more (rather) labored metaphor hereafter.
Perhaps the most famous pontoon bridge in the history of pontoon bridges20 was
Xerxes’ bridge across the Hellespont, which spanned nearly three kilometers. It was
a series of 674 boats sequentially anchored and lashed together with planks, earth,
and rails laid on top to act as the bridge.21 It was across this bridge that he ﬁrst
crossed his armies to attack Greece, which later resulted in his defeat and the ascent
of Athenian culture.22 If we think of how to connect the sciences to the humanities
in any meaningful way, we should think of this kind of bridge.23 Piece by ﬂoating
piece, it is assembled, one-piece bearing a little bit of the weight traveling across it.
In several other articles, I have attempted such small devices, each intending to lay
one more plank across the water.24
19See Hamlin [15].
20Not a terribly fabled ﬁeld.
21This event also includes the famous anecdote, told by Herodotus [16], of Xerxes ordering his
men to whip the Hellespont 300 times because a storm there had destroyed one of his earlier
bridges.
22Coincidentally laying the groundwork for Greece’s inﬂuence on philosophy, science, the arts and
architecture.
23In a peaceful way this time.
24See Hellberg [17, 18].
120
D. Hellberg

However, my use of metaphors here intends to point something out in regards to
science and humanities. The humanities tend to latch onto scientiﬁc ideas directly
through metaphors. Einsteinian relativity is wielded as a philosophical bludgeon to
refute ‘Truth’ about this or that. Quantum electrodynamics is trotted out to ‘prove’
that there is no deﬁnitive reality out there the further we peer into things. Evolution
is tossed over sociological or linguistic arguments to demonstrate that words/ideas
evolve just like species. All of this is perfectly ﬁne and is part of what the hu-
manities do. The sciences use metaphors as well. As Haack says, “The cognitive
usefulness of such metaphors, in scientiﬁc inquiry as elsewhere, is to direct inquiry
into new avenues … If, for example, [someone] takes an interest in William
Hamilton’s metaphor of parental investment … [that person will be interested] in
how the metaphor is cashed out … in literal terms, and how well the resulting
account stands up” [6]. As the sciences and humanities are human institutions, it is
natural to ﬁnd metaphors in each. The humanities may use a scientiﬁc metaphor to
guide social research or as a concept to guide the writing of a novel, just as the
sciences may wield metaphors to help clarify certain arcane or difﬁcult concepts.25
However, language and metaphor seem an insufﬁcient connection to place these
disciplines within conversational distance of one another. Humans use metaphors
frequently in language. The connection between the disciplines needs something a
little more rigid. What I propose, within a Deweyan framework, are the concepts of
plausible/potential fallibility and plausible/potential falsiﬁability.
These terms hearken back to an older, and as of yet unresolved, issue of ‘is’
versus ‘ought’. Science’s aim and methods intend to produce descriptive claims.
X is the case. Evolution by natural selection is a fact. Human beings are an evolved
species. Our Sun is a star. The atomic weight of hydrogen is 1.00784 u. The
humanities cannot produce the same kinds of claims because the aim and method
are different. They produce normative claims. X ought to be the case. This or that
book ought to be understood in this or that way. Li Po was a great poet (or ought to
be seen as one). We ought not to discriminate against those of a different gender,
ethnicity, or orientation. We ought not to censor books. While a normative claim
seeks to regulate future action, it is not predictive. It cannot be held as true or false
in the same way that a descriptive claim can.26 While it is generally true that science
can make normative claims and the humanities can make descriptive claims, it is
methodologically less necessary. Smoking cigarettes correlates with an increased
risk of lung cancer. This is a descriptive claim. The evidence is strong and com-
pelling. A panel of doctors may then say that people ought to quit smoking if they
wish to avoid potential complications later in life. That’s a normative claim.
However, here we must note that these two can have a bearing on one another. It is
here that our bridge may ﬁnd another plank.
25As Plato does in The Republic, for example.
26Note here, too, the looming specter of the inductive fallacy.
6
The Indelible Stamp of Our Lowly Origins
121

Science must always remain potentially fallible and potentially falsiﬁable. It
must be potentially falsiﬁable because it aims to make predictive and replicable
claims. It seeks to deﬁne and inform, categorize, and order. It must be potentially
fallible because new instruments/hypotheses may yield more subtle discoveries that
may require adjustments (or even abandonment) of earlier theories and hypotheses.
It orients science in its normal way, but these terms outline a more deﬁnite Prag-
matist ethos. I use ‘potentially’ here because the scientiﬁc method deals with cer-
tainty in ways that the humanities do not and cannot. If I hypothesize Claim P, it has
to have the possibility of being wrong. String theory is an example of a hypothesis
that cannot be scientiﬁcally tested by these metrics and therefore is neither
potentially fallible nor falsiﬁable by scientiﬁc standards. That is not a criticism of
string theory, either. It is simply the way science works. As physicist Lee Smolin
says of string theory: “Predictions [about ﬁnding a cosmic string via gravitational
waves seen by LIGO]27 give us some hope that string theory might someday be
veriﬁed by observations. Yet the discovery of a cosmic string, by itself, cannot verify
string theory, because several other theories also predict the existence of such
strings. Nor can failure to ﬁnd one lead to falsiﬁcation of string theory, because the
conditions for such cosmic strings to exist are specially chosen, and there is no
reason to think they might exist in our universe” [19].28
Lacking potential fallibility and falsiﬁability, even something like string theory,
fail to comply with the governing qualiﬁcations of science. It is a fascinating
subject, but it does not qualify as science per se.
The humanities, on the other hand, must be plausibly fallible and plausibly
falsiﬁable.29 I use plausibly here because we are dealing with claims that should
deal with aggregate statistics, tendencies, and behaviors that are generally inter-
preted. The plausible aspect allows for normative claims to be made that do not
need to pass strict true/false demarcations because these may be legal claims,
political claims, literary claims, and etc. If we reexamine the three Orthodoxies of
the humanities seen earlier, this plausible versus potential distinction becomes more
clear. Though the two disciplines fall along a more or less qualiﬁable/quantiﬁable
demarcation, I will, however, try to tease out a way of connecting the humanities to
the sciences by use of these falsiﬁable/fallible qualiﬁcations. As I said earlier, the
prevailing methodologies are entirely unlike, but certain connections may be
possible.
What are the three Orthodoxies again? 1. Gender is a social construct; 2. Race is
a social construct; and 3. Class is a function of privilege. These have the veneer of
descriptive claims, but on further analysis, they are normative. The ﬁrst two use
‘construct’ as their operative claim. What would it mean to say that truth is a social
construct, or that ducks are a social construct? Would we base our justice system or
27The Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory.
28Smolin also says, “[A] theory must make speciﬁc and precise predictions that can either be
conﬁrmed or refuted. If there is a high risk of disconﬁrmation, then conﬁrmation counts for a lot. If
there is no risk of either, then there is no way to continue to do science” [19].
29I mean this in an ideal sense where the humanities remain open to revision in the face of
statistics, data and facts without losing their normative core. These are meant as ‘good faith’ terms.
122
D. Hellberg

ornithology on an uncategorizable deﬁnition? The third is simply tautological.
While its intended meaning of ‘privilege’ is ‘white male privilege’, if we reword it,
it simply says that those with power in society (however gained) will have more
power in a society. They are secretly ‘ought’ claims, though very important ones
and not to be dismissed. We ought not to discriminate based on gender. We ought
not to discriminate based on ethnicity. Those in power ought not to wield it against
those without power. Few would argue these points.
Further, seen through the plausibly fallible/falsiﬁable ﬁlter, combined with a
Pragmatist foundation, these terms make more sense. I take my Pragmatist foun-
dation and ask, ‘Given everything I know, is it plausible that a society like America
(or take your pick) continues to discriminate against people based on gender,
ethnicity or social class?’ Few would answer this question in the negative. But the
distinction is important. For normative claims to be taken seriously, they must be
plausibly fallible. There could be any other number of reasons why discrimination
occurs that are indirectly or unrelated to gender, ethnicity, or class. These factors
may well be central, but they needn’t be true or false. Some societies do not
discriminate based on gender, ethnicity, or social class. They may be exceedingly
rare, but the plausible distinction means that one example, to the contrary, does not
destroy the original claim.
The plausibly falsiﬁable criterion follows suit, too. If other discriminatory factors
also pertain to the Orthodoxy’s trifecta, then we need not reject the central nor-
mative claims because the central normative claims remain plausible. In the dis-
cussion of normative claims, we speak of individual interpretations of generalities.
Book X exhibits sexist or racist language, and therefore we ought to critically
understand why, etc. Society Y exhibits homophobic laws, and we ought to criti-
cally examine these, etc. However, normative claims cannot hope to speak to ‘all’
people because it is not plausible to do so. What does it mean to say ‘all’ about any
group of people? Not even evolution works in the same way on all members of a
species.30 The humanities cannot hope to speak in this way either.
The humanities and their theories must tether themselves to real and imagined
worlds and, therefore, to plausible generalities. These imagined worlds may be a
work of literature or a future social world more egalitarian and just. In either case,
the predictive capabilities as to how we interpret remain retrodictive, and any pro-
jection made remains plausible at best. The sciences, on the other hand, speak to
potential states of the world that move from observation toward generalities as well.
In either case, we need not then seek ‘the way the world is’ but rather the ‘way the
world tends to be’ which is distinct from the ‘way the world ought to be’. However,
both move toward a general ‘theory’ of the world, albeit splitting along the plausible
and potential lines. As Haack says: “Unless there were real generals, Peirce argues,
science would be impossible; for the very possibility of prediction, induction, and
explanation depends on the reality of kinds and laws. There is a pattern of generals,
of natural kinds and laws, independent of how anyone thinks them to be, underlying
30This should torpedo notions about the sciences making the humanities deterministic. Fallibilism
erases determinism because fallibilism is open-ended, subject to inquiry and corrigible.
6
The Indelible Stamp of Our Lowly Origins
123

the particular things and events we perceive. And so the “arbitrary, accidental
element” in inquiry introduced by the peculiar circumstances and idiosyncrasies of
individual inquirers would eventually be overcome as inquiry proceeds” [6].
What else would a theory, in the sciences or humanities, seek to convey except a
real general? These generals must account for observed experience combined with
broader categories of interpretive inference. A single contrafactual in a potential
descriptive claim upends the claim entirely, while a contrafactual in a plausible
normative claim may yet add to the claim’s more general point. As Haack notes, the
‘arbitrary accidental element’ could well apply to the methodologies and aims of the
humanities as well as the sciences. Though it was not her intention in the passage,
the plausible versus potential distinction noted here may bend the distinctions just
close enough to overlap.
5
Conclusion
There is no clear, convincing way to connect the sciences and humanities truly. It is
not a fault on either side but rather, as noted, merely a condition of methodological
differences and aims. However, when we think of collaboration, of true interdis-
ciplinary work, both ﬁelds could greatly beneﬁt from increased communication. We
may see a ﬂourishing of new departments, discoveries, new insights. It is impos-
sible to tell. I will end with a lengthy but not unfair quote from evolutionary
biologist Robert Trivers. Murray quotes Trivers who says: “Once you remove
biology from human social life, what do you have? Words. Not even language,
which of course is deeply biological, but words alone that then wield magical
powers, capable of biasing your every thought, science itself reduced to one of
many arbitrary systems of thought. And what has been the upshot of this?
Thirty-ﬁve wasted years and counting. Years wasted in not synthesizing social and
physical anthropology. Strong people welcome new ideas and make them their
own. Weak people run from new ideas, or so it seems, and then are driven into
bizarre mind states, such as believing that words have the power to dominate
reality, that social constructs such as gender are much stronger than the 300
million years of genetic evolution that went into producing the two sexes—whose
facts in any case they remain resolutely ignorant of” [2].
The humanities very much need to stop seeing humans as apart from Nature but
rather as a part of it. Like Dewey, we need to understand the outgrowth of human
expression –in the arts or sciences—as coeval and part of the same continuum. If
culture itself were a construct, we should expect to ﬁnd a culture somewhere that
lacks artistic practice and expression. Such is not the case. Artistic practice is a
human universal and therefore, must have its roots in our shared evolutionary
history. An aesthetic theory that ignores this or dismisses it is incomplete. Never-
theless, an aesthetic theory that focuses solely on the evolved human universal
misses the variety, the sheer range of diversity in how different cultures and eras
express themselves. It borders on ludicrous to say that humans are constructed by
124
D. Hellberg

the language they speak. Taken as a potential descriptive claim, this is outright
false. As a plausible normative claim, however, the claim stands and becomes all
the more interesting.31 Only when the disciplines are nudged closer to another will a
proper hybrid discipline emerge to bridge the growing chasm between these critical
ways of human growth in our laws, literature, and lives.
Core Messages
• Though there is no clear methodological overlap between the sciences and
humanities, efforts to combine them should not be seen as impossible.
• The core orthodoxy of the humanities remains incompatible if not hostile
to the ﬁndings of science, but it can be realigned to incorporate scientiﬁc
ideas and facts.
• All ﬁelds of inquiry would beneﬁt from introducing more robustly inter-
disciplinary methodologies and theories.
References
1. Darwin C (2006) On the origin of species. Norton, New York
2. Murray C (2020) Human diversity. Grand Central Publishing, Kindle editions
3. Stjernfelt F (2014) Natural propositions. Docent Press, Boston
4. Wilson EO (1998) Conslience Vintage New York
5. Hellberg D (2015) World enough. Atropos, New York
6. Haack S (2007) Defending science. Prometheus, Amherst
7. Godfrey-Smith P (2003) Theory and reality. University of Chicago Press, Chicago
8. Peirce C (1992) The essential peirce, vol 2. Indiana University Press, Bloomington
9. James W (1987) Writings 1902–1910. Library of America, New York
10. Bordo S (2010) Unbearable weight: feminism, western culture and the body. In: Leitch V
(ed) The Norton anthology of criticism and theory. Norton, New York, pp 2241–2254
11. Dewey J (1958) Experience and nature. Dover, New York
12. Dewey J (2005) Art as experience. Perigee, New York
13. Bacon M (2012) Pragmatism. Polity Malden
14. Gouinlock J (1995) What is the legacy of instrumentalism? In: Saatkamp H (ed) Rorty and
pragmatism. Vanderbilty University Press, Nashville
15. Hamlin JK (2013) Failed attempts to help and harm: intention versus outcome in preverbal
infants’ social evaluations. 128(3):451–474
16. Herodotus (2008) The histories. Oxford University Press, New York
31To return to the Pragmatist foundation I tried to lay for this endeavor, I quote Peirce again:
“Pragmatism is the principle that every theoretical judgment expressible in a sentence in the
indicative mood is a confused form of thought whose only meaning, if it has any, lies in its
tendency to enforce a corresponding practical maxim expressible as a conditional sentence having
its apodosis in the imperative mood” [8]. By his own admission and practice, Peirce was an obtuse
writer.
6
The Indelible Stamp of Our Lowly Origins
125

17. Hellberg D (2018) Funny in the bones: the neural interrelation of humor, irony and metaphor.
20(3):237–254
18. Hellberg D (2019) By their fruits ye shall not know them: forgery, collective intentionality
and aesthetics. 11
19. Smolin L (2006) The trouble with physics. Mariner, New York
Dustin Hellberg is an assistant professor of creative writing at the
University of the Bahamas. He holds Ph.D.s in philosophy of
science and English literature, and a master’s in poetry from the
Iowa Writers’ Workshop. He is the author of three books in
poetry, ﬁction and criticism as well as numerous articles on a
range of topics.
126
D. Hellberg

7
Transdisciplinary Approaches
to Understand and Facilitate
Transformations Towards
Sustainability
Ortwin Renn
“Formerly, the future was simply given to us; now it must be
achieved. We must become the agriculturalists of time. If we do
not plant and cultivate the future years of human life, we will
never reap them”.
Jonathan Schell, The Fate of the Earth
Summary
Many political decision-making processes are based on evidence and expert
knowledge. However, expert knowledge and its use in public policy arenas have
become increasingly contested in society. This is particularly true for complex
issues related to sustainable development, such as climate change or loss of
biodiversity. Even during the COVID-19 crisis, scientiﬁc advice beyond
protecting against infections has been highly scrutinized by many actors in
society. The classic science-policy interface of “truth speaks to power” is not
adequate anymore to address these new challenges. Concepts such as
transformative, transdisciplinary, or co-creative research elucidate the direction
in which scientiﬁc research ﬁnds its new role(s). The paper provides a short
overview of these new approaches to re-deﬁning the nexus between science and
policymaking. The main message is to combine classic curiosity-driven
approaches of scientiﬁc inquiry with goal-oriented and catalytic concepts. This
combination meets the requirement of a new scientiﬁc approach that can be
labeled as transformative and transdisciplinary.
O. Renn (&)
Institute for Advanced Sustainability Studies (IASS), Berliner Str. 130, 14467 Potsdam, Germany
e-mail: ortwin.renn@iass-potsdam.de
O. Renn
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Potsdam, Germany
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
N. Rezaei (ed.), Integrated Science, Integrated Science 1,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65273-9_7
127

A symbolic image of the need for integrating the curiosity-driven (brown),
goal-oriented (green), and catalytic (yellow) research concepts into the
continuous process of transformational policymaking (grey).
[Adopted from Shutterstock, image licensed to the author for free use]
The code of this chapter is 01101001 01100010 01001000 01100100
01110010 01111001.
1
Introduction
Transdisciplinary research has become a keyword in the scientiﬁc debate on sus-
tainability and social transformation. Developing strategic options for policy and
articulating or preparing recommendations for the relevant policymakers from a
scientiﬁc perspective is not sufﬁcient in the light of a transdisciplinary under-
standing of research practice [1, 2]. On the one hand, no scientiﬁc consensus exists
on many factual issues. This implies that researchers and practitioners need to
develop a common understanding of the underlying problems and to co-create
options for action in a joint problem exploration and resolution activity. The goal is
to develop, in the context of a joint deliberative discourse, a solution space from
which concrete actions can be prepared. On the other hand, there are factual topics
on which—as in the climate change issue—scientiﬁc consensus has existed for
decades, but on which the nexus between knowledge, beliefs, and action is not
functioning because of the complexity of the factual information and its range of
interpretations [3, 4]. Given this situation, transdisciplinary approaches require
establishing useful links between plural truth claims, diverse societal goals and
objectives, and the choice of concrete policies. More speciﬁcally, Renn [5] attri-
butes three major properties to the concept of transdisciplinarity:
128
O. Renn

• Firstly, it addresses research practices that, in addition to the scope of the dis-
ciplines
involved,
adapt
research
topics,
methods,
and
approaches
to
non-scientiﬁc problems and issues, and develop solutions to socially complex
problems independently of disciplines [6, 7];
• Secondly, transdisciplinary research relies on an intensive exchange between
knowledge producers and knowledge recipients across all phases of the cogni-
tive and research process [8]. Those who want to use scientiﬁc knowledge for
political decisions and to apply it concretely need to know not only the results of
the research but also the context conditions and the areas of validity. Without
this expanded concept of knowledge, a proper interpretation of the results is not
possible. Moreover, the users and producers of knowledge are engaged in a
mutual dialogue in which both sides add knowledge as well as experience to the
learning process of developing a common understanding of the problems and a
solution space for policy options; and
• Thirdly, the transdisciplinary approach is characterized by the deliberate inte-
gration of knowledge carriers outside of science [9]. For addressing complex
questions, experiential knowledge and often also contextual knowledge of the
actors dealing with this question in society are relevant in order to develop not
only theoretically conclusive but also practical solutions.
It is contested in the literature how such transdisciplinary communication pro-
cesses between knowledge bearers and knowledge recipients can and should be
organized in concrete terms [8, 10]. Essential characteristics of such a process are
(i) the early involvement of all relevant knowledge carriers; (ii) a learning discourse
with the users of knowledge in parallel with each research phase (from
agenda-setting to interpretation); and (iii) the use of innovative, communicative
procedures that enable an intensive exchange of arguments, observations, and
experiences [11].
The transdisciplinary approach goes, however, beyond the participation of
stakeholders in individual phases of the research process. Transdisciplinary research
is aimed at a jointly supported, integration-oriented merging of different forms of
knowledge that are needed for the analysis of a situation and/or for problem-solving
[12]. In the literature on transdisciplinary research, there is (so far) hardly any
agreement or consent on the different approaches, methods, and procedures for how
transdisciplinary research can be implemented in practice. It is not enough to gather
stakeholders around a round table and hope that added value would result from the
mere fact of having a joint discussion. What is needed is a structured and, above all,
a reﬂected process that is based on the profound knowledge of the conditions that
govern transdisciplinary discourses. Such process knowledge needs to be theoret-
ically sound, empirically tested, and methodologically reproducible.
7
Transdisciplinary Approaches Towards Sustainability
129

This chapter is an attempt to develop a conceptual framework that combines the
rigor of (transdisciplinary) science with the transformative effect of transdisci-
plinarity. The need for robust and valid scientiﬁc insights is crucial for dealing with
complex issues since intuition and common sense are likely to fail in these cir-
cumstances. At the same time, producing valid descriptions of complex structures is
insufﬁcient for developing and implementing evidence-informed policy options.
How to combine these two aspects of transdisciplinarity will be the main focus of
this chapter. First, I will give a brief review of the various schools and concepts that
have emerged over the last two decades. I will show that neither one of these
concepts, as valuable as they may be, provides a clear concept of how to accom-
plish scientiﬁc excellence and practical relevance. Based on this analysis, I will
propose a new modular approach for integrating transdisciplinary scientiﬁc
knowledge into societal transformation discourses and democratic policymaking.
2
Traditions and Concepts of Transdisciplinarity
The concept of transdisciplinarity emerged in the 1970s to the 1990s as a new
approach to tackling complex and controversial issues. Transdisciplinary approa-
ches gained ground in connection with efforts to address wicked problems [13], the
debate on post-normal science [14], and the division of scientiﬁc approaches into
Mode 1 and Mode 2 research [15, 16]. These approaches differed from the more
established concepts of multi- and interdisciplinary research in the way that they
integrated practitioners, and not just other scientiﬁc disciplines, into the research
process. This transdisciplinary involvement of practitioners was seen as a prereq-
uisite for dealing with problems characterized by complex causal structures and
interconnections, uncertainties around the relationship(s) between causes and
effects, and challenging ambiguities [2]. In particular, transdisciplinary approaches
were expected to prove their worth in addressing the tensions between the con-
textuality and universality of scientiﬁc knowledge [17].
Over time, some different perspectives and concepts relating to the theoretical
foundations and practical implementation of transdisciplinary approaches emerged
worldwide. At the beginning of the debate, two major concepts evolved: the
transgressive school inspired by Nicolescu [18, 19] and the so-called Swiss
(polycentric) school, mainly represented by European authors who laid down the
foundations of their understanding in a seminal conference in Zurich, Switzerland
[17, 20] as reviewed in [21, 22]. This crude dualism has given rise to a multitude of
competing and complementing concepts that all relate to the theoretical roots of
addressing wicked problems utilizing knowledge integration. It is not possible to
cover all of these approaches in detail here. In what follows, I present a brief outline
of ﬁve concepts that are particularly relevant for the present status of interdisci-
plinary research (with an emphasis on European traditions):
130
O. Renn

• The Anglo-Saxon concept of a new inner-scientiﬁc orientation towards the
treatment of complex and socially controversial questions, especially about
sustainability science, which emerged in response to the conditions that initially
prompted the development of transdisciplinary approaches as noted most
prominently in [23, 24];
• The approach proposed by Jürgen Mittelstraß, Martin Scheringer, Jochen Jaeger,
and others, which focusses on real-world problems and the associated changes in
the scientiﬁc system and research practice [25, 26];
• The concept put forward by the German socio-ecological tradition, which
focusses on integrating rigid scientiﬁc methods and practice in collaboration
with affected people and groups [27];
• The concept of epistemic integration envisioning transdisciplinarity as a mutual
learning process in which scientists and practitioners integrate systematic
knowledge and experience as equally valid forms of knowledge [28]; and
• The concept of common good orientation views transdisciplinarity as a form of
discourse between scientists and practitioners oriented towards negotiating
societal improvements of public welfare [29, 30].
All these proposals for transdisciplinary research provide orientations for
informing transdisciplinary research. However, there are three major shortcomings:
• The relationship between transdisciplinary, interdisciplinary, and disciplinary
concepts remain vague and often confusing [31]. What is the role of classic
science approaches in transdisciplinary research? How are conﬂicts been han-
dled when scientiﬁc truth claims contrast with the experiential knowledge of
stakeholders? The main body of transdisciplinary literature recommends reliance
on robust knowledge, excellent science, and evidence-informed judgments [32].
However, it is not clear how this is accomplished and how conﬂicts are ade-
quately addressed;
• The tension between curiosity-driven research and advocacy for a special cause
(as noble as it may be) is often mentioned in the literature [33, 34]. Suggesting
joint fact-ﬁnding methods and engaging in a deliberative discourse may produce
procedural forms of resolving this tension. However, it is not clear how these
tensions can be addressed substantively. In a very critical review, Strohschneider
[35], the former president of the German Science Foundation, criticized trans-
disciplinary research as being torn between the need for rigorous scientiﬁc
methods combined with an impartial search for a causal explanation and the
normative orientation of promoting sustainability or other political objectives.1
Such a tension, so his analysis could lead to wishful thinking, partialized truth
claims, and in the end to a delegitimization of science as an impartial broker [38];
• The tensions between epistemic and democratic ideals in research have also been
addressed by critical reviews [2, 39]. Maasen et al. [40] have emphasized the
1The very critical review by Strohmeier triggered a major debate and several proponents of the
transdisciplinary research communities replied to the accusations [36, 37].
7
Transdisciplinary Approaches Towards Sustainability
131

unresolvable tension that arises between normative and epistemological
demands when scientiﬁc research is expected to be both reliable and justiﬁable.
In the course of transdisciplinary research, they believe that normative con-
straints move from the periphery to the epistemic core of science, encouraging a
shift in the role of scientists from analysis to intervention. The criticism of
Maasen and her colleagues centres on the question of how to deal in a
responsible way with the fact that participation in science is generally discussed
in the context of the normative goal of democratising science with the ultimate
aim of expanding the democratisation process itself but not to enhance our
knowledge about the causal and functional relationships in the natural and social
world. Maasen and Dickel [41] also point out potential conﬂicts of including
non-epistemological values into scientiﬁc research such as sustainability, ethical
acceptability, and productivity.
In my view, these three questions have not been adequately addressed in the
literature on transdisciplinarity. In particular, the integration of (i) classic,
curiosity-driven science (disciplinary and interdisciplinary); (ii) goal-oriented, often
advocacy science; and (iii) non-scientiﬁc actors in a deliberative forum of
co-production of knowledge is still an unresolved topic in the conceptual literature
and also in the practical guidelines for transdisciplinary research. The following
paragraphs attempt to address these problems and develop a hybrid approach of
transdisciplinarity as a combination of curiosity-driven, goal-oriented, and catalytic
research traditions.2
3
Transdisciplinarity: Merger of Three Research
Traditions3
3.1
The Curiosity-Driven Research Concept
To locate the appropriate function of science and research for transdisciplinary
research in the context of current transformations, it seems important to differentiate
between three basic concepts of scientiﬁc research traditions and the types of
knowledge associated with each of them.
The ﬁrst concept comprises the classical understanding of curiosity-driven
research
(classic
science)
[43].
Agar
has
characterized
the
evolution
of
2Beyond the classic model of disciplinary and interdisciplinary scientiﬁc research, a distinction is
often made between transformation research and transformative research [36]. In the terminology
presented here, transformation research is most likely to be assigned to the curiosity-driven
concept of science (general and systematic insights into transformation processes) and
transformative research to the goal-oriented concept (supporting transformative goal attainment).
3The following section is a translation of an earlier version of this paper that has been published
in German in the Journal GAIA [5]. Similar thoughts can also be found in [42]. The version here is
updated and also includes more international references.
132
O. Renn

curiosity-driven research by referring to development from ‘basic science’ to
‘mission-oriented science’ and to ‘curiosity-driven research.’ This evolution “has
provided important tools used to create and manage the apparent social autonomy
that is functional in sustaining science. The social contract has been that science
will deliver, if left autonomous” [44].
Scientiﬁc activities in this scientiﬁc tradition aim to ﬁnd valid insights into as yet
unknown connections between phenomena or dynamic developments. The driving
force behind these activities is curiosity; the aim is to uncover causal or functional
relationships without any speciﬁc goal of application or implementation in mind
using proven methods of gaining knowledge and to integrate these new discoveries
into a consistent body of existing insights. All parties in society thus receive the
necessary background knowledge to inform themselves on factual issues and get to
know the status of systematic knowledge. This enlightenment function of science
without consideration of interests, social preferences, and political contexts is not a
sign of ivory-tower thinking, as so often caricatured, but a necessary and indis-
pensable corrective against wishful thinking and ideological blinkers [45, 46].
Science is never unconditional, but it is based on normative assumptions and
conventions and can produce ﬁndings in the space beyond interests. These ﬁndings
help to prevent unpleasant surprises for all those involved.
The results of curiosity-driven research, therefore, provide insights into causal or
functional processes. Such knowledge is relevant for politics and business (mainly
if Mode 1 issues are addressed). If a research team found out, for example, which
incentives could lead to greater energy efﬁciency or energy savings among con-
sumers, policymakers could consciously introduce these incentives as policy
options in order to better achieve the goal of energy system transformation.
A better understanding of complex and wicked problems (Mode 2) requires,
however, more than just disciplinary knowledge. Rather, an integrative approach is
needed that simultaneously illuminates the various aspects of the phenomenon to be
investigated and, above all, captures their interactions. The term systems knowledge
has become established in the specialist literature for this purpose [9, 11]. This refers
to knowledge that describes and analyses the various facets of a phenomenon in their
systemic interaction and understands them in their holistic interrelationships [3].
Systems knowledge is, therefore, almost always interdisciplinary, i.e., it is aimed at
uncovering relationship patterns that encompass and integrate the scope of several
disciplines. Yet, the research design may still be curiosity-driven and governed by
the traditional quality standards of each scientiﬁc discipline involved [47].
No doubt that there are a number of problems associated with the classic
understanding of science. One major problem is that in the case of complex and
stochastic interrelationships, a clear causal or even functional understanding of the
relationships is hard, if not impossible, to accomplish [48]. Moreover, even if
knowledge of functional interrelationships is available, a direct translation into
political action is often impeded by unfavorable context conditions [49]. Investi-
gators may be able to identify particularly effective incentives for energy-saving
behavior through laboratory experiments. When applied to everyday political life,
these incentives may not work at all, either because the framework conditions do
7
Transdisciplinary Approaches Towards Sustainability
133

not match the experimental context or because other political or social circum-
stances weaken the effect of all the chosen incentives. After all, in a concrete
political situation, there are always many actors operating at the same time, whose
interactions are difﬁcult to grasp by scientiﬁc methods [12, 50].
3.2
The Goad-Oriented Research Concept
To design research agendas to speciﬁc situations and contexts, there is a second
concept of scientiﬁc research, which can best be described by the term
“goal-oriented research” (mission-oriented, or more provocative advocacy science).
Goal-oriented research dissolves the distinction between basic and applied research,
which has become obsolete [51]. Rather, it is the acquisition of knowledge-oriented
towards a speciﬁc beneﬁt or problem-solution that can be approached systemati-
cally with both basic and applied research.4 Goal-oriented research produces
knowledge that policymakers can use as strategies for achieving goals or solving
problems. In this concept, policymakers or other shapers of social reality (such as
business or civil society groups) either set goals for science that are to be achieved
by a certain point in time (e.g., energy system transformation) or address problems
that are to be solved using the best evidence available. In the literature on forms of
contemporary policy advice, this function of science is often described as strategic
or instrumental [52].
Goal orientation comes in two variants. In the ﬁrst case, social groups set targets.
These can be targets for energy system transformation, such as the 100%
replacement of fossil fuels by renewable energy sources by 2050. In the second
case, the research addresses conditions that are regarded as “problematic” by certain
groups or by policymaking bodies. These problems should be resolved towards a
more desirable state, such as more sustainable food production or ﬁnding more
equitable solutions when distributing income. That what is regarded as desirable is
deﬁned in advance, ideally in an orientation discourse. In many cases, consent of
what is regarded as desirable may be based on an implicit consensus in society
(more climate protection is better than less) or may have been negotiated in a
political discourse involving ethical expertise (for example, more investment in
resilience after experiencing a pandemic crisis). In other cases, scientiﬁc advice is
demanded partial, interest-based goals or group-speciﬁc problem views. This is
normally associated with advocacy research [53]. For example, environmental
protection groups or business associations can commission expert reports that
consider the problems and develop strategies that serve their speciﬁc objectives.
Irrespective of the client and their interests or concerns, the common feature of
goal-oriented research is to provide options or propose solutions for clients from
politics, business, and civil society that, to the best of their knowledge, meet
4In Donald Stokes’ well-known four-ﬁeld scheme of scientiﬁc research [54], this research
represents the second dimension of research: beneﬁt orientation. This can be both basic and
practical.
134
O. Renn

speciﬁed goals within the speciﬁed time frame or help solve speciﬁc problems in an
appropriate way and reﬂect the values of the respective policymakers. It is obvious
that this research tradition is value-based and not driven by curiosity.
Similar to the curiosity-driven research tradition, goal-oriented research also
faces numerous problems and pitfalls. One major problem is that, as the name
suggests, the research team is tied into a predetermined corset of objectives [55]. It
is possible, for example, that other objectives could better implement the original
intentions associated with the objectives at a higher level. Perhaps there are also
other variants which, with fewer side effects, can achieve the originally intended
purposes just as effectively (or even more effectively). In climate protection, for
example, one might think of negative emissions or drastic lifestyle changes. After
all, goals are not set in stone, and they have to be constantly adapted in the social
discourse and reﬂected upon again and again.
Moreover, with the goal-oriented variant, there is always the danger that in the
conﬂict between the achievement of goals and the results of scientiﬁc research,
loyalty to the goals carries more weight than loyalty to the methodological rules of
ﬁnding knowledge in the respective sciences [56]. This danger is even more pro-
nounced if the topic itself requires an interdisciplinary approach since it is then
more likely to be associated with great uncertainties and ambiguities from a sci-
entiﬁc perspective. Also, goal-oriented research is often conducted by scientists
who themselves share these goals and may be biased against any evidence that may
contradict these goals or may suggest much more effort to reach them in time.
3.3
The Catalytic Research Concepts
The last and third variant of scientiﬁc research is less clearly deﬁned and has been
labeled as participatory [57], deliberative [58], or reﬂective [59]. It aims to integrate
knowledge outside of the scientiﬁc communities and provide models for deliber-
ation in which knowledge claims, interests, values, and preferences can be con-
sidered for designing policy options. In my own writing, I have referred to this
concept as the catalytic approach to research [5, 42]. To my knowledge, this term
has rarely been used in the context of transdisciplinary policy advice, and it may
represent a new category of scientiﬁc self-understanding. In this understanding,
science assumes the role of a catalyst. Its task is to systematically collect the
knowledge from scientiﬁc communities and also from other sources of knowledge,
which may be instrumental for problem-solving, to reorganize it, and to process it to
create a mutual understanding among all participants [3, 60]. Above all, conﬂicts
are to be identiﬁed, the underlying knowledge assumptions, but also the values,
interests, and preferences associated with them are to be disclosed, and joint
approaches to solutions are to be developed, which are based on robust knowledge,
generally accepted normative principles, and fair negotiation of interests. According
to this concept, the systematically collected knowledge elements are transferred into
a new format that is understandable and comprehensible for all participants, so that
a proper discourse appropriate to the plural values can be conducted [61, 62]. In this
7
Transdisciplinary Approaches Towards Sustainability
135

discourse, the different
knowledge carriers meet with the knowledge users and
discuss the initial situation, jointly reﬂect the different views of the problem
(frames), and develop evidence-informed policymaking for society as a whole [63].
The catalytic understanding of science is more than just a new domain for the
social sciences and especially the communication sciences aimed at conﬂict man-
agement and discourse design. It puts science in the role of an “honest broker”, a
mediator between competing truth claims, options for action, and moral justiﬁca-
tions of distribution keys for public goods and burdens (impositions) [38]. In the
spirit of Jürgen Habermas’ Rational Discourse, the catalytic research team explores
and implements the structural and procedural conditions necessary for a factually
sound formation of judgment that adequately reﬂects the plurality of values [64,
65]. It is a matter of the institutional and organizational conditions that guarantee an
effective and fair exchange of arguments (speech acts), in which not the status of the
speaker, but the claims to validity associated with each statement are used as a
yardstick for a collective agreement. The aim is an understanding-oriented action
through which all actors can bring in their claims to validity and jointly redeem
them [66]. This requires not only a robust knowledge-based process of scientiﬁc
methods, procedures, and testing procedures but also communicative competencies
and skills, which can be described using catalytic knowledge and can be entrusted
to non-scientiﬁc actors with a high level of communicative competence [61].
A catalytic research team has the mandate to explore, empirically test, and structure
the design, but it does not need to moderate the process itself. In the literature on
policy advice, the catalytic task of science is often described by using the term
co-creation (co-generation or co-production) of knowledge [67, 68]. However,
co-creation describes the goal of such deliberation but not the way to accomplish it.
Catalytic science compiles the necessary process of knowledge of how co-creative
processes can succeed in the context of the various policy ﬁelds in their sequencing
and structuring. It does not ignore existing power relations or socio-political con-
textual conditions, but systematically examines whether a co-creative solution to a
problem supported by all can be achieved and implemented and, if so, under which
conditions and what type of discourse architecture. It is a matter of structural and
process knowledge that guarantees fair treatment of all positions in conﬂicts and a
factually solid and socially balanced formation of judgments in political discourse
[62, 69].
Catalytic science has the task of researching and reviewing the architecture for
such discourses for handling complex problems and of incorporating this knowl-
edge into political discourse [70]. Especially in a time when political populism and
simplistic claims to truth are gaining more and more weight, a counter-movement
that builds up institutional, organizational and process-related knowledge for an
adequate treatment of complexity, uncertainty, and ambiguity is of particular
importance [71].
Like the other two concepts, the concept of catalytic research also has a number
of problems and deﬁcits. First of all, it only collects and organizes the expert
knowledge without contributing to the substance of the issue in question. Catalytic
research is, therefore, dependent on at least one of the other two concepts
136
O. Renn

(curiosity-driven or goal-oriented) to bring relevant expertise into the process.
Secondly, the generation of process and structural knowledge to shape discourses
that are appropriate to the subject matter and reﬂective of the underlying values and
interests is particularly context-dependent and makes it difﬁcult to provide uni-
versally valid insights that go beyond the individual case [72]. Therefore, devel-
oping a systematic knowledge base design depends on the compilation of empirical
case studies and interpersonal experience.
3.4
Synopsis of the Three Concepts
In short, the three concepts of scientiﬁc research (curiosity-driven, goal-oriented,
and catalytic) complement each other and have overlapped at the margins but are
not functionally equivalent. They are, as explained in the next section, modules of a
comprehensive transdisciplinary understanding of science. In Table 1, the essential
characteristics of the three concepts are summarized in a compact form.
4
Transdisciplinarity as an Integrative Hybrid of the Three
Concepts
How can this triad of curiosity-driven (disciplinary and interdisciplinary),
goal-oriented, and catalytic research concepts be integrated into a coherent and
interconnected pattern of transdisciplinarity, and how can this integration address
the problems and shortcomings mentioned in Sect. 3.4?
The three concepts of research complement each other and constitute analyti-
cally separate but closely intertwined modules in the process of co-producing
knowledge, developing options for policymaking, and generating normative ori-
entations. All three research concepts are constitutive for the transdisciplinary
exchange and provide a platform for interactions between science, society, and
politics.
Table 1 Three concepts of scientiﬁc research for policymaking purposes
Concept
Curiosity-driven
Goal-oriented
Catalytic
Knowledge type
Systematic
Instrumental
Processual
Function for
policymaking
Orientation
(enlightenment)
Problem solving
Co-creation
Forms of expression
Analyses
(causal/functional)
Scenarios/options
Process
architecture
Limits and problems
Coping with complexity
Goal ﬁxation
Lack of
universality
7
Transdisciplinary Approaches Towards Sustainability
137

First, it is crucial for transdisciplinary discourse to examine truth claims with the
authority of the sciences and to differentiate “fake news” from “true news” in a
deliberative setting [73]. Also, curiosity-driven research teams are also needed for
the transdisciplinary discourse in order to provide the discourse participants with
the appropriate factual knowledge according to scientiﬁcally recognized standards
and to respond to factual questions that participants may raise. Here, the
ideology-critical function of science is also called to uncover misjudgments based
on wishful thinking and intuitively plausible but often misleading rules of thumb
and plausibility assumptions, and to share these critical insights with all parties
involved in the discourse as well [60, 74].
Secondly, the transdisciplinary discourse thrives on the targeted knowledge of
experts who point out realistic ways to achieve the goals sought by politics,
business, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and develop policy options
that promise to be effective in light of the goals that the participants want to
accomplish. They develop strategies together with the discourse participants. At the
same time, it is there mandate to point to the possible positive and negative side
effects that each strategy is likely to produce. The associated goal-oriented research
is closely aligned with the problems to be solved and, especially in complex and
uncertain decision-making contexts, helps to design scientiﬁcally robust options for
action and to assess their consequences [75].
Thirdly, transdisciplinary processes are based on a deliberative discourse
involving all relevant groups. This discursive treatment for designing policy options
is necessary because of the uncertainty, ambiguity, and frame-dependence of sci-
entiﬁc problem descriptions. Non-scientiﬁc actors have valuable experience or local
knowledge to contribute, and they are often the best judges of what knowledge is
relevant for addressing the problem at hand [76]. Also, the ever-increasing diversity
of evaluations, beliefs, interpretations, and value judgments requires a discourse
that promotes integration and resolves conﬂicts [57]. Organizing such discursive
processes of acquiring and sharing relevant knowledge and embedding it in an
argumentative discourse based on weighing each argument and reﬂecting on
common values and interests lies at the heart of a transdisciplinary process. How to
ensure the high quality of such a process and how to integrate the scientiﬁc com-
munities
(curiosity-driven and goal-oriented) as well as stakeholders and repre-
sentatives of the public in such a discursive setting is literally science in itself,
which I have called the catalytic research concept. Catalytic expertise provides
evidence-informed and experience-based instructions for designing a discourse
architecture that increases the probability of accomplishing the main goal of
transdisciplinarity: to ﬁnd scientiﬁcally valid, socially negotiated, environmentally
sustainable, and morally superior options for dealing with wicked problems.
In my view, the integration of the three concepts (curiosity-driven, goal-oriented,
and catalytic) into processes of deliberative policymaking is the essential contri-
bution of the sciences to promote transformations towards more sustainable futures.
Such processes require more than scientiﬁc knowledge. It is precisely a charac-
teristic of transdisciplinary approaches to integrate knowledge from different
sources and areas of experience [77]. But how this integration is to be shaped
138
O. Renn

epistemically, organizationally, and procedurally is a new task for science, in this
case, its catalytic mandate. Moreover, in deliberative discourses, robust causal or
functional elements of knowledge, as well as strategic options for achieving pre-
determined goals or solving problems, are urgently needed, in particular, if prob-
lems are complex, laden with uncertainty and ambiguity, and potential solutions are
highly contested in society. To ignore scientiﬁc insights in those circumstances is
normally an invitation to disaster. Replacing robust knowledge by power or
interests or being guided by wishful thinking has rarely helped to address a matter
of problem effectively and fairly. At the same time, however, social experience,
local familiarity, interest- or value-based judgments, social preferences, and cher-
ished routines are important elements of any policy, and those elements are best
contributed by non-scientiﬁc actors [68]. Transdisciplinary science is, thus, not a
monolithic block. Nor does it require a fundamental reorientation of the sciences.
Rather, in my understanding, transdisciplinary science is a synthesis of different
modules, each with a clear orientation, function, and methodology. These modules
can be integrated into transformative discourses, and thus represent an important
and irreplaceable contribution to complex policymaking.
5
Conclusion
Policymaking for dealing with wicked and complex problems requires a robust
knowledge base for assessing the likely consequences of each policy option and is
based on balancing conﬂicting goals taking into account the diversity of interests,
preferences, and values of society. This requires better integration of scientiﬁc
expertise for informing policymaking so that the relevant knowledge base can be
used in the preparation of evidence-informed, socially acceptable, and morally
substantiated decisions. The best way to inform policymaking is by implementing
transdisciplinary research methods. Transdisciplinarity becomes manifest in the
systematic integration of classical curiosity-driven research (disciplinary and
interdisciplinary), goal-oriented strategic research (impact assessment of different
options), and process-related catalytic research (deliberative integration of knowl-
edge, values, interests, and preferences). The deﬁning characteristics of transdis-
ciplinarity, namely, the systematic perspective, the orientation on concrete
problems, and the inclusion of non-scientiﬁc knowledge, are inherent to this kind of
research process. To meet these characteristics requires an organic synthesis of the
three research concepts described in this chapter. The curiosity-driven concept
brings in systematic insights to make policy options effective. The goal-oriented
concept develops strategies to achieve the desired objectives or to address problems
that need public attention constructively. The catalytic concept prepares the insti-
tutional architecture and communicative design necessary to successfully conduct a
deliberative discourse between and among the various knowledge carriers and users
of knowledge.
7
Transdisciplinary Approaches Towards Sustainability
139

The synthesis of these three concepts into an integrative approach of building
bridges between knowledge and collective action corresponds to the transdisci-
plinary mission of science. Transdisciplinary approaches integrate process-related,
factual, and strategy-related knowledge and ideally lead to a problem resolution that
is factually convincing, argumentatively consistent, morally substantiated, and, in
principle, acceptable to all.
Core Messages
• Wicked problems and complex issues require a new cooperative model
between science, policymakers, and societal actors to provide robust
knowledge for effective transformations of society (i.e., sustainability).
• The concept of transdisciplinary science is aimed at a jointly supported,
integration-oriented merging of different forms of knowledge that are
needed for the analysis of wicked problems and/or for creating solution
spaces for addressing these problems.
• The concept introduced in this paper consists of the integration of three
research components: (i) curiosity-driven research, directed towards
improved understanding of complex phenomena; (ii) goal-oriented
research, directed towards designing strategies and assessing their soci-
etal impacts for achieving pre-deﬁned political objectives (such as energy
transition); and (iii) catalytic research, directed towards designing and
evaluating processes, formats, and techniques that facilitate desired
transformations using deliberative discourse.
• The integration of the three components mentioned above into a process of
interaction between experts, policymakers, social actors, and affected cit-
izens can produce robust knowledge, democratically legitimized orienta-
tion, and process know-how for implementation.
References
1. Nowotny H, Scott P, Gibbons M (2001) Re-thinking science: knowledge and the public in an
age of uncertainty. Polity Press, Cambridge
2. Polk M (2014) Achieving the promise of transdisciplinarity: a critical exploration of the
relationship between transdisciplinary research and societal problem solving. Sustain Sci
9:439–451. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-014-0247-7
3. Nanz P, Renn O, Lawrence M (2017) Der transdisziplinäre Ansatz des Institute for Advanced
Sustainability Studies (IASS): Konzept und Umsetzung. GAIA 26(3):293–296
4. Mattor K, Betsill M, Huayhuaca C, Huber-Stearns H, Jedd T, Sternlieb F, Bixler P, Luizza M,
Cheng AS (2014) Transdisciplinary research on environmental governance: a view from the
inside. Environ Sci Policy 42:90–100
140
O. Renn

5. Renn O (2019) Die Rolle transdisziplinärer Wissenschaft bei konﬂiktgeladenen Transforma-
tionsprozessen. GAIA 28(1):44–51
6. Mittelstraß J (1992) Auf dem Weg zur Transdisziplinarität. GAIA 1(5):250–258
7. Mittelstraß J (2018) Forschung und Gesellschaft. Von theoretischer und praktischer
Transdisziplinarität. GAIA 27(2):201–204
8. Krohn W, Grunwald A, Ukowitz M (2017) Transdisziplinäre Forschung revisited. Erken-
ntnisinteresse, Forschungsgegenstände, Wissensform und Methodologie. GAIA 26(4):341–
347
9. Jahn T, Bergmann M, Keil F (2012) Transdisciplinarity. Between mainstreaming and
marginalization. Ecol Econ 79:1–10
10. Lawrence RJ, Després C (2004) Futures of transdisciplinarity. Futures 36(4):397–405
11. Patterson J, Schulz K, Vervoort J, Adler C, Hurlbert M, van der Hel S, Schmidt A, Barau A,
Obani P, Sethi M, Hissen N, Tebboth M, Anderton K, Börner S, Widerberg O (2015)
Transformations towards sustainability. Emerging approaches, critical reﬂections, and a
research agenda. Earth system governance working paper no. 33. Earth System Governance
Project, Lund and Amsterdam
12. Lang D, Wiek A, Bergmann M, Stauffacher M, Martens P, Moll P, Swilling M, Thomas CJ
(2012) Transdisciplinary research in sustainability science: practice, principles, and
challenges. Sustain Sci 7(Supplement 1):25–43
13. Rittel HWJ, Webber MM (1974) Wicked problems. Futures 26(1):272–280
14. Funtowicz SO, Ravetz JR (1993) Science for the post-normal age. Futures 25(7):739–755
15. Gibbons M, Limoges C, Nowotny H, Schwartman S, Scott P, Trow M (1994) The new
production of knowledge. The dynamics of science and research in contemporary science.
Sage, London, Thousand Oaks, New Delhi
16. Nowotny H, Scott P, Gibbons M (2003) ‘Mode 2’ revisited: the new production of
knowledge. Minerva 41:179–194
17. Thomsen Klein J (2010) A taxonomy of interdisciplinarity. In: Frodeman R (ed) The Oxford
handbook of interdisciplinarity. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 15–30
18. Nicolescu B (2002) Manifesto of transdisciplinarity (Trans: Voss KC). State University of
New York Press, Albany
19. Nicolescu B (2012) Transdisciplinarity: the hidden third, between the subject and the object.
Hum Soc Stud 1(2):13–28
20. Thompson Klein J (2014) Discourses of transdisciplinarity: looking back to the future.
Futures 63:68–74
21. McGregor SLT (2015) The Nicolescuian and Zurich approaches to transdisciplinarity. Integ
Leadersh Rev 15(2). Retrieved from https://integralleadershipreview.com/13135-616-the-
nicolescuian-and-zurich-approaches-to-transdisciplinarity/
22. Bernstein JH (2015) Transdisciplinarity: a review of its origins, development, and current
issues. J Res Pract 11(1):Article R1. Retrieved from https://jrp.icaap.org/index.php/jrp/article/
view/510/412
23. Kates RW, Clark WC, Corell R, Hall JM, Jaeger CC, Lowe I, McCarthy JJ, Schellnhuber HJ,
Bolin B, Dickson NM, Faucheux S (2001) Sustainability science. Science 292:641–642,
pmid:11330321
24. Leavy P (2011) Essentials of transdisciplinary research: using problem-centered methodolo-
gies. Left Coast, Walnut Creek
25. Mittelstrass J (2011) On transdisciplinarity. Trames 15(4):329–338
26. Jaeger J, Scheringer M (2018) Weshalb ist die Beteiligung von Akteuren nicht konstitutiv für
transdisziplinäre Forschung? GAIA 27(4):345–347
27. Bergmann M, Jahn T, Knobloch T, Krohn W, Pohl C, Schramm E (2012) Methods for
transdisciplinary research: a primer for practice. Campus, Frankfurt
28. Scholz RW (2000) Mutual learning as a basic principle of transdisciplinarity. In: Scholz RW,
Häberli R, Bill A, Welti W (eds) Transdisciplinarity: joint problem-solving among science,
7
Transdisciplinary Approaches Towards Sustainability
141

technology and society. Workbook II: mutual learning sessions. Haffmans Sachbuch, Zürich,
pp 13–17
29. Hirsch Hadorn GH, Bradley D, Pohl C, Rist S, Wiesmann U (2006) Implications of
transdisciplinarity for sustainability research. Ecol Econ 60:119–128
30. Hirsch Hadorn G, Biber-Klemm S, Grossenbacher-Mansuy W, Hoffmann-Riem H, Joye D,
Pohl C, Wiesmann U, Zemp E (2008) The emergence of transdisciplinarity as a form of
research. In: Hirsch Hadorn G, Hoffmann-Riem H, Biber-Klemm S, Grossenbacher-Mansuy
W, Joye D, Pohl C, Wiesmann U, Zemp E (eds) Handbook of transdisciplinary research.
Springer, Berlin, pp 19–39
31. Maasen S, Lieven O (2006) Transdisciplinarity: a new mode of governing science? Sci Public
Policy 33(6):99–410
32. Burger P, Kamber R (2003) Cognitive integration in transdisciplinary science: knowledge as a
key notion. Issues Integr Stud 21:43–73
33. Russell AW, Wickson F, Carew AL (2008) Transdisciplinarity: context, contradictions and
capacity. Futures 40(5):460–472
34. Wickson F, Carew A, Russell AW (2006) Transdisciplinary research: characteristics,
quandaries and quality. Futures 38(9):1046–1059
35. Strohschneider P (2014) Zur Politik der Transformativen Wissenschaft. In: Brodocz A,
Herrmann D, Schmidt R, Schulz D, Schulze-Wessel J (eds) Die Verfassung des Politischen.
Festschrift für Hans Vorländer. Springer, Wiesbaden, pp 175–192
36. Grunwald A (2015) Transformative Wissenschaft—eine neue Ordnung im Wissenschaftsbe-
trieb? GAIA 24(1):17–20
37. Schneidewind U (2015) Transformative Wissenschaft—Motor für gute Wissenschaft und
lebendige Demokratie. GAIA 24(1):17–20
38. Pielke RA (2007) The honest broker: making sense of science in policy and politics.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
39. Robinson J (2008) Being undisciplined: transgressions and intersections in academia and
beyond. Futures 40:70–86
40. Maasen S, Lengwiler M, Guggenheim M (2006) Practices of transdisciplinary research: close
(r) encounters of science and society. Sci Public Policy 33(6):394–398. https://doi.org/10.
3152/147154306781778830
41. Maasen S, Dickel S (2019) Normative answers, epistemic questions. Updating the
science-society contract. In: Simon D, Kuhlmann S, Stamm J, Canzler W (eds) Handbook
of science and public policy. Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, pp 49–66
42. Renn O (2019) Inter- und Transdisziplinäre Forschung: Konzept und Anwendung auf die
Energiewende. Angew Philos (Appl Philos) 1:54–75
43. Bast F (2020) In defense of curiosity driven basic scientiﬁc research. Science 57(2):21–24
44. Agar J (2016) The curious history of curiosity driven research. R Soc J Hist Sci. https://doi.
org/10.1098/rsnr.2017.0034
45. Weiss C (1977) Research for policy’s sake: the enlightenment function of social research.
Policy Anal 3(4):531–545
46. Calvert J (2006) What’s special about basic research? Sci Technol Hum Values 31:199–220
47. Kockelmans JJ (1979) Why interdisciplinarity? In: Kockelmans JJ (ed) Interdisciplinarity and
higher education. University Park, Pennsylvania State University Press, pp 123–160
48. Spiegelhalter DJ, Riesch H (2011) Don’t know, can’t know. Embracing deeper uncertainties
when analysing risks. Philos Trans R Soc A 369:4730–4750. Royal Society, London
49. Sanderson I (2006) Complexity, ‘practical rationality’ and evidence-based policy making.
Polity Polit 34(1):115–132
50. Van der Sluijs JP, Petersen AC, Janssen PHM, Risbey JS, Ravetz JR (2008) Exploring the
quality of evidence for complex and contested policy decisions. Environ Res Lett 3
(2):024008/1–024008/9
51. Gooday G (2012) “Vague and artiﬁcial”: the historically elusive distinction between pure and
applied research. Isis 103:546–554
142
O. Renn

52. Ingold K, Gschwend M (2014) Science in policy making: neutral experts or strategic policy
makers. West Eur Polit 37(5):993–1018
53. Cristi C, Horton CC, Peterson TR, Banerjee P, Peterson MJ (2016) Credibility and advocacy
in conservation science. Conserv Biol 30(1):23–32
54. Stokes DE (1997) Pasteur’s quadrant: basic science and technological innovation. Brookings
Institution Press, Washington
55. Guston DH (2000) Between politics and science: assuring the integrity and productivity of
research. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
56. Nielsen LA (2001) Science and advocacy are different and we need to keep them that way.
Hum Dimens Wildl 6(1):39–47
57. Witmayer JN, Schäpke N (2014) Action, research and participation: roles of researchers in
sustainability transitions. Sustain Sci 9(4):483–496
58. Nowotny H (2003) Democratising expertise and socially robust knowledge. Sci Public Policy
30(3):151–156
59. Popa F, Guillermin M, Dedeurwaerdere T (2015) A pragmatist approach to transdisciplinarity
in sustainability research: form complex systems theory to reﬂexive science. Futures 65:45–
56
60. Renn O (2014) Stakeholder involvement in risk governance. Ark Publications, London
61. Webler T (1995) ‘Right’ discourse in citizen participation. An evaluative yardstick. In:
Renn O, Webler T, Wiedemann P (eds) Fairness and competence in citizen participation.
Kluwer, Dordrecht and Boston, pp 35–86
62. Renn O, Schweizer P-J (2020) Inclusive governance for energy policy making: conceptual
foundations, applications, and lessons learned. In: Renn O, Ulmer F, Deckert A (eds) The role
of public participation in energy transitions. Elsevier Academic Press, London, pp 39–79
63. Bremer S (2013) Mobilising high-quality knowledge through dialogic environmental
governance: a comparison of approaches and their institutional settings. Int J Sustain Dev
16(1/2):66–90
64. Habermas J (1984) The theory of communicative action. Vol. 1. Reason and the
rationalization of society (Trans: McCarthy T). Beacon Press, Boston, pp 44ff
65. Chambers S (1996) Reasonable democracy. Jürgen Habermans and the politics of discourse.
Cornell University Press, Ithaca and London
66. Bohman J (1996) Public deliberation: pluralism, complexity and democracy. MIT Press,
Cambridge
67. Hoppe R (1999) Policy analysis, science and politics: from ‘speaking truth to power’ to
‘making sense together.’ Sci Public Policy 26(3):201–210
68. Mauser W, Klepper G, Rice M, Schmalzbauer BS, Hackmann H, Leemans B, Moore H
(2013) Transdisciplinary global change research: the co-creation of knowledge for
sustainability. Curr Opin Environ Sustain 5(3–4):420–431. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.
2013.07.001
69. Bäckstrand K (2003) Civic science for sustainability: reframing the role of experts,
policymakers and citizens in environmental governance. Glob Environ Polit 3:24–41
70. Renn O (2019) Decision making under uncertainty: trade-offs between environmental health
and other risks. In: Nriagu J (ed) Encyclopedia of environmental health, vol 2. Elsevier, New
York, pp 10–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-409548-9.10675-X
71. McIntyre L (2017) Post-truth. MIT Press, Boston, pp 156ff
72. Giri AK (2002) The calling of a creative transdisciplinarity. Futures 34:103–115
73. Bago B, Rand DG, Pennycook G (2020) Fake news, fast and slow: deliberation reduces belief
in false (but not true) news headlines. J Exp Psychol Gen 149(8):1608–1613. https://doi.org/
10.1037/xge0000729
74. McIntyre L (2017) Post-truth. MIT Press, Boston, p 163
75. Cash D, Clark W, Alcock F, Dickson, N, Eckley N, Jäger J (2002) Salience, credibility,
legitimacy and boundaries: linking research, assessment and decision making. KSG working
paper series RWP02-046. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.372280
7
Transdisciplinary Approaches Towards Sustainability
143

76. Renn O (2010) The contribution of different types of knowledge towards understanding,
sharing and communicating risk concepts. Catal J Commun Cult Stud 2(2):177–195
77. Pohl C, Rist S, Zimmermann FP, Gurung GS, Schneider F, Speranza CI, Kiteme B, Boillat S,
Serrano E, Hirsch Hadorn G, Wiesmann U (2010) Researchers roles in knowledge
co-production: experience from sustainability research in Kenya, Switzerland, Bolivia and
Nepal. Sci Public Policy 37(4):267–281
Ortwin Renn serves as Scientiﬁc Director at the Institute for
Advanced Sustainability Studies (IASS) in Potsdam (Germany).
He is professor for technology assessment and environmental
sociology at the University of Stuttgart and directs, together with
Dr. Marion Dreyer and Agnes Lampke, the non-proﬁt company
DIALOGIK, a research institute for the investigation of commu-
nication and participation processes. His research is particularly
directed towards risk governance and transitions of energysys-
tems. His aim is to contribute to the mission of the institute to
become a highly reputable and acknowledged international center
for transdisciplinary studies on sustainable development. Profes-
sor Renn has a Ph.D. in social psychology from the University of
Cologne. His career has included teaching and research positions
at the Jülich Research Centre (Germany), Clark University
(Worcester, USA), the Swiss Institute of Technology (Zurich)
and the Center of Technology Assessment (Stuttgart). Ortwin
Renn has published more than 30 books and 250 articles. The
book Risk Governance (Earthscan: London, 2008) is his most
prominent monograph.
144
O. Renn

8
Models and Integration
Henrik Thorén
“All models are wrong, but some are useful.”
George Box
Summary
Models can be used as integrative devices in scientiﬁc practice, as well as at the
science-policy interface, in many different ways. In this chapter, three ways in
which models can function as such devices are discussed. As themselves, the
locus of the integration of different kinds of epistemic components, as coupled
and modular structures that integrate other models, and as boundary objects that,
in virtue of their position in a particular situation, can facilitate integration and
interdisciplinarity. A single model can be integrative in all three ways at one and
the same time. Special attention is paid to the collaborative aspects of
interdisciplinarity and how various forms of integration can support such efforts.
H. Thorén (&)
Department of Philosophy, Lund University, Box 192, 221 00 Lund, Sweden
e-mail: henrik.thoren@ﬁl.lu.se
H. Thorén
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Lund, Sweden
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
N. Rezaei (ed.), Integrated Science, Integrated Science 1,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65273-9_8
145

“A path in the woods.” Integration is a way of managing and navigating
complexity as well as itself a complicated and diverse set of practices.
[Made by Henrik Thorén].
The code of this chapter is 01100100 01101111 01000011 01100101
01110000 01101100 01110101.
1
Introduction
Challenges such as climate change, environmental destruction, and the management
of pandemic outbreaks belong to a set of problems that are often characterized as
real-world problems, complex problems, or, indeed, wicked problems [1]. Pervasive
uncertainties, high-stakes, value conﬂicts, and lack of simple or optimal solutions
are some of the distinguishing features typically believed to preclude conventional
scientiﬁc (disciplinary) approaches and necessitate something new [2–4]. A science
is needed that can better harness knowledge from diverse disciplinary sources and
manage conﬂicting values. Often enough, integration is at the core of these new
approaches, although what is to be integrated, and how, can vary.
146
H. Thorén

In practice, much of the science that engages with these kinds of issues, and
embody some of these integrative ideals, is model-driven. The integrated assess-
ment models, widely used in the science that studies the impacts of climate change,
are an excellent example of this [5]. This raises questions of how models can serve
as integrative devices and function within an integrative science, broadly construed.
In this chapter, we will examine this question and try to outline the roles models can
play in an integrative science. The pretenses are modest but broad. The focus will
be on three ways in which models can be integrative and serve as pivot points and
organizing tools in an inter- and transdisciplinary science. Yet the idea is not to
propose a typology. There are better alternatives here [6]. Instead, we shall seek to
illustrate some of the complexity involved in how models integrate knowledge and
values and the diversity of ways in which this may happen.
To preview what is to come; ﬁrst, there is an inherently integrative role models
often play as devices that provide a framework or structure for combining
knowledge claims and values of different kinds or from different sources to form a
coherent whole. This is a highly general feature and is signiﬁcant in many contexts
where scientiﬁc models are used. Second, there are classes of models that are
integrative in their structure. In ﬁelds such as climate impact assessment,
such integrated models are the dominant tools used. These modular coupled
models, we shall suggest, can in virtue of their speciﬁc structure be used to “model”
interdisciplinary relationships. The coupling interface within the model tracks—or
better arranges—the interface between involved disciplines, thus mapping out how
these disciplines effectively can work together. Third, we examine the classical
notion of a boundary object [7] that has been so important in science and tech-
nology studies (STS) and how models, as boundary objects considered, also can be
integrative in virtue of their context and position in certain situations. It is argued
that models play a diverse and complicated set of roles in facilitating integration,
interdisciplinarity, and collaboration.
The chapter is organized as follows. In the following section, we will brieﬂy
discuss the connection between integration, interdisciplinarity, and transdisci-
plinary. The third section contains our main three examples as previewed above,
and the ﬁnal section contains a brief concluding discussion and a summary.
To conclude this section, Box’s famous remarks, with which this chapter opens,
are a frequent recurrence in lectures and talks on topics dealing with the tensions
between pragmatic and epistemic aspects of models and modeling. Models are tools
that can serve many different purposes and are in no simple way (or sometimes no
way at all) mere representations of the world. Often different values come in tension
with one another—simplicity, tractability, transparency, ease of use, realisticness,
etc., rarely all pull in the same direction. Trade-offs have to be made. As we shall
discuss in more detail below, models can be seen as themselves the product that
integrates such conﬂicting values.
8
Models and Integration
147

2
Integration and Interdisciplinary
Interdisciplinarity is not one thing, and neither is integration. The conventional way
of distinguishing between different kinds of interdisciplinarity is a basic trichotomy;
multidisciplinarity, interdisciplinarity, and transdisciplinarity. The terminology goes
back to a report on interdisciplinarity commissioned by the Organization for Eco-
nomic Cooperation and Development (OECD) [8]. It is now a ﬁrmly estab-
lished albeit maybe simplistic way of distinguishing between the different forms
interdisciplinarity may assume [3, 9]. The least demanding form is multidisci-
plinarity. It is a ‘merely’ additive proposition involving the juxtaposition of
knowledge claims from different disciplines [3]. Interdisciplinarity, which is the
next step on the ladder, is different from multidisciplinarity precisely in that it is
integrative and thus goes beyond mere addition. Finally, there is transdisciplinarity,
which has been understood in different ways over the years—sometimes as the
formation of a new stable, but maybe more encompassing (disciplinary) framework,
or as an integration that operates not only between disciplines but also (and cru-
cially) between science and society [10–12].1 Clearly, however, there can be
integration that is neither inter- nor transdisciplinary. The reason we are typically
interested in those latter forms, however, is that they are more challenging as well
as associated with higher value outcomes when successful [15, 16].
When it comes to integration, the literature is surprisingly sparse. Some
have nonetheless provided general accounts. For example, O’Rourke et al. [17]
suggest that integration is a combinatorial process that can be broken down into
inputs (the parts to be integrated), the process through which integration itself
happens and ﬁnally the outcomes of the integrative process, or the outputs (the
products). This framework usefully highlights the overwhelming diversity of
approaches that could reasonably be labeled integrative depending on what is to be
integrated, how that integration happens, and what accounts for the outputs to be
preferable over the inputs. This product/process dimension to integration is
important, and we will ﬁnd a reason to return to it below.
It is noteworthy that interdisciplinarity has a collaborative dimension that will be
important in the discussion below. Suppose we think of disciplines as in part social
entities consisting not only of things such as theories, methods, tools, and concepts
but also of scientists who see themselves as members of those disciplines. It is also
natural to think that interdisciplinarity is a collaborative affair. It is a practice carried
out by groups of researchers from different disciplines that try to work together. It is
not merely, or always, to be characterized as an abstract process by which equally
abstract epistemically and scientiﬁcally signiﬁcant components of disciplines—
again, methods, theories, models, tools—are combined. Following MacLeod and
1In recent years it seems the more dominant understanding of this concept takes to designate
research approaches that involve stakeholders and other non-academic actors through-out the
research process [13, 14].
148
H. Thorén

Nagatsu [6], we will discuss this in terms of collaborative affordances. Speciﬁc
ways of combining the epistemically active parts of disciplines promote or other-
wise enable collaboration, whereas other approaches do not have these affordances.
3
Three Ways of Looking at Integration
In what follows below, we shall discuss three ways in which models ﬁgure in
integration and integrative practices. As mentioned in the introduction, what fol-
lows is not meant as a typology of integration, and neither should it be thought of as
approaches or strategies in any straightforward way. Instead, we should think of
these three examples as ways in which models can function as integrators. Often a
single model will be integrative in all three ways.
There is a rich body of literature in the philosophy of science that has discussed
the role of models in science. The purpose here is not to review this literature. We
shall settle for two very general and much-simpliﬁed points.2 First, an important set
of philosophical accounts of the role models play in science construes them as the
link between abstract theories on the one hand, and on the other, the world (or, as it
were, data) (see, e.g. [20]). In a very broad sense, this affords models an integrative
role of sorts, but it is too general to be of much use here. Second, plenty of
philosophers of science have highlighted the many different constraints that model
construction operates under, beyond what a target system may provide (see, e.g.
[21, 22]). That is, models are built with particular purposes in mind [23, 24] and are
in no way only representations of target systems (see, e.g. [25]). Values come into
play, and conﬂicts may arise between epistemic and non-epistemic values [26, 27].
This implies a kind of general boundary transgressing and integrative role for
models already at the outset. We shall return to one such account, due to Marcel
Boumans, below.
3.1
Modeling as Integration
It is useful to start with a topical example. Mathematical and computer-driven
simulation models have been a crucial tool in producing policy-relevant knowledge
in the management of the recent—and at the time of writing, still on-going—
COVID-19 pandemic. The dominant discipline supplying models is epidemiology,
and epidemiological models of different kinds have been widely used within public
health agencies and academics to project the developments and shape policy
responses.
In the middle of March 2020, a group of scientists led by Neil Ferguson at the
Imperial College London published a report titled Impact of non-pharmaceutical
2The interested reader may consult Morgan and Knuuttila [18] and Bailer-Jones [19] for
overviews.
8
Models and Integration
149

interventions (NPIs) to reduce COVID19 mortality and healthcare demand [28].
The report presented the results of a modeling study that tested a handful of
non-pharmaceutical interventions on the spread of COVID-19 in the United States
and the United Kingdom. What got the most publicity, however, were the
worst-case scenarios where the model simulating the outbreak was run without
interventions. According to Ferguson’s model, such a scenario would lead to
fatalities upwards of half a million in the United Kingdom and over two million in
the United States. According to reporting at the time, these projections were enough
to cause major policy shifts in both countries [29].
The model Ferguson and colleagues used in their study is a so-called com-
partmental model. It is a very common kind of model in epidemiology. Com-
partmental models simulate outbreaks dynamically, rather than project the
development by ﬁtting curves to sets of data as do statistical regression models
(which are also common in the ﬁeld). The most basic form of the compartmental
model
in
epidemiology
is
the
SIR-model.
The
abbreviation
stands
for
susceptible-infected-recovered—these categories are the compartments that lends
the model type its name. The model works by simulating the movements and
interactions of agents in the model, each of whom can belong to one of the
aforementioned categories. When they are close to one another, an infection may
happen and an agent goes from being suscepitble to infected, and thus the disease
spreads through the modeled population. At its most simple, the agents move
randomly on some undifferentiated grid, but often these models are much more
complex. How the agents in the model spend their time can be represented; they are
at work or school and spend time at home with their families. The central
parameters of the disease can be made relative to a heterogeneous population, and
so on. However, regardless of the complexity one strives for, much is inevitably
going to have to be left outside the model.
In this way, these kinds of models are clearly integrative devices. Various pieces
of knowledge about the disease and those affected by the disease are collected under
a given structure within the model. These pieces come from different places and are
of different quality. There are demographic data for relevant locations, data about the
effect of the disease on people of different ages, and perhaps data indicating the
transmissibility of the disease. The data is often coupled to some educated
guess-work that reﬂects, for example, assumed differences between, say, Wuhan and
the United Kingdom, or the quality of the data in question. On top of this, there are a
lot of further assumptions made for a variety of reasons. Efforts are directed towards
what are perceived to be the central epidemiological parameters. This reﬂects
judgments of what is important, in some broad sense, but also presumably what is
within the expertise of the modelers. In this way, values also come into play, both via
the various assumptions made and the way the model is structured and used.
A complicated set of risks typically inﬂuence how such modeling decisions are
made. These notably include the risks of an epidemic outbreak of a deadly disease
gone completely out of control or possibly negative effects of the interventions
150
H. Thorén

themselves.3 Another, perhaps more difﬁcult to analyze risk is the danger that the
scientists themselves (or science as a whole) would seem partial in one way or the
other and therefore lose legitimacy or otherwise be subject to harassment [32].
The model integrates all of these ingredients into a whole. The ingredients
metaphor is borrowed from Boumans [33], who has advanced a philosophical
account of models that portrays modeling as a process that is fundamentally about
integration. He likens the process to one in which a cake is to be baked without a
recipe. On his account, the building of models is a process in which disparate parts
or components—metaphors, theoretical notions, analogies, stylized facts, policy
views, empirical data, and so on—are connected and integrated by means of what
he calls mathematical moulding. This essentially involves choosing a mathematical
formalism that then allows for the other components to be integrated. The mathe-
matical framework serves both to allow for integration and imposes a constraint on
how this integration can happen. In the above case, the SIR-framework plays this
role and functions as the integrative scaffolding to which the different ingredients
can be ﬁtted and made to impinge on one another. If everything goes well, what
comes out on the other side is—as was the case with the Ferguson model—outputs
that are meaningful to policy-makers and provided a reason for action. All things
considered, it is a very complicated operation that, even if it can be made trans-
parent in certain respects, in many ways will inevitably remain opaque to those to
whom the results are of concern.
This integrative function of models need not be interdisciplinary—indeed, it
often is not—but seems important at the so-called science-policy interface. The
example just provided is a case in point. An important function the integration
served in the COVID-19 case was to bring together, and make sense of, disparate
pieces of knowledge from diverse sources together with a range of complicated
epistemic and non-epistemic value assumptions. The risks were enormous and the
science very much in the making. The product was not messy at all but actionable
and clear information, whatever its ﬂaws may have been. It is not a process without
problems and challenges. But that is beside the point, the model brings order to
disorderly information and integrates important non-epistemic values which can
then be used to support decision making.
If something we would wish to call interdisciplinarity is involved in this type of
integration, it is usually that the ingredients in one way or the other come from
different disciplines. The collaborative affordances are otherwise weak and depend
on a considerable extent on the organizing modeling framework and how closely
tied it is to some particular disciplinary context [6].
3This is often discussed in the philosophy of science in terms of so-called inductive risks. See e.g.
[27, 30, 31].
8
Models and Integration
151

3.2
Integration in Coupled Models
In some scientiﬁc ﬁelds—often ones that perceive themselves as in one way or the
other interdisciplinary—model coupling has become a dominant mode of con-
ducting research. Good examples are climate science, climate impacts assessment,
climate economics, and the environmental sciences more broadly. Model coupling
involves the connecting, not of components of different kinds, but of more or less
independent sub-models or modules that are essentially of the same kind. In climate
science, integration through model coupling is perhaps the most salient way in
which models have been and are developed [34]. A pivotal event in the develop-
ment of modern climate models was indeed the coupling of the ocean and atmo-
spheric general circulation models to create so-called coupled atmosphere-ocean
general circulation models (usually referred to as AOGCMs) in the early 1990s. The
most advanced climate models used are so-called Earth System Models that are
vastly more complex with countless further modules representing a range of
sub-systems and processes.
This kind of integration has a pronounced interdisciplinary dimension in that the
different systems which the various modules represent usually belong to the domain
of different disciplines. This is especially clear regarding climate impact models,
such as so-called integrated assessment models (IAMs). IAMs are computer-driven
simulation models that typically couple modules that model bio-geo-physical sys-
tems, such as the climate system or the global vegetation system, to modules that
model social and economic systems such as land-use systems, the global economy,
the energy sector, or the agricultural economy. Generally speaking, many different
kinds of IAMs exist that differ from one another along with a number of dimen-
sions, and they are used for a range of different purposes [5, 35–38]. Prominent
among these are models constructed to ﬁnd optimal mitigation pathways, ex-ante
assessment of speciﬁc policies, and producing GHG concentration scenarios for
large-scale climate modeling exercises such as those summarized in the reports of
the IPCC. These models are generally comparatively simple. More complex IAMs
are incredibly complicated and highly resolved computer models that contain many
modules such as the IMAGE model [39] developed for the Dutch government in the
early 1990s and remained in use by Netherlands Environmental Assessment
Agency.4
To understand how the coupling-interfaces work, however, it is useful to
examine the simpler models. Nordhaus’s Dynamic Integrated Climate Economy
model (DICE) [41] is a good example of such a model. DICE essentially contains
two main sub-models: an economic growth model and a simple climate model.
They are connected via two functions that run in opposing directions. There is a
damage function that takes its input from the climate model, a temperature differ-
ence, and outputs to the economic model of economic damages. The abatement
function that runs in the other direction gives gross emissions and also induces
4The ﬁrst somewhat successful models were developed to assess the costs and beneﬁts of various
policy options pertaining to transboundary air pollution [40].
152
H. Thorén

abatement costs. The optimization structure, the so-called objective function, in this
particular type of model, is typically some social welfare function that maximizes
time-discounted aggregate utility. In this way, mitigation costs are now balanced
against future damages.
As mentioned above, more complex models have many more components, each
of which itself can be an integrated model of sorts. These models are not developed
by individuals but by large interdisciplinary teams. For example, at the Potsdam
Institute for Climate Impact Research, several models are developed. Some of the
core models are the integrated assessment model REMIND, the agro-economy
model MAgPIE, the climate model MAGICC, and the global vegetation model
LPJmL. These models are developed by different teams, are largely autonomous,
and can be run independently from one. However, they are also continually
deployed together and depend on one another for inputs in various ways.
Many kinds of coupling strategies are deployed at the same time, and the cou-
pling is layered and happens both within each of these models as well as between
them. Hard-linking involves integrating the code of the models. This is contrasted
against soft-linking, where sub-models communicate via a data ﬁle [42]. One
important consideration when striving for one approach or the other (except the
many practical considerations that may arise) concerns features of the target system
itself; soft-linking is appropriate or sufﬁcient when feedbacks between the relevant
systems are (believed to be) weak [42].
Rotmans and van Asselt [5] distinguish between two coupling strategies. In the
ﬁrst couples expert models lifted directly from their disciplinary contexts with
minimal modiﬁcation. The second strategy involves also an interpretative step
where the disciplinary expert or ‘legacy’ models [43] are ﬁrst simpliﬁed (formu-
lated as reduced-form models) before they are coupled in the integrated model. The
ﬁrst strategy often produces models, Rotmans and van Asselt suggest, that
are complicated but not complex. These retain all the modular ﬁdelity and detail
of the expert models as modiﬁcation of sub-models mostly involve making inputs
and outputs of a various sub-models’ match. The downside is that they become
difﬁcult to survey and manipulate, but most crucially typically fail to portray
feedbacks and non-linearities adequately. They write: “The ﬁrst strategy may lead
to a complicated model, but not necessarily to a complex model. This means that
their dynamic behaviour is almost linear, i.e., incremental changes in input lead to
incremental changes in output. (Un)fortunately, the world does not function in such
a simple, linear way, but shows strongly nonlinear, variable and chaotic behaviour.
This implies that incremental changes in input may lead to considerable changes in
the overall output, which may not be predicted beforehand” [5].
Adopting the second ‘metamodel’ strategy sacriﬁces modular ﬁdelity for the
ability of the integrated model to capture global features of the system. “The
metamodel strategy is to be preferred in most cases,” Rotmans and van Asselt
argue, “because it enables the inclusion of linkages, interactions and feedbacks at
each possible level, which leads to a more advanced form of integration” [5].
Emphasizing the collaborative and interdisciplinary affordances of model cou-
pling, MacLeod and Nagatsu [6, 44] have outlined a handful of interdisciplinary
8
Models and Integration
153

modeling templates.5 Data-driven models and integral models rely on some mod-
eling framework to integrate data or knowledge from different disciplinary sources.
More pertinent in the present context, however, is modular coupled models. In this
kind of model, the modular structure implemented in the models tracks the
boundaries of the involved disciplines—as is the case with Rotmans and van
Asselt’s integrated expert models. Alternatively, better, the modular structure of the
integrated model itself models the relationship between the involved disciplines that
can then serve as a basis for the effective division of labor between them.
An important aspect of this particular way these models may work is that they
allow for problems to be formulated in one discipline, or among a group of
researchers with the same or similar expertise, that can be ‘fed’ to another such
group in such a way that the receiving group actually can solve the problem in a
way that is useful to the group that formulated the problem. This type of problem
exchange, called bilateral problem-feeding [12, 45–47], hinges precisely on a
well-structured coupling interface and interdisciplinary coordination. The outright
collaborative work can be focused on the coupling interface itself, allowing for
disciplines or teams to work more independently on their own modules. This makes
good use of speciﬁc expertise while avoiding potential difﬁculty in resolving
interdisciplinary conﬂicts that may arise if the coupling interfaces are not
controlled.
To sum up, the discussion thus far illustrates some of the considerable inter-
disciplinary and collaborative potential of model coupling as an integrative prin-
ciple. However, it also indicates several potential trade-offs, not least between the
collaborative affordances of the model and the way it manages to capture system-
level features. Different values and priorities come into tension with one another,
including the performance of the overarching integrative model, the ﬁdelity and
detail in the coupled modules, and the interdisciplinary and boundary-crossing
affordances of the framework.
3.3
Models as Boundary Objects
The previous section focused to a considerable extent on certain kinds of models,
i.e., modular coupled models, and what that structure means for integration. The
issue can also be approached from a more functional perspective on the role of
models in interdisciplinary integration, namely of models as so-called boundary
objects [48, 49].
The boundary object concept is due to Star and Griesemer [7] that introduced the
notion as a way of explaining how communication sometimes can be achieved
across different communities belonging to different social worlds between which
consensus is lacking and incommensurability reigns (see also [50]). A boundary
object is an entity that can bridge such a divide by being ﬂexible in certain respects
and rigid in others. This is how Star and Griesemer characterize this concept: “This
5See also [43] for a similar distinction.
154
H. Thorén

[boundary object] is an analytic concept of those scientiﬁc objects which both
inhabit several intersecting social worlds and satisfy the informational require-
ments of each of them. Boundary objects are objects which are both plastic enough
to adapt to local needs and the constraints of the several parties employing them,
yet robust enough to maintain a common identity across sites. They are weakly
structured in common use, and become strongly structured in individual site use.
These objects may be abstract or concrete. They have different meanings in dif-
ferent social worlds but their structure is common enough to more than one world
to make them recognizable, a means of translation” [51].
There are few material constraints on boundary objects, but Star and Griesemer
do offer some ideas of both general categories and concrete examples. One
important type of boundary object is the repository, a modular structure that is such
that components can be removed without altering or collapsing the overall structure
[51]. A library could realize this structure, or perhaps a modular coupled model
such as the agro-economy model MAgPIE, where individual modules can be
somewhat independently exchanged or altered ﬂuidly [52]. One example that Star
and Griesemer found important in their case-study of Berkley’s Museum of Ver-
tebrate Zoology at the beginning of the last century was the increasingly abstract
maps that could be used both by academic biologists and amateurs who collected
specimen for the museum [51].
Boundary objects can be crucial where collaboration is mandated but some of
the common preconditions for collaboration are found in want. As Egmont and
Zeiss point out, “[t]he value of the notion of a boundary object lies in the idea that
different social worlds can communicate and at the same time remain dissimilar
and relatively stable” [48].
We can analyze the boundary object concept as a primarily functional concept;
fundamentally, x is a boundary object if x serves the ‘boundary object’-function.
This function is as a communicative device that allow individuals from different
social worlds to communicate and collaborate, although they lack the usual
resources to do so effectively (such as e.g. a shared or at least commensurable
languages). In other words, the function in question can only be served under
speciﬁc conditions (such as those just mentioned), and certain things are for deﬁ-
nitional reasons precluded from being boundary objects (such as the languages
themselves, for instance). Beyond this, Star and Griesemer outline two abstract
properties that boundary objects have that make it possible for them to realize the
boundary object-function [53]. They have to be (interpretatively) ﬂexible (being
adaptable to local needs) but, at the same time, be rigid (able to maintain identity
across sites). However, if something is indeed a boundary object, it just follows that
it has these properties, and their abstract nature affords the boundary concept itself
considerable interpretative ﬂexibility. The concept of a boundary object demands
relatively little in concrete terms from the situation; the object should exhibit the
general features of ﬂexibility and rigidity and serve the communicative function.
The situation has to comport with the incommensurability criteria.
If anything can be a boundary object, then surely a model can. More interesting
then, is perhaps, in virtue of what models can function as boundary objects.
8
Models and Integration
155

A plausible case could be made that it is precisely in virtue of the kinds of features
discussed in the previous two sections. Moreover, indeed, such considerations do
ﬁgure in the literature [48, 49, 54]. However, the boundary object concept also
affords other possibilities.
Although case studies that examine one boundary object or the other have
sometimes focused on abstract entities, such as concepts [55], some boundary
objects are actual, concrete objects that function as boundary objects precisely in
virtue of this materiality. For Star and Griesemer [7], the specimen that was col-
lected by amateurs and then used by professional biologists working at the museum
were themselves boundary objects. They could be exchanged and used by both
groups but had vastly different meanings to each. The exchange itself turns on the
use of various standardized practices, such as labeling, but it is the fact that it is an
actual object that can be interacted with that allows for information to be
exchanged. The integration that happens in these situations does not ﬂow from the
object itself, having certain parts that map onto the overall situation somehow.
Quite the opposite, the object in question is a concrete whole, and the pivotal
properties are contextual (it is the object’s position in a situation that seems to be
central). Moreover, the object is not itself the target of integration, the integration
instead appears to happen entirely outside of that object in the communication
between the involved collaborators.
To conclude this section, I will gesture towards some potential examples of
models functioning as boundary objects in this way. Companion modeling [56] is a
participatory approach to modeling that aims to, among other things, help local
stakeholders better understand, navigate, and resolve conﬂicts in complex
social-environmental systems in which they are embedded [57, 58]. In these kinds
of approaches, the models can be designed as games that stakeholders can play,
e.g., to understand better complicated common pool resource management prob-
lems [59]. These kinds of models are typically integrated with all the ways we have
already discussed. However, crucially, they function to facilitate transdisciplinary
exchanges in no small part by being objects with which both scientists and
stakeholders can interact with one another by interacting with the model in different
ways. A kind of open-ended collaboration and exchange—indeed, integration—that
is not readily captured in the terms we laid out in the previous two sections.
4
Conclusion
To summarize, we overviewed three main ways in which models serve as inte-
grative devices, ﬁrst, in terms of how models can integrate different kinds of
epistemic and non-epistemic components into a whole. This is a highly general
feature of models—most if not all models function in this way—but one with few
collaborative affordances. Second, the way that a certain kind of model—modular
coupled models—can function to structure a particular kind of interdisciplinary
integration by not only modeling the systems involved but also the relationship
156
H. Thorén

between the involved disciplines. This is not a general feature of models but one
that has considerable collaborative affordances. Both, nonetheless, essentially are
about the way models are structured internally and the relationships between their
various components. And third, we discussed the notion of boundary objects to
illustrate how models also may serve as integrative devices due to the position they
sometimes can have collaborative situations rather than the internal structure of the
models themselves.
There are many different ways in which models serve as integrative devices in
integrative and interdisciplinary scientiﬁc practices and, at the science-policy
interface and often several if not all of these, will be relevant at the same time.
Modular coupled models, such as IAMs, consist of sub-models that draw on and
integrate different kinds of knowledge, assumptions, and values. These models may
function as boundary objects in several different ways. For example, between
disciplines or teams of specialists, they may arrange the relationships to divide the
labor and avoid unnecessary conﬂicts by providing a framework for bilateral
problem-feeding [6, 12, 44]. However, that does not prevent the same model from
functioning in a different way between other actors. Companion modeling
approaches are a case in point. Stakeholder involvement does not turn on the
modularity of the model in question, and the division of labor issues are much less
prominent. Instead, the model is central in a fruitful and open-ended exchange
between scientists and stakeholders in order to make a material situation better in
some way.
Core Messages
• Models often function as integrative devices but do so in many and diverse
ways.
• Three important ways models can be integrative are frameworks that
organize epistemic ingredients, as structures that can arrange interdisci-
plinary relationships, and as boundary objects.
• From an interdisciplinary and collaborative point of view, have different
affordances and limitations.
References
1. Rittel HW, Webber MM (1973) Dilemmas in a general theory of planning. Policy Sci 4
(2):155–169
2. Funtowicz SO, Ravetz JR (1993) Science for the post-normal age. Futures 25(7):739–755
3. Klein JT (1990) Interdisciplinarity: history, theory, and practice. Wayne State University
Press
8
Models and Integration
157

4. Brewer GD (1999) The challenges of interdisciplinarity. Policy Sci 32(4):327–337
5. Rotmans J, Van Asselt MB (2001) Uncertainty in integrated assessment modelling: a
labyrinthic path. Integr Assess 54(2):43–55
6. MacLeod M, Nagatsu M (2018) What does interdisciplinarity look like in practice: mapping
interdisciplinarity and its limits in the environmental sciences. Stud Hist Philos Sci Part A
67:74–84
7. Star SL, Griesemer JR (1989) Institutional ecology, ‘translations’ and boundary objects:
amateurs and professionals in Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907–39. Soc Stud
Sci 19(3):387–420
8. Apostel L, Berger G, Briggs A, Michaud G (eds) (1972) Interdisciplinarity: problems of
teaching and research in universities
9. Klein JT (2010) A taxonomy of interdisciplinarity. In: The Oxford handbook of interdis-
ciplinarity, vol 15, pp 15–30
10. Bernstein JH (2015) Transdisciplinarity: a review of its origins, development, and current
issues. J Res Pract 11(1):1–20
11. Thorén H, Breian L (2016) Stepping stone or stumbling block? Mode 2 knowledge
production in sustainability science. Stud Hist Philos Sci Part C Stud Hist Philos Biol Biomed
Sci 56:71–81
12. Thorén H, Persson J (2013) The philosophy of interdisciplinarity: sustainability science and
problem-feeding. J Gen Philos Sci 44(2):337–355
13. Lang DJ, Wiek A, Bergmann M, Stauffacher M, Martens P, Moll P, Swilling M, Thomas CJ
(2012) Transdisciplinary research in sustainability science: practice, principles, and
challenges. Sustain Sci 7(1):25–43
14. Wiek A, Farioli F, Fukushi K, Yarime M (2012) Sustainability science: bridging the gap
between science and society. Sustain Sci 7(1):1–4
15. Hansson B (1999) Interdisciplinarity: for what purpose? Policy Sci 32(4):339–343
16. Nissani M (1997) Ten cheers for interdisciplinarity: the case for interdisciplinary knowledge
and research. Soc Sci J 34(2):201–216
17. O’Rourke M, Crowley S, Gonnerman C (2016) On the nature of cross-disciplinary
integration: a philosophical framework. Stud Hist Philos Sci Part C Stud Hist Philos Biol
Biomed Sci 56:62–70
18. Morgan M, Knuuttila T (2012) Models and modelling in economics. In: Mäki U
(ed) Philosophy of economics. Elsevier, Amsterdam
19. Bailer-Jones DM (2009) Scientiﬁc models in philosophy of science. University of Pittsburgh
Press
20. Cartwright N (1984) How the laws of physics lie. Oxford University Press
21. Mäki U (2011) Models and the locus of their truth. Synthese 180(1):47–63
22. Giere R (2004) How models are used to represent reality. Philos Sci 71:742–752
23. Parker WS (2020) Model evaluation: an adequacy-for-purpose view. Philos Sci 87(3):457–
477
24. Winsberg E (2018) Philosophy and climate science. Cambridge University Press
25. Knuuttila T (2011) Modelling and representing: an artefactual approach to model-based
representation. Stud Hist Philos Sci Part A 42(2):262–271
26. Vezér M, Bakker A, Keller K, Tuana N (2018) Epistemic and ethical trade-offs in decision
analytical modelling. Clim Change 147(1–2):1–10
27. Elliott K (2017) A tapestry of values. Oxford University Press
28. Ferguson N, Laydon D, Gilani GV, Imai N, Ainslie KEC, Baguelin M, Bhatia S,
Boonyasiri A, Perez ZC, Cuomo-Dannenburg G, Dighe A, Dorigatti I, Fu H, Gaythorpe K,
Green W, Hamlet A, Hinsley W, Okell L, Elsland S, Thompson H, Verity R, Volz E,
Wang H, Wang Y, Walker P, Walters C, Winskill P, Whittaker C, Donnelly CA, Riley S,
Ghani A (2020) Report 9: impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduce
COVID19 mortality and healthcare demand
158
H. Thorén

29. Adam A (2020) Special report: the simulations driving the world’s response to COVID-19.
Nature 580(7803):316–318
30. Rudner R (1953) The scientist qua scientist makes value judgments. Philos Sci 20(1):1–6
31. Douglas H (2009) Science, policy, and the value-free ideal. University of Pittsburgh Press
32. Brysse K, Oreskes N, O’Reilly J, Oppenheimer M (2013) Climate change prediction: erring
on the side of least drama? Glob Environ Change 23(1):327–337
33. Boumans M (1999) Built-in justiﬁcation. In: Morgan M, Morrison M (eds) Models as
mediators. Cambridge University Press, pp 66–96
34. Dahan A (2010) Putting the earth system in a numerical box? The evolution from climate
modeling toward global change. Stud Hist Philos Sci Part B Stud Hist Philos Mod Phys 41
(3):282–292
35. Beck M, Krueger T (2016) The epistemic, ethical, and political dimensions of uncertainty in
integrated assessment modeling. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Clim Change 7(5):627–645
36. Weyant JP (2009) A perspective on integrated assessment. Clim Change 95(3–4):317
37. Nordhaus W (2013) Integrated economic and climate modeling. In: Dixon P, Jorgenson DW
(eds) Handbook of computable general equilibrium modeling. Elsevier
38. Dowlatabadi H (1995) Integrated assessment models of climate change: an incomplete
overview. Energy Policy 23(4–5):289–296
39. Rotmans J (1990) IMAGE: an integrated models to assess the greenhouse effect. Kluwer
Academic Publishers
40. Alcamo J, Shaw R, Hordijk L (1991) The RAINS models of acidiﬁcation: science and
strategies in Europe
41. Nordhaus W, Boyer J (2000) Warming the world: economic models of global warming. MIT
Press
42. Stehfest E, van Vuuren D, Bouwman L, Kram T (2014) Integrated assessment of global
environmental change with IMAGE 3.0: model description and policy applications.
Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency (PBL)
43. Voinov A, Shugart HH (2013) ‘Integronsters’, integral and integrated modeling. Environ
Model Softw 39:149–158
44. MacLeod M, Nagatsu M (2016) Model coupling in resource economics: conditions for
effective interdisciplinary collaboration. Philos Sci 83(3):412–433
45. Persson J, Thorén H, Olsson L (2018) The interdisciplinary decision problem: Popperian
optimism and Kuhnian pessimism in forestry. Ecol Soc
46. Thorén H (2015) History and philosophy of science as an interdisciplinary ﬁeld of problem
transfers. In: Empirical philosophy of science. Springer, pp 147–159
47. Wahlberg L, Persson J (2017) Importing notions in health law: science and proven
experience. Eur J Health Law 24(5):565–590
48. van Egmond S, Zeiss R (2010) Modeling for policy science-based models as performative
boundary objects for Dutch policy making. Sci Stud 23(1):58–78
49. Franco LA (2013) Rethinking soft OR interventions: models as boundary objects. Eur J Oper
Res 231(3):720–733
50. Carlile PR (2004) Transferring, translating, and transforming: an integrative framework for
managing knowledge across boundaries. Organ Sci 15(5):555–568
51. Star SL (2010) This is not a boundary object: reﬂections on the origin of a concept. Sci
Technol Hum Values 35(5):601–617
52. Dietrich J, Bodirsky B, Humpenöder F, Weindl I, Stevanović M, Karstens K, Kreidenweis U,
Wang X, Mishra A, Klein D, Ambrósio G, Araujo E, Yalew A, Baumstark L, Wirth S,
Giannousakis A, Beier F, Chen D, Lotze-Campen H, Popp A (2019) MAgPIE 4—a modular
open-source framework for modeling global land systems. Geosci Model Dev 12(4):1299–
1317
53. Thorén H (2014) Resilience as a unifying concept. Int Stud Philos Sci 28(3):303–324
54. Zeiss R, van Egmond S (2014) Dissolving decision making? Models and their roles in
decision-making processes and policy at large. Sci Context 27(4):631–657
8
Models and Integration
159

55. Brand FS, Jax K (2007) Focusing the meaning(s) of resilience: resilience as a descriptive
concept and a boundary object. Ecol Soc 12(1)
56. Étienne M (2013) Companion modelling: a participatory approach to support sustainable
development. Springer Science & Business Media
57. Simon C, Etienne M (2010) A companion modelling approach applied to forest management
planning. Environ Model Softw 25(11):1371–1384
58. Nagatsu M (forthcoming) Co-production and economics: insights from the constructive use of
experimental games in adaptive resource management. J Econ Methodol
59. Worrapimphong K, Gajaseni N, Le Page C, Bousquet F (2010) A companion modeling
approach applied to ﬁshery management. Environ Model Softw 25(11):1334–1344
Henrik Thorén is a philosopher of science working on
methodological and conceptual issues, primarily in sustainability
science and climate economics. He holds a Ph.D. in theoretical
philosophy from Lund University in Lund, Sweden, and has held
several post-doctoral research fellowships at Lund University and
the University of Helsinki. He is currently a researcher at Lund
University, working on risks and values in climate economic
models. Among his research interests are inter- and transdisci-
plinarity in sustainability science, the epistemology and ethics of
integratedassessment modeling, the value of nature and ecosys-
tem service valuation, the concept of resilience, and uncertainty
and risk in climate and sustainability sciences.
160
H. Thorén

9
Unlaws: The Missing “Dark Matter”
in the Philosophy of Science?
Rory Allen
“They gave it me,” Humpty Dumpty continued thoughtfully, as
he crossed one knee over the other and clasped his hands round
it, “they gave it me – for an un-birthday present.”
“I beg your pardon?” Alice said with a puzzled air.
“I’m not offended,” said Humpty Dumpty.
“I mean, what is an un-birthday present?”
“A present given when it isn’t your birthday, of course.”
Alice considered a little. “I like birthday presents best,” she
said at last.
“You don’t know what you’re talking about!” cried Humpty
Dumpty.
Alice through the Looking Glass
Summary
Science is sometimes deﬁned as the systematic study of the physical world to
discover the laws of nature. Laws embody generalizations connecting different
phenomena, often involving a causal link between one concept and another.
I suggest that much of science, in fact, depends on the opposite idea: the
“unlaw,” deﬁned as the proposition that two variables have no causal or
mathematical link with one another. This idea uniﬁes such apparently distinct
notions as thought experiments, conservation principles in physics, and
experimental design paradigms in the life sciences, as well as highlighting the
importance of diversity in the human condition. I propose that the importance of
R. Allen (&)
Department of Psychology, Goldsmiths, University of London, London SE14 6NW, UK
e-mail: r.allen@gold.ac.uk
R. Allen
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), York, UK
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
N. Rezaei (ed.), Integrated Science, Integrated Science 1,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65273-9_9
161

unlaws be acknowledged and that this category be given due consideration in the
philosophy of science, where it may help to resolve certain persistent
misunderstandings.
“Dark matter.” This work is a cylindrical piece made of resin and ﬂuorescent
powder. The diameter of this work is 7 cm, and the height is 2.5 cm. The photo
is taken at night without light and wants to convey the concept that dark matter is
a kind of ﬂuid in cosmology and it has no infrastructure. The idea that dark
matter is made of a particle may or may not exist. At present we have no
observations to say that dark matter must have a microscopic infrastructure. Dark
matter is a purely scientiﬁc hypothesis and may be wrong.
[Adapted with permission from the Association of Science and Art (ASA),
USERN; Made by Sepideh Sargoli].
The code of this chapter is 01101001 01101110 01110010 01000010
01100111 01100100 01100111 01101001.
1
Introduction
Dark matter accounts for a large part of the mass of the universe, but its existence
was not even suspected until Swiss Astronomer Fritz Zwicky came up with the
concept in the 1930s. The theme of this chapter is that likewise, science relies on a
group of ideas whose importance, as a category, we have until now failed to
appreciate. This failure distorts the picture that science presents to the broader
world, and leads to hostility, especially among our colleagues within the
162
R. Allen

humanities, towards what they see as science’s blindness to the diversity of human
experience. It also leads to criticism from philosophers, who perceive the con-
ceptual gap and dare to ask the difﬁcult questions but fail to elicit an answer from
conventional scientiﬁc accounts. This paper aims to address these confusions and to
suggest that thinking about science from a new perspective can reveal fundamental
and surprising connections that integrate theory and practice across a broad range of
scientiﬁc disciplines.
One deﬁnition of a scientiﬁc law is that it states a link, of a mathematical or
causal nature, between two or more variables. In the spirit of Humpty Dumpty, I
deﬁne an ‘unlaw’ to be a statement of a lack of a mathematical or causal linkage
between two or more variables. In its simplest form, this may state that two vari-
ables are statistically independent. Knowing the value of one variable gives us no
additional information regarding the value of the second variable.1 One example
might be that whether today’s date is odd or even has no predictive value regarding
the likely mean temperature in London tomorrow.
The idea of unlaws was suggested by the Daoist tradition of philosophy, in
which the world is seen as made up of a mixture of positive (yang) and negative
(yin) elements. In our present context, the laws of nature are yang, but the unlaws
supply the essential yin element. A familiar example of this essential duality is
music, where the intervals between the notes are as essential as the notes
themselves.
I will argue that the concept of unlaws, the negative counterpart of laws, unites
many quite separate notions in science, including some that may be drawn upon by
practising scientists almost unconsciously. Having once become aware of unlaws,
one begins to see them everywhere. It is, therefore, necessary, or at least helpful, to
attempt a taxonomy of unlaws, and in the following sections, I will attempt to group
them into the main families into which, in my opinion, they naturally fall.
2
Symmetry, Invariance, and Conservation Principles
If there is a category in which unlaws enjoy the respect they deserve, it is this.
Symmetry and invariance are closely related. The technical deﬁnition of symmetry
involves the notion of a mathematical group of transformations. More simply,
symmetries can be understood as certain kinds of change, which preserve a spec-
iﬁed property of something. Wallpaper patterns show symmetry since the pattern is
preserved if you move it horizontally a certain distance; otherwise, it would be
impossible to match the pattern across different rolls. Whereas symmetry represents
1Statistical independence is sometimes confused with orthogonality, in which two variables have
zero correlation. Independence is a more stringent condition: two variables can be orthogonal, but
functionally connected and therefore not independent (e.g. the graph of y = x2 in the range x = −1
to +1).
9
Unlaws: The Missing “Dark Matter” in the Philosophy of Science?
163

change, an invariant refers to the thing which is unchanged under a symmetry
group. This independence under the changes imposed by the symmetry group is an
example of an unlaw.
In the case of wallpaper, the symmetry group may comprise certain horizontal
and vertical displacements, and sometimes, reﬂection in a mirror. The invariant is
the “unit cell” or fundamental component of the recurring pattern. Wallpapers can
have complex unit cells: William Morris’ “Strawberry thief” design has two birds
and multiple plants, ﬂowers, and fruits. Under reﬂection and translation, this unit
generates the whole design.
Different groups give rise to different wall patterns. It can be shown that there are
just seventeen possible symmetry groups with two-dimensional patterns. Islamic
artists, who were constrained by their religion to a limited number of themes (unit
cells) but were permitted to use geometric patterns, explored their full range. It has
been claimed that all seventeen symmetry groups are exhibited in, for example, the
decoration of the walls of the Alhambra Palace in Granada.
More complex symmetries are, of course, possible. The Cosmological Principle
in physics states that the universe is homogeneous and isotropic: it is invariant
under the group comprising all lateral displacements plus rotations; on a large scale,
the universe appears the same at any point in space and any direction. A powerful
result in theoretical physics, Noether’s theorem, tells us that for a physical system,
an invariance of this kind always implies a corresponding conservation law—a
statement that some quantity is unchanged over time. In particular, the homogeneity
of space implies the conservation of momentum, and isotropy ensures the conser-
vation of angular momentum. The invariance of the universe over time gives rise to
the conservation of energy. Though traditionally referred to as ‘laws,’ I suggest that
conservation principles are more naturally viewed as unlaws. They are of com-
prehensive application and have had a powerful impact on physics.
Newton’s third law that action and reaction are equal and the opposite is justiﬁed
by the claim that a mirror symmetry can interchange action and reaction. At a more
complex level, Einstein’s fundamental equations of special relativity can also be
related to an invariance principle. It is famously true that the velocity of light
appears identical to different observers in relative motion to one another. This fact is
often taken in physics books as an unexplained assumption, but it appears arbitrary:
why should the speed of light be so special? Why not, say, take the speed of sound
as constant?
There is a more fundamental explanation. Light is an electromagnetic wave. Its
velocity can therefore be derived from Maxwell’s equations, which are a complete
expression in classical physics of the relationships between electric and magnetic
ﬁelds and how they change over time. Maxwell’s equations correspond to the unit
cell in the wallpaper example. Einstein believed that laws of nature, such as
Maxwell’s equations, should be true for any observer. The assumption of the
independence of laws from observers is a very powerful unlaw; it corresponds to
the symmetry invariance of wallpaper patterns. From this, it follows that each
observer will use the same set of equations—Maxwell’s equations—to calculate the
164
R. Allen

velocity of light in their frame of reference. Similar equations must have identical
consequences, and since the velocity of light is a mathematical consequence of
these equations, each observer must ﬁnd the same value for it. No further
assumptions are needed.
Our ﬁnal example in this section concerns dimensional analysis, developed by
the British physicist, Lord Rayleigh. The details are technical, but the idea behind
the method is simple. Where physical laws can be expressed in terms of funda-
mental units such as mass, length, and time, it is reasonable to assume that the
expression of the law should not depend on the particular system of units that is
used: kilograms and meters should give the same formulae as yards and pounds.
This invariance of form under change of basic units is an unlaw, and one with
profound consequences. One can deduce, without knowing anything about the
mechanics of pendulums, that the period of oscillation of a pendulum is propor-
tional to the square root of its length. In this example, the method does not tell us
anything new because a conventional analysis is powerful enough to give us an
exact solution. However, the method comes into its own in situations where at a
fundamental level, we are deplorably ignorant of how the physics works.
A notorious example is a turbulent ﬂow in ﬂuids. On his death bed, Werner
Heisenberg said that he was looking forward to asking God to explain turbulence,
though he was not sure He would be able to. However, though we cannot yet ﬁnd
exact solutions for turbulent ﬂow, dimensional analysis reliably enables us to ﬁnd
out whether or not in a given situation, the ﬂow will be turbulent. This is done by
calculating the Reynolds number: if this is greater than 4000, the ﬂow will be
turbulent.
The Reynolds number is one example of a dimensionless parameter. “Dimen-
sionless” means that it has the same value whatever physical units for mass, length,
and time are used: the number is invariant under changes of fundamental units.
Dimensionless parameters represent a way of gaining insight into many areas of
physics where highly complex systems confront us. As such, they are of great
practical value to designers and engineers. One text on dimensional analysis [1] lists
over 200 dimensionless parameters, concerned with everything from astronomy and
meteorology to ship design, each of which can be viewed as a self-contained unlaw.
On a purely numerical count, unlaws far outnumber laws.
This is merely a selection of the applications of symmetry in physics. It is, for
example, central to understanding the relationships between subatomic particles, a
ﬁeld of current active research. However, we must turn our attention to areas where
the underlying unlaws are less familiar.
3
Unlaws and Thought Experiments
Galileo used thought experiments extensively, and herein lies a paradox. Though
often described as one of the pioneers of experimental science, it has been claimed
that Galileo did not, in fact, conduct many of the experiments that he describes.
9
Unlaws: The Missing “Dark Matter” in the Philosophy of Science?
165

This does not seem to matter: his arguments are so compelling that we do not need
to witness the experiment; just reading about it is enough to carry conviction. This
cannot simply be due to Galileo’s ﬂair for dialectic, though he was certainly a gifted
polemicist. I would argue that the true reason for the persuasive power of Galileo’s
arguments is that they rely on unlaws.
This is not obvious at ﬁrst sight, and philosophers of science have sometimes
been misled. Paul Feyerabend, who was acute enough to be aware of the lack of
empirical evidence, but failed to spot the unlaws, concluded that Galileo was a
propagandist who relied on trickery [2]. For Galileo’s fans, his thought experiments
derive their force through being based on pure logic, but this, too, is mistaken.
A single example will illustrate the point. One of the experiments attributed to
Galileo, which he probably never performed, was to drop two balls, one heavy and
one light, from the Tower of Pisa and to show that they hit the ground simulta-
neously. This contradicted Aristotelian physics because Aristotle had taught that
heavier weights would fall proportionately faster than lighter ones.
His refutation is as follows [3, p. 63]. He asks us to grant that if you have two
bodies whose natural speeds of fall are different, and you tie them together, the
faster one will be retarded by the slower, and the slower one will be speeded up by
the faster. Suppose you have a large stone that moves with a speed of, say, eight,
and a smaller stone that moves with a speed of four, then if they are tied together,
the system will move with a speed of more than four but less than eight. However,
the two stones together are equal to a larger stone than the one that moved with a
speed of eight, yet it moves with speed less than eight. The more massive body
moves more slowly than the lighter, refuting Aristotle.
Why does this argument work? Galileo uses two premises—in fact, two unlaws—
in his argument: one stated, the other implicit. The ﬁrst is that the slower ball will
affect the faster ball, slowing it, and the faster ball will have the opposite effect on the
slower ball. The second assumption is that an object of a certain weight composed of
two balls will behave in the same way as a single ball of their combined weights. The
ﬁrst assumption is, in essence, Newton’s third law, that action and reaction are equal
and opposite. The second may not be precisely true, since air resistance may differ
for a single and a combined object. However, in the conditions of the thought
experiment, we have an intuitive conviction that this objection will make little
difference.
Historically, Galileo did not invent the thought experiment: he had two fore-
runners. Archimedes used the method with great ingenuity to prove the principle of
the lever. He was followed in the sixteenth century by a Dutch investigator, Simon
Stevin. To motivate Stevin’s most famous discovery, we may begin with the
commonplace observation that it is harder to pull a loaded wheelbarrow up a steep
slope than up a gentle incline. Stevin showed that this common experience could be
made exact, in a surprisingly simple way (see [4], pp. 24–28 for a fuller discussion).
Stevin imagines a chain loosely draped over wedge-shaped support, represented in
Fig. 1 by the triangle ABC.
166
R. Allen

The bottom portion of the chain hangs freely from the horizontal edge BC. From
the symmetry of the situation, the weight of the portion of the chain hanging loose
from the edge BC must exert the same force at B as it does at C. Moreover, such a
chain must remain at rest: if it were to start to move around the wedge, say in the
clockwise direction, there is no reason for it ever to stop. We would, in effect, have
a perpetual motion machine. Stevin claims that this is impossible.
Now focus on the link at the apex A of the wedge. From the previous argument,
we know that this link cannot have any tendency to move. This implies that it must
be acted upon by equal forces from the chain draped over the side AB and from the
chain along the side AC. Therefore, the more massive length of chain along AB
exerts the same force at A as the lighter length along AC (the chain dangling from
BC makes no difference as it affects the two sides equally, as we have seen). In
wheelbarrow language, a heavy wheelbarrow resting on AB would require the same
force at A to hold it steady, as a light wheelbarrow resting on side AC.
We now have our required connection between the steepness of slope and force.
Put into mathematical language, this amounts to the statement that the force of
gravity on an object on a frictionless plane extending a ﬁxed height from the ground
is proportional to the object’s weight and inversely proportional to the length of the
slope.
This is a substantial result to be deduced from nothing more, apparently, than
simple logic, together with the assumption that the chain cannot go round forever.
Mach [4] suggests that this results from ‘instinctive knowledge,’ arising from our
‘accumulated experiences’ of nature. He concludes: “It is a peculiarity of instinctive
knowledge that it is predominantly of a negative nature.” Mach seems to be on the
verge of deﬁning unlaws as a category. He also suggests how our understanding of
them arises: from our constant exposure to unlaws in everyday life.
Fig. 1 Stevin’s
demonstration
9
Unlaws: The Missing “Dark Matter” in the Philosophy of Science?
167

I will brieﬂy mention another application of unlaws in thought experiments,
namely scaling arguments. From our schooldays, we may recall such questions as:
if two men dig three trenches in three days, how long does it take six men to dig
nine trenches? Solving these problems requires the assumption that the rate of
trench-digging per man is independent of the number of men present, which is an
unlaw. Scaling arguments are an area in which Galileo came into his own. In his
second book [3], he used the scaling method to such effect that it enabled him to lay
the foundations for modern statics and dynamics. Again, Galileo’s arguments are
not supported by experimental data, yet they are persuasive in the same way that his
refutation of Aristotle is persuasive, and for the same reason: they depend on
unlaws.
4
Unlaws and Experimental Design
Perhaps the most sensitive and remarkable measurements ever conducted are car-
ried out by the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO),
which has detected events such as the merger of two black holes. LIGO is so
sensitive that elaborate precautions are needed to ﬁlter out disturbances on Earth, to
enable it to detect genuine gravitational signals from space. It does this using a pair
of interferometers 3000 km apart. Processing the data depends on an unlaw: the
assumption that vibrations in one place due to local effects are completely inde-
pendent of local vibrations in the second site. When the results are processed,
vibrations that are detected at only one site are rejected as interference; signals that
are identical in both locations are retained as indicating a gravitational event in
space.
Studies in psychology are notoriously subject to ‘noise’ in the data, and par-
ticular precautions need to be taken to avoid its effects. People differ between
themselves; even the same person will behave differently on different days. Aca-
demic papers in psychology follow a standard format, enabling other researchers to
replicate the results2 despite these difﬁculties. The message of such a paper is this:
“if you follow the procedures we followed, you will get similar results.” This is to
claim an unlaw: the results will be independent of the laboratory doing the
experiment, and of the time and place in which it is carried out.
However, this independence is not easily gained. A well-conducted experiment
should eliminate two kinds of error, random and systematic, to ensure it. To reduce
random error, it is often essential to standardize the way an experiment is admin-
istered to different participants—for instance, ﬁxing the distance and brightness of a
visual display—and these details will be given in the report of the results. Without
this, attempts at replication may fail because they will not repeat the original
experiment sufﬁciently closely.
2This aim is not always successfully achieved. An internet search for ‘the replication crisis in
psychology’ will indicate the extent of the problem.
168
R. Allen

However, no experimental report can ever be a complete account, which would
require a second by second record of everything that occurred, however trivial. The
report implicitly assumes that details that are unspeciﬁed and which may therefore
vary in replication are not vital. We take it for granted that things like the colour of
the experimenter’s shoes, or the position of the planets at the instant of measure-
ment, are irrelevant. If we call these “ignorable variables,” we are saying that the
results are independent of these variables; in other words, every ignorable variable
is the subject of an unlaw. Thus, around every experimental report, there is an
invisible cloud of unlaws, swarming as densely as gnats on a summer’s evening.
Moreover, whether or not an unlaw is acknowledged, its existence is essential.
Every ignorable variable implies the truth of a corresponding unlaw, but if the
unlaw turns out to be false, we are in trouble. A variable that signiﬁcantly affects the
outcome of an experiment but which is overlooked is known as a confounding
variable and may have disastrous effects on the validity of the results.
The principle known as Occam’s razor can be recast in the language of unlaws.
In the form “nature operates in the shortest way possible,” it goes back to Aristotle.
The usual wording, due to William of Occam, is “it is vain to do with more what
can be done with less.” Applied to experimental hypotheses, it suggests that we
should minimize the number of causal factors included in a hypothesis. This
requires that we should maximize the number of causal factors excluded from a
hypothesis. However, to state that a causal factor C is absent from a hypothesis
accounting for an effect E is equivalent to stating that C and E are related by an
unlaw. So Occam’s principle becomes: “for any given hypothesis, maximize the
corresponding set of unlaws.” However, we must be careful not to go too far, and
wield Occam’s razor over-zealously [5].
All aspiring medical and psychology students are taught about the threat of
systematic bias that may arise in experiments where you take two groups of par-
ticipants and use them as “treatment” and “control” groups. The most effective way
to test an experimental effect is to use a randomized controlled trial. A pool of
participants is allocated randomly to receive or not receive a particular treatment.
There must be no systematic difference between the two groups at the outset.
Otherwise, the results may be due to the difference between the groups and not the
actual treatment. This is achieved by using random allocation, in which the decision
to put a particular participant in the treatment or control group is decided by chance.
The usual method involves a random number generator, such as can be found in
any spreadsheet program. We ﬁrst list the participants in any order. This order does
not matter: it could be alphabetically by name. Suppose they are Alice, Dick, Emily,
and Tom. To Alice, one allocates the ﬁrst random number found, say 0.853, to
Dick, the second number (0.452) to Emily, the third (0.227), and Tom the fourth
(0.696). The random numbers are then rearranged in their own numerical order
(0.227, 0.452, 0.696, 0.853), and the participants to which they correspond are
listed in the same order (in our example, this gives Emily, Dick, Tom, and Alice).
The process scrambles the original order of participants. Now we can allocate
Emily and Dick to the treatment group and Tom and Alice to the control group.
With 60 participants, one might allocate the ﬁrst 30 participants in the scrambled
9
Unlaws: The Missing “Dark Matter” in the Philosophy of Science?
169

order list to the treatment group, and the second 30 to the control group. How do we
know that this allocation will be free of systematic bias? Because an unlaw states
that generating random numbers in a computer is by its nature statistically inde-
pendent of the process of listing participants in alphabetical order. The computer is
blind to their identity.
Unlaws are subtly involved in more complex experimental setups, too, which are
often based—whether or not the experimenters are aware of it—on John Stuart
Mill’s “canons of experimental enquiry” [6, pp. 448–471]. To introduce the canons,
I will illustrate their use in Fig. 2.
Imagine that we have reason to believe that the two rocker switches on the left,
with both switches in the “up” position, have some causal link with the light bulb
on the right, which we assume initially to be lit. The obvious next step is to operate
the switches and see what happens to the light. Suppose we ﬂick the left-hand
switch down and up again, and nothing happens. Now we ﬂick the right-hand
switch down, and the bulb goes off. When we ﬂick it up, the bulb goes on again. To
complete our ‘experiment,’ we ﬂick the left-hand switch down and leave it there;
the light remains lit as we already know. Now we try the right-hand switch, and we
ﬁnd it has the same effect as before, of turning the light off, and then on again.
It is evident that the right-hand switch, and it alone, causes the light to go on and
off. Operating the left-hand switch while not touching the right-hand switch and
seeing no effect on the bulb is essentially what Mill called his “method of agree-
ment”: the right-hand switch is unchanged, so its positions agree, and the bulb stays
lit, so its states also agree. The right-hand switch demonstrates his second canon,
the “method of difference”: when the positions of the switch differ, the states of the
bulb also differ. The method of agreement means we can rule out the left-hand
switch as causal. If we already knew that one of the switches was the control switch,
we would now be able to assert that it was the right-hand one, by elimination.
However, if we were not certain that one of the switches was the controlling one,
the method of difference would remove our doubts. So, our manipulation of both
switches—what Mill called the “joint method of agreement and difference”—en-
ables a complete analysis of the causal links between the switches and the light.
Note that the methods of agreement and difference operate to demonstrate an
unlaw and a law, respectively. The unlaw is that the position of the left-hand switch
does not correlate with the light being on or off, and the law is that the position of
the right-hand switch does so correlate. The information given by this “experiment”
can be summarised in Table 1.
In this presentation, the law is represented by the difference between the rows
(ON-ON is different from OFF-OFF), and the unlaw is represented by the agree-
ment between the columns (ON-OFF, and ON-OFF). This illustration of the
row/column dichotomy between laws and unlaws suggests an analogy with the weft
and warp structure of fabrics; both warp and weft are essential for the fabric to stay
together.
It is not always appreciated that Mill’s joint method of agreement and difference
is central to many experimental designs. A single example will illustrate the point.
A group of French scientists [7] has shown that female fruit ﬂies get a boost in their
170
R. Allen

long-term memory thanks to a molecule found in male ﬂy semen. This ‘sex peptide’
binds to fruit ﬂy sperm and travels from the female reproductive tract to the brain.
To test their theory that the sex peptide is responsible for the memory effect, the
team conditioned females by pairing certain smells with electric shocks. The ﬂies
were then exposed to smells that were and were not associated with shocks. Flies
that had mated remembered to avoid smells linked with shocks, but those that had
not mated forgot after four days.
This experiment shows the method of difference in action. However, the group
did more than this: they extended the experiment by invoking the method of
agreement. A critic might object that the memory improvement was due not to the
sex peptide in the sperm, but some other chemical in it, or another effect of mating.
To rule this out, females were mated with males modiﬁed to lack the sex peptide,
and these were found to show no improvement in long-term memories. Females
who had not mated with a male but were injected with the peptide showed the
improvement. The ﬁndings can be summarised in Table 2.
Table 2 has exactly the same pattern of responses as in Table 1. It shows that the
act of mating does not in itself produce better memory, aside from its role in
transferring the sex peptide. Therefore, the sex peptide is truly the factor responsible
for the effect. The power of this result is that it combines an unlaw (no effect of
mating per se) with a law (positive effect of the presence of sex peptide).
There is nothing particularly unusual about this study. The principle is of general
application in the life sciences: it can be shown, for example, that the joint method
of agreement and difference is the foundation for the validity of Koch’s postulates,
which is the standard method of determining whether an infectious agent is the
cause of some disease.
Fig. 2 Mill’s methods of
agreement and difference
Table 1 Causal link between
switch positions and light
responses
Left switch up
Left switch down
Right switch up
On
On
Right switch down
Off
Off
9
Unlaws: The Missing “Dark Matter” in the Philosophy of Science?
171

5
Unlaws and Unreality
Hollywood knows that a good way to invoke a threatening atmosphere is to use a
laboratory setting. Real-life laboratory experiments are, if not sinister, at least
unnatural environments. Scientists generally wish to study individual processes in
isolation from the confusing medley of sights, sounds, and feelings, which is the
outside world.3 Some philosophers criticize experimental science precisely because
laboratory testing is unrealistic. How can anything arising out of such a controlled
environment be of any relevance to the rich diversity of human experience? How, in
technical terms, can such experiments achieve ecological validity?
This question has two answers. The ﬁrst, simpler reason for the value of artiﬁcial
laboratory environments involves the idea of hypothesis testing. It is a standard
principle of scientiﬁc research that it should be ‘hypothesis-driven.’ In its most
sophisticated form, this involves putting all possible hypotheses into a competition,
which will enable us to eliminate the false alternatives and settle on the true one by
comparing the actual outcomes with what the different hypotheses would predict.
The art of experimental design consists in ensuring that these different hypotheses
make different predictions about the outcome of the experiment. In that case, only
one hypothesis can succeed in matching the actual results.
The ‘acid test’ with which jewellers distinguish gold from base metal is an
artiﬁcial procedure, but I doubt whether any philosopher would reject it on the
grounds of its artiﬁciality. Creating an acid test for hypotheses may also involve
artiﬁce, but this need not matter; we require only that the hypotheses under test
predict different results for an experiment in such conditions. The lack of realism
may make this task easier. Galileo was once visited by a fraudster claiming to have
invented a machine for communicating over long distances. The man asked Galileo
for money to send him abroad to demonstrate his machine by sending a message to
Galileo in Italy. Galileo told him to go ﬁrst to the room next door and demonstrate
his machine by sending him a message from there.
The second answer to our question about validity is that complex natural phe-
nomena, such as a leaf blowing in the wind, are often a combination of simpler
processes. Nobody expects scientists to come up with a comprehensive theory
devoted to explaining the drift of autumn leaves. To ﬁnd regularities that can be
Table 2 Causal link between sex peptide and memory in female fruit ﬂies
Females were mated
Females were not mated
Sex peptide present
Improved memory
Improved memory
Sex peptide absent
No improvement
No improvement
3Note, however, that laboratories are not always enough. Ethology, the study of animals in their
natural environment, is essential to a full understanding of their behaviour, just as sociology and
anthropology complement experimental psychology. Science is a broad church.
172
R. Allen

described by laws, one needs to isolate and study the different inﬂuences on a leaf
independently. Part of this study might be to discover that in a vacuum, all objects,
including leaves, fall with a constant acceleration. The study of the force exerted by
air resistance, and how this depends on an object’s shape and relative velocity,
would be another aspect. In the case of our leaf, its movement is determined by two
forces: gravity, and air resistance, together with wind velocity. These forces could
be calculated separately and then added. This is valid because the effect of one force
is independent of the size or direction of the other force.
This independence is, of course, another unlaw.4 The additivity of the forces
acting on an object is just one instance of how separate processes can be studied—
artiﬁcially if you will—and then combined to achieve a realistic outcome. Addi-
tivity,5 meaning that there is no interaction between the forces, is a characteristic of
this class of unlaws. Additivity, where it applies, is an essential accompaniment to
the laws of physics, and as important as the laws themselves. It is a failure to
understand this that vitiates the criticisms in, for example, [8, pp. 57–63].
In the absence of additivity, interaction effects appear, and everything becomes
more complicated. The effect of a cocktail of drugs on the human body cannot be
found from calculating the individual effects of the chemical components of the
drugs on the individual organs of the body and adding the results; in such areas, the
reservations in [8] are fully justiﬁed. Moreover, in many areas of science, our
understanding is partial and limited, and different models may have to be used in
different situations. Scientiﬁc theories are not capable of universal application, like
a Swiss penknife; they are more like the hammers and screwdrivers on a carpenter’s
bench. This does not invalidate these theories any more than its inability to drive in
screws invalidates a hammer. We cheerfully accept that human judgment is nec-
essary for the practice of medicine. It is also needed in physics to a surprising
degree. In short, exact science is not an exact science.
6
Unlaws as the Source of Laws
Unlaws also lie at the heart of a historical argument between two fundamentally
different ways of looking at science, whose echoes continue to this day. It was most
clearly expressed in the dispute between the followers of Isaac Newton and René
Descartes. Newton considered that the job was done when an accurate mathematical
description had been given of the way objects behaved in the universe, such as his
law of gravitation. However, Descartes found Newton’s account incomplete. He
demanded that a valid scientiﬁc explanation should describe not only how two
objects attracted each other, but why they did so—a complete theory of gravitation
should explain the mechanism by which the attractive force exerted its effects.
4And it can be shown to be a mathematical consequence of the invariance of the laws of mechanics
under rotation, reﬂection and similarity transformations.
5More usually referred to as ‘linearity’. Scientists dread nonlinearity like a vampire dreads garlic.
9
Unlaws: The Missing “Dark Matter” in the Philosophy of Science?
173

In some accounts, Descartes is judged to have had the better of the argument.
Newton is seen as the arch empiricist, who, in the typically slipshod English tra-
dition, did not bother too much with the logic of an argument as long as his theories
gave the right answers in practice. Descartes is presented as the man who was
asking the right questions, though ahead of his time, and who would have been
delighted with Einstein’s theory of general relativity as providing the explanation
for gravity, which Newton’s ideas lacked. Newton should never have been content
with ‘action at a distance.’ Moreover, he turned out to be wrong even by his own
criterion of providing a correct mathematical description of the phenomena.
Newton’s theory fails to account for a host of effects, such as the precession of the
orbit of Mercury, which is correctly described by Einstein’s theory.
I wish to present another way of seeing Newton’s empiricism. Newton was
wrong in the mathematical sense that his theory of gravitation is only an approx-
imation to the truth, though, for nearly all practical purposes, it is adequate.
However, he was not illogical. Newton referred to a process of deducing propo-
sitions from phenomena which he called ‘induction.’ induction involves reasoning
from the particular to the general; in other words, the process of deriving general
statements from individual sets of empirical data. Newton did not explain in suf-
ﬁcient detail why he thought induction was valid, and subsequent philosophers of
science have agreed, if they agree on little else, that induction is untenable as a
method of ﬁnding the truth.
David Hume was the ﬁrst philosopher to point out that pure induction can give
us no sure knowledge, an insight taken up and developed by Karl Popper. Popper
cited an example (ﬁrst formulated invented by J. S. Mill) to prove that empirical
data could never justify a general proposition derived from these data, no matter
how many conﬁrmatory instances of the proposition are obtained. Suppose that
English naturalists observe a large number of swans and note that they are all white.
By induction, the naturalists claim that all swans are white, and further tests conﬁrm
its truth. However, when European explorers landed in Australia, they found swans
similar to those in Europe, but black. Despite conﬁrmation by thousands of
instances, the proposition “all swans are white” turns out to be false.
This argument, presented with Popper’s characteristic force and persuasiveness,
appears ﬁnal. However, now consider a similar statement: “all electrons have a
mass of 9.109  10−31 kg.” This statement is true,6 or at least, is accepted as such
by physicists. Applying Popper’s white swan argument, how can we be sure?
Discoveries about subatomic particles appear constantly. Might we not at some
future time be presented with an electron having, say, twice this mass? One answer
would be that if we found such a particle, physicists would not call it an electron:
they would give it a new name. However, would this not be cheating? Suppose one
were to defend the statement “all swans are white” on the grounds that a so-called
‘black swan’ was not a swan at all because it was the wrong colour. Then the
6True, that is, if we accept it as giving the mass of an electron to within the level of precision
implied by three places of decimals.
174
R. Allen

original statement “all swans are white” is no longer a factual law, but part of the
deﬁnition of a swan.
It seems to be the case that subatomic particles obey different rules than
macroscopic objects such as swans. It would indeed be cheating to rule out black
swans as swans by deﬁnition, but it is not cheating to rule out overweight electrons
as electrons. There seems to be a qualitative difference between the subatomic realm
where quantum laws prevail, and the world of what J. L. Austin called
“middle-sized dry goods.” If on this basis, we accept that all electrons are identical,
then we can obtain a general statement about electrons by simply examining one of
them, ﬁnding a property that it possesses, and then making a general statement to
the effect that every electron has this same property. So, we can establish laws, at
least regarding electrons, by induction. According to Descartes, we have no right to
do this, unless we explain why an individual electron should have these properties.
However, scientists seem entirely unperturbed with the claim that every electron is
identical to every other electron, not only in its mass but also in its charge and spin.
Most scientists, in this respect, are Newtonians and not Cartesians.7
The method of induction applied to electrons involves generating a law from a
combination of empirical observation and an unlaw. The unlaw is: “the identity of
an electron8 is independent of its properties,” which is equivalent to saying “all
electrons have the same properties.” The empirical observation is “this electron
here has a mass of 9.109  10−31 kg,” and the law formed by combining these two
statements is “all electrons have a mass of 9.109  10−31 kg.”
There is no space to discuss Newton’s logic in detail, which is contained in his
four rules of reasoning in philosophy [9]. In what follows, I will merely lay out
what I believe is the substance of his argument, as I interpret it. Rule III is the key
assumption. It claims that certain properties of bodies are identical for all bodies,
just as certain properties of electrons are identical for all electrons. This implies that
if two bodies with given masses at a given distance apart are found to attract one
another with a certain force, then any two bodies with those masses placed at that
distance will attract one another with that same force. This is an unlaw because it
states that all other properties of the bodies are irrelevant to determining the force
between them.
This is the ﬁrst part of his argument. The second part is that he ﬁnds, using the
solar system as an example, that bodies attract one another proportionately to the
inverse square of the distance between them. This is the empirical part. However, as
we saw above with the electron, the combination of an unlaw with observation can
give rise to a law, by simple logic. Therefore, Newton can conclude that his
observation is general, and state a universal law of gravitation. Of course, Newton’s
7Most, but not all. The physicist Geoffrey Chew claimed that it should be possible to deduce the
properties of subatomic particles by logic, from the demand that the laws of nature must be
self-consistent. His so-called “bootstrap” method scored some successes, but ultimately failed to
gain general acceptance.
8By “identity” I mean any way of distinguishing a given set of electrons: this one here, that one
over there and so on. Whichever one I choose, I ﬁnd it makes no difference to the properties that I
measure.
9
Unlaws: The Missing “Dark Matter” in the Philosophy of Science?
175

conclusion was wrong, but this was due to the failure of the second part of the
argument; the empirical data were not precise enough. The ﬁrst part, the unlaw, is
unaffected by this, and I am not aware of any scientist who would dispute it.
Philosophers writing on induction have overlooked the ﬁrst part of Newton’s rea-
soning, which was, and remains, unchallenged.
7
Unlaws and Diversity
Imagine a population of Martians who move around on tripod-legs and possess
antennae. The population shows the usual range of large and small individuals.
Suppose that for Martians living in the northern hemisphere of their planet, the
length of their legs and their antennae is perfectly correlated, so that they obey a law
of the form L = kA, where L is leg length, A is antenna length, and k is a number
which takes the same value for each Martian. If the values of L and A for the
Martian population were plotted as a graph, the points would all lie on the line
Y = kX. Knowing that the law held, and the value of k would give us useful
information about the population, and would certainly be of interest to Martian
biologists. Call this population I.
However, now assume that another race of Martians exists, population II,
occupying the southern hemisphere, separated from population I by an impassably
hostile equatorial zone. For them, L and A are completely independent of one
another. This means that these Martians can be found with any combination of short
or long legs and short or long antennae. The usual approach of the life sciences
would have little to say about population II. The lack of correlation would be seen
as an uninteresting fact, scarcely worthy of mention. However, with an awareness
of the value of unlaws, we can examine the situation differently.
Suppose that in population II, the distribution of leg lengths is uniform between
3 and 5 m and that antennae are uniformly distributed between 1 and 2 m in length.
If the values of leg and antenna length are plotted on a plane for population II, the
points will be uniformly distributed in a rectangle. This distribution expresses a fact
about population II, which, in its way, is as much a characteristic of it, as the
straight-line graph is of the population I. The distribution is an indication of the
diversity of population II. This fact is an important one, not for describing indi-
vidual Martians but for characterizing population II as a whole.
Another way of looking at this is that the correlation in population I strongly
suggest a common causal mechanism for determining the length of both legs and
antennae; there is possibly a common link connecting both leg and antenna length
with the age and genetic makeup of the individual. The Greek philosopher Dem-
ocritus is reported as saying: “I would rather discover one causal law than be king
of Persia,” and scientists to this day are often strongly motivated by the prospect of
ﬁnding causal mechanisms. Moreover, the study of zoology has traditionally
focused on the characteristics of individuals rather than populations.
176
R. Allen

With population II, on the other hand, we have a lack of causal mechanisms
connecting legs and antennae. It might be difﬁcult to publish a discovery con-
cerning the absence of mechanism: this would appear to be a situation without
interest. For a population ecologist, on the other hand, the reverse might be true.
Diversity in a population sometimes reﬂects an evolutionary pressure to fully
occupy the ecological niches available in an environment, and it may well be that a
more varied population has greater potential resilience in surviving external shocks
and challenges. There may be some unforeseeable combination of leg and antenna
characteristics that would enable at least some population II individuals to endure a
Martian catastrophe, whereas the more restricted population I would be wiped out.
If it turns out that the southern but not the northern hemisphere is subject to
repeated environmental shocks, this might explain the difference between the two
populations.
Diversity is known to be a characteristic of successful teams, which bring
multiple skill sets to a problem. Group-think, conversely, is the consequence of
having a set of individuals cast in the mould of the leader: the outcome, from the
Crusades to the Challenger disaster, is often catastrophic. One might summarise this
aspect of unlaws as follows: while laws describe a limitation, unlaws describe
diversity, and diversity is frequently desirable.
Ignoring unlaws leads to a mindset where diversity may be undervalued. One
example of this occurs in psychology research into people with neurological dif-
ferences, such as individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Researchers
often seek to show that ASD is associated with a functional deﬁcit of some kind.
Finding such a group difference amounts to a law: ASD is associated with a
speciﬁed difference in language and social communication and interaction. This
leads to reporting bias since it ignores the need to identify unlaws as well as laws.
This tendency is made worse by the standard statistical procedure of null
hypothesis signiﬁcance testing (NHST: see, e.g., [10]). The null hypothesis—that
the independent variable has no effect on the dependent variable—is the statement
of an unlaw, but the NHST procedure does not allow for any positive conclusion in
favour of the null hypothesis. The result is the so-called ‘ﬁle drawer problem,’
meaning that research which fails to show a signiﬁcant group difference, is often
deemed unpublishable, giving the impression that ASD is deﬁned in terms of
deﬁcits.
This is no mere theoretical possibility and can have real implications for the
treatment and well-being of people diagnosed with ASD. In the early 2000s, my
own research involved studying the effect of music on people with ASD. At that
time, some researchers were arguing on a priori grounds that ASD would be
associated with a failure to understand or be moved by the emotional content of the
music. I subsequently discovered through personal communication that one of the
people who had put forward this hypothesis had carried out research which showed
that no such differences existed. However, this important result remained unknown
9
Unlaws: The Missing “Dark Matter” in the Philosophy of Science?
177

to the broader community; the researcher had abandoned the study because it would
be hard to get such negative results published. The misconception therefore con-
tinued and even spread until growing evidence to the contrary forced a rethink.
A system that fails to recognize the value of unlaws makes such errors more likely.
8
Conclusion
One of the objections that humanists make to science is that it attempts to force
everything into a straitjacket, where iron laws determine events in a clockwork
universe, and that it ignores the richness of the private experience of life possessed
by different individuals. I have argued elsewhere that the arts and sciences share
important features [11]. However, science may present itself as interested only in
necessity and is negligent of contingency and diversity. Scientists sometimes appear
blind, or at least one-eyed, in their pursuit of regularity and generality and their lack
of interest in uniqueness. This is a result of orthodox scientiﬁc training, which
overlooks the unlaws in which this diversity resides. In psychology, in the case of
music and autism but also elsewhere, this style of thought raises serious ethical
questions about the way conclusions are drawn from research and applied to the
treatment of people.
The drive to examine the laws which underlie the regularities in the universe, in
which every particle is connected with every other particle, is admirable, but it can
lead to a habit of mind where the world is seen as deterministic, and where indi-
vidual free will is obscured. E. M. Forster’s famous words “Only connect” are often
cited, but few people seem familiar with the full passage in Howards End from
which these words are taken: “Only connect! That was the whole of her sermon.
Only connect the prose and the passion, and both will be exalted, and human love
will be seen at its height. Live in fragments no longer.” Science is already familiar
with the prose. We need to add the element of passion by becoming aware of the
value of diversity, and I propose that we begin by appreciating those dark materials
comprising the deepest foundations of science, the unlaws.
Laws and unlaws are the weft and warp in the fabric of nature. Like children, we
are drawn to movement and colour, to the shuttle as it ﬂies to and fro, creating
patterns out of the air as it carries the weft through the warp. However, without the
warp, there would be no fabric, and without unlaws, there would be no science.
Fully to appreciate the world, we must learn to understand both.
178
R. Allen

Core Messages
• Science is usually seen as tasked with stating and justifying laws of nature.
• The usual view of science ignores the role of unlaws, the essential com-
plements of laws.
• The idea of unlaws connects diverse concepts in the design of experiments
and tackles philosophical criticisms of scientiﬁc explanations.
• The idea of unlaws may help to bridge the conceptual gulf between science
and the arts
Funding, Ethics, and Conﬂict of Interest Statement The ideas on which this chapter is based
were developed over many years of practicing psychology research. No speciﬁc funding was
provided for them or the writing of the chapter. The work involved no experiments, and so raised
no ethical issues. I have no conﬂict of interest to declare.
References
1. Massey BS (1971) Units, dimensional analysis and physical similarity. Van Nostrand
Reinhold
2. Feyerabend P (1993) Against method. Verso
3. Galilei G (1914) Dialogues concerning two new sciences. Dover
4. Mach E (1919) The science of mechanics (trans: McCormack TJ). The Open Court Publishing
Co., London
5. Ball P (2016) The tyranny of simple explanations. The Atlantic
6. Mill JS (1875) A system of logic. Longmans, Green, Reader, and Dyer, London
7. Scheunemann L, Lampin-Saint-Amaux A, Schor J, Preat T (2019) A sperm peptide enhances
long-term memory in female Drosophila. Sci Adv 5(11):eaax3432
8. Cartwright N (1983) How the laws of physics lie. Oxford University Press
9. Newton SI (2007) Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy. Stanford Center for the Study of
Language and Information, Stanford
10. Allen R (2017) Statistics and experimental design for psychologists: a model comparison
approach. World Scientiﬁc Publishing Company
11. Allen R, Heaton P (2018) Can shared mechanisms of cultural evolution illuminate the process
of creativity within the arts and the sciences? In: Arts and the brain: psychology and
physiology beyond pleasure, vol 237, pp 61–75
9
Unlaws: The Missing “Dark Matter” in the Philosophy of Science?
179

Rory Allen after completing the ﬁrst degree in mathematics at
Cambridge University, Rory Allen joined the UK diplomatic
service in 1972 and spent a career traveling and living overseas,
particularly in East and Southeast Asia, where He acquired an
interest in Chinese culture and Daoist philosophy. In 2004, he
took early retirement and began a course of study in psychology,
leading to a Ph.D. on music and autism in 2010, and the
publication of over twenty papers on this and other topics. Dr.
Allen has taught statistics and research methods at Goldsmiths,
University of London, until 2016. In 2017, he published an
academic book on model comparison approaches to statistics and
is currently working on a book explaining and developing the
concept of unlaws and invariance principles in science. He is also
working on theoretical difﬁculties with the use of Bayesian
methods in model development and on understanding the role of
creativityand aesthetic criteria in the presentation of mathematical
proofs.
180
R. Allen

10
Life—Stabilization of the Unstable
Through Controlling Influence
of Quantum Information
Thomas Görnitz
“…, daß die meisten Biologen zwar durchaus bereit sind
zuzugeben, daß die Existenz der Atome und Moleküle nur mit
der Quantentheorie verstanden werden könne, daß sie aber
sonst den Wunsch haben, die Bausteine der Chemiker und
Biologen, nämlich Atome und Moleküle, als Gegenstände der
klassischen Physik zu betrachten, also mit ihnen umzugehen wie
mit Steinen oder Sandkörnern. Ein solches Verfahren mag zwar
oft zu richtigen Resultaten führen; aber wenn man es genauer
nehmen muß, ist die begrifﬂiche Struktur der Quantentheorie
doch sehr anders als die der klassischen Physik. Man kann also
gelegentlich zu ganz falschen Ergebnissen kommen, wenn man
in den Begriffen der klassischen Physik denkt.”
“… while most biologists are quite willing to admit that the
existence of atoms and molecules can only be understood with
quantum theory, they otherwise have the desire to regard the
building blocks of chemists and biologists, namely atoms and
molecules, as objects of classical physics, i.e. to treat them as if
they were stones or grains of sand. Such a procedure may often
lead to correct results; but if a higher accuracy is needed, the
conceptual structure of quantum differs quite a bit from that of
classical physics Thus, one can occasionally come to
completely wrong results if one thinks in the terms of classical
physics.”
Werner Heisenberg [1]
T. Görnitz (&)
Department of Physics, J. W. Goethe-University, Frankfurt/Main, Germany
e-mail: goernitz@em.uni-frankfurt.de
T. Görnitz
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Frankfurt/Main, Germany
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
N. Rezaei (ed.), Integrated Science, Integrated Science 1,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65273-9_10
181

Summary
The equivalence of matter and energy can be generalized within the framework
of quantum theory by establishing the simplest mathematically possible quantum
structures, the AQIs (bits of absolute quantum information) of the Protyposis.
The AQIs are cosmologically deﬁned bits of absolute quantum information:
quantum information “free-of-dedicated-or-special-meaning.” Most of the
structures forming from the AQIs are what is called “matter” or “energy” in
natural sciences. However, some of the AQIs can appear as properties of the
respective quantum particles, and even—as a result of processing in a living
being—acquire what can be interpreted as meaning. This incorporation of
information within the realm of scientiﬁc quantities has made it possible to
characterize life as the ability of unstable systems to self-stabilize by control
based on intelligent information processing.
Life can only be understood in the interplay between the factual and the
possible, i.e., in the description, including both quantum theory and classical
physics. From cells up to entire living beings, there is an alternation of two types
of situations, one of which can be described in a classical deterministic way,
while the other type is characterized by the presence of so-called bifurcations. In
the latter case, there is a “fanning out” of possibilities, and here a quantum
theoretical description becomes inevitable.
The code of this chapter is 01100011 01101001 01101110 01101001
01110011 01101100 01100001 01110100 01101111 01001111 01101100.
182
T. Görnitz

1
Introduction
“What is life?” [2]. Everyone has an idea of what a living being is, be it a uni-
cellular organism, plant, fungus, or animal. Nevertheless, according to the theo-
retical biologist Heinz Penzlin, the question about “life” should be: “What is the
essence of the living-beings?” [3].
From a physical point of view, it can be stated that, for the ﬁrst time in the
history of the cosmos, the information could become meaningful to living beings.
So, for the ﬁrst time, not only energies but also meaningful information could cause
real effects. Abstractly speaking, living can be characterized as the ability of
unstable material systems to stabilize themselves by intelligent information pro-
cessing. The prerequisite for controlling information processing is ﬂow equilibrium,
i.e., a constant throughput of matter and energy through the boundaries of the
system. High-grade energy (of low entropy) is used for work at the system and
afterward released again as low-grade energy (of high entropy, e.g., as heat).
Of course, one may ask what is meant by “intelligent”. In the present context,
“intelligent” means that the system processes incoming information and reacts to it,
thus gaining control to ensure its survival. Via such an assessment, information
becomes meaningful for the respective living being. An unintelligent behavior in
this sense leads to a faster decay and thus dropout from evolutionary development.
The steady self-stabilization is an essential difference between living beings and
devices of technical information processing.
The great change from physics and chemistry to biology is that phenomena such
as “meaning, expediency, purposefulness or teleonomy, intention, function, and
ﬁnally organization” become important. Because of their relatively large subjective
components, these aspects can hardly be considered in sciences like physics that
focus on the “objective”. Sense and meaning can only be determined about a
speciﬁc system (i.e., a living being) and its respective context. However, quantum
theory incorporating information as a physical concept provides the prerequisite
that all these biological phenomena can be linked to the other objective scientiﬁc
phenomena. Mass and energy alone are not sufﬁcient to understand biological
processes; information has become meaningful. So, acquiring meaning is indis-
pensable. The mathematical structure of wholeness resulting from quantum theory
only makes it possible to overcome mechanistic short circuits that must ignore the
essence of biology. Living things are more than the sum of the molecular con-
stituents involved.
Moreover, what is meant by control? We understand control in the sense that the
effect of meaningful information becomes more important than the energy required
for its transmission and the triggered effect. For us, humans, it is a commonplace
and almost trivial that in many cases, we consider a read or heard message more
important than the color of the paper or the tone of voice of the speaker. The
frequency of the photons that pass from the paper into our eyes or the intensity of
the sound waves that we hear characterize the carrier of the message and are
therefore only very rarely registered as being important. Sometimes, it is a fact of
10
Life—Stabilization of the Unstable
183

being yelled at and less the uttered words, which is signiﬁcant. However, it is
mostly about the meaning of the words and less about the chosen font in which they
are printed.
Because
living
beings
stabilize
themselves,
they
acquire
a
state
of
“meta-stability”, at least for the time until they die. To explain information pro-
cessing in living beings, it is necessary to understand how quantum theory estab-
lishes an equivalence between matter, energy, and information.
For clariﬁcation, we note that here the terms matter, energy, and information are
used in a scientiﬁc sense. The matter has a rest mass and, therefore, can be conﬁned
to a small volume of space for a certain time. Energy is the ability to do work, such
as changing the state of motion or the shape of matter. Material bodies can absorb
energy and thereby, for example, gain kinetic energy and move differently than
before. They can transfer this energy again to other bodies.
The energy in its “pure form” has no rest mass. We know it in the form of quanta
of light, the photons. Of the approximately 200 possible octaves, spanned by the
oscillations of the photons, the frequency region accessible to our eyes comprises
only a single octave. Photons always move at the speed of light until being
absorbed by matter.
For a long time, it was a great mystery how matter could absorb energy,
transport it, and release it again. Since the equivalence of mass and energy dis-
covered by Einstein, it has become understandable: they are equivalent, they are
different forms of a basic entity.
The ﬁnding that something appearing entirely different is not fundamentally
distinct is of central importance for the further development of the natural sciences.
Using modern quantum theory, it could be shown and mathematically devised that
this underlying fundamental structure proves to be the simplest of the mathemati-
cally possible quantum structures [4–6]. The mathematically simplest quantum
structures have the smallest possible state spaces, being two-dimensional, and
accordingly, they are referred to as quantum bits.
2
The Structure of Fundamental Quantum Information
Quantum bits are usually identiﬁed with what is known in everyday life as infor-
mation, i.e., an amount of meaningful data. Signiﬁcance or meaning, however, has
always highly subjective aspects, whereas physics is aiming at the objective.
Therefore, it was important to introduce these simplest quantum structures as free of
any special meaning and not merely being associated with the notion of “infor-
mation”. They are Absolute, still free of meaning, but potentially susceptive to
speciﬁc meanings, bits of Quantum Information, AQIs. They are referred to as
Protyposis, ancient Greek for “pre-formed” (Fig. 1).
The state space is a mathematical structure. It comprises all the data with which
the properties of a system can be recorded. The state of a particle may be given in
different forms depending on the accuracy of the desired description. Often the
184
T. Görnitz

lower accuracy of classical mechanics is sufﬁcient. Here the state of a particle is
determined by three spatial and three velocity coordinates. The dimension of the
state space is given by the number of independent variables. Accordingly, the state
space of a particle in classical mechanics is six-dimensional. In quantum theory, the
actual state of a particle is speciﬁed by inﬁnitely many numbers; its state space is
inﬁnite-dimensional.
This shows two things. First, quantum theory is much more precise than classical
physics. Second, whatever a quantum particle may be, it is certainly not something
“simple”. A classical particle merely reﬂects the given factual state, while the state
of a quantum particle comprises all possibilities available to the particle within the
constraints of the laws of nature.
How to conceive a basic entity from which everything can form? In quantum
theory, generally, complex systems are constructed from simpler ones by forming
the tensor product of the state spaces. For a rough understanding, it may sufﬁce to
realize that here dimensions of the state spaces are multiplied. In classical physics,
the dimensions of the sub-spaces are merely added. In quantum theory, the simplest
non-trivial state space is two-dimensional. Using tensor products of sufﬁciently
many (possibly inﬁnite) two-dimensional state spaces, the state space of any con-
ceivable quantum system can be constructed. The phase space of an AQI, an
absolute quantum bit, is two-dimensional, which suggests that, in principle, all
physical structures can be constructed from these entities.
Fig. 1 The basic structure of the cosmos: An AQI of the Protyposis may be called a quantum bit
in view of its two-dimensional state space. It is an information-like quantum structure. Many of
them can fuse to form the quanta of matter and energy. In these quantum particles, in turn,
quantum bits, which usually are called “properties” of the quantum particles, can act as meaningful
information
10
Life—Stabilization of the Unstable
185

As is well known, a bit is the smallest unit of information. Concerning a
quantum bit, we may accordingly speak of “quantum information”. However, it
should not be forgotten that information acquires meaning only by becoming
effective for a living being (unicellular organism, plant, fungus, or animal). An
assignment of meaning depends on the incoming information and the respective
living being (here also a “non-reaction” to a piece of perceived information cor-
responds to an effect). For example, plants direct their leaves to light and their roots
to the water. Mushrooms need little light and maybe grown in dark cellars and
caves. Animals escape from ﬁre, and humans use it to prepare food.
Thus, a special meaning is assigned to information only by a living being, and,
as a consequence, “meaning” has a major subjective component. Given this, it is
important that, as a subject of physics, information is to be understood as absolute
and, therefore, free of any special meaning. To break free from the almost inevitable
association information = meaning, as mentioned above, a new designation was
expedient: “Protyposis”.
In the present context, it is important to note that in the quantum bits of the
Protyposis, one uses the complete complex two-dimensional vector space as state
space. By contrast, in quantum computing, only two real parameters are taken into
account, the angles of the so-called Bloch sphere. The state of a quantum bit of the
Protyposis, on the other hand, is determined by four real parameters. In quantum
computing, incomplete knowledge is associated with “mixed states” rather than
“pure states”. The mixed states can be speciﬁed by the radius of the Bloch sphere.
The center then means complete ignorance.
About a fundamental explanation of reality, it should be noted that within the
framework of quantum theory, it could mathematically be shown how the quanta of
matter and energy, as well as the quanta classiﬁed as force quanta and substance
quanta, can be constructed from the abstract quantum bits [7–9]. Substance quanta
are always matter; force quanta, on the other hand, can be pure energy like photons
or sometimes also matter, like the W- and Z-bosons of the weak interaction. Since,
as mentioned above, living beings are unstable systems stabilized by intelligent
processing of information, it became necessary for the ﬁrst time to reﬁne scientiﬁc
description and explanation of reality. In addition to matter and energy, information
also can enter the scientiﬁc ﬁeld as an acting element. Here it was necessary to
advance to the actual foundations of reality.
This foundation is established by the simplest of all possible quantum structures:
the AQI bits, featuring a two-dimensional complex phase space, being referred to as
Protyposis. The most precise scientiﬁc theory available today is quantum theory. In
classical physics, it is disregarded that in nature very often, “a whole is more than
the sum of its possible parts.” By contrast, this is reﬂected in a central mathematical
structure of the quantum theory. Furthermore, we know from our own behavior that
it is not only inﬂuenced by facts. Rather, we also react to possibilities we expect,
fear, or hope for. A well-known example is betting on the stock exchange.
186
T. Görnitz

Quantum theory shows that even in inanimate nature, not only facts but also
possibilities can generate real effects. For example, quantum particles in a
double-slit experiment differently behave when they can pass through the slits
uncontrolled than when it is examined through which slit they factually pass.
According to quantum theory, only the possibilities are determined, but not the
facts arising within the scope of the possibilities. The environment in which a
quantum system is placed and eventually interacts determines which possibilities
are open to the system. Quantum theory was a great challenge to the worldview of
natural philosophy, which for a long time, was formed by the idea of an actual
determinism of facts.
In natural sciences, “explaining” means to reconstruct or construct theoretically
complicated and complex phenomena from simpler ones. Of course, one can start
with an explanation at any point on the ascending ladder of complexity. In
chemistry, for example, it is usually sufﬁcient to start with the existence of atoms
and their electron shells. Concerning the atomic nuclei, only their electric charges
and, of course, masses must here be taken into account. However, if one wants to
reach an actual and fundamental explanation, it is necessary to set out the truly
simplest structures.
For centuries, the guiding principle of a scientiﬁc explanation was the idea that
the simplest would also be the smallest. This has led to the concepts of atoms and
elementary particles. These systems are described with quantum theory, as only
quantum theory is precise enough to grasp such small structures. However, a
negative consequence of this success of quantum theory is the misconception that
the scaling down would ultimately lead to the simplest quantum-theoretical struc-
tures. This is deﬁnitely wrong, even though “spatially small” and “simple” are often
synonymous.
Already the famous formula with which Max Planck opened the way to quantum
theory, E = hc/l, shows that ever smaller structures characterized by a wavelength
come along with an ever-increasing concentration of energy. From everyday life,
we know that more energy also opens up more possibilities. Much energy can
enable signiﬁcant changes. That evermore energy would lead to ever simpler
structures, contradicting such ﬁndings, and all experimental results (Fig. 2).
The mathematically simplest quantum structures are those that have a state space
of the smallest dimension. A quantum particle has an inﬁnite-dimensional state
space. The smallest mathematically possible dimension of state space is two—as in
the quantum bit. Thus, if we want to explain life and its information processing in a
scientiﬁc way, we have to go to the actual foundation in the study of nature. It is
therefore not suitable to set out from the relatively complex structures of atoms or
the even smaller quantum particles into which atoms can be fragmented.
Here, it is essential to speak of “structures” and not of “particles.” A quantum bit
has no relationship whatsoever to a particle—especially not being spatially small.
A high localization, as featured by particles, requires plenty of information. Cor-
respondingly, a quantum bit is the most spatially extended structure possible in the
cosmos. It can be imagined as a “fundamental oscillation of the cosmic space.”
(Fig. 3).
10
Life—Stabilization of the Unstable
187

It is these simple and mathematically comprehensible structures that form the
foundations of physics. Even if it may not be obvious, they do not lead away from
life, but rather towards life.
To explain living, we need structures being already present in cosmic evolution
before the formation of particles. This suggests understanding information as being
the basic scientiﬁc structure.
Fig. 2 Down to the atoms, the structure and strength of the electromagnetic interaction ensure
that the smaller becomes the simpler. Beyond that, the strong interaction comes into play. Then the
way into the even smaller leads to more and more complicated structures. As a search for the
simplest structures it is a recognizable dead end, an aberration
Fig. 3 The product of many extended structures can evolve to something highly localized. (The
power of the sine function (to 500) comprises modes of very high frequencies and very small
wavelengths!)
188
T. Görnitz

3
A Quick Passage Through Evolution up to the First
Living Beings
Traditionally, the description of the processes that led to life beginning with
inspecting the deconstruction of things found in the real world: You have a table as
a form, and the material in that form is wood. However, already Carl Friedrich v.
Weizsäcker pointed out that such a distinction between form and substance is
becoming increasingly questionable nowadays. To a chemist, “wood” is a form, and
the lignin molecules are the material content. The physicist, in turn, will say the
molecules are a form, and atoms are their material content.
Given the quantum bits, however—Weizsäcker spoke of quantized binary
alternatives or Ur-alternatives—the distinction between form and content becomes
moot, as here a meaningful separation between form and content is no longer
possible. It should be noted, however, that Weizsäcker did not deﬁne information as
absolute, but as relative, equating it with “meaning” (Fig. 4).
A further step of abstraction towards the Protyposis, absolute, free of meaning
quantum information, was necessary to establish a valid connection to physics. The
path from complex structures to the simplest possible structures will be reversed in
the context of cosmic evolution. Beginning with the simplest structures, ever more
complex structures are encountered.
After an early phase lacking signiﬁcant structure, shortly after the Big Bang,
new, increasingly complex structures
develop. The empirical data can well be
explained by a theory in which the simplest structures are at the origin of the
development. Today, we are making rapid progress in treating these events
Fig. 4 Carl Friedrich v. Weizsäcker and Thomas Görnitz
10
Life—Stabilization of the Unstable
189

mathematically and physically, allowing us to trace back the cosmic development.
Previously, one could have said metaphorically that for us, humans, the beginning
of the cosmos was completely in the dark. By contrast, we know today that
immediately after the Big Bang, the cosmos must have been very small and its
contents, therefore, extremely hot and extremely bright.
All beings in the cosmos, the basic substance from which all has formed over
time, all shapes and forms, are ultimately absolute bits of quantum information,
AQI bits being related to the cosmos as a whole. As can be shown by quantum
theoretical methods, all existing subjects of physics can, in principle, be constructed
from such bits of absolute quantum information, e.g., particles with mass and spin.
The Protyposis allows establishing the three stable charges underlying the three
quantic interactions: the weak, electromagnetic, and strong interaction [10, 11].
Charges cause the existence of mass; they cannot be generated nor annihilated.
A net charge zero, though, can be split into two equivalent positive and negative
portions. Put differently, a zero charge gives rise to equal shares of matter and
anti-matter. As a consequence of charges, there are only three particle types,
namely, neutrino, electron, and proton—plus their anti-particles—that can be
understood as being stable and elementary. However, a rationalization of the exact
rest masses of these three stable particle types and the abundance of matter over
anti-matter are still open issues. The AQIs can form material and energetic quanta,
and these, in turn, tangible entities.
What are the essential structures in evolution? In the hot initial phase, the
cosmos is so densely ﬁlled with photons that it is impossible for our telescopes to
distinguish anything else. Only about 300,000 years after the Big Bang, it becomes
possible to recognize objects in the cosmos. From the Protyposis, black holes and
the massless quanta of light, i.e., photons, can form. Furthermore, the AQIs give
rise to quantum particles with a rest mass. These quantum particles are the neu-
trinos, the electrons, and the protons, the nuclei of hydrogen atoms. Electrons and
protons can form neutrons. Neutrons and protons, in turn, can form alpha particles,
the atomic nuclei of helium. When the content of the cosmos has sufﬁciently cooled
down due to the spatial expansion, electrons, protons, and alpha particles can
combine to form hydrogen and helium atoms. From such gas clouds, stars form
galaxies around the black holes.
Heavier elements, up to iron, are produced in the stars by nuclear reactions.
When large stars, having only a very short life span, explode at the end of their
evolutionary period, also the heavier elements of the periodic table are produced
and blown into space as the result of such a supernova explosion. From the ele-
ments heavier than hydrogen and helium, now also small astronomical bodies can
form, such as planets and comets.
190
T. Görnitz

4
The Beginning of the Chemical Evolution
Promoted by the radiation of stars, simple and more complex molecules are formed
in gas and dust clouds and solid bodies. Especially carbon, with its fascinating
chemical potential, can form very complex molecules. This area is called organic
chemistry because it is a prerequisite for understanding organic life.
When I was a student, chemistry was taught based on the idea of atoms,
according to Bohr’s atomic model. The atoms have valences, depicted by dashes,
indicating the bonds between the atoms. More advanced concepts consider that
atoms have a nucleus with a positive electric charge and a shell of negatively
charged electrons. Electromagnetic forces act between all these electric charges.
Very often, it is sufﬁcient to describe the electromagnetic interactions using the
classical force ﬁelds. The particles of matter that are electrically charged also act as
small magnets. This magnetic property is because these particles have a spin, i.e.,
something being related to rotation. Metaphorically speaking, they have a tiny
circular current generating a magnetic ﬁeld. In medical applications known as
nuclear magnetic resonance, the magnetic ﬁelds of protons or other atomic nuclei
can be used to monitor physiological properties and processes in the body.
Using simple quantum mechanical models, it was possible to explain various
types of chemical bonds already in the 1930s. Here the concept of Coulomb
interaction, i.e., the electrostatic interaction between charges, proved sufﬁcient for
most practical applications of chemistry within the inanimate sphere. The ionic
bonds rely on that the electrons of the participating atoms essentially assume noble
gas conﬁgurations, and the resulting ions attract each other electrostatically.
Covalent bonds, on the other hand, can no longer be explained solely by concepts
of classical physics. Here quantum-mechanical phenomena play a decisive role in
so far as the indistinguishability of the electrons becomes signiﬁcant, manifesting as
an exchange interaction. Thus, in certain situations, it becomes important that two
electrons, e.g., forming a chemical bond, cannot be distinguished. In the wave
function, terms appear featuring an ‘entanglement’ of these electrons. Accordingly,
the conception of “two particles” is not helpful in this situation. In such a case, it is
perhaps better to speak of one “di-electron” rather than of “two electrons”. While
the indistinguishability is not a force itself, its effects are like those of an additional
force, contributing to the bonding of atoms in a molecule. “A whole differs from its
constituents—also when two atoms form a molecule.”
One of the popular misconceptions of atoms is that atoms essentially consist of
empty space. This is probably caused by ﬁgures in which a tiny particle orbits
around an equally tiny atomic nucleus. However, as already Werner Heisenberg had
pointed out, the idea of motion on a trajectory is the opposite of the essence of
quantum theory. Electrons bound by the atomic nucleus have “possible positions”.
The distribution of these positions can be calculated using the Schrödinger equa-
tion. In some cases, the possible electron locations are distributed uniformly and
spherically around the atomic nucleus and have their maximum at the nucleus in the
center. In other cases, in which the electron shell exhibits states with angular
10
Life—Stabilization of the Unstable
191

momentum, the possible locations, for example, may take the appearance of a
double club-shaped structure. To illustrate these electron density distributions, one
may use contour plots enveloping a given percentage, say 95%, of all possible
positions. The possible position distributions of a single electron are referred to as
“orbitals”. With the help of these orbitals, the spatial structures of molecules can be
visualized, and some binding behavior is explained.
Before we turn to the biochemical processes in the animate nature, a glance at
“normal” chemistry is appropriate. In the usual chemical processes, one deals with
an enormous number of essentially identical molecules. Just to give a rough idea, a
single drop of water comprises about 1021 H2O molecules. That is a whopping
ﬁgure of 22 digits. Since chemistry in the test tube and even more so in technical
applications, always deals with huge numbers of molecules, many of its key notions
are based on thermodynamics. Thermodynamics can be understood as a theory of
many such objects that only mean values are of interest. In the case of a single
molecule, one can describe its energy and the transfer of momentum when it hits a
wall. If, on the other hand, there are many billions of molecules, one will take
recourse to temperature and pressure. The temperature can be understood as a
measure of the average energy of a molecule and the pressure as the average
momentum transfer of the molecules to the wall of a container. The temperature and
pressure of a gas can easily be measured, but, of course, such measurements
indicate little about the behavior of a single molecule.
As the theoretical chemist Hans Primas has argued [12], this chemical behavior
is reﬂected in those other concepts than in quantum mechanics are sometimes
important, as the latter, which he refers to as “pioneer” quantum mechanics, often
deals with only a few particles. Primas points out that given the vast number of
molecules participating in a usual chemical reaction, autonomous chemical con-
cepts become viable and needed, which cannot be formulated within the pioneer
quantum mechanics: “If we give up realism, we get into trouble. There is no clear-
cut transition from microphysics to macrophysics, so it would be inconvenient to
use different regulative principles when speaking of electrons, atoms, molecules,
macromolecules, enzymes, biological cells, bacteria or crystals. We all think that it
is sensible to speak of chairs, books and animals as objectively existing entities,
existing independently of our knowledge of them. Hence a reasonable and con-
sistent uniﬁed language for theoretical chemistry will have to choose its regulative
principles in such a manner that the fair requirements of a moderate realism are
fulﬁlled. That is, everything which is practically real should appear as objectively
real in the theory.
We shall therefore arrange our theoretical discussion in such a way that it is
about objectively existing entities. In a more technical language this means that we
adopt an ontic interpretation of generalized quantum theory. Many physicists and
philosophers have claimed that a consistent ontic interpretation of quantum me-
chanics is impossible. This view is wrong. The main problem in adopting realism as
a regulative principle for quantum mechanics was pointed out already by Einstein,
Podolsky
and
Rosen
in
1935.
The
existence
of
Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen
192
T. Görnitz

correlations implies that nature is holistic so that the classical mode of investi-
gating nature by compartmentalization is no longer defensible.
We accept the existence of Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen correlations as experi-
mentally. Hence we cannot anymore adhere to the old dream of a single frame of
reference that permits us to eliminate the pluralism of physical, chemical and
biological theories. We can break the holistic symmetry of the world only if we
abstract deliberately from some Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen correlations. Without
such an abstraction there are no phenomena. There are no entities in our world
which have observable attributes independently of any abstraction. Observable
phenomena are created by abstracting from some Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen cor-
relations. Using different abstractions, one observes different phenomena. Each
abstraction creates its own reality. This concept of reality is objective since it is
intersubjective: everybody who makes the same abstractions gets the same
observable phenomena. The idea that experienced reality is conditional and
abstraction-dependent is hardly new but is in fact part of our culture. It is true that
this idea has been tacitly suppressed by the theoretical framework of nineteenth
Century physics (which still dominates present scientiﬁc thought) so that its
reappearance in a new quantum-theoretical dressing is perceived as a radical
change in our attitude toward science, as a paradigm shift” [13].
According to Primas, the operator algebras for systems in the pioneer quantum
mechanics can be formulated as algebras of von-Neumann type I, whereas
von-Neumann algebras of type III are to be used in the context of chemistry. The
latter is the mathematical result of the averaging mentioned above, and they allow
that, as a consequence of a less accurate description, observables with classical
properties become possible within the framework of quantum theory. Such an
observable, for example, temperature, cannot be assigned to a single molecule.
Approximations are approaches by which we recognize structures in nature as
similar, disregard unimportant features, and eventually form correspondingly
adapted notions. Macroscopic observables such as temperature and pressure are
used to specify the special situations relevant in chemistry, applying here reason-
able approximations, in which the irrelevant aspects of the respective situation are
neglected. It should be repeated once again. Approximations disregard aspects that
are unimportant in the speciﬁc situation, but which may well be of importance in
other situations and contexts. There, one will not apply such approximations. For
example, the isotopic composition of the elements is insigniﬁcant in many chemical
processes. It can be of central importance, though, for determining the age or origin
of an archaeological ﬁnd.
5
From Chemistry to Life
As already noted, in the chemical practice, one often can do without the accuracy of
quantum theory. Likewise, one usually does not care much about the mathematical
structures described by Primas. However, in recent years, the accurate quantum
10
Life—Stabilization of the Unstable
193

mechanical treatment of the electron structure and the nuclear dynamics of
ever-larger molecules has made enormous progress, increasing relevance for a wide
range of chemical issues. Here, it is usually sufﬁcient to apply the classical
description of the electromagnetic interaction, that is, Coulomb potentials and
electromagnetic ﬁelds. An accuracy enabled by taking into account that an atom
emits or absorbs single photons rather than an electromagnetic wave can so far be
dispensed with in chemistry, as Primas has emphasized. Such an accuracy level
would imply having to resort to quantum ﬁeld theory. As in solid-state physics,
some formal developments originated in quantum ﬁeld theory have proved useful in
quantum chemistry as well [14].
The structures of quantum ﬁeld theory allow one to take into account the effects
of changes in the particle numbers. In chemistry, the photon numbers in conversion
processes are constantly changing, while electrons and atomic nuclei are neither
created nor destroyed. Their production and destruction are the subjects of
“high-energy physics”, as this ﬁeld was termed half a century ago, also in dis-
tinction from atomic physics and chemistry.
Today’s giant accelerators have about a thousand times the energy of the
Bevatron (Berkeley, California), generating anti-protons for the ﬁrst time in 1955,
or the Synchrophasotron in Dubna, near Moscow, which I visited brieﬂy after my
Ph.D. in high-energy mathematical physics. The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at
CERN does not produce just one particle-antiparticle pair, but thousands in a single
collision.
The processes in living organisms differ from those in the test tube. In the test
tube, there are very many molecules, atoms, and ions of the same kind, which, if
mixed sufﬁciently well, for example, by shaking, all react with each other. In living
cells, on the other hand, there are very ﬁnely tuned interactions between a vast
number of enzymes and the transformations affected by these enzymes. To
understand these processes, it is important to understand the processes between
individual molecules. In particular, the development of laser technology has made it
possible to investigate increasingly chemical processes at the level of individual
molecules. Here it may become apparent that the classical physical concepts of
Coulomb ﬁelds and electromagnetic waves will not always be sufﬁciently accurate.
A very accurate description will ultimately require to replace Coulomb ﬁelds
with models of virtual photons and electromagnetic waves with real photons [15].
The conception that all chemical and biochemical processes are ultimately based on
the exchange of real and virtual photons is usually disregarded. For example, the
simple idea of colliding molecules in a gas is inspired somewhat by billiard than
natural science. If the process is described more accurately, we speak of the
Coulomb repulsion of the electron shells. However, electrons are not impenetrable
marbles; what here is taking place is actually an exchange of virtual photons. As a
means of graphical illustration and computational device, Richard Feynman has
developed his diagrams [16] (Fig. 5).
194
T. Görnitz

As already mentioned, the methods of investigation have recently become so
precise that chemical conversions of individual molecules can be tracked. Here is a
characteristic quote from a paper on current research at the Max Planck Institute for
Structure and Dynamics of Matter [17]: “Traditionally, quantum chemistry inves-
tigates molecular systems assuming that the photon ﬁeld, which leads to the
interaction of charged particles, is well approximated by the Coulomb interaction.
On the other hand, quantum optics describes the photon ﬁeld in detail while
approximating the matter systems via few levels. Recent experiments at the inter-
face between these two areas of research have uncovered situations where both the
molecular system and the photon ﬁeld have to be treated in detail.”
As is claimed here, the description of photochemical processes in individual
molecules should be based on a complete consideration of quantum-theoretical
relationships. As a side note, it is presently highly interesting to observe how
difﬁcult it is to change traditional paradigms, even in science. This is not different to
the time of Max Planck, who addressed the difﬁculties of establishing new ideas in
science as follows [18]: “A new scientiﬁc truth does not tend to assert itself by
convincing its opponents and declaring itself to have been taught, but rather by the
gradual extinction of the opponents and by the fact that the growing generation is
familiar with the truth from the outset.”
However, one may wonder whether Planck’s optimistic assessment can still be
shared today. When the planning and performing of extensive experiments take
decades, and when even theoretical groups often are large-scale teams, obviously
outdated ideas are not phased out as fast as Planck had presumed. In the current
research environment, younger researchers cannot easily break free from the pre-
vailing views.
In biochemistry, which is of interest here, there is an apparent conﬂict between
different views on the role of quantum effects. It has been argued for some time that
photosynthesis, i.e., the conversion of sunlight into chemically stored energy in
plants, cannot be understood without considering certain quantum physical
Fig. 5 Feynman diagram for
the Coulomb interaction
between two electrons via the
exchange of a virtual photon
10
Life—Stabilization of the Unstable
195

mechanisms [19]. The issue here is the role of “long-range” coherences (this means
in the nm-regime) of excitons (electronic particle-hole excitations) in the
light-harvesting centers.
As quantum physical features are essential for the understanding of life and
especially for the understanding of the important role of information, we will take a
brief look at the dispute arisen here. The opposing view is held by a group at the
Max Planck Institute for Structure and Dynamics of Matter, stating their stance as
follows [20]: “In the context of light harvesting, it has become apparent that
electronic excitation may be described entirely by classical models and that the
coherent and incoherent regimes are common for both quantum and classical
descriptions of their dynamics. Furthermore, it has been shown that the excitons in
PPCs [pigment-protein-complexes] can be treated as a set of classical oscillators,
so even here, the strictly quantum nature of biology appears hidden….
In summary, we have revisited the quantum aspects of photosynthetic light
harvesting. It has become clear from basic considerations that there is no equiv-
alence between quantumness of the processes and coherences observed in fem-
tosecond spectroscopy experiments.”
The authors thus claim the possibility of describing the processes they investi-
gate essentially within the framework of classical physics. Using the very advanced
capabilities of X-ray lasers at DESY, repeated measurements can be made in the
femtosecond range (10−15 s). According to quantum theory, each measurement
enforces a transition from possibilities to a fact. Moreover, facts, of course, can be
well described within the framework of classical physics. I suppose that the authors
have shown in their experiments that certainly some corrections have to be made in
the work they criticize. I am also sure that, particularly in biology, a deﬁnite
interplay between theoretical and classical-quantum descriptions is crucial, which
we have conceptualized as the “dynamic layering structure” [21, 22] (Fig. 3).
However, this example also shows that apart from the evaluation of experimental
results, also philosophical attitudes seem to play a role here. Seventy-ﬁve years ago,
Erwin Schrödinger, after all the discoverer of the Schrödinger equation, i.e., the
basis of a practicable mathematical treatment of quantum theory, stated in his
famous book “What is life?” [23] that quantum theory would be of no relevance in
biology. This view has largely prevailed until today. Thus, when publicly referring
to their work, the quoted researchers speak of certain “esoteric quantum effects” in
biology, which in their opinion, are not relevant in the energy transport of photo-
synthesis: “This simple concept, mastered by nature over all relevant time and
spatial dimensions, rather than esoteric quantum effects, is the true marvel of
biology” [24]. Such criticism is reminiscent of Einstein’s statements about “spooky
long distance actions”. Einstein was concerned that such quantum features were at
odds with the theory of relativity, as here effects would occur instantaneously
irrespective of the distance from the cause, rather than obeying the limits set by the
speed of light. As all pertinent experiments have shown, nature does not care about
Einstein’s concerns here. What today is referred to as Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen
(EPR) effect does not imply a violation of the theory of relativity. The EPR effect
reﬂects the non-locality in quantum theory, which is not a “spook,” nor does it
196
T. Görnitz

introduce “long-distance effects” in the sense of an action violating the theory of
relativity. However, there is an instantaneous collapse of a correlation extending
over a large spatial distance, i.e., a quantic wholeness. This interpretation is often
obscured by speaking misleadingly of “two particles” rather than a single quantum
object [25, 26].
“Spook” or “esotericism” pretty much stands for the opposite of serious natural
science. There is nothing esoteric in the most exact and best explanation of nature,
namely the mathematical and theoretical-physical description by quantum theory.
The misgivings of the kind conveyed in the above quote seem to be due to rela-
tively ﬁrm philosophical convictions. As another side note, in the history of science,
it has occasionally occurred that scientiﬁc theories, which were presented in an
insufﬁciently comprehensible way, have been misinterpreted or even misused in the
sense of esoterics. One may here recall the abuse of human corpses when it was
thought, as in the Frankenstein novel by Mary Shelly [27], that one could revive a
dead body by applying high voltage. Such examples do not speak against scientiﬁc
results and theories, but rather against their insufﬁcient didactic elucidation.
6
Control
For a scientiﬁc approach to life, quantum ﬁeld theory with its treatment of virtual
and real photons but also Protyposis is essential. Concomitant to life processes, in
each chemical process, information is transferred from one molecule to another via
photons. Such processes, of course, do not just occur occasionally, concerning
single molecules, but happen again and again in a vast number of molecules. Given
that living beings can stabilize themselves by intelligent information processing, it
is necessary to understand how such control is feasible. To cause changes in
material objects, an amount of energy must be available. One speaks of control in
unstable situations where mere information sufﬁces to bring about a change, and
where the energy involved plays only a background role or is entirely insigniﬁcant
compared to the effect of the information.
It is a trivial experience for us, humans, having access to language and writing
that the meaning of information does not depend on the particular medium.
Whether we read a warning, whether a blind person scans Braille, whether it is
shouted at us, or whether we perceive an odor signaling danger, in all cases, the
carrier is different and affects different sensory organs. Nevertheless, the meaning of
the transmitted information can be identical. As these examples make plain, what is
essential is the meaning of the information rather than the energy involved in its
transmission.
The explanation of the working potential of information, the meaning of which
only arises for the recipient, is not yet given by using the term “information” or by
masking the difference between energy and information. Naturally, the less the
relevance of meaningful information is obvious, the simpler the living organisms
are. A unicellular organism, already by deﬁnition, does not have sensory organs.
10
Life—Stabilization of the Unstable
197

Notwithstanding, many of them already react to weak light, for example. The
reaction of a living being to information makes apparent that the information has a
meaning for the living being, and that this information has a controlling effect on
the behavior of the living being.
Energy is necessary to effect changes in matter. Information can trigger available
energies in unstable situations. Information acts only in the unstable. We speak of
control when the meaning assigned to a piece of information is the key factor rather
than the energy accompanying the process. All living beings are localized in space
and time. They react to effects affecting their existence locally. Both massless
photons and particles with a rest mass can cause localized effects. Therefore, they
can appear as carriers of meaningful information. In everyday life, we experience
such information also as properties of its carriers: a text as a property of the printing
ink distribution on the paper. When reading aloud this information, becomes
property of pressure variations in the air. Information may also appear in the form
of the polarization direction of a photon, being a property of the photons. In
information processing, it is of central importance that information can change its
carrier. The processing requires that information stored in the matter can be
transferred to photons. Information that cannot change its carrier obviously cannot
participate in information processing.
Such a carrier change always entails a new coding and ensuing decoding.
Coding here means the transformation of a given form of meaningful information
into another form. This may have the result (intended or undesired) that in the new
form, the original meaning is no longer accessible. For example, a written text in a
foreign language may well be understandable, whereas when presented by a “native
speaker,” comprehension may no longer be possible. As mentioned, all chemical
reactions are based entirely on the electromagnetic interaction. Accordingly, they
are the result of an exchange of virtual or real photons between the reaction part-
ners. Usually, in chemical processes, the focus is on the exchange of energy.
However, in processes in living organisms, it would be insufﬁcient to consider only
energy as the decisive agent. Meaningful information is equally important. Of
course, the photon (in visible light, the frequency corresponding to its color) has the
character of information that can become meaningful. Photons of the same energy
may still differ in their polarization properties. A polarization ﬁlter can make it
visible for human eyes. Some sunglasses, for example, allow for a distinction
between horizontal and vertical polarization, while some glasses used in 3-D cin-
emas distinguish right- and left-handed circular polarization. Since such polariza-
tion properties can inﬂuence some chemical reactions, polarization would be the
simplest example of a property that can inﬂuence processes without being merely a
form of energy. Of course, the respective context of the reaction partners will also
be necessary for the course of the reaction. Depending on temperature, pressure, pH
value, substance densities, and similar parameters, chemical processes will proceed
differently. However, if such processes occur in test tubes or the reactors, one will
not yet speak of information processing.
198
T. Görnitz

However, in the processes preceding the appearance of the ﬁrst life forms,
polarization properties may have acted as prototypical structures of chemical
meaning. Properties of the context, which can be meaningful too, comprise spatial
proximity, additional molecules, and the already mentioned parameters such as
temperature, pressure, pH level, and so forth. Many reactions of organic molecules
behave differently to the exposure with different polarizations. That there are right-
and left-handed lactic acid molecules one might already have seen on yogurt cups.
Such molecules behave similar to a right and left glove. This property of “hand-
edness” (chirality) can be transferred to photons in the reactions, taken away with
them, and transmitted to other molecules upon absorption.
If then right- and left-handed photons, i.e., photons with left- or right-handed
polarization, cause different effects, this could be interpreted as the effect of a
pre-meaning. The effects of molecules of different handedness became tragically
known in the 1960s in connection with the leprosy drug thalidomide. As “Conter-
gan” it was marketed as a sleeping pill, and in its “left form” led to severe deformities
of fetuses. The formation of germs of meaning in chemical reactions can be seen as a
preliminary stage for forming meaning in the ﬁrst living beings. Properties that
cannot be reduced to a mere energy item are transmitted from one molecule to
another molecule and may affect the latter. Through the continuous exchange of real
and virtual photons, quantum-physically entangled regions of molecules are created.
Decoherence can disrupt these entanglements, and a fact resulting in one part causes
a transition into a deﬁned quantum state at the other part.
In a simple chemical process, one will certainly not yet speak of “meaning.”
However, within living organisms, and possibly also without them, reaction pro-
cesses are known in which intermediate products are catalytically inﬂuenced by
other reaction participants. If such reactions lead to cyclic processes, then such
inﬂuences can stabilize the reaction. In catalytic processes, the emphasis is on the
properties of the catalyst, which here are important for the effect, are in the fore-
ground. Effective actional properties, on the other hand, can be regarded as being
meaningful and informative.
The property of frequencies in air oscillations can produce the meaning of a
word. Manfred Eigen [28] had expressed the assumption that such circular pro-
cesses could, in turn, stabilize each other. They could thus organize themselves into
the “self-reproducing hyper-cycles.” The term “information,” as used by Eigen, is
to be understood as “meaningful information.” At that time, it was still used in the
sense of Norbert Wiener, who stated [29]: “Information is information, not matter
or energy.” Because of this strict separation between information on the one hand
and matter and energy on the other hand, as postulated by Wiener, “information”
perceived in such a way cannot be reconciled with a scientiﬁc description. The
hypercycles as structures “running in a circle,” i.e., being rhythmic, are also
characteristic of all later processes in the living. Recent investigations with a
microfabricated atomic force microscopy cantilever have shown [30] that the
changes occurring in reaction cycles are associated with measurable vibrations with
amplitudes in the nanometer range. This makes it possible to distinguish living
bacteria from dead bacteria since these vibrations do not occur in something dead.
10
Life—Stabilization of the Unstable
199

In the case of stabilization of several intertwined cyclic processes through
information, i.e., via properties becoming effective, one may reasonably speak of
pre-meaning. For the formation of the ﬁrst cells, many further development stages
are necessary. Many of the molecules needed in cells can form only under condi-
tions that are not mutually compatible [31]. This means that the formation of the
various molecule types can only happen in different local regions featuring different
conditions.
There are many wise proposals for the primordial formation of complex organic
molecules. They range from the changing situation in the ice of comets [32] to the
extremely interesting hot conditions with possible pyrite catalysts [33] in the
vicinity of black and white smokers, up to the edges of geysers with the local
change between wet and dry conditions there [34, 35]. If the chemical conditions
required for the formation of the various “molecules of life” must be different, it can
be assumed that many of the considered contexts studied contributed to the for-
mation of such molecules. In this context, an interesting idea has been presented by
U.C. Schreiber [36]. Some of the molecules necessary for life are hydrophobic, and
others are hydrophilic, but water-soluble and water-insoluble molecules can hardly
form under the same conditions. As Schreiber points out, under geological condi-
tions in which, for example, active geysers can be found, carbon dioxide becomes
supercritical below a depth of about 1 km. It is here in a form in which it is no
longer possible to distinguish gas and liquid. Carbon dioxide can, therefore, act as a
solvent for hydrophobic molecules. When CO2 rises from the depths, it evaporates,
and any dissolved molecules enter a new environment offering new reaction pos-
sibilities. Furthermore, as has been known for a long time, it is important that lipid
molecules form double layers, which can form so-called vesicles. These are tiny
bubbles that can shield an aqueous content from an aqueous environment.
Very often, chemical reactions take place so that the outcome appears as being
factually determined. Already a few grams of hydrogen and oxygen in the right
stoichiometric ratio will lead to an oxyhydrogen explosion when triggered by a
spark. Only in the case of small molecule quantities, the quantum behavior of a
reaction can become apparent. A manifold of a few molecules will hardly undergo
an immediate explosion. If the distance between the atoms or molecules is sufﬁ-
ciently large, there will be no chemical reaction at all for a longer time. In the “usual
case”, on the other hand, with the presence of sextillions of molecules, the outcome,
as e.g., in an oxyhydrogen explosion, can be expected as a fact. In the genesis of
complex biomolecules, one should always bear in mind that the formation of such
complicated structures is a quantum process. An essential feature of quantum theory
is that—loosely speaking—a quantum system simultaneously probes all possibili-
ties. This entails that the actual time scales in the formation of complex molecules
are radically smaller than those resulting within models based on classical physics.
For quite some time, biochemists have pointed out that the formation of RNA
molecules (ribonucleic acid) marks an important stage in the transition to life. This
type of biomolecule, which performs important tasks in the intracellular information
processing of all living cells, can act both as a catalyst and as a storage element for
information. In later stages of the biological evolution, the catalytic effects are
200
T. Görnitz

performed much more effectively by proteins known as enzymes, while DNA
(deoxyribonucleic acid) proves a much more stable storage medium for information
than RNA.
The development of storage media is a prerequisite for the feasibility of control.
Only if stored information can be compared with incoming information, meaningful
control becomes possible. Without “memory” this cannot work. Such control rests
on the evaluation of incoming information in the context of existing information.
Simply spoken, this is information on information. For physical reasons, the storage
of information, i.e., keeping meaningful information available within a small region
of space and over a certain time, requires a system with rest mass. Information
stored in such a way is given in the form of facts.
During the transition to life and later on in the early stages of life, according to
the current state of knowledge, information was stored in RNA molecules. This
form of information storage can still be found in viruses. In single- and
multi-cellular organisms, RNA is used to transport information within the cell. All
viruses known today are dependent on living organisms for their reproduction, so
they cannot be counted among the preliminary stages of life. However, it is not
considered implausible that there may have been “RNA living beings” before
“DNA life.” If these RNA forms should have been less efﬁcient, they were
metabolized by the later life forms and, therefore, “exterminated.” However, it is
possible that some of such RNA phenomena still exist today. The huge viruses that
have only recently been discovered and which are large enough to reach the size of
bacteria make it seem conceivable that RNA based cellular life does indeed actually
exist. However, the actual storage of genetic information in all known forms of life
is provided by the molecules of the DNA. Via biochemical processes, the mean-
ingful information stored in the DNA becomes usable for the cell as quantum
information. Here transfers take the place of stored information to photons and from
the photons, in turn, to other molecules in the cell.
Here it should be recalled again that as a consequence of decoherence, i.e., the
loss of information on quantum possibilities (through a “leakage” or “emission” of
information), states materialize that can be described as facts. Facts, in turn, are the
starting points, from which new quantum possibilities unfold. As long as just being
stored in a material carrier, information cannot cause effects. Only the biochemical
processes in the cell interior enable by photonic activation the formation of quan-
tum states from the factual information of the DNA. The possibilities thereby
resulting are determined by the respective fact from which they originate. The
possibilities, in turn, determine the setting for future facts. As mentioned above,
these processes are reﬂected by vibrations in the nm-regime and are reminiscent of
rhythmic patterns such as, in a later evolutionary stage, the heartbeat of animals.
Only this interplay of factual information and quantum processes controlled by
deterministically evolving quantum information makes life possible.
The factually stored information of the DNA can be copied in the cell division. It
can even be replaced. There have been publications reporting that the cell nuclei of
unicellular organisms could have been replaced with artiﬁcially produced DNA
complexes. After transplanting such artiﬁcial cell nuclei into a denucleated living
10
Life—Stabilization of the Unstable
201

cell, the cell functions according to the new program. Neither the cell content
without a controlling center nor the cell nucleus without the quantum elements of
the cell content can by itself constitute a living object. It is for this reason that the
factually stored information of a virus needs a host cell to become “active”.
A viable description of life has to rely on the “dynamic layer structure” of
classical and quantum physics as shown in Graphical abstract. The information
factually stored in the cell nucleus is turned into quantum information via trans-
mission to photons. As said above, the interaction between molecules is electro-
magnetic. This applies as well to the transport of molecules carrying meaningful
information within the cells. However, the concomitant transfer of information from
molecules to other molecules cannot be captured. Describing these processes
entirely within classical physics and disregarding photons is often sufﬁcient in the
case of a test tube. For a less accurate description, though, classical physics is often
satisfactory. As pointed out by Primas, the respective level of abstraction deter-
mines what can or cannot be accounted for.
When information gets to a molecule via a photon, this can cause a speciﬁc
change in the molecule. While eventually, the meaning of the information is still the
same; the form of coding is different. A trivial example, taken from everyday life
rather than cell biochemistry, is reading aloud a text. Initially, the information is a
feature of the paper. Via photons, in a completely different form, it gets to the eye of
the reader. In the reader’s brain, a new coding takes place, ultimately resulting in
the activation of muscle cells around the vocal cords. The acoustic waves thereby
aroused carry the text in another coding to the listener—and so forth. In cells, we
also ﬁnd various coding changes at different action sites. Photons may directly
transmit meaningful information or just deliver “energy” for moving molecules
within the cell, just like carrying home a book.
Decoding can be understood as the assignment of meaning to new incoming
information in the light of an already stored information context. It is thus infor-
mation on information. For understanding life and explaining its origins, it is
therefore highly signiﬁcant that the concept of “information” is the only one in the
natural sciences for which a reﬂexive use proves meaningful. Without “information
on information,” i.e., without the valuation of incoming data, life is unimaginable.
Let us come back to one aspect for further clariﬁcation. As already mentioned,
information can only affect a material object if there is an unstable situation in
which this information can trigger an available energy potential. During the exis-
tence of a living being, the corresponding energy supply must be replenished time
and again. The release of energy is often called the “great ampliﬁcation factor” in
the information processing of biological systems. The ratio between the energy
serving as the carrier of the information and the energy triggered by the information
can be many orders of magnitude. The constant provisioning and use of energy are
usually referred to as the metabolism. The molecule ATP (adenosine triphosphate)
plays a key role in the provisioning of energy. When converted into adenosine
diphosphate (ADP) and adenosine monophosphate (AMP), energy is released,
which can be used in the cell. In the mitochondria, ATP is again synthesized from
ADP.
202
T. Görnitz

By reacting to information, living beings assess information and, thus, assign
meaning to information. A reaction is an action, therefore a fact. For facts, classical
logic applies. The process of life also marks the ﬁrst time in the cosmic evolution
where the logical terms “right or wrong” (true or false) can be attributed to a
meaning. Information is assessed in the “right” way by a living being if the action
(or the non-action) initiated by this information serves its stabilization. If an
assessment is “wrong,” then it leads to a faster drop out from the evolutionary
process. One could, therefore, state: right or wrong depends on whether the life
span of the respective individual living being is rather prolonged or rather short-
ened. Information is not “true or false” per se, but an assessment can be false or
correct. The assessment is then the prerequisite for action or non-action.
With the advent of sexual reproduction, the second level of meaning evolves. In
the struggle for potential progeny, sexual rivalry may put survival at risk. Moreover,
the survival of the offspring can have a higher importance than their own survival.
With language, writing, and culture, the third level of meaning appears. The sur-
vival of the community to which one belongs, but eventually also ideas such as the
indispensability of single individuals or groups, or “posthumous fame in history”
can be motives for disregarding one’s own life and that of one’s offspring. Even if
hardly conceivable today, there have been literary lines proclaiming [37]: “Sweet
and glorious, it is to die for the fatherland.” Such sentences show how biology can
be superseded by the cultural sphere.
7
Conclusion
Incorporating information into the realm of scientiﬁc quantities has made it possible
to characterize life as the ability of unstable systems to stabilize themselves by
control based on intelligent information processing. With the mathematical struc-
ture of the quantum theory, this organization of the living can be explained sci-
entiﬁcally. To this end, the equivalence of matter and energy had to be generalized
within the framework of quantum theory by extending it to the simplest mathe-
matically possible quantum structures, the AQIs of the Protyposis. The AQIs are
primarily bits of absolute quantum information, and thus quantum information
“free-of-dedicated-or-specialized-meaning.” Most of the structures, which form
from the AQIs, are called “matter” or “energy” in natural sciences. Some AQIs can
appear as properties of the respective quantum particles. The relational character of
quantum theory enables chemical processes, and these enable lives. Some AQIs
affect living beings in the form of information. Here information can become
meaningful as a result of processing in a living being (Fig.6).
10
Life—Stabilization of the Unstable
203

Core Messages
• AQIs are absolute, cosmologically founded, bits of quantum information,
being primarily free of any concrete or special meaning that form quantum
particles of matter and energy (photons).
• The Protyposis, the entirety of the AQIs, provides us with a universal basis
of natural sciences for everything being amenable to a scientiﬁc expla-
nation at all.
• In the form of properties of particles, AQIs can become meaningful
information for humans, as well as for all living beings.
• In biochemical processes, photons are instrumental in exchanging mean-
ingful information between material particles and forming coherent states,
enabling intelligent information processing.
• Living entities, actually being unstable, can self-stabilize by control.
Acknowledgements I thank Jochen Schirmer for many helpful hints and remarks and Brigitte
Görnitz for countless fruitful discussions.
Fig. 6 Forms of the Protyposis
204
T. Görnitz

References
1. Heisenberg W (1969) Der Teil und das Ganze. Piper, München, p 328
2. Schrödinger E (1944) What is life? the physical aspect of the living cell. The University Press,
Cambridge, NY
3. Penzlin H (2016) Das Phänomen Leben/Grundfragen der Theoretischen Biologie. Springer,
Berlin
4. Görnitz T, Görnitz B (2018) Protyposis–an introduction: consciousness and matter from
quantum information. DAS NEUE DENKEN, München
5. Görnitz T (2019) Protyposis–Eine Einführung. Springer, Berlin
6. Görnitz T, Görnitz B (2016) Von der Quantenphysik zum Bewusstsein: Kosmos. Springer,
Geist und Materie
7. Görnitz T, Weizsäcker CFv (1986) De—Sitter representations and the particle concept in an
ur-theoretical cosmological model. In: Conformal groups and related symmetries, physical
results and mathematical background. Springer, Berlin, pp 63–76
8. Görnitz T, Graudenz D, Weizsäcker CFv (1992) Quantum ﬁeld theory of binary alternatives.
Int J Theor Phys 31(11):1929–1959
9. Görnitz T, Schomäcker U (2012) Quantum particles from quantum information, J Phys: Conf
Ser 380:012025
10. Görnitz T (2014) Simplest quantum structures and the foundation of interaction. Rev Theor
Sci 2(4):289–300
11. Görnitz T, Schomäcker U (2018) The structures of interactions: how to explain the gauge
groups U (1), SU (2) and SU (3). Found Sci 23(1):51–73
12. Primas H (1983) Chemistry, quantum mechanics and reductionism, x3. 3, second corrected
edition. Berlin-Heidelberg, Springer
13. Primas H (1981) Chemistry, quantum mechanics, and reductionism: perspectives in
theoretical chemistry, 24. Springer Berlin, pp 254–255
14. Schirmer J (2018) Many-Body Methods for Atoms, Molecules and Clusters. Springer, Berlin
15. Al-Khalili J, McFadden J (2015) Der Quantenbeat des Lebens: wie Quantenbiologie die Welt
neu erklärt. Ullstein Ebooks
16. Feynman RP (1949) Space-time approach to quantum electrodynamics. Phys Rev 76(6):769
17. Flick J, Ruggenthaler M, Appel H, Rubio A (2017) Atoms and molecules in cavities, from
weak to strong coupling in quantum-electrodynamics (QED) chemistry. Proc Natl Acad Sci
114(12):3026–3034
18. Planck M (2013) Vorträge, Reden, Erinnerungen. Springer, Berlin
19. Lambert N, Chen Y-N, Cheng Y-C, Li C-M, Chen G-Y, Nori F (2013) Quantum biology. Nat
Phys 9(1):10–18
20. Cao J, Cogdell RJ, Coker DF, Duan H-G, Hauer J, Kleinekathöfer U, Jansen TLC, Mančal T,
Miller RJD, Ogilvie JP (2020) Quantum biology revisited. Sci Adv 6 (14):eaaz4888
21. Görnitz T, Görnitz B (2002) Der kreative Kosmos: Geist und Materie aus Information.
Spektrum. Akademischer Verlag, Heidelberg/Berlin
22. Görnitz T, Görnitz B (2016) Von der Quantenphysik zum Bewusstsein: Kosmos, Geist und
Materie. Springer-Verlag, Berlin
23. Schrödinger E (1944) What is life? The physical aspect of the living cell. Cambridge.
Cambridge University Press
24. https://www.mpsd.mpg.de/437912/2020-04-quantum-biology-duan. as of 22.05.2020
25. Görnitz T (1999) Quanten sind anders: die verborgene Einheit der Welt. Spektrum
Akademischer Verlag, Heidelberg
26. Görnitz T, Görnitz B (2016) Von der Quantenphysik zum Bewusstsein: Kosmos, Geist und
Materie. Springer, Berlin
27. Shelly MW, Moser B (1994) Frankenstein or the modern Prometheus. Wordsworth
28. Eigen M (1971) Selforganization of matter and the evolution of biological macromolecules.
Naturwissenschaften 58(10):465–523
10
Life—Stabilization of the Unstable
205

29. Wiener N (1961) Cybernetics or control and communication in the animal and the machine.
Chap. V, Computing machines and the nervous system. Cambridge. MIT Press, p 132
30. Kasas S, Ruggeri FS, Benadiba C, Maillard C, Stupar P, Tournu H, Dietler G, Longo G
(2015) Detecting nanoscale vibrations as signature of life. Proc Natl Acad Sci 112(2):378–381
31. Kricheldorf HR (2019) Leben durch chemische Evolution?: Eine kritische Bestandsaufnahme
von Experimenten und Hypothesen. Springer, Berlin
32. Trinks H, Schröder W, Biebricher C (2003) Eis und die Entstehung des Lebens, Aachen
33. Wächtershäuser G (1990) Evolution of the ﬁrst metabolic cycles. Proc Natl Acad Sci 87
(1):200–204
34. Damer B, Deamer D (2015) Coupled phases and combinatorial selection in ﬂuctuating
hydrothermal pools: A scenario to guide experimental approaches to the origin of cellular life.
Life 5(1):872–887
35. Djokic T, Van Kranendonk MJ, Campbell KA, Walter MR, Ward CR (2017) Earliest signs of
life on land preserved in ca. 3.5 Ga hot spring deposits. Nature communications 8 (1):1–9
36. Schreiber UC (2019) Das Geheimnis um die erste Zelle: dem Ursprung des Lebens auf der
Spur. Springer. Berlin
37. Carne-Ross DS, Haynes K (1996) Horace in english. Penguin Classics
Thomas Görnitz was Professor for Didactics of Physics at the
Goethe Univ. in Frankfurt/M. He was the winner of the
GDR-Mathematics Olympics, and the ﬁrst German awarded a
prize at the International Math Olympics. He studied physics and
mathematics in Leipzig, receiving a Ph.D. in mathematical physics.
After applying for permission to leave the communist country, he
worked in the GDR as a gravedigger. He was ﬁnally able to settle in
Munich with his family. Carl Friedrich v. Weizsäcker won him for
cooperation in fundamental questions of quantum physics and
cosmology, which ﬁnally lasted over two decades. Afterward, he
worked on the Inst. for Mathematical Physics at the TU Braun-
schweig. He works on the implications of quantum theory for
understanding the universe and itsevolutionary processes leading
to mankind and the conscious mind. Publications include: Quanta
Are Different (1999), Protyposis—an introduction/Consciousness
and Matter from Quantum Information (2018) and (with Dr.
Brigitte Görnitz) The CreativeCosmos: Mindand Matter from
Quantum Information (2002), The Evolution of Mind: Quan-
tumphysics, Consciousness, Religion (2008) From QuantumThe-
oryto Consciousness—Cosmos, Mind, Matter (2016).
206
T. Görnitz

11
The Sustainable Humanist Concept
in Art and Science Synergies
Silvia Nuere, Laura de Miguel Álvarez, Adela Acitores Suz,
and Raúl Díaz-Obregón Cruzado
“The most beautiful thing we can experience is the mysterious.
It is the source of all true art and science. He to whom the
emotion is a stranger, who can no longer pause to wonder, and
stand wrapped in awe, is as good as dead his eyes are closed.”
Albert Einstein
Summary
Humanism concept has evolved from its origins to the present day. This approach
to life can also be found before and after the ﬁfteenth century. Leonardo da Vinci
is, for sure, the best reference, but we can also consider humanists Vitruvius and
Humbolt, distant from the twenty-ﬁrst century. Considering that one of the
principles of humanism was to retake the ancient Greco-Latin cultures, it is
necessary to take a tour around its fundamental elements. We will make a
chronological tour of the Greek paideia, the liberal arts, ﬁnishing with the studia
S. Nuere (&)  A. Acitores Suz  R. Díaz-Obregón Cruzado
Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
e-mail: silvia.nuere@upm.es
A. Acitores Suz
e-mail: adela.acitores@upm.es
R. Díaz-Obregón Cruzado
e-mail: raul.diazobregon@upm.es
S. Nuere
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Madrid, Spain
L. de Miguel Álvarez
Universidad Internacional de La Rioja, Logroño, Spain
e-mail: laura.demiguel@unir.net
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
N. Rezaei (ed.), Integrated Science, Integrated Science 1,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65273-9_11
207

humanitatis to understand the elements that have endured and remain essential for
forming the human being. The transmission of knowledge has been at the base of
teaching to allow new achievements to be transmitted from generation to
generation. Such is the case, for example, of Leonardo da Vinci’s codices. On the
other hand, research is essential to advance knowledge, and here arises the
dilemma of the kind of research to use. Science and art start from different
methodologies, quantitative and qualitative, and yet both are complementary. The
researcher’s own experience must also be at the base of their approaches, as an
added value. Artography enables this way of conducting educational research
based on the arts. Next, different approaches will be exposed where art and
science go hand in hand, enriching the results and breaking the barriers of
compartmentalizing these two ﬁelds of knowledge. Currently, there are different
examples, even becoming exhibitions in museums. The relationship of a human
being in his natural environment, a concept inherent to humanism and connected
to the interest of researching, brings us closer to the concept of critical theory
where praxis and theory must be related to experience for approaching
knowledge. Finally, we can afﬁrm that the concept of sustainability is closely
linked to the search for balance, to the concept of the relationship between man
and nature. Artists like Joseph Beuys or the young Juan Zamora show us, through
their artwork, the need to make people aware. The sustainable humanist must seek
the balance between the person and the environment and how knowledge is
related, investigated, learned, and transmitted, with equality as a principle.
Sustainable humanism concept.
208
S. Nuere et al.

The code of this chapter is 01111001 01110010 01001000 01101110
01101111 01101101 01100001.
1
Introduction
Humanism is a well-known concept present for centuries. Its origin dated from the
15th is unique. Leonardo da Vinci is undeniably the highest model and inspiration
of a humanist to be. Nobody will intend to call it into question. His wisdom and
capacity are astonishing, and centuries later, still in our minds. Even though
Vitruvius lived in the ﬁrst century before Christ, he could also be considered a
humanist. His approach to knowledge is quite similar, emphasizing the integral and
complete vision in the analysis of whole reality. Some centuries later, Alexander
von Humbolt had also an interdisciplinary training, and as all that preceded him, he
was able to connect art and science.
The humanism concept has evolved as humanity has. The main characteristics
are, apart from its traditional consideration, the capacity for dealing with different
ﬁelds of knowledge at a time. They are essential for working hand in hand and
move forward in human breakthroughs.
Knowledge is essential to progress in life, and education is the main tool to
transmit it. Knowledge production and transmission must go hand in hand. The
different process of researching, qualitative or quantitative, can be approached.
Either way, the experience must be taken into consideration as a value of research.
Personal viewpoints are an attractive way of improving the relations between
human beings and their surroundings.
Next, the concepts of sustainability and humanism that are closely related
between art and science will interrelate. The connection between humanism and
interdisciplinary nature will be analyzed, a useful tool to attenuate the current
division of thought characterized by fragmentation. Finally, we are going to put
practical examples, where these interrelationships between education, art, sustain-
ability, humanism, and science are interrelated.
2
Humanism
Human ingenuity could develop different inventions of which, with the help of machines
that serve the same purpose, could never give rise to a creation more beautiful, simpler, or
with a better purpose than things produced by nature; because in its creations nothing is
missing or nothing is superﬂuous.
Leonardo da Vinci
11
The Sustainable Humanist Concept in Art and Science Synergies
209

For understanding the humanism concept, it is worth it to travel backward,
follow the line of time, and analyze through history what have been the funda-
mental elements for the present evolution of human beings. Humanism ﬁnds
interest in the ancient Greco-Roman writings, and therefore, we go back to these
cultures to understand what makes these two cultures so interesting.
We start with the Greek paideia, deﬁned from the Encyclopedia Britannica [1] as
a “system of education and training in classical Greek and Hellenistic (Greco-
Roman) cultures that included such subjects as gymnastics, grammar, rhetoric,
music, mathematics, geography, natural history, and philosophy. In the early
Christian era the Greek paideia, called humanitasin Latin, served as a model for
Christian institutions of higher learning.” The term was combined with enkyklios
(‘complete ’, or ‘circle’) to identify an extensive compendium of general education,
hence ‘encyclopedia’.
Greek paideia aims at conforming a person suitable to practice their civic duties
[2], not focusing on individualism but humanism, humanitas. Paideia (from Greek
paideίa, education or training, and from pai1, child) means the process of edu-
cating men and seeks to nurture and sustain the ideal of human character [3].
Learning is focused on giving the human knowledge and care about themselves
and their experiences.
Following history, we connect with Liberal Arts, known as the medieval studies
comprising the Trivium and Quadrivium. The roots of liberal arts lie in the Latin
word, liber, meaning ‘free, unrestricted.’ Our language borrowed “the term from the
Latin liberales artes, which described the education given to free man and members
of the upper classes and involved training the mind” [4].
Seven were the liberal arts, deﬁned as “the intellectual search for the ﬁrst
principles of everything, and the identity of the in-itself and the for-another” [3].
They were organized into Trivium (from Latin 3 ways), seeking persuasion and
demonstration, grammar, rhetoric and dialectics, and searching the in-itself in the
exploration of nature, which became the Quadrivium (form Latin 4 ways), geom-
etry, arithmetic, music, and astrology [3]. The aim was to form free men through
knowledge and the development of intellectual abilities (Fig. 1).
Renaissance and its spirit of modernity were taking place. Traditional culture
values were revised with criticism, accepting new ways to consider integral training
from the humanities studies (studia humanitatis). The studia humanitatis, among
the classic knowledge related to the moral education of man, were reborn as ways
of ‘recreation’ of what constitutes ‘human dignity’ [5]. They inspired the contents
of the literary disciplines. It seemed the word “humanities” came from the version
of studia humanitatis with education connotations.
Leonardo Bruni 1369–1444 founded a new educational curriculum in the
Modern Age. In one of his Epistles, he deﬁned the Studia Humanitatis in these
terms [5]: “In these studies, your knowledge should be varied and multiple, and
taken from everywhere, so that you do not leave out anything that can contribute to
the formation, to dignity, to the praise of life. You should focus not only in the
elegance and dexterity of expressing your arguments, but also keep in mind poets,
orators, historians so your speech will be rich.”
210
S. Nuere et al.

Leonardo Bruni can be considered a major literary ﬁgure of the early Renais-
sance and, therefore, an important ﬁgure in the early ﬁfteenth century [6]. He sets an
articulation of a new ethos of citizenship and liberty, his civic humanism [6].
The humanitas that is reborn is nothing other than the education of what con-
stitutes the human being. His “dignity of man” is not just given to him but must be
‘recreated’ from each of his ‘himself’. The path to walk from ‘how is the man’ to
‘how he should be’ connotes essentially pedagogical reasons [5].
In the evolution from the paideia, going through the liberal arts and later the
studia humanitatis, the predecessor of Renaissance humanism, one can see the
constant interest in forming the human being in their personality, freedom, and the
development into a civic community (Fig. 2).
Humanism is an intellectual movement born in Italy during the Renaissance, at
the end of the XIV century, before spreading it through Europe. It is “the reawaking
of the taste for classical antiquity, as well as an intention of Greco-Roman art” [7].
They are interested in acquiring knowledge and share it through education. Human
beings became the center of the universe and the measurement of everything.
Renaissance humanism is interested in nature and tries to apply this character to
all things. It is a naturalist humanism and a humanism naturalist. Human being
started to be watched, neither from a religious point of view, nor from science,
Fig. 1 Liberal Arts Based on the Hortus deliciarum from Herrade of Landsberg (written by a
woman), twelfth century
11
The Sustainable Humanist Concept in Art and Science Synergies
211

which was not settled yet, but from the human being itself, seen beautiful, active,
and happy in the middle of the pretty and colorful nature, blazing, and open into the
sunset [8]. An integrated conception of human values started to ﬂourish.
2.1
Leonardo da Vinci
For René Schyns [9], commissioner of the Exhibition Leonardo da Vinci, The
European Genius, Leonardo has become one of the most famous beacons for
humanity, and an outstanding ﬁgure of the Renaissance. This painter, botanist,
geologist, geometrist, engineer, musician, and inventor could deal with different
ﬁelds of knowledge in perfect harmony.
Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519) had various facets with an extraordinary per-
sonality that let us deepen our knowledge of what preceded our modern civilization.
In this exhibition, they show the artist through four major themes: the man, the
artist, the , and the humanist (Fig. 3).
“Generally, although this major scientist of the Renaissance took his prede-
cessors as his starting point, he managed to structure knowledge, to represent, to
ﬁx it” [7]. It was not enough to understand; he also wanted to reproduce what he
discovered, created, or invented. He found it necessary to prove and reproduce his
work in pages, manuscripts, or codices.
Leonardo opposed the concept of ideal beauty, defending the imitation of nature
with ﬁdelity, without trying to improve it [10]. There was a constant interest in the
relation between human beings and nature.
During the Italian Renaissance, the revolution of the scientiﬁc method began,
and great astronomical and geographical discoveries were made that would change
the conception of planet Earth, and the cosmos and art are transformed from a
mechanical activity into an intellectual one [8]. Science was taking place in the
middle of more philosophical concepts.
Fig. 2 Humanism concept evolution
212
S. Nuere et al.

Despite everything, even though the word humanism had not even been named
until 1808 by the works of Niethammer. It can be said that its appearance was the
quintessential starting point for a new awareness already implicit in the human
being with himself and with what surrounded him; never ceasing to be, likewise,
the engine in our philosophical, scientiﬁc, or moral development, in one or another
form, through the evolution of subsequent history. This vagueness in its principles
is also because humanism cannot be taken both as a strict philosophical doctrine
Fig. 3 Leonardo da Vinci skills analysis
11
The Sustainable Humanist Concept in Art and Science Synergies
213

sensu estricto, as a perspective, and a position towards life who tried, from the
beginning, to take full advantage of the fabulous human potential [11].
2.2
Previous Approach
However, back in time, we can also ﬁnd the concept of humanism to mix ﬁelds of
knowledge to enrich human lives. The vision of broad knowledge that Vitruvius
proposed can ﬁt with many other current professions that require a broad per-
spective to study problems from different ﬁelds, allowing to relate facts and data to
obtain the best solutions without neglecting essential aspects.
Vitruvius [12] wanted to give Emperor Cesar your treatise “The 10 Books of
Architecture,” in gratitude for the life pension he had received under the inﬂuence
of his sister Octavia. The intention was that the emperor could ﬁnd out for himself
what was and what not Architecture was. He explains the holistic nature of his
profession, spilling in its ﬁrst pages the most inspiring lines for anyone who wanted
to follow in his footsteps. Vitruvius, in his ﬁrst chapter, “What is Architecture and
what things should architects know,” begins by saying: “Architecture is a science
that must be accompanied by many other knowledge and studies, thanks to which it
judges the works of all the arts that are related to it. This science is acquired by
practice and by theory. […] You should therefore study grammar; have aptitude for
drawing; know the Geometry; not be fasting from Optics; be instructed in Arith-
metic and versed in history; to have proﬁtably heard the philosophers; have
knowledge of music; not to ignore the Medicine; unite the knowledge of
Jurisprudence to the Astrology ones and the movement of the stars” [12].
Alexander von Humboldt (1769–1859) was a peculiar scientist with different
knowledge, curious and pioneering, and with the capacity for innovation. If anyone
can justiﬁably apply the label polymath, it is him. He studied at the Berlin Mine
School, but thanks to his ambition for knowledge, he became a geographer,
astronomer, humanist, and naturalist. His travels as an explorer in Asia and America
led him to specialize in anthropology and ethnography, zoology, botany, mineral-
ogy, oceanography, hydrography, and climatology.
Added to this knowledge is its great capacity for graphic and communicative
innovation of its ﬁndings. He could express them in a synthetic and clear way, in
which he related data intelligently, denoting his integrated knowledge. His illus-
trated maps, of great beauty, exquisitely capture all these aspects, being a lesson
even today. However, Humboldt’s greatest contribution was his worldview appli-
cable today. He is considered the creator of environmental thought. He understood
the earth as a living organism in which everything was connected, posing con-
nections between deforestation and soil drought [13]. This vision would not have
been possible without the innate curiosity, the extreme capacity of observation, and
its interdisciplinary nature that provided an integrated knowledge.
214
S. Nuere et al.

Seventeen centuries separate Vitruvius from Humboldt, but both illustrate a
reality that we cannot ignore today. Both taught us to contemplate the world, our
societies, and their problems from a holistic framework that allows us to leave
nothing aside and, in turn, relate everything, uniting science and humanities.
3
Spreading Knowledge
In matters of culture and knowledge, only what is saved is lost; you only earn what you
give.
Antonio Machado
Humanity is the ﬁrst principle of human beings, but a modern ﬁrst principle
which is essentially open, unstable, and true ohuman beingsnly as an education
in-and-for-itself. Humanism is again the culture, the continuing education of
humanity [3].
Italian universities were created in the 13th and fourteenth centuries, due to the
need to prepare the personnel required by the growing production process and to
satisfy the intellectual demands for knowledge and artistic development. Bologna
(1088) was the ﬁrst university in Europe, a sample of the dynamics of Italian social
life in the transition from the Middle Ages to Modernity. The universities were a
refuge, training, and teaching for the humanists [14].
Leonardo wanted to publish his observations, technical and scientiﬁc ﬁndings
written in his over 6000 pages. The intention was to create a big encyclopedia, but
he could not do it [9]. One of his goals was spreading knowledge through his own
experience.
Knowledge must be shared, and the different ﬁelds of knowledge should work
hand in hand to improve people’s training. The concept of Liberal arts has been
part of our language for a long time, and nowadays, science matters should form
part of this general concept. The places to make it possible are schools, universities
with no distinction between one another.
The STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Mathematics) edu-
cational concept proposed in the ﬁrst decade of the twentieth century aims to train
in a multidisciplinary way to generate greater synergies. Georgette Yakman [15],
creator of the framework for this new educational approach and founder of STE@M
EDUCATION, explains the breadth of the word Arts, making it representative of
many other disciplines related to the Arts and Humanities that have been pro-
gressively added (Fig. 4).
Yakman explains, in the interview published in 2016, the concept expanded
from STEAM to STREAM, where the “R” refers to Reading and Writing with a
broad interpretation (Figurative Language, Sentence Structure, Vocabulary, Text
Analysis, Writing, and Composition). Reading and writing can be related to the
Greco-Roman concept of being able to communicate with each other.
11
The Sustainable Humanist Concept in Art and Science Synergies
215

The inclusion of art greatly beneﬁts students with clear scientiﬁc concerns,
expanding their integrated vision and creative capacity. To understand the com-
plexity of the problems of our time requires interpretations from different
paradigms.
This type of multidisciplinary approach favors the student’s ability to integrate
into teams made up of different proﬁles, offering the possibility of understanding
different approaches and points of view. Therefore, the possibility of dialogue and
understanding is generated.
Man is a bunch of possibilities. In the beginning, he develops a structure of
knowledge and thought, understanding, and reason. From them, it is possible to
outline in prehistory and history the projection of their humanity: work, ethics,
production, culture, civilization, institutions, science, art, and philosophy [14].
What typiﬁes the humanity of man is not nature, but what he has historically
created from the development of the mind, of thought, of understanding, of reason.
Humanism is thus a historical development of humanization [14]. The human
persists in the use of language, in the ability to think [14]. Nobody can limit human
beings’ imagination, talent, and artistic creations, which outline and discover
emerging from something that has not existed before. Science and technology have
become necessary to prove new advances in life and to improve knowledge.
Fig. 4 STEAM Pyramid,
based on Yakman’s
216
S. Nuere et al.

3.1
Art and Science Approach to Knowledge
It is by intuition that we discover and by logic we prove.
Henri Poincaré
Three can be the theories of knowledge (Fig. 5):
• The world is a knowable matter, “it is there ready to be discovered and known;”
• The human being needs to know this world; and
• In the knowledge of the world, the human being needs to establish an acceptable
truth about it, something known as an objective reality.
Progress takes place through experimental research but also sensitive experience.
Science needs to be stable, transferred, and veriﬁed, and the value of experience is
unstable and needs to be transmitted and inferred.
Artistic languages are tools for the explicit transmission of experience in a
double sense: an investigative experience that happens during the time, known as a
process, and experience that results from its existence, arisen in the reader or
spectator who contemplates it.
In science, results are transmitted, but in artistic research, the process and the
results remain united with the research. The Journal of Artistic Research (JAR)
research exposition [16] mentions that experience is important, and subjectivity
might be present and the protagonist in the artistic research being a real protagonist.
The process and result cannot be separate. There are two ways of exposing the
results in the academic ﬁeld through writings and in the artistic ﬁeld through the
exhibitions.
The concept of artistic research began to be raised in the Spanish context in the
late 1970s when art schools began to enroll in the university environment, thus
creating the ﬁrst Fine Arts faculties. This fact meant that artists from different
disciplines had to start academic research projects exposing themselves to the
critical gaze of the educational community. Artistic research tried then to imitate the
leaving away their real essence. This caused the displacement of the sense of artistic
research-practice, placing itself in three recognized academic research perspectives:
the interpretative, the empiricist, and the critical [17]. Although, as stated by
Moraza [18], the inclusion of art at the university has not required to make art
scientiﬁcally, it has had.
The investigations carried out in the academic ﬁeld were bound to be related to
methods and epistemological approaches of a scientiﬁc nature, thus reducing their
possibilities of self-representation and scope. Research artists put aside their own
interest in artistic research as the focus of their work, for fear of the little impact or
interest that individual artistic work might have for scholars at the university.
Fortunately, for more than ten years, there have been more and more artistic re-
search works that include the research artist’s own practice as the main theme
(Fig. 6).
11
The Sustainable Humanist Concept in Art and Science Synergies
217

3.2
Differences and Similarities Between Scientific
and Artistic Research
The concept of research could be understood as building knowledge through the
establishment of predetermined resources and methods. The researcher may keep
some distance from the object. They establish and systematize a protocol whose
truth criteria are universally valid. The one that the researcher establishes thanks to
his ability to imagine and visualize. In the words of Torres [19], “Human being,
thanks to his imagination, can see in advance the results he intends to achieve.”
Words, and their meaning, are an aspect to consider if we want to place ideas
around the relationship between artistic and scientiﬁc research. We can establish a
slight deﬁnition of the meaning of the word research and how it differs from its
synonym inquiry.
In scientiﬁc research, the recording of data allows more depth about the object of
study. When investigating, the fulﬁllment of a hypothesis and/or a series of ob-
jectives is pursued from the beginning of the process. Finishing an investigation on
a ﬁeld through a speciﬁc subject implies the expansion of knowledge. It will
undoubtedly represent progress for the community.
Fig. 5 Knowledge theories
218
S. Nuere et al.

We ﬁnd in the word inquire an acceptable synonym of the word research,
although, in its most profound sense, there are slight nuances that make inquiring
the perfect verb to establish the practice of art research. Some nuances are related to
the attitude of the research subject, who, far from distancing himself from his object
of study, sometimes stands at the center of it. The researcher who is also an artist
does not assume the separation between him and his object of study because he
cannot contemplate any distance between the researcher and the artistic practice that
they develop, which, in turn, is their focus of research [20].
If we continue searching for nuances, investigating, in turn, involves actions
such as planning, acting, reﬂecting, establishing, theorizing, converging, and con-
cluding, among others. On the other hand, the action of inquiring includes actions
such as browsing, intuiting, ﬁnding out, inquiring, speaking, and questioning. In
this way, we ﬁnd the ﬁrst constant of the complementary nature between scientiﬁc
research and artistic inquiry, establishing that where scientiﬁc research seeks the
expansion of concrete knowledge, inquiry in art offers the possibility of increasing
our sensitivity to the whole. Another way of saying it could be that where research
focuses on acting, investigation focuses on feeling. It leads us to the concept of
experience.
Fig. 6 Kind of research in art ﬁelds
11
The Sustainable Humanist Concept in Art and Science Synergies
219

3.3
Truth or True Experience?
The truth or truth experience of an investigation goes beyond the truth, as stated in
the traditional experimental method. The truth, in arts, lies in the receiver’s capacity
for interpretation based on the previous establishment of veracity that the
artist-researcher has imprinted on his work. For this reason, the viewer is said to be
more than the receiver of work; it is the builder of the message.
However, to reach that climax of certainty and credibility of the results of an
artistic investigation, we must pay special attention to how we do it, to the methods
we choose. Quantitative methodologies collect and analyze data numerically. It is
indirect, summarizes, and treats the experiences as if they were similar, either
adding or multiplying them together or quantifying them [21].
The qualitative ones are mostly used for artistic research, which is to collect and
analyze the information in all possible forms, except the numerical one. Its goal is
to achieve depth and not breadth. As Sherman and Webb [21] put it, “it involves a
direct interest in the experience according to whether it is ‘lived’, ‘felt’, or
‘suffered’.”
Occasionally, artistic research is closely related to humanities research, espe-
cially in terms of own art and/or cultural studies. However, on the other hand,
sometimes, this type of research is closely related to applied technological research,
especially when the research aims at improving materials or techniques [22].
In the social sciences, action research allows the study of social situations whose
objective is to improve the quality of the actions that take place within the situation.
The case study allows us to focus on one, two, or three examples as a focus, with
life history being the methodological approach that best suits observation projects
from a qualitative perspective [23]. However, we can also ﬁnd others, such as
biography or autobiography, that allow us to assess subjectivity and writing from
the in-itself. In all these methodologies, the researcher is both a participant and an
observer.
Artistic research does not have an exclusive methodology. We can rather speak
of methodological pluralism in which what could be afﬁrmed is that “artistic re-
search focuses on the practice of doing and interpreting” [20]. It could be estab-
lished, based on the approach of Borgdorff [20], that artistic research to be so, must
present three differentiating aspects that:
• Affect the foundations of our perception, our way of understanding, and our
relationship with the world and other people;
• The presentation of knowledge and experience is articulated and embodied in
works of art and their creative processes; and
• The investigation does not deal with theory but thought.
Tell me and I forget, teach me and I may remember, involve me and I learn.
Benjamin Franklin
220
S. Nuere et al.

3.4
Experience as a Value of Research
Various types of artistic investigations can be established in which experience is
process and result.
Hand in hand with Barone and Eisner [24], Hernández [25] performs the fol-
lowing characterization of research Based on the Arts (RBA). It is a research
perspective that uses artistic and aesthetic elements. It looks for other ways of
looking at and representing the experience and revealing what it is not said. In this
way, the RBA provides an opportunity to see the experiences and phenomena from
other viewpoints and to ask questions other ways of doing research do not ask us
[25].
Various methodologies from the ﬁeld of social sciences are collected to develop
research performed under the approach described by Hernández. One of these
methodologies is autoethnography, which arises from the combination of ethnog-
raphy and autobiography. The methodology resulting from this combination tries to
convert a discourse in which the protagonists and their reﬂexivity are the ones who
reveal and develop forms of writing that warn creative methodological contribu-
tions for other areas. It can be a way to connect Art with Science from direct
experience [26].
The artography raises the possibility of conducting educational research based
on the arts that do not seek certainty, but rather improve educational perspectives in
themselves [27]. This methodology establishes a triangulation between the artistic,
research, and teaching dimension of the subject. The artographer shares their poiesis
(creation) with their students, so the resulting knowledge passes through the
experience of being part of these poetics. Students can also establish their own ones.
The starting research from the teacher through students metaphorically becomes a
polygon that grows and becomes more important (Fig. 7).
As argued by Marín and Roldán [28], “in scientiﬁc research in general, and in
educational research, there is a constant proliferation of new research and new
research techniques.” This phenomenon continually occurs and maintains experi-
ence as the center of the research process. Decisions can revert the process and the
result of the research following a coherent, rigorous, and attractive way. Thus, the
experience of truth in artistic media helps to understand and transfer what has been
investigated.
What is to investigate? […] It is a verb that implies an action developed by a
living subject, surrounded by inﬁnite context, space, and time Variables. If you
avoid them, you will leave off important aspects of the Research process.
Maybe scientiﬁc and artistic ways of researching can look into each other to
improve their results, and personal experience can be considered. Scientists and
artists, while creating, are making a breakthrough in the human and nature context.
11
The Sustainable Humanist Concept in Art and Science Synergies
221

4
Science and Art Examples
The art and science of asking questions is the source of all knowledge.
Thomas Berger
4.1
Synergies Between Physicists and Artists
Richard Feynman awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1965, became friends
with Jiraur Zorthian (Jerry), an Armenian-American painter. Both decided to ex-
change knowledge since, in their usual discussions, they did not reach an agree-
ment. Thus, they formed each other. Freynman discovered the importance of
experimentation and observation, ﬁnding between art and science a relationship that
adds up. In Feynman’s words: “The painting teacher tries to inspire you to expe-
rience new paths, while physics teachers spend too much time telling students how
they should do things.”
In Ode on a Flower, an animation by Fraser Davidson, based on a BBC inter-
view with Feynman, shows how scientiﬁc knowledge can increase the beauty of the
ﬂower: “I wanted to learn to paint to express an emotion about the world: the
feeling that everything we see is the result of great interior complexity, like that of
atoms interacting. She wanted to remind all those who had ever seen her of the
glorious beauty of the universe.”
This friendship between a physicist and a painter inﬂuenced Feynman’s way of
communicating science [29]. It is known that the Feynman, also a teacher, has put
Fig. 7 Evolution of research
experience dimension
222
S. Nuere et al.

special interest in being able to easily explain his arguments as if it were a con-
ference to a group of ﬁrst-year students.
Science is usually communicated through the data sample. However, neuro-
science and communication experts warn that science should not give up empathy,
but through stories, it needs to make attempts to connect with society, communi-
cate, raise awareness, and make ourselves understood.
At the beginning of the 80s, art began to experiment with science and tech-
nology, sometimes produced in a collaborative environment of multidisciplinary
teams. This was the case of the works presented in the Machines and Souls exhi-
bition presented by the Reina Sofía Art Museum in Madrid in 2008, visited by more
than 450,000 people, thus assuming the most extensive digital art exhibition. The
Machines and Souls exhibition delves into the fact that, at the beginning of the
twenty-ﬁrst century, art and science run parallel paths. Moreover, it was made by a
selection of artists whose works combined art, technology, mystery, emotion, and
beauty.
One way of working is through multidisciplinary teams in a shared Laboratory
designed for art-science cooperation in which the development of Projects occurs.
Art-science interactions would be classiﬁed by the type of use that the artist makes
of the laboratory [30]. According to Gisela Massara, biology or science has allowed
the artist to explore new means and methods of expression, which has meant that
the artist plays a new role in the history of art, whose work also acquires new
meanings [31]. The results are linked to the research areas, with a reﬂection that
guides the project. It is then when science and laboratories are put at the service of
an artistic idea. With these artistic expressions, the borders of science and art are
blurred since they share, beyond the space of experimentation in ﬁelds such as
genetics, bioengineering, the biology of living systems , stem cells, particle phy-
sics, atomic energy, and robotics.
4.2
Collaborations Between Scientists and Artists
SciArt [32] wants to represent the collaboration between scientists and artists. It is a
webspace created for the interaction of artists and scientists and dissemination.
When entering the webpage, you receive the following phrase: “Collaborations
between the Arts & Sciences making the secrets of the world we live in more
intelligible to the human imagination.”
Communication is, without a doubt, one of the contributions that art makes to
science. It has been sought in many cases as a vehicle of communication to society.
However, it has not been and will not be its only function. Many are the artists who
since the 80s have worked in this broad ﬁeld that continues to evolve.
The artistic approaches of Daniel Canogar, a multidisciplinary artist, despite
being framed within digital art or media art, are immersed in the context of con-
temporary creation, in which the artistic object loses value compared to the
reﬂection of the process and the author and viewer roles, referred to as media art by
Claudia Giannetti [33].
11
The Sustainable Humanist Concept in Art and Science Synergies
223

Behind every Canogar installation or work lies a reﬂection around technology
and the human body, the idea of expiration implicit in junk or garbage, and the
relationship of technology with the human body.
Through photography, video, or installation, Canogar’s work reﬂects on the
dizzying changes today.
In another interview published by the newspaper El País, years before, Rafael
Ruiz asks the artist: “Going back to the relationship of the human being with
technology, what is your opinion about the scientists?”
The artist answers: “Every time I feel closer to them, I increasingly vindicate the
idea of the artist as a researcher, who investigates with other methodologies and
Object, but who investigates reality. It is a role that I feel very much in my work
process; I am not a creator of mere aesthetic objects, but I am interpreting a
reality, some circumstances, which is also basically what scientists do. I think the
future is there” [34].
There is a sample of artistic processes in which artists and scientists act almost in
unison, the project being a single unit conceived together.
4.3
Art/Science Exhibitions
Media art or digital art has been gaining strength from entering the twentieth
century. The ArtScience Museum in Singapore, opened in 2011, was the world’s
ﬁrst Art/Science museum, with major exhibitions that combine art, technology,
culture, and science. This type of art-technology relationship has come to Tokyo in
the Digital Museum, also called the light museum. Artists and technicians of light,
sound, and space offer the viewer a walk through different, sometimes interactive,
environments that generate beauty and sensory experiences.
We see changes in spreading and showing art, as a participatory fact, where the
viewer is immersed in the context of the work, thus generating a dialogue between
the work and the viewer, based on the sensory experience received.
In Madrid, we have been able to enjoy the Van Gogh Alive exhibition, a show
with audiovisual media, to enjoy an immersive experience through the work of Van
Gogh. In this case, it is a means of diffusion through a sensory experience made
from an artistic work produced in another medium and not from work conceived as
such.
These new samples or technological museums, in which light is an essential part
of the installations, require new exhibition spaces, typical of this era, and the
exhibited material. Technology is also at the service of the media.
MIDAS magazine—Museums and Interdisciplinary Studies—in 2014, invited to
collaborate in the ﬁfth issue, which includes a thematic dossier: “Science and Art,
SciArt: Museums, Laboratories, Scientists and Artists.” One of the lines of work
was the working relationships between artists, scientists, and science mediators in
artistic creation.
224
S. Nuere et al.

The document that the magazine released asked the following question: once the
representation of science by art was overcome, although through a critical and
poetic relationship, it was essentially based on form, the fusion of science and art
began. Could it be the artists who become scientists by using scientiﬁc knowledge
to create or the scientists who become artists by creating art using science? This
collaboration involves sharing and often implies the need for facilitation and
mediation.
These are two different forms of knowledge production, art and humanities, and
science—both with different research methods (qualitative research and quantitative
research, respectively). However, we ﬁnd enormous potential in these participatory
experiences in joint projects that arise from multidisciplinary teams.
Theories and knowledge are related to personal experience. The process of
innovation takes place in the same way in science, arts, and techniques [35].
Knowing how to accept the imagination is the mark of a creator, in all times, and all
areas of thought or action; the futility precedes the usefulness [35].
5
Science and Art Reconciliation with Nature
Art and science coincide insofar as both aim to improve the lives of men and women. The
latter normally concerns itself with proﬁt, the former with pleasure. In the coming age, art
will fashion our entertainment out of new means of productivity in ways that will simul-
taneously enhance our proﬁt and maximize our pleasure.”
Bertolt Brecht
5.1
Critical Theory
Critical theory is radically opposed to the idea of pure theory, which supposes a
separation between the contemplating subject and the contemplated truth, and
insists on a knowledge that is mediated by experience, by the concrete praxis of an
era, as by the theoretical and extra-theoretical interests that move within them. This
means that the conceptual organizations or systematizations of knowledge; in other
words, the sciences are constituted about the changing process of social life. In
other words, the praxis and the theoretical and extra-theoretical interests take place
at a particular historical moment having a theoretical-cognitive value.
It is the reﬂection around reason, which, in opposition to the instrumental reason
of traditional theory, constitutes a human reason, or as Adela Cortina says, “a
reason that loses all north if it does not sink its roots in the feeling. From pity and
from pain, from the desire for happy life and from the dream of emancipation, the
true reason of the West is on the way” [36].
Heidegger also agrees on the criticism of the dominating tendency of reason over
nature, and in the same awareness of the imminence of destruction. For his part,
Husserl seeks to reconcile science with life, since he considers that the scientiﬁc
11
The Sustainable Humanist Concept in Art and Science Synergies
225

perspective, although important, is simply one more among the many possible
perspectives for looking at the world.
5.2
The Sustainable Approach Through Art
The concept of sustainability is inevitably associated with current production
models and economic structures of a neoliberal nature. These structures produce a
destruction of the environment and an increase in social exclusion [37, 38]. These
aspects directly affect education, producing a “rupture of basic vital ties”. It is
urgent and necessary to generate a thought that reacts to this situation. Education
becomes an important tool for social transformation. Moreno Yus explains his point
of view: “We start from the idea that one of the greatest challenges revolves around
the promotion of a global, interdisciplinary, humanistic, and naturalistic knowl-
edge of reality. The intention is going beyond appearances. This consideration
encourages us to pose the problem of sustainability as something that affects
humanity and ecosystem, depending exclusively on the humanity that inhabits the
planet. The importance of strengthening social and education Systems lies on
understanding and be afﬁliated to global socio-educational approaches with
comprehensive actions” [39].
First, she talks about the interrelation of concepts, integrating humanistic
developments with ecological and naturalistic ones. She underlines the need to
approach the problem from global knowledge, developed through an interdisci-
plinary nature. She also highlights the dimension of the problem, requiring global
understanding or comprehensive actions in which social systems and education
have a fundamental role. Inevitably, ethical aspects of solidarity, acceptance of
difference, and appear interrelated, in which “education has a very speciﬁc role to
play in carrying out this universal task” [39].
Moreno analyzes how cognition has fostered the disconnection of knowledge,
“discordant and typecast in disconnected disciplines,” [39] that reproduces the
usual separation between science and humanities. All this leads to a disorganization
of knowledge and the consequent ineptitude to generate fundamental vital
understandings.
The artist, teacher, and activist, Joseph Beuys (1921–1986), could deal with the
connection between art, sustainability, science, humanities, and its direct connec-
tion with educational, political, and social aspects, under the approaches of Moreno
Yus [39]. This creator was popularly known for his eclectic production, his political
activity, his social involvement, and his overwhelming personality. Her legacy
gives us a unique vision, which will help us break with the artist stereotype, and
especially to understand the potential of art in these areas.
Beuys performs a mixed creation of sculptures, paintings, drawings, of indi-
viduals to performances, even some musical participation. However, the main
interest is not its formal expression, but its conceptual dimension. This artist con-
sidered that artistic activity had enormous potential for social transformation.
226
S. Nuere et al.

5.2.1
Joseph Beuys Sustainable Approach
Beuys coined a series of concepts such as ‘hot plastic art’, ‘social plastic art’, or
‘social sculpture’. All of them attended to the capacity of individuals to carry out a
creative activity and the need, as Moreno Yus pointed out, of empowering the
individual in society. That is, the responsibility of the human being to remain
active, dialoguing, cooperating, and contributing to its improvement under ethical
principles.
This artist considers that art can articulate thought and serve as a link between
the different disciplines, generating divergent processes to interrelate knowledge.
He opposed the trends of his time based on disciplinary separation, purely theo-
retical approaches, and trends that belittled interest in art. Beuys supported expe-
riential learning and defended a humanistic, holistic, and integrated vision of
knowledge.
According to Adams [40], Beuys “was not only a radical ecologist, but also the
pioneer investigator of the role of art in forging radical ecological paradigms for
the relationship between human beings and natural environment.”
Adams’ statements are complemented and expanded by Montagnino, delving
into the clearly ecological dimension of Beuys. Montagnino ﬂatly afﬁrms that Josep
Beuys was a visionary of the current dynamics of sustainable development. He
explains that the artist’s non-destructive model of human development has been the
inspirer of innovators, entrepreneurs, and economists. He considers that “the sense
of urgency, an open and collaborative approach, the search for disruptive solution
to be scaled-up at a global level, the fundamental role of individual engagement
and creativity” are the most important factors of the artistic work of Beuys [41].
One of the most characteristic examples of his work, in its ecological, sustain-
able, and social dimension, is ‘7000 oaks’. The artist intervened in the seventh
edition of the Documenta contemporary art exhibition in Kassel, which consisted of
placing 7000 basalt blocks in front of the Fridericianum Museum facade. They
would only be removed if the equivalent number of oaks was planted in a new
location in Kassel. The intervention lasted from 1982 to 1987 and involved citizens,
urban planners, administrations, companies, political institutions, and artistic cen-
ters. It was a clear example of social sculpture, which used participatory dynamics.
5.2.2
Juan Zamora, Young Artist Sustainable Approach
Finally, we present an example of a young artist and teacher, Juan Zamora. This
interconnection between art, science, and sustainability is also cited in his work. In
his artistic statement, he exposes the following: “I observe the processes of nature
and human activity to offer alternative ways of feeling and understanding our
environment with a series of artworks that impel us to reconsider our vision of the
planet and our relationship with it” [42].
Zamora uses materials and natural phenomena to show processes in a personal
and symbolic poetics. It confronts the human being in his relationship with the land
and the landscape, establishing spiritual, philosophical, cultural, and biological
connections. The artist explains that his work tries to connect with the past, using
nature and the link with the earth. Fragility, sensitivity, and equanimity are the
11
The Sustainable Humanist Concept in Art and Science Synergies
227

constancies of his work, combined with an emphatic poetics to “propose a new
form of exchange between humanity and the environment” [42].
One of the most recent works consists of the accurate representation of the
endangered ﬂora of different geographical areas (Extinct ﬂora in Spain, 2019). The
artist emulates the role of the scientist-draftsman who, before the appearance of
photography, faithfully represented that ﬁnding through drawing (Fig. 8).
In the Coliform work (Fig. 9), Juan Zamora takes samples of the contaminated
waters of the Rio Potomac in Washington, D.C. From the graphic representation
obtained under the microscope, he generated a musical score played by the musi-
cian David Schulman. The artist creates new ways of making human action and its
impact on nature visible, to raise awareness of this transformation. Blanca de la
Torre, the curator of the HYBRIS exhibition, where Juan Zamoras’ work was
shown, states it: “Hybris reﬂects on the possible ways when facing environmental
destruction and proposes an approach to art as a way of positioning oneself in
front of a reality. As a means of complaint and awareness that paves the way
towards a possible ecological aesthetic” [43].
Fig. 8 Extinct ﬂora in Spain, 2019 (Photography by Juan Zamora, Spain, 2019)
228
S. Nuere et al.

The proposal of Zamora, and many other artists, is to generate symbolic and
practical creative proposals to build a more sustainable world. Emphasis is placed
on the ability of art to make visible and generate public debate and seek clear
answers for the regeneration of an environment, under the criteria of justice, equity,
and sustainability:
• Humanism emphasizes the integral and complete vision in the analysis of whole
reality;
• Nowadays, the main Humanism characteristic is the of dealing with diffe of
dealing with different ﬁelds of knowledge at a time;
• Spreading mixed knowledge is essential to progress in life;
• Research and experience, both scientiﬁc and artistic, help form improving
relations between human beings and their surroundings; and
• Sustainability and humanism must attenuate the current division of thought
between art and science, or science and art.
6
Conclusion
Artists and researchers have taken elements from science and the humanities – two distinct
and well-established cultures – and created a third. This third culture –arts & science– is a
bridge between the two old ones. Artists are now able to use elements of science in new and
exciting ways to generate creative results.
Willem 2008
Fig. 9 Coliform, 2019. Juan
Zamora (Photography by Juan
Zamora, Spain, 2019)
11
The Sustainable Humanist Concept in Art and Science Synergies
229

Although it may seem reductionist, throughout the centuries, the interest of the
human being has been the development of his personality, of his , but always in
harmony with nature. Man, and earth have become an inseparable tandem. In the
beginning, training derived from knowledge based on the ability to communicate,
to express oneself, to train in the so-called liberal arts. The constant relationship
with their environment and the need to evolve and innovate led humanshumans to
worry about science, a necessary element to creating everything that nature had not
created. Humanism, in a broad sense of the word, must unite both the formation of
the liberal arts derived from antiquity, as well as the interest and concern for another
more updated knowledge. However, knowledge is not limited; it must be shared. It
has been veriﬁed how, since the Greek paideia, the interest was to train individuals.
Arts, in a broad sense, and humanities are revealed as mediators between science
and man, providing the appropriate means for the development of science. The
problems and opportunities of the twenty-ﬁrst century cover all dimensions of life.
Therefore, to create innovative and comprehensive solutions, interdisciplinary
approaches are required that generate the active exchange of visions, approaches,
and knowledge as shown in Graphical abstract.
During the COVID19 pandemic, humans stopped all activities.
Fauna and ﬂora recovered, ultimately the earth did.
Where is the balance?
Sustainable Humanism is the answer.
Silvia Nuere, 2020
Core Messages
• We must look at the world, our societies, and its problems from a holistic
framework.
• The Greek paideia, the Liberal Arts, and the Studia Humanitas lead us to
the Renaissance humanism, with a constant interest in forming the human
being in their , freedom, and development into a civic community.
• Research, scientiﬁc or artistic, and the way to approach it to become
essential to improve our lives and to move on in harmony with nature.
• Knowledge is at the base of all progress.
• The sum of the different areas of knowledge gives the technician, the
scientist, the humanist, or the artist a greater capacity for understanding,
communicating, and seeing the world from different perspectives.
• Being sustainable means searching for a balance between human beings,
nature, research, and humanistic or scientiﬁc activities.
230
S. Nuere et al.

References
1. Encyclopedia Britannica (2020) Paideia. From Encyclopedia Britannica. https://www.
britannica.com/topic/paideia Accessed 23 May 2020
2. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (2020) Civic education. Retrieved 23 May 2020 from
https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/civic-education/
3. Tubbs N (2014) Humanitas, metaphysics and modern liberal arts. Educational Philosophy and
Theory 46(5):488–498. https://doi.org/10.1080/00131857.2013.765794
4. Merriam Webster (North Dakota) (2020) Liberal arts. In the dictionary Merriam-Webster.com.
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/liberal%20arts. Accessed 20 May 2020
5. Capitán-Díaz A (1987) De los “Estudios de humanidad” (Studia Humanitatis) y la “dignidad
del hombre” en el primer renacimiento español. [Of the “Humanity Studies” (Studia
Humanitatis) and the “dignity of man” in the ﬁrst Spanish Renaissance] Revista Española de
Pedagogía. Año XLV 178:459–498
6. Najemy J (1991) The Humanism of Leonardo Bruni: selected texts. Leonardo Bruni, Gordon
Grifﬁths, James Hankins, David Thompson. Speculum 66(3):616–618. https://doi.org/10.
2307/2864237
7. Broun J, Fagnart L, Hubert JC, Hurard Y, Pierre S, Ruwet J (2007) Leonardo da Vinci. The
European Genius. Brussels: Europa 50
8. Díaz-Novoa G (2009) El humanismo renacentista (Renaissance humanism]). In: Cuadros, C.R.
(Ed.) Perspectivas sobre el humanismo (Perspectives about humanism). Universidad de Ibagué,
Programa de Filosofía, Ibagué. Accessed 16 May 2020 http://ebookcentral.proquest.com
9. Da Vinci el genio (Da Vinci, the genius) (2009) Exposition catalogue. Madrid: grande exhi-
bitions.http://wbc-inco.net/object/document/6983/attach/art_science.pdf Accessed8June2020
10. Brotons P (2014) La estética de los humanistas: Leonardo da Vinci (The aesthetics of
humanists: Leonardo da Vinci) http://blogﬁlosoﬁa.ucv.es/articulos-ﬁlosoﬁcos/la-estetica-de-
los-humanistas-leonardo-da-vinci-por-pablo-brotons/ Accessed 6 June 2020
11. Rodríguez F (2002) El humanismo renacentista (The Renaissance humanism). Jornades de
Foment de la Investigació. Universitat Jaume I. http://repositori.uji.es/xmlui/bitstream/handle/
10234/79400/Forum_2002_12.pdf?sequence=1
12. Vitruvio M (1970) Los diez libros de Arquitectura (The 10 books of Architecture). (A.
Blánquez, Trad). Editorial Iberia, Barcelona
13. Wulf A (2015) The invention of nature. Alexander Von Humbolt’s new world. Knopf
Publishing Group, London
14. Botero-Uribe D (2014) Discurso sobre el humanismo (Discourse on humanism). Ecoe
Ediciones.
ProQuest
Ebook
Central,
Bogotá.
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/
universidadcomplutense-ebooks/detail.action?docID=3201081.
Created
from
universidad
complutense-ebooks on 2020–05-15 10:26:08
15. Hui Chen Z (2016) Developing STEAM education to improve students’ innovative ability—
An Interview with Prof. Georgette Yakman, a Famous American STEAM Educator. https://
steamedu.com/developing-steam-education-to-improve-students-innovative-ability/ Accessed
25 May 2020
16. Blasco S (ed) (2013) Investigación Artística y Universidad: Materiales para un debate
(Artistic Research and University: Materials for a debate). Ediciones Asim, Madrid
17. Calderón N, Hernández F (2019) La investigación artística. Un espacio de conocimiento
disruptivo en las artes y en la Universidad (Artistic research. A space for disruptive
knowledge in the arts and at the university). Octaedro, Barcelona
18. Moraza JL (2008) Aporías de la investigación (tras, sobre, so, sin, según, por, para, hasta,
hacia, desde, de, contra, con, cabe, bajo, ante, en) Arte. NOTAS SOBRE EL SABŒR
[Apories of the investigation (through, over, so, without, by, for, … in art]. In: de la Iglesia JF,
Rodríguez M, Fuentes S (eds) Notas para una investigación artística [Notes for an artistic
investigation.]. Universidad de Vigo, Vigo. Accessed 26 May 2020 from http://belasartes.
uvigo.es/escultura/_documentos/_not_documentos/notasparaunainvestigacionartistica.pdf
11
The Sustainable Humanist Concept in Art and Science Synergies
231

19. Torres M (2004) La investigación cientíﬁca: cómo abordarla 2ª ed. [Scientiﬁc research: how
to approach it 2nd ed.] Doble Hélice. https://doi.org/10.13140/rg.2.1.4335.7843
20. Borgdorff H (2005) El debate sobre la Investigación en las artes. [The art research debate].
Amsterdam: School of Arts
21. Sherman RR, Webb RB (1998) Qualitative research in education: Focus and methods.
Routledge/Falmer, London & New York
22. Borgdorff H (2017) “Where are we today? The state of the art in artistic research”. In: Entre
Diálogos. Un espacio para la investigación artística al alcance de todos. Retrieved from
https://revistadigitalentredialogos.wordpress.com/download/ Accessed 14 May 2020
23. Barone T, Eisner E (1997) Arts-based educational research. In: Complementary methods for
research in education (2nd ed). American Educational Research Association, Washington,
DC, pp 73–98
24. Barone T, Eisner E (2006) Arts-based educational research. In: Green J, Grego C, Belmore P
(eds) Handbook of Complementary Methods in Educational Research. AERA, Mahwah, New
Jersey, pp 95–109
25. Hernández F (2008) La investigación basada en las artes. Propuestas para repensar la
investigación en educación. [Research based on the arts. Proposals to rethink educational
research] In Educatio Siglo 11I (26):85–118
26. Ochoa MA (2019) Textiﬁcando experiencia: La auto etnografía como método de
investigación en las artes (Making text experience: Auto ethnography as a method of
research in the arts). In A de Arte. Revista de Arte y Diseño. 2, N.3:132–161
27. Irwin RL (2013) La práctica de la a/r/tografía. [a/r/tography practice]. In: Revista Educación y
Pedagogía. 25, 65:106–113
28. Marín R, Roldán J (2014) 4 instrumentos cuantitativos y 3 instrumentos cualitativos en
Investigación Educativa Basada en las Artes (4 Quantitative Instruments and 3 Qualitative
Instruments in Educational Research Based on the Arts). In: The 2nd conference on arts-based
research and artistic research. Retrieved from http://art2investigacion-en.weebly.com/
29. Orts-Gil G (2018) Feynman y Zorthian: una amistad de tercera Cultura. Dossier de Física
Cuántica. CCCBLAB. Investigación e innovación en cultura (Feynman and Zorthian: a
friendship of the third Culture. Quantum Physics Dossier. CCCBLAB. Research and
innovation in culture). Retrieved from http://lab.cccb.org/es/feynman-y-zorthian-una-amistad-
de-tercera-cultura/
30. López-del-Rincón D (2016) Arte, biología y tecnología. Relaciones interdisciplinares en el
laboratorio cientíﬁco (Art, biology and technology. Relationships Interdisciplinary relation-
ships in the scientiﬁc laboratory). Arte, Individuo y Sociedad 28(2):235–252
31. Massara G (2013) Arte y nuevas tecnologías, lo experimental en el bioarte (Art and new
technologies, the experimental in bioart). Cuad del Centro de Estudios de Diseño y
Comunicación Año XIII 45:27–37
32. Agostinho M, Casaleiro P, Turk H (2014) Ciencia y Arte, SciArt: Museos, Laboratorios,
Cientíﬁcos y Artistas. MIDAS. Museos y Estudios Interdisciplinarios (Science and Art,
SciArt: Museums, Laboratories, Scientists and Artists. MIDAS. Museums and Interdisci-
plinary Studies) Call for papers #N5. Accessed 2 June 2020 https://sciart.org.uk
33. Giannetti C (2002) Estética Digital—Sintopía del arte, la ciencia y la tecnología. [Digital
Aesthetics—Synopsis of art, science, and technology]. Barcelona: L’Angelot
34. Canogar D (2012) Mentalmente, ya hemos abandonado la tierra (Mentally, we have already
abandoned the earth). El País https://elpais.com/cultura/2012/08/01/actualidad/1343823993_
595182.html Accessed 26 May 2020
35. Gaudin T (1990) 2100 récit du prochain siècle (2100 story of the next century). Payot, Paris
36. Cortina A (2008) La Escuela de Fráncfort: crítica y utopía. Síntesis, Madrid
37. Galtung J (2002) La Transformación de Conﬂictos por Medios Pacíﬁcos. El Método
Trascendente (The Transformation of Conﬂicts by Peaceful Means. The transcendental
method). Madrid: Asociación Nacional Presencia Gitana
38. Sen A (2000) Desarrollo y libertad (Development and Freedom). Planeta, Barcelona
232
S. Nuere et al.

39. Moreno Yus MA (2007) Pedagogía para la sostenibilidad basada en la recuperación de tres
vínculos: vital, humano y natural (Pedagogy for sustainability based on the recovery of three
links: vital, human, and natural). Educatio Siglo 11I(25):167–185
40. Adams D (1992) Joseph Beuys: Pioneer of a radical ecology. Art J 51(2):26–34
41. Montagnino FM (2018) Joseph Beuys’ rediscovery of man-nature relationship: A pioneering
experience of open social innovation. J Open Innov Technol, Mark, Complexity 4(4):50
42. Zamora J (2020) Statement. Retrieved from http://juanzamora.com/
43. de la Torre B (2017) Guía de sala HYBRIS. Una posible aproximación ecoestética. [HYBRIS
room guide. A possible eco-aesthetic approach]. Junta de Castilla y León. Museo de Arte
Contemporáneo. Retrieved from http://www.arteytecnosfera.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/
06/Gui%CC%81a-de-sala-HYBRIS.pdf
Silvia Nuere Ph.D. in Fine Arts, with 20 years of experience in
university teaching, has taught at different universities and in
different ﬁelds as Fine Arts, Architecture, and currently Industrial
Design Engineering and Product Development. From the begin-
ning, she has interested in different and new teaching/learning
methods, seeking synergies between art and science. Her doctoral
thesis investigated geometric representation systems learning
through pictorial expressions. This interest in seeking new
relationships between art and science led her to set up the
scientiﬁc journal ‘ArDIn, Arte, Diseño e Ingeniería’ [ArDIn. Art,
Design, and Engineering]. Another fundamental element is to
bring students closer to the professional world by promoting the
realization of projects connected with the business world. Parallel
to these activities, she has participated in group art exhibitions
and theatre plays. She has also made architectural models and
reproductions of houses and furniture in 1/12 scale.
Laura de Miguel Álvarez Laura de Miguel has a Bachelor of
Fine Arts in Image Arts and a Ph.D. in Fine Arts from the
Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Spain. She is a professor in
the Higher School of Engineering and Technology, at the
Universidad Internacional de la Rioja (UNIR), Spain. With more
than 15 years in the university ﬁeld, she has specialized in being a
teacher and author of the content in areas of Graphic and Artistic
Expression and Design (graphic, industrial, fashion). She teaches
subjects such as Creativity, Artistic Drawing, Analysis of the
shape, or Projects. She has numerous publications and has
participated in artistic and academic outreach activities. Further-
more, in parallel to these activities, she has always kept her face
as a creator by generating multidisciplinary workshops (painting,
drawing, engraving, or short ﬁlm) shown in individual and group
exhibitions. She has also been a curator of exhibition projects,
designed and directed art workshops in spaces for cultural
dissemination. Her lines of research focus on creative processes in
Art-Design, the relationship between Art-Design-Society, educa-
tional innovation in creative training, methodological exploration
for the teaching of graphic representation, evaluation systems in
areas of graphic expression, the direction of audiovisual produc-
tions as an awareness tool.
11
The Sustainable Humanist Concept in Art and Science Synergies
233

12
From Being One to Being Many.
Understanding the Diversity
of Bio-Life: Human, Nonhuman,
and Liminal Beings in Bio Art
and Body Art
Monika Michałowska and Karolina Żyniewicz
“What keeps theories alive and lively is being responsible and
responsive to the world’s patternings and murmurings. Doing
theory requires being open to the world’s aliveness, allowing
oneself to be lured by curiosity, surprise, and wonder. (…)
Theories are living and breathing reconﬁgurings of the world.”
Karen Barad [1]
Summary
Without a doubt, new forms of art, together with new (bio)technologies and
bioengineering, challenge the well-established concepts, assumptions, and
beliefs concerning the human and question the taken-for-granted parameters of
what it means to be a human being. Given that bio/body art and new (bio)
technologies inﬂuence our lives, signiﬁcantly shaping the way we understand
‘the self’ and ‘the human,’ the extension of the discourse concerning these
notions is greatly needed—the extension which will seriously take into account
bio art and body art both as a tool of exploration and as a medium of transferring
the ﬁndings to society. This new way of addressing the problems of human
versus nonhuman will provide a platform for an interdisciplinary perspective that
will enrich the debate by extending the anthropocentric vision of the world. The
new vision of the world requires developing a new method of obtaining and
Monika Michałowska and Karolina Żyniewicz have contributed equally to this paper.
M. Michałowska (&)
Department of Bioethics, Medical University of Łódź, Łódź, Poland
e-mail: monika.michalowska@umed.lodz.pl
K. Żyniewicz
Artes Liberales Faculty, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland
e-mail: karolinazyniewicz@gmail.com
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
N. Rezaei (ed.), Integrated Science, Integrated Science 1,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65273-9_12
235

sharing knowledge. The goal of this chapter is to show how the content can be
connected with the method of work and theory with practice.
In the frame of
“Safe suicide.” project Karolina Żyniewicz cultivated her
lymphocytes (B lymphocytes immortalized with the use of Epstein-Barr virus)
and HeLa cells (Flipln) and cultured them in DMEM medium (dedicated for
adherent cells). Healthy cells reveal a visible nucleus. The reason for the death of
cells was microscopic observation outside the incubator.
[Photography by Karolina Żyniewicz, from the artist's archive, confocal
microscope]
The code of this chapter is 01111001 01100001 01010010 01100101
01110100 01101001 01101100.
1
Introduction
There has been a long philosophical tradition of deﬁning the human and human
nature by emphasizing its distinctive and unique features, with the capacity to form
and operate on mental concepts being among the most commonly acknowledged
236
M. Michałowska and K. Żyniewicz

ones. This perspective has been grounded in the anthropocentric vision of the world
and embedded in Christian theology. It has also been a cornerstone of the Western
analytic tradition rooted in the formal reasoning of moral philosophy that centered
around the human and presupposed human superiority. As such, it has had a
signiﬁcant effect on medical and bioethical realms, both of which primarily deal
with human beings. To a certain extent, it has also shaped artistic projects that have
naturally focused on the human as the axis of the world.
This perspective has been recently challenged by the rapid development of (bio)
technologies used to alter the human body, which has rendered the entrenched
philosophical deﬁnitions of the human too narrow to adequately reﬂect the new
notions of the human and human nature or the changes. Consequently, we have
witnessed a shift in the humanities, which has made redeﬁning the concepts of
‘human’ versus ‘nonhuman’ both exigent and expedient. Symptomatically, the
terminology (providing a criterion for various classiﬁcations and categorizations)
used to discuss these issues reveals certain tensions, since the term versus stresses
conﬂict between the terms that it links and implies their complete separation. In the
age of extensive and common applications of (bio)technologies that question di-
chotomies such as human–plant, human–animal, natural–artiﬁcial, and human–
robot/cyborg, the following questions arise (1) Can the traditional philosophical
concepts based on the human–nonhuman caesura distinction serve as tools to
understand ourselves and the world? (2) Do these mutually exclusive normative
categories adequately reﬂect and describe the world of the twenty-ﬁrst century?
Addressing the problems concerning the dichotomy of human versus nonhuman,
our argument will rely on various notions and concepts of new materialism and ﬂat
ontology (Bruno Latour, Donna Haraway, Karen Barad, Vinciane Despret, Marie
Puig de Bellacasa) as well as on the reasoning espoused by bioconservatists and
bioliberals in bioethical discourse (Norman Daniels, Leon Kass, John Harris). We
will analyze how these theories are reﬂected in and discussed by several bio art
projects. The last Section of our Chapter will examine Karolina Żyniewicz’s bio-art
practice involving work on liminal beings as a testimony to the signiﬁcance of these
notions and concepts.
Since, in our view, ‘queering’ is a fundamental notion for both the practice and
the study of bio art, which provides the research material for this chapter, we
adopted it as our method of writing. We elaborated on Barad’s concept of ‘queer’ as
“a radical questioning of identity and binaries” [1, 2], and used it to question
dichotomies in general and the ‘we’–‘I’ dichotomy in particular. We decided on
writing together (and simultaneously via modern virtual technologies), instead of
putting together separately produced parts. In this way, the writing process became
an intra-action process subject to constant reconﬁgurations. Queer writing also
required an experimental approach, since it presupposed mistakes and uncertainties
about how the text would develop. What was personally important for us was the
fact that it reﬂected in practice the presence of ‘me’ and ‘us.’
12
From Being One to Being Many
237

2
Blurred Borders: The Variety and Diversity
of the Bio-network and the Concept of Being Many
In the twentieth and twenty-ﬁrst centuries, the anthropocentric perspective, so
prevalent in Western culture and underpinned by various dichotomies, was chal-
lenged in a new sense, mainly as a result of the revolution in biotechnologies and
socio-cultural changes. This perspective began to be gradually replaced with an
emergent perspective foregrounding the unity, multiplicity, and diversity of life and
attempting to shadow the dichotomic structuring of life and the world. Over the last
decades, the (bio)technologization of the world has entered our existence and
considerably affected all spheres of our lives. This process is perfectly epitomized in
the medical realm with its range of medical devices, such as cochlear implants and
pacemakers. Its recent and even more archetypal exempliﬁcation is to be found in
bio art, which blurs the borders of the human and the nonhuman at various levels
and dimensions. As inevitable as these changes seem, they cause certain anxiety
and feelings of unease. Losing the superior and dominant role in the world, which,
by the power of God or nature, gave us unlimited rights to rule all other forms of
life, strips us of the uniqueness that has been taken for granted for millennia and
helped us humans to deﬁne ourselves and to understand the world around us.
Arguably, this loss makes us feel that we dangle in the void of the undeﬁned and
no-identity. In this sense, the transformation we undergo is risky and disturbing,
since it requires redeﬁning the most fundamental concepts that ground our identity,
such as the human and life, as well as repositioning the human within the
bio-network. This repositioning needs to happen in all areas of existence, both in
theory and in practice. Apart from philosophy and bioethics, bio art, which is part of
art&science practice and has generated an extensive theoretical framework, can also
provide valuable insight into the process of transformation and redeﬁnition.
Therefore, in our analysis, we shall avail ourselves of both philosophical and artistic
perspectives.
One of such theoretical attempts to re-understand the human and life can be
found in Bruno Latour’s concepts of the ‘sociology of associations’ and creating a
network [3] that draw our attention to relations between humans and nonhumans
and the modes in which they exist. Another approach that informs our analysis was
put forward by Donna Haraway in her concept of ‘becoming with many,’ which she
formulates in a paradoxical claim that “To be one is always to become with many”
[4]. By stressing the importance of ‘splitting’ instead of ‘being,’ the former in her
view contributing to the distribution of agency, she also addresses another
dichotomy, namely the one between the subject and the object [5]. In our chapter,
we shall also draw on Karen Barad’s notion of ‘cutting together-apart’ [1, 2], which
encapsulates the queer character of reality and the lack of rigid borders. Largely
indebted to Barad’s background in quantum physics, this notion applies physical
rules to the discourse of the humanities, and underlines that the ‘cutting’ (such as by
quantum scissors) does not mean a strong separation because the cut elements are in
constant intra-actions. Finally, we shall employ the notion of caring as theorized by
238
M. Michałowska and K. Żyniewicz

Vinciane Despret, which is a way of being response-able, being patient, active or
passive, depending on which is needed [6].
In our analysis, we argue that these theoretical approaches cross methodological
borders and interconnect to form a new conceptual framework. Moreover, by
stressing the importance of the actual presence of the researcher/artist, they take into
account her/his/their embodiment, as well as her/his/their individual perspective,
and consequently suspend certain dichotomies. We shall also build on the ﬁrst-hand
experience of a bio artist (Żyniewicz) to show how this methodological trans-
gression is possible in artistic practice (Sect. 4).
2.1
Forging Relations
Latour’s concept of the ‘sociology of associations’ [3] is entwined with the notion
of collectives and deals with relations among various beings as actors. In this sense,
we can conceptualize society and nature not by analyzing the uniqueness of par-
ticular beings, therein humans, but by examining their relations and intra-relations
alongside the ways these (intra)relations are forged and exist. Importantly, as one of
its key aspects, Latour’s theory of social constructionism presupposes a spectrum of
actors, called actants (actors in action), which is not limited to humans or even
living agents. Instead, it encompasses both human and nonhuman entities, while the
nonhuman ones can be sentient or non-sentient. This allows seeing reality not as
something existing outside or ‘out there,’ but as something embedded in social
practices and being constructed by diverse and varied cognitive activities. In
Latour’s Actor Network Theory (ANT), a human being (a scientist in the case of
laboratory practice) is not a mere recipient of scientiﬁc facts or the leading actor of
reality. A human becomes a creator, at the same time remaining just an element in
the network of equal actors—of “scientists and engineers and of all their human and
non-human allies” whose actions are “the cause, of which various states of nature
and societies are the consequence” [7]. In this sense, the production of knowledge
becomes a collaborative process which involves human and nonhuman agents and
depends on contingent social and epistemic norms. Network experiences in bio-
logical laboratories and the experience of building relations (which one of the
authors of the text has had) reveal that perceiving the human as a leading actor in
control of the process of life is an illusion. Bacteria/yeast or tissues can stop
growing or, on the contrary, they can start to grow in a bizarre or unpredictable
way. Also, nonhuman non-sentient actors may play an important, sometimes
unforeseeable, role in the network; for example, devices may simply break down, or
there may be a power failure. Sometimes, identifying the element that contributes to
the outcome of laboratory work or signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the network becomes a
separate task in its own right. The laboratory is also a site where the diversity of life
reveals its potential, and where various forms of production and re-production take
place, becoming the border zone of transformations. The laboratory, being a
physical space, forms both the context and the network of relations and
intra-relations.
12
From Being One to Being Many
239

A similar perspective has been adopted by Karen Knorr Cetina [8]. In her theory
of epistemic cultures, Knorr Cetina also relies on constructivist thinking where the
laboratory is a mechanism comprised of several different active components. Her
concept, however, is still recognizably informed by the anthropocentric perspective,
and to some extent is a continuation of the medicine-oriented use of animals in
biomedical studies. The value of living agents depends on whether they are useful
for research. Moreover, their value is gradable—the more useful they are, the more
valuable they become to humans. Consequently, they lose their signiﬁcance alto-
gether if they appear to present no beneﬁts to research/medical practice. In other
words, the utility criterion continues to be a relevant factor in this model. In Sect. 3,
we shall refer to some artistic projects that challenge this approach.
2.2
Being Many and Cutting Together-Apart
Another interesting and signiﬁcant insight into the issues analyzed in this chapter is
offered by the theories of new materialism, especially in its feminist iteration as
represented by Donna Haraway, who believes that we should perceive actants as
‘signiﬁcant others’ and try to ﬁnd a way to coexist with them. It can be argued that
being one means being many. This idea of distributed agency dismantles the
subject-object binary, which is one of the crucial dichotomies in Western thought.
By employing the notion of a ‘multiple subject,’ Haraway points out that the
distribution of agency is also associated with the fragmentation of human agency
and the human losing the dominant position, which eventually leads to the distri-
bution of equivalence. As Haraway underlines: “Situated knowledges are about
communities, not about isolated individuals” [5]. Given that a researcher is just one
among the many elements of the network of actants, research should accommodate
the active participation of other actants. The process of acquiring and sharing
knowledge is a collaborative one. It involves science, transdisciplinary approaches,
and liminal practices as well.
Some more insight into the concept of being many can be gleaned from the
works of Karen Barad, who uses analytical tools derived from quantum physics,
because, as she explains: “Quantum physics profoundly disrupts many classical
ontological and epistemological notions what we take for granted, and delving into
the details of this disruption can open up exciting realms of thought” [1, 2]. Barad
argues that instead of perceiving the world as partitioned into distinct ontological
domains, which leads to splitting or cutting almost anything we can think of into
two—the process reﬂected in the various dichotomies we address—we should
rather adopt the notion of what she calls intra-action. By referring to the concept of
quantum leaps, she introduces the notion of dis/continuity. She points out that the
slash reveals the active and intra-active character of the world and makes us rethink
various categorizations based on binary oppositions and imposed on reality [1, 2].
In elaborating on this idea, Barad avers that: “Dis/continuity is neither continuous
with discontinuity nor discontinuous with continuity. The assumption that there is a
strict dichotomy between continuity and discontinuity has been a very persistent
240
M. Michałowska and K. Żyniewicz

belief” [1, 2]. She calls the process ‘cutting together-apart,’ whereby she stresses its
splitting and integrating character at the same time.
2.3
Responsibility and Response-Ability
We regard ‘responsibility’ and ‘ response-ability’ as central notions in a non-
anthropocentric vision of the world. The concepts can already be identiﬁed in
Haraway’s theory, but they are even more pronounced in Vinciane Despret’s the-
oretical model. Like many other authors afﬁliated with new materialism and
posthumanism, Despret aspires to reshape the anthropocentric perspective. Her
endeavor is focused on a speciﬁc aspect of recasting the human-centered mindset
that is articulated in her question whether our actions are our responsibility or rather
response-ability. Each chapter of Despret’s book entitled What Would Animals Say
if We Asked the Right Question? [6] provides a different example of human–animal
response-ability, in which taking both actors of the relation into account becomes
crucial. By stressing the importance of being with others instead of being like
others, Despret shows how we can open ourselves to paying attention to what
various living beings communicate. In her view, taking the pinstead of beiner-
spective of other species is the greatest misunderstanding in non-anthropocentric
discourse. She discusses Barbara Smut’s research and her entering a baboon group
in order to insist that a different scientiﬁc perspective should be adopted—one of
being visible, present, and interacting with animals [9]. Such interaction contributes
to mutual learning and mutual transformation, to use Despret’s terminology.
Despret underlines the role of ‘being properly embodied,’ since being physically
present means being response-able. The lived body recognizes the self in the ability
to respond. Despret suggests adopting a similar approach in laboratory research,
which means taking into account the preferences and interests of animals used in
research. Response-ability means sharing the responsibility for research, as well as
perceiving research as a performative process which involves the unknown,
uncertainty and, to some extent, irony. It means, moreover, appreciating natural
reactions of the observed animals, instead of presupposing certain responses which
meet the researchers’ expectations and ﬁt the research plan. Useful frameworks
evoked by Despret in this context include Jakob Johann von Uexküll’s theory of
Umwelten [10] and William James’s [11] proposal of the ‘pluriverse’ [6]. Both of
them envision ‘being-with-associated-worlds.’ There is not just one objectiﬁed
world; we exist in and simultaneously construct multiple interrelated worlds. Each
of these worlds requires a different way of communication. Exploring them means
engaging in translations, or, more precisely, it means both comparing and trans-
lating. Additionally, we need to accept that something can get lost in translation.
However, we argue that there is nothing wrong with that and that the new com-
munication mode can become a therapy for perfectionists, making them realize that,
as human beings, they are neither the only ones responsible for everything nor in
control of everything, they should trust others and collaborate (Fig. 1).
12
From Being One to Being Many
241

2.4
Caring
We believe it is futile to talk about responsibility and
response-ability without
taking into account caring. One of the notions of caring relevant to our study can be
found in writings by Marie Puig de Bellacasa. In her book entitled Matters of Care:
Speculative Ethics in More Than Human Worlds, Puig de la Bellacasa identiﬁes the
concept of care as the cornerstone of knowledge transformation and links care to
touch [12]. Her claim that “[c]are is not about fusion; it can be about the right
distance (…)” [12] ties in with the notion of response-ability. Being simultaneously
merged and distant reﬂects the idea of being one and many at the same time, as Puig
de la Bellacasa implies by posing an important question: “How many are ‘we’?”
[12]. If approached seriously, this question prompts other ones: Who/what should
be included in ‘we’? How broad should the network of relations be? How should
we care? By showing and bringing into relief various elements of ‘we,’ bio art
addresses these queries.
A caring approach means “an understanding of human agencies as immersed in
worlds made of heterogeneous but interdependent forms and processes of life and
matter” [12]. It entails being aware of human relations with nonhuman agents. As
Astrid Schrader rightly observes, we should recognize two meanings of care: caring
for and caring about [13]. Both these forms of caring are equally important in the
practice of biological art. The object of caring about is not always another human
being; it can be any element of the relational network, therein knowledge-sharing.
Aryn Martin, Natasha Myers, and Ana Viseu claim that “knowing requires caring
about what and how one knows” [14]. Acquiring and sharing knowledge is a matter
of care and responsibility. Producing and presenting bio art projects is also predi-
cated on caring about the entire process, including each and every element and actor
Fig. 1 Working with insects
—forging relations
[Photography by Karolina
Żyniewicz, from the artist's
archive]
242
M. Michałowska and K. Żyniewicz

of it. Schrader stresses that caring sometimes requires troubling oneself [13], which
involves making an effort to redirect the focus from ‘me’ to ‘us.’ Thus, caring
becomes an element of professional ethics.
Caring is naturally bound up with the concept of touch, as Puig de Bellacasa
emphasizes. Touch is both of physical and of metaphorical character, and it also
comprises an element of the unknown, since we cannot predict the way the object
we approach will react [12]. Being careful means being open, responsive, and ready
both to touch and not to touch (Fig. 2).
3
Bio Art and Body Art as a Way of Crossing Borders
and Forging Relations
The notions discussed in the preceding Section will serve as important analytical
tools in our discussion of bio art projects that, in our view, simultaneously reﬂect
the ongoing changes and pave the way for shadowing the dichotomies. We shall
focus on several projects that challenge the anthropocentric vision of the world and
question the taken-for-granted concepts of the human by extending the notion of
humanity and putting it on the borderline. We shall now have a closer look at these
projects.
3.1
Human–Plant
Let us consider an artistic project that uses biological material to create new forms
of life, such as Edunia, “a genetically engineered ﬂower that is a hybrid of myself
[Eduardo Kac] and Petunia” [15]. Transgressing the borders between the plant and
the human, Kac shows how rigid categorizations, even genetic ones, can redeﬁne
‘the self’ and afford new ways of self-creation and self-deﬁnition. As he puts it: “In
this work, it is precisely that which identiﬁes and rejects the other that I integrate
into the other, thus creating a new kind of self that is partially ﬂower and partially
human” [15]. By openly questioning the human–plant dichotomy, Kac directs our
attention to the ideas of being many and of entering a certain relationship, one
deepened by a genetic connection, with a being that is both metaphysically and
biologically alien to us. This project is also an example of so-called junk art. The
genetic engineering procedure performed by Kac is not visible as such; rather, it is
readable, and can only be recognized and understood with the help of the artist’s
commentary. As Thierry Bardini observes: “(…) an interesting new twist on the
history of art, the visible has given way to the readable, and in both cases, the
aesthetic posture requires the explanatory discourse of the artists. The real cyborg,
the artiﬁcial creature, is (…) invisible to the piece’s audience: it is the plasmid, this
12
From Being One to Being Many
243

virus-like entity, that is the true creation” [16]. What the audience of Edunia can
see is the phenotype of the ﬂower [17]. The artist explains that the pattern visible in
the Petunia results from the presence of his gene, yet the genome is not visible (at
least not to the naked eye). The crucial actant remains outside the audience’s
perception. The responsibility of the artist is to give information and expound the
procedure. In a way, Kac engages a complex network of actors in a dialogue in
which the range of interlocutors is not limited to humans, to paraphrase Latour. In
this case, the agency is distributed among the artist, his gene, scientists in the lab,
and the plant, all of them involved in intra-actions.
3.2
Human–Animal
Human self-repositioning through ‘the other’ is one of the leading motifs in Art
Orienté objet, Que le cheval vive en moi (2011), a project which poses a conundrum
concerning the rigid borders between the human and the animal. By injecting horse
immunoglobulins into her own blood system, Marion Laval-Jeantet challenged that
demarcating line [18, 19]. One of the main medical concerns of the project was the
reaction of the human immune system to horse immunoglobulins, which could
cause immediate serious health problems, including an anaphylactic shock or death,
and have long-term detrimental outcomes. Over several months, Laval-Jeantet
gradually adapted her immune system to horse immunoglobulins by regular in-
jections to slowly develop tolerance and prepare her body for a full dose of horse
blood plasma containing the entire spectrum of foreign immunoglobulins. This
borderline and life-threatening art project proved an artistic success, yet the artist
experienced psychological and physiological effects, which were most likely a
response to foreign proteins; as she puts it: “I had the feeling of being extra-human
Fig. 2 Taking care of insects [Photography by Karolina Żyniewicz, from the artist's archive]
244
M. Michałowska and K. Żyniewicz

(…) I was not in my usual body. I was hyper-powerful, hyper-sensitive, hyper-
nervous and very difﬁdent” [20].1
It has been commonly acknowledged that over the twentieth and twenty-ﬁrst
centuries medicalization has spread on an unprecedented scale, affecting all the
aspects and areas of our lives. It has also had a signiﬁcant impact on the increase of
general medical knowledge among the general public. In a sense, by asserting the
incompatibility of the animal and human immune systems, and warning against the
possible medical risks due to the immunological response of the human body to
horse blood plasma, the professional literature reinforces the dichotomy between
the human and the animal, as well as the perception of other species as alien, in both
medical and laymen’s circles. This antagonist perspective is also visible in medical
language, which operates on such dichotomies and uses phrases such as
attack-response, protection-destruction, or arm against [21–23], conveying a con-
ﬂict between the human and a foreign body that attacks the human. Laval-Jeantet’s
project challenged the ‘human versus nonhuman’ dichotomy at the cellular level by
addressing the problem of the perception of trans-species modiﬁcations (whether
medical, such as xenotransplantations or xenotransfusion, or artistic ones) as a
species–species conﬂict. It has recently been reported that as a result of advance-
ments in overcoming immunological barriers [24], the abandoned procedures of
xenotransfusion, which go back to Jean-Baptiste Denis’s attempts in the seven-
teenth century, are “once again on the agenda” [25]. Roux, Saï, and Deschamps also
argue that, if rejection mechanisms were successfully overcome, “[t]he use of an
animal source would provide an unlimited amount of blood on demand, would
eliminate the risk of transmission of inter-human infectious diseases (hepatitis C,
HIV, etc.)” [25]. It seems, however, that the authors abide by the ‘superiority–
inferiority’ dialectic of ‘human–animal’ and that, by focusing on the therapeutic
aspect of the procedure, they reinforce the hierarchical and anthropocentric vision
of the world. Animals are important as long as they are useful to humans. In our
view, the power and the critical role of Laval-Jeantet’s project lie in her attempt to
evade this anthropocentric human–animal relation. It also builds a certain personal
experience amid the diversity of actors involved in the project: the human artist,
human doctors, the human audience, and ﬁnally the animal as such (a horse), as
well the animal’s immunoglobulins. Similarly to Kac’s Edunia, Art Orienté objet
produces a network of actants. Apart from quite an obvious involvement of the
human and the animal, another form of participation is in place, namely that of
transfused molecules (an example of liminal beings, to be discussed in the next
Section). Laval-Jeantet’s project reveals the importance of the ethical dimension of
being responsible and response-able, as the artist is responsible both for her actions
and for her body’s response to the animal molecules. The scientists who helped to
implement the project also played an important role as actants: they shared the
1Importantly, as there is little medical data on the process of injections and the artist’s health
condition at the time and no follow up on the long-term effects of the procedure, it is impossible to
conclude whether it indeed had no serious medical consequences, as the artists reported.
12
From Being One to Being Many
245

responsibility for the effect of the medical-artistic procedure, and at the same time
they were the audience of the performance.
Yet another artistic project that challenged the human–animal dichotomy was
undertaken by Kathy High [26, 27]. Between 2004 and 2006, she carried out a
project involving Matilda, Tara, and Star, genetically engineered rats called
HLA-B27 transgenic rats, which were injected with human DNA and thus became
hybrids (High Embracing Animal 2004–2006, HLA-B27 2008). High’s project
addresses the issue of a genetic engineering procedure, which is commonly
accepted in biomedical research and consists in creating human-animal hybrids to
be used as a disease model. The sole purpose of the ‘manufactured’ human-rat
hybrids, as she calls them, is to be created, examined, and bred to serve “as a model
to predict the human response accurately,” a capacity “that makes them our sac-
riﬁcial animal of choice” (High Embracing Animal 2004–2006) (Fig. 3).
A certain tension and a puzzling question arise at this point. While the medical
and laboratory use of transgenic animals is principally approved as ethical by both
the medical professionals and the general public (provided that all the ethical and
bioethical guidelines of medical and biomedical research on animals are met), the
project that takes the opposite path of cell transmission, i.e., from an animal to a
human (as in the case of Laval-Jeantet) rather than from a human to an animal (as in
the case of Matilda, Tara, and Star), becomes disturbing, ethically objectionable, or
even obnoxious and abhorrent. Simply, yet ironically put, it is “yuk,” to use a
famous expression attitude attributed to the bioethicist Leon Kass [28]. We argue
that it is so because Laval-Jeantet’s project puts human superiority at risk. More-
over, it questions ‘human uniqueness’ as something worth protecting at all cost.
To conclude, each of these projects refers to a certain mode of encountering ‘the
other,’ not only at the stratum of seeing but also at the stratum of cell integration,
revealing a profound existential experience of a human who transgresses the bor-
ders of humanity or, as we would say, setting the human on the borderline.
3.3
Human–Robot
The emergence of body art (including cyborg art and hybrid art) as a new move-
ment in which artists use technologies to signiﬁcantly alter their bodies triggers
additional troubling questions for the ongoing analysis of human versus nonhuman
in our culture. Drawing inspiration from a well-known bioethical concept of human
enhancement and from artistic projects, such as those of Stelarc, Neil Harbisson
puts the idea of an enhanced human into practice, calling himself a cyborg
artist [29]. Born with an extreme form of color blindness that results in seeing in
greyscale, Harbisson has an antenna implanted in his skull that enables him to
perceive visible and invisible colors (such as infrared and ultraviolet) through
audible vibrations in his skull. Harbisson hears colors, so to speak, which is an
unnatural skill that humans do not possess. He uses the antenna to create paintings,
such as sound portraits, which he produces by hearing the notes via his antenna
pointed at his ‘sitter’s’ face, writing them down, and subsequently putting them
246
M. Michałowska and K. Żyniewicz

together [30]. Having created sound portraits of several actors, artists, and politi-
cians, Riefe [31] underlines that: “Each person has their own peculiar sound.
Woody Allen sounds very unsaturated, very soft sounds. Macaulay Culkin sounds
C-major, which is very unusual to ﬁnd major chords in a face. Al Gore has different
notes in his eyes cause he has different shades of turquoise. Each eye sounds
slightly different. Leonardo DiCaprio, he sounds almost like a major chord as well.
He sounds G, E, and the shade of the eyes are similar to the color combinations of
Macaulay Culkin.”
At this point, we can usefully refer to Emmanuel Levinas’s well-known notion
of the ‘face’ [32], which acquires yet another dimension in Harbisson’s project. For
Levinas, a face-to-face encounter with the Other becomes the most profound
existential experience through which the ‘self’ can be constituted and deﬁned. Since
the face of the Other affects ‘me’ in a fundamental way before any reﬂection can
emerge, the encounter of the Other becomes the ﬁrst unreﬂective experience of
another being. Although, for Levinas, this is a transcendental experience, Harbis-
son’s project reveals that the encounter with the face of another person starts at the
physical level. The face-to-face relation via his antenna becomes a truly physical
and unreﬂective relation with another human being, in which the Other can never be
truly perceived, being only encountered and reﬂected, and remaining in the constant
process of revealing. In this way, the face indeed speaks and is literally, rather than
Fig. 3 Embracing Animal
[Photography by Kathy High]
12
From Being One to Being Many
247

only transcendentally, experienced by the lived body, which opens up a platform
for dialogue in various senses of the term, be they metaphysical or literal.
Harbisson’s project and body transformations pose a fundamental problem that
has been vividly analyzed by bioethicists and philosophers in the so-called
enhancement debate. Bioconservatists claim that the distinction between natural
(e.g., human) and artiﬁcial (e.g., robot) is obvious and can be reasonably maintained
by explicit or implicit reference to the concept of human nature. For instance,
Norman Daniels deﬁnes enhancement “as departures from species-typical normal
functioning” [33], and argues that the medical boundary between therapy and
enhancement can be effectively defended by resorting to the notion of normality.
Thus, he views the therapy-enhancement distinction as evident: therapy restores
normal species functioning, whereas enhancement improves it. This approach is
also adopted by Leon Kass. Relying on the notions of ‘natural’ and ‘humanness,’
Kass formulates a normative evaluation of any procedures that are unnatural,
artiﬁcial, or invasive, and expresses an attitude called in the subject literature as
“yuk” [28]. In his view, the mere fact that they are unnatural sufﬁces to consider
them morally wrong. As he claims, “we intuit and feel without argument” that our
humanity is something “that we rightfully hold dear” [28], and any attempt at
tampering with it is “offensive, grotesque, revolting, repugnant and repulsive” [28].
Although Kass talks about human cloning in particular, it is quite obvious that his
morally negative assessment of biotechnologies and bioengineering used to alter
humans is not limited just to cloning.
Kass’s approach has been eloquently criticized, among others, by John Harris,
who insists that such claims of what he calls ‘olfactory ethics’ lack any theoretical
underpinnings. Harris underlines that the term ‘rightfully,’ as employed by Kass,
needs to be founded on at least one reasonable argument, and ironically concludes
that “[t]he problem is that nasal reasoning is notoriously unreliable and difﬁcult to
assess objectively, and olfactory ethics, despite being widely practised, has never
really taken off as an academic discipline” [34].
Although Harbisson calls himself a cyborg, the question we pose is whether such
rigid classiﬁcations (human vs. robot vs. cyborg) are indeed necessary or tenable in
the ﬁrst place, given that any person with a cochlear implant, which makes a human
a blend of biological and mechanical parts functioning together, is also a cyborg.
Our position is that an altogether different approach appears to be more fruitful and
signiﬁcant. The approach we advocate involves redeﬁning the notion of the human
and extending its boundaries and limits. In this sense, elaborating on Haraway’s
theory, we would say that many can become one.
248
M. Michałowska and K. Żyniewicz

4
Being in-Between: The Concept of Liminality
4.1
Liminal Beings: Inhabitants of the Borderline Area
Apart from the relations that can be forged between humans and animals, humans
and plants, or humans and robots, humans may enter yet another and less obvious
form of relation, namely a relation with liminal beings, i.e., beings of an indeﬁnite
ontological status.
The notion of liminality (from Latin limen) comes from anthropology. It was
ﬁrst introduced to the history of ideas by Arnold van Gennep in his Les rites de
passage of 1909 [35] and then developed by Victor Turner in the late 1970s. They
used it to describe the process of passing the ritual and the liminal phase: “Limen,
or threshold (…) is a no-man’s-land betwixt and between the structural past and the
structural future (…)” [36]. They divided the ritual process into three phases:
pre-liminal (separation), liminal, and post-liminal (re-assimilation/incorporation).
The middle one is the core of our interest. When passing the ritual, a person or a
group needs to leave the well-known context and identity in order to obtain a new
one. Between these two deﬁned and identiﬁed phases lies an undeﬁned and
unknown one: liminality. Liminality is the phase of reﬂection, where the individual
ﬁnds herself in the transition from one known to another known; as Turner puts it:
“Liminal entities are neither here nor there; they are betwixt and between the
positions assigned and arrayed by law, custom, convention, and ceremony” [37].
One could say that being in the liminal phase means being in a borderline area.
In her book entitled Liminal Lives: Imagining the Human at the Frontiers of
Biomedicine (2004) [38], Susan Merill Squier develops the notion of liminality
depicted by van Gennep and Turner by extending its application to beings other
than humans. Using the theoretical framework of new materialism (see Sect. 2), and
relinquishing binary thinking, she includes nonhuman living beings into the realm
of liminality. In Squier’s view, nonhuman agents can also pass the ritual of
transformation. To give a clearer insight into the nature of nonhuman liminal be-
ings, she lists some of them, such as embryonic stem cells, organs for transplan-
tation, and frozen embryos (awaiting implantation) [38]. These forms of life are
intrinsically poised at the stage of in-between, between two different forms of
embodiment. Another of their distinctive features is that they do not exist inde-
pendently, but they are kept alive in laboratory conditions. The laboratory space is a
border zone for nonhuman liminal entities. It is, however, a border zone for
everyone else as well, except the authorized personnel. This fact carries signiﬁcant
meaning for our analysis of bio art practice that deals with
nonhuman liminal
beings and actually occurs in the space of a laboratory. Consequently, nonhuman
liminal beings become known through bio artists'’ actions.
Since liminality, by deﬁnition, is the phase of facing the unknown, a phase in
which a being awaits to be redeﬁned, it deﬁes all the categorizations and classiﬁ-
cations with which humans feel so comfortable. As Squier suggests, the existence
of nonhuman liminal beings is crucial for our human existence. They can teach us
12
From Being One to Being Many
249

how to be liminal, since liminality is in fact what we humans share with nonhu-
mans. Such lessons have been experienced by one of the authors of this Chapter.
4.2
Being a Liminal Actant
We shall now incorporate the ﬁrst-hand experience of Karolina Żyniewicz’s bio
artistic practice into our analysis, focusing on the ‘me’ perspective. This perspective
also requires changing the pronoun from ‘we’ to ‘I.’ This change does not mean,
however, that ‘I’ becomes separated from the rest of the network. It is simply a
matter of language which does not have adequate terminology to describe the
liminal position and ‘being many.’ ‘I’ is related here to nonhuman living beings,
non-living actants, scientists, the audience of exhibitions, and ﬁnally, to the
co-author of this text and its readers.
Being a bio artists means being liminal. As liminal beings enumerated by Squier
are located in biological laboratories, a limited range of persons—mainly, if not
exclusively, scientists—can work with them. Access to the lab can be perceived as
an opportunity to be closer to liminal beings. Yet it should be acknowledged that
such access is not easily available even to bio artists, since the work with liminal
beings, such as human body parts and cells (especially those listed by Squier),
depends on obtaining approvals of various bioethical committees and regulatory
bodies and is restricted to biomedical research. Such constraints are due to a rather
obvious fact that organs for transplantation or embryos are too valuable to be used
in artistic projects, as the former are meant to save lives and the latter can be
considered (potential) persons.
As an artist working in biological laboratories, I have decided to go beyond
Squier’s deﬁnition of liminal beings and extend its meaning to include another form
of life. In one of my projects, entitled safe suicide (Żyniewicz 2016–2019), I
worked with my own cells: ﬁrst with immortalized B lymphocytes and then with
ﬁbroblasts [39]. They were derived from my own body and kept alive in sterile
laboratory conditions. My cells were not planned to be transferred to another body,
although ﬁbroblasts could be cultivated as the skin for transplantation. In the case of
B lymphocytes, I took care of them by changing the medium, controlling the
growing process, and immortalizing them. It was authentic care for separate beings,
which was enhanced by the sensory experience of seeing them under a confocal
microscope. Yet the intention behind all these actions had always been to ‘kill’ the
cells, which I eventually did in various experiments. Being-as-one and at the same
time destroying (killing myself, so to speak) generated a sustained and distressing
sense of incongruousness; namely, I was not sure whether I was facing ‘me’ or
‘us’—my cells got their own dates of ‘death,’ even though I shared my human
name with them. They could even be said to have my ‘face.’ Although they were
not moved either to another or to my own body, and in a sense their passing of the
ritual was incomplete, I perceived them as liminal beings.
Laboratory devices are a kind of technological body. This is especially true for
the incubator, which resembles the human body, including its internal heat
250
M. Michałowska and K. Żyniewicz

(incubators are set to maintain the average temperature of the human body). As a
piece of technology, the incubator is artiﬁcial, but it has its own internal temper-
ature, which is identical to the temperature of the human body. This could become a
bridge of shadowing one of our most entrenched dichotomies, speciﬁcally the
dichotomy of natural and artiﬁcial. The technological body contains ‘us.’ Multiple
diverse cell cultures—cells derived from various organisms—live there at the same
time. In this sense, technology offers a real chance to create ‘us’ (composed of
many different ‘me’s’). Arguably, another dichotomy—the one of I and they—is
shadowed in this context as well, in the sense of forging intra-relations and
becoming ‘we’ (Fig. 4).
The relations that are forged within the ‘we’ are unique because of the invisi-
bility of the cells to the human eye. That is why the relations are not direct; they are
mediated through various representations. We need technological extensions (mi-
croscopes) to see these liminal beings, to see their ‘faces.’ The ﬁrst level of
mediation involves the use of laboratory tools, such as pipets, gloves, and test tubes;
the second one is the application of tools for the observation and analysis of
pictures. By introducing a liminal being to the audience at art exhibitions and
performances, a bio artists becomes the third level of representation. Finally, by
making the audience familiar with liminal being, bio art extends the network of
actants, and the ‘we’ becomes increasingly broader (Fig. 5).
My personal experience with liminal beings on the one hand and with the
audience on the other puts me (as an artist and a human) in-between, offering me a
true experience of liminality, and furthers my process of becoming liminal. This
Fig. 4 The cells in an incubator—a technological body [Photography by Karolina Żyniewicz,
from the artist's archive, Institute of Genetics and Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, University of
Warsaw]
12
From Being One to Being Many
251

impression is also enhanced by my method of work. Bio art is a liminal practice in
its own right; it is situated knowledge production (to use Haraway’s coinage) and a
method of being responsible and response-able. I use the term ‘bio art’ even though
Fig. 5 Care and response-
ability, human and
nonhuman [Photography by
Karolina Żyniewicz, from the
artist's archive]
Fig. 6 Symbiosis [Photography by Karolina Żyniewicz, from the artist's archive]
252
M. Michałowska and K. Żyniewicz

I realize that it does not accurately reﬂect or deﬁne my work as an artist. There is
bio (biology) as a ‘pre-liminal’ term, art as a ‘post-liminal’ term, and a gap between
them. I inhabit this gap, as do all the artists whose projects are evoked in our
Chapter, who are translators and distributors of liminality, a kind of vectors. Fol-
lowing Karen Barad’s model, I conclude that as a liminal actant, I am constantly
being ‘reconﬁgured’ (Fig. 6).
5
Conclusion
5.1
Designing a New Conceptual Apparatus
As a result of revolutions and developments in (bio)technology and bioengineering,
humanity is undergoing important changes in all—biological, social, cultural, and
other—dimensions of its existence. The process of change requires designing a new
conceptual apparatus, since the traditional philosophical and cultural concepts (and
the terminology they employ) which we have used to deﬁne the most profound
notions, such as ‘human’ and ‘life,’ and to explain the most troubling dilemmas
have proved fruitless. The static and rigid borders and binaries on which we have so
far founded our knowledge of the world and ourselves are no longer tenable.
5.2
Constructing a Non-binary Reality
Taking into account the theory of passing the ritual, these borders and binaries
belong to the pre-liminal phase of the ritual. They are well-known and safe, yet they
have become insufﬁcient. We ﬁnd ourselves at the point of stepping forward and
trying to construct a non-binary reality. This stage of development can be seen as a
liminal phase, in which nothing is certain or deﬁned—several phenomena do not
have a precise status or an accurate description. Following Latour’s theories of
knowledge production, we argue that ‘the black box’ [40], i.e., a set of ready
solutions (not only in science), has been reopened. We need to see what is inside
and what relations emerge among these elements. Thus, an important question is
whether packing the stuff we have at our disposal now into ‘the black box’ is
creating a new one or merely reshaping the old one. It is also a question about
direction. Speciﬁcally, is it a movement forward or backward, and more impor-
tantly: Is moving back possible if needed?
5.3
Becoming Liminal
Our Chapter shows what the dynamic of becoming liminal can be like and
who/what participates in the process. The new mental framework still must be
confronted with the old structures in order to prove their value and independence.
12
From Being One to Being Many
253

Each of the conceptual and manual (material) practices presented in this text,
including the writing of it, is a frontier activity. We are trying things out, we are
experimenting, we are moving back and forth.
Core Messages
1. Bio art and body art can be a way of analyzing and shaping the human and
nonhuman relations. These relations require being responsible and also
response-able.
2. Human bodies are in the process of reshaping. Humans are becoming
liminal. Bio art (and art & science practices in general) can help us to pass
this ritual.
3. The cultural understanding of liminality, derived from the area of
anthropology
should
be
completed
by
corporal
understanding
of
liminality.
4. Being one of actors of the liminal network allows us to analyze the net-
work from the insider perspective.
References
1. Barad K (2012) On touching—The inhuman that therefore I am. Differences 23(3):206–223
2. Barad K, Juelskjær M, Schwennesen N (2012) Intra-active entanglements: an interview with
Karen Barad. Kvinder, Køn og forskning/Women, Gender Res 1:10–24
3. Latour B (2005) Reassembling the Social—An introduction to actor-network-theory. Oxford
University Press
4. Donna H (2008) When species meet. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis
5. Haraway D (1988) Situated knowledges: The science question in feminism and the privilege
of partial perspective. Feminist Stud 14(3):575–599
6. Despret V (2016) What would animals say if we asked the right questions?, vol 38. U of
Minnesota Press
7. Callon M, Latour B (1992) Don’t throw the baby out with the bath school! a reply to collins
and yearley. Sci Pract Cult 343:368
8. Knorr CK (1999) Epistemic cultures: How the sciences make knowledge. Harvard University,
Cambridge
9. Smuts B (2001) Encounters with animal minds. J Conscious Stud 8(5–6):293–309
10. Uexküll Jv (2010) A foray into the worlds of animals and humans: With a theory of meaning,
trans. Joseph D O’Neil (Minneapolis: Minnesota)
11. James W (1909) 1996. A pluralistic universe. University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, NE
12. de La Bellacasa MP (2017) Matters of care: Speculative ethics in more than human worlds,
vol 41. U of Minnesota Press
13. Schrader A (2015) Abyssal intimacies and temporalities of care: how (not) to care about
deformed leaf bugs in the aftermath of Chernobyl. Soc Stud Sci 45(5):665–690
14. Martin A, Myers N, Viseu A (2015) The politics of care in technoscience. Soc Stud Sci 45
(5):625–641
15. Kac E (2003–2008) Natural history of the enigma
254
M. Michałowska and K. Żyniewicz

16. Bardini T (2011) Junkware. U of Minnesota Press
17. Eduardo Kac Natural History of the Enigma. http://www.ekac.org/nat.hist.enig.html.
Accessed 07 May 2020
18. Marion Laval-Jeantet (Art Orienté objet) Que le cheval vive en moi (May the Horse Live in
Me). https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Awz4w22tFHw. Accessed 07 May 2020
19. Marion Laval-Jeantet May the Horse Live in Me. https://we-make-money-not-art.com/que_
le_cheval_vive_en_moi_may/. Accessed 07 May 2020
20. Laval-Jeantet M Que le cheval vive en moi (May the Horse Live in Me)
21. Brower V (2004) When the immune system goes on the attack: thanks to advances in
research, it may soon be easier to diagnose autoimmune diseases earlier, but therapy remains a
tricky problem. EMBO Rep 5(8):757–760
22. Dave RV, Jebar AHS, Jennings VA, Adair RA, West EJ, Errington-Mais F, Toogood GJ,
Melcher AA (2014) Viral warfare! Front-line defence and arming the immune system against
cancer using oncolytic vaccinia and other viruses. The Surgeon 12(4):210–220
23. Savelyeva N, Allen A, Chotprakaikiat W, Harden E, Jobsri J, Godeseth R, Wang Y,
Stevenson F, Ottensmeier C (2016) Linked CD4 T cell help: broadening immune attack
against cancer by vaccination. In: Cancer vaccines. Springer, Berlin, pp 123–143
24. Deschamps JY, Roux FA, Saï P, Gouin E (2005) History of xenotransplantation.
Xenotransplantation 12(2):91–109
25. Roux FA, Saï P, Deschamps JY (2007) Xenotransfusions, past and present. Xenotransplan-
tation 14(3):208–216
26. Kathy High Embracing Animal. https://www.kathyhigh.com/projects/embracing-animal/.
Accessed 07 May 2020
27. Kathy High HLA-B27. https://www.kathyhigh.com/projects/hla-b27/. Accessed 07 May 2020
28. Kass L, Wilson JQ, Wilson JK (1998) The ethics of human cloning. American Enterprise
Institute
29. Neil Harbisson https://www.cyborgarts.com. Accessed 07 May 2020
30. Neil Harbisson https://cyborgproject.com/pdf/Neil-Harbisson-A-cyborg-artist.pdf. Accessed
20 May 2020
31. Riefe J (2016) Sound portraits by cyborg artist reveal facial similarities between leonardo
DiCaprio and macaulay culkin
32. Levinas E (1961) Totalité et Inﬁni: Essais sur l’Extériorité, Phaenomenologica 8. Martinus
Nijhoff, The Hague
33. Daniels N (2000) Normal functioning and the treatment-enhancement distinction. Camb Q
Healthc Ethic 9:309
34. Harris J (2016) How to be good: The possibility of moral enhancement. Oxford University
Press
35. Van Gennep A (1909) Les rites de passage: étude systématique des rites de la porte et du
seuil, de l’hospitalité, de l’adoption, de la grossesse et de l’accouchement, de la naissance, de
l’enfance, de la puberté, de l’initiation, de l’ordination, du couronnement des ﬁançailles et du
mariage, des funérailles, des saisons, etc, vol 5. É. Nourry
36. Turner VWBE (1986) The anthropology of experience. University of Illinois Press, Urbana
37. Turner
V
(1969)
Liminality
and
communitas.
The
ritual
process:
Structure
and
anti-structure 94(113):125–130
38. Squier SM (2004) Liminal lives: Imagining the human at the frontiers of biomedicine. Duke
University Press
39. Karolina Żyniewicz safe suicide. http://karolinazyniewicz.com/gallery/safe-suicid/. Accessed
20 May 2020
40. Latour B (1987) Science in action: How to follow scientists and engineers through society.
Harvard university press
12
From Being One to Being Many
255

Monika Michałowska works as Habil-
itated Doctor, Assistant Professor at the
Department
of
Bioethics,
Medical
University of Łódź, Poland. Her research
focuses on bioethical aspects of repro-
ductive medicine, feminist approaches to
issues such as preimplantation genetic
diagnosis, embryo, gamete and mito-
chondrial donation, as well as human
enhancement and cross-disciplinary per-
spectives (bioethics/ﬁlm studies/cultural
studies/body, bio and cyborg art) on
dying, aging, and embodiment.
Karolina Żyniewicz works as an
artist (M.A. from the Department of
Visual Arts, Academy of Fine Arts in
Łódź, 2009) and researcher (Ph.D.
student of the Nature-Culture Trans-
disciplinary Ph.D. Program at the
Artes Liberales Faculty, University
of Warsaw). Her artistic projects fall
in the ﬁeld of bio art. She sees her
liminal activity as situated knowl-
edge production. She is mostly
focused on life in a broad under-
standing of the term (its biological
and
cultural
meanings).
http://
karolinazyniewicz.com/
256
M. Michałowska and K. Żyniewicz

13
Composite Bodies in Times of Revolt.
On Socio-Material Assemblies in Social
Uprisings
Pedro E. Moscoso-Flores and Antonia Viu
“New collective assemblages of enunciation are beginning to
form an identity out of fragmentary ventures, at times risky
initiatives, trial and error experiments; different ways of seeing
and making the world, different ways of being and bringing to
light modalities of being will open up, be irrigated and enrich
one another. It is less a question of having access to novel cognitive
spheres than of apprehending and creating, in pathic modes,
mutant existential virtualities”.
Félix Guattari
Summary
The objectives of this text are twofold. Firstly, it proposes an analysis of the
processes of organic compost and their links to the human in order to illustrate
how the contemporary landscape calls into question habitual conceptions of
popular mobilization and the social using a renewed understanding of the
relationship between human and non-human phenomena and of the diverse
material forces that collide through processes of embodiment or association. The
notion of compost here is an epistemological and political proposal related to
P. E. Moscoso-Flores (&)
Philosophy Department, Universidad Adolfo Ibáñez, Av. Diagonal Las Torres 2640, Peñalolén,
Santiago, Chile
e-mail: pedro.moscoso@uai.cl
P. E. Moscoso-Flores  A. Viu
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Santiago, Chile
e-mail: antonia.viu@uai.cl
A. Viu
Literature Department, Universidad Adolfo Ibáñez, Santiago, Chile
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
N. Rezaei (ed.), Integrated Science, Integrated Science 1,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65273-9_13
257

compositional modes of thought around an ecology of practices. The second
objective is to present the Chilean social uprising of October 2019 by discussing
bodies as composites. Here, we seek to address the political problem from a
perspective that highlights the embodiment processes involved in the revolt and
how it challenges the logic of order imposed by the anthropocentric neoliberal
rationale. In order to achieve the two objectives, we consider how bodies are
composed through forces which, in their multiple trajectories and contingent
encounters, alter the temporalities of the urban space, and we explore the mesh
of human and non-human elements that shape the landscape of revolt as an
expression of the need to recover its intensive and relational potential through
mobilization.
“This dance is the bomb.”
[Street art by Caiozzama, Chile, 2014].
The code of this chapter is 01110011 01100101 01100101 01110010
01100101 01101110 01010000 01100011.
1
Introduction: Matters of Compost
In 2019, the legislature of Seattle in Washington, USA, passed a law that introduces
a new way for human bodies to be laid to rest. The practice of human composting
will, as of 2021, be an option available to those looking for an eco-friendly
258
P. E. Moscoso-Flores and A. Viu

alternative to the more traditional deathcare options of burial and cremation. As
Katrina Spade, CEO of Recompose, puts it, this process of “recomposition” or
“natural organic reduction” is very similar to practices that have long been used for
the disposal of animal carcasses, particularly livestock. She goes on to highlight the
distinction between processes of “decomposing” and “recomposing,” explaining that
the former occurs when a body is above ground, while the latter takes place when it
is integrated with the soil or buried, allowing the elements to intermingle [1].
This image provides us with a context to conduct our proposed analysis. First of
all, it is worth pointing out that the practice of human composting would have been
inconceivable a few decades ago. Human rituals associated with death have been an
integral element of processes of cultural construction since time immemorial,
constituting more than merely an efﬁcient means of disposing of the bodies of the
deceased. These ritual practices are generally linked to the various beliefs and world
views regarding meanings of life and death and their associated taboos, having
profoundly religious roots in Western Culture. In addition to this precedent, one
should note the diverse social processes and struggles linked to liberal policies and
legislations concerning the human body, as in the case of discussions regarding
reproductive rights, euthanasia, and organ donation.
There is no doubt that ecological discussions sparked by the succession of
natural disasters that in recent decades have underlined the harmful effects of
human intervention are also related to these new possibilities for the treatment of
bodies, almost as though it were time for humanity to give back to the earth that
which it has destroyed through the uncontrolled extractivism of global capitalism.
Within this multifaceted and complex context, the practice of human composting
constitutes an excellent example of the variations in the ways we comprehend the
relationship between the human body and its environment. It reveals a fracturing of
conventional wisdom regarding the body as individuality and poses a critique on
the supremacy of humans over other non-human species, lending weight to the fact
that human materiality is maybe not different from that of other organic compounds.
Rather than embarking upon a discussion regarding the origins of these new
practices or the effects they may have on Western social representations and
imaginaries of life and death, our aim in this chapter is to introduce an exploration
of that which practices of composting make evident in and through the bodies
implicated in it. In other words, we seek to understand bodies like composites, that
is, as living arrangements that acquire form through a series of multiple interactions
and inﬂuences with its environment, which cannot be attributed exclusively to
human bonds. We suggest that, by contrast with the preconceptions engendered by
patterns of thought and behavior embedded by an anthropological world view, it is
possible to embark upon analysis that considers both the semiotic and material
conditions from which bodies emerge. By focusing on the processes that result from
the contacts, movements, and trajectories between the human and the non-human,
and attending to a principle related to the porous and open composition of bodies,
we seek to address phenomena within the contemporary context that are generally
understood as manifestations of social malaise or discontent.
13
Composite Bodies in Times of Revolt
259

Speciﬁcally, we seek to understand the civil uprisings that erupted in late 2019 in
Santiago, Chile, from this semiotic-material perspective. As we shall argue, the
emergence of this event has shown the inability of traditional western epistemo-
logical and political categories to acknowledge the uprising that occurred in Chile
last October entirely. Some reasons justify this endeavor. Firstly, the current
planetary catastrophic context [2, 3] generates new and singular conditions that
demand the creation and imagination of new hybrid categories with which to
critically address the social, in order to deal with the connections and complex
processes between political, economic, scientiﬁc and environmental issues. Sec-
ondly, the endurance of the bodies that make up the landscapes of the uprisings
points to modes of assemblage, understood as movements and trajectories by which
human and non-human bodies are mingled and confused, becoming composites,
that is, by producing new heterogenous embodiments that involve a quarrel with the
linear and causal temporality at the foundation of capitalist rationality. Thirdly,
these assemblages or forms of connective and disjunctive association result in
modes of expression which, more than advocating recognition and the legitimacy of
civil rights rooted in the notion of being human from an individual or collective
perspective, are built by means that seek to create a milieu by experimenting other
ways of involvement from the perspective of a relational space [4] that results from
the mesh and entanglements between material and semiotic elements. This is
achieved through the activation of intensive trajectories that operate through
affective contagion, provoking mutations in the regimes of the sensible [5] through
the consideration of multiple materialities that, aside from their potential for local
interactions, produce other possibilities for epitomizing the common by enabling
new modes of creating and imagining the future.
2
Intra-Actions: Between the Biological and the Social
Let us consider for a moment the deﬁnition of the term compost. The word refers to
“1. rotted vegetation, used as fertilizer or mulch 2. A prepared soil or peat mixture
in which plants are grown in horticulture. Verb, to form material resembling
hummus by the decomposition of organic waste, as in a compost heap” [6], p. 42.
Use of a term such as this may seem incongruous within an analysis of social
phenomena. However, this would only be the case if we were to assume that
compost functions as a category in which the organic and the social are combined in
a metaphorical and analogous relationship, in a relationship of similarity between
two independent unitary totalities. What we suggest here is a relationship in which
the practice of composting is charged with a certain potency that shapes and
straddles both the ﬁeld of organic relations and that of human interactions. To
explain the type of relationship to which we refer, we must ﬁrst touch upon the
concept of strata taken from the geological studies conducted by Deleuze and
Guattari [7] and used to explain desire as a principle of the social, in that it allows
us to approach a mode of considering a thing in terms of its immanent relational
260
P. E. Moscoso-Flores and A. Viu

properties; in other words, this entails that elements cannot be separated from the
multiple processes and forces of which they are composed.
The notion of strata1—which can be classiﬁed into three groups: geological,
biological, and techno-semiological—constitutes a useful analytical category to
explore the processes by which material acquires form: “Strata are acts of capture,
they are like ‘black holes’ or occlusions striving to seize whatever comes within
their reach” [7], p. 40. This implies, ﬁrstly, that materials have no predeﬁned form
or substance—not even those associated with a ﬁrst nature—but are systems of
multiple constantly moving particles, always susceptible, due to their contingent
connections, to mutation and multiplication as they cross certain thresholds of
differential intensity. Secondly, it implies that strata act upon formless materials,
organizing them as substances and forms around the surfaces of stratiﬁcation or
planes of consistency between two layers, introducing codes, or, to put it another
way, modes of coding and decoding: “phenomena constituting an overcoding are
produced, phenomena of centering, uniﬁcation, totalization, integration, hierar-
chization, and ﬁnalization” [7], p. 41. This has a fundamental impact on our general
understanding of the differentiation between material and immaterial phenomena, as
it signals that the discussion of the intertwining of human and non-human phe-
nomena requires that it be understood in terms of the emergence of a surface of the
inscription which stratiﬁes and assigns forms of content and forms of expression.
Bringing the discussion back to the notion of composting, it should be noted that
it implies a degree of criticism regarding traditional forms of explanatory coding
that deﬁne the ﬁeld of possible relations between the geological—earth—and the
biological—living organisms—, by asserting that the relevance of compost lies in
its revelation of ecological trajectories, that is, the procedural, cyclical, and fertile
conditions of materials that lead to forms of growth, transformation, and decay [9].
Compost entails the need to expand the common understanding of the notion of the
ecosystem to include its simultaneous and twofold condition that permits the
visualization of the disjunctive temporalities that lie at the heart of processes of
geological and biological embodiments found in between making and unmaking: a
sense of composting entities “who undergo continuous decomposition and
recomposition” [9], p. 137 through “an irreversible labyrinth of endings and
beginnings” [9], p. 138. This implies that processes of material embodiment
between the geological and biological strata assume decomposition as inherent, thus
confronting the schema of sequential temporality of a human techno-semiological
stratum that works through acts of clipping, division, and linguistic overcoding,
deﬁning bodies through the separation between the living and the inert, thus
denoting death as the outer boundary of life. In this sense, it seems clear that the
1As Buchanan states: “[S]trata are ﬁrst of all a way of problematizing appearances. Strata are the
conceptual means of transforming that which seems to have been given by either god or nature into
something that is the product of multiple processes and forces over time. Strata transform nature
into history and history into nature. Strata are the product of the manifold processes that have over
time constructed and produced the thing we call nature, whether by that we mean human nature or
nature as wilderness […] ‘strata’ refers to a concept that enables us to see and think about a certain
type of process, the production of nature, not the thing itself” [8], pp. 26–27.
13
Composite Bodies in Times of Revolt
261

semiotic—human—stratum operates through hegemonic codings, affecting the
representation and abstraction of the other strata and, by doing so, producing a
scientiﬁc world view.
This translatable aspect of language is crucial to understanding the elements
upon which the principles of science are based, establishing and deﬁning a uni-
versal view of the boundaries and divisions between the “biological” and the
“social” by distributing a priori the hierarchies and possibilities of conceiving
connections between the two. This is made particularly clear by the presence of a
linguistically mediated conception of Nature—or, as Latour [10] would put it,
social construction of Nature—that functions as an articulating spatial node, pre-
scribing the assignable modes or modulations of content and expression to each
sphere that it encompasses. In other words, we must focus critically on the speciﬁc
conditions by which Nature becomes a homogeneous space and the consequences
this has on the production of other forms of space, confronting the scientiﬁc deﬁ-
nitions that present Nature as an objective, explanatory frame from which we may
clarify, classify, discern, and order the chaotic ﬂow of phenomena that operate
within it.
This seems to us to be related to what Latour claims when critically discussing
the dominant notion of “political ecology”, conﬁrming that the notion of Nature
from which environmentalist groups are derived, and which has become increas-
ingly prominent in political discourses sparked by the evident impact of human
intervention on the planet, still seems to be the result of a tacit division between
“political issues” and “natural issues” that constitute such polar opposites. This is
the case, for example, with discourses of green consumerism based on
well-intended environmental discourses that, without realizing it, serve only to
domesticate and limit the potential of radical environmentalism [11]. This anthro-
pological reafﬁrmation of the dualism between man and Nature constitutes the basis
of the hegemony of scientiﬁc knowledge.
What Latour emphasizes is the need for an ecological policy that takes re-
sponsibility and enables us to overcome the limitations of translative coding sys-
tems of human politics. In this regard, he states that modern political categories
based on an anthropological epistemology have taken over responsibility for dis-
tributing power and determining in advance who may speak about which issues,
resulting in the objectiﬁcation of Nature. However, he warns us that “Nature is not
a thing, a domain, a realm, an ontological territory. It is […] a way of organizing
the division […] between appearances and reality, subjectivity and objectivity,
history and immutability” [12], p. 476.
3
Bodily Composts as Semiotic-Material Assemblages
So far, we have sought to introduce some conceptual and methodological elements
to offer an alternative approach to understanding the links between the human and
the non-human, by showing how traditional scientiﬁc production practices have
262
P. E. Moscoso-Flores and A. Viu

tended towards the construction of an anthropologically determined natural envi-
ronment. The latter uses semiotic coding processes that operate by homogenizing
the
elements
and
the
possible
links
between
geological,
biological,
and
techno-semiological strata, rendering them translatable.
Thus, the practice of human composting is understood here as an assemblage
whose entanglements enable us to discern unexpected and unpredictable transfor-
mations between strata, modifying both the conditions of the production of space
and the singular elements of which it is comprised. In other words, this practice
invites us to consider how hegemonic views of the human may mutate as a result of
a renewed understanding of how bodies undergo processes of mixture and blurring
of their boundaries as they come into contact with other bodies, themselves bearers
of materiality. The fact that the dead will now be allowed legally to be integrated
into the circuit of environmental biodegradation, as promoted by the human
composting initiative, opens up the present to explore the body in a different light.
One could argue that these intertwining only works because of the common
ground—the organic—between the human and non-human elements that make up
this assemblage of compost. In other words, the contact process between apparently
heterogeneous elements—organic waste, scraps, worms, bacteria, and, ultimately,
human bodies—depends on the common somatic condition of these bodies and
their predeﬁned and independent capacities for transformation from a state of
composition to one of decomposition, inadvertently reproducing the separatist
conﬁguration of res cogitans and res extensa. The critical element at stake is to
determine the possibility of projecting that which does the practice of composting
viable beyond certain fundamental organic determinations, enabling it as a mode of
thought and knowledge. This implies the need to leave behind the organizational
function of thought as human metaphysical property, that is, as an external function
that acts upon a series of spatially scattered and detached phenomena. In other
words, it seems necessary to acknowledge a notion of thought utilizing the pro-
cesses activated by the multiple materialities which it depends on. That occurs
through the activation of brain functions involving millions of neurons and their
synaptic connections, its hemispheres, the white and grey matter involved, etc.
However, this does not mean that thought can be reduced to the causal result of
these cerebral elements understood as individual entities, but rather as the result of
the compositional and relational processes in connection to the multiplicity implied
by the immediacy of experience, opening the brain structure to its links with its
outer materials.
This alternate cosmovision suggests that the condition of possibility of thought is
linked to its active condition—procedural and relational, that of making-with—and,
as such, it is essentially practice-oriented. In other words, the living condition of
thought pertains to its capacity for active attunement with the world [13], using the
trajectories, modes of circulation, and inﬂuences that occur with and between the
human and the non-human. We understand this in close reference to the process of
vermicomposting described by Abrahamsson and Bertoni [14], who propose it as an
alternative for constructing new ethical and political principles founded on to-
getherness. In other words, in terms of a compost politics whose nucleus “Involves
13
Composite Bodies in Times of Revolt
263

more than strategic associations of heterogeneous things: the actions and relations
between the various entities that come together is also part of the assembly” [14],
pp. 138–139].
This implies that a fundamental enclave of thought occurs through its capacity to
acquire form—or become embodied—in and by intensive assemblages that emerge
in its connection to things with regard to both their semiotic and material condi-
tions, thus abandoning correlationist perspectives according to which “there are
things in themselves (as Kant would put it), but that they aren’t ‘realized’ until they
are correlated by a correlator” [15], p. 7. This also requires further examination of
the meanings associated with the human as an organism deﬁned by its division
between mind and body and, at the same time, the consequences that this division
bears within inquiries into the speciﬁc historical conditions in which ‘the human’
emerges and unfurls.
From
this
standpoint,
it
seems
feasible
to
comprehend
bodies—
human/non-human, organic/inorganic—as assemblages subject to constant and
potential transformations. The concept of assemblage has been addressed from the
perspective of New Materialist theory to rethink the connections between the
human and the non-human. Within this ﬁeld of study, Samantha Frost [16] has
developed the concept of biocultural creatures as a critical category that seeks to
open an alternative to the abstract and universal comprehension of the human.
Rather than appealing to a homogeneous integration between the biological and the
cultural, Frost focuses on the inseparability of the biological body and the envi-
ronment in which it exists. She uses the notion of culture—in its sense as a verb: to
culture—to emphasize the interdependences and the intra-actions2 between living
organisms and the worlds they inhabit: “to think of culture in terms of cultivation
enables us to incorporate in our thinking simultaneously and sometimes variously
aesthetic, arboreal, commodiﬁed, composted, cruciferous, disruptive, economic,
embodied, fermented, fractured […] in short, the material, social and symbolic
worlds we inhabit” [16], p. 4.
What is interesting about her position is the way she turns back to science and its
language in order to demonstrate how its developments have proved that the main
feature of biological bodies is their inﬂuxes and porosities, thus connecting with
Oppermann’s [18] standpoint in regard to the interconnectedness of the bodies
within composting processes. Furthermore, from the ﬁelds of physics and chem-
istry, Frost adopts the notion of ‘matter’ as ‘energy’ in order to launch a ﬁerce
critique directed towards atomist epistemological conceptions that have advocated
for a notion of the corporeal from a solid or ﬁxed condition: “Matter is composed of
elements whose varied composition constitutes the conditions of possibility for
material things’ being, persistence, transformation, and effectivity in the world”
[16], p. 32.
2Intra-actions, is a concept that “signiﬁes the mutual constitution of entangled agencies […] the
notion of intra-action recognizes that distinct agencies do not precede, but rather emerge through,
their intra-action” [17], p. 33.
264
P. E. Moscoso-Flores and A. Viu

This assertion clariﬁes that between matter and body, there is a hiatus mediated
by operations or processes of embodiment. Embodiment, which, according to
Munster [19], can be understood as “a set of relations between elements simulta-
neously joined together and deforming as they intersect at certain points and move
apart from each other following various vectors or lines” [19], p. 112. This enables
a de-familiarization of the organicist body-life node, repositioning the notion of life
as a force derived from the material energies that emerge and renew themselves
through contact with other energies with differing intensities, ﬂows, and rhythms,
resulting in a comprehension of the body as a contingent formation within these
differential affective intersecting lines. This is in connection to what Deleuze, ref-
erencing Spinoza, establishes in regard to the question of the composition of the
body by means of effects:
[R]elations are inseparable from the capacity to be affected. So that Spinoza can consider
two fundamental questions as equivalent: What is the structure (fabrica) of a body? And:
What can a body do? A body’s structure is the composition of its relation. What a body can
do corresponds to the Nature and limit of its capacity to be affected [20], p. 218.
This perspective also considers that bodies become when they enter into a re-
lationship of co-dependence with the milieu that they inhabit, assembling them-
selves as an integral part of it. According to Massumi, this means that instead of
addressing the environment as the scientiﬁc translation of a natural space that stands
in opposition to the social, the notion of milieu focuses on the modes of relationship
that require a mutual involvement of different realities: “milieu means ‘surround-
ings,’ ‘medium’ (as in chemistry), and ‘middle’” [21], p. xvii]; or, as Stengers puts
it, “that of the dense network of our practices and their histories, that of compo-
nents and modes of interaction that populate what is referred to as the ‘physical
world’” [22], p. 22.
A reconsideration of the body in terms of its material-relational conditions
enables modes of connection with other elements that penetrate and go beyond its
bioorganic dimension. This has become clear, for instance, in the case of
biotechnological developments that have redeﬁned the very notion of life by
showing the potential to “create it from scratch”; an issue which poses a question
regarding the artiﬁciality of the natural [23]. However, more than simply verifying a
contradiction, this shows the displacement from an understanding of life as an
immense abstraction to one that considers the semiotic and material dependence of
life on the milieu that emerges from this new biotechnological landscape, enabling
the expansion—and, as such, transformation—of the environmental ecosystem on a
planetary scale by opening up new spatial and temporal dimensions of contact
within a wide spectrum of processes and relationships that incorporate and, indeed,
go beyond the human.
This depiction relates to what Braidotti describes, referring to Deleuze and
Guattari’s work, as becoming-machine: “The merger of the human with the tech-
nological results in a new transversal compound, a new kind of eco-sophical unity
[…] which aims at crossing transversally the multiple layers of the subject, from
interiority to exteriority and everything in between” [24], p. 92. This approach
13
Composite Bodies in Times of Revolt
265

considers a mode of assemblage in which the machine is not just a technical
element, but instead “it is technical only as a social machine […] having men and
women as part of its gears along with things, structures, metals, materials” [25],
p. 81. This perspective allows us to reconsider the question of the body aside from
the nature-culture continuum.
4
Towards a Social Virtual Ecology: Composite Bodies
of the Revolt
In his 1989 book, The Three Ecologies, Félix Guattari [26] offered a raw assessment
of the state of things which, by the end of the last century, seemed to reﬂect the
multiple devastating effects produced by technoscientiﬁc transformations of modes
of life in the context of integrated global capitalism. Even when emphasizing the
gravity of environmental phenomena, Guattari expanded the ﬁeld of analysis to
include the ethical and political structures involved in what he referred to as
ecosophy: “The ecological practice can be traced to a more general crisis of the
social, political and existential. The problem involves a type of revolution of
mentalities whereby they cease investing in a certain kind of development, based on
productivism that has lost all human ﬁnality. Thus the issue returns with insistence:
how do we change mentalities, how do we reinvent social practices that would give
back to humanity—if it ever had it—a sense of responsibility, not only for its own
survival but equally for the future of all life on the planet, for animal and vegetable
species, likewise for incorporeal species such as music, the arts, cinema, the
relation with time, love and compassion for others, the feeling of fusion at the heart
of cosmos?” [27], pp. 119–120].
The broadening of the ecological includes molecular relationships arranged
cartographically around three differentiated registers: the social, the mental, and the
environmental. This implies that the phenomena and effects of contemporary
catastrophe cannot be understood as separate from one another, but must be
addressed in their differential relations. This integration between the three realms
becomes a real and concrete concern when we acknowledge that “in this new era,
we are no longer only dealing with nature to be ‘protected’ from the damage
caused by humans, but also with a nature capable of threatening our modes of
thinking and living for good” [2], p. 20. In other words, the contemporary context
requires us to address how these three surfaces assemble themselves in particular
ways within contrasting scenarios, considering their multiple and unexpected
effects.
This approach constitutes a means of bringing together the practice of com-
posting in terms of a world of intertwined activities [18], with an analysis of what
we shall refer to as revolted bodies3 in the context of the civil uprisings that erupted
3We adopt this term in analogy to the work and teachings of Japanese choreographer Tatsumi
Hijikata, founder of Butoh performance art. For Hijikata there is an indestructible bond between
the body and its never-ending movements: “Hijikata’s work constitutes a vast opening-out of the
266
P. E. Moscoso-Flores and A. Viu

in Chile towards the end of 2019. As we shall argue, this phenomenon can be
addressed in terms of the singularities that emerge around semiotic-material
engagements related to embodiment processes that become reluctant towards
pre-established forms of representation of the social. In other words, our claim is
that within this landscape, the revolt takes shape as a result of the creation and
application of indeﬁnite new variations [29] that seek to reassemble the social [30]
by introducing hybrid modes of inhabiting, circulation, and association which
include human and non-human beings.
Against the backdrop of the social conﬂict’s paradigm of representation, the
demand no longer concerns bringing about change through legislative reform, but
advocating for a change to the very deﬁnition of the political: a politics of
assemblages or compositionism, as Latour [12] suggests, in terms of an alternative
critical mode of thought struggling with modern explanatory taxonomies of what
human conﬂicts are. The latter relates to the relational and procedural dimension of
composites in terms of the material living intensities that emerge and move
relentlessly between processes of constant composition and decomposition. Within
this scenario, the issue at stake is not only a purely environmental one but rather “a
crisis of objectivity. The risk-free objects, the smooth objects to which we had been
accustomed up to now, are giving way to risky attachments, tangled objects” [10],
p. 22.
We aim to illustrate how the uprising can be comprehended as an event linked to
the explosion of juxtaposed temporalities that break away from the logic of linear
time along trajectories in which the bodies involved, far from being the protagonists
of the demonstrations, emerged as the result of forms of situated and contingent
content and expression. We link these embodiment practices with a temporal
regime of the ephemeral and perishable that is in stark contrast to the category of
civil disobedience,4 which projects social struggle into the future through a di-
mension of emancipation.5
human body. Hijikata viewed his work as never closed; it demanded a constant process of
concurrent erasure and resuscitation” [28], p. 107.
4We are referring here to humanist concepts such as that of Henry David Thoreau, the great
proponent of the principle of resistance against government injustice through non-compliance with
the law as a peaceful means to the resolution of social conﬂict. Thoreau, in his well-known essay
of 1848 entitled Civil Disobedience, seems to pin his hopes on the rational conscience of the
individual as a motivator to action and social change, relegating the materialities of human and
non-human bodies—both natural and artiﬁcial—and placing them in a position of passivity and
subordination relative to governmental logics: “In most cases there is no free exercise whatever of
the judgement or of the moral sense; but they put themselves on a level with wood and earth and
stones (…) A wise man will only be useful as a man, and will not submit to be ‘clay’, and ‘stop a
hole to keep the wind away’” [31], p. 192.
5Sousa proposes the notion of abyssal thinking in reference to an hegemonic Eurocentric colonial
epistemology that has divided the world between the visible and the invisible as an organizing
principle through the construction and radicalization of distinctions, asserting itself around the
denial of co-presence with other ways of thinking: “This radical denial of copresence grounds the
afﬁrmation of the radical difference that, on this side of the line. Separates true and false, legal and
illegal. The other side of the line comprises a vast set of discarded experiences, made invisible both
as agencies and as agents, with no ﬁxed territorial location” [32], p. 120.
13
Composite Bodies in Times of Revolt
267

Furthermore, we draw a link between these disjunctive temporalities and the
emergence of landscapes of meshed materialities that make up the revolt, pushing
against the imposed boundaries which tend to segment and differentially classify
bodies, thus disputing the logic of the clear and contrasting boundaries with which
governmental politics interprets and seeks to stamp out social conﬂict. These
processes involve a series of movements by which mixed bodies continuously
change their composition, iteratively mutating, liquefying, and transforming
themselves. These meshed temporalities and materialities contribute to the semiotic
redeﬁnition of social conﬂict by recognizing non-human elements as a consub-
stantial part of ecosophical assemblages that dispute the hegemonic meanings of the
social through the production of an embodied and affective experience of constant
union and dispersion.
By means of this analysis, we propose an interpretation that links this phe-
nomenon with the relational and procedural dimension of composites, speciﬁcally
in terms of the material living intensities that emerge and move relentlessly between
processes of constant composition and decomposition, altering the frameworks of
indisputable cause and effect imposed by semiotic human-centric translative
regimes to which we referred earlier in this chapter.
5
The Temporal Explosion of the Social in Chile
In late 2019, Chile felt the ﬁrst tremors of what would rapidly develop into a
full-blown social uprising. On 14 October, a group of students united under the
slogan Evade (literally, “evade”), called for wholesale fare dodging on the Santiago
metro in response to a sudden and unannounced increase in ticket prices. A few
days later, on 18 October, the ﬁrst large-scale protests hit the streets of the capital,
and metro stations and rolling stock were set alight, provoking an immediate police
response in a vain attempt to contain the demonstrators. These early scenes pro-
vided a glimpse of what was to come over the next three months. A series of
large-scale demonstrations and protests, many of them violent, tore through the
streets of the country’s major cities, and the legitimacy of the political class was
called into question by their failure either to respond to the demands of the people
or to reinstate social order, try as they might.
The uncontrollable and immeasurable force of these events revealed that the true
root of the dispute was accumulated disaffection with a neoliberal economic regime
which, for over thirty years,6 had attempted to maintain a normal state of affairs
while ignoring the high levels of inequality and segregation which had such an
intensely negative impact on the population. This supposed normality had suddenly
6“No son treinta pesos, ¡son treinta años!” (“It’s not thirty pesos, it’s thirty years!”) was one of the
slogans heard during the uprising in reference to the fact that the unrest had little to do with the
increase in metro fares but rather with the perceived injustice of neoliberal policies instated during
Augusto Pinochet’s dictatorship and maintained by post-transitional democratic governments.
268
P. E. Moscoso-Flores and A. Viu

become too much to bear, and the normalized violence that lay at the heart of
institutionalized political injustice was now clearly visible through the cracks.
What happened on 14 October can be comprehended as a sudden and unex-
pected fracture occurred under the weight of materiality that, for a moment, man-
aged to detach itself from the common sense that had until then ensured the reign of
normality in Chile, leading to an eruption of a citizenry who, only minutes before,
had believed themselves to be living a single existence, triggering an explosion of
thousands of possible worlds within the same present. To put it another way, this
landscape of revolt emerged as an interruption to the semiotic circuits and strati-
ﬁcations of capital ﬂows and trajectories—an interruption made possible, initially,
by the shutdown of the Metro system, a mega-apparatus that day to day ensures the
traceability and normalization of bodies—forcing thousands of people to take to the
streets in order to return home at the end of the working day. This eruption of
physical force against the machines which day after day channel and distribute
ﬂows by forcing bodies—the workforce within the capitalist productive machine—
to pass through it [33] constitutes one of the fundamental elements to which, via a
diversity of platforms, the voices that congregated on the edges of the multitudinous
demonstrations7 would later point in their expressions of malaise and discontent in
the form of cacerolazos (pot banging), posters, placards, grafﬁti, chants, rallies, and
repudiation of the monuments and symbols of oligarchic national history that
throng the cities of Chile.8 As such, the uprising can be viewed as a
semiotic-material rupture produced within the physical space in which these bodies
congregate, thus provoking a questioning of that which forms the social fabric from
the enclave of cohabitation [36].
This event highlighted an insurmountable problem at the heart of the authorities’
attempts to diagnose and understand the conﬂict. Acts persistently interpreted as
excessively violent vandalism perpetrated by subversive human agents appeared to
spread through the streets as an expression of an amorphous matter—with no
discernible actors—rendered ever stronger by its unprecedented multiplicity. In
other words, the uprising opened up a rift between itself and the strategies deployed
by the authorities to organize and manage it. The latter sought desperately to resolve
the situation by means of agreements and negotiations, which were proven fruitless
in the absence of identiﬁable opposition negotiators and in the face of a movement
which advanced day after day calling for a situated, concrete, and tangible spatiality
7The largest of the demonstrations took place on Friday 25 October 2019, when over a million
people took to the streets and avenues leading to the city centre, calling for reforms to an unequal
economic system and chanting anti-government slogans criticising the deployment of the military
to deal with the largest popular uprising in Chile for three decades [34].
8Among the more notable interventions, at Plaza Italia—an iconic open space that forms the
traditional focal point of protests and was renamed Plaza de la Dignidad (Dignity Square) during
the uprising—the statue of Manuel Baquedano, a Chilean general who symbolizes the nation’s
victory during the War of the Paciﬁc, was the subject of repeated damage, grafﬁti and other
actions. Meanwhile, in Arica, a stone sculpture from 1910 honoring Christopher Columbus was
destroyed, and in La Serena, the statue of Francisco de Aguirre—a prominent soldier from the
Spanish colonial period—was pulled down and replaced with the likeness of a woman belonging
to the pre-Columbian Diaguita people [35].
13
Composite Bodies in Times of Revolt
269

made palpable by the trajectories and messages from the citizenry of discontent-
ment with their position of servitude.
The initial force of the uprising has to do with the irruption of singular and
multiple temporalities associated with its embodiment processes. That which
emerged to the rhythm of diverse encounters of varying intensities and durations
were new forms of detention, of circulation of the masses with neither ﬁxed nor
precise direction, making it almost impossible to anticipate and trace their steps.
This was made possible by the generation and intertwining of spaces of manifes-
tation and organization that emerged via a variety of platforms and material sup-
ports: from social media and virtual meetings, televised discussions and debates,
neighborhood and public assemblies, to the creation of cultural spaces for discus-
sion, projections and artistic intervention at the street level.
At the same time, these instances of singular connectivity and differentiated
temporalities highlighted the fruitless operations of clipping and division proposed
by the government, including the attempted promotion of narratives of sense
founded on the semiotic classiﬁcation and distribution of bodies into “good”
(peaceful) and “bad” (insurgent) demonstrators; the use of discourses dominated by
presidential messages alluding to the uprising as a declaration of war (“we are at
war against a powerful, implacable enemy”); the early declaration of a state of
emergency in an attempt to restore public order with the help of a military presence
in the streets; and the passing of laws promoting the identiﬁcation and punishment
of those individuals involved in violent activities, such as the antiencapuchados
(anti-mask) act which introduced stricter penalties for people who cover their faces
and attempt to disrupt public order. But perhaps the most emblematic strategy was
the expansion of measures by ways of temporal delaying resolutions in order to
exhaust the population in the hope that this would internally fracture the movement
(Fig. 1).
We understand these government strategies as seeking to defend the very time of
a capitolocentric temporality [37], although they nevertheless did not succeed in
interrupting the trajectories around encounters which sought to produce a new
embodied spatiality. By insisting on an image of the city as an abstract and closed
space through policies directed towards the protection of “public goods” as objects
that “belong to all of us”, the authorities neglected to appreciate the permanently
open and generative Nature of space, that is, without taking into consideration that
the “explosion” was not an exception but rather the expression of the dissolution of
the inner boundaries between human and non-human bodies through its multiple
material interrelations, and that its political potential lay in maintaining the
heterogeneity and contingency of those encounters: “What all of these spatial (I
would call them anti-spatial) strategies do is evade the challenge of space as a
multiplicity. And this raises the aspect of practiced space, which is its relational
construction” (4, p. 61).
The temporality of the uprising can be viewed as a deviation provoked by
multiple processes of composition and decomposition of matter, resulting in an
effect of openness by sensibly noting the effect of the iterations produced by the
contact between the bodies gathered in the public space. These encounters took the
270
P. E. Moscoso-Flores and A. Viu

form of rhythmic pulses that made the present come alive or, in other words,
enabled a present “that it passes, that it enfolds the past and unfolds into the future”
[38], p. 65. The latter, by engaging in concrete actions by which multiple tempo-
ralities congregated all in the same space, gives way to sensitivities that arose
questioning the meaning of life beyond the face value inscribed in its biopolitical
condition.9
6
Mesh Materialities Within the Milieu of the Revolt
In March 2020, the uprising continued in full force. The 8 M event, a series of
nationwide demonstrations held annually on 8 March, brought together thousands
of women under the hymn el violador eres tú (the rapist is you), a denouncement of
patriarchal violence directed towards the authorities and the uniformed services
that, later on, was adopted as an anthem against male violence in different parts of
the world. During the marches, the messages scrawled across human bodies became
confused with those on walls and road surfaces, with slogans on posters, with
painted murals, and with the tags and improvised symbols that appeared
Fig. 1 “Primera línea” (front line) protester at the October uprising. [Street photography by
Caiozzama, Chile, 2019]
9This is reﬂected in slogans such as “Es todo o nada” (It’s all or nothing), and “Hasta que valga la
pena vivir” (Until life becomes worth living).
13
Composite Bodies in Times of Revolt
271

everywhere, including on the side of armored vehicles and water cannon deployed
by the military and the police (Fig. 2).
The scribbles spread out over both analog and digital surfaces in toxicity, which,
ﬁve months after the uprising began, had become all-encompassing. Weeks later,
the so-called primera línea or “front line”—the most violent and anonymous fac-
tion of protesters—continued its offensive against the police and military forces,
and the declaration of a state of exception in response to the proliferation of looting
and arson the length of the country led to fears that the conﬂict would ultimately be
resolved by force. Days later, however, the streets were cleared not by political or
police efforts, but by coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). The health emergency
rapidly became the sole focus of media attention, and all traces of the uprising were
hastily swept aside as streets were cleaned up and walls repainted. On the night of 3
April, as the city slept through the curfew, the President of the Republic halted his
motorcade in the deserted Plaza de la Dignidad and posed for a photo against a
backdrop of grafﬁti calling for his resignation in a gesture of reappropriation of one
of the revolt’s most contested spaces. When confronted by the press, the head of
state claimed: “I was moved by the emptiness and tranquillity of Plaza Italia” [39].
This image of the President posing alone in the city center illustrates the
party-line conviction that the demonstrations and their demands were “soiling” the
image of a country that had worked hard to become a model of growth in the
region. Just as had happened a few weeks earlier in the confrontations between
demonstrators and public forces, when bodies were dispersed and dissolved through
the use of water mixed with toxic chemicals, the walls stained with their residues
receive the same treatment. This graphically shows the discomfort caused by the
agencies of the materialities in conﬂict, trying to erase their traces in an aseptic way
commanded by the mandates of the macroeconomic rationality. In the absence of
demonstrators and their stubborn resistance to “rational” arguments, the uprising
identiﬁes with the debris and the stained walls, becoming nothing more than an
issue of municipal clean-up (Fig. 3).
The force of the uprising was largely due to the recomposition from new
embodiments in which the human participates in the ﬂuid materialities of the
organic, dispersing itself through multiple networks and signals, multiplying itself
on the screens, and revitalizing itself in the indistinction of the mesh.10 Perhaps the
slogan that best expresses the uprising is hasta que la dignidad se haga costumbre
(“until dignity becomes the norm”), because it emphasizes the fact that the struggle
is against something more than indignity itself: it is against the custom of con-
sidering that some lives and some bodies are worth less than others. Bodies as
scattered materialities and affectivities have become a political force precisely due
to the lack of differentiation with the waste they produce. By these means, bodies
10The concept of mesh can be understood in terms of processes of ﬂuidisation of bodies in revolt,
although this refers not to the dissolution of their materiality—despite repeated clean-up attempts
on the part of the authorities—but to the need to recover their intensive and relational power
through mobilisation. This can be understood in terms of what Groys [40] proposes as a return to
an inﬁnite material ﬂow, that is, as a process of decomposition of individualities—of
deterritorialization—that seeks to integrate itself into an ever-possible totality.
272
P. E. Moscoso-Flores and A. Viu

Fig. 2 Anonymous intervention of sculpture “Fuente Alemana” by Gustavo Eberlein. [Street
photography by Caiozzama, Chile, 2019]
Fig. 3 Laser pointers used during manifestations against helicopters and drones. [Street
photography by Caiozzama, Chile, 2019]
13
Composite Bodies in Times of Revolt
273

no longer allow themselves to be reduced to the qualities that THEY intended to
assign to them. Bodies refuse to “incorporate them […] Recognition, which ﬁrst
designates a certain distance between bodies, is overrun at every point. It can no
longer account for what is happening between bodies” (33, pp. 161–162) (Fig. 4).
This relates to what Rancière would call “a new art of living” ([41], p. 57) that
lies in the potential to interrupt and redirect the trajectories of affection and meaning
that have been followed up to a given point. The interruption projected from the
city’s grafﬁti is a means of mixing together movement and stillness: a means that
decomposes order in order to recompose movement. The “debris” of the walls
understood as waste provides a record of these other trajectories, the traces of
recursion and superimposed strata that cannot be homogenized. Waste, just as in the
case of composting, is not merely a trace left behind, but an actualization of new
forms of embodiment: of other modes of inhabiting the city scattered across the
walls, but also across screens giving ways to an in-between that is no longer simply
a function of Euclidean space. It is virtuality, which is by no means disembodied,
but which transcends the materialities of the analog and the digital. It is waste that
comes to show that space can never be empty, but rather constantly produces and
reproduces a set of relationships that also aspire to justice at the multiple scales of
the geography that we inhabit: the body, the home, the city, the region, the
nation-state, the continent, and the world [42].
In the midst of the debris, art as a practice and as organic matter that is composed
and decomposed ﬁnds expression in the paste-ups of street artist Caiozzama:
printed materials afﬁxed at night to walls often already covered by earlier inter-
ventions and with which they enter into contact. An art that is waiting for the
transformations that the urban will continue to print on top of it until wear converts
them into just another form of waste, impossible to eliminate from the whole,
repeated in a million photos alongside something else: a passer-by, a sliver of the
street, a new poster, a scrawled slogan, and the frame of the screen that re-enacts it
over and over again. For art that transmits in a way that is very different from
conventional communication theory, its message is not conveyed by a particular
medium, and it does not address different audiences depending on the platform on
which it appears. Instead, it is multiple events that can occur on a wall or a screen,
each time updating a clash of strata, between forms of attention and inattention, of
diverse inﬂuences. As Brian Massumi states: “A screen is an event-surface. It
includes many layers of nested potential, audiovisually re-enacting (especially as
screen windows multiply and embedded links add multiple clinamantic triggers
aiming to inﬂect the arc of the occasion’s immediate future). But it is not only what
is on screen that is part of the event. The off-screen and out-of-frame also enters in
(…) The crash and burst of potential has no such causal linearity as that implied in
this commonplace” [43], pp. 539–540 (Fig. 5).
It is an art within the uprising and not art about the uprising that activates the
crash and burst of potential that is part of the revolt, decomposing trajectories and
temporalities and enabling the emergence of new forms of embodiment. In this
context, the deserted square with the President himself is a proprioceptive rupture
triggered by a point of view that claims to have the monopoly on the perceptible
274
P. E. Moscoso-Flores and A. Viu

still, failing to appreciate that space is disputed by conﬂict from the virtualities of
the pluriverse.11 This rupture, which insists upon mechanisms of surveillance and
identiﬁcation as a product of visual hyper attention, is illustrated by attacks
explicitly directed at demonstrators’ eyes during the early months of the demon-
strations, initially in the generalized form of tear gas grenades and later with tar-
geted rubber bullets which by 3 January 2020 had caused 360 eye injuries. Despite
the dramatic consequences of these precise attacks, they failed to thwart a revolt
that continued to spread along non-linear trajectories and using materialities that do
not distinguish between the human and the organic or the analog and the digital.12
Fig. 4 Mesh materialities of the revolt: paint, water, pavement stones, hoods, human bodies, dirt.
[Street photography by Caiozzama, Chile, 2019]
11According to Bruno Latour, the notion of pluriverse is used in order to cope with the deﬁciency
of the word universe: “Since the word ‘uni-verse’ has the same deﬁciency as the word ‘nature’ (for
uniﬁcation has come about without due process), the expression ‘pluriverse’ is used to designate
propositions that are candidates for common existence before the process of uniﬁcation in the
common world” [10], p. 246.
12As Anna Munster states in her afﬁrmation of the materiality of the digital, “Yet the very
mutability of data—the inﬁnitely reconﬁgurable arrangements of code as varying responses to user
interaction, and as results of nonhuman interactions (networked communication with other
machines, infrastructure and technologies)—means that the abstract elements of computation are
constantly subjected to external transformation and rearrangement beyond their programmed
parameters. This process subjects the abstract space of information and its relationship with purely
conceptual operations to the contingencies of corruption, nonstandardization, incompatibility and
accident” [19], p. 93.
13
Composite Bodies in Times of Revolt
275

7
Conclusion
In the ﬁrst three sections of the chapter, we embarked upon an analysis of organic
compost processes and their ties with the human to illustrate how the contemporary
landscape presents the possibility of questioning habitual modes of understanding
human and non-human phenomena. In doing so, we referred to a series of critical
theoretical positions that question the scientiﬁc view of the natural environment as
closed and subject to certain natural laws, proposing a new position that opens up
the discussion to the interrelations that exist between the social, political, economic,
cultural, and environmental elements that form a space or milieu connected with the
idea of habitat. This implies a reconﬁguration of the concept of space as the result
of processes of assemblage in which multiple material forces come into contact
using embodiment or association. This has also allowed us to shift the notion of
compost—in its purely organic sense—towards an epistemological and political
proposal involving situated compositional modes of thought according to what
Stengers [44] expresses as ecologies of practice.
In Sects. 4, 5, and 6, which form the second part of the chapter, we discussed the
notion of bodies as composites and presented an analysis focused on the social
uprising in Chile towards the end of 2019. The objective here was to address the
Fig. 5 “Merry Christmas. Best wishes from the Nation’s Police.” Paste-up on a wall in downtown
Santiago by Caiozzama showing grafﬁti interventions and street debris below, 2019. [Street art by
Caiozzama, Chile, 2019]
276
P. E. Moscoso-Flores and A. Viu

political problem from a perspective that would cast light on how the embodiment
processes of the revolt challenge the logic of order imposed by the anthropocentric
and technoscientiﬁc neoliberal rationale. To do so, we explored two fundamental
issues. Firstly, we considered the idea that bodies are composed of forces which,
through their multiple trajectories and contingent encounters, alter the temporalities
of the closed urban space, opening up new modes of transformation relating to the
ephemeral and intermittent, which in turn provoke a change in our understanding of
their forms of expression. Secondly, we explored the mesh of human and
non-human elements that make up the landscape of revolt, showing how the
multiple forms of presence conﬁgured in diverse material and non-material supports
force a reconsideration of the uprising from a perspective that takes into consid-
eration the materialities of the association strategies that these bodies make possible
in terms of the singularities of which their heterogeneous intersections are com-
prised—their bodies in contact with other bodies, and the subversion of their
boundaries through the inclusion of waste as an integral part of these processes—
becoming reluctant towards traditional semiotic-translative logics of social conﬂict
and of how these seek to be classiﬁed. Both issues may be addressed in terms of the
recomposition of the social, understood as the search to construct a milieu focused
on the principle of its production involving the relational and affective powers that
bodies possess.
Core Messages
• This perspective puts forward questions regarding the limits of the social
and, as such, its capacity for transformation.
• The chapter focused on modes of ﬂuidization of materials from which the
social is comprised, utilizing processes of composition and decomposition
that present new forms of epistemological and political continuity and
interaction between the biological and the social.
• The uprising, viewed from an ecosophical perspective, invites a ques-
tioning of governmental translative logic regarding the bodies involved in
the social conﬂict.
• The emergence and production of diverse semiotic material encounters
present us with the opportunity to imagine a new social landscape.
• Finally, and within the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is possible
to identify a need for a shift in the relationship between body and life
within the Chilean uprising, especially considering the unrest motivated by
policies of hierarchization of bodies (e.g. who lives vs. who dies) from the
perspective of the disposable and the biodegradable.
13
Composite Bodies in Times of Revolt
277

Acknowledgements This book chapter is part of two research projects ﬁnanced by the Chilean
Agency of Research and Development (ANID): Fondecyt Regular No. 1190182 and Fondecyt
Regular No. 1210004.
References
1. Ghosh P (2020) Human compost funerals better for environment. BBC. ‘Available via
online’. https://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-51389084. Accessed 14 Jun 2020
2. Stengers I (2015) In catastrophic times. Resisting the Coming Barbarism (Au temps des
catastrophes. Résister à la barbarie qui vient) (trans: Andrew Goffey). Critical Climate Change
Series. Open Humanities Press in collaboration with Meson Press, London
3. Danowski D, Viveiros de Castro E (2019) ¿Hay Mundos por Venir? Ensayo sobre los Miedos
y los Fines (Há mundo por vir? Ensaio sobre os medos e os ﬁns) (trans: Rodrigo Álvarez).
Serie Futuros Próximos, 23. Caja Negra Editora, Buenos Aires
4. Massey D (2008) For space. Sage Publications, London
5. Rancière J (2011) The politics of aesthetics. The distribution of the sensible (Le Partage du
sensible: Esthétique el politique) (trans: Gabriel Rockhill). Bloomsbury Academic Series.
Bloomsbury Revelations, New York
6. Collin PH (2004) Dictionary of environment and ecology, 5th edn. Bloomsbury, London
7. Deleuze G, Guattari F (1987) A thousand plateaus. Capitalism and schizophrenia (Mille
Plateaux, vol 2. Capitalisme et Schizophrenic) (trans: Brian Massumi). University of
Minnesota Press, Minneapolis
8. Buchanan I (2020) Assemblage theory and method: an introduction and guide. Bloomsbury
Academic Series, Bloomsbury, London
9. Oppermann S (2017) Compost. In: Cohen J, Duckert L (eds) Veer ecology. A companion for
environmental thinking. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, pp 136–150
10. Latour B (2004) Politics of nature. How to bring the sciences into democracy (Politiques de la
Nature) (trans: Catherine Porter). Harvard University Press, Massachusetts
11. Luke T (1993) Green consumerism: ecology and the ruse of recycling. In: Bennett J,
Chalopuka W (eds) In the nature of things. Language, Politics and the Environment.
University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, pp 154–172
12. Latour B (2010) An attempt at a ´Compositionist Manifesto´. New Literary Hist 41:471–490
13. Haraway D (2016) Staying with the trouble. Making Kin in the chthulucene. Experimental
futures: technological lives, scientiﬁc arts, anthropological voices series. Duke University
Press, Durham
14. Abrahamsson S, Bertoni F (2014) Compost politics: experimenting with togetherness in
vermicomposting. Environmental Humanities 4:125–148. https://doi.org/10.1215/22011919-
3614962
15. Morton T (2019) Humankind: solidarity with non-human people. Verso Books, Brooklyn
16. Frost S (2016) Biocultural creatures: toward a new theory of the human. Duke University
Press, Durham
17. Barad K (2007) Meeting the Universe Halfway. Quantum physics and the entanglement of
matter and meaning. Duke University Press, Durham
18. Oppermann S (2017) Nature’s narrative agencies as compound individuals. Neohelicon
44:283–295. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11059-017-0394-9
19. Munster A (2006) Materializing new media. Embodiment in Information aesthetics.
INTERFACES: studies in visual culture series. Dartmouth College Press, New Hampshire
20. Deleuze G (1990) Expressionism in philosophy: Spinoza (Spinoza et le problème de
l`expression) (trans: Martin Joughin). Zone Books, New York
21. Massumi B (1987) Foreword. In: Deleuze G, Guattari F (eds) A thousand plateaus. Capitalism
and Schizophrenia (Mille Plateaux, vol 2. Capitalisme et Schizophrenic) (trans: Brian
Massumi). University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, pp. ix–xv
278
P. E. Moscoso-Flores and A. Viu

22. Stengers I (2010) Cosmopolitics I (Cosmopolitiques I) (trans: Roberto Bonnono). Posthu-
manities Series, 9. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis
23. Palson G (2013) Ensembles of biosocial relations. In: Ingold T, Palson G (eds) Biosocial
becomings. Cambridge University Press, Edinburgh, Integrating Social and Biological
Anthropology, pp 22–41
24. Braidotti R (2013) The posthuman. Polity Press, Cambridge
25. Deleuze G, Guattari F (1986) Kafka. Toward a minor literature (Kafka: Pour une littérature
mineure) (trans: Dana Polan). Theory and History of Literature Series, vol 30. University of
Minnesota Press, Minneapolis
26. Guattari F (2000) The three ecologies (Les trois écologies) (trans: Ian Pindar and Paul Sutton).
The Athlone Press, New Jersey
27. Guattari F (1995) Chaosmosis. An ethico-aesthetic paradigm (Chaosmose) (trans: Paul Bains
and Julian Pefanis). Indiana University Press, Indianapolis
28. Barber S (2010) Hijikata: Revolt of the Body. Solar East Books, London
29. Deleuze G, Guattari F (1994) What is Philosophy? (Qu’est-ce que la philosophie?) (trans:
Hugh Tomlinson and Graham Burchell). Columbia University Press, New York, European
Perspectives Series
30. Latour B (2005) Reassembling the social. An introduction to actor-network-theory. Clarendon
Lectures un Management Studies Series. Oxford University Press, New York
31. Thoreau H (1849) Civil disobedience. In: Pepperman B (2015) The routledge guide to
thoreau’s civil disobedience. Routledge Guide to the Great Books Series. Routledge, New
York, pp 189–215
32. de Sousa Santos B (2016) Epistemologies of the South. Justice Against Epistemicide,
Routledge, New York
33. Tiqqun (2011) This is not a program (Ceci n’est pas un programme) (trans: Joshua David
Jordan). Semiotext Intervention Series, 7. Semiotext, Los Angeles
34. Urrejola J (2019) La cronología del estallido social en Chile. DW. ‘Available via online’.
https://www.dw.com/es/la-cronolog%C3%ADa-del-estallido-social-de-chile/a-51407726.
Accessed 3 July 2020
35. Alvarado R (2020) Monumentos derribados: ¿reescribiendo o destruyendo la historia?.
Universidad
de
Chile.
‘Available
via
online’.
https://www.uchile.cl/noticias/164798/
monumentos-derribados-reescribiendo-o-destruyendo-la-historia. Accessed 3 July 2020
36. Latour B (2005) From Realpolitik to Dingpolitik or How to make Things Public. In: Latour B,
Weibel P (eds.) Making Things Public. Atmospheres of Democracy. Exhibition at the ZKM
Center for Art and Media Karlsruhe 20.03.–03.10.2005. MIT Press, Cambridge, pp 14–43
37. Willey A (2017) Engendering new materializations: feminism, nature and the challenge to
disciplinary proper objects. In: Ellenzweig S, Sammito J (eds) The New Politics of
Materialism. History, Philosophy, Science. Routledge, New York, pp 131–153
38. Pape T (2019) Resurrecting television: memories of the future and the anarchival politics of
joy in arrested development. In: Manning E, Munster A, Stavning Thomsen BM Immediation
I (eds) Immediatons Series. Open Humanities Press, London, pp 63–78
39. La Tercera (2020) Piñera justiﬁca su visita a Plaza Italia en medio de la cuarentena: ´No
cometí ningún delito (…) nadie es dueño´ de ese lugar. La Tercera. ´Available via online´.
https://www.latercera.com/politica/noticia/pinera-justiﬁca-su-visita-a-plaza-italia-en-medio-
de-la-cuarentena-no-cometi-ningun-delito-nadie-es-dueno-de-ese
lugar/OY74HRX5MFFKJGYU6C7NI6HJUI/. Accessed 20 June 2020
40. Groys B (2016) In the ﬂow. Verso Books, London
41. Rancière J (2014) Un levantamiento puede esconder otro. In: Didi-Huberman G (ed).
Insurrecciones Series. Museu Nacional D´Art de Catalunya, Barcelona, pp. 55 – 60
42. Dorfman D (2018) Restos Globales: Basureros y derecho a la ciudad en Brasil a propósito de
Ilha Das Flores de Jorge Furtado (1989) y Boca De Lixo de Eduardo Coutinho (1992).
In: Mitologías hoy, vol. 17, pp. 225 – 243. DOI:10.5565/rev/mitologias.549
13
Composite Bodies in Times of Revolt
279

43. Massumi B (2019) Immediation unlimited. In: Manning E, Munster A, Stavning Thomsen BM
Immediation II (eds) Immediatons series. Open Humanities Press, London, pp 501–543
44. Stengers I (2005) Introductory notes on an ecology of practices. Cult Stud Rev 11(1):183–
196. https://doi.org/10.5130/csr.v11i1.3459
Pedro E. Moscoso-Flores (Panama City, 1979) gained his Ph.D.
in Philosophy from the University of Valladolid, Spain. He is
currently a faculty member at the Department of Philosophy at
Adolfo Ibáñez University. He participates as a researcher at the
Center for American Studies and as an associate researcher at the
Languages and Materialities Research Group at the Universidad
Adolfo Ibáñez. He has researched and written in the ﬁeld of
political philosophy, particularly concerning contemporary pro-
cesses linked to the construction of subjectivities and identities
around fear politics and the links between politics and materi-
alities from the perspective of processual philosophy. He has
published and edited various books, including Lenguajes y
Materialidades. Trayectorias Cruzadas (RIL, 2020); Fragmentos
del sujeto moderno: crítica, poder, identidad (Editorial Cuarto
Propio, 2018); Rastros y Gestos de las emociones: desbordes
disciplinarios (Editorial Cuarto Propio, 2018); La Hoja Sanitaria.
Archivo del Policlínico Obrero de la I.W.W. Chile 1924-1927
(Ceibo ediciones, 2015); Pensar Iberoamérica. Historia, Memoria
y Nuevas Tramas Regionales (Ediciones Universidad de Val-
ladolid, 2013).
Antonia Viu (Santiago 1971) received her Doctorate in Latin
American Literature from Universidad de Chile and her Masters
in Spanish American Literature from Washington University in
St. Louis. She is currently the chair of the Department of
Literature and an associate researcher at the Center for American
Studies and the Languages and Materialities Research Group at
Adolfo Ibáñez University. She was awarded several research
grants from ANID (Chilean National Agency of Research and
Development) and other international collaborative funding. Her
latest research has focused on new materialisms, print culture,
cultures of reading, and Latin American periodicals. She has
published and edited various books, including Materialidades de
lo impreso. Revistas Latinoamericanas 1910–1950 (Santiago:
Metales Pesados, 2019); Lenguajes y Materialidades. Trayecto-
rias Cruzadas (Santiago: Ril, 2020); Rastros y Gestos de las
emociones: desbordes disciplinarios (Editorial Cuarto Propio,
2018); Escrituras a ras de suelo. Crónica latinoamericana del
siglo 13 (Ediciones Universidad Finis Terrae, 2014); Imaginar el
pasado, decir el presente. La novela histórica chilena 1985-2003
(Ril, 2007).
280
P. E. Moscoso-Flores and A. Viu

14
Life, Complexity, Communication:
Integrating Social Systems Theory
and Consciousness
Tilia Stingl de Vasconcelos Guedes
“But that the dread of something after death.
The undiscover’d country from whose bourn.
No traveller returns, puzzles the will,.
And makes us rather bear those ills we have,.
Than ﬂy to others that we know not of?.
Thus conscience doth make cowards of us all;.
And thus the native hue of resolution.
Is sicklied o’er with the pale cast of thought.
And enterprises of great pith and moment.
With this regard their currents turn awry,.
And lose the name of action.”
Shakespeare, Hamlet (3.1.78–88)
Summary
When we, as humans, engage with the conceptual division between conscious-
ness and society, complexity becomes noticeable and increases exponentially.
Here, we apply the concepts of social systems theory to discuss ways of dealing
with it. The deﬁnition of complexity used here is therefore the one coming from
the perspective of Luhmann’s social systems theory. In this context, complexity
means “commitment to the selection.” Thus, complexity is a subject-related
phenomenon that can be found wherever an observer perceives a reality, where
there are so many elements that not every element can be in relation to every
other element, i.e. these relations must be selective. Such a reality must also
exhibit a non-linear, unpredictable dynamic. Consequently, when we perceive
complexity, we are looking into an undiscovered land, i.e., into the future,
T. Stingl de Vasconcelos Guedes (&)
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Josefsgasse 19/3, 2340 Mödling, Austria
e-mail: comunic@tiliastingl.com
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
N. Rezaei (ed.), Integrated Science, Integrated Science 1,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65273-9_14
281

whence no one has ever been able to return or reveal which decision in the
present would have been the right one. When we consciously perceive a
complex event occurring in societal reality, we are asked to act, to select, under
uncertainty. If this selection takes place within society, then it does so
exclusively through communication. Consequently, the intrinsic question we
discuss here is which possibilities do our existence—life, in the existential rather
than biological sense—and communication offer for consciously shaping
society? While we follow our path to possible answers to this question, we
will ﬁnd ourselves wandering the border between social and psychic systems.
The carpeting on which this workshop took place is a ﬁtting symbol for the
complexities of systems that not only communicate but also aggregate and
disaggregate according to their environments.
[Photography by Tilia Stingl de Vasconcelos Guedes, Höldrichsmühle,
Austria 2019].
The code of this chapter is 01100001 01000011 01101100 01100011
01100011 01101100 01101001 01111001.
1
Introduction
We live, if we consider our social environment from the point of view of social
systems theory, in a hypercomplex society. In this context, hypercomplexity is
deﬁned as the inclusion of the consequences of a second-order observation in the
observation itself. Therefore, society is hypercomplex if it observes the effects that
its observations have on its environment (in the widest sense of the term) [1], p. 95.
A simple example to explain Hypercomplexity is: observing a situation carries the
potential of changing that very situation, and such changes are, in turn, visible to the
282
T. Stingl de Vasconcelos Guedes

observer. It is difﬁcult to predict the effect of observing in the context of society but
making the observer’s actions part of the observed state certainly increases, through
elementary combinatorics, the number of potential outcomes.
Complexity, and especially hypercomplexity, are closely tied to uncertainty. To
reduce this uncertainty, efforts to understand this our hypercomplex world were and
are made, but such efforts cannot rely on conventional approaches as those pre-
suppose a system whose fundamental traits include linearity, causality, and feasi-
bility [2], p. 32. However, a complex world is subject to unpredictable changes that
mutually inﬂuence each other. The effects of an action or a set of actions are,
therefore, nigh on impossible to predict based on existing information.
In the famous soliloquy quoted at the beginning of this chapter, Hamlet explains
how he is torn between his uncertainty and his yearning for death’s release. What
happens there, in that “country from whose bourn/No traveller returns”? Similar to
Hamlet, if in less tragic a manner, we sometimes must face our future: a future from
which, outside of science ﬁction, no one has yet returned.
What, then, can we do about our desire for certainty and predictability in the
future? Is it even possible to actively shape one’s life within a society? And what is
the contribution that communication can offer towards social certainty? Along the
way to potential answers to these questions, questions that in and of themselves ask
for individualized solutions, this chapter will ﬁrst sketch out several complexity
reduction mechanisms applied in and by society. Aiming to ﬁnd and demonstrate
ways to deal with uncertainty, ways relating to society, and related to social sys-
tems, the focus will be the interface between social systems and thinking, i.e. the
psychic system. This search is at its core a balancing act, looking at consciousness
not only as of the entity that seeks certainty and is at the same time creating
complexity but also as the creation and as a creator.
2
Complexity—As Opportunity and as Excessive Stress
“A system may be termed complex once it is so large […] that it is no longer
possible to connect each element to every other element and relationships must be
created selectively”1 [3], p. 340. In this context, “complexity” assumes the meaning
of “forced selection”. In a complex world, the number of possible combinations is
so large that we are constantly pressured to select, to choose, one of many options.
Considering contingency, we neither have a manual on how to choose a particular
mode of action nor can we be certain where the paths will lead us, and every step
opens up yet more possibilities.
When discussing complexity, we, therefore, implicitly look to the future. In the
past, there are no longer any divergent possibilities: the past is always an
already-reduced complexity ([4], pp. 19–20) and while orienting ourselves based on
1Translation by author. Original: “Man kann ein System als komplex bezeichnen, wenn es so groß
ist, […], daß nicht mehr jedes Element mit jedem anderen verknüpft werden kann, sondern
Relationierungen selektiv erfolgen müssen.” (emphasis in original).
14
Life, Complexity, Communication
283

what has been maybe useful in comprehending and simplifying the world, looking
to the past becomes much less likely to produce desirable outcomes once we turn
our eyes towards a contingent and complex future.
In the course of human events, a number of mechanisms arose, aiming to reduce
complexity and offering some modicum of certainty in the now and for the future.
For example, the cultures we live in give us rules and norms on behavior in social
contexts. We are, thus, offered a structure that, in the best case, shows the conse-
quences to be expected from every possible action or behavior. Money, as a gen-
eralized symbolical communication medium, occupies an important role in our
society, and doing without such a mechanism is hard to conceive. As such, it is a
further example of a communication medium that reduces complexity: it comprises
the sum of the beliefs, trust, values that support clearer and more reliable com-
munication about the value of a commodity, to name just one example. Power,
truth, transport systems, and many more are samples of achievements of constructs,
which reduce the number of possible combinations we must deal with.
However, no matter how far these achievements, building on one another, may
reduce complexity, they implicitly also increase it. A road network, for instance,
reduces the options for cars’ movements and makes the remaining choices for
moving easier and faster to accomplish; but at the same time, the ease and rapidity
cause more movements to happen and therefore, the number of options increases [5,
p. 507]. “The meaning of complexity reduction is that the structure of the relations
between elements […] is reconstructed with a smaller number of relations in a
particular system”2 [1], p. 96. Moreover, as soon as this new, more transparent
structure works, new combinatorial possibilities develop and lead to an increase in
complexity.
Complexity is not an objective measure but rather a subjective one. Different
agents will assess complexity differently; a situation that is simple for an experi-
enced agent may well be extraordinarily complex for an inexperienced agent.
Experience and memory may reduce the number of potential relations in a given
situation, as only those elements are integrated into the experienced agents’ deci-
sion processes that have previously been recognized as being relevant; Dörner
describes these as “super signs” [6], p. 62 that reduce complexity by aggregating
multiple attributes.
When a society is faced with an utterly new challenge, as was the case when
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) erupted worldwide, the complexity of the
decision process is generally regarded as very high. The search for comprehension
of the situation, for the consequences of interactions and interplay between humans,
systems, and the environment, is intensiﬁed. However, while we hope that our
understanding of the social, economic, and biological contexts will supply us with a
basis for improved decisions, the clock is running out. Moreover, as soon as a
partial explanation is available, we are confronted with a new reality because, in a
2Translation by author. Original: “Komplexitätsreduktion bedeutet, dass die Struktur der
Relationen zwischen den Elementen […] in einem besonderen System mit einer kleineren Zahl
von Relationen rekonstruiert wird.”
284
T. Stingl de Vasconcelos Guedes

hypercomplex constellation, the act of observing by itself already causes changes.
In situations of this kind, decisions often cannot be taken based on data and require
different underpinnings instead.
System theories offer a number of approaches to explaining and modeling ori-
entation in highly complex situations; approaches that offer structure and reference
points for decision making under conditions of complexity. A clear understanding
of our thought patterns, of our social interactions, and our organizational structures
bears with it the potential to improve our handling of uncertainties. Social systems
theory chooses an unconventional path through this ﬁeld and begins with decon-
structing a commonplace, the notion that humans are part of society.
3
Society Without Humans
“A human may appear as a single entity to both himself and to observers, but he is
not a system. A fortiori it is impossible to form a system from a multitude of
humans”3 [7], pp. 67–68. By excluding humans from his theory, Niklas Luhmann
created admirers and critics alike. How is a theory of society supposed to work
when it explicitly excludes humans as a concept, construct, and idea? Answering
this question requires a short excursion into one of the motives that drive the
development of system theories.
The functional differentiation4 that began at the end of the eighteenth century,
once the Industrial Revolution was steaming ahead, caused a change to society’s
way of thinking. The advantages of functional differentiation (specialization, deeper
knowledge, experts, etc.) are clear and can, in most cases, be demonstrated
empirically, but so are the disadvantages. For many interdisciplinary questions, the
separation between different parts of society has obstructed, even blocked, the way
to a solution. Attempts to unify or combine disciplines often run into communi-
cation barriers: biology uses a different “code” than electrical engineering, which
communicates differently than psychology. The efforts to examine the ﬁndings of
numerous disciplines for commonalities became the foundation for systems theory.
However, individual contributions to systems theory vary greatly. It is difﬁcult to
ﬁnd common factors in different papers on systems theory. Nevertheless, a his-
torical perspective of all the different contributions to the discussions around a
general systems theory does highlight some patterns that are common to the various
schools of thought.
3Translation by author. Original: “Der Mensch mag für sich selbst und für Beobachter als Einheit
erscheinen, aber er ist kein System. Erst recht kann aus einer Mehrheit von Menschen kein System
gebildet werden.”
4This functional differentiation primarily causes the individual parts of society to become
independent of external checks and controls and developed an inner logic of their own; separate,
mostly independent, sub-worlds focussed on speciﬁc topics came into being.
14
Life, Complexity, Communication
285

Ludwig von Bertalanffy, biologist and philosopher, and Norbert Wiener,
cyberneticist, are considered the founders and initial creators of modern systems
theory. In his seminal work General System Theory [8], the former clearly and
succinctly describes his motivation for developing a general system theory: “Thus,
there exist models, principles, and laws that apply to generalized systems or their
subclasses, irrespective of their particular kind, the nature of their component
elements, and the relations or ‘forces’ between them. It seems legitimate to ask for
a theory, not of systems of a more or less special kind, but of universal principles
applying to systems in general” [8], p. 32.
Bertalanffy dared to develop an ‘applied’ systems theory, intended to solve
problems directly and focus primarily on living systems. On the other hand,
Wiener, who today is known mainly as one of the founders of modern cybernetics,
examined, in particular, the special cyclical structures that systems exhibit.
Niklas Luhmann, who studied law but worked nearly exclusively in sociology,
studied under Talcott Parson at Harvard University and developed Parson’s initial
thoughts and abstract concept of systems theory into a general theory of social
systems.
Luhmann concentrates on the question of what the essence, the kernel, of a
social system might be—what is a system? What is a system made of? Luhmann
concludes that systems only exist by and as their difference to their environment
and that they are comprised of operations as their building elements. For social
systems, the fundamental operation is communication.
In social systems theory, systems exist because they operate, because they
perform the operations they consist of. If the operation of a psychic system is
thinking, then by analogy, the operation of social systems is, as explained above,
communication. By operating, the system delineates itself with respect to its
environment: “[T]he primary object of systems theory is not the object (or kind of
object) ‘system,’ but the difference between system and environment”5 [9], p. 77.
This environment in the system-theoretical sense is not itself a system. It is the
totality of external circumstances, constrains the arbitrariness in the development of
systems, and exposes them to evolutionary selection. For every system, the com-
plexity of its environment is greater than its own.
In the system that is society, the environment consists of everything that is not
communication. Humans are also part of this environment, not part of society.
Communications are, therefore, the basic elements of social systems.
Another central activity of a system is observing, that is, distinguishing and
indicating.6 A system, therefore, takes its exterior boundary, previously created by
the system itself, into itself and uses this delineation as the basis for all of its
distinguishing respectively observing run.
5Translation by author. Original: “Wir werden daher immer wieder Anlaß haben, darauf
hinzuweisen, daß der primäre Gegenstand der Systemtheorie nicht ein Gegenstand (oder eine
Gegenstandsart) » System « ist, sondern die Differenz von System und Umwelt.”
6One of the references important to Luhmann was George Spencer Brown’s calculus of
observation; for Spencer Brown, observation is the dual operation of drawing a distinction (e.g. a
closed curve on a plane) and making an indication (e.g. inside/outside). [10], p. 1).
286
T. Stingl de Vasconcelos Guedes

Systems are autopoietic; they reproduce themselves by operating and thereby
perpetually (re–)drawing their own borders with their environments. Also, they
operate self-referentially; they can only access their own internal states and oper-
ations and are closed over their operations. At the same time, systems are oriented
towards their environment and cannot exist without it; they operate in openness to
the environment, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Luhmann explains modern society as a fully differentiated system that, in turn,
consists of subsystems (societal systems, interaction systems, and organizational
systems). Since society as a social system is composed of communications, there
can be no position outside society from which it would be possible to speak about
society. That is a critical distinction to objects in the natural sciences, as a societal
theory cannot be discussed outside of society itself.
Fig. 1 Relationship between
system and environment.
(Author’s work based on
Berghaus71 [11], p. 58)
7This chapter uses images and sketches of system-related processes, but Luhmann himself rejected
all forms of spatial metaphors for systems, stating: “One cannot understand interpenetration either
on the model of the relationship between two separate things or on the model of two partially
intersecting circles. Here, all spatial metaphors are misleading. Decisively, the boundaries of one
system can be included in the operational domain of the other.” [9], p. 217.
14
Life, Complexity, Communication
287

The social system theory is often labelled as ‘technocratic’, due to its inde-
pendence of humans; only social systems communicate, and humans are not sys-
tems. Luhmann himself phrased this rather directly: “Well, humans don’t interest
me, if I may say that brutally”8 [12], p. 98. Many scientists consider Luhmann’s
system theory unapproachable in its complexity, rendering it unsuitable for
real-world applications. Romhardt comments: “My problems with this theory are
along several axes. That it is difﬁcult to approach and expects me to master a
complex structure of concepts I can accept, and it tickles my intellectual ambition.
However, I consider this barrier to entry to be a great danger for the theory’s
fruitfulness”9 [13], Chap. 1.
On the other hand, the distinct internal structure of the social systems theory
facilitates the inspection of a society’s processes for observing, communicating,
deciding, and fulﬁlling its promise to be a wide-ranging instrument for creating
conceptual frameworks for analyzing complex social systems.
The journey, therefore, leads from bidding farewell to humans as part of society
via communication as an operation sustaining a system to, ﬁnally, the essence of
every one of us, to the one place where a sense of responsibility for our peaceful
common life develops, our consciousness.
4
The Trinity of Communication
“Communication is the autopoietic operation that takes recourse to and anticipates
itself, thus generating social systems” [14], pp. 38–39. It is also a synthesis of three
selections: information, utterance, and understanding. The process is symmetrical as
all three components are, in equal measure, required elements for communication to
occur [9], p. 164. Nonetheless, the selections are made sequentially. First, the
information (the contents) is selected, then the utterance, and ﬁnally, it is up to the
recipient (“Ego”10) to recognize and understand the ﬁrst two selections as what they
are, information, and utterance [11], p. 77.
8Translation by author. Original: “Also der Mensch interessiert mich nicht, wenn ich das so hart
sagen darf.”
9Translation by author. Original: “Ich habe in mehreren Dimensionen mit dieser Theorie
Probleme. Daß sie schwer zugänglich ist und mir die Aneignung eines komplexen Begriffsapparats
zumutet, kann ich noch akzeptieren und kitzelt meinen intellektuellen Ehrgeiz. Vielmehr sehe ich
in dieser Eintrittsbarriere eine große Gefahr für die Fruchtbarkeit der Theorie.”
10“Ego” and “Alter Ego” (or just “Alter”) are terms that Luhmann uses to explain communication
processes; they replace terms used by other communication theories (e.g., “sender” and “receiver”)
as those may be misleading in the context of system theory: Social relations are viewpoint-driven,
that is, centred on the Ego, and each communicator realizes that his counterpart regards himself as
“Ego”, too.
288
T. Stingl de Vasconcelos Guedes

Looking at communication from this angle, it is easy to follow and understand
Paul Watzlawick’s axiom: “one cannot not communicate” [15], p. 51. Since it is
Ego’s choice whether an act of communication is ﬁnalized, he decides what he
considers to be an utterance encapsulating information. Other theories call the
“sender” (Alter Ego) to see reduced possibilities in this regard; he cannot control the
understanding of the utterance or information.
This implies that no communication has taken place if Ego did not understand
that Alter selected an utterance. Communication has happened only when Ego
understands the intent of an utterance. “Only after the behaviour of other systems
(persons or social systems) is interpreted as acts of making utterances one may
properly speak of Understanding. Actions that are not understood as utterances
with information do not constitute communication”11 [16], p. 12. This turns un-
derstanding of the most important selection among the three [11], p. 84, as un-
derstanding includes the ﬁrst two. Only understanding ensures that reactions to
communication are possible. When we attempt to observe communication, we only
ever see utterances, never the understanding of such utterances. We cannot directly
observe communication; at best, we may infer it. “To be observed or to observe
itself, a communication system must be ﬂagged as an action system” [9], p. 164.
Part and parcel of the communication process are also the numerous required
decision processes: Alter Ego selects not only the information to be uttered but also
how, in which form, at which time, in which context, to whom, or in reference to
which externality and etc. it is uttered. On the other end, Ego selects how to
understand the utterance, which other meanings it carries, what it might refer to, and
with which intent it was made. After all these decisions, a reaction happens, a
reaction which, of course, takes the form of communication, and the process of
decision-making begins anew. When considering communications, one must
therefore assume that the behavior of a person or a system is not only a selection, a
choice among multiple possibilities, but is also coupled to the behavior of the
partner in the communication. This highly complex process is also known as a
“double contingency”.
Initiating a communication in the ﬁrst place requires, due to this double con-
tingency, “[…] a minimum of reciprocal observation and a minimum of expectation
grounded in knowledge […]” [9], p. 108. In the normal course of life, this necessity
is often resolved with the label “relationship”. Luhmann, however, recognizes
something different within this requirement: the need for an infrastructure that
provides “[h]ighly complex meaning-using systems that are opaque and incalcu-
lable to one another […]” [9], p. 109. As Luhmann mentions a little earlier, “The
relationship itself becomes the reduction of complexity” [9], p. 108.
11Translation by author. Original: “Erst wenn das Verhalten anderer Systeme (Personen oder
soziale Systeme) als Mitteilungshandeln betrachtet […] wird, kann man vom Verstehen sprechen.
Handeln, das nicht als die Mitteilung von Information verstanden wird, ist noch keine
Kommunikation.”
14
Life, Complexity, Communication
289

Up to this point, Luhmann’s explanations regarding communication are gener-
ally well-received and widely accepted. His view that “[h]umans cannot commu-
nicate; only communication is able to communicate”12 [17], p. 31 was far more
controversial. In his view, the communicating entities are expressly social systems,
not humans.
This situation is illustrated in Fig. 2, which shows a simpliﬁed sketch of a
possible interaction system; outside of the system are the psychic systems of two
humans (uppercase “X” and “Y”), which are, from the interaction system’s point of
view, part of the environment. Conversely, for the psychic systems representing the
participating humans, the interaction system is part of the environment. Since
psychic systems can only connect to their own thoughts (represented by circular
arrows around “X” and “Y”), every communication (straight black arrows in the
center) must be transformed into thoughts to achieve connectivity with the psychic
systems. The interactions between different systems (white arrows) are perceived as
irritations, as disturbances of the system’s equilibrium, from the environment, if
these perturbations are translated into the system’s operations. Here, they make up
the behavior of X and Y that is visible to the system (white squares labeled “Xb”
and “Yb”).
Humans are, as biological and psychic systems, usually a precondition for
successful communication, but a person is neither the social system as a whole nor a
part of it. As Luhmann used to quip, society does not become smaller if a person
acting in this society gets a haircut.
As much as this separation of humans and social systems may at ﬁrst glance
leave an impression of heartlessness and cold distance, it may as well be considered
very, very human. We as human beings are not just parts of some system; we exist
without society, too: in our bodies, in our thoughts, in everything that we are made
of, and that is not transformed into communication. Moreover, we can, at least to
some degree, decide what of ourselves is fed into a communication system.
12Translation by author. Original: “Der Mensch kann nicht kommunizieren; nur die Kommu-
nikation kann kommunizieren.”
Fig. 2 Example of an interaction system. (Author’s work based on Pfeffer [16], p. 10)
290
T. Stingl de Vasconcelos Guedes

Psychic systems and communication systems do, of course, have something in
common: both communication and thought to actualize in the medium of meaning.
Meaning is the universal medium of all psychic and social systems [5, p. 51]. It
controls the ability to connect to communication. The common factor of psychic
and social systems is that both types process meaning.
Without meaning, there would be no hope to link up with further communica-
tions. A repetitive movement or tic, for instance, one that is not under the control of
the afﬂicted person, is rarely interpreted as communication. As long as the meaning
of an action is not amenable to interpretation, communication will not happen or
will stop. Meaning contributes to making connections to communications, even
though that meaning may consist of useless small talk or may spread nonsense and
humbug.
As a consequence, in social systems theory, meaning cannot be explained with
categories of opposites such as “meaningful” and “meaningless”; instead, it is the
oneness of actualized (or selected) and potential meaning [11], p. 122. All psychic
and social processes are forced to make sense, to bear what Luhmann calls
“Sinnzwang”, the “constraint of meaning” [9], p. 61. The constraint of meaning
cannot be evaded nor negated, but particular instances, particular propositions,
particular decisions in and about meaning can be negated. “The medium is not
negatable, but speciﬁc forms are”13 [11], p. 121.
5
Consciousness and Social Systems: Mind the Gap
“It might actually be possible to describe everything that is communicated on the
level of mental states […], with one exception: the autopoiesis of the emerging
system; that is, with the exception of what alone can describe what communication
(or life) is” [18], p. 172. To explain the inﬂuence that humans have on social
systems, Luhmann used the concept of structural coupling; the term was ﬁrst used
by Humberto Maturana, Francisco Varela, and labels relations (which Maturana
calls “interactions”) between a system and its environment [14], p. 328 and [19],
p. 75. When discussing social systems, the term primarily refers to the interde-
pendencies between systems and environments “that are visible to an observer who
uses the distinction between system and environment as the basis”14 [20], p. 267.
While these relations or interdependencies do not interfere with the system in a
structure-determining manner, they do, in the long run, affect the structures pro-
duced within and by the system itself [14], p. 328. “In the case of the societal
13Translation by author. Original: “Das Medium ist also nicht verneinbar, wohl aber einzelne
Formen.”
14Translation by author. Original: “[…] die ein Beobachter sehen kann, wenn er die
Unterscheidung von System und Umwelt zugrunde legt.”
14
Life, Complexity, Communication
291

system, structural coupling with consciousness systems is produced through lan-
guage” [14], p. 329. Luhmann notes that any use of symbols in a manner akin to the
language will serve as well.
To summarize, the structural coupling is present when two or more systems
affect one another while maintaining their own structures unchanged. This mech-
anism, this coupling, makes it possible to connect systems to highly complex
environmental situations without having to work with and through their complexity
[5], p. 107.
Structural couplings also are entailed with severe restrictions, which are char-
acterized by Luhmann as follows: “Structural couplings only ever encompass an
extremely restricted sector of the environment. Whatever has thus been excluded
can […] at most have a destructive effect on the system. […] The complexity of the
coupled environmental systems remains wholly opaque to the system. […] It is
usually only reconstructed in the form of preconditions and perturbations […] in
the course of the system’s own operation”15 [5], pp. 107–108.
As social systems cannot even exist in the absence of psychic systems, Luhmann
also uses the term “interpenetration” for this case: “If such relations develop
mutually and coevolutively, and none of the systems that are structurally coupled in
this fashion could exist without them, one may also speak of interpenetration”16 [5],
p. 108. Society cannot exist without psychic systems, which, in turn, cannot con-
tinue to develop in the absence of society.
Before taking a closer look at the interface between social and psychic systems,
we should clarify that the social systems theory assumes that psyche and con-
sciousness are identical, that they are the same. It follows that social systems theory
does not address or deal with any subconscious processes despite the majority of
psychological and neurophysiological research pointing to the existence of psychic
processes that take place below the level of consciousness [21], p. 359. Systems
theory regards the psyche as more of an entity that processes experiences and less of
one that handles conscious processes.
Consciousness and self-assurance are, of course, important social concepts;
without them, it would be impossible to, e.g. assign responsibilities to others.
Responsibility, in this sense, is one of the most effective social mechanisms that
reduce complexity, and in this context, it is understood as an addressable act with
an expectation of results. Via the assignment of responsibility, structured expec-
tations are allocated to an Alter. Beyond responsibility, communication elements
such as freedom, dignity, accountability, etc. depending on the assumption that
consciousness and self-assurance exist and are present [21], p. 380.
15Translation by author. Original: “[S]trukturelle Kopplungen [erfassen] immer nur einen extrem
beschränkten Ausschnitt der Umwelt. Alles damit ausgeschlossene kann […] nur destruktiv auf
das System einwirken. […] Die Komplexität der gekoppelten Umweltsysteme bleibt für das
System intransparent […]. Sie wird zumeist nur in der Form von Voraussetzung und Störung […]
im eigenen Operieren rekonstruiert.”
16Translation by author. Original: “Für den Fall, dass sich solche Verhältnisse wechselseitig
koevolutiv entwickeln und keines der in dieser Weise strukturell gekoppelten Systeme ohne sie
existieren könnte, kann man auch von Interpenetration sprechen.” (emphasis in original).
292
T. Stingl de Vasconcelos Guedes

The strict and rigorous separation of different systems in Luhmann’s social
systems theory brings clarity, but his explanations regarding the grey zones in
between, his remarks on what happens between systems, are fairly sparse. In
principle, Luhmann explains interdependence as follows: “[T]he model emphasizes
the difference between psychological and social systems. The former operates on
the basis of consciousness, the latter on the basis of communication. Both are
circularly closed systems, each of which can apply only its own mode of autopoietic
reproduction. A social system cannot think; a psychological system cannot com-
municate. Seen causally, there are nonetheless immense, highly complex interde-
pendencies. […] From the consistency of this model, it follows that consciousness
contributes only noise, interference, and disturbance to communication, and vice
versa” [18], p. 165.
6
In the Beginning, Was the Word
To observe is to distinguish and to indicate. Regarding self-observation, Luhmann
speaks of “handling distinctions” in the way that “Accordingly, self-observation is
the introduction of the system/environment distinction within the system, which
constitutes itself with the help of that distinction […]” [9], pp. 36–37.
Putting on the hat of social system theorists, we see that distinguishing is the
core of self-observation. The psychic system distinguishes and, by this action,
creates the boundaries between the “I” and the “rest”. However, distinguishing
requires differences. On a higher level, this becomes possible through language, a
language that supports the further differentiation of already-differentiated concepts.
A language, in other words, that enables the “concretization of abstractions”, as
Philipp Belcredi, biologist and economist, states. This is the only way for con-
sciousness to develop further by ﬁnding, say, in the term “power”, space where
“impotence”, “permission”, “humiliation”, and “hierarchy” can be distinguished
from one another, and in which all those concepts, in turn, offer a space in which
“power” is distinguishable from these other terms [22].
Sharing, via language, among observers allows for differentiating differences and
for differentiating and developing signiﬁcation in the medium of meaning, which,
as noted above, form the bases for the continued existence of social systems.
Maturana and Varela, biologists both, reinforce this in their seminal book “The
Tree of Knowledge” that “We human beings are human beings only in language.
Because we have language, there is no limit to what we can describe, imagine, and
relate. In thus permeates our whole ontogeny as individuals: from walking to
attitudes to politics” [19], p. 212.
Thanks to the language, we do not have to be in the middle of an event for it to
become a reality or information to us. “We stand in the language”17 claims
philosopher Martin Buber (referring to Ludwig Wittgenstein) in one of his poetic
17Translation by author. Original: “Wir stehen in der Sprache.”
14
Life, Complexity, Communication
293

metaphors and opens up multiple layers of meaning: language is our foundation; it
carries us, but we can also move in/over/across it [23], p. 245. His works hint at
how language-based sharing facilitates social construction. At the same time, Buber
recognizes boundaries and limitations to what may be achieved with how we can
express ourselves; but most of all, he points out what language, in encounters
between humans, may impede and obstruct [24].
As mentioned, Philipp Belcredi sees in language the potential to create ab-
stractions via concepts. These abstractions make us independent of whether we are
in an event and are recallable whenever we choose. This carries advantages with it:
aside from the option to recall a version of the event at any time, the abstraction also
enables adopting a (self–) observation perspective. On the negative side, abstrac-
tions also carry risks. Due to the independence of abstraction, of verbal description,
from the actual event being described, there is the potential for an emotional dis-
tancing, which may lead to reduced affectedness and lessened empathy [22].
Using language, we may reﬂect on events, observations, objects, and interrela-
tion, and we may discuss them without having to be at and in the event itself.
However, this concretization of events and circumstances may lay traps for the
intended mutual understanding, Belcredi warns. What is supposedly the same set of
circumstances may be charged with different meanings, with differing degrees of
affectedness. However, affectedness, that is, the effect of other human aspects
outside of language on human observers, is the emotion that makes humans capable
of empathy. This is also one of the aspects that distinguish humans from machines,
no matter how “artiﬁcially intelligent” they might be [22].
Emotions and empathy have a great import in human communication, as they
inﬂuence our actions and the connectivity of our communication. Dietrich Dörner
describes the dependency between thinking and feeling categorically: “There is no
cogitation without emotion. Thinking is embedded in the context created by emotion
and affect; it has an inﬂuence on this context and is in turn itself inﬂuenced.
Thinking is always embedded into a person’s system of values and motivations”18
[6], p. 14.
Our highly developed language also differentiates us from animals and enables
us to develop various systems. However, our emotions, which are not even
accessible to social systems unless they are communicated, differentiate us from
machines. It is at the limits of these distinctions that consciousness travels.
18Translation by author. Original: “Es gibt kein Denken ohne Gefühle. […] Denken ist eingebettet
in den Kontext der Gefühle und Affekte, beeinﬂußt diesen Kontext und wird selbst wieder von ihm
beeinﬂußt. Denken ist auch immer eingebettet in das Wert- und Motivsystem einer Person.”
294
T. Stingl de Vasconcelos Guedes

7
Less Human Without Society?
“The evolution of social communication is possible only in a constantly operative
link with states of consciousness. This link was ﬁrst achieved through language,
then more effectively through writing, and ﬁnally through printing” [18], p. 173.
In the same measure, as the evolution of social systems is dependent on the
consciousness outside of those systems, the evolution of consciousness is subject to
communicative sharing.
In the late 1960s, a remarkable study offered insights into the relationship
between consciousness and social interactions. The study cohort were patients who
have severe epilepsy and were treated by surgical separation of the two brain
hemispheres (by severing the corpus callosum). The outcome was an (expected)
improvement of the patients’ epilepsy, but the patients’ brains no longer functioned
as a single entity [19], pp. 225–227.
For most people, the language centers are situated in the cortex of the left
hemisphere of the brain. Therefore, patients could not recognize a word that was
shown only to the opposite hemisphere; they perceived nothing; they were unable
to differentiate. There are, however, a few persons who process language in both
hemispheres, understanding as well as producing it bilaterally. One such person was
Paul, aged ﬁfteen, who underwent severance of the corpus callosum and then
agreed to become a study subject. If Paul was asked for the current day of the week,
he answered with the correct day name, independent of which hemisphere was
asked. But that changed as the questions became more personal:
Yet, when the left hemisphere was asked, ‘What would you like to be when you grow up?’
the answer was: ‘A racing car driver.’ This is fascinating, because the same question on the
right side received the answer: ‘A designer.’ […] This is very signiﬁcant, because the
difference between Paul and patients who do not have the capacity to generate linguistic
reﬂections independently with both hemispheres shows that “there is no self-consciousness
without language as a phenomenon of linguistic recursion. Self-consciousness, awareness,
mind—these are phenomena that take place in language. Therefore, as such they take place
only in the social domain [19], p. 230.
We do not need society just for protection from natural enemies and predators.
Without social interaction, we would not be able to form an identity of our own, to
reﬂect upon ourselves, or to take note of our thoughts. Without language-facilitated
exchange, we would be unable to concretize abstractions, concepts, ideas, and
values. Communicating with society, we are able to create new, complex worlds
and to derive from those worlds new differences which, in turn, give us as indi-
viduals sharper contours. At the same time, we run the risk of over-socialize and to
ignore whatever is outside of society: the environment in general as well as our
bodies, emotions, pains, and ecstasies … In his novella “The Body”, Stephen King
14
Life, Complexity, Communication
295

wrote: “The most important things are the hardest things to say. They are the things
you get ashamed of because words diminish your feelings—words shrink things
that seem timeless when they are in your head to no more than living size when they
are brought out” [25], p. 301.
However, our consciousness is capable of recursively accessing both society (by
translating communication into thoughts) and itself, and in so doing, to perceive
more differences ever. It then creates new boundaries, adapts itself, participates in
developing society and itself, reduces complexity, and then increases complexity.
Through its internal complexity, it offers us the opportunity to connect to external
complexity. The cyberneticist, Ross Ashby, stated the Law of Requisite Variety,
usually paraphrased as “any effective system must be as complex as the system it
controls.”19 Our consciousness is well-suited to this complex world, carpe
conscientiam!
8
Conclusion
The Circe of Greek legend was the daughter of Helios and the nymph Perse; her
potions and her magic let her transform enemies and offenders into animals. This
fate also struck Odysseus’ companions when they visited Circe’s island of Aeaea;
but Odysseus, protected by a herb he received from Hermes, compelled her to
restore them to their original human forms. After gaining Circe’s trust, Odysseus
stayed for a year before resuming his journey [27], Bk. X. 135–XII.
This story, part of Greek mythology and more than 3,000 years old, shows how
the relationship between being human and communicating has been a topic of
discussions and, yes, myths for a long time already: only a gift from Hermes, the
god’s messenger, the patron of travelers, and most of all, the god of language,
enabled Odysseus to restore his companions.
From animal to human and from human to society, our remarks and explanations
hitherto were accompanied by our curiosity: how much does the individual con-
tribute to society, and how much society do we, as humans, need?
Interactions and dependencies between humans and social systems often render
it difﬁcult to separate the reality provided by nature from social reality, and such
difﬁculties may contribute to a perceived increase in complexity. During our inquiry
for complexity-reducing mechanisms, systems theory demonstrated how it might
help us with this search. With its clear scaffold for deﬁnitions and perspectives, it
supports a more pronounced position towards solutions that may be usefully
applied to the problem of complexity.
19The actual wording of Ashby’s law is: “The law of Requisite Variety says that R’s capacity as a
regulator cannot exceed R’s capacity as a channel of communication.” [26], p. 211.
296
T. Stingl de Vasconcelos Guedes

With “Hermes’s gift,” language, we have the innate ability to create new social
systems that can perform highly complex tasks. Entirely new worlds can be invented and
developed, new insights become available, and interrelations become transparent. The
work of shaping our society and ﬁnding ways out of the explosive growth of complexity
is ours to take on. If we look only for solutions extrinsic to ourselves, we are not reaching
far enough and may even contribute to accelerating the increases in complexity. It
follows that we must not, cannot, outsource our societal tasks, but we can reﬂect on them
when we encounter difﬁculties, and we can attempt to recalibrate while in communi-
cation with others. All of a sudden, new perspectives, differentiation patterns, or ideas
may present “the world” in an entirely different light.20 A healthy consciousness capable
of differentiating will be important to contribute to these new perspectives.
That which sounds easy and attractive, a larger space for a consciousness better
able to further a more peaceful society, becomes rather difﬁcult in practice. Idea-
tional realization arrives hand-in-hand with responsibility. As soon as we are
conscious of the consequences of our actions, we are expected to take on respon-
sibility for those actions and for our decisions. Some areas of responsibility we try
to pass on to social systems. Others see themselves delegated to “external cir-
cumstances”. Overall, we have become so good at ridding ourselves of responsi-
bility that we sometimes prefer not to decide, not to act, until all external
circumstances have been clariﬁed; a decision was taken while in the state of
not-knowing would be attributed to the differentiation patterns of the decider only
and would therefore be entirely his responsibility.
When hypercomplexity and high rates of change prevail, reliable data often are
hard to ﬁnd, and decisions not taken for that reason contribute to a further increase
in complexity. In a world that we can no longer examine statically, we ﬁnd answers
only in our differentiation patterns. Even or especially in highly complex times,
making decisions and accepting responsibility can lead us out of uncertainty. But
we do need a reasonable and yes, courageous, consciousness, not one that “does
make cowards of us all.”
My mother used to say that “sometimes, ignorance is a blessing.” What she
meant was that conscious knowledge also comes with responsibility: If we know
something consciously, we are asked to act based on our values and feelings. More
than that, our actions represent our values and feelings, where our actions encounter
our inner self, that is where society and consciousness meet.
Core Messages
• To appropriately address complexity, we need suitable complex structures.
• The social systems theory offers in its deep abstractions a foundation for
new
perspectives
and,
subsequently,
novel
solutions
for
complex
challenges.
• Language allows the creation of common new worlds and identities.
20“The solution of the problem of life is seen in the vanishing of the problem.” [28], p. 88.
14
Life, Complexity, Communication
297

• Consciousness evolves through communication and language.
• Our consciousness is the place where we can reﬂect on and access both our
body/emotions as well as society as far as we are willing to be alert to our
inﬂuence in communication and the inﬂuence of communication to our
own feelings and needs.
• Decisions, even when based upon incomplete data, tend to reduce com-
plexity and uncertainty as long as we are ready to take responsibility for
our choices.
Acknowledgements The author would like to thank Felix Kasza for the English language review.
References
1. Baraldi C, Corsi G, Esposito E (1997) GLU: Glossar zu Niklas Luhmanns Theorie sozialer
Systeme, 1st edn. Suhrkamp, Frankfurt am Main
2. Dollinger A, Fehse K, Haasis K (2019) Komplexitätstrainings für Führende erfolgreich leiten:
der Seminarfahrplan. ManagerSeminare, Bonn
3. Luhmann N (1993) Soziales System, Gesellschaft, Organisation, 3rd edn. VS Verlag für
Sozialwissenschaften, Opladen
4. Luhmann N (2005) Trust and power: two works, Faks. d. Ausg. Chichester [u.a.], Wiley,
1979. UMI Books on Demand, Ann Arbor, Mich
5. Luhmann N (1998) Die Gesellschaft der Gesellschaft, 1st edn. Suhrkamp, Frankfurt am Main
6. Dörner D (1992) Die Logik des Mißlingens: strategisches Denken in komplexen Situationen.
Rowohlt, Reinbek bei Hamburg
7. Luhmann N (1987) Soziale Systeme: Grundriß einer allgemeinen Theorie, 1st edn. Suhrkamp,
Frankfurt am Main
8. Bertalanffy L von (1968) General system theory: foundations, development, applications, 2.
print. Braziller, New York
9. Luhmann N (1995) Social systems. Stanford University Press, Stanford, Calif
10. Spencer Brown G (1972) Laws of form. The Julian Press, New York
11. Berghaus M (2011) Luhmann leicht gemacht: eine Einführung in die Systemtheorie, 3,
überarbeitete und, ergänzte edn. Böhlau, Köln
12. Hagen W, Luhmann N, Baecker D (2009) Was tun, Herr Luhmann?. Vorletzte Gespräche mit
Niklas Luhmann. Kulturverl, Kadmos, Berlin
13. Romhardt K (1996) Interventionen in die organisatorische Wissensbasis zwischen Theorie
und Praxis Welchen Beitrag kann die Systemtheorie leisten?
14. Luhmann
N
(2018)
Organization
and
decision,
1st
ed.
https://doi.org/10.1017/
9781108560672
15. Watzlawick P, Bavelas JB, Jackson DD (1967) Pragmatics of human communication: a study
of interactional patterns, pathologies, and paradoxes. Norton, New York
16. Pfeffer
T
(1999)
Das
zirkuläre
Fragen
der
systematischen
Familientherapie
als
Forschungsmethode der Luhmannschen Systemtheorie. Diploma thesis, University of Vienna
17. Luhmann N (1992) Die Wissenschaft der Gesellschaft, 1st edn. Suhrkamp, Frankfurt am Main
298
T. Stingl de Vasconcelos Guedes

18. Luhmann N (2002) Theories of distinction: redescribing the descriptions of modernity.
Stanford University Press, Stanford, Calif
19. Maturana HR, Varela FJ (1992) The tree of knowledge: the biological roots of human
understanding, Rev. ed. Shambhala, Boston, New York
20. Luhmann N (1990) Ökologische Kommunikation, 3. Auﬂ. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-322-
94325-5
21. Wasser H (2004) Luhmanns Theorie psychischer Systeme und das Freudsche Unbewusste.
Zur Beobachtung strukturfunktionaler Latenz. Soziale Systeme 10:355–390. https://doi.org/
10.1515/sosys-2004-0213
22. Belcredi P (2020) Wtr: Sprache und Mensch. Email-Interview, 2 July 2020
23. Buber M (2013) Schriften zur chinesischen Philosophie und Literatur, 1st edn. Gütersloher
Verlagshaus, Gütersloh
24. Buber M (1995) Ich und du, Nachdr, 11th edn. Reclam, Stuttgart
25. King S (1982) Different seasons. Viking Press, New York
26. Ashby WR (1956) An introduction to cybernetics. Chapman & Hall, London
27. Murray AT, Homer (1919) The Odyssey I-XII. Harvard University Press, Cambridge
28. Wittgenstein L (2001) Tractatus logico-philosophicus. Routledge, London, New York
Dr. Tilia Stingl de Vasconcelos Guedes is a socialsystems
expert, currently an Organizational Consultant, a member of the
Editorial Advisory Board of the Journal of Systemics, Cyber-
netics, and Informatics, and a former lecturer at Universities of
Applied Sciences in Austria in the area of Business Adminis-
tration and Change Management. She holds bachelor’s and
master’s degrees in Computer Science and Business Adminis-
tration from the Vienna University of Technology, has a
post-graduate education in Magazine Journalism and earned her
doctorate in Communication Science from the University of
Vienna, working in the ﬁeld of Knowledge Management and
Organizational Communication. Today, her research interests are
in the ﬁeld of social systems, organizational communication and
systemic approaches.
14
Life, Complexity, Communication
299

15
Instrumentality Versus Awareness:
Rethinking the Reverse Side
of Artificial Intelligence
Žilvinas Svigaris
“Perhaps we should all stop for a moment and focus not only on
making our AI better and more successful but also on the
beneﬁt of humanity.”
Stephen Hawking
Summary
Every epoch with exciting discoveries opens up a unique and stunning
worldview. Long ago, the attention of archaic man was on Mother Nature. With
the utmost amazement and reverence, he prayed for the majesty of nature’s
creatures and empowered himself with her magical amulets. Later, man’s
attention was attracted to objects in the sky. He worshipped the sun, the moon,
and constellations of stars. He ritualized cosmic rhythms and formed the
cyclicality of daily life. Later, in ancient Greek tragedy, onto the stage of divine
circumstances, suddenly came the man himself—a hero. In the Age of
Enlightenment, the man unexpectedly became an inﬁnite potential capable of
discovering
the
whole
universe.
However,
with
the
advancement
of
techno-scientiﬁc transformations, the focus is changed again. It is no longer
on the human, but on technology, the development and training of the
instrument. Moreover, again, reverently stunned, but this time adorned with the
symbolic amulets of technology instead of ﬂora and fauna, the man looks at the
immense scale of technology. He marvels at the growth of “unlimited”
Ž. Svigaris (&)
Department of the History of Philosophy and Analytic Philosophy, Vilnius University, Sausio
13-Osios, 2, Vilnius LT04343, Lithuania
e-mail: zilvinas.svigaris@fsf.vu.lt; svigaris@3t.lt
Ž. Svigaris
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Vilnius, Lithuania
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
N. Rezaei (ed.), Integrated Science, Integrated Science 1,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65273-9_15
301

possibilities of artiﬁcial super-intelligence. The changes brought by artiﬁcial
intelligence are claimed to be radically different, and in fact, they are shaping
social, economic, and political reality, transforming the entire human world.
However, are they radically different? What underpins artiﬁcial intelligence?
What can it change and what cannot?
With the rise of artiﬁcial intelligence, we are witnessing many concerns, but
also positive opportunities—new human relations with knowledge, and the
emergence of a decentralized society, which is focused not solely on
consumerism, but also on sharing.
[Adopted from
https://www.chrismadden.co.uk/cartoon-gallery/turing-test-
cartoon-turing-test-being-failed-by-a-human/, image licensed to the author for
free use].
The code of this chapter is 01101110 01101100 01010101 01101001
01100101 01110010 01110110 01100001 01110011.
1
Introduction
The era of globalization and technology has opened up incredible opportunities and
provoked fascinating changes in all areas of the living world; however, it is
important to reﬂect on their essence. History shows that superﬁcial admiration and
302
Ž. Svigaris

blind encouragement of technological innovation could bring not only beneﬁts but
also dangers. Technological revolutions have already shown that accelerating
technological progress provokes not only positive but also increases negative
consequences. The ﬁercest world wars in human history and ecological catastrophe
warn us that we cannot naively trust the charms of technology. The “fourth” rev-
olution, which automates industry, is already taking place on a global scale, digi-
tizing not only industrial processes but also the entire living world and human itself.
Although it is impossible to stop the euphoric process of technological transfor-
mation, maybe it is possible to prepare for change? We have seen that so far, such
preparations have been not only belated and awkward but incredibly naïve, leading
to destructive and massive fatal consequences rather than mitigating them. What
would such preparation entail?
First of all, as techno-scientiﬁc ambitions grow, so does the scale of possibilities
of errors. Therefore, it is crucial to understand the essence of technology. Artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI) systems only spotlighted the fact that the scale of technology is
inhuman. Although the result achieved by technological means seems obvious, the
very discovery of a new supernova with digital telescopes, or micro-particle with a
hadron collider is not possible without the tools of technology. These phenomena
are not directly accessible to humans; such discoveries are always theoretical and,
in a certain sense, hypothetical. Hence, we cannot easily reveal the essence of
technology because it simply exceeds the possibilities of human perception.
However, even though technology reaches beyond the scope of human perception,
it is just a contrivance—in Latin, an instrumentum. Thus, the essence of technology
can be partially revealed and understood through its instrumentality, which is well
known to humans. However, we often use instruments non-reﬂexively [1]. When
we wear glasses, we do not see them until they get dirty, break or take them off. As
Heidegger rightly notes, the worst happens when we regard technology as some-
thing neutral.
We are well aware that changes in instrumentality, such as the advent of the
steam engine or electricity, signiﬁcantly accelerate transformations, not only of the
living world but also of the man himself. Nowadays, man is changing in all areas of
daily life as never before in history. We have not even noticed that just over the last
few decades, memory and knowledge have moved to electronic databases, orien-
tation around cities to virtual maps, language skills to multilingual applications,
daily communication to virtual social portals, and so on. Transformations in the past
progressed for centuries or millennia, like a slow mutation of human consciousness.
However, it is evident that currently, this mutation is not only gaining momentum
with growing changes in digital instruments [2] but is also becoming challenging to
describe it. So, do we understand what those changes of instrumentality have
triggered?
15
Instrumentality Versus Awareness
303

2
The Paradox of Instrumentality
It is almost taken for granted that man himself creates technology, not to mention
that man uses his own experience. However, is that the case? It would probably be
more accurate to say that the development of technology, such as aviation or
energy, is not based on own human experience but rather on theoretical models.
Same with the theoretical models, they are not related to human experience either;
they are constructed based on laboratory research using computational systems and
measurement techniques. A man who was previously directly involved in the
development process of creating his instruments is becoming an observer in the
development of modern technology. The non-humane scale of technology leads to
some alienation with the object being created. The alienation and distance are
unavoidable in the construction of technology of different scales. It is not possible
to work with micro-particles without a microscope or to build a bridge without
cranes. In summary, we can say that modern technology constructs itself. Of course,
there is nothing new about making one tool with another; even a primitive man can
carve a spoon with a knife, but a more radical change is taking place. Modern
technology is not only creating itself but is also maintaining itself. This brings us to
the promises of the fourth industrial revolution with full automation of industry.
Historically each transformation of the industry has signiﬁcantly changed the
concept of the tool, increased its scale and complexity. Every industrial transfor-
mation required new professional skills and specialists with higher training to
manage them. Thus, most universities, in one way or another, are connected to
economic needs. Academic programs became designed for mass training of spe-
cialists. Algis Mickūnas rightly notes that university, in the true sense of this word,
disappeared and became a contributor to technical performance in the production of
functionaries [3]. Consequently, educational institutions in the West are preparing
specialists for various industries as if they were some instruments. It seems man
himself has become part of technological tooling. Has industry turned the man into
an instrument?
2.1
The Instrumentality of the Human
What does a person typically answer when asked—who are you? The most com-
mon answer is an engineer, a salesman, a teacher. Man is identiﬁed with his
specialization. However, it is worth noting that specialization is used only at work,
and once the person returns home, he usually takes off that mask. Hence, spe-
cialization is purely instrumental and is used by man to earn a living in an
industrialized society. Thus, by becoming an instrument, man has the opportunity to
understand what instrumentality “from within” means. However, what does it mean
to be an instrument? Let’s agree; it is a weird question when a person raises it for
himself. Every specialty today has a different self-perception, but in summary, there
is a common modern ontology: reduction of the human to function. Naturally, we
304
Ž. Svigaris

have to be at least a little surprised. With the appearance of mass production,
humans become part of the conveyor, and instead of being the master of the
instrument, humans themselves become instruments of the mass production system
[4]. Consequently, instrumentality reduces a human, making him suitable only for a
particular operation. The same access that uses tools to master natural resources has
been adopted to overtake people [5]. In a sense, we can say that industry has
equated humans to resources that are consumed as aggressively as other natural
resources [6].
Meanwhile, with the intensive industrial automation, more and more routine
repetitive operations, not only manual but also mental, have been taken away from
the man. Henri Bergson L’Évolution créatrice considered [7] that man, instead of
devoting himself entirely to mechanistic-materialistic worldview, can reveal intu-
ition, which opens up a much deeper and subtly nuanced phenomenon—life itself.
However, man is in no hurry to leave the materialistic realm; instead, he even more
stubbornly reduces himself to an instrument. Artiﬁcial organs, neural-connections,
and extensions that eliminate the difference between body and technologies [8]
emphasize that the human body is also being treated as a tool. Alphonso Lingis
rightly observes that on closer inspection, we see that man was not created by
nature. The man himself shaped his vertical posture, thumbs, increased neo-cortex,
and a peculiar nervous system. We can say that the human body is remade; it is
turned into a tool [9].
However, technology extends human corporeality in increasingly amazing ways.
Virtual worlds, with completely different concepts of time and space, become part
of everyday life. Everyone happily moved to virtual stores and virtual auditoriums.
There has been an almost unnoticed yet particularly signiﬁcant change. By helping
to overcome the material constraints of space and time in the living world, tech-
nology has opened a new relationship with the actual reality, where the future, the
past, and the distant places of space have merged into one whole: virtual maps that
change the conception of navigation; videos that resemble the past in the same way
we see the present; virtual designs and simulations with visualizations of the
designed district of the city, house or room; and virtual games that create a more
realistic and intense world than actual reality. The virtual dimensions are trans-
forming the understanding of the very instrumentality in a very different and new
way.
Digital technology is becoming not just a tool but a meta-tool, which frees a
person from direct involvement in industrial production operations. Simultaneously,
a much more radical change takes place, explaining the phenomenon of mass
automation. Apart from tool construction, digital technology today decides also
how to create that tool. In the past, the design of architecture, logistics systems, or
electronic circuits required a titanic imagination from an engineer, with many notes
and calculations. Now it is different; it is enough to deﬁne the requirements, to
formulate a task for automatic development systems. Thus, man becomes a creator
of technology in a completely different sense, he is more of a customer, and
technology is more likely to satisfy his requests. Technology asks, “Where do you
want to go today?”—as if there were no real-world constraints. The fascinated
15
Instrumentality Versus Awareness
305

modern man sinks into the world of artiﬁcial simulacra wrapped in incredibly
attractive promises, gradually losing the sense of the natural world.
2.2
Instrumentality of Knowledge
The cyberspace unexpectedly brought some comfort, even some security, and yet
another even more signiﬁcant phenomenon emerges here. Digital technology has
provoked a new type of relationship with knowledge by extending the possibilities
of human memory, allowing unlimited amounts of information to be stored and
accessed quickly. With rapid development, renewal, and changes in data, the
information in the virtual space is updated continuously, and each version is
becoming more accurate and comprehensive, more easily accessible. These changes
speak about the transformation of another extremely signiﬁcant form of instru-
mentality: knowledge. Although smart search engines create a new kind of rela-
tionship with knowledge, the amount of it dramatically exceeds human potential to
conceive and, therefore, it is increasingly understood as mere information. After
ﬁnding ourselves in a world of redundant information, we can assert that digital
technology brought some liberation. The consumption paradigm has turned things
into short-lived worthless toys, and this turn seems, released humans from the
addiction of accumulation in general. The accumulation of knowledge in memory is
no different from the accumulation of things. Crowded shelves call for getting rid of
not only material obsolete trinkets but also information, which, like things, has
become ﬂowable, changing, and available on-demand without limitations. There is
no point in cluttering memory with piles of information that tomorrow will become
obsolete.
For so long, humanity has regarded knowledge as the biggest treasure, but with
the advent of its saturation, knowledge is losing its exceptional value and elite
status. The monopoly of one “rightest” knowledge, which for millennia has con-
trolled the Western world, disappears. The dominance of one truth recedes into the
background, leaving room for synergies between different opinions. Instead of
having the ultimate knowledge, as if it were an objective value, it is shared and
continuously questioned in the face of changing challenges. The struggle for the
“rightest” truth is replaced by a creative symbiosis and a combination of different
positions. Even the so-called fundamental sciences are transforming, giving way to
new approaches and paradigms such as the rapidly spreading quantum, string, and
many other theories that reject static unambiguous deﬁniteness and determinism
paradigm in general. Online encyclopedias are continuously updated in the face of a
growing demand for the requaliﬁcation of each “truth” in the updated contexts of
other “truths.” New types of communities emerge where knowledge becomes
openly shared; this triggers comparative and interdisciplinary studies that intensiﬁes
the knowledge-sharing processes and makes knowledge an intermediate, rather than
a ﬁnal state of thinking. Thus, the instrumentality of knowledge changes signiﬁ-
cantly: it becomes not static, not tethering, not possessing, but the opposite: lib-
erating, dynamic, alive, and more intended for sharing than accumulation.
306
Ž. Svigaris

2.3
Instrumentality of Thinking
Technological change not only changes the relationship with knowledge but it also
signiﬁcantly transforms thinking. However, if knowledge is instrumental, what
about thinking? It is hard to disagree with John Searle’s well-known argument [10]
that thinking is just a function of the mind, same as blood circulating is the function
of the heart, and digestion is a function of the stomach. Such a viewpoint opens the
mind as a kind of biological instrument that is used in the same way we use our feet
when we go for a walk, or eyes to observe the enchanting colors of the world. It
turns out that both the mind and its function of thinking are just instruments. We
can apply mathematical formulas to calculate, for example, the area of a square, or
knowing the speed and distance; we can calculate how long it will take to reach a
destination. However, such thinking is not complex. If we consider such calcula-
tions as thinking, we will admit that the calculator thinks faster and better than man.
However, does the calculator think? We know that 2 + 2 = 4, regardless of whether
someone is thinking about it or not. Instead, it is the knowledge of mathematical
logic itself. No one is likely to hesitate to call deductive thinking instrumental.
Paradoxically, for a calculation, everybody prefers a calculator instead of cal-
culating in one’s “head”. In other words, the man happily expands his thinking
instrumentally by using artiﬁcial means. This process accelerates itself because the
growing scale and complexity of the living world require an increasing scale of
tools for its construction and control. Therefore, the digital revolutions are
increasingly reshaping the human at the same time. However, digital technology
has revealed the function of tools in a very different way and has signiﬁcantly
expanded the concept of instrumentality. If the tool was perceived only as an
instrument for implementing human ideas, now the tool has begun to “think” itself.
In many areas, the tool has become “smarter” than humans. Today, man no longer
competes with technology in solving data analysis, digital simulations, design, or
other tasks related to the processing of large amounts of information. Does not that
mean that humans transfer their thinking to technology as well?
3
Artificial Intelligence
And indeed, as early as 1959, Arthur Samuel developed a chess program that not
only played chess but also learned from every game. Since then, AI-based on
automatic learning has already shown its irreplaceability in many areas. Seeing the
enthusiasm in the ﬁeld of AI, we partly understand that the goal is to replace man
with a more effective tool, not only in the area of mechanical operations but also in
the ﬁeld of thinking. The man began to develop AI systems as tools, with the help
of programming languages whose underlying syntax allows the description of
logical models based on the principles of categorization and abstraction. By
checking the real information, such models “know” that the consumer would be
pressing the purchase button in the online store and thereby asks to prepare an
15
Instrumentality Versus Awareness
307

invoice, to make a bank transfer, and inform the warehouse with the logistics broker
to ship the goods. In another sample, by comparing glass bottles on the product
packaging line, the recognition algorithm separates a broken bottle from a good one
and automatically cleans the line if needed. These and other samples of automation
and robotization has already freed up many jobs and signiﬁcantly increased
industrial and economic productivity. However, such so-called expert systems of AI
do not understand the formulas, what they discover, or what those discoveries
mean. Simply but scrupulously programmed mechanical execution of a program
using real-time data already yields an incredibly large effect, and when viewed from
outside, the system seems to understand what it is doing. However, what does such
a system understand?
3.1
Is AI Conscious?
In 1980, John Searle’s suggested a well-known hypothesis, the so-called Chinese
room argument [11]. He explains the level of awareness that AI has by a simple life
example: a note with Chinese characters is fed into a room through a window. The
person in the room does not understand Chinese but has a rulebook with answers.
When he ﬁnds an answer that matches the received character sequence, he returns it
through the same window. After reading the answer, the Chinese person, who asked
the question, may think that the person in the room understands Chinese, but he
does not understand either the question or the answer. Same with expert AI systems,
they do not understand the meaning of the questions and answers. For a long time,
computer-based learning has been understood as computations that require
increasingly faster and longer queues of comparisons. But, this approach leads to a
combinatorial explosion, because when the tasks become more complex, the
sequence of such comparison queues grows exponentially. Therefore, computer
programs based on syntax rather than semantics does not offer any qualitative
leap. Quantity does not transform into a different quality regardless of the amount of
syntax or the speed of the computer. No matter how accurately the information is
described, it is insufﬁcient to perceive things as qualitatively different phenomena.
It requires a different kind of access that has not been available to computers until
now.
However, important developments have taken place in this area recently after
returning to Frank Rosenblatt’s idea of perceptrons, which was born in 1958 out of
the study of biological models. AI systems started developing neural network
models. Systems themselves began to learn and develop their algorithms. The
system, having separate photos of cats and dogs, ﬁnds out how those animals differ
from each other, and it learns to recognize and distinguish them. The change seems
not dramatic, not the programmer, but the system now is creating the model.
However, it has accelerated the systems thousands of times and initiated signiﬁcant
transformations that have been impossible until now. Even an engineer who has
created an AI system does not understand the models that the system creates.
Although AI is human-made, for the ﬁrst time in history, man cannot fully explain
308
Ž. Svigaris

the operation of the tool he has created. The system itself creates models to rec-
ognize a particular object, social phenomena, disease, or cosmic constellations.
Such models are incomprehensible to humans primarily because of the scale of
complexity that is inconceivable to humans.
Consequently, AI makes decisions using models that exceed the possibilities of
human perception, as a result of which technological development accelerates itself
and pushes to the periphery the human itself. Instead, man creates interfaces
through which AI with different skills can learn from each other. AI systems,
instead of just being tools, began to learn and develop tools for themselves. This
already means that the system can go on and create not only the models but also the
logic itself, which it uses to build those models. Let us ask a rather unexpected
question. If AI has become smarter than the humans who created them, can we
consider such systems conscious? We often hear people, especially AI developers,
claiming that despite today’s limitations of technology, it is only a question of time
when AI will become conscious. However, can we create a system of AI that is
conscious in a human sense? Do such considerations arise because modern man and
his consciousness, as we have already mentioned, are impoverished to instrumen-
tality, or because of the truly limitless possibilities of AI?
Before answering these questions, it is essential to understand what do we mean
by consciousness. It seems that consciousness is often confused with various logic,
rationality, theories, and sometimes even with calculations or formulas which are
used instrumentally. Instrumentality and being conscious are fundamentally dif-
ferent. Behind the instrument should be a conscious self who uses different in-
struments depending on the situation. A person can change the means to solve
speciﬁc tasks, but he cannot change himself as a conscious self. Instruments are
made for one purpose or another, but the awareness that uses those instruments is
not made, it cannot be reduced to an instrument. The man can create rules, logic,
and instruments, but he does not know how to create consciousness.
AI systems use a certain logic to perform operations by manipulating large
arrays of data beyond human comprehension, but they remain in the dimension of
instrumentality. Even an improved Chinese room, which no longer uses a rulebook,
but more effective models created by the AI itself, is just a simulation of human
thinking that is instrumental and lacks consciousness spirit. Like movies, even very
well made, remain only movies. When a parrot repeats the roar of a lion, it does not
become the lion, although we may mistake it as such without seeing it. However,
another issue is more important here, which is usually overlooked by confronting
awareness with instrumentality. Attempts to establish the possibility of AI as
conscious continue the ﬂawed reductionist tendency of instrumentality discussed
earlier. The very attempt to legitimize the claim that AI systems can become
conscious is, in fact, once again, an even more radical impoverishment of the
human self. Human, who is not realizing what is going on and naively replacing his
identity with a specialization, after he was lured into a cage of industrial instru-
mentality, now is robbed even more arrogantly. Now he is losing not only the self
but also the consciousness underlying it. When consciousness is equated with
instrumentality, man is no longer there.
15
Instrumentality Versus Awareness
309

3.2
Threats of AI
AI has penetrated deeply into the everyday life of every human through various
tools. Not only is the living world-changing, but also human habits and identity.
Lingis rightly observes that man no longer deﬁnes his identity and worth, as in prior
ages, with character traits, such as bravery, loyalty, and honor, nor with allegiance
to a leader, saint, sage, or sovereign; nor by ideas and ideals. It is all obsolete.
Instead, we go to shopping malls and immerse ourselves into endless rows of
heavily loaded mass-produced consumer goods [12]. The transformation of all the
variety of cultures into the narrow concept of consumption has become almost a
matter, of course. The saddest part is that the transformations which provoke the
unprecedented spiritual impoverishment have been presented as what society itself
demands. Hence, along with the popularity of radio and television, an unreﬂected
mechanism of social self-hypnosis was launched. At the dawn of entertainment
culture, Horkheimer and Adorno, in their work, The Culture Industry: Enlighten-
ment as Mass Deception, rightly noted that the living world had suddenly become a
place of a deplorable standardized and industrialized culture [13].
The concept of consumerism culture demanded a standardized educational
system, which, by adapting standardized curricula and standardized tests, prepared
for standardized industry specialists as if they were just another product. However,
this was not always the case. Growing up in a mythical substrate and religious
community, man lived in a world of shared values. Spiritual and moral attitudes
were important because it was an integral part of the identity of each member of the
community. Today, however, with the intensiﬁcation of multicultural processes,
especially in megacities worldwide. The spiritual paradigms, which were organi-
cally shaped for millennials, are collapsing one after another in front of our eyes.
These processes are opening ways to aggressive political, economic, social, and
other systems based on the paradigm of consumption. Samuel Huntington notes that
many countries realized the mentioned threats and tried cautiously to import
modernization and protect themselves from Westernization [14]. However, it is
very naïve to hope to modernize local culture selectively. Each new generation
worldwide demonstrates the growing trend of sinking into a banal mirage of
pleasures of consumerism at the cost of replacing old traditional cultural values.
Algis Mickūnas rightly notes that they found themselves in an unexpected
dichotomy “between plough and computer” [15]. Consequently, modernization
means not a sustainable cultural growth but rather “standardization” and reduction
of any culture into consumerism. As mythical and religious traditions weaken, they
are replaced by the entertainment industry, ﬁlms, and other consumption-based
standardized forms of public education. Spiritual traditions that shape man “from
within” are intensively marginalized. Therefore the individual is increasingly
manipulated “from outside.” By rejecting spiritual traditions and moral norms, the
individual loses his inner spine. Consumerism values are formed not by moral
beliefs and experience of ancestors, but by superﬁcial advertisements, shaping the
contemporary individual in increasingly strange ways. Industrial revolutions, one
310
Ž. Svigaris

after another, have swayed the pendulum of the progress and shaped a contem-
porary man as chronically dependent on consumption.
This context brought Western civilization to a neoliberalism state with unex-
pectedly sad results, summed up by the famous saying that the economy is doing
well, and the people are not. Enthusiasts of the neoliberal vision have promised that
the new laissez-faire era would signiﬁcantly improve economic performance in both
developed and developing countries. Unfortunately, these promises have not been
fulﬁlled [16]. There are no longer exceptions to the rule that neoliberalism leads to
growing inequality everywhere [17]. It seems that democracy serves not society and
not the individual, but lobbying structures. These tendencies led to the greatest rift
between rich and poor in human history. The trends are not only shocking; they are
growing at an incredible rate. In 1981, 1% of Americans in the richest class earned
27 times more income than 50% of Americans in the middle and lower classes. In
2016, this difference increased three times to 81 times [18]. The income inequality
between the upper and lower tenths of people is a staggering 320: 1 [19]. Where
will these trends lead us after AI enters the economy at full speed?
AI systems of an unprecedented scale are shaping society in almost all areas of
daily life already. However, those systems are not governmental organizations but
online search portals, navigators, telephones, translation, and others that collect and
analyze information about each individual. Different companies like Google,
Facebook, Amazon, Alibaba, Netﬂix, Apple, and others have developed systems of
different efﬁciencies, but in summary, we can already say that each person
remembers himself less than those systems. They monitor him and keep track of
what he was interested in, what he ate, what he bought, what TV show he watched,
with whom and about what he talked on the phone, where and when he traveled,
and many other things. The conversion of this information into economic or
political tools becomes incredibly dangerous manipulation of society on a massive
scale. However, it has become almost the norm that one can buy a service of
inﬂuencing the opinions on social networks or trends in search engines that stim-
ulate purchases, political or social decisions. The democracy not only became
nominal, as Giorgio Agamben rightly noted, but AI-based manipulations also make
democracy a hazardous tool in the hands of those who have intentions to manip-
ulate the opinion of society. Society is now faced not only with the problem of an
uncontrolled political, bureaucratic apparatus [20] but also with the manipulations
of the opinions of communities. Well-known samples like the election of the
controversial government of Trump’s in the United States or the misunderstanding
of the Brexit referendum in the United Kingdom have already shown the help-
lessness of Western democracy and its shift toward autocracy.
The systemic growth of AI threatens to accelerate and deepen the mentioned
neoliberal problems and degradation of democracy. There is no doubt that AI
systems will increasingly change middle-class and especially lower-class jobs in all
areas. These systems already allow people to shop, eat, rent a car, stay in a hotel,
choose to buy real estate, design home interiors, or perform other daily activities
without the active participation of service employees. Employees already lost the
advantage over AI systems in many areas. Not only the knowledge is devalued,
15
Instrumentality Versus Awareness
311

now is the time for the devaluation of thinking. AI systems can understand and
perform much more efﬁciently, faster, more accurately, and more cheaply than
humans. It is no surprise, then, that human comparisons with AI are becoming more
common today, usually without leaving any chance of preserving human dignity.
How could this happen? Is it possible to explain this misunderstanding?
3.3
Education
If we take a closer look at the Western educational system, we will ﬁnd that a strong
tendency to train professionals of narrow specializations prevails here. The grid of
the academic program is prepared for graduates to acquire the qualiﬁcation that
helps them quickly adapt themselves to a speciﬁc industrial segment. However, as
noted already, people, identiﬁed with a specialty only, are reduced into an instru-
ment and impoverished as conscious beings. Such an educational system, while
suitable for economic growth, has, at the same time, placed people in an ambiguous
situation. Because of the massive implementation of AI automatizations, people
with a narrow specialization are pushed out of their working place these days. It
seems that there is the right time to rethink the very need for training narrow-proﬁle
specialists because, in many areas, human-instrument will simply no longer be
needed soon. At the same time, there is a need for conscious and independent
personalities with a broader mindset. However, how can we educate conscious
individuals?
Can we restore the human back, not as a tool for narrow exploitation, but as the
one that is free from an instrumental ontology? However, how can we do this, even
the mind and thought, as discussed, are a type of instrument! It seems that the very
question should be changed here. We are not interested in the very instrument and
what it can do; we ask who is the one who uses instruments? Herein lies the
problem! Even when we intuitively perceive that it is, it is complicated to describe.
So, what does it mean to be conscious? Why are educational institutions not taught
to be conscious? This question is not new. It is worth noting that more than a
hundred years ago, Nietzsche pointed out that self-assured scholars and science
itself have turned overly speculative and theoretical. However, after Schopenhauer
and Kant, we understand the limits and the relativity of claims of science, the
naivety, and illusory of the notion that a narrow method of causality can fathom the
innermost essence of the universe [21] and human itself. Nietzsche and other
thinkers initiated a movement against the narrowing of thinking, which expanded
against the Enlightenment project into a wide-ranging critique. Husserl, with a
project of phenomenology called “back to things themselves,” focused primarily on
grasping the primordial nature of awareness rather than sinking in the ocean of
speculative theorizing. Heidegger soon announced that science does not think [22],
and emphasized the “impotence of the sciences” [23] in terms of their inability to
represent their essence in scientiﬁc terms.
Commenting on the effect of the Enlightenment project on the Western culture,
Horkheimer and Adorno noted that it brought us to the culture, which has become a
312
Ž. Svigaris

factory producing standardized cultural goods—movies, radio programs, magazi-
nes, and cultural events. The culture of mass production forms a passive, homog-
enized audience [13]. Indeed, the focus of public attention, psychological and
cultural needs and the forms of media and other aspects of active cultural life are
shaped to meet mass-produced industrial offerings. Therefore, authentic culture was
suppressed and reformed for consumption. Even the very way of focusing attention
on some aspects of culture and not focusing on others is massively implemented as
a form of public consciousness. The characteristics of a society, the patterns of
behavior, and the way of thinking are intended for the development of the industrial
apparatus, which is spreading en masse.
The paradigm of mass production and consumption commercialized not only
culture but also science. Science lost its authentic foundations and became an
instrument of industry. Scientiﬁc researchers were fragmented into narrow work-
shops, disciplines, which safely barricaded themselves in specialized departments
encased in a jargon of terms understood only by a narrow circle of specialists. For
many disciplines, there is no need and no possibility to make research meaningful
in a broader sense. This approach created a caricature situation as if the scientists
had agreed to paint a picture of the world together, but without being interested in
what others were drawing, they drew unrelated fragments. One drew a human, the
other a tree, but the human head got bigger than the tree, and the tree was drawn
growing downward. An inability to transcend theoretical dogmas and fragmentation
of science into countless disciplines imprisoned the knowledge in speculative micro
worldviews. Without a seeing of the “big picture” and having no comprehensive
and encompassing understanding, there is no possibility of a meaningful world-
view, no ability to reconcile different areas of thinking.
It is worth mentioning valuable insights into Jean Gebser’s book, The Ever
Present Origin, where he showed that the very absence of an integral worldview in
Western culture results from a profound crisis of mental consciousness. Gebser
notes that the mental structure of consciousness, which represents the very
understanding of the world, has lost the ability to cover the multiplicity of actual
worldviews and is fragmenting to control the areas that are already slipping out of
its grasp. The fragmentation of mental consciousness brings the fragmentation of
science into disintegrating disciplines. These important signs of the breakdown and
inability to embrace a meaningful vision or the entire worldview brought modern
man onto a misleading path of technological progress [24], with the primary
purpose of rejecting everything “old.” However, the very treatment of the entire
cultural legacy and heritage as primitive and obsolete, suitable only for museums,
has an incredibly impoverished Western culture and the man himself. The paradigm
of progress, which is secular and artiﬁcially imposed, did not solve the fundamental
human issues, but brought the deeply problematic and reductionistic instrumental
ontology and techno-scientiﬁc worldview into the dominance.
There is a growing necessity to reveal openness of thinking, reconcile different
structures of consciousness, and transcend the limitations of the techno-scientiﬁc
worldview. It calls for different modes of awareness. However, what does it mean to
reveal different modes of awareness? The very awareness of different cultural
15
Instrumentality Versus Awareness
313

traditions has been developed in different ways for centuries. At the birth of
Western tradition, we ﬁnd it mentioned in Plato’s dialogues. For instance, in the
conversation with Theaetetus, Socrates talks about the special art of midwifery,
which helps to overcome the pains of the birth of wisdom and cognition. The role of
the midwife of Socrates is very eloquent. If we understand the mythical world as the
ﬁrst birth, Socrates speaks about the second birth, transitioning from a mythical
substrate to a medium of rational thinking. Hence, consciousness is not a static
phenomenon, but rather the ability to question different ways and change the very
understanding of the living world. The possibility of the birth of wisdom opens up a
process of awareness that allows one to rethink already established truths, to dis-
cover their place and meaning anew. The process of becoming aware, in the case of
Socrates, does not take worldview for granted, but with the help of courage given
by the gods and with certain pains of birth. Here we talk about consciousness not as
an end goal, but as a process in which the very awareness is involved.
This awareness is also developed in traditions that cultivate the technique of
contemplation, such as the Japanese Zen. Awareness here ﬁnds itself present before
all the cultural dogmas and rituals; it is related to the concept of self. It is important
to note that the self is understood not by highlighting traits of personality or
individuality that are considered cultural clichés, but on the contrary, by breaking
free from them. Such freedom in the Zen tradition is called Enlightenment. Shinichi
Hisamatsu, who revealed the richness of the Zen tradition in the book Zen and the
Fine Arts, emphasized that the very desire to be attached is a lack of self. The
Enlightenment of self-liberates from the identity or attachment that obscures
thinking. Even blindly following after the Buddha or a patriarch is considered
captivity. A person who needs dependence, even from the ultimate supreme
authority, cannot be considered truly free. Only wholly free from attachment—from
both objective and transcendental things—can one be self-sufﬁcient and indepen-
dent. So, paradoxically, one cannot be free, even if he is attached to the idea of
freedom. Hence, freedom is understood as independence from the dichotomy of
freedom and captivity as a kind of detachment arising from a liberated self. The self
here primarily frees himself from dependence even from the rules of tradition, not
because they are inappropriate, but because he realizes their instrumental nature.
Whatever truth may be, its stagnation and dogmatism lead to a decline.
Therefore, awareness is strengthened by liberating oneself from what obscures
the self. This is also well developed by Algis Mickūnas in his book, Social Value,
and Individual Worth, where we ﬁnd brilliant phenomenology of self [25]. We
cannot grasp the self in the usual sense of objectivity, because it is neither the body,
nor the thoughts, nor the feelings, but what perceives the thoughts, experiences the
feelings, that makes all this means. When trying to grasp the very consciousness,
we are always left empty-handed. Consciousness can be developed by experiencing
clarity of self-awareness, accepting different modes of understanding and different
worldviews, or questioning one’s own worldview. Therefore, transformation here
takes place by suspending rather than denying or rejecting traditional values and
perceiving tradition from within. Liberation does not mean rejection or struggle
with tradition. It means that the conscious self, liberated from the norms of society,
314
Ž. Svigaris

will not follow these norms blindly. Norms, for instance, such as road trafﬁc rules,
are observed not out of fear of being punished, but because of understanding their
necessity and importance. Also, other norms and values, such as respect for the
elderly or love and care for the living environment, do not lose their signiﬁcance.
Therefore, neither the “rightest” perspective nor speciﬁc knowledge, but the
conscious self behind it is the most important in those three given samples. Hence,
it is important to educate individuals who can orient themselves and adapt in a
changing context actively and. The individual should be able to choose the
instrumentality that is most appropriate for each case instead of themselves
becoming a narrow speciﬁcation limited instrument for all of their life. Thus, calling
for awareness should be a part of the educational process. Education can be per-
ceived not as a transformation of a human into an instrument, and not as forcing
him to ﬁt one logic, but rather as a liberation of self and consciousness for
self-education. This would naturally change the main question, which is raised for
educational institutions. Can individuals adapt to the changes in the world via
self-education and recreation of himself in the renewed environment? Suppose the
one is free, self-sufﬁcient, and responsible. In that case, he can be productive to his
community and humanity, and also able consciously to contribute to the creation of
a sustainable living world. Hence, the concept of education itself has to be looked at
with entirely new eyes. What can such an education process look like?
3.4
Self-sustaining Society
We did not even notice that all the knowledge of humanity became easily accessible
to everybody, even to children. There are no more secrets left. Even pupils have
access to the latest developments, articles, and books of science. They do sophis-
ticated experiments, like curious Wilson Taylor, who at the age of 14, studied
information mostly from Wikipedia and other online sources, constructed a
mini-nuclear reactor, and managed to launch mini-thermonuclear fusion that takes
place in the stars, like the sun [26]. Instead of training to repeat standardized
curriculum [27] in a parrot-like manner, it is important to understand why children
are not encouraged to create, to promote their talents. The concept of education
should be changed to the development of creativity and inspiration for talent, in
other words, to nurturing awareness instead of instrumentality. Why is this
becoming increasingly important?
In just a few years, graduates will ﬁnd themselves in a world where they have to
feed not only themselves but also their families. Sticking to the centralized and
standardized vision of education and economics leads to a clear dead end where the
work of human-instruments will be handed over to robotics and AI systems.
Without a change in the educational system, the current rapidly evolving trends will
provoke uncontrollably rising unemployment. However, we can change our
approach. By changing the concept of education, developing conscious and inde-
pendent creative personalities, looking at the situation in a decentralized way, the
situation seems promising and optimistic because, together with the negative
15
Instrumentality Versus Awareness
315

consequences of the development of technology, the changing concept of tooling
has also opened up undeveloped positive trends that have not yet been explored.
The development of technology has inspired a new phenomenon based on the
concept of sharing, which is radically changing the paradigm of consumption in
general. These important trends emerge within the context of a community based on
dynamic forms of synergy. They displace the hitherto dominant ontology of static
determinism and strictly deﬁned property. The Internet of Things has become part
of everyday life with such objects as bicycles or cars, which can be shared by all
members of the community for a small fee. The sharing of information, services,
and other means have emerged as self-accelerating and expanding phenomena on
all levels of the economy, even the sector of energy with the Internet of renewable
energy is developing, where every house becomes not only energy self-sufﬁcient
but also becomes a hub for its sharing and distribution. In a decentralized
sharing-based context, each participant not only consumes, but also creates energy,
services, products, and other value and share them to others. The concept of the
specialty should be transformed to respond to these changes.
The specialty should acquire completely different qualities by becoming not
static, but adaptable, not dependent on some corporation, but independent and open
up to the living world. The Internet of professionals, which sells various services,
such as translation, design, photography, etc., is developing already. Here, the
specialists no longer have to be formal employees of some system. The new
generation of specialists works en masse independently in the Internet space, where
they make their living. The AI tools can serve them, allowing their skills and
qualiﬁcations to be extended to a wider range of users. The change appears small,
but the exponential expansion of sharing goods, services, knowledge, and
short-term rentals is gradually decentralizing the global economy, displacing tra-
ditional centralized forms of ownership and dependency. Even the fastest-growing
enterprises are not focusing on the accumulation of property anymore, but rather the
opposite, opening new ways to share it.
We see many examples, such as the largest operating system: Linux, the largest
portal of design and photography Shutterstock, where with a small fee, one can sell
and buy design or photos; Home Sweet Home Exchange [28] which opened for
many an affordable way to travel; even major supermarkets—Amazon or Alibaba
where people can easily sell their goods online; or the largest logistics company—
Uber, where one can register and start earning as a driver, and many other
fast-growing projects that have emerged as “sharing” initiatives. These initiatives
are developing intensively on popular platforms based on the principles of sharing
within the context and for the beneﬁt of the community—the concept of community
changes. Small discourses and micro-communities are emerging with raising
intensity. They bring together various forms of coexistence based not exclusively
on pragmatic principles but on the everyday interests in a particular area, mostly
based on creativity. Participation in those communities or usage of such service is
generally without fees. A society is emerging that is based on community values,
that creates different well-being and different relations with its environment. Con-
sequently, this self-sustaining society is introducing a different economic model,
316
Ž. Svigaris

which is based on the principles of sharing rather than ownership. This new type of
economy promotes a new kind of policy based on cooperation rather than
opposition.
4
Conclusion
The era of AI is revolutionary in the sense that it transforms not only the very
instrument, but it also changes the ontology of the instrument. The AI-driven
industrial transformations are very different from previous industrial revolutions.
All previous transformations of instruments created new specializations and new
jobs, though AI technology, conversely, detracts employees from their working
places in all sectors. Therefore, AI, ﬁrst of all, empowers the problematic neoliberal
model—it is spreading massively but concentrated in the hands of a few.
With the rise of AI, we are also witnessing positive opportunities. First of all—
human relations with knowledge, together with the phenomena of changing social
relations, which is not focused solely on consumerism, but mostly on sharing.
Although new opportunities arise, the Western educational system is inert and
focused on the old paradigm of an uncreative, narrow tool-shaped specialist. It
continues to prepare graduates in a standardized way for neoliberal systems and
strictly deﬁned jobs. The reformation of educational institutions is just beginning to
develop, new curriculums are still not prepared, but new forms of economy are
already here. This urges to reshape the question for educational systems: how to
transform narrowly qualiﬁed specialists-instruments programs and educate con-
scious, self-sustainable, integral, and universal personalities?
Core Messages
• The era of AI is revolutionary—it transforms not only the very instrument,
but it also changes the ontology of the instrument.
• The AI-driven industrial transformations are very different from previous
industrial revolutions, which created new specializations and new jobs. AI
technologies, conversely, detracts employees from their working places.
Therefore, current developments of AI, ﬁrst of all, and even more radi-
cally, empowers problematic aspects of the neoliberal economic model.
• With the rise of AI, we are witnessing many concerns, but also positive
opportunities—new human relations with knowledge, and the emergence
of a decentralized society, which is focused not solely on consumerism,
but also sharing.
• The western educational system is still too inert, and instead of preparing
graduates for new opportunities on the market, it continues to train spe-
cialists in a standardized way for neoliberal systems and strictly deﬁned
jobs as tool-shaped professionals.
15
Instrumentality Versus Awareness
317

• The reformation of educational institutions is beginning to develop. How-
ever, new curriculums are still not prepared, but new forms of economy are
already here. This urges to reshape the question for educational systems:
how to transform narrowly qualiﬁed specialists-instruments programs and
educate conscious, self-sustainable, integral, and universal personalities?
References
1. Heidegger M (1993) The question concerning technology. Basic Writings, Rev. Ed. Trans.
Lovitt W, Krell DF (ed) San Francisco, HarperSan-Francisco, pp 311–41
2. Kurzweil R (2005) The singularity is near: when humans transcend biology. Penguin
3. Mickunas A (2016) Lithuania and globalization: monograph. Mykolas Romeris University,
p 169
4. Rubavičius V (2010) Postmodernusis kapitalizmas (Postmodern Capitalism). Kitos knygos,
p 31
5. Riis S (2009) The question concerning thinking. New waves in philosophy of technology.
Palgrave Macmillan, London, pp 123–145
6. Dreyfus H (1992) Heidegger’s history of the being of equipment. Blackwell Publishers,
Cambridge, p 184
7. Bergson H (1941) L’Évolution créatrice (Creative Evolution). Quadrige PUF. Presses
Universitaires de France, pp 166–181
8. Benedikter R, Fathi K (2019) The future of the human mind: techno-anthropological
hybridization? Challenge 62(1):77–95
9. Lingis A (2015) Building for movement. Creativity Stud 8(2):103–114
10. Searle JR (1983) Intentionality: an essay in the philosophy of mind. Cambridge University
Press, p 15
11. Searle JR (1980) Minds, brains, and programs. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3 (Bd. 3, S.
417–457)
12. Lingis A (2015) Building for movement. Routledge. Creativity Studies ISSN 2345-0479, 8
(2):103–114
13. Horkheimer M, Adorno TW (2006) The culture industry: enlightenment as mass deception.
Keyworks, Media and cultural studies, pp 41–72
14. Huntington SP, Jervis R (1997) The clash of civilizations and the remaking of world order.
Finance and Dev Engl Ed 34(2):51–51
15. Mickūnas A (2012) Social value and individual worth. Mykolas Romeris University, p 32
16. Crotty J (2000) Slow growth, destructive competition, and low road labor relations: a
keynes-marx-schumpeter analysis of neoliberal globalization
17. Crotty J, Lee KK (2002) A political-economic analysis of the failure of neo-liberal
restructuring in post-crisis Korea. Camb J Econ 26(5):667–678
18. Bremmer I (2018) Us vs them. The Failure of Globalism, Penguin
19. Pogge T (2008) Preface: introduction to the two volume collection [of] global ethics: seminal
essays. In Global ethics: seminal essays. Paragon House
20. Agamben G (1998) Homo sacer: sovereign power and bare life. Stanford University Press
21. Nietzsche FW (1909) The birth of tragedy: or, hellenism and pessimism, vol 3, TN Foulis
318
Ž. Svigaris

22. Heidegger M (1961) Was heisst Denken? (lecture course at Freiburg, winter semester, 1951–
52 and summer semester 1952)
23. Heidegger M (1977) Science and reﬂection. The question concerning technology and other
essays, p 173
24. Gebser J (1985) The ever-present origin, trans. Noel Barstad & Algis Mickunas. Athens,
Ohio: Ohio University Press
25. Mickūnas A (2012) Social value and individual worth. Mykolas Romeris University
26. Wilson T (2014) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PINttscIAEo
27. Mickūnas A (2014) Mokykla, mokytojai, mokiniai. Versus Aureus
28. https://www.homesweethomeexchange.com/
Žilvinas Svigaris (Ph.D. Vilnius University 2014) is a faculty
member of the Department of the History of Philosophy and
Analytic Philosophy. He has translated books “Philosophy and
Theurgy in Late antiquity” by Algis Uždavinys, “Search for
Goods” by Vincas Vyčinas. He has organized conferences
“Preeminence of Myth and the Decline of Instrumental Reason”
and “The Ever-present Myth” at Vilnius University. He has
initiated the project “Research of mytho-philosophical discourse
problematic” at Vilnius University. He is also a Research Fellow
and at Lithuanian Culture Research Institute and a member of the
project “Lithuanian interpretations of Heidegger’s philosophy.”
Dr. Svigaris is also a member of the Lithuanian association of
aesthetics. He has co-authored the “Neoliberalism: Perspectives,
History and Criticisms” with the chapter “Autocracy vs. Neolib-
eralism: A Ukrainian Test Case” and other projects.
15
Instrumentality Versus Awareness
319

16
The Question of Transdisciplinarity
Between Modern Science and Critical
Thought
Christopher Ryan Maboloc
“Choice, not chance, determines your destiny.”
Aristotle
Summary
Advances in Nanotechnology and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) worry people. The
thinking is that developments in the ﬁeld are limited to afﬂuent societies and, in
this way, deprive the people in the Third World of the fruits of human progress.
This study is concerned with giving modern technology its human face.
Technology is not just a means to an end. It reveals a way of life.
Transdisciplinarity is a crucial concept that allows us to bridge the gap between
integrated science and philosophy. The critical theory of technology makes this
possible.
Both
have
a
common
epistemic
interest
regarding
society’s
life-changing questions. This chapter is an attempt to address the issue of how
nanoscience and AI can help promote the well-being of people. The main point
is that modern technology must expand rather than preclude human freedom.
The question of transdisciplinarity between science and critical philosophy is
about the important role of modern technology in realizing the good life.
C. R. Maboloc (&)
Philosophy Department, Ateneo de Davao University, Roxas Ave, Davao City, Philippines
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
N. Rezaei (ed.), Integrated Science, Integrated Science 1,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65273-9_16
321

The domain of nanotechnology research
The code of this chapter is 01110100 01110101 01010001 01101100
01100001 01101001 01111001.
1
Introduction
“There is plenty of room at the bottom”, Richard Feynman said during a Lecture
given at the annual American Physical Society at Caltech in 1959. At that time,
nanotechnology was an unknown ﬁeld in physics, but Feynman presented it as
the way to manipulate atomic particles to make them function like very tiny
machines at a Nanoscale. Quite thrilled by the possibilities that Feynman opened in
the ﬁeld, President William Clinton (2000) asked, “what would happen if we could
arrange atoms one by one the way we want them?” Following this line of thought,
a question needs to be posed - would that be a meaningful way to re-arrange or
re-engineer society to realize higher values and improve the quality of human life?
There is an apparent bias against nanotechnology in developing nations. The
sentiment of many people is that advanced technologies only beneﬁt the rich and
that the developments in nanoscience do not serve the poor, who cannot afford the
high price of cutting-edge technology. The mind-set that modern medicine does not
beneﬁt those who have so little in life has factual basis. In Third World societies,
only the wealthy get ﬁrst class treatment considering its prohibitive cost. Trans-
forming human society, in this sense, would require an understanding of the
important role of modern science in creating a just world for everyone.
322
C. R. Maboloc

The question of justice in liberal contemporary society concerns the issue of
fairness. Modern technology gives individuals and societies tremendous possibili-
ties that empower them to adapt to change. However, advances in the ﬁeld of
scientiﬁc research also result to considerable risks, problems, and burdens. This
investigation recognizes the issue of justice in the area of digital and nano-divide.
While high-end technologies can enhance human life, people usually think that the
good created by the modern sciences is restricted to the developed economies [1].
However, it should be noted that the issues concerning inequality are not limited to
Third World nations. Income inequality is also prevalent in the United States [2, 3].
According to John Weckert [1], it is important to “think carefully about what is
wanted from technology, and that involves thinking about what sort of life one
thinks is a good one”. The development of every society must be guided by
standards that do not undermine the meaning of our humanity. The use of nan-
otechnology and AI should be geared toward the pursuit of the public good. Risks
and the potential harm from new technology should be carefully assessed.
Reﬂexively, a critical theory of technology can help determine the proper goals of
science to avoid the disastrous consequences to human life in the future.
While the scientiﬁc discipline is founded in the objectivity of its ﬁndings, phi-
losophy lies in its critical analysis of reality. Critical thinking is at the heart of both
ﬁelds. The basic point is not to accept things as taken for granted, and for this
reason, the way technology is contextualized is important so that modern devices
can help individuals see a higher value in life. Paradigm shifts in this respect are not
just limited to pure scientiﬁc concepts; they involve the human sciences. Progress is
about the increase in economic output. Economic growth is driven by physical
infrastructures and the use of modern technology. However, any progress is
meaningless if it would not improve the quality of life. For instance, Maboloc [4]
argues:
Modernization theory is a Western type of progress. It is a framework that has been used in
order to propel and realize growth and development in the Third World. In this concept of
growth, the social, political, and cultural implications of development are emphasized.
Theorists were quick to point out, however, that the prevailing realities in the Third World
are not that of democratization, but of ethnic conﬂict, inequality, and power-struggles
between the poor and the elite.
Modernization can be humanized. The right path is to utilize economic progress
to advance the interests of the disadvantaged. This is the humanist face of devel-
opment. Selin and Boradkar [5] express that “behind and within the technological
artifacts populating our daily lives are the cumulative worlds of design, politics,
economics, values, and science”. Innovation brings growth to society. Research
breakthroughs in genetic science have the potential to end diseases that have
bedeviled humankind for decades. Selin and Boradkar [5] explain that “the ability
to manipulate matter on the scale of atoms and molecules has become a targeted
pursuit of the global science community”. Such is crucial in terms of understanding
the transdisciplinary link between science and philosophy. For example, uncovering
the secrets of the atom elicits profound philosophical questions as well.
16
Transdisciplinarity Between Modern Science and Critical Thought
323

There is a common epistemic interest between science and philosophy. Phi-
losophy probes deep questions about life. Understandably, St. Thomas conceived of
the problem of evil from the perspective of the human will insofar as the genetic
data when it comes to the science of criminal behavior was not present during his
time. The Medieval Age did not have the exact information as to how amino acids
converge to create those organisms that eventually reached their peak in the intri-
cate nature of our neural systems. Today, we possess the power to improve human
society through scientiﬁc research at the molecular level. Supercomputers and
nanomachines have brought us into exciting times unimaginable 500 years ago.
2
Modern Technology: Fundamental Problems and Issues
Feynman, in his seminal paper, imagined miniaturizing machines at the molecular
scale to usher a new era in which the power of nanotechnology can transform
human society as we know it. He writes, “There is plenty of room to make them
smaller. There is nothing that I can see in the physical laws that say the computer
elements cannot be made enormously smaller than they are now” [6]. The appli-
cation of this new science has great advantages, from storing millions of books
inside the tiny head of a pin to understanding biological processes and chemical
reactions. Tiny engines no more than the tip of a ﬁngernail can do targeted and
accurate surgeries inside the human body. The applications of nanotechnology are
plenty, from vehicles not beyond 1 mm in size to heat-resistant solar sails,
which give scientists the sophisticated tools to examine the human body.
Feynman’s predictions have come true. For instance, the computing power of a
supercomputer is many million times than that of human beings. Computers today
learn automatically. Google uses algorithms on its search engines, and marketing
ﬁrms employ machine learning to inﬂuence consumer behavior in the market,
thereby eliciting privacy issues. As such, the design and building of complex
computer systems and networks are a source of concern [7]. However, since
modern technology plays a vital role in our present way of life, the right approach is
to be able to utilize it with the public good in mind. In the ﬁeld of healthcare, with
the right mix of state policy and science, nanotechnology and AI have the potential
to save millions of lives.
With the advent of the internet, globalization has come into full swing. For
Thomas Friedman (2005), the web has simply ﬂattened the world. It has enabled
tech giants to create monopolies that control markets. The best example of this is
Amazon and Apple Corporation. Webster [8] likes to believe that “information has
always been integrally linked to globalization. The problem, however, is not
globalization per se, but its consequences”. Globalization necessitates the rise of
institutions and the information infrastructure that is international in scope [9].
Coenen [10] thinks that this digital age “is increasingly becoming a frontier of
social equity that can and must be included in a more general expansion of the
rights of citizens”. Since the ability to make and manipulate digital content favors
324
C. R. Maboloc

big corporations, uneven socio-economic structures in the world have become
stronger.
Selin and Boradkar [5] write that “given the widespread association of nan-
otechnology with revolutionary and disruptive innovations, it is necessary to think
carefully and systematically about the potential futures that it enables and con-
strains”. This claim can be traced to the origin of the Modern Age. Nanotechnology
is a new science. Every science is linked to the project of modernity in which man is
at the center of everything. Nature at man’s disposal means that he lords over it.
Andrew Feenberg [11] explains that what was called science in the time of Aristotle
was concerned with essences. Science then was about the potentiality or the inner
qualities of things. Physis refers to the intrinsic characteristic of nature. Modernity
has changed all that. We no longer think about the essence of things as Aristotle
did. The concern for potentiality has been replaced by the concept of testing,
control, and manipulation.
We can learn from the insight of Max Weber. The science of man is distin-
guished by Weber as humanist, following the German tradition, and materialist,
which he identiﬁes with the British and American way of life. The above reveals the
purposes that modernity serves. In contrast, humanism is focused on the meaning of
happiness. Man is beyond quantiﬁcation. But something must have been lost along
the way. Man is not using his instruments to serve his altruistic ends. The point of
the matter is that we need to rectify our wrong impressions about the use of our
modern devices to realize the empowering role of science.
New forms of control, according to Herbert Marcuse, repress human beings in
society by creating false needs through the mass media [12]. Humans, in this way,
are forced to think of life only in mechanical terms. The human being falls prey to a
consumer culture that reduces everything into a commodity. Antonio Gramsci's
thoughts, rooted in Marx, might help understand how the poor have been excluded
in society. Big factories that produce things for the consumption of the world are
places where workers are exploited and oppressed. However, in the long term, what
people will fear is not the power of capitalists, but misbehaving drones and
supercomputers. This leads to issues regarding superintelligence. Indeed, the
problem that we must recognize is the fact that modern gadgets and devices have
control over us.
3
Nanotechnology: Applications and Potentials
If you take a soccer ball and compare it to the size of the earth, that soccer ball is 10
million times smaller. Now, if you compare the size of one carbon nanotube to the
size of that soccer ball, the nanotube is one billion times smaller than the latter.
Feynman’s “tiny motor” has since found a strong voice in Eric Drexler in the book
Engines of Creation. Drexler [13] explains that “the things around us act as they do
because of the way their molecules behave. Air holds neither its shape nor its
volume because its molecules move freely, bumping and ricocheting through open
16
Transdisciplinarity Between Modern Science and Critical Thought
325

space”. Genetic engineers can manipulate the building blocks of life. Drexler [13]
thinks that it can be done “by directing the cheap and efﬁcient molecular machinery
inside living organisms to do the work”.
Nanotechnology is about the ability of science to fabricate super-small or very
tiny machines at the molecular level [1, 6]. For Weckert [1], nanotechnology is an
“enabling form of technology”. At the present time, miniature devices are at work in
computer semi-conductors. The earliest supercomputer, the CDC 6600, was the size
of four ﬁling cabinets, built at the cost of eight million dollars in 1964. In contrast,
the smallest supercomputer in existence today, the Jetson Xavier NX, which is used
for artiﬁcial intelligence applications, and delivers a server-class performance, is a
70  45 mm microchip device. Graphical abstract shows the domain of nan-
otechnology research in terms of how the various applications correlate.
The computer microchip is a very, very small but very, very fast machine.
Nanotechnology is a relatively new technology whose impact and consequences are
not yet felt. Weckert [1] believes that when it comes to this technology, not many
problems are known yet. At the beginning of the century, Friedman [9] thinks that
people had no idea that the world can be interconnected by electronic devices.
Drexler tells us that nanocomputers behave like the human brain. He writes that
when it comes to such, people have “to imagine a brainlike device with comparable
ﬂexibility” [13]. In this way, we can think of this engine as an electronic circuit
surrounded by tiny computers. Scientists have harnessed the power of nature in the
past and today, the capacities of the human brain. Drexler says that “nanocomputers
will be smaller than synapses, and assembler-built wires will be thinner than the
brain’s axons and dendrites” [13].
A component of nanotechnology is nanomaterials. A nanotube can “either
consist of a single sheet of atoms wrapped in order to form a sheet or may consist
of multiple layers wrapped to form a hollow core” [14]. Nanotubes, for example,
have solid applications in engineering design and drug delivery inside the human
body because of the broad and special attributes of this super ﬁber material. Drexler
[13] explains that nanomachines follow the laws of nature. Parallel to nanomate-
rials, viral proteins, he writes, are like materials in the human body that assemble to
create protection for the body. He explains, “by mixing viral proteins (and the DNA
they serve) in a test tube, molecular biologists have assembled working T4 viru-
ses…the T4 virus is but one of many self-assembling structures” [13]. The possi-
bilities are enormous. As Drexler [13] describes:
As nanotechnology moves beyond reliance on proteins, it will grow more ordinary from an
engineer’s point of view. Molecules will be assembled like the components of an erector
set, and well-bonded parts will stay put. Just as ordinary tools can build ordinary machines
from parts, so molecular tools will bond molecules together to make tiny gears, motors,
levers, and casings, and assemble them to make complex machines.
The potential of nanotechnology in terms of treating illnesses is promising,
although the risks need to be managed. Drexler says that molecular medicine works
differently from the traditional forms of treatment using regular drugs, writing that
the “drug molecules work without direction. Once dumped into the body, they
326
C. R. Maboloc

tumble and bump around in solution haphazardly until they bump a target mole-
cule, ﬁt, and stick, affecting its function” [13]. However, physicians would be more
precise and accurate with nanotechnology, as “molecular machines directed by
nanocomputers will offer physicians another choice” [13]. Drexler explains that
clinicians “will combine sensors, computer programs, and molecular tools to form
systems able to examine and repair the ultimate components of individual cells.
They will bring surgical control to the molecular domain” [13].
Many pieces of research in the ﬁeld of genetic medicine are cutting edge.
Experts need to know the genetic origin of diseases and develop an effective
treatment. Critical to this pursuit is the creation of highly sophisticated computers
that would perform the laboratory analysis. To date, the CRISPR is a gene-editing
technology that provides a ray of hope. It can locate a speciﬁc DNA inside a cell
and “turn on or off” the same gene. This is useful in identifying and correcting
genes that cause diseases. Drexler [13] explains that “repair enzymes compensate
somewhat by detecting and repairing certain kinds of damage to DNA. These
repairs help cells survive, but existing repair mechanisms are too simple to correct
all problems, either in DNA or elsewhere. Errors mount, contributing to the aging
and death of cells—and of people”.
4
Artificial Intelligence: Directions and Risks
In Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, and Strategies, Nick Bostrom [14] discussed
the possibility of AI surpassing the human mind. According to Thorn [15], we can
develop technology with human-level capacity intelligence inside a digital computer.
In his review of Bostrom’s work on the said subject, Thorn [15] posits that the
development of AI could accidentally lead to the development of extreme types of
superintelligenceortheverykindofsuperintelligence“whosecapabilityindeveloping
and deploying new technologies would constitute a potential threat to humanity”.
However, there is a consensus among experts that the danger of tiny self-replicating
machines wiping out the planet (the Grey Goo problem) is only hypothetical [7].
The concept of “user-autonomy” suggests that the human agent is solely
accountable for the consequences brought about by computing tools. However,
Drexler thinks that beginning in the 1960s, engineers have already studied neural
systems to come up with the devices that mimic the human brain. He elaborates
further that after knowing how neurons work, engineers will be able to make
nanomachines that “will interact like neurons, but will work faster. Neurons, though
complex, do seem simple enough for a mind to understand and an engineer to
imitate” [13]. According to Drexler, “neurobiologists have learned much about
their structure and function, even without molecular-scale machinery to probe their
workings” [13]. But questions arise since emerging technologies often produce new
issues. From a moral end, the use of any device must be within the parameters of
acceptable standards given their important functions in everyday life. Figure 1
shows the domain of AI research.
16
Transdisciplinarity Between Modern Science and Critical Thought
327

Automation brings huge beneﬁts to society. Globalization is heightened by the
emergence of the Internet. Products manufactured thousands of miles away in
China, or the Philippines are designed by an engineer living in the comfort of his
Manhattan apartment. In the area of health care, Swedish scientists and doctors
have been developing tiny devices or microchips that can be implanted to enable
family members to monitor their elderly from a distance. Computers and AI are at
the heart of the modern societal structure. Drexler[13] says that “we need to know
how fast advanced AI systems think”. Modern computers are not as complicated as
our brain system, but Drexler tells us that the programs can now imitate aspects of
how people behave [13].
AI is in the process of changing the way people do things. AI systems have
something to do with speed. In the modern world, speed means everything. We can
think of the Deep Blue 1 and Deep Blue 2 supercomputers that played chess
against world champion Gary Kasparov. Drexler says that a nanocomputer can
perform a million computations per second. Nanomachines can act like an
assembler of a new living cell. In this manner, it inﬂuences genetic medicine.
Drexler [13] adds that “molecular technology will develop and mature, aided by
advances in automated engineering”. The future of society will soon depend on
those “assembler-built AI systems” that will automate everything “a million times
faster than a human brain” [13].
Robots can be designed to do many things. A robot possesses a kind of ﬂexibility
that will reduce risks for man. Drexler [13] writes that “eventually, some AI systems
will have both great technical ability and the social ability needed to understand
human speech and wishes”. However, Drexler is aware of the grave dangers. Drones
do not distinguish criminal targets from innocent civilians. AI poses challenges that
could undermine a person’s way of life if human society becomes overly dependent.
Computers do not have real emotions, although they can interface with any human
being. Hence, society must develop sound policies and build institutions that will
handle difﬁcult issues, for, in the end, our devices must serve the good of humanity
and not the objectives of corporate interests. Drexler says that “technical AI is
emerging today, and its every advance will speed the technology race” [13].
Fig. 1 The domain of AI research
328
C. R. Maboloc

5
Gestell and the Good of Society
In his analysis of modern technology, Martin Heidegger [16] writes that Gestell or
enframing is a mode of revealing man’s being-in-the-world. Enframing means the
reduction of human reality into forms of calculative thinking and technical efﬁ-
ciency. Enframing casts a spell on man where he is subordinated to its inﬂuence so
that he could no longer enjoy his freedom. According to Heidegger [16], we should
strive to press on the meaning of technology as it unfolds. Technology, by its own
accord, does not endanger man. However, the concern for technical efﬁciency that
comes along with enframing forces humans to make unreasonable demands on
nature. For Heidegger, the essence of technology “is not technological” [16]. He
writes in The Question Concerning Technology:
Everything, then, depends upon this: that we ponder this arising and that, recollecting, we
watch over it. How can this happen? Above all through our catching sight of what comes to
presence in technology, instead of merely staring at the technological. So long as we
represent technology as an instrument, we remain held fast in the will to master it. We press
on past the essence of technology [16].
Enframing deﬁnes the limits of the intricate relationship that people have with
their devices. We use technology as if we are its master. Modern devices have
shaped our present world, but they also block human freedom. Human existence
cannot be reduced into mere calculations. But life is ﬁtted into a technical mode of
ordering. Technology is value-neutral. However, it can expand the freedoms of
people. The issue is not the platform or the apparatus. It is actually a question of
purpose. The critical thing to ask when it comes to the importance of modern
technology is about its fundamental role in promoting the well-being of people.
Information Technology (IT) systems, for instance, can be used to dismantle unjust
structures and systems. Transparency and integrity in governance can be enhanced
by means of computer systems that help prevent fraud.
In the Third World, the products of nanotechnology or modern technology for
that matter like 5G phones is beyond the reach of ordinary people. In this respect,
human progress appears restricted. This makes the role of modern science less
important in the mind of the common people in the community when it comes to
creating a just and equitable world. However, this perception needs to be chal-
lenged. Scientists are concerned about what is good for every man. Modern tech-
nology cannot be conceived outside of the context of the world in which people
live. It is for this reason that the greater task ahead is to make modern science as a
discipline closer to the people.
Low-income countries are vulnerable to many things like diseases, natural dis-
asters, and violent conﬂicts. Socio-political pathologies are due to extreme poverty,
discrimination, and economic inequalities. Reform in society will require not only
physical changes but the re-engineering of processes and the transformation of the
people’s way of life. Urban centers are hampered by the woes of overpopulation,
pollution, and homelessness. A big factor that affects the comfort of ordinary people
is the inefﬁciency of transport systems and poor internet connectivity. While our
16
Transdisciplinarity Between Modern Science and Critical Thought
329

machines and devices do not have any moral compass, good social dynamics that
employ the use of advanced technologies, anchored in the idea of novelty, can help
solve the above problems. Simone Arnaldi [17] explains that “technologies do not
develop in isolation from society, but are socially embedded and inﬂuenced by
social, economic, and political conditions”.
Human development is only possible in a world that is inclusive. Realizing
democracy is founded on the empowerment of the common people. We can
empower citizens if society is anchored in the principles that will secure the
attainment of the good life. Feenberg discusses the notion of re-contextualization in
which modern technology is used to make our democratic systems work. It is a
process that will involve the acquisition of values and adapting to the same [11].
The digital divide can be overcome if governments implement well-meaning
policies. The realization of the good of society can be addressed responsibly with
the aid of advanced logistics systems that will ensure the availability of basic goods
and services.
The desire to discover a cure for very severe ailments at the molecular level
needs billions of dollars of investments. While the possibility will catapult this new
science into global importance a decade from now with all the innovations it is
introducing, the great danger of widening the gap between afﬂuent societies and
impoverished ones is there. The challenge in this respect is to determine how
progress in science can ultimately bridge the gap. Institutional approaches are
necessary, but we can begin with the recognition that people have a right to beneﬁt
from modern science and technology. Since the researches in nanotechnology are
growing in the past decade, it only means that developments can be expected in its
various ﬁelds of application.
Many of our challenges today possess a socio-political context. For instance,
with the most recent global pandemic, the vaccine for coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) is expected to be prohibitively expensive for the global poor. The
hegemonic structures of the global order will defeat the important purpose of
science. Modern science is meant to promote the cause of humankind. In order to
do this, the right kind of diplomacy is to make the access to the vaccines a matter of
right that should be secured through global solidarity. If modern science must
inspire the young, it is because science plays a critical role that can recreate human
societies and make the lives of people better. Human development, in this regard,
requires some form of a paradigm shift [4, 18].
The exodus of many Jewish scientists into America during the Second World
War served as the impetus for its superpower status. American universities are the
oasis of growth in the Western hemisphere. John D. Rockefeller brought the likes of
Albert Einstein, Edward Teller, and Jon Von Neumann into US soil. By doing so,
the industrialist ignited the engines of growth that deﬁned the global age. The
research on game theory, to cite a good example, enabled advances in economics
that ultimately produced great wealth. Today, we observe how tech companies are
leading the charge. In the 1900s, it was oil and gas that fueled the growth of nations.
Right now, companies such as Microsoft, Apple, and Google, with assets worth
330
C. R. Maboloc

hundreds of billions of dollars, are even wealthier and more powerful than some
states.
Nevertheless, it would be too simplistic to say that science and technology can
change human society overnight. After all, our troubles are enormous. We live in a
world in which justice is not found. Amartya Sen [3] deﬁnes human development as
“the expansion of freedoms that people enjoy”. Indeed, society must address the
reality of the economic divide and political exclusion. It is for this reason that
advances in modern technology must be used to enhance human freedom. Science
must help propel not only economic progress but equitable growth and develop-
ment as well. For this reason, people must go beyond the technical aspect of reality.
The critical theory of technology has a moral job to do. To realize the good of
society, the transdisciplinarity between science and critical thought accomplishes
our intent of deﬁning the meaningful role of technology in human life.
For instance, while we have used AI in making smartphones and smart TVs, tech
research can also look into designing homes for children with disabilities. It is a
place that is conﬁgured to provide a child with a safe environment in which there is
fusion in terms of meaningful day to day activities and the presence of devices that
will cater to the special needs of an intellectually challenged human being. It is a
matter of remodeling society so that we can ﬁnd the right ﬁt for people. We can use
our modern devices to make life comfortable for persons with disabilities who also
deserve to live and enjoy life as it is.
A big part of how we can transcend our situation or overcome our condition is
anchored in our ability to exercise the meaning and value of our basic liberties.
Decision-making is important to make life worth living. Science need not be an
enemy of human freedom. Instead, science can help people make proper decisions.
AI, in this way, can assist leaders in deciding how to make the lives of others better.
The task at hand, hence, is to be able to give science a human face. Since AI and
nanotechnology have something to do with speed, such should translate into a sense
of urgency in the political realm in terms of modernizing the systems and networks
that deal with public service. Precisely, science and technology can help realize
justice in the world by helping build the institutions meant to secure the well-being
of people and protect the interests of the least advantaged.
6
Conclusion
Today’s world is hampered by the problem of inequality and the absence of justice.
Integrating science with the critical function of philosophy is in that position to
respond to this important generational challenge. Nanotechnology and AI can
provide many possibilities for the future that can ﬁnally alter the problematic sit-
uations of people when it comes to diseases and the problem of poverty. Science
can help remedy many socio-political pathologies in the world. Redesigning human
society is an inescapable moral obligation, as well as a scientiﬁc effort. All the
innovations brought about by researches in nanoscience and AI can help uplift the
16
Transdisciplinarity Between Modern Science and Critical Thought
331

quality of human life though we must not compromise the values that have come to
deﬁne who we are as human subjects. It is for this reason that critical thought
always matters. Transdisciplinarity can give directions to link up the new advances
in modern technology with society’s desire to realize the good life for every human
being.
Technology is wrongly seen as a mere instrument. Heidegger [16] tells us that
technology reveals a deeper truth. The fundamental role of technology is to expand
human freedom. It is not meant to impede the latter. The essence of technology is
the reality of life. It can be shown in how nanotechnology and AI can advance the
technological capabilities of societies. Indeed, every modern technology is more
than just a means to an end. It reveals a way of life. Our devices are crucial in
ﬁnding the right ﬁt that will secure the good for every person. We have seen how
nanotechnology can solve important issues in the medical world and how the
application of AI can help improve complex social networks. The idea of trans-
disciplinarity between philosophy and science is now clear. Beyond the job to
inﬂuence policy and decision making, philosophers can help integrate modern
science to social and ethical concerns that matter to the everyday life of man.
Core Messages
• The transdisciplinarity of science and philosophy is rooted in critical
thinking.
• Nanotechnology is the manipulation of materials at the atomic and
molecular level.
• AI refers to the decision-making capability of robots and complex com-
puter systems.
• Technology is contextualized in terms of structures, ethical aims, and
social goals.
• ‘Enframing’ reduces human life into the calculative and the efﬁciency of
our devices.
• The fundamental role of technology is the promotion of the good of
society.
References
1. Weckert J (2013) Nanotechnology, ethics of. International encyclopedia of ethics pp 1–8
2. Sachs J (2006) The end of poverty. Penguin Books, London
3. Sen A (1999) Development as freedom. Alfred Knopf, New York
4. Maboloc CR (2018) On the scientiﬁc methods of Kuhn and Popper: implications of
paradigm-shifts to development models. Philosophia 46(2):387–399
332
C. R. Maboloc

5. Selin C, Boradkar P (2010) Prototyping nanotechnology: a transdisciplinary approach to
responsible innovation. J Nano Educ 2(1–2):1–12
6. Feynman RP (1960) There’s plenty of room at the bottom. California Institute of Technology,
Engineering and Science magazine
7. Weckert J (2012) Risks and scientiﬁc responsibilities in nanotechnology. Handbook of risk
theory: epistemology, decision theory, ethics, and social implications of risk 1
8. Webster F (2002) Globalization, information, and change. Technology, development, and
democracy pp 79–103
9. Friedman T (2005) The world is ﬂat. Farrar, Straus and Giroux, New York
10. Coenen C (2019) Engineering life. NanoEthics 13(3):151–153. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11569-019-00360-5
11. Feenberg A (2002) Transforming technology: a critical theory revisited. Oxford University
Press
12. Marcuse H (1964) One dimensional man. Beacon Press, Boston
13. Drexler KE (1986) Engines of creation: the coming era of nanotechnology. Anchor Books,
New York
14. Bostrom N (2014) Superintelligence: paths, dangers, strategies, Reprint (ed). Oxford
University Press, Oxford
15. Thorn PD (2015) Nick bostrom: superintelligence: paths, dangers. Springer, Strategies
16. Heidegger M (1977) The question concerning technology and other essays. (trans: Lovitt W).
Garland Publishing, New York and London
17. Arnaldi S (2018) Responsibility and human enhancement. Springer
18. Kuhn TS (1962) The structure of scientiﬁc revolutions, Original edn. University of Chicago
Press
Christopher Ryan Maboloc , associate professor at Ateneo de
Davao University, is the author of several papers on modern
liberalism, disability rights, bioethics, the philosophy of technol-
ogy, and radical democracy. He obtained his doctorate at the
University of San Carlos, maxima cum laude. He ﬁnished an
Erasmus Mundus Master in Applied Ethics at Linkoping
University, Sweden and NTNU, Norway. He also has a Master’s
in Philosophy from Ateneo de Manila University. He is a Visiting
Professor for Global Justice at the American University of
Sovereign Nations.
16
Transdisciplinarity Between Modern Science and Critical Thought
333

17
Adaptive Networks at the Crossroad
of Artificial Intelligence and Formal,
Biological, Medical, and Social
Sciences
Jan Treur
“What is the role of causality in the mechanisms suggested
here? Because of the constant recursivity of the process, the
widespread notion of linear causality (a single cause for a
single effect) cannot be applied to these mechanisms. (…) there
is no simple, unidirectional sense of causality …”
Scherer [1, p. 3470]
Summary
In this paper, it has been illustrated how a network-oriented modeling approach
based on temporal-causal networks can be used to model adaptive processes in
different domains and thus serve as a unifying factor for multiple sciences. The
approach uses mathematical relations and functions as declarative building
blocks to be used in a standard temporal-causal network format. A dedicated
software environment is available, including a combination function library
for aggregation of multiple impacts within a temporal-causal network, with
more than 35 already predeﬁned basic combination functions. This software
environment makes design and simulation for such network models relatively
easy. The approach is illustrated by three examples of adaptive network models:
a ﬁrst-order adaptive network model for bonding by homophily: a second-order
adaptive network model for plasticity and metaplasticity for emotion regulation
dysfunction in disorders; and a fourth-order adaptive network model for
evolutionary processes related to pathogens and pregnancy.
J. Treur (&)
Social AI Group, Department of Computer Science, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, De Boelelaan
1111, 1081HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands
e-mail: j.treur@vu.nl
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
N. Rezaei (ed.), Integrated Science, Integrated Science 1,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65273-9_17
335

Ascending and Descending (Adopted from Lithograph, Escher, 1960, https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ascending_and_Descending#/media/File:Ascending_
and_Descending.jpg)
The code of this chapter is 01110100 01000100 01101110 01101101
01111001 01111001 01101001 01100011 01100001 01101001.
1
Introduction
Although different scientiﬁc disciplines address different domains from a concep-
tual and methodological perspective, they have a number of important common
elements. These common elements form a good basis for more progress by
exchange between disciplines andh forms of uniﬁcation than what is achieved when
staying within the boundaries of a single discipline. In this introduction, ﬁrst, a few
of these common elements are brieﬂy pointed out. Next, it is discussed how the
adaptive network-oriented modeling approach presented in this paper exploits them.
One of the common elements in different disciplines is the use of causal rela-
tions to describe processes (i.e. describing when one factor affects another factor).
Just a few examples are how opinions or emotions (or even viral infections) of
persons inﬂuence each other (social science, social neuroscience), how certain
events may lead to stress within a person (psychology), how stress can lead to many
mental and physical disorders (neuroscience, psychology, medicine), and how
336
J. Treur

pathogens can negatively affect someone’s health (biology, medicine). Next to
causal relations, often some form of dynamics of processes over time is addressed in
different disciplines. For example, how will a viral infection spread within the
whole population (social Science, medicine), how does stress lead to certain dis-
orders (neuroscience, psychology, medicine), how is the human body ﬁghting
against a pathogen after an infection (biology, medicine). Describing such dy-
namics can make use of networks of causal relations, which often contain internal
cycles. In many cases, also a form of adaptiveness is considered as a kind of
extended form of dynamics. For example, how does a human body adapt to
infections (biology, medicine), how do relations between humans adapt due to
circumstances (social science), and how does the brain adapt to long-term stress
(neuroscience, psychology).
Other common elements in different disciplines concern the use of concepts and
techniques from formal sciences. An important one is mathematical formalization.
Historically, the important role of mathematical formalization within physics has
become well-known. It has led to the foundations for important generic concepts
and areas within mathematics, such as calculus and differential equations by Des-
cartes [2], Leibniz [3], Newton [4]. Later on, these have been applied in many other
disciplines. Accordingly, in more recent times, mathematical formalizations are also
playing an important role in other disciplines. This concerns, for example, math-
ematical descriptions of biochemical processes within a cell addressed in biology
and chemistry [5–7], of contagion processes addressed within social science and
biology [8–10], and of processes within the brain addressed within neuroscience
[11]; these examples all use concepts and techniques from the areas mentioned
above of mathematics.
Nowadays, mathematical formalizations often go hand in hand with computa-
tional analysis and simulation from computational science within the formal sci-
ence called informatics or computer science. For this, simulated in silico versions of
processes in reality, can be obtained by executing mathematical descriptions of
these processes on a computational device as dynamical systems, often speciﬁed by
differential equations [12, 13]. The outcomes of such simulated processes for dif-
ferent inputs or parameters can be analyzed using mathematical techniques as well.
For example, the processes within a cell are simulated based on a mathematical
description of the cell’s biochemistry within biology [5–7], the processes within the
brain are simulated based on a mathematical description of these brain processes
within neuroscience [11], and the spread of a virus is simulated based on a math-
ematical description of the effects of the characteristics of the contact network
within social science or biology [8–10]. Also, more and more concepts and tech-
niques are applied from artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), which can be viewed as an area
within informatics or computer science.
Within this paper, the focus is on the adaptive dynamic network-oriented
modeling approach described in [14, 15]; this approach covers all of the common
elements mentioned above. By some examples in different sections, it is illustrated
how this approach supports uniﬁcation and integration for different disciplines. The
considered approach is a network-oriented modeling approach based on adaptive
17
Adaptive Networks at the Crossroad of Artificial Intelligence
337

dynamic causal networks, a relatively new branch in the longstanding causal
modeling area within AI, e.g. [16–18]. Due to this causal perspective, it ﬁts well
with all scientiﬁc disciplines where causal relations are considered, which are
practically all scientiﬁc disciplines. Within these causal networks, the temporal
dynamics of causal effects is addressed, too.
By addressing adaptiveness through self-models within the network based on the
notion of network reiﬁcation, the modeling approach also belongs to another
longstanding area within AI, metalevel architectures, and metaprogramming [19–
25]. The use of self-models provides a modeling technique by which adaptation can
be modeled easily and also iteratively. This is of good help when modeling in
scientiﬁc domains where multiple levels of adaptivity are important. Examples of
this addressed here in some detail are:
• adaptive social processes for bonding based on homophily or similarity [26]
within social science (Sect. 3).
• plasticity and metaplasticity for emotion (dys)regulation [27–30] within neuro-
science and psychology and complex adaptive disorders [30] in medicine
(Sect. 4).
• different levels of evolutionary adaptation [31] in biology and medicine
(Sect. 5).
The adaptive network-oriented modeling approach has a solid basis in formal
sciences. Being network-oriented, the approach belongs to the relatively new formal
discipline called network science [14]. Moreover, the basic modeling constructs are
just declarative relations and functions, which are elementary concepts within
mathematics. Based on them, in a canonical manner, difference and differential
equations are deﬁned mathematically, which are also declarative (temporal) notions
within mathematics. Via them, mathematical analysis of considered network
models can be performed to analyses emerging behavior, for example, concerning
emerging equilibria and monotonicity.
The mathematical formalizations of adaptive networks, as mentioned, can easily
be used to conduct computational simulation experiments from a computational
science perspective, which is an area within the formal science indicated by
informatics or computer science. A dedicated software environment is available to
support this [15, Chap. 9]. The outcomes of such simulation experiments for dif-
ferent inputs and parameters can be analyzed in relation to mathematical analysis,
thus supporting the veriﬁcation of implemented models.
Based on the above, the chapter is structured as follows. In Sect. 2, the adaptive
network-oriented modeling approach is brieﬂy explained. In Sect. 3, a ﬁrst example
network model is presented for the social science discipline addressing the adaptive
process of bonding in relation to similarity (homophily) of persons. Next, in Sect. 4,
an example model is presented for the neuroscience, psychology, and medicine
disciplines. This model addresses the role of emotion (dys)regulation in handling
stress and medical therapy for that. Section 5 presents an example of evolutionary
338
J. Treur

processes within biology and medicine concerning pregnancy. Finally, Sect. 6 is a
discussion.
2
Modeling by Adaptive Networks
Network-oriented modeling uses some form of network structure as basic archi-
tecture. In this Section, such a modeling approach is brieﬂy introduced for
temporal-causal network models, which can be nonadaptive or adaptive.
2.1
Dynamic Modeling by Temporal-Causal Network Models
For the networks used here, the interpretation of connections is based on causality
and dynamics. The nodes in a network represent states (or state variables) varying
in time. The connections deﬁne causal relationships that show how each state
affects other states over time. The type of network used has been called a
temporal-causal network [32]. They represent by mathematical relations, and
function states X and connections X ! Y between them for (causal) impacts; here,
states X have values X(t) that usually change over time t. More precisely, the
following notions from the deﬁning network structure characteristics of a
temporal-causal network model:
Connectivity of the Network
• connection weights xX,Y 2 [−1, 1] for each connection from a state X to a state Y.
Aggregation of Multiple Impacts on a Given State in the Network
• basic combination functions cj(..), j = 1,.., m for aggregation, selected for the
whole network model from an available combination function library. This is
done by specifying mcf = [k1,.., km], where kj refers to the number combination
function cj(..) has within that library;
• for each state Y, combination function weights cj,Y for the basic combination
functions cj(..), j = 1,.., m are used to indicate by a weighted average of the
functions cj(..), j = 1,.., m the aggregation of incoming single causal impacts
xXi;YXi(t) of the states X1,.., Xk from which Y gets incoming connections;
• for each state Y and combination function cj(..), pi,j,Y is used to identify com-
bination function parameters.
17
Adaptive Networks at the Crossroad of Artificial Intelligence
339

Timing in the Network
• for each state Y, there is a speed factor ηY  0.
The above deﬁned concepts deﬁne in a canonical manner an associated nu-
merical representation of the network model [32, Chap. 2], in difference or dif-
ferential equation format which can be used for simulation and mathematical
analysis:
Y t þ Dt
ð
Þ ¼ YðtÞ þ gY cY xX1;YX1ðtÞ; . . .; xXk;YXk tð Þ


 YðtÞ


Dt
dYðtÞ=dt ¼ gY cY xX1;YX1 tð Þ; . . .; xXk;YXk tð Þ


 YðtÞ


ð1Þ
where X1, …, Xk are the states from which state Y gets incoming base connections
(Table 1).
Here the overall combination function cY(..) for state Y is the weighted average
of the basic combination functions cj(..) by the speciﬁed weights cj,Y for Y:
cY V1; . . .; Vk
ð
Þ ¼ c1;Y c1 V1; . . .; Vk
ð
Þ þ . . . þ cm;Y cm V1; . . .; Vk
ð
Þ
c1;Y þ . . . þ cm;Y
ð2Þ
Such equations are hidden in the dedicated software environment [15, Chap. 9]
that has been developed. This software environment is freely downloadable at
https://www.researchgate.net/project/Network-Oriented-Modeling-Software.
Table 1 Numerical representations of a temporal-causal network in terms of the network
characteristics
Concepts
Numerical representation
Explanation
State values
over time t
Y(t)
At each time point t each state Y in the
model has a real number value, usually
in [0, 1]
Single causal
impact
impactX,Y(t) = xX,Y X(t)
At t state X with connection to state
Y has an impact on Y, using weight xX,
Y
Aggregating
multiple
impacts
aggimpactY(t) = cYðimpactX1;YðtÞ,
…, impactXk;YðtÞÞ
cYðxX1;YX1ðtÞ, …, xXk;YXkðtÞÞ
The aggregated causal impact of
multiple states Xi on Y at t, is
determin-ed using combination
function cY(..) applied to the single
causal impacts xXi;YXiðtÞ, where X1,
…, Xk are the states from which state
Y gets incoming connections
Timing of
the causal
effect
Y(t + Dt) = Y(t) + ηY
[aggimpactY(t) −Y(t)] Dt
= Y(t) + ηY [cYðxX1;YX1ðtÞ, …,
xXk;YXkðtÞÞ−Y(t)] Dt
The causal impact on Y is exerted over
time gradually, using speed factor ηY
340
J. Treur

Making the parameters p1;j;Y, p2;j;Y of the combination functions cj,Y(..) explicit,
this becomes
cY p1;1;Y; p2;1;Y; . . .; p1;m;Y; p2;m;Y; V1; . . .; Vk


¼ c1;Y c1 p1;1;Y; p2;1;Y; V1; . . .; Vk


þ . . . þ cm;Ycm p1;m;Yp2;m;Y; V1; . . .; Vk


c1;Y þ . . . þ cm;Y
ð3Þ
There are many different approaches possible to address the issue of aggregating
multiple impacts by combination functions. Therefore, for this aggregation, a
combination function library with a number of basic combination functions (cur-
rently more than 40) is available, while also own-deﬁned functions can be added.
Examples of basic combination functions from this library can be found in Table 2.
Based on the canonical equation in (1), the following criterion for mathematical
analysis can easily be derived.
Table 2 Examples of basic combination functions from the library
Combination
function
Notation
Formula
Parameters
Identity
id(V)
V
Complemental
identity
compid(V)
1  V
Scaled sum
ssumk(V1, …, Vk)
V1 þ ... þ Vk
k
Scaling factor
k > 0
Simple logistic
slogistic r,s(V1,
…,Vk)
1
1 þer V1 þ ... þ Vks
ð
Þ
Steepness r > 0
Excitability
threshold s
Advanced logistic
alogisticr,s(V1,
…,Vk)
1
1 þer V1 þ ... þ Vks
ð
Þ 
1
1 þers
h
i
Steepness r > 0
Excitability
threshold s
Scaled maximun
smaxk(V1,…, Vk)
minðV1;...;VkÞ
k
Scaling factor
k > 0
Scaled minimum
smink(V1, …, Vk)
maxðV1;...;VkÞ
k
Scaling factor
k > 0
Euclidean
eucln,k(V1, …, Vk)
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
V1n þ ... þ Vkn
k
nq
Order n > 0
Scaling factor
k > 0
Scaled geometric
mean
sgeomeank(V1,
…, Vk)
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
V1...Vk
k
kq
Scaling factor
k > 0
17
Adaptive Networks at the Crossroad of Artificial Intelligence
341

2.2
A Criterion for Stationary Points and Equilibria
State Y has a stationary point at time t if dY(t)/dt = 0 at t. The network has an
equilibrium at t if all states have a stationary point at t. From (1). It directly follows
that in a temporal-causal network model, state Y is stationary at t if and only if
gY ¼ 0
or
aggimpactY tð Þ ¼ Y tð Þ
where
aggimpactY tð Þ ¼ cY xX1;YX1 tð Þ; . . .; xXk;YXk tð Þ


ð4Þ
Here X1, …, Xk are the states from which Y has incoming connections.
The network model is in equilibrium when for all states, Y of the network the
Eq. (4) holds (also called an equilibrium equation then).
Note that considering (3), this criterion (4) is expressed purely in terms of the
network structure characteristics ηY, xX,Y, ci,Y, pi,j,Y. Therefore, it is a very simple
and easily applicable criterion to analyze a network’s stationary points and its
emerging equilibrium behavior, just based on the network’s structure characteris-
tics. This can be used, for example, to verify whether an implemented network
model is correct with respect to the network structure. By a variant of this criterion
(4), also monotonicity can be analyzed, just by replacing the equality sign in the
equation by an inequality sign <,  , or >,  , thus obtaining an inequality relation.
2.3
Adaptive Dynamic Modeling by Adaptive
Temporal-Causal Network Models
In Sect. 2.1, the characteristics xX,Y, ci,Y, pi,j,Y, ηY of the network structure were
assumed to be static, which works ﬁne for modeling nonadaptive networks.
However, to model adaptive processes as often occur in the real world by adaptive
networks, some or all of these characteristics also have to change over time. In
general, adaptive networks are usually modeled in a hybrid manner by considering
two types of models that interact with each other: a network model for the dynamics
within the base network and an adaptation model for the dynamics of the network
characteristics of the base network.
The latter dynamic model is usually speciﬁed in a format outside the
network-oriented modeling perspective as used for the base network itself. It is
most often speciﬁed in the form of some procedural or algorithmic programming
speciﬁcation closely related to the code used to program the network adaptation
process. This non-network dynamic adaptation model interacts intensively with the
dynamic model for the internal network dynamics of the base network. The hybrid
approach for adaptive networks was also followed earlier in [32, 33]. In that case,
for each new adaptation principle, a new piece of software had to be added to the
modeling environment. These limitations of the hybrid approach to adaptive net-
works have led to the motivation to develop the alternative approach described
below.
342
J. Treur

Recently it has been found out how adaptive networks can be modeled in a more
transparent network-oriented modeling manner by one overall network extending
the base network by a self-model based on so-called reiﬁcation states or self-model
states [14, 15, 34]. This step has been called network reiﬁcation, and the obtained
network a self-modeling network or reiﬁed network. It has been shown in [15] how
network reiﬁcation can be used to explicitly represent many kinds of well-known
(e.g. from cognitive neuroscience and social science) adaptation principles for
networks in a declarative, transparent, and uniﬁed manner. Examples of such
adaptation principles include, among others, principles for Hebbian learning (to
model plasticity in the brain or mental processes and for bonding based on
homophily (to model adaptive social networks). Using self-models, writing pro-
cedural or algorithmic speciﬁcations, and programming code, as usually applied for
network adaptation by the hybrid approach, is not needed anymore. Both the dy-
namics of the states within the base network and the dynamics of the network
structure are speciﬁed in a declarative manner by mathematical relations and
functions and executed, not by two different interacting software components as in
the hybrid case, but by the same generic computational reiﬁed network engine as
described in more detail in [15, Chaps. 9 and 10].
More speciﬁcally, network reiﬁcation for a temporal-causal network means that
for each state Y of the base network, for the adaptive ones among the network
structure characteristics xX,Y, ci,Y, pi,j,Y, ηY, additional self-model states WX,Y, Ci,Y,
Pi,j,Y, HY (also called reiﬁcation states) are introduced (see the blue upper plane in
Fig. 1):
(a) Connectivity characteristics reiﬁcation
• Self-model states WXi;Y
are added, representing adaptive connection
weights xXi;Y.
Fig. 1 Network reiﬁcation for temporal-causal networks: downward connections from self-model
states to base network states (Adapted from [15, Chap. 3, Fig. 3.3])
17
Adaptive Networks at the Crossroad of Artificial Intelligence
343

(b) Aggregation characteristics reiﬁcation
• Self-model states Cj,Y are added representing adaptive combination function
weights ci,Y; and
• Self-model states Pi,j,Y are added representing adaptive combination func-
tion parameters pi,j,Y.
(c) Timing characteristics reiﬁcation
• Self-model states HY are added representing adaptive speed factors ηY
The notations WX,Y, Ci,Y, Pi,j,Y, HY for the self-model states indicate the
speciﬁc roles they play with respect to base state Y. These roles are the basis
for the speciﬁcation of a reiﬁed network according to role matrices mcw,
mcfw, mcfp, ms, as explained in detail in Sect. 4.2:
• Connection weight role W role matrix mcw
The self-model states WXi,Y for states Xi from which Y gets an incoming
connection play the role of providing the adaptive values for the connection
weights for Y.
• Combination function weight role C role matrix mcfw
The self-model states Cj,Y play the role of providing the adaptive values for
the combination function weights for the chosen combination functions for
Y.
• Combination function parameter role P role matrix mcfp
The self-model states Pi,j,Y play the role of providing the adaptive values for
the combination function parameters for the chosen combination functions
for Y.
• Speed factor role H role matrix ms
The self-model states HY play the role of providing the adaptive value for the
speed factor for Y.
For a nonadaptive network characteristic from xX,Y, cj,Y(..), pi,j,Y, ηY, the role is
played by the network characteristic itself.
The ﬁrst step is the inclusion of self-model states for some of the characteristics
of the base network structure to obtain an extended network. As a next step, the
dynamics of the self-model states themselves and their impact on base state Y are
described by additional network structure of the extended network. The outgoing
impact of the self-model states WX,Y, Cj,Y, Pi,j,Y, HY on the concerning base state
Y is indicated in Fig. 1 by the pink downward arrows. Their effect on Y is that
within the above Eq. (1), in computations actually some of the static characteristics
xX,Y, cj,Y, pi,j,Y, ηY are replaced by the corresponding adaptive characteristics WX,
Y(t), Cj,Y(t), Pi,j,Y(t), HY(t) at the considered time point t. For shortness leaving out
the t, as an adaptive variant of (1) and (3) this becomes:
344
J. Treur

ð5Þ
However, note that this (5) is by itself not in standard temporal-causal network
format, as that format requires constant speed factors ηY, combination function
weights ci,Y, combination function parameter values pi,j,Y, and connection weights
xX,Y, and apparently in (4), the HY, Ci,Y, Pi,j,Y, WX,Y that replace them are not
constant. Nevertheless, with a little more effort, the additional network structure
within the reiﬁed network can still be (re)written in standard temporal-causal net-
work format (with static characteristics η*Y, c*j,Y, p*i,j,Y, and x*X,Y) [15, Chaps.
9 and 10].
As in this way, the resulting reiﬁed network is still a temporal-causal network. It
can be handled as any temporal-causal network. In particular, mathematical analysis
and veriﬁcation can be applied to it as described for nonadaptive networks [35] and
[32, Chap. 12]. It can also be reiﬁed itself and thus provide second- and
higher-order reiﬁed networks to cover networks that are second- or higher-order
adaptive. Moreover, the universal combination function and universal difference
equation derived in [15, Chap. 10] applies to all states at all levels, enabling a quite
compact and uniform computational reiﬁed network engine, as described in [15,
Chap. 9].
So, by this construction, a reiﬁed network structure is obtained that explicitly
represents the adaptive characteristics of the base network structure as self-model
by some of its states. By its own network characteristics, a reiﬁed network repre-
sents how the base network adapts over time. This is how certain adaptation
principles are speciﬁed that describes how exactly the speciﬁc base network
structure characteristics change due to the adaptation process. To this end, like any
other state, the dynamics of reiﬁcation states themselves are speciﬁed by the three
general types of network structure characteristics connectivity (a), aggregation (b),
and timing (c), also mentioned above:
(a) Connectivity for the self-model states in the reiﬁed network
For the self-model states, their connectivity in terms of their incoming and
outgoing connections has two different functions:
• Effectuating its special effect from its speciﬁc role
The outgoing downward causal connections (the pink downward arrows in
Fig. 1) from the self-model states WX,Y, Ci,Y, Pi,j,Y, HY to state Y represent the
speciﬁc causal impact (its special effect from its speciﬁc role) each of these
self-model states has on Y. These downward causal impacts are standard per
17
Adaptive Networks at the Crossroad of Artificial Intelligence
345

role, and make that the adaptive values WX,Y(t), Ci,Y(t), Pi,j,Y(t), HY(t) are used
for the adaptive characteristics of the base network as in (5).
• Indicating the input for the adaptation principle speciﬁed in (b)
The incoming upward or leveled causal connections (blue and black arrows)
to a self-model state are used to specify the input needed for the particular
adaptation principle that is addressed.
(b) Aggregation of multiple impacts for the self-model states in the reiﬁed
network
For the self-model states, their aggregation characteristics have one main aim:
• Expressing the adaptation principle by a (declarative) mathematical
function
For the aggregation of the incoming causal impacts for a self-model state, provided
as indicated in (a), a speciﬁc combination function is chosen to express the
adaptation principle in a declarative mathematical manner. For example, the
mathematical function deﬁnition (7) in Sect. 4.1 used for the self-model states
WXi;Y expresses a Hebbian Learning adaptation principle by the function hebbl(..)
in a declarative manner.
(c) Timing for the self-model states in the reiﬁed network
For the self-model states, their timing characteristics have one main aim:
• Expressing the adaptation timing in a declarative manner by a number
Finally, like any other state, self-model states have their own timing in terms
of speed factors. Here these speed factors are used as the means to express the
adaptation speed.
3
A First-Order Adaptive Social Network for Bonding
by Homophily
Within social science, adaptive network models are often used to study the
emerging behavior of the coevolution of social contagion [36, 37] and bonding by
homophily [26, 38]. In this Section, this process is analyzed both by simulation and
by mathematical analysis. Using the approach described in Sect. 2, social contagion
is modeled by the base level and bonding by homophily by the ﬁrst reiﬁcation level,
using a state WX,Y for the strength of any connection from base state X to base state
Y. In particular, it is analyzed how emerging communities based on the coevolution
of social contagion and bonding by homophily can be related to characteristics of
the reiﬁed adaptive network’s structure characteristics. The homophily adaptation
346
J. Treur

principle, “birds of a feather ﬂock together” [26], expresses how being “birds of a
feather” (or being alike or being similar) strengthens the connection between two
persons [26, 38]. Social contagion suggests that the stronger the tie between two
persons, the more they will become alike [36, 37]. So, this provides an interesting
causal cycle, often indicated by the term coevolution.
Below, the ﬁrst relevant characteristics of the reiﬁed network and the incorpo-
rated homophily adaptation principle are identiﬁed, such as a tipping point s for
homophily. This is the extent s of similarity between the two persons where being
attracted (extent of dissimilarity lower than s) turns into being repelled (extent of
dissimilarity higher than s), and conversely. This tipping point plays a determining
role in the emergence of communities. Speciﬁc characteristics of the reiﬁed network
structure make all connection weights to converge to 0 (for states in different
emerging communities) or 1 (for states within one emerging community). The
reference [15, Chap. 15] describes the proofs of the results.
As adaptation principles are speciﬁed by the network characteristics of their
reiﬁcation, particularly the combination functions of the reiﬁcation states for the
adaptive connection weights, properties of them are described as properties of such
homophily combination functions. In this Section, they are often called homophily
functions.
3.1
Design of a First-Order Adaptive Social Network Model
for Bonding by Homophily
The coevolution of social contagion and bonding by homophily is illustrated by a
ﬁrst-order adaptive social network model with connectivity, as shown in Fig. 2.
This example of social network has ten base states Xi depicted in the pink plane for
the base level in and Fig. 2 90 connection weight self-model states WXi;Yi for all i,
j with i 6¼ j. Only two examples are depicted in the blue plane for the ﬁrst reiﬁ-
cation level in Fig. 2.
The following combination functions were used:
• For social contagion between the base states Xi, the normalized scaled sum
functions ssumk(..) from Table 2 is used for the self-model states for the con-
nection weights, the simple linear homophily function slhomoa,s(V1, V2, W) with
tipping point s = 0.1 and modulation factor a is expressed as slhomoa,s(V1, V2,
W) = W + a (s - |V1 -V2|)(1-W)W; and
• The speed factors for all base states Y are ηY = 0.1 and for all self-model states
for the connection weights, the (adaptation) speed factor is gWX;Y = 0.4.
17
Adaptive Networks at the Crossroad of Artificial Intelligence
347

3.2
Simulation for the First-Order Adaptive Network Model
for Bonding by Homophily
In Fig. 3, examples of simulations are shown for modulation factors a varying from
5 to 15. These examples all concern an initially fully connected social network with
initial values WX,Y(0) for the self-model states for the connection weights, as shown
in Table 3. As can be seen, no initial values W of weights for the connection
between distinct states are 0. The initial values for base states X1 to X10 were 0.1,
0.3, 0.9, 0.8, 0.5, 0.6, 0.85, 0.05, 0.25, and 0.4, respectively.
The graphs show how clusters emerge and, more speciﬁcally, how their emer-
gence depends on one of the aggregation characteristics of the adaptive network:
the chosen homophily parameter a. The graphs at the left-hand side of Fig. 3 show
how the base states in the simulations end up in an equilibrium state (shown for
t = 100 and Dt = 0.05), i.e. all base state values become constant. On the right-hand
side of the Fig. 3 are matrices with the ﬁnal connection weights (shown for t = 500
and Dt = 0.25) with an accuracy of 3 digits (0 means < 0.001, 1 means > 0.999).
All show a pattern of emerging clustering. To explore different clustering, the
homophily modulation factor a varied from 5 to 15. The emerging clusters are
listed in Table 4.
3.3
Mathematical Analysis of the Emerging Equilibrium
Behavior for Bonding by Homophily
From a wider perspective, an analysis is presented of the behavior of an adaptive
network emerging as a result of social contagion and its coevolution with bonding
Fig. 2 The example adaptive social network model: base level and one example self-model state
WX1;X4 for the weight xX1;X4 of the connection from X1 to X4
348
J. Treur

by homophily. Below are plausible assumptions for a homophily function c(V1, V2,
W) for the self-model states WX,Y for xX,Y. Note that in the current Section, all
connection weights are assumed to be nonnegative, which means WX,Y(t)  0 for
all t.
Fig. 3 Simulations for the example network for bonding by homophily with modulation factor
a = 5, 11, 11.4, and 15. Left-hand side: the graphs of the state values and their clustering up to
t = 100. Right-hand side: the ﬁnal connection weights at t = 500, showing the same clustering
17
Adaptive Networks at the Crossroad of Artificial Intelligence
349

Deﬁnition 1 (Tipping point and symmetric)
(a) The function c(V1, V2, W): [0, 1] x [0, 1] x [0, 1] ! [0, 1] has tipping point s
for V1 and V2 if for all W with 0 < W < 1 and all V1, V2 it holds
(i)
c(V1, V2, W) > W if|V1 – V2| < s
(ii)
c(V1, V2, W) = W if |V1 – V2| = s
(iii)
c(V1, V2, W) < W if |V1 – V2| > s
(b) The function c(V1, V2, W) has a strict tipping point s if it has tipping point s and
in addition it holds:
(i) If |V1 – V2| < s then c(V1, V2, 0) > 0
(ii) If |V1 – V2| > s then c(V1, V2, 1) < 1
(c) A function c(V1, V2, W) is called symmetric in V1 and V2 if c(V1, V2, W) = c(V2,
V1, W).
It is quite simple to obtain functions with a tipping point s or with a strict tipping
point s based on the following proposition.
Proposition 1 Here, D is a variable used to represent |V1 −V2|. Suppose, for any
function d(s, D) it holds for all D  0:
d s, D
ð
Þ [ 0 if D\s
d s, D
ð
Þ\0 if D [ s
Then the following hold:
Table 3 Connection matrix for the initial connection weights in the example
From to
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
X1
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.25
0.25
0.1
X2
0.25
0.25
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.15
0.25
0.25
0.25
X3
0.1
0.25
0.1
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.25
0.1
0.15
X4
0.25
0.15
0.25
0.15
0.8
0.25
0.15
0.25
0.25
X5
0.25
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.25
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.15
X6
0.25
0.1
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.1
0.25
0.25
0.1
X7
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.15
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.15
0.25
X8
0.1
0.25
0.1
0.25
0.05
0.15
0.25
0.1
0.25
X9
0.25
0.15
0.25
0.15
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.15
0.15
X10
0.2
0.25
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.15
0.8
0.2
350
J. Treur

(a) For any a > 0 the function
c V1; V2; W
ð
Þ ¼ W þ a W 1  W
ð
Þd s; V1  V2
j
j
ð
Þ
is symmetric in V1 and V2 and satisﬁes the tipping point condition, but not
strict.
(b) For any a > 0 the function
c V1; V2; W
ð
Þ ¼ W þ a Pos d s, V1  V2
j
j
ð
Þ
ð
Þ 1  W
ð
Þ
 a Pos d s, V1  V2
j
j
ð
Þ
ð
ÞW
with Pos(x) = (|x|+x)/2 is symmetric in V1 and V2 and satisﬁes the strict tipping
point condition.
Proposition 1 can easily be applied to linear or quadratic functions d(s, D) = s −
D or d(s, D) = s2 – D2 or to similar functions d(s, D) = sn – Dn of any degree n in
D, thus obtaining homophily functions (with non-strict tipping point or strict tip-
ping point) of any order (Table 5).
Table 5 Examples of basic homophily combination functions from the library
Combination
function
Notation
Formula
Parameters
Simple linear
homophily
function
slhomoa,s(V1,
V2, W)
W + a (s −|V1 −V2|)(1 −W)W
Modulation
factor a
Tipping
point s
Simple quadratic
homophily
function
sqhomos,a(V1,
V2, W)
W + a W (1 −W) (s2 −D2)
Sdvanced linear
homophily
function
alhomos,r(V1,
V2, W)
W + Pos(a (s−|V1 −V2|))
(1 −W) −Pos(−a (s −|V1 −V2|))
W
Advanced
quadratic
homophily
function
aqhomos,r(V1,
V2, W)
W + Pos(a (s2−(V1 −V2)2))
(1 −W) −
Pos(−a (s2−(V1 −V2)2)) W
Modulation
factor a
Tipping
point s
Order n
Simple nth order
homophily
function
shomon
s,a(V1,
V2, W)
W + a W (1 −W) (sn−Dn)
Advanced nth
order homophily
function
ahomon
s,r(V1,
V2, W)
W + Pos(a (sn−(V1 −V2)n))
(1 −W) −Pos(−a (sn −(V1 −
V2)n)) W
17
Adaptive Networks at the Crossroad of Artificial Intelligence
351

Next, it is found out how the properties of the network (and adaptation) deﬁned
above (such as a tipping point s), actually affect the emerging equilibrium behavior.
Theorem 1 below presents some of the basic results found for the relation between
the emerging equilibrium values for base states and those for the self-model states
for the related connection weights. This is obtained by applying criterion (4) from
Sect. 2 to an equilibrium state and, in particular, to the self-model state for bonding
by homophily that has a homophily function c(V1, V2, W) as a combination func-
tion. For such an equilibrium state, criterion (4) is equivalent to
c V1; V2; W
ð
Þ ¼ W
ð6Þ
Note that if c(..) has tipping point s, then by deﬁnition 1a) it easily follows that
(6) is equivalent to
V1V2
j
j ¼ s
or
W ¼ 0
or
W ¼ 1
If, moreover, a strict tipping point s is assumed for c(..), then from Theorem 1b)
by contraposition it easily follows that (6) is equivalent to
V1  V2
j
j ¼ s
or
W ¼ 0 and V1V2
j
j  s
or
W ¼ 1 and V1V2
j
j  s
This indicates how the distance of the equilibrium values of the two states relates
to the equilibrium value of their connections. The following theorem is mainly
based on the above analysis [15, Chap. 13].
Theorem 1 Suppose the function c(V1, V2, W) has tipping point s for V1 and V2.
Then, in any emerging attracting equilibrium, the following hold:
• All base states X, Y with values V1, V2 at distance 6¼ s have connection weight
W = 0 or W = 1;
• All base states X, Y with values V1, V2 at distance < s have connection weight
W = 1, if initial connection weight W > 0 or the function c(V1, V2, W) has strict
tipping point s for V1 and V2;
• All base states X, Y with values V1, V2 at a distance > s have connection weight
W = 0, if the initial connection weight W < 1 or the function c(V1, V2, W) has a
strict tipping point s for V1 and V2; and
• For all base states X, Y with connection weight 0 < W < 1, their values V1, V2
differ exactly s. ∎
Note that no speciﬁc assumption is made on the aggregation characteristics for
the social contagion of the base states in terms of properties of the combination
functions for it. However, when also some assumptions are made for social con-
tagion of the base states, more reﬁned results can be found. The following notions
are needed for this.
352
J. Treur

Deﬁnition 2 (Connectivity and aggregation properties) Let c(V1, …, Vk) be a
function
• c(..) is strictly monotonically increasing
if Ui  Vi for all i, and Uj < Vj for at least one j ) c(U1, …, Uk) < c(V1, …, Vk);
• c(..) is scalar-free if c(aV1, …, aVk) = a c(V1, …, Vk) for all a > 0;
• cY(..) is normalized in the network if for each state Y it holds cY(xX1;Y, …,
xXk;Y) = 1, where; and
• X1, …, Xk are the states from which Y gets incoming connections.
A network is called weakly symmetric if for all states X, Y, it holds xX,Y > 0 if
xY,X > 0. Based on this, the following is obtained.
Theorem 2 Suppose the network is weakly symmetric, and the combination
functions for the social contagion for the base states are strictly monotonically
increasing, normalized, and scalar-free. Moreover, suppose c(V1, V2, W) has a
tipping point s and is symmetric in V1 and V2. Then the following hold for any
emerging attracting equilibrium state:
(a) All base states X, Y with distinct values V1 6¼ V2 have connection weight W = 0
(b) All base states X, Y with equal values V1 = V2 have connection weight W = 1 if
the initial connection weight W > 0 or the function c(V1, V2, W) has a strict
tipping point s for V1 and V2.∎
Theorem 3 (Emerging clusters) This theorem is applicable to emerging commu-
nities or clusters and distances between different equilibrium values for the base
states. Suppose the network is weakly symmetric, the combination function for the
states is strictly monotonically increasing, scalar-free, and normalized, and the
combination function c(V1, V2, W) for the connections uses a strict tipping point s
and is symmetric in V1 and V2. Then for any emerging attracting equilibrium state,
the following hold:
(a) A partition of the set of base states into disjoint subsets (clusters) C1,.., Cp
occurs such that:
• For each cluster Ci the values for all the base states in Ci are equal: V1 = V2
for all X, Y 2 Ci;
• Every cluster Ci forms a fully connected network with weights 1: connection
weight W = 1 for all X, Y 2 Ci;
• Every two base states in two different clusters Ci have connection weight 0:
i 6¼ j, X 2 Ci and Y 2 Cj imply W = 0; and
• Any two distinct values V1 6¼ V2 of base states X, Y have distance  s.
17
Adaptive Networks at the Crossroad of Artificial Intelligence
353

Therefore, there are at most p  1 + 1/s clusters Ci and base state values V.
(b) The condition that c(V1, V2, W) has a strict tipping point s for a) can be
weakened to having a non-strict tipping point s if no initial values W = 0 are
used for connection weights. ∎
These theorems are illustrated by the example of adaptive social networks and
the simulations shown in Fig. 3. It turns out that all connection weights converge to
0 or 1. This is consistent with that what Theorems 2 and 3 predicted. Moreover, it
can be seen that clusters with distance less than 0.1 do not occur, in accordance with
Theorem 3. For example, in the step from a = 5 to a = 11, one of the clusters splits
in two, where the two emerging clusters have distance >0.1. Between a = 11 and
a = 11.4, there is another (discontinuous) jump like that. For a = 11, after some
time of ‘hesitation’ between time point 20 and time point 40, states X5 and X6
ﬁnally ‘decide’ to join X3, X4, and X7 to form one cluster of ﬁve states still.
However, increasing aggregation characteristic a very slightly, for a = 11.4, they
suddenly stay separate, not just at a small distance from the cluster of X3, X4 and
X7, but immediately with a distance more than s = 0.1: this new cluster {X5, X6}
converges to state value 0.683 whereas the other cluster {X3, X4, X7} converges to
state value 0.796, which is a difference of 0.113, just above the tipping point s =
0.1. This is exactly as Theorem 3 predicts. This would correspond with a difference
of 0.113, just above the tipping point s = 0.1, as exactly predicted by Theorem 3.
Note that for higher values of a, no more than these four clusters occur, and for
a = 1, the ten states together form just one cluster.
It is discussed in [15, Chap. 6] how a second-order adaptive network model can
be obtained by making the tipping point parameter s of the homophily function
adaptive so that it becomes dependent on the number or strength of the already
available connections.
4
A Second-Order Adaptive Network for Stress Regulation
Dysfunction
In this Section, an example of a second-order adaptive network model is described
for a medical context. In such a second-order adaptive network, the base network
has its own internal dynamics, but it also uses ﬁrst-order adaptation principles.
Moreover, these ﬁrst-order adaptation principles themselves change based on
second-order adaptation principles.
354
J. Treur

4.1
Design of the Adaptive Network Model Showing
Plasticity and Metaplasticity
Neural or mental networks equipped with a Hebbian learning mechanism [39–41]
can adapt connection weights over time. From a neuroscientiﬁc perspective, this is
usually considered an important form of plasticity. The principle is in a simpliﬁed
form, sometimes formulated as “what ﬁres together, wires together” [42, 43].
In some circumstances, an organism should learn (and change) fast, but in other
circumstances, it is better to stay stable and persist what has been learned in the
past, referred to as the Plasticity Versus Stability Conundrum [44, p. 773]. To
control this, the brain uses a type of (second-order) adaptation called metaplasticity.
It has become an important focus of study within cognitive neuroscience. Various
studies such as [30, 44–46] show how the adaptation of synapses (as described, for
example, by Hebbian learning) is modulated by accelerating the adaptation process
or decelerating or even blocking it. Among the reported factors affecting synaptic
plasticity in such a way are stimulus exposure, activation, previous experiences, and
stress. In [30], the focus is on the role of stress in reducing or blocking plasticity.
Many mental and physical disorders are stress-related and are hard to overcome due
to poor or even blocked plasticity that comes with stress. Garcia [30] describes the
negative role of stress-related metaplasticity for this, which often leads to a patient
being locked in a disorder by that negative pattern. However, he also shows that by
some form of therapy, this negative cycle might be broken:
At the cellular level, evidence has emerged indicating neuronal atrophy and cell loss in
response to stress and in depression. At the molecular level, it has been suggested that these
cellular deﬁciencies, mostly detected in the hippocampus, result from a decrease in the
expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) associated with elevation of glu-
cocorticoids [30, p. 629].
…modiﬁcations in the threshold for synaptic plasticity that enhances cognitive function is
referred here to as ‘positive’ metaplasticity. In contrast, changes in the threshold for
synaptic plasticity that yield impairment of cognitive functions, for example (..) in response
to stress (..), is referred to as ‘negative’ metaplasticity [30, pp. 630–631].
In summary, depressive-like behavior in animals and human depression are associated with
high plasma levels of glucocorticoids that produce ‘negative’ metaplasticity in limbic
structures
(…).
This
stress-related
metaplasticity
impairs
performance
on
certain
hippocampal-dependent tasks. Antidepressant treatments act by increasing expression of
BDNF in the hippocampus. This antidepressant effect can trigger, in turn, the suppression
of stress-related metaplasticity in hippocampal-hypothalamic pathways thus restoring
physiological levels of glucocorticoids [30, p. 634].
Based on this literature, a second-order adaptive reiﬁed network model for
plasticity and metaplasticity has been designed with connectivity, as shown in
Fig. 4. Table 6 displays the explanations of the states, too. Here, blocked plasticity
for emotion regulation is modeled, which leads to emotion dysregulation and its
often-found consequences in the form of a mental or physical disorder [27–30].
In the base network, s is a stressful stimulus leading to stressful, emotional
response psb and stress feeling fsb. State csb performs stress regulation by its
17
Adaptive Networks at the Crossroad of Artificial Intelligence
355

negative outgoing connection, as soon as it is activated. However, to get csb acti-
vated, the connections from fsb and psb to csb play an important role, and such
connections have to be learned and maintained, which may not happen if that
plasticity is out of order. Many disorders, both physical and mental, originate from
such poor functioning stress regulation. In the example, for the sake of simplicity,
we focus on the connection from fsb to csb. The learning process for this connection
is modeled by a Hebbian learning principle represented by ﬁrst-order self-model
state Wfsb;csb. This state models a Hebbian learning adaptation principle deﬁned as a
combination function by
hebbl V1; V2; W
ð
Þ ¼ V1V2 1  W
ð
Þ þ lW
ð7Þ
where l is the persistence parameter, variable W is used for the weight of the
considered connection and variables V1, V2 for the activation values of the two
connected states.
However, whether or not learning takes place depends on metaplasticity, mod-
eled here by second-order self-model states HWfsb;csb and MWfsb;csb for learning speed
and persistence, respectively. Note that the M-state is an aggregation self-model
state for a combination function parameter: persistence parameter l for the com-
bination function hebbl(..) for ﬁrst-order adaptation state, and Wfsb;csb for Hebbian
learning of the connection from fsb to csb. In principle, the learning will start to
work or accelerate when the external stimulus s is sensed through sensor state sss.
As discussed above, whether or not and to which extent learning is controlled by a
Fig. 4 Connectivity of the second-order adaptive network model for plasticity and metaplasticity
of emotion regulation with base level (lower plane, pink), ﬁrst reiﬁcation level (middle plane, blue)
and second reiﬁcation level (upper plane, purple), and upward connections (blue) and downward
connections (red) deﬁning interlevel relations
356
J. Treur

form of metaplasticity, for example, affected by stimulus exposure. As noted in [46,
p. 2], “adaptation accelerates with stimulus exposure.”
However, as shown in the above quotations by Garcia [30], stress creates a
negative metaplasticity effect, which corresponds to low values for these
second-order self-model states. For example, a value close to 0 for learning speed
representation HWfsb;csb practically blocks the learning, and value around 0.5 for
persistence representation MWfsb;csb makes that every time unit, around 50% of the
learned effect is lost, which is a dramatic effect if no additional learning takes place.
For most of the states in the designed network model, for the aggregation
characteristics alogisticr,s(..) is used as a combination function (Table 2). The only
exceptions are Wfsb;csb, which uses hebbl(..) deﬁned by (7), and therapy state tsb,
which is an external input modeled by stepmodq,d(..), which deﬁnes an (indepen-
dent) activation after duration d and repetition of the cycle after a time period q.
In Figs. 5 and 6, all network characteristics for the designed adaptive network
model are speciﬁed in the form of role matrices. Role matrix mb in Fig. 1 speciﬁes
the base connectivity characteristics. On each row, for the given state, it indicates
from which states at the same or a lower level it gets an incoming connection (the
black and blue arrows in Fig. 4). Note that for some of the states, a connection from
the state itself occurs. The latter applies to all (ﬁrst- and second-order) self-model
states, as shown in mb.
As an example, in the second row, it is indicated that state X2 (= srss) only has
one incoming base connection from state X1 (= sss). As another example, the
seventh row indicates that state X7 (= Wfsb;csb) has incoming base connections from
X4 (= fsb), X5 (= csb), X7 (= Wfsb;csb) itself, and in that order. This order is important
as the Hebbian combination function hebbl(..) used is not symmetric in its argu-
ments. Note that the more informative state names such as sss, and so on, in each of
the role matrices depicted in Figs. 1 and 2 are not part of the speciﬁcation but are
just added for human understanding. Similarly, the other types of role matrices were
deﬁned (Figs. 1 and 2): role matrices mcw for connection weights; mcfw for
Fig. 5 Speciﬁcation of the connectivity characteristics and timing characteristics of the
second-order adaptive example network model by role matrices mb, mcw, and ms
17
Adaptive Networks at the Crossroad of Artificial Intelligence
357

combination function weights; mcfp for combination function parameters; and ms
for speed factor roles.
Within each role matrix, for an adaptive network characteristic, entries in red
cells indicate a reference to the name of another state that, as a form of reiﬁcation,
represents that characteristic. In contrast, entries in green cells indicate ﬁxed values
for nonadaptive characteristics. In this way, the red cells represent the pink
downward connections from the self-model states in pictures, as shown in Fig. 4,
with their speciﬁc roles W, H, C, P indicated by the type of role matrix. The type of
role matrix in which connections are represented deﬁnes the roles of the self-model
states. For example, in mcw, the X7 in the red cell in the row for X5 deﬁnes that the
connection weight for X5 (= csb) from X4 (= fsb) is adaptive with value represented
by X7 (= Wfsb;csb). Similarly, role matrix ms indicates (in red) that X8 represents the
adaptive speed factor of X7, and (in green) that the speed factors of all other states
have ﬁxed values.
In Fig. 6, the role matrices mcfw and mcfp are shown for aggregation charac-
teristics in terms of combination function weights and parameters, respectively.
Matrix mcfp is a 3D matrix with the ﬁrst dimension for the states, second dimension
for the (two) combination function parameters, and third dimension for the com-
bination functions. For example, in Fig. 2, the name X9 in the red cell in role matrix
mcfp indicates that the value of the persistence parameter l for X7 (= Wfsb;csb) is
adaptive and is represented by the value of state X9 (= MWfsb;csb). In contrast, the 5 in
the ﬁrst green cell of mcfp for X5 indicates the static value of the steepness of the
logistic function for X5 (= csb).
For this example network model, the selection of combination functions from the
library for the network is speciﬁed by mcf = [2 3 35], being alogisticr,s(..),
Fig. 6 Speciﬁcation of the aggregation characteristics of the second-order adaptive example
network model by role matrices mcfw and mcwfp (Adapted from [15, Chap. 7, Fig. 7.1)
358
J. Treur

hebbl(..), stepmodq,d(..) respectively. So, in terms of (2) for this network it holds
c1(..) = alogisticr,s(..), c2(..) = hebbl(..), c3(..) = stepmodq,d(..).
4.2
Simulations for the Adaptive Network Model Showing
Plasticity and Metaplasticity
Some simulation experiments have been performed using the dedicated software
environment for reiﬁed network models described in [15, Chap. 9]. In particular, a
scenario is shown here in which the focus was on the effect of the stress level of fsb
on plasticity [30]. In Fig. 5, simulation results are shown for the characteristics in
Figs. 1 and 2. Here a person is considered who for some time (before time 0) has
had a stressful life so that the initial values already reﬂect a high-stress level. Initial
values are shown in Table 7.
The graph in Fig. 7 shows the activation levels of all states, including how the
weight of the connection from fsb to csb represented by Wfsb;csb is learned, and what
speed and persistence values are applied for that, represented by HWfsb;csb and
MWfsb;csb . As can be seen, in the ﬁrst phase until time 100, a high-stress level
represented by fsb (the red line) leads to maintaining low values of HWfsb;csb (the
brown line starting at 0.05) and MWfsb;csb (the grey line starting at 0.6). Therefore
learning is practically blocked in this phase (the blue line for Wfsb;csb starting at 0.1
stays low). In the next phase, from time 100 to time 200, therapy is applied,
represented by tsb, that boosts the activation level of csb, which in turn reduces the
stress level represented by fsb. This also increases the speed and persistence of the
Hebbian learning (second-order states HWfsb;csb and MWfsb;csb increase to 1 and 0.9,
respectively), and because of this, now indeed learning takes place. In the last
phase, from time 200 to time 300, the therapy has ﬁnished, but due to the therapy,
the stress regulation mechanism has been unlocked, now it can keep the stress
levels low without external help.
4.3
Mathematical Analysis of the Emerging Equilibrium
Behavior for the Example Network
Mathematical analysis and veriﬁcation have been performed based on Sect. 2,
criterion (4). After continuing the simulation until t = 1000 without any further
intervention, the values shown in Table 8 were obtained while the pattern stabilizes.
So, the feeling state fsb stabilizes at 0.37 and the control state at 0.64. This is in
contrast to the phase before therapy indicated by t = 100 where the feeling state was
Table 7 Initial values for the simulation
sss
srss
psb
fsb
csb
tsb
Wfsb;csb
HWfsb;csb
MWfsb;csb
1
0.8
0.7
0.7
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.05
0.6
17
Adaptive Networks at the Crossroad of Artificial Intelligence
359

0.72 and the control state was 0.38. The connection from feeling state to control
state now has weight 0.87, which before the therapy was 0.16. All this indicates that
a well-functioning emotion regulation mechanism was obtained, unlike before the
therapy. Another big difference is that the learning speed was only 0.002 before the
therapy, which indicates that the learning was blocked, whereas now it has become
0.95, so now plasticity is there. For veriﬁcation of the network model, some further
elementary mathematical analysis has been performed. Such analysis for the
learning process goes as follows;
W ¼ hebbl V1; V2; W
ð
Þ ¼ V1V2 1  W
ð
Þ þ lW
,
W ¼ V1V2  V1V2W þ lW
,
W ¼
V1V2
1l þ V1V2
ð8Þ
In the above situation at t = 1000 the simulated values are:
V1 ¼ fsb 1000
ð
Þ ¼ 0:3728337
V2 ¼ csb 1000
ð
Þ ¼ 0:6376211
W ¼ Wfsb;csb 1000
ð
Þ ¼ 0:870346678
l ¼ MWfsb;csb 1000
ð
Þ ¼ 0:964586502
Substituting these values in the right-hand side of (8) provides 0.8703467786 (in
10 digits). Comparing this to the value 0.8703466777 of W at time 1000 in 10 digits
Fig. 7 Simulations for the second-order adaptive example network model. The ﬁrst phase (time 0
to 100): a high-stress level while metaplasticity blocks plasticity due to which emotion regulation
does not function properly. The second phase (time 100 to 200): a therapy artiﬁcially boosts
emotion regulation, making metaplasticity unblock the plasticity, making emotion regulation
stronger. The third phase (time 200 to 300): due to the unblocked plasticity, the emotion regulation
is now able to learn further and keep the stress level low without therapy. (Adapted from [15,
Chap. 7, Fig. 7.4])
360
J. Treur

Table 8 Values in the simulation at t = 1000
State
sss
srss
psb
fsb
csb
tsb
Wfsb;csb
HWfsb;csb
MWfsb;csb
t = 1000
0.9717402
0.9717402
0.9955412
0.3728337
0.6376211
0
0.8703467
0.9490621
0.9645865
t = 100
0.9717402
0.9717402
0.9992254
0.7229209
0.3786141
0
0.1626221
0.0019257
0.5104981
17
Adaptive Networks at the Crossroad of Artificial Intelligence
361

shows a difference of 1.006  10–7. This is reasonably small, and so can be
considered as some evidence that the implemented network model is correct in
comparison to the adaptive model’s speciﬁed network characteristics. As another
veriﬁcation, the value of X8 (= HWfsb;csb ) has been checked compared to its aggre-
gated impact. The aggregated impact for X8 at time 1000 is:
aggimpactX8 tð Þ ¼ alogistic5;0:9ð0:18642; 0:637621; 0:087035; 0:949062Þ
¼ alogistic5;0:9ð1:487301Þ
¼ 0:949062128
The difference of this with the value 0.949062090 of X8 at t = 1000 is 3.7  10–
8. As this is also small, this provides another evidence that the implemented net-
work
model
is
correct
in
comparison
to
the
model’s speciﬁed
network
characteristics.
4.4
Further Mathematical Analysis of Hebbian Learning
In this Section, it is discussed more generally how aggregation for the connection
weight self-model state can be deﬁned by a speciﬁc class of combination functions
for Hebbian learning, and it will be analyzed what equilibrium values can emerge
for the learned connections. The following plausible assumptions are made for this
class of Hebbian learning functions. They were adopted from [15, Chap. 14].
Deﬁnition 3 (Hebbian learning function) A function c: [0, 1] x [0, 1] x [0,
1] ! [0, 1] is called a Hebbian learning function with persistence parameter l if
the following hold:
(a) c(V1, V2, W) is a monotonically increasing function of V1 and V2
(b) c(V1, V2, W) - lW is a monotonically decreasing function of W
(c) c(V1, V2, W)  lW
(d) c(V1, V2, W) = lW if and only if one of V1 and V2 is 0 (or both), or W = 1
A Hebbian learning function is called a fully persistent Hebbian learning func-
tion if l = 1.
Deﬁnition 4 (Variable separation) The Hebbian learning function c(V1, V2, W)
with persistence parameter l enables variable separation by functions cs: [0, 1] x
[0, 1] ! [0, 1] monotonically increasing and cs: [0, 1] ! [0, 1] monotonically
decreasing if c(V1, V2, W) = cs(V1, V2) cc(W) + lW. where cs(V1, V2) = 0 if and
only if one of V1, V2 is 0, and cc(1) = 0 and cc(W) > 0 when W < 1.
The function cs(V1, V2) is called the state factor and the function cc(W) the
connection factor.
Theorem 4 Assume in a reiﬁed temporal-causal network the Hebbian learning
combination function c(V1, V2, W) with persistence parameter l enables variable
separation by state factor cs(V1, V2) and connection factor cc(W), then:
362
J. Treur

(a) For l < 1 the function hl deﬁned for W 2 [0, 1) by
hl W
ð
Þ ¼ 1  l
ð
ÞW
cc W
ð
Þ
is strictly monotonically increasing and has an inverse gl.
(b) In any emerging attracting equilibrium state, it holds
(i) If l < 1 then W = gl(cs(V1, V2)) < 1
(ii) If l = 1 then V1 = 0 or V2 = 0 or W = 1 ∎
As an example, the speciﬁc class of Hebbian learning functions enabling vari-
able separation with a linear connection function cc(W) = 1-W is considered. Then
hl W
ð
Þ ¼ 1  l
ð
ÞW
cc W
ð
Þ
¼ 1  l
ð
ÞW
1  W
ð9Þ
and the inverse gl(W′) of hl(W) can easily be determined from (9) algebraically:
glðW0Þ ¼
W0
W0 þ 1  l
ð
Þ
ð10Þ
Substitute W’ = cs(V1, V2) in (18) and it is obtained:
W ¼ gl cs V1; V2
ð
Þ
ð
Þ ¼
cs V1; V2
ð
Þ
1  l
ð
Þ þ cs V1; V2
ð
Þ
ð11Þ
This generalizes what was found in Sect. 4.3, which was based on the case cs
(V1, V2) = V1V2.
5
A Fourth-Order Adaptive Evolutionary Biological
Network
The third adaptive network model addressed here is an example of a fourth-order
adaptive network model for the evolutionary biological domain, in particular,
concerning pregnancy. Viewed from a distance, an evolutionary process is an
adaptation process that is changing the physical world by creating new causal
pathways that often change or block existing causal pathways, based on circum-
stances. From a causal modeling perspective, this can be described as (depending
17
Adaptive Networks at the Crossroad of Artificial Intelligence
363

on certain circumstances) changing some of the causal connections in such existing
causal pathways from high to 0 or very low, or conversely. As these new causal
pathways usually depend on speciﬁc circumstances, they make that an organism
can operate in a more context-sensitive manner than before: it becomes more
ﬁne-tuned to what can happen. Selection pressure makes that for given circum-
stances, organisms with more favorable causal pathways for these circumstances
become more dominant within a population. In this way, this leads to a shift in the
average pathways within the population. In [31, 47], it is suggested that the fol-
lowing evolutionary levels of adaptation can be distinguished for pathogens,
defense (immune) systems, and disgust during the ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy: “…
one form of disgust, pathogen disgust, functions in part as a third-order adaptation,
as disease-avoidance responses are up-regulated in a manner that compensates for
the increases in vulnerability to pathogens that accompany pregnancy and
preparation for implantation—changes that are themselves a second-order adap-
tation addressing the conﬂict between maternal immune defenses and the parasitic
behavior of the half-foreign conceptus …” [47].
Fessler et al. [31, 47] sketch three adaptation levels, which occur on top of the
ecological adaptation level of the development of pathogens that affect health. It
makes a total of four adaptation levels that can be distinguished. At each level, new
causal pathways were added that modulate the causal pathway of the previous level
by modifying it if certain circumstances occur:
• First-order adaptation.
Pathogens occur, with causal pathways negatively affecting the causal pathways
for good health;
• Second-order adaptation.
An internal defense system occurs, with causal pathways which negatively affect
the causal pathways used by pathogens as soon as they occur;
• Third-order adaptation.
For pregnancy, causal pathways are added to make during ﬁrst-trimester preg-
nancy the defense system’s causal pathways less strong as the half-foreign
conceptus might easily be identiﬁed as a kind of parasite and attacked; and
• Fourth-order adaptation.
Disgust during (ﬁrst-trimester) pregnancy adds causal pathways by which po-
tential pathogens in the external world are avoided to reduce risks of entering
pathogens while the internal defense system is low functioning. This strengthens
the overall defense system by strengthening the external defense system (the
behavioral immune system) by which the pathogens are addressed outside the
body. This makes the causal pathway from (ﬁrst trimester) pregnancy to suppress
the causal pathways of the overall defense system less strong as the external
component of the defense system is strengthened by disgust.
364
J. Treur

5.1
Design of the Fourth-Order Adaptive Network Model
for Evolutionary Adaptation
A fourth-order reiﬁed adaptive network for these evolutionary processes has been
designed. Levels of adaptation are created where the causal pathways at one
adaptation level are adapted by the causal pathways at the next level. The general
pattern then becomes in a simple form, as shown in the connectivity picture
depicted in Fig. 8. For an explanation of the states, see Table 9. Here, the causal
pathways addressed are modeled by the (upward) causal relations from base states
s1 to s4 to certain states in the four non-base planes that play a role as connection
weight self-model state for the connection of the previous causal pathway. For
example, by the causal pathway from s1 to Ws5,e1, the occurrence s1 of pathogens
has a negative effect on the causal pathway leading to good health e1. In turn, by the
causal pathway from s2 to Ws1,Ws5;e1, the occurrence s2 of a defense system has a
negative effect on the pathogen’s causal pathway from s1 to Ws5;e1, thus making that
the causal pathway to good health can function better.
Similarly, the other two adaptation levels triggered by s3 (pregnancy) and s4
(disgust) modify the previous causal pathways. To get the suppression effect on the
self-model states aimed for, the occurrence of a high level for any of the si, i = 1, 2,
3, 4 has to result in a low level of the targeted self-model state, whereas a low level
Fig. 8 Connectivity of the fourth-order adaptive example network model for evolutionary
processes (Adapted from [15, Chap. 8, Fig. 8.2])
17
Adaptive Networks at the Crossroad of Artificial Intelligence
365

of this si should result in a high level of that self-model state. This is exactly what
the complemental identity function compid(..) does. Recall that it is deﬁned by
(Table 2):
compid V
ð Þ ¼ 1V
ð12Þ
Therefore, this combination function is used here for all self-model states X7 to
X10.
Figure 9 shows the role matrices for this adaptive network model. As in Sect. 4,
each role matrix has a format in which in each row for the indicated state, it is
speciﬁed which other states (red cells) or values (green cells) affect it, according to
the role of that matrix. In particular, in role matrix mcw, the red cells indicate which
states Xiplay the role of the self-model states for the weights of the connection
indicated in that cell in mb.
5.2
Simulation for the Fourth-Order Adaptive Network
for Evolutionary Adaptation
Simulations have been performed using the dedicated software environment for
reiﬁed network models described in [15, Chap. 9]. The scenario considered here
focuses on a time period in which for a population, subsequently, pathogens occur,
a defense system against them is developed, pregnancy occurs, and disgust (in the
ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy) occurs. So, in the simulation, the four orders of
adaptation show up:
Adaptation 1 Pathogens are introduced
ﬁrst-order adaptation
Adaptation 2 Defense system is developed
second-order adaptation
Adaptation 3 Pregnancy
third-order adaptation
Adaptation 4 Disgust
fourth-order adaptation
Figure 10 summarizes the simulation results for this scenario. The red line in
Fig. 10 indicates the health level. Before adaptation 1, health is good. After
adaptation 1, health becomes bad. After adaptation 2, health becomes good again.
After adaptation 3, health becomes worse again. Finally, after adaptation 4, health
becomes better again.
5.3
Mathematical Equilibrium Analysis for the Example
of an Evolutionary Network
Again criterion (6) is used here to analyze the state values in an equilibrium. The
states X1 to X5 are independent states as they have no incoming connections from
other states. They can be handled separately. States X7 to X10 depend on the
independent states X1 to X4, respectively; they have a single incoming arrow with
the complemental identity function compid(..) as combination function cY(V) for
366
J. Treur

Fig. 9 Role matrices for the fourth-order adaptive example network model
17
Adaptive Networks at the Crossroad of Artificial Intelligence
367

Y. Then for state Xj depending on state Xi based on criterion (6), the equilibrium
equation for Xj is,
compid WXi; XjXi


¼ Xj
1  WXi; XjXi ¼ Xj
ð13Þ
where WXi;Xj is also one of the Xk, actually for k = j + 1. So, the equation becomes
1  Xj þ 1Xi ¼ Xj
From this, the following equilibrium equations are found for X7 to X10.
X7 ¼ 1X8X1
X8 ¼ 1X9X2
X9 ¼ 1X10X3
X10 ¼ 1X4
ð14Þ
State X6 depends on independent state X5, but also on the connection weight
represented by X7. Based on criterion (6), the equilibrium equation for X6 is
X6 ¼ alogistic8;0:5 X7X5
ð
Þ
ð15Þ
After some algebraic rewriting, the following solutions in terms of X1 to X5 of
the equilibrium equations (14) and (15) result.
Fig. 10 Simulations for the fourth-order adaptive example network model with pathogens,
internal defense system, pregnancy, and disgust occurring
368
J. Treur

X10 ¼ 1X4
X9 ¼ 1X3 þ X4X3
X8 ¼ 1X2 þ X3X2  X4X3X2
X7 ¼ 1X1 þ X2X1  X3X2X1 þ X4X3X2X1
X6 ¼ alogistic8;0:5
1X1 þ X2X1  X3X2X1 þ X4X3X2X1
ð
ÞX5
ð
Þ
ð16Þ
For the nonzero independent states among X1 to X5 the equilibrium equation is
Xi ¼ alogistic18;0:2 Xi
ð
Þ
ð17Þ
and the solution value for this Eq. (17) is numerically approximated by
0.999999427374 [15, Chap. 3, Sect. 3.7.4]. Therefore, for the analysis X1, X2, X3,
X4, and X5, all have been assigned equilibrium value 0.999999427374. From these,
the equilibrium values for the other states have been determined using Eqs. (16). All
of these analyzed values are in the column under analysis in Table 10.
For veriﬁcation for the scenario shown in Fig. 10, these analyzed equilibrium
values have been compared to the approximate simulated equilibrium values that
have been determined by running the model with Dt = 0.1 until t = 3000; see the
column under simulation in Table 10. The deviations (the last column in Table 10)
are in the order of 10−4 to 10−12, which is fair and gives evidence that the
implemented network model is correct in relation to the model’s speciﬁed network
characteristics.
6
Conclusion
In this paper, it has been illustrated how a network-oriented modeling approach
based on adaptive temporal-causal networks can be used to model adaptive pro-
cesses in different domains. The approach uses mathematical relations and functions
as declarative building blocks incorporated in a canonical manner in a standard
temporal-causal network format. A dedicated software environment is available,
including a combination function library for aggregation of multiple impacts within
a temporal-causal network, with more than 35 already predeﬁned basic combination
functions. This software environment makes design and simulation for such net-
work models relatively easy. In [48], it has been shown how for any ﬁrst-order
differential equation, a combination function can be found so that the standard
temporal-causal network format using this combination function is equivalent to
that differential equation. Therefore, the standard temporal-causal network format in
principle has a scope of applicability as wide as all (state-determined) dynamical
systems or all sets of ﬁrst-order differential equations [12, 13].
17
Adaptive Networks at the Crossroad of Artificial Intelligence
369

The network format is an adequate means to model in particular complex pro-
cesses with a highly interactive and cyclic nature, and the approach to adaptive
networks discussed here is especially useful for complex adaptive processes, as also
has been illustrated here by the three main examples of the ﬁrst-, second- and
fourth-order adaptive processes, respectively.
For example, in social contexts, it is clear that an intense interaction between
persons based on their mutual and often interrelated and adaptive cyclic relation-
ships takes place. In the domain of neuroscience, the structures and mechanisms
found also show that many parts in the brain are connected by connections that are
part of adaptive cyclic paths, and such cycles and their adaptation play an important
role in many mental processes (e.g. [49]). For example, usually, mental states
trigger emotions, and these emotions, in turn, affect these and other mental states.
Even leaving adaptation aside, for this type of circular effect, different views on
causality and modeling are required, compared to the traditional views in the
modeling of mental processes. For example, recall the quotation from Scherer [1] at
the beginning of this chapter, which was stated for emotions and appraisal but has
much wider applicability: “What is the role of causality in the mechanisms sug-
gested here? Because of the constant recursivity of the process, the widespread
notion of linear causality (a single cause for a single effect) cannot be applied to
these mechanisms. Appraisal is a process with constantly changing results over
very short periods of time and, in turn, constantly changing driving effects on
subsystem synchronization (and, consequently, on the type of emotion). (…) there is
no simple, unidirectional sense of causality …” [1, p. 3470].
Similarly, from the angle of psychiatry, it is put forward that dynamics based on
networks of causal relations play an important role in many mental disorders; for
example: “… instead of being effects of a common cause, psychiatric symptoms
have been argued to cause each other. For instance, if one thinks that other people
can read one’s mind (delusion), this may generate extreme suspicion (paranoia);
this paranoia can lead one to avoid other people (social isolation), which, because
one is no longer exposed to corrective actions of the social environment, may serve
to sustain and exacerbate the relevant delusions. In this way, symptoms may form
feedback loops that lead the person to spiral down into the state of prolonged
symptom activation that we phenomenologically recognize as a mental disorder”
[50, pp. 5–6]. Also, “Disorders with a cyclic pattern (e.g. bipolar disorder) may be
accommodated in models for which the stable state is a cycle rather than a ﬁxed
point” [50, p. 11].
Another example was a network perspective for medicine, which addresses
adaptive chronic pain circuitry, as can be found in [51, 52]. Another example is
[53], where a migraine is addressed from a disrupted plasticity perspective for the
circuitry involved, a form of metaplasticity or second-order adaptation, like in
Sect. 4.
For modeling the cell’s metabolic and life processes as biochemical networks
within biology, Westerhoff et al. [6, 7] also point at the importance of such
structures, “the dynamic biochemical networks of life”, for example: “Living
organisms persist by virtue of complex interactions among many components
370
J. Treur

organized into dynamic, environment-responsive networks that span multiple scales
and dimensions. Biological networks constitute a type of information and com-
munication technology (ICT): they receive information from the outside and inside
of cells, integrate and interpret this information, and then activate a response.
Biological networks enable molecules within cells, and even cells themselves, to
communicate with each other and their environment” [7, p. 1].
The network-oriented perspective provides a form of uniﬁcation so that different
types of processes become comparable, and we can, for example, compare the
processes underlying human intelligence and behavior to the processes underlying
bacterial behavior, as described in more detail in [5, 7]. For example: “We have
become accustomed to associating brain activity—particularly activity of the hu-
man brain—with a phenomenon we call “intelligence.” Yet, four billion years of
evolution could have selected networks with topologies and dynamics that confer
traits analogous to this intelligence, even though they were outside the intercellular
networks of the brain. Here, we explore how macromolecular networks in microbes
confer intelligent characteristics, such as memory, anticipation, adaptation and
reﬂection and we review current understanding of how network organization
reﬂects the type of intelligence required for the environments in which they were
selected. We propose that, if we were to leave terms such as “human” and “brain”
out of the deﬁning features of “intelligence,” all forms of life—from microbes to
humans—exhibit some or all characteristics consistent with “intelligence”” [7,
p. 1]. The emphasis in this quote is on how not only in the brain, but even in the
smallest life forms, network structure, organization, dynamics, and adaptation occur
to realize many if not all aspects of intelligence.
Hofstadter [54] emphasizes that for human intelligence and consciousness, not
only different levels are important, but also that the ‘hierarchical’ structure formed
by these levels is actually cyclic and is what he calls a Strange Loop: “My belief is
that the explanations of “emergent” phenomena in our brains—for instance, ideas,
hopes, images, analogies, and ﬁnally consciousness and free will—are based on a
kind of Strange Loop, an interaction between levels in which the top level reaches
back down towards the bottom level (…) In other words, a self-reinforcing “res-
onance” between different levels (…) The self comes into being at the moment it has
the power to reﬂect itself” [54, p. 704].
He uses as one of his illustrations of this idea, artwork of Maurits Cornelis
Escher (1898–1972). Escher was a famous Dutch graphic artist who made
mathematically-inspired woodcuts, lithographs, and mezzotints. For example, in
Ascending and Descending from 1960 as shown in Artwork, two lines of persons
are seen, one of which walks in circles upstairs all the time and one downstairs,
paradoxically both all the time after one cycle returning to the same level. The
network-oriented modeling approach based on network reiﬁcation or self-modeling
covers this notion as well. Examples of higher-order adaptive network models
applying this notion of Strange Loop can be found in [15, Chap. 8] and in [55].
The above cases indicate that networks can provide a unifying perspective over
different disciplines. Such a unifying perspective of networks can be seen in many
other cases as well. For example, by social contagion, someone can be a big
17
Adaptive Networks at the Crossroad of Artificial Intelligence
371

inﬂuencer for many others via social media, and in the same way, a ﬂock of sheep
following a leader sheep can be described by social contagion in a similar network
structure, where the leading sheep is the big inﬂuencer. In such cases, usually,
forms of causality and dynamics are important, and often also some form of
adaptation. This means that a more traditional, static approach to causal modeling
as in [17, 18] has limitations in the sense that the dynamic, cyclic, and interactive
character described above is beyond the scope of such an approach, as is adaptation.
To overcome this limitation, by adding a temporal dimension, a systematic ap-
proach to dynamics in causal modeling was obtained (based on temporal-causal
network models) in [32], and by adding the notion of self-modeling by network
reiﬁcation, a systematic approach to adaptation (based on adaptive temporal-causal
network models) in [15], as well. All this is supported by a dedicated software
environment. Thus, a quite effective and efﬁcient modeling approach is obtained,
which is a relatively straightforward manner that enables the design of scientiﬁcally
justiﬁed computational models for all kinds of human characteristics, grounded in
human-directed disciplines such as neuroscience, cognitive science, and social
sciences.
The examples in Sects. 3 to 5 illustrate how, based on the obtained approach, the
required dynamics and adaptation within these different disciplines are indeed
covered. These are just a few examples, while more can be found in [15, 32], and
still many more in other papers, for example, available at https://www.researchgate.
net/proﬁle/Jan_Treur/research. This extensive collection of already available com-
putational models covers many human characteristics such as autonomy and using
goals, emotions and their regulation, decision making, mindreading, empathy,
self-interpretation, and ownership and responsibility for actions. By adopting,
improving, and reﬁning such computational models, they can provide a good basis
for the future development of human-like robots and other smart artifacts with
human-like behavior.
Core Messages
• Causality and dynamics are central concepts in many disciplines.
• Also, often adaptiveness plays an important role, which can occur in
different orders.
• The described (multi-order) adaptive network modeling approach addres-
ses these.
• For social sciences, processes of bonding based on similarity have been
described by adaptive social network models.
• For cognitive neuroscience, the concepts plasticity and metaplasticity have
been identiﬁed as crucial for (ﬁrst- and second-order) adaptiveness and, for
example, the role this plays in stress-related disorders, where metaplas-
ticity controls under which circumstances plasticity will occur.
• For biology, examples of evolutionary processes have been addressed by
multi-order adaptive network models for the causal pathways involved.
372
J. Treur

• These are just a few illustrations of how the described modeling approach
can and has been used to obtain computational models for a wide variety of
human characteristics, which then can be applied to make future robots and
other smart artifacts more human-like.
References
1. Scherer KR (2009) Emotions are emergent processes: they require a dynamic computational
architecture. Phil Trans R Soc B 364:3459–3474
2. Descartes R (1644) Principles of philosophy (translated by Mahoney MS)
3. Leibniz GW (1698) Phoranomus seu De potentia et legibus naturæ. Dialogus II Republished
in (1991) in Physis vol 28, pp 797–885
4. Newton I (1729) The mathematical principles of natural philosophy; Newton’s principles of
natural philosophy, Dawsons of Pall Mall, 1968
5. Jonker CM, Snoep JL, Treur J, Westerhoff HV, Wijngaards WCA (2008) BDI-modelling of
complex intracellular dynamics. J Theoretical Biology 251:1–23
6. Westerhoff HV, He F, Murabito E, Crémazy F, Barberis M (2014) Understanding principles
of the dynamic biochemical networks of life through systems biology. In: Kriete A, Eils R
(eds) Computational Syst Biology, 2nd edn. Academic Press, Oxford, pp 21–44
7. Westerhoff HV, Brooks AN, Simeonidis E, García-Contreras R, He F, Boogerd FC,
Jackson VJ, Goncharuk V, Kolodkin A (2014) Macromolecular networks and intelligence in
microorganisms. Frontiers Microbiol 5:379
8. Steenbeek HW, van Geert PLC (2007) A theory and dynamic model of dyadic interaction:
concerns, appraisals, and contagiousness in a developmental context. Dev Rev 27:1–40
9. Sharpanskykh A, Treur J (2014) Modelling and analysis of social contagion in dynamic
networks. Neurocomputing 146:140–150
10. Keeling M, Rohani P (2008) Modeling infectious diseases in human and animals. Princeton
Univ Press, Princeton, NJ
11. Trappenberg TP (2002) Fundamentals of computational neuroscience. Oxford UP, Oxford
12. Ashby WR (1960) Design for a brain, Chapman and hall, London (second extended edn). 1st
edn, 1952
13. Hirsch MW (1984) The dynamical systems approach to differential equations. Bulletin (New
Series) Am Mathe Soc 11:1–64
14. Treur J (2020) Modeling higher-order adaptivity of a network by multilevel network
reiﬁcation. Network Sci 8(S1):S110–S144. https://doi.org/10.1017/nws.2019.56
15. Treur J (2020) Network-oriented modeling for adaptive networks: designing higher-order
adaptive biological. Mental and Social Network Models, Springer Nature, Cham, Switzerland
16. Wright S (1921) Correlation and causation. J Agricu Res 20:557–585
17. Kuipers BJ (1984) Commonsense reasoning about causality: deriving behavior from structure.
Artif Intell 24:169–203
18. Pearl J (2000) Causality. Cambridge University Press
19. Bowen KA, Kowalski R (1982) Amalgamating language and meta-language in logic
programming. In: Clark K, Tarnlund S (eds) Logic programming. Academic Press, New
York, pp 153–172
20. Galton A (2006) Operators versus arguments: the Ins and outs of reiﬁcation. Synthese
150:415–441
17
Adaptive Networks at the Crossroad of Artificial Intelligence
373

21. van der Hoek W, Meyer J-JC, Treur J (2003) Formal semantics of meta-level architectures:
temporal epistemic reﬂection. Int J Intell Syst 18:1293–1318
22. Sterling L, Beer R (1989) Metainterpreters for expert system construction. J Logic Program
6:163–178
23. Treur J (1991) On the use of reﬂection principles in modelling complex reasoning. Int J Intell
Syst 6(3):277–294
24. Treur J (2002) Formal semantics of meta-level architectures: dynamic control of reasoning.
Int J Intell Syst 17(6):545–567
25. Weyhrauch RW (1980) Prolegomena to a theory of mechanized formal reasoning. Artif Intell
13:133–170
26. McPherson M, Smith-Lovin L, Cook JM (2001) Birds of a feather: homophily in social
networks. Annu Rev Sociol 27:415–444
27. Aldao A, Gee DG, De Los RA, Seager I (2016) Emotion regulation as a transdiagnostic factor
in the development of internalizing and externalizing psychopathology: current and future
directions. Dev Psychopathol 28(4):927–946
28. Beauchaine TP, Cicchetti D (2019) Emotion dysregulation and emerging psychopathology: a
transdiagnostic, transdisciplinary perspective. Dev Psychopathol 31(3):799–804
29. Calkins SD, Dollar JM, Wideman L (2019) Temperamental vulnerability to emotion
dysregulation and risk for mental and physical health challenges. Dev Psychopathol 31
(3):957–970
30. Garcia R (2002) Stress, metaplasticity, and antidepressants. Curr Mol Med 2:629–638
31. Fessler DMT, Eng SJ, Navarrete CD (2005) Elevated disgust sensitivity in the ﬁrst trimester
of pregnancy: evidence supporting the compensatory prophylaxis hypothesis. Evolution
Human Behavior 26(4):344–351
32. Treur J (2016) Network-oriented modeling: addressing complexity of cognitive. Springer
International Publishers, Affective and Social Interactions
33. Mohammadi Ziabari SS, Treur J (2019) A modeling environment for dynamic and adaptive
network models implemented in matlab. In: Yang XS, Sherratt S, Dey N, Joshi A (eds) Proc
of the fourth international congress on information and communication technology, ICICT
2019 vol 1, Advances in intelligent systems and computing, vol 1041, Springer International
Publishing pp 91–111
34. Treur J (2018a) Network reiﬁcation as a uniﬁed approach to represent network adaptation
principles within a network. In: Martín-Vide C, Vega-Rodríguez MA, Fagan D, O’Neill M
(eds) Proceedings of the 7th International conference on theory and practice of natural
computing, TPNC’18, Lecture notes in computer science, vol 11324. Springer Publishers,
pp 344–358
35. Treur J (2016) Veriﬁcation of temporal-causal network models by mathematical analysis.
Vietnam J Comput Sci 3:207–221
36. Levy DA, Nail PR (1993) Contagion: a theoretical and empirical review and reconceptu-
alization. Genet Soc Gen Psychol Monogr 119(2):233–284
37. Iacoboni M (2008) Mirroring people: the new science of how we connect with others. Farrar,
Straus and Giroux, New York
38. Pearson M, Steglich C, Snijders T (2006) Homophily and assimilation among sport-active
adolescent substance users. Connections 27(1):47–63
39. Hebb DO (1949) The organization of behavior: a neuropsychological theory. Wiley
40. Gerstner W, Kistler WM (2002) Mathematical formulations of Hebbian learning. Biol Cybern
87:404–415
41. Kuriscak E, Marsalek P, Stroffek J, Toth PG (2015) Biological context of Hebb learning in
artiﬁcial neural networks, a review. Neurocomputing 152:27–35
42. Shatz CJ (1992) The developing brain. Sci Am 267:60–67. https://doi.org/10.1038/
scientiﬁcamerican0992-60
43. Keysers C, Gazzola V (2014) Hebbian learning and predictive mirror neurons for actions,
sensations and emotions. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 369:20130175
374
J. Treur

44. Sjöström PJ, Rancz EA, Roth A, Hausser M (2008) Dendritic excitability and synaptic
plasticity. Physiol Rev 88:769–840
45. Abraham WC, Bear MF (1996) Metaplasticity: the plasticity of synaptic plasticity. Trends
Neurosci 19(4):126–130
46. Robinson BL, Harper NS, McAlpine D (2016) Meta-adaptation in the auditory midbrain
under cortical inﬂuence. Nat Commun 7:13442
47. Fessler DMT, Clark JA, Clint EK (2015) Evolutionary psychology and evolutionary
anthropology. In: Buss DM (ed) The handbook of evolutionary psychology. Wiley, pp 1029–
1046
48. Treur J (2017) On the applicability of network-oriented modeling based on temporal-causal
networks: why network models do not just model networks. J Inform Telecommun 1(1):23–
40
49. Bell A (1999) Levels and loops: the future of artiﬁcial intelligence and neuroscience. Phil
Trans R Soc Lond B 354:2013–2020
50. Borsboom D (2017) A network theory of mental disorders. World Psychiatry 16(1):5–13
51. Kuner R, Flor H (2017) Structural plasticity and reorganisation in chronic pain. Nat Rev
Neurosci 18:20–30
52. Inoue K, Tsuda M (2018) Microglia in neuropathic pain: cellular and molecular mechanisms
and therapeutic potential. Nat Rev Neurosci 19:138–152
53. Brennan KC, Pietrobon D (2018) A systems neuroscience approach to migraine. Neuron
97:1004–1021
54. Hofstadter DR (1979) Gödel, Escher, Bach. Basic Books, New York
55. Anten J, Earle J, Treur J (2020) An adaptive computational network model for strange loops
in political evolution in society Proceedings of the 20th International conference on
computational science, ICCS'20, vol 2, pp 604–617. Lecture notes in computer science, vol
12138. Springer Nature
Jan Treur works as a full professor in Artiﬁcial Intelligence. He
is an internationally well-recognized expert in human-directed AI
and cognitive and social modeling. The research of Jan Treur
during the past ten years concerns both fundamental and
application-directed aspects of human-directed AI. This covers
methods
and
techniques
for
modeling
and
analysis
of
human-directed AI approaches in a number of application areas,
including
Cognitive
and
Social
modeling
and
simulation.
Currently, his research includes Network-Oriented Modeling
approaches based on adaptive temporal-causal networks to model
cognitive, affective, and social interactions, with two books about
this published in 2016 and 2020. Modeling, analysis, and
simulation address parts of reality in the context of aspects of
human functioning as described in scientiﬁc disciplines such as
Biology, Neuroscience, Cognitive Science, and Social Sciences.
Applications
cover
mental
and
social
simulation
and
human-aware or socially aware AI systems and virtual agents.
17
Adaptive Networks at the Crossroad of Artificial Intelligence
375

18
Are We Ready for “Them” Now? The
Relationship Between Human
and Humanoid Robots
Xiao Dou and Chih-Fu Wu
“Sort of like a digital Jiminy—as in the well-known fairy tale—
Social robot will become-a kind of friendly, supportive presence
that's always there to be able to help you make the right
decisionin the right way at the right time to help you form
healthy habits.”
Cynthia Breazeal
Summary
The limits of anthropomorphism in robots and how to successfully implement
anthropomorphism are discussed in this study. Through a review of previous
studies, we sorted through the discussion and controversy points of verbal and
nonverbal
cues
for anthropomorphism.
Open questions
regarding
robot
design-related issues were proposed. Firstly, balancing the relationship between
humans, application tasks, and robots should be the focus of future research.
Secondly, consistency between verbal and nonverbal communication cues of
humanoid robots is necessary, and the restricted relationship between these cues
should be noted and further investigated.
X. Dou
College of Fine Arts, Guangdong Polytechnic Normal University, Guangzhou, China
C.-F. Wu (&)
Department of Industrial Design, Tatung University, No. 40, Sec. 3, Zhongshan N. Rd.,
Taipei City 104, Taiwan
e-mail: wcf@gm.ttu.edu.tw
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
N. Rezaei (ed.), Integrated Science, Integrated Science 1,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65273-9_18
377

Robot Sophia (developed by Hanson Robotics). [Adapted from https://
zh.wikipedia.org/wiki/%E7%B4%A2%E8%8F%B2%E4%BA%9A_(%E6%9C%
BA%E5%99%A8%E4%BA%BA)].
The code of this chapter is 01100100 01101110 01110100 01100001
01001101 01100101 01101001 01100111 01110011 01100101.
1
Introduction
In the future, social robots play critical roles in human life in areas such as com-
panionship, education, security, and health care [1–3]. Thus, social robots must
have strong social abilities to interact with humans and adapt to different envi-
ronments, tasks, and user groups. Therefore, the improvement of the social attri-
butes and interaction abilities of social robots has attracted considerable research
attention [1, 4, 5]. Anthropomorphism in human–robot interaction (HRI) is deﬁned
as “the tendency to attribute human characteristics to inanimate objects (i.e., robots)
with a view of helping people rationalize their actions” [6]. Humanoid robots can be
regarded as a microcosm of anthropomorphism designed to facilitate interaction and
understanding with a technology agent [7, 8]. Observers expect robots to have
human-like performance, which can increase the empathy of people with robots and
make robots more acceptable [7]. Many studies have been conducted on human
perceptions and acceptance of social robots in HRIs. These studies have aimed to
378
X. Dou and C.-F. Wu

achieve natural, intuitive, and safe HRI so that robots can better integrate into and
assist human lives [9, 10]. Computers are a social actor’s paradigm that provides a
reference benchmark for human perceptions of a robot or computer. Studies have
indicated that if a robot or computer can display sufﬁcient interactive and social
cues, people tend to regard it as a social entity [11–14].
Interactions between humans and humanoid robots are inﬂuenced by the verbal
and nonverbal communication cues of robots, such as their appearance, speech,
facial expression, and behavior [15]. Research has recommended how to provide
human features to humanoid robots (e.g., by using human-like appearances [16],
voices [17, 18], facial expressions, behaviors [19], and eye gaze [20–22]). If
humanoid robots are provided with human features, their likeability, acceptance,
and trustworthiness will increase. Moreover, anthropomorphism can occur across
various agents (e.g., computers, robots, and virtual agents). For example, Craig,
Schroeder [23] found that human voices are more favored than synthetic voices are
in virtual agents. However, the uncanny valley concept [24] indicates that the
acceptance of robots is not linear. As robots look more human-like, people’s
fondness of robots may suddenly decrease because they perceive the robots to be
scary. Unfortunately, the literature is unclear regarding the limits of robot anthro-
pomorphism, including anthropomorphism related to appearance and communica-
tion
cues,
such
as
voice,
behavior,
and
facial
expressions.
Increased
anthropomorphism makes robots more human-like; however, humans’ acceptance
of robots may not increase in this scenario. Determining an appropriate level of
anthropomorphism is important because humans are sensitive to robots’ human-like
features [25, 26]. If users have a negative affective evaluation or fear a robot, they
would lose interest in the functional evaluation of the robot. Thus, the limits of
robot anthropomorphism affect the direction of future robot development.
Enhancing robot anthropomorphism is meaningless if people do not desire almost
human-look robots in their lives. Studies have discussed the limits of anthropo-
morphism in robots and how to implement anthropomorphism successfully. For
example, Ho, MacDorman [25] explored the location of the uncanny valley across
various agents, such as humanoids, androids, and computer-animated virtual
characters, to develop an accurate and comprehensive scale measuring the uncanny
valley. Tinwell et al. [26] examined whether facial expressions cause a phe-
nomenon similar to the uncanny valley. They found that more unnatural and rigid
facial expressions are more likely to evoke unpleasant feelings.
This study explores the limits of anthropomorphism in humanoid robots and
determines the effects of anthropomorphism on robots’ verbal and nonverbal
communication cues. By reviewing previous studies, this study examined the
results of implementing anthropomorphic features in robots. This study reviewed
key insights on robot anthropomorphism and subsequently proposed open questions
to provide directions for future studies.
18
Relationship Between Human and Humanoid Robots
379

2
Anthropomorphism in Humanoid Robots
Humanoid robots must use nonverbal and verbal communication cues to achieve
natural HRI. These cues affect people’s expectations as well as their functional and
affective evaluations of robots [27]. Mechanical robots are more likely to be treated
impolitely than humanoid robots are [28]. Moreover, humanoid robots generate
higher expectations than do robots with an animal appearance [3]. To facilitate HRI,
a robot should use readable communication cues so that users can interact with it
intuitively and naturally [29, 30]. The communication cues of humanoid robots
include appearance, speech, body language, facial expressions, and eye gaze [15].
Numerous studies have examined the application of these communication cues
(Table 1), and many open questions exist in the ﬁeld of HRI. Some questions in this
ﬁeld are listed as follows: is providing robots with a more human-like appearance,
voice, and body language suitable? What type of relationships do the communi-
cation cues of robots have? The following section reviews research on robot
communication cues in HRI.
The appearance of a humanoid robot can affect a person’s ﬁrst impression of the
robot, which, in turn, can affect their expectations for the robot [40]. Fong et al. [15]
classiﬁed robot appearances into four types based on morphology: anthropomor-
phic, zoomorphic, caricatured, and functional. According to the similarities between
robots and humans, Walters [41] divided robots into three categories: mechanical
robots (low realistic), humanoid robots (moderately realistic), and android robots
(highly realistic). Androids, such as the robot Soﬁa, are similar to humans in
appearance. Mechanical robots have a raw mechanical appearance. Among the
three types of robots, humanoid robots are the most accepted and are commonly
used as social robots (e.g., NAO and Pepper) in many markets.
The uncanny valley is a widely accepted theory of robot appearance that implies
that blindly mimicking human appearance may cause undesired effects [24, 42].
However, the uncanny valley theory does not apply to speciﬁc complex and
interrelated robot design features, including the head, body, limbs, and many other
parts [32]. Criteria for the aforementioned human-like design elements have not yet
been established. Hwang et al. [32] explored how a humanoid robot’s overall shape
affects user perceptions of the robot’s personality. Robots with human-like, rect-
angular parallelepiped, and cylindrical shapes were investigated in the study
mentioned above, and the robot with a human-like shape was perceived to be more
outgoing than the other robots. However, most studies regarding robot appearance
are based on perceptual ambiguity [25] rather than on any explicit criterion [41].
Some controversies are associated with the uncanny valley concerning robot
appearance. According to the uncanny valley, mechanical robots do not easily win
people’s favor, but they do not cause aversion. However, Hanson [43] claimed that
if a mechanical robot “does not conform to an aesthetic standard”, people ﬁnd them
scary. Bethel and Murphy [44] also found that when mechanical robots are used in
rescue tasks, rescuers consider the robots “creepy.” A robot’s aesthetics and degree
of similarity with humans are important factors in robot appearance design. These
380
X. Dou and C.-F. Wu

Table 1 Previous studies on social robots’ communication cues
Author (Year)
Region
Name of the robot
Communication cues
Operationalization
Robots’ task
Kirby et al.
[31]
USA
Valerie and Tank
Facial expressions
Virtual agent
No speciﬁc task
Tinwell et al.
[26]
UK
Self-made robot
Facial expressions
Virtual agent
No speciﬁc task
Hwang et al.
[32]
Korean
Self-made robot
Appearance
Picture and real prototype
No speciﬁc task
Kim et al. [33] Korean
Nettoro
Speech: speech style
calling names
Real robot
Chatting
Leite et al.
[34]
Portugal
Icat
Facial expressions Verbal utterances
Real robot
Play chess game
Niculescu
et al. [17]
Netherlands Self-made robot: Olivia
Speech
Real robot
Chatting
Van den Brule
et al. [35]
Netherlands A self-made robot inspired
by TWENTY-one
Body language Eye gaze
Virtual robot
Performing the Van
Halen task
Mara et al. 36
Austria
Asimo, Kojiro, and Telenoid Body language: Head
Photos of the robots Asimo, No speciﬁc task
Tay et al. [37] Singapore
Self-made robot
Appearance moving speed gesture
types speech rate pitch volume
Real robot
Healthcare/security
Koch et al.
[18]
USA
Monkey look socially
animated machine (SAM)
Facial expressions
Real robot
Chatting
Stanton et al.
[38]
Austria
NAO
eye gaze
Real robot
Play shell game
Ghazali et al.
[39]
Netherlands Self-made robot
Speech
Body language
Eye gaze
Real robot/Virtual agent
Chatting
Dou et al. [30] Taiwan
Alpha 1 pro
Voice
Video (i.e. video-based
human–robot interaction)
Education/shopping
service/companion
18
Relationship Between Human and Humanoid Robots
381

factors have a subtle inﬂuence in real environments. Mitchell et al. [45] found that if
a robot’s appearance and voice do not match, an uncanny valley might happen.
They argued that ensuring the robot’s integrity by matching visual and verbal cues
is vital; however, the deﬁnition of a “match” is unclear. Moreover, studies have not
established a set of design principles for humanoid robots.
2.1
Speech
Verbal communication is an important method of human–human interaction, and
making robots achieve natural language communication is the goal of robot tech-
nology and HRI [46]. Usually, information is acquired from speech through verbal
and vocal channels [47]. The verbal channel provides the interpretation of the
content. The vocal channel involves a series of acoustic factors, such as pitch and
volume, which affect people’s judgment of the speaker’s gender, age, and emo-
tional status. Dou et al. [30] argued that robot voices should be consistent with their
target applications. The authors mentioned above divided robot voices into the
male, female, child, and synthetic to examine the application of different voice
types in different ﬁelds. They found that male, female, and child voices were
preferred over synthetic voices in educational, companionship, and shopping ser-
vices. Chang et al. [48] indicated that a high-pitched female voice is more suitable
than other voice types for companion robots used at home. Lee [12] compared
preferences for robots with human and synthetic voices and found that people prefer
robots with human voices. The ﬁndings appear to support the conclusion that
humans more readily accept robots with more human-like voices. However, the
study of Walters et al. [49] provided contrasting ﬁndings. They used mechanical
robots with recorded human and synthetic voices in an experiment and measured
the comfortable approaching distance between the participants and the robots. The
results indicated that people were willing to approach a synthetic-voiced robot more
closely because they expected the mechanical robot’s appearance and voice to
match. This ﬁnding also supports the idea that human voices are suitable for
humanoid robots. However, only vague deﬁnitions are available for human-like
voices. Studies have used humanized synthetic voices [30] and recordings of human
voices [49]. Therefore, a speciﬁc acoustic deﬁnition for a “human-like voice” is
unavailable. Although vocal prosody can be used to deﬁne a human-like voice [50,
51], it involves many acoustic parameters and must be adjusted according to the
dialog context and content. Achieving a human-like voice throughout the adjust-
ment process is difﬁcult. Moreover, whether sudden changes in “almost human”
and “barely humanlike” voice cause negative emotions remains unknown.
Because a robot’s voice and appearance are closely related, a change in a robot’s
appearance would undoubtedly affect people’s perceptions and evaluations of the
robot’s voice. However, to the best of our knowledge, no study has explored the
relationship between robot appearances and voices. Studies conducted on robot
voices have used ready-made and ﬁxed robot appearances, such as Pepper [52],
NAO [38], and Alpha 1 Pro [53]. In addition to humanoid robots, disembodied
382
X. Dou and C.-F. Wu

chatbots (e.g., Siri) use speech as the main interface to communicate with users.
Users may have different perceptions of disembodied chatbots and physical robots.
Hill et al. [54] found that people use more profanity in their conversations with a
chatbot than they do with a physical robot, suggesting that the absence of a physical
body may put robots at a disadvantage in their interactions with humans. The voice
settings of humanoid robots must be further analyzed.
2.2
Facial Expression
Humanoid robots must demonstrate social interaction capabilities through verbal
and nonverbal communication cues [55]. Robots need to display social cues that
can be interpreted directly in order to establish natural and intuitive interaction [56].
Verbal communication can achieve 80% of information transmission tasks, and
nonverbal communication, as a supplement to verbal communication, can effec-
tively convey emotions and other information [30].
Facial expression is an important mechanism through which robots express
artiﬁcial emotions [57]. Moreover, studies have found that some expressions are
universal in conveying emotions across gender, age, ethnicity, and even between
humans and animals [58]. To design humanoid robots that can express emotions
through facial expressions, one must refer to human facial expression studies. Most
human facial expression studies describe facial expressions by using the arousal and
valence system. Arousal refers to excitement and ranges from calm to excited.
Valence refers to emotional states, which can vary from highly positive to highly
negative [59, 60]. For example, the expression “happy” indicates medium arousal
and positive valence, whereas the expression “angry” indicates high arousal and
negative valence. The six basic emotions proposed by Ekman [61], namely anger,
disgust, fear, joy, sadness, and surprise, are popular in research on robot expression.
In general, facial expressions of robots (e.g., Kismet) are based on the six emotions
above [62].
Currently, robots can display facial expressions through two methods. One
method involves the use of digital screens to generate cartoonish expressions,
which are mostly used by commercial service robots (e.g., Zenbo). Another method
mainly used in research involves the autonomous eye, eyebrow, and mouth
movements (e.g., Kismet) to form expressions that imitate human facial changes.
Some robots do not display expressions but use light-emitting diodes around the
eyes and ears as an emotional feedback channel (e.g., Pepper). Robots equipped
with digital screens that generate cartoonish expressions are unsuitable for studying
the application of anthropomorphism because their facial expressions are abstract.
However, robots with physical facial features that can move autonomously are
limited by technology. As a transition to the study of robots, Kirby et al. [31]
reviewed the literature on virtual agent facial expressions and investigated the
reactions of people to the Tank and Valerie virtual agents, which express happiness,
sadness, disgust, and anger by adjusting their eyes, eyebrows, and mouths. People
could accurately identify the emotions conveyed by the facial expressions of the
18
Relationship Between Human and Humanoid Robots
383

virtual agents. Koch et al. [18] employed SAM, which is a monkey-shaped robot, to
interact with children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The facial expressions
of the robot were controlled through movements of the eyes, eyebrows, and mouth
to express different emotions. The results indicated that children with ASD spent
considerable time focusing on the face of the robot and experienced happiness and
comfort when interacting with it.
However, whether robots would become more acceptable or create aversion if
their expressive abilities become more similar to those of humans is unclear. Tin-
well et al. [26] suggested that realistic humanoid characters with human-like facial
expressions make people feel disgusted. The authors used software to simulate
virtual agents with a full face or missing upper face. They made the virtual agent
express anger, fear, disgust, happiness, sadness, and surprise. The results indicated
that the virtual character with complete facial expressions was more acceptable than
the virtual character with a missing upper face. The virtual character with blurred or
no facial expressions increased perceived uncanniness and unease. The results
above indicate that the acceptance of a virtual character or robot increases as its
facial expressions, which are used to express emotions, more closely resemble those
of humans. No evidence has indicated a sudden decrease in goodwill with an
increase in the humanness of a virtual character or robot’s facial expressions.
However, the virtual characters or robots used in studies have had numerous lim-
itations related to appearance and embodiment. Technical limitations of embodi-
ment made the simulation of human-like facial expressions difﬁcult for these virtual
characters or robots. Therefore, future studies should consider additional factors
(e.g., different robot appearances, and physical forms) to determine whether a
robot’s facial expression should be more similar to those of a human.
2.3
Body Language
During face-to-face communication, robots can supplement verbal communication
with appropriate body language to achieve communication continuity [46]. Body
language includes gestures, posture, and head movement. Appropriate body lan-
guage can improve a robot’s persuasive abilities and even change a user’s behavior
[63, 64]. Although robot limbs can achieve a high degree of freedom, their body
language cannot achieve the same degree of ﬂexibility as that of humans because
robots cannot exactly resemble humans due to technological and cost constraints.
Usually, humanoid robots have at least one head and arm that can move freely.
A few humanoid robots can move their ﬁngers to make different gestures (e.g.,
Pepper) or move their legs to dance (e.g., Alpha). Mori et al. [42] claimed that
movement is the foundation of robots. Movements also change the curve of the
uncanny valley.
Studies have mainly examined the effects of a robot’s physical parameters, such
as amplitude, frequency, speed, smoothness, and duration. For example, Kim et al.
[33] found that the range, frequency, and speed of a robot’s movements can change
its perceived personality. Brule et al. [35] examined whether the use of robots with
384
X. Dou and C.-F. Wu

different behavior styles affects people’s trust and found that if a robot lacks ﬂu-
ency, people’s trust in the robot decreases.
Some studies have explored the inﬂuence of different categories and meanings of
a robot’s behavior. In particular, studies have focused on the meaning represented
by a change in gesture. Gestures not only affect people’s feelings but also signif-
icantly improve the success rate of human–robot collaborative tasks [65]. Gestures
related to contents also inﬂuence the human assessment of content interpretation.
Krauss et al. [66] classiﬁed gestures into four types, namely pointing, symbolic,
meaningless, and ﬁgurative, and set the robot’s behavior to imitate human behavior.
Dou et al. [67] examined the inﬂuence of robot gestures on human–robot conver-
sation and found that a robot that uses more gestures to communicate is perceived
as more outgoing and friendly. Moreover, low gesture usage results in low robot
acceptance.
In general, due to technological and cost constraints, the body language of
humanoid robots still has a low level of anthropomorphism. Current research
remains focused on making a robot’s body language as natural and intuitive as that
of humans. Future studies should focus on matching robot appearances with
behavior because robots with nonmatching appearances and behavior are perceived
as uncanny by humans [42].
2.4
Eye Gaze
As mentioned above, most humanoid robots have heads, which can be used to
display facial expressions and another nonverbal communication cue, such as eye
gaze. The human eye is a special cognitive stimulus and specialized pathways in the
brain that explain its meaning [68]. Eye gaze can convey mental state, enhance
verbal communication, and strengthen verbal communication content [9]. The
human eye gaze can convey considerable emotions and meanings, and research on
robots has indicated that the effect of the eye gaze of robots on HRI is signiﬁcant
[21, 69]. Humanoid Robots display four types of gaze: mutual gaze (i.e., eye
contact), referential gaze, joint attention, gaze aversions. To display eye gaze,
robots are required to have an eyeball that can move independently. Therefore,
having an eye gaze is restricted by the robot’s appearance. Currently, only a few
robots have this ability. In a social eye gaze study [21], the authors established a
spectrum range from human, virtual agents to embodied robots in terms of their
ability to display gaze. Most robots do not have free movement of the eyeballs and
rely on head movements to simulate gaze. For example, Stanton et al. [38]
employed NAO to discuss the impact of three types of gaze (i.e., constant, averted,
and situational gaze) on trust. In their experiment, they used the head movement
instead of the eye movement to simulate gaze. The results demonstrated that women
were very distrustful of robots that looked at them all the time, indicating that
robots’ eye gaze may produce similar effects as human gaze. However, displaying
18
Relationship Between Human and Humanoid Robots
385

gaze through head movements is not sufﬁcient. Presently, enabling robots to display
gaze with the eyeball movement is difﬁcult. Studies have reported that anthropo-
morphism has no obvious effect on robots’ eye gaze.
3
Open Questions for Future HRI Research
This section poses open questions regarding robot design–related issues for the
human–robot interaction and discusses future research directions.
3.1
How Can We Balance the Relationship Between Humans,
Robots, and Application Tasks?
The generally accepted goal of HRI is to establish intuitive, safe, and natural interac-
tions to improve the acceptance of robots [37]. To establish these interactions, rela-
tionships among user groups, robots, and application tasks should be investigated, and
the balance among the three should be considered when designing robots (Fig. 1). The
design process would beneﬁt from the integration of technology-focused research,
human-focused research, and robot-focused research [21].
Humanoid robots can be employed in various occupational roles, such as edu-
cation, companionship, health care, and security. They can even be multifunctional,
such as mixing companion and entertainment. A study [37] reported that robots in
health care were expected to display more feminist characteristics, such as using a
female voice and being striped with red lines, whereas robots used for security were
expected to be more masculine. Another study [30] demonstrated that user pref-
erences and affective evaluations of a robot's voice would change depending on the
occupation that the robot is engaged in. These results indicated that different tasks
have different requirements for robots.
Fig. 1 The balance among
the user groups, robots, and
application tasks
386
X. Dou and C.-F. Wu

Moreover, robots will serve groups of all ages, genders, races, cultural back-
grounds, and physical abilities. The users’ backgrounds and experiences have an
enormous effect on their perception of robots’ capabilities and interactive experi-
ences [70]. For example, a study [60] reported cultural differences in the evaluation
of robots’ afﬁnity, engagement, trust, and satisfaction. The engagement of partici-
pants from Germany (i.e., low-context culture) was more inﬂuenced by robots’
spoken information than Korean and Chinese participants (i.e., high-context cul-
ture). Also, affections and preferences for robots differ between children aged 6–
7 years and 8–11 years [70]. Therefore, balancing the relationship between hu-
mans, application tasks, and robots should be the focus of future research.
3.2
What Are the Currently Known Robots Focused Design
Principles?
In the process of balancing the relationship of humans, robots, and their application
tasks, the verbal and nonverbal communication cues of robots are adjusted factors
[71]. HRI studies have generally focused on the communication cues of a robot
(e.g., only on overall shape [32] or voice and gesture [67]). Furthermore, verbal and
nonverbal communication cues are still technically limited. For example, inte-
grating all parameters (e.g., size, shape, and color) that would affect the voice, facial
expression, and gaze preference into an empirical study of robot appearance is
difﬁcult.
This restricted relationship between verbal cues and nonverbal communication
cues in humanoid robots should be noted. In particular, facial expression and eye
gaze cannot be displayed in a facial expression structure without autonomous facial
features (e.g., Pepper). Using robots that look too human may cause antipathy,
whereas it is uncertain whether using robots that sound or behave too human will
cause antipathy. Because of the limitation of robot appearance, combining the
appearance of robots to discuss the effect of other communication cues is difﬁcult.
Studies have demonstrated that the mapping of human-like communications cues is
beneﬁcial for humanoid robots. However, mismatched voices, expressions, and
movements cause discomfort. Therefore, future research on humanoid robots
should focus on how to match various communication cues better.
3.3
How Do Interaction Time and Proximity Affect Human–
robot Interactions?
In addition to robot design-related problems, proximity is also a frequently dis-
cussed factor in HRI. Proximity implies that individuals are closely related to each
other, and closer proximity increases compliance [63]. The adjustment of proximity
in HRI must consider an individual’s personal space range, and the performance of
robots will also affect the distance that individuals require. Kim et al. [72] claimed
that proximity could be understood as a social distance that represents the personal
18
Relationship Between Human and Humanoid Robots
387

intimacy and boundaries between humans and robots. Their study determined that
the use of familiar speech styles led people to perceive robots as more friendly,
which increased their preference for proximity. Walters et al. [49] determined that
the comfortable distance between humans and robots changed when robots adopted
different voice styles, and the distance was the shortest when mechanical robots
used a synthetic voice.
The effect of time on HRI must also be considered [73, 74]. Most studies focus
on short-term interactions to discuss the evaluation and perception of robots by
people who are ﬁrst in contact or short contact. Collecting large samples of
long-term interaction data is difﬁcult because of the great experimental difﬁculty.
Therefore, there are relatively few studies on this topic. In a long-term interaction,
the familiarity between humans and robots may change over time with repeated
exposure and thus alter the uncanny valley curve [75]. People are affected by the
novelty when they interact with robots for the ﬁrst time, but the novelty wears off in
long-term relationships. Therefore, the long-term perception of robots warrants
further observation. In an 18-day study, Kanda et al. [76] used robots to help
Japanese students learn English. At ﬁrst, the students displayed a high interest in the
robot, but their interest in robots decreased over time. However, a study by De
Graaf et al. [77] reported conﬂicting results. They conducted a long-term obser-
vation (over two months) that used robots in the homes of older adults to promote
quality of life and determined that participants rated robots more positively over
time. The type of robots used, the degree of autonomy and the population infor-
mation of subjects should be considered when viewing these results to compre-
hensively determine what key inﬂuencing factors are in a long-term interaction. The
difference in results may be caused by differences in user groups (students and
elderly), the robot’s appearance, or tasks (education and companion) that they
perform. The robots use different appearances and different behaviors, which may
also affect perception. Furthermore, changes over time may not be linear; for in-
stance, students may be less interested after 18 days but increasingly dependent
after two months. The relationship between these factors should be considered in
future studies.
4
Conclusion
The purpose of this chapter was to discuss the application of anthropomorphism in
humanoid robots. Through a review of previous studies, we sorted through the
discussion and controversy points of verbal and nonverbal cues for anthropomor-
phism. Furthermore, we presented open questions for future research.
Verbal and nonverbal communication cues (speech, appearance, facial expres-
sions, body language, and eye gaze) of robots have inﬂuenced and restricted each
other. Appearance (including facial expression, body language, and gaze) has
considerable inﬂuence and determines whether the voice is suitable for a robot.
Numerous studies have reported that the uncanny valley is related to the appearance
388
X. Dou and C.-F. Wu

of robots; however, no conclusive evidence has demonstrated that similar phe-
nomena exist for voices, with more human-like voices preferred to synthetic voices.
A robot’s facial expression, body language, and gaze are not sufﬁcient for a robot to
be associated with a man. The relationship to appearance is subtle. Because they are
limited by appearance, deﬁning “human-like” facial expressions is difﬁcult. The
experimental results of simulating human features in robots’ facial expressions and
behaviors may be different from those of real robot’s applications. Therefore, future
research should investigate the speciﬁc criterion for developing a “human-like”
robot design.
The consistency between verbal and nonverbal communication cues of huma-
noid robots is necessary, and numerous studies support this principle. The robots’
application tasks and end-user groups have huge effects on robots’ design. Verbal
and nonverbal communication cues for robots can be considered a complete system
for more holistic research.
Core Messages
• The improvement of the social attributes and interaction abilities of social
robots is vital in HRI studies.
• Humanoid robots must use nonverbal and verbal communication cues to
achieve natural HRI.
• Future research should investigate the speciﬁc criterion for developing a
“human-like” robot regarding to all the social cues.
References
1. Savela N, Turja T, Oksanen A (2018) Social acceptance of robots in different occupational
ﬁelds: a systematic literature review. Int J Soc Robot 10(4):493–502. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12369-017-0452-5
2. Hegel F, Lohse M, Swadzba A, Wachsmuth S, Rohlﬁng K, Wrede B (2007) Classes of
applications for social robots: a user study. In: RO-MAN 2007-The 16th IEEE international
symposium on robot and human interactive communication. Jeju, Korea, IEEE, pp 938–943
3. Dou X, Wu C-f, Wang X, Niu J (2020) User Expectations of Social Robots in Different
Applications: An Online User Study. Paper presented at the International Conference on
Human-Computer Interaction, Copenhagen, Denmark, July 13–21
4. Birnbaum GE, Mizrahi M, Hoffman G, Reis HT, Finkel EJ, Sass O (2016) What robots can
teach us about intimacy: the reassuring effects of robot responsiveness to human disclosure.
Comput Hum Behav 63:416–423. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2016.05.064
5. Heerink M, Kröse B, Evers V, Wielinga B (2010) Assessing acceptance of assistive social
agent technology by older adults: the almere model. Int J Soc Robot. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12369-010-0068-5
18
Relationship Between Human and Humanoid Robots
389

6. Duffy BR (2003) Anthropomorphism and the social robot. Robot Auton Syst 42(3–4):177–
190
7. Zanatto D, Patacchiola M, Cangelosi A, Goslin J (2019) Generalisation of anthropomorphic
stereotype. Int J Soc Robot 1–10
8. Bartneck C, Kulić D, Croft E, Zoghbi S (2009) Measurement instruments for the
anthropomorphism, animacy, likeability, perceived intelligence, and perceived safety of
robots. Int J Soc Robot. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369-008-0001-3
9. Looije R, Neerincx MA, Cnossen F (2010) Persuasive robotic assistant for health
self-management of older adults: design and evaluation of social behaviors. Int J Hum
Comput Stud 68:386–397. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2009.08.007
10. Rodriguez-Lizundia E, Marcos S, Zalama E, Gómez-García-Bermejo J, Gordaliza A (2015) A
bellboy robot: study of the effects of robot behaviour on user engagement and comfort. Int J
Hum Comput Stud 82:83–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2015.06.001
11. Nass C, Steuer J, Tauber ER (1994) Computers are social actors. Conference companion on
Human factors in computing systems—CHI ‘94. https://doi.org/10.1145/259963.260288
12. Lee EJ (2010) The more humanlike, the better? How speech type and users’ cognitive style
affect social responses to computers. Comput Hum Behav. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2010.
01.003
13. Chad E, Autumn E, Brett S, Lin X, Noelle M (2019) Evaluations of an artiﬁcial intelligence
instructor’s voice: social identity theory in human-robot interactions. Comput Hum Behav
90:357–362. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2018.08.027
14. Mou Y, Xu K (2017) The media inequality: comparing the initial human-human and
human-AI social interactions. Comput Hum Behav 72:432–440
15. Fong T, Nourbakhsh I, Dautenhahn K (2003) A survey of socially interactive robots. Robot
Auton Syst 42(3–4):143–166
16. Yan H, Ang MH, Poo AN (2014) A survey on perception methods for human-robot
interaction in social robots. Int J Soc Robot 6. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369-013-0199-6
17. Niculescu A, van Dijk B, Nijholt A, Li H, See SL (2013) Making social robots more
attractive: the effects of voice pitch, humor and empathy. Int J Soc Robot 5(2):171–191.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369-012-0171-x
18. Koch SA, Stevens CE, Clesi CD, Lebersfeld JB, Sellers AG, McNew ME, Biasini FJ,
Amthor FR, Hopkins MI (2017) A feasibility study evaluating the emotionally expressive
robot SAM. Int J Soc Robot. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369-017-0419-6
19. Komatsubara T, Shiomi M, Kanda T, Ishiguro H (2018) Can using pointing gestures
encourage children to ask questions? Int J Soc Robot 10(4):387–399. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12369-017-0444-5
20. Admoni H, Scassellati B (2014) Roles of robots in socially assistive applications. In: IROS
2014 workshop on rehabilitation and assistive robotics. Chicago, U.S.
21. Admoni H, Scassellati B (2017) Social eye gaze in human-robot interaction: a review.
J Hum-Robot Interact 6(1):25–63
22. Xu T, Zhang H, Yu C (2016) See you see me: the role of eye contact in multimodal
human-robot interaction. ACM Trans Interact Intell Syst (TiiS) 6(1):1–22
23. Craig SD, Schroeder NL (2017) Reconsidering the voice effect when learning from a virtual
human. Comput Educ 114:193–205
24. Mori M (1970) The uncanny valley. Energy 7(4):33–35
25. Ho CC, MacDorman KF (2017) Measuring the uncanny valley effect: reﬁnements to indices
for perceived humanness, attractiveness, and eeriness. Int J Soc Robot https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12369-016-0380-9
26. Tinwell A, Grimshaw M, Nabi DA, Williams A (2011) Facial expression of emotion and
perception of the uncanny valley in virtual characters. Comput Hum Behav 27(2):741–749
27. DiSalvo CF, Gemperle F, Forlizzi J, Kiesler S (2002) All robots are not created equal: the
design and perception of humanoid robot heads. In: Proceedings of the 4th conference on
designing interactive systems: processes, practices, methods, and techniques. pp 321–326
390
X. Dou and C.-F. Wu

28. Hinds PJ, Roberts TL, Jones H (2004) Whose job is it anyway? A study of human-robot
interaction in a collaborative task. Hum-Comput Interact 19(1–2):151–181
29. Baraka K (2016) Effective non-verbal communication for mobile robots using expressive
lights. p 82
30. Dou X, Wu C-f, Lin K-c, Gan Sz, Tseng T-M (2020) Effects of different types of social robot
voices on affective evaluations in different application ﬁelds. Int J Soc Robot
31. Kirby R, Forlizzi J, Simmons R (2010) Affective social robots. Robot Auton Syst 58(3):322–
332
32. Hwang J, Park T, Hwang W (2013) The effects of overall robot shape on the emotions
invoked in users and the perceived personalities of robot. Appl Ergon 44(3):459–471. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2012.10.010
33. Kim H, Kwak SS, Kim M (2008) Personality design of sociable robots by control of gesture
design factors. In: RO-MAN 2008-The 17th IEEE international symposium on robot and
human interactive communication. IEEE, pp 494–499
34. Leite I, Pereira A, Mascarenhas S, Martinho C, Prada R, Paiva A (2013) The inﬂuence of
empathy in human-robot relations. Int J Hum Comput Stud 71:250–260. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ijhcs.2012.09.005
35. van den Brule R, Dotsch R, Bijlstra G, Wigboldus DHJ, Haselager P (2014) Do robot
performance and behavioral style affect human trust?: A multi-method approach. Int J Soc
Robot. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369-014-0231-5
36. Mara M, Appel M (2015) Effects of lateral head tilt on user perceptions of humanoid and
android robots. Comput Hum Behav. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2014.09.025
37. Tay B, Jung Y, Park T (2014) When stereotypes meet robots: the double-edge sword of robot
gender and personality in human–robot interaction. Comput Hum Behav 38:75–84
38. Stanton CJ, Stevens CJ (2017) Don’t stare at me: the impact of a humanoid robot’s gaze upon
trust during a cooperative human–robot visual task. Int J Soc Robot. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12369-017-0422-y
39. Ghazali AS, Ham J, Barakova E, Markopoulos P (2018) The inﬂuence of social cues in
persuasive social robots on psychological reactance and compliance. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chb.2018.05.016
40. Robins B, Dautenhahn K, te Boerkhorst R, Billard A Robots as assistive technology—does
appearance matter? RO-MAN 2004. 13th IEEE international workshop on robot and human
interactive communication (IEEE Catalog No. 04TH8759). https://doi.org/10.1109/ROMAN.
2004.1374773
41. Walters ML (2008) The design space for robot appearance and behaviour for social robot
companions. University of Hertfordshire, Hertfordshire, UK
42. Mori M, MacDorman KF, Kageki N (2012) The uncanny valley. IEEE Robot Autom Mag.
https://doi.org/10.1109/MRA.2012.2192811
43. Hanson D (2006) Exploring the aesthetic range for humanoid robots. In: Proceedings of the
ICCS/CogSci-2006 long symposium: toward social mechanisms of android science. Citeseer,
pp 39–42
44. Bethel CL, Murphy RR (2006) Affective expression in appearance constrained robots. In:
Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGCHI/SIGART conference on human-robot interaction.
pp 327–328
45. Mitchell WJ, Szerszen Sr KA, Lu AS, Schermerhorn PW, Scheutz M, MacDorman KF (2011)
A mismatch in the human realism of face and voice produces an uncanny valley. i-Perception
2(1):10–12
46. Mavridis N (2015) A review of verbal and non-verbal human–robot interactive communi-
cation. Robot Auton Syst 63:22–35
47. Apple W, Streeter LA, Krauss RM (1979) Effects of pitch and speech rate on personal
attributions. J Pers Soc Psychol. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.37.5.715
18
Relationship Between Human and Humanoid Robots
391

48. Chang RCS, Lu HP, Yang P (2018) Stereotypes or golden rules? exploring likable voice traits
of social robots as active aging companions for tech-savvy baby boomers in Taiwan. Comput
Hum Behav 84:194–210. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2018.02.025
49. Walters, Syrdal D, Koay K, Dautenhahn K, Te Boekhorst R (2008) Human approach
distances to a mechanical-looking robot with different robot voice styles. Proceedings of the
17th IEEE international symposium on robot and human interactive communication,
RO-MAN. https://doi.org/10.1109/ROMAN.2008.4600750
50. Crumpton J, Bethel CL (2016) A survey of using vocal prosody to convey emotion in robot
speech. Int J Soc Robot 8(2):271–285
51. Hellbernd N, Sammler D (2016) Prosody conveys speaker’s intentions: acoustic cues for
speech act perception. J Mem Lang. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2016.01.001
52. Hirano T, Shiomi M, Iio T, Kimoto M, Tanev I, Shimohara K, Hagita N (2018) How do
communication cues change impressions of human–robot touch interaction? Int J Soc Robot
10(1):21–31
53. Xu K (2019) First encounter with robot Alpha: How individual differences interact with vocal
and kinetic cues in users’ social responses. New Media Soc 21(11–12):2522–2547
54. Hill J, Ford WR, Farreras IG (2015) Real conversations with artiﬁcial intelligence: a
comparison between human–human online conversations and human–chatbot conversations.
Comput Hum Behav 49:245–250
55. Van Amelsvoort M, Joosten B, Krahmer E, Postma E (2013) Using non-verbal cues to
(automatically) assess children’s performance difﬁculties with arithmetic problems. Comput
Hum Behav. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2012.10.016
56. Baraka K, Veloso MM (2018) Mobile service robot state revealing through expressive lights:
formalism, design, and evaluation. Int J Soc Robot 10:65–92. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369-
017-0431-x
57. Broadbent E, Kumar V, Li X, Sollers J, Stafford RQ, MacDonald BA, Wegner DM (2013)
Robots with display screens: a robot with a more humanlike face display is perceived to have
more mind and a better personality. PLoS ONE 8. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
0072589
58. Darwin C, Prodger P (1998) The expression of the emotions in man and animals. Oxford
University Press, USA
59. Lang PJ, Greenwald MK, Bradley MM, Hamm AO (1993) Looking at pictures: affective,
facial, visceral, and behavioral reactions. Psychophysiology 30(3):261–273
60. Yang E, Dorneich MC (2017) The emotional, cognitive, physiological, and performance
effects of variable time delay in robotic teleoperation. Int J Soc Robot. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12369-017-0407-x
61. Ekman P (1982) What emotion categories or dimensions can observers judge from facial
behavior? Emotions in the human face pp 39–55
62. Breazeal C (2003) Emotion and sociable humanoid robots. Int J Hum Comput Stud 59(1–
2):119–155
63. Chidambaram V, Chiang Y-H, Mutlu B (2012) Designing persuasive robots: how robots
might persuade people using vocal and nonverbal cues. In: Proceedings of the seventh annual
ACM/IEEE international conference on human-robot interaction, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA, 5–8 March 2012. ACM, pp 293–300
64. Salomons N, van der Linden M, Strohkorb Sebo S, Scassellati B (2018) Humans conform to
robots: disambiguating trust, truth, and conformity. In: Proceedings of the 2018 acm/ieee
international conference on human-robot interaction. pp 187–195
65. Lohse M, Hegel F, Swadzba A, Rohlﬁng K, Wachsmuth S, Wrede B (2007) What can I do for
you? Appearance and application of robots. In: Proceedings of AISB. pp 121–126
66. Krauss RM, Morrel-samuels P, Colasante C (1991) Do conversational hand gestures
communicate? 61:743–754
392
X. Dou and C.-F. Wu

67. Dou X, Wu C-F, Lin K-C, Tseng T-M (2019) The effects of robot voice and gesture types on
the perceived robot personalities. In: International conference on human-computer interaction,
Orlando, Florida, USA, 2019. Springer, pp 299–309
68. Emery NJ (2000) The eyes have it: the neuroethology, function and evolution of social gaze.
Neurosci Biobehav Rev 24(6):581–604
69. Scassellati B (1996) Mechanisms of shared attention for a humanoid robot. In: Embodied
cognition and action: papers from the 1996 AAAI fall symposium, vol 9. p 21
70. Martínez-Miranda J, Pérez-Espinosa H, Espinosa-Curiel I, Avila-George H, Rodríguez-Ja-
cobo J (2018) Age-based differences in preferences and affective reactions towards a robot’s
personality during interaction. Comput Hum Behav. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2018.02.
039
71. Ayanoğlu H, Saraiva M, Teixeira L, Duarte E (2019) Human-robot interaction: exploring the
ability to express emotions by a social robot. In: Emotional design in human-robot interaction.
Springer, pp 163–183
72. Kim Y, Kwak SS, Kim Ms (2013) Am i acceptable to you? Effect of a robot's verbal language
forms on people’s social distance from robots. Comput Hum Behav. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chb.2012.10.001
73. Walters ML, Syrdal DS, Dautenhahn K, Te Boekhorst R, Koay KL (2008) Avoiding the
uncanny valley:
robot
appearance,
personality and consistency
of behavior
in an
attention-seeking home scenario for a robot companion. Auton Robots 24(2):159–178
74. Konok V, Korcsok B, Miklósi Á, Gácsi M (2018) Should we love robots?–The most liked
qualities of companion dogs and how they can be implemented in social robots. Comput Hum
Behav 80:132–142
75. Bartneck C, Kanda T, Ishiguro H, Hagita N (2007) Is the uncanny valley an uncanny cliff? In:
RO-MAN 2007-The 16th IEEE international symposium on robot and human interactive
communication. IEEE, pp 368–373
76. Kanda T, Hirano T, Eaton D, Ishiguro H (2004) Interactive robots as social partners and peer
tutors for children: a ﬁeld trial. Hum-Comput Interact 19(1–2):61–84
77. De Graaf MM, Allouch SB, Klamer T (2015) Sharing a life with Harvey: Exploring the
acceptance of and relationship-building with a social robot. Comput Hum Behav 43:1–14.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2014.10.030
Xiao Dou received her degree in the Graduate Institute of Design
Science at Tatung University. Her area of research interests
includes Human–Robot Interaction, interactive design and Digital
Media Art.
18
Relationship Between Human and Humanoid Robots
393

Chih-Fu Wu is a Professor in the Department of
Industrial Design and the Dean of Design College at
Tatung University. He holds a Ph.D. degree in the
Department of Mechanical Engineering from Tatung
University. His research interests include Human
Factors,
Service
Design,
and
Human–Robot
Interaction.
394
X. Dou and C.-F. Wu

19
Integrating Computer Simulation
and Social Theory for the Planning
and Managing Complex Problems
Leonardo G. Rodríguez Zoya
“The simple is always the simpliﬁed; it could not be thought
correctly except that it appears as a product of a simpliﬁcation
process.”
Gaston Bachelard
Summary
This chapter aims to provide some theoretical, methodological, and practical
guidelines for researching, planning, and managing complex problems. This
concept entails integrating the contributions from complexity theory in science
and the humanities while bridging the gap between the complexity sciences and
complex thought. We analyze the theoretical background associated with the
concept of complex problems as well as its methodological challenges. We claim
that integrating computer simulation and social theory is relevant for planning
and managing complex problems because it amounts to exploring the future. We
tackle this issue through a concrete social simulation platform called the SocLab
framework, and we apply it to a public policy case study. We describe creating a
conceptual, empirical, and computational model for an instance of public policy
L. G. Rodríguez Zoya (&)
National Scientiﬁc and Technical Research Council of Argentina, Gino Germani Research
Institute, University of Buenos Aires, Uriburu 950, 6th, Box 1, C1114AAD Ciudad Autónoma de
Buenos Aires, Argentina
e-mail: leonardo.rodriguez@conicet.gov.ar
L. G. Rodríguez Zoya
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Buenos Aires, Argentina
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
N. Rezaei (ed.), Integrated Science, Integrated Science 1,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65273-9_19
395

using SocLab, and we conduct a structural and simulation analysis. We conclude
with some theoretical and practical remarks on the implications of complex
problems for science and politics.
The conceptual map of complex problems
The code of this chapter is 01100101 01100100 01100101 01100001 01001101
0110111101110100 01101100 01101101.
1
Introduction
This Chapter aims to provide some theoretical, methodological, and practical
guidelines for researching, planning, and managing complex problems. The term
“research” relates primarily to the process of knowledge construction, whereas
“planning” concerns the relation between, on the one hand, knowledge and action,
and on the other hand, the present and the future. Finally, to “manage” means,
etymologically speaking, “to steer, to pilot.” Thus, a managing practice is a form of
intervention in a given process to guide it toward an end. It is important to note that
research is irreducible to science, planning is irreducible to planners, and the
government is irreducible to the State.
The concept of ‘complexity’ has been ﬂourished in both scientiﬁc and philo-
sophical discourse over the past four decades. Indeed, a vast number of theories
have embraced a complex approach, including complexity sciences [1, 2], complex
thought [3], complex systems [4], complex adaptive systems [5], complex
396
L. G. Rodríguez Zoya

structures [6], and complex networks [7], among others. However, the idea of
complex problems has received limited attention [8].
In light of this, we hold two theoretical claims. The ﬁrst one states that the
concept of complex problems is a theoretical and practical strategy for integrating
scientiﬁc, planning, and managing practices in a relevant manner to design and
create futures. The second one asserts that integrating computer simulation and
social theory is relevant for planning and managing complex problems insofar as it
is a strategy for exploring the plurality of futures.
The present Chapter is organized as follows. First, we offer a brief theoretical
overview of the concept of complex problems (Sect. 2). To that aim, we distinguish
two questions: what is a problem? (Sect. 2.1) and what makes a problem ‘com-
plex’? (Sect. 2.2). Second, we review some of the methodological challenges
associated with complex problems (Sect. 3). Third, we give a brief introduction of
the SocLab theoretical and methodological framework, an agent-based toolkit for
modeling and simulating social organizations (Sect. 4). Next, we illustrate how
SocLab can be applied to researching a complex concrete problem (Sect. 5). We
showcase the design of a conceptual, empirical, and computational model about a
case study in SocLab’s platform (Sect. 5.1), and we conduct a structural (Sect. 5.2)
and a simulation analysis (Sect. 5.3). Lastly, we zoom in on the theoretical and
practical implications of complex problems and their implications for science and
politics, and we highlight the contributions of social simulation for research,
planning, and managing complex problems (Sect. 6).
2
Theoretical Background of Complex Problems
Complexity theory developed out of two main inﬂuences, the ﬁrst is grounded on
natural and formal sciences (i.e., complexity science), and the second one has its
roots in philosophy and the humanities (i.e., complex thought). The dialogue and
communication between both approaches are not evident due to the very nature of
the language they employ: whereas the former mainly uses a formal language (i.e.,
mathematical, logical, or computational) to model and simulate complex systems,
the latter employs natural languages (i.e., non-formal, conceptual).
It appears that the 19th-century Methodenstreit (that is, the dispute over methods
that has conceptually opposed erklären/verstehen, explanation/understanding,
natural sciences/cultural, and historical sciences) re-emerges at the center of the
ﬁeld complexity. The controversy of complexity theory in science and the
humanities is re-ignited despite the transdisciplinary aims of both complexity sci-
ence and complex thought. The former aspires to discover common laws in com-
plex natural and social systems, whereas the latter seeks to understand organized
complexity in the natural and social worlds.
Furthermore, for complexity science, it is hard to deal with non-formal and
non-quantiﬁable aspects of complex systems, and the ethical and political issues
implicated in the construction of scientiﬁc knowledge are not among its concerns.
19
Integrating Computer Simulation
397

In a similar vein, complex thought has enormous difﬁculties inspiring empirically
grounded research and, even more, bridging the gap between discursive theories
and formal models.
From our perspective, the dichotomy between complexity science and complex
thought is unacceptable for theoretical and practical reasons. Theoretically, such a
dichotomy entails accepting the divorce between science and the humanities, nat-
ure, and culture, formal and natural language, which in the end leaves the Cartesian
dualism subject and object intact. In other words, on the one hand, complexity
science would amount to an objective form of research with a new kind of scientiﬁc
object: complex systems; on the other hand, complex thought would be a method of
thinking, a kind of mental strategy by the subject. At the practical level, integrating
these two complexity approaches would be essential to attain a better understanding
of concrete and real problems. Additionally, while the controversy between com-
plexity science and complex thought is relevant in the scientiﬁc and philosophical
debate, it is meaningless from social, economic, and political actors.
Having exposed the nature of this controversy, let us consider the following
questions: why and for whom do we conduct scientiﬁc research? Do we want to
research on complex systems to have an impact on real problems? If the answer is
“yes,” we need to move beyond the dichotomy of complexity science versus
complex thought. The concept of complex problems has been introduced and
developed as part of a strategy to tackle this particular challenge [9]. The category
of complex problems is a conceptual tool for integrating theoretical, methodolog-
ical, and practical contributions of complexity theory in science and the humanities
while narrowing the gap between complexity science and complex thought. To
theoretically develop this concept, we propose to tackle two questions: What is a
problem? And what makes a problem complex? Whereas the ﬁrst question enables
us to conceptualize a recursive loop between problems and problematization
(Sect. 2.1), the second question leads us to conceptualize three vectors of complex
problems (Sect. 2.2).
2.1
The Recursive Loop Between Problems
and Problematization
Let us begin by making three theoretical remarks. According to Herbert Simon [10],
a system can be described from two perspectives: either as a state or as a process.
On the one hand, the analysis of a system qua state focuses on the structure and
organization of a given system without considering the time variable. In other
words, a state is a moment in the history of the system. On the other hand, a
processual description characterizes the world as acted upon and providing the
means for the production and generation of objects, thereby implying a dynamism
or evolution over time [10].
Following the genetic epistemology of Jean Piaget [11], knowledge is both a
state and a process. For Piaget, to understand the structure of knowledge (i.e., a
state), we need to explain its process of construction genetically. For this reason,
398
L. G. Rodríguez Zoya

Piaget [12] states that there is the “fundamental necessity of a dialectic between
genesis and structures,” and consequently, “there is no structure without history
nor history without structure” [4].
We can connect the contributions of Simon and Piaget via the concept of re-
cursive loop coined by Edgar Morin [13] in order to highlight a type of process
whereby its products are themselves producers of the very process that produces
them. The loop between states (or products) and processes is useful for our pur-
poses because the notion of a problem can be thought as a double-entry concept:
problem-product and problem-process, which in turn allows us to differentiate the
noun “problem” from the concept of “problematization” (Fig. 1).
Often, we employ the noun “problem” to characterize states of affairs in the
world that we conceive as problematic, for instance, climate change, inequality,
poverty, corruption, pollution, and so on. This manner of speaking encourages
thinking about problems as entities or things in the world, such as facts or products
existing independently of us. However, it is less habitual to think of problems as
processes. The French philosopher Michel Foucault developed the concept of
problematization to tackle the question of “how and why certain things (behavior,
phenomena, processes) became a problem” [14]. The crucial point is that prob-
lematization is a process through which a problem comes into its own.
Integrating the contributions of Simon, Piaget, Morin, and Foucault, we can
formulate the following thesis: a problem is the emergent product of a process of
problematization. Furthermore, we can build on the epigraph by Gaston Bachelard
and state that a problem is always what is problematized, which could not be
thought correctly except when it appears as the product of a problematization
process.
Fig. 1 The recursive loop
between problem and
problematization
19
Integrating Computer Simulation
399

To conclude, problematization is a historical, social, and cognitive process
through which different discourses and practices employ diverse forms of knowl-
edge, power strategies, and value judgments to construct a situation, experience, or
phenomenon as a problem.
2.2
The Complexity of Problems
We propose three conceptual vectors to characterize a complex problem: the en-
tanglement of multiple points of view (Sect. 2.2.1), the entanglement between
knowledge, action, and ethics (Sect. 2.2.2), and the entanglement between past,
present, and future.
2.2.1
The Entanglement of Multiple Points of View
A complex problem is a problematized situation in which different views of
heterogeneous social actors are interwoven. The concept of point of view has
multiple theoretical roots ranging from the biology of cognition of Maturana and
Varela [15, 16] to second-order cybernetics of Heinz von Foerster [17, 18], to the
complex thought of Edgar Morin [13, 19], to the theory of situational planning
developed by Carlos Matus [20, 21], among others. These different theoretical
approaches share a common epistemological assumption: a dialectical link between
the observing system (the subject) and the observed system (the object). In other
words, the subject and the object, the observer and the observed are not two distinct
and separate entities, as in Cartesian dualism, but they themselves entail a correl-
ative and mutually constitutive process.
Theoretically, the concept of point of view is instrumental in capturing the
diversity of knowledge, values, beliefs, power relations, and action strategies that
each observing system (i.e., individual or collective social actors) mobilize to
explain and understand a problematic situation. Moreover, points of view are not
only diverse but possibly conﬂictive and even contradictory.
For this reason, the elucidation that a complex problem necessitates what Edgar
Morin calls “meta point of view,” that is, a meta-system capable of articulating
different points of view from multiple social actors involved in a problematic
situation (Fig. 2).
All in all, the second-order epistemology developed by Maturana, Varela,
Morin, and von Foerster enables us to state that a complex problem can be con-
ceptualized as an observed system that emerges from the entanglement of different
points of view belonging to multiple observing systems. The observed system (i.e.,
a complex problem) is neither a datum of reality, nor is it given in experience
independently of the observing activities of social actors that problematize the said
experience or situation.
400
L. G. Rodríguez Zoya

2.2.2
The Entanglement Between Knowledge, Action,
and Ethics
Complex problems are simultaneously problems of knowledge (epistemic dimen-
sion), problems of decision and action (pragmatic dimension), and ethical problems
(axiological dimension). The complexity of a problem is related to the impossibility
of decomposing and treating as separate epistemic, axiological, and practical
aspects. Figure 3 shows the double-bind between each term of the triad.
Let us explain this theoretical idea through a brief example. When we deal with
environmental damage, for instance, this situation calls upon us to intervene on
three separate but interrelated levels: ethically (we evaluate that something is
inadequate, undesirable, or unbearable based on a normative framework or a value
system); pragmatically (we think that something should be done in order to
transform or revert the damage); and epistemically (we want to know something
about the phenomenon). For the sake of brevity, let us sketch out a theoretical
characterization of each dimension.
First, the ethical dimension states that our value judgments shape both our
cognitive processes and our decision and action-based processes. This theoretical
position is embraced by a plethora of developments from multiple traditions, such
as the Pragmatism of William James, the Philosophy of Science [22, 23], the
Sociology of Science [24, 25], the History of Science [26, 27], Economics [28], the
Philosophy of Biology [29], Postcolonial and Feminist Studies [30], Social Psy-
chology [31], and Latin-American studies [32–35], among others. At the cognitive
level, ethical values intervene in the problematization process itself, since a problem
is something for someone in the context of a value system. Moreover, as genetic
epistemology has empirically shown, values shape the type of question a researcher
Fig. 2 Structure of a complex problem
19
Integrating Computer Simulation
401

formulates, and therefore, carry consequences for the demarcation of the empirical
domain of inquiry [36, 37]. Lastly, facts and values are entangled with complex
problems to not divorce factual descriptions from ethical reasoning, as Putnam [38]
has shown. At the practical level, ethical values are indispensable for deliberating
about and choosing between the different ends that social actors pursue. In other
words, we use our ethical values to design, compare, and choose between alter-
native futures to the present state of a complex problem.
Second, the pragmatic dimension concerns human action and decision in its
double-bind with epistemic and ethical reasoning. On the one hand, when we face a
complex problem, we want to act to know something and, recursively, we want to
know how to act and transform something. On the other hand, when we assert that
something is not right (ethical judgment), we make a call to action, such as
something that should be done (pragmatic judgment). Concomitantly, we move
from pragmatics to ethics when we reason we must act to build an alternative future,
which can only be deﬁned by some value system.
Finally, the epistemic dimension of complex problems can be summarized in
three key points:
• evolutionary complexity, a complex problem is a time-dependent and non-linear
process. Thus, the history of its component interactions is crucial to understand
its present structure; however, we cannot predict its future due to hard uncer-
tainty and nonlinearity;
Fig. 3 The triad of complex problems: epistemic, ethics, and pragmatic
402
L. G. Rodríguez Zoya

• organizational complexity, by organizational complexity, we refer to the inter-
connection of multiple temporal scales (past, present, and future), multiple
durations (short, medium, and long duration) [39], multiple spatial scales (local,
regional, and global scales) [4], multiple levels of organization (micro, meso,
and macro levels) [40], and multiple types of processes (physical, biological,
cultural, and social processes)
[41]. In this sense, complex problems are
‘complex’ because they are difﬁcult to understand. These features of complex
problems are closely related to Hebert Simon’s idea of a non-decomposable
system [10], Warren Weaver’s idea of organized complexity problems [42], and
Carlos Matus’s idea of quasi-structured problems [20]; and
• methodological complexity, as concerns methodological complexity, we argued
that the entities and processes of a complex problem cut across different disci-
plinary ﬁelds in such a way that the problem cannot be decomposed to be
independently studied by the simple addition of separate specialized studies [4].
To conclude, a complex problem is a problematized situation or experience that
is sought to be known and transformed because it is deemed undesirable. Knowl-
edge (to know), action (to do), and judgment (to evaluate) are interdeﬁnable terms
since the meaning of each can be speciﬁed by its relations to other terms.
2.2.3
The Entanglement Between Past, Present, and Future
Past, present, and future are concepts that bear on our representation of time. The
key question is how our conception of time relates to scientiﬁc and political
rationality. Following the groundbreaking constructive philosophy of Oscar Var-
savsky [43, 44], we can distinguish three scientiﬁc attitudes: rationalist, genetic, and
constructive. For the sake of brevity, we summarize them in Table 1.
The crucial point is that the complex problems approach calls for the integration
of three scientiﬁc attitudes. Let us express this in a more systemic language. On the
one hand, understanding the presence of a system (its current structure) involves an
inquiry into the system (its structuring process). On the other hand, acting upon the
Table 1 Three scientiﬁc attitudes: rationalist, genetic and constructive
Scientiﬁc
attitude
Type of
approach
Temporal
scale
Type of
structure
Philosophical
concern
Example
Rationalist
Static
Present
Structures
without
history
Being
Classical physics
Genetic
Processual Past
Historical
structures
Becoming
Evolution,
thermodynamics,
genetic epistemology,
genealogy, etc.
Constructive Strategic
Future
Construction
of new
structures
Foresight
Future studies, strategic
planning, system
science, and system
design
19
Integrating Computer Simulation
403

system to create an alternative future often implies a structural change; therefore, it
is important to understand the di-structuring and re-structuring process affecting
such a system.
Let us focus on the problem of the future. By Varsavsky’s philosophy, we can
differentiate three concepts: probable futures, possible futures, and desirable futures
(Fig. 4). In particular, a probabilistic approach to the future requires statistical anal-
ysis to describe a systemic trend, although this kind of analysis neither reveals other
alternatives to the current trend nor predicts a trend change. In other words, we cannot
project the current trend of a complex and non-linear system to understand its future.
On the other hand, a possibility-based approach to the future encourages a
conditional type of reasoning, i.e., questions such as what could happen if? An
analysis based on possibilities is important to make different visible alternatives to
an apparent situation, design different scenarios, and evaluate their feasibility.
Consequently, a possibilistic analysis of the future is crucial for planning and
managing complex problems.
Lastly, the idea of desirable futures entails a recursive loop between purposes
and values since, “whereas a purpose deﬁnes a goal or objective to be achieved,
values are necessary to choose and decide between different purposes that can be
evaluated as more or less desirables” [8]. For this reason, we claim that a desirable
future is an ethical-political concept.
To conclude, it is important to note that modern philosophy and science have left
us with a major contradiction about the future. On the one hand, modernity entails,
above all, a faith in human progress, that is, the idea that the future will be better
than the present through the development of science, technique, and reason. Con-
comitantly, the epistemology of modern science excludes the problem of the future
from the concerns of scientiﬁc rationality. In effect, science is a discourse about past
or present facts, not an ethical deliberation about the ends we want to achieve in the
future. The biologist, Jacques Monod, has explained this point with great clarity:
“the
cornerstone
of
the
scientiﬁc
method
is
[…]
the
systematic
denial
that « true » knowledge can be got at by interpreting phenomena in terms of ﬁnal
causes—that is to say, of « purpose” [45]. In doing so, modernity left science
devoid of theoretical and practical tools to deal with alternative futures.
Fig. 4 Three types of future of complex problems: desirable, possible, and probable
404
L. G. Rodríguez Zoya

3
Methodological Challenges of Complex Problems
The previous conceptualization involves methodological consequences for the
research, planning, and management of complex problems. A comprehensive
presentation of the methodology of complex problems is beyond this article;
however, we can provide a methodological overview of how to model complex
problems. Let us ﬁrst make an important remark: there is no unique and universal
methodology to tackle complex problems. Conversely, complex problems call for a
problematization method that integrates ﬁve basic questions summarized in Fig. 5.
We have deliberately used a metaphorical language to formulate the questions in
order to communicate the key ideas. Let us add that those questions can be
reformulated in different theoretical and context-speciﬁc languages (planning,
systemic, structural, etc.).
As shown in Fig. 5, each question implies a type of problematization about the
present, the past, the future, and the possibilities of a complex problem. Thus, each
of those types of problematization poses a methodological challenge concerning
explaining the current situation of a complex problem, the history of the present,
and how to design and construct models of desirable futures and assess possible
alternatives to the current situation.
Different methods can be utilized to tackle each type of problematization and the
key question associated with it, as shown in Table 2. It is important to emphasize
that the same method can be applied to explore more than one question. However,
as the third column of Table 2 provides more details, we suggest the main appli-
cations this method may have. The last column illustrates the type of model
emerging from the exploration of each key question.
Fig. 5 A method of problematization for modeling complex problems
19
Integrating Computer Simulation
405

In the following two Sections, we will direct our attention to the question
concerning the problematization of possibilities. Our central theoretical claim is that
integrating computer simulation and social theory amounts to a strategy for ana-
lyzing and exploring the possibilities of a complex problem. We will tackle this
issue through a concrete social simulation platform: the SocLab framework.
4
The SocLab Framework: An Agent-Based Toolkit
for Modeling and Simulating Social Organizations
In this Section, we ﬁrst show that SocLab is a way of integrating sociological theory
with empirical research through computational models (Sect. 4.1). Then, we present
the formal meta-model of SocLab as an UML class diagram (Sect. 4.2). Finally, we
describe the mathematical structure of the SocLab framework, focusing on the main
indicators for socio-organizational analysis (Sect. 4.3).
4.1
SocLab: A Way of Integrating Theoretical, Empirical,
and Computational Models
Let us ﬁrst state that SocLab can be deﬁned as a middle-range agent-based simu-
lation platform that integrates the three components of scientiﬁc activity postulated
by Hummon and Fararo [46]: theoretical, empirical, and computational. First,
SocLab is grounded on the formalization of the Sociology of Organized Action
(SOA) [47–49]. The SocLab framework enables the modeling of different types of
organizations (formal and informal), an analysis of their structure, and a simulation
Table 2 Complex problems modeling: key questions, methods, and types of models
Key
question
Key
question
Methods
Types of model
Where are
we?
Present
Situational explanation, qualitative
methods, quantitative methods,
participatory modeling, action-research
strategy
Diagnosis models
Where are
we going?
Present
Trend analysis, time series analysis,
statistical methods
Probabilistic
models
Where do
we come
from?
Past
Genealogical approach, historical-critical
analysis, evolutive approach, genetic
methods
Historical-genetic
models
Where do
we want to
go?
Future
Situational planning, constructive
methods, strategic foresight, scenario
planning
Models of
desirable future
Where can
we go?
Possibilities
Simulation methods, role-playing,
human simulation, feasibility analysis
Possibilistic
models
406
L. G. Rodríguez Zoya

of the behavior and interactions among the agents that constitute them. Its main
goal is to study the organization’s dynamics and the forms of regulation of social
systems. Second, SocLab provides a methodological strategy for using qualitative
methods and qualitative data for building empirical models of social organizations.
Finally, SocLab is a computational platform permitting the researcher to model the
structure and simulate the dynamics of a social organization. It is important to note
that SocLab consists in an intuitive user interface that requires no programing skills.
Nevertheless, a deep knowledge of the theoretical framework and qualitative
methodology is essential for using SocLab properly.
4.2
The Meta-Model of SocLab
The SocLab computational toolkit implements the formalized theoretical frame-
work as a meta-model (Fig. 6), an abstract conceptual structure that can be used to
create concrete models of a case of study using the empirical evidence produced
with qualitative methods.
A social organization can be deﬁned as a social game composed of “a set of
actors and a set of relations that are linked by the control and depend associations”
[50]. Actors are the main entities of a system, and they can be individuals or groups
(collective actors such as ﬁrms, trade unions, political parties, states, etc.). In
SocLab, an actor is someone that controls at least one resource, that is, something
needed to conduct an action. Actors mobilize resources in order to achieve SocLab’s
goals. Since resources are means of actions, in the SocLab framework, the socio-
logical status of actors is not granted to those who do not control any resources.
Fig. 6 The meta-model of SocLab as a UML class diagram [Adapted from [50]]
19
Integrating Computer Simulation
407

It is important to note that resources can be material (i.e., funding), immaterial
(i.e., skills), or cognitive (i.e., information). Thus, resources are objects of ex-
change, and they are the foundations of social relations. In other words, a relation
between two actors is not direct, but indirect; this means that the relation between
them is grounded on the resources being exchanged at any given time.
In SocLab, we do not have model resources nor goals (see dotted line in Fig. 6).
On the one hand, we investigate resources to conceptualize and model relations; on
the other hand, goals are frequently opaque for social actors. Therefore, we focus
our analysis on what an actor does and what he needs to achieve its goals: the
relations.
4.3
The Mathematical Structure of SocLab
The meta-model of SocLab can also be deﬁned as an algebraic structure [51]. Thus,
a social organization (i.e., a SocLab’s model) is a ﬁnite mathematical structure,
including:
• A ¼ a1; . . .; an
f
g, a set of actors;
• R ¼ r1; . . .; rn
f
g, a set of relations;
• Control: R ! A, a function indicating the actor that controls each relation;
• State: R ! SBr ¼ 10; 10
½
, each relation has a state whose value ranges over
the space; of behaviors [SB]. B_min and B_max parameters allow to modify the
lower and upper limit of the SB;
• Stake: A  R ! ½0; 10, such as 8a 2 A; P
r2R
stake a; r
ð
Þ ¼ 10; and
• Effect ()A  ECr ! 10; 10
f
g, the function quantiﬁes the capacity that each
actor obtains considering the state of every relation he depends on.
We are now able to distinguish between the structure and the state of a social
organization. On the one hand, the organization’s structure is a set of multiple
conﬁgurations, that is, a space of possibilities corresponding to the different types of
behavior that the actors may adopt. A social structure deﬁnes what actions are
possible to happen within the organization and which actions cannot take place. Let
us emphasize that the social structure of an organization does not determine the
actor’s behavior. It does not prescribe what the actor must do. On the contrary, the
structure deﬁnes a space of possible actions, and it depends on the actor to make a
decision and choose a course of action.
On the other hand, a state of the organization is “one of its possible conﬁgu-
ration, as a vector of all the relations’ state” [50]. An organizational state can be
deﬁned as a moment of a social process. In effect, organizations are social games,
and when a social actor plays the organizational game, he acts. By doing so, he
changes the state of relations, the controls, and, indirectly, also changes the state of
the entire organization.
408
L. G. Rodríguez Zoya

For the sake of analysis, two indicators require our attention: action capacity and
power. When an organization is in a state s, action capacity measures “how much
each actor has the means he needs to achieve his goals” [52], formally deﬁned as:
action capacity a; s
ð
Þ ¼
X
r2R
stake a; r
ð
Þ  effectr a; sr
ð
Þ
Power measures the amount of action capacity one actor grants to others, deﬁned
as:
power a; s
ð
Þ ¼
X
r2R;a controls r
X
b2A;b6¼a
stake b; r
ð
Þ  effectr b; sr
ð
Þ
If we consider the solidarity between actors, two additional indicators can be
considered, satisfaction and inﬂuence. When an organization is in a state s, “the
satisfaction perceived by an actor a is the sum of the action capacities of all the
actors, weighted by his solidarities for them” [53]:
satisfaction a; s
ð
Þ ¼
X
b2A
solidarity a; b
ð
Þ  action capacity b; s
ð
Þ
In a reverse way, “inﬂuence exerted by an actor a on another actor b is the sum,
over and beyond all the actors, of the impacts of the relations controlled by a,
weighted by the solidarities of b” [53]:
influence a; s
ð
Þ ¼
X
b2A
solidarity a; b
ð
Þ  power b; s
ð
Þ
5
Applying SocLab to Planning and Managing Concrete
Complex Problems
The object of study is the process formation consisting of a cluster of ﬁne fruits by
producers in the Patagonia of Argentina. The Cluster was the object of an inter-
vention of public policy, developed by the Ministry of Agriculture of Argentina,
whose goal was to strengthen the productive networks and to improve the com-
petitiveness of local economies. First, a research team conducted a qualitative
investigation through in-depth interviews with key participants of the Cluster:
productive, institutional, private, and public actors. Next, we interpret the qualita-
tive data in terms of SocLab’s theoretical framework to build a computer model.
For the sake of brevity, we summarize the modeling process (Sect. 5.1), and
then, we synthesize the main results emerging from structural (Sect. 5.2) and
simulation analysis (Sect. 5.3). For a full introduction to SocLabs’ methodology,
we refer to some key bibliography [50, 51, 54].
19
Integrating Computer Simulation
409

5.1
A Conceptual, Empirical, and Computational Model
of a Public Policy
First, we theoretically analyze the empirical evidence produced with qualitative
methods, and based on this analysis, we model a conceptual map identifying the
key actors and the resources and relations they control (Fig. 7).
Second, this conceptual scheme was implemented in SocLab as a computer model
(Table 3) integrated by ﬁve actors (in columns) and eight relations (in rows). In the
table cells, we show the stakes and effect functions of each actor. An effect function is
represented in a Cartesian coordinate system. The state of a relation [−10, 10] is
plotted on the x-axis, whereas the effect is plotted on the y-axis, that is, the actor’s
capacity to make use of the resource [−10, 10]. Grey cells indicate the relations an
actor control. As the reader can verify, the sum of the actor’s stakes is equal to ten. The
last column, called relevance, is equal to the sum of the stakes and expresses the
importance of each relation. A comprehensive analysis of the modeling process is
provided here [55]. The SocLab model and its methodological documentation are
available here: https://complejidad.com.ar/simsoc/FineFruitesCluster.
It is crucial to understand that a computer model is a numerical model; therefore,
the output of a simulation is always a set of numerical values. The modeler has the
theoretical responsibility to conceptualize those numbers and make the simulation
interpretable. To that end, it is highly important to conceptualize the meaning of
numerical values representing the states of the relations. Table 4 summarizes the
behavioral space of each relation grouped by class intervals with its corresponding
theoretical interpretation.
Fig. 7 Actors, resources, and relations diagram of Fine Fruits Cluster
410
L. G. Rodríguez Zoya

5.2
Structural Analysis
We have investigated some analytical properties of the Fine Fruits Cluster through
structural analysis. In particular, we have focused our attention on the global
maximum satisfaction and the maximum satisfaction obtained by each actor
(Table 5).
Let us make some crucial theoretical remarks. On the one hand, the global
maximum satisfaction (ﬁrst column) quantiﬁes the highest social satisfaction that
actors can obtain at the same time (228.2 points). The key ﬁnding is those pro-
ducers of Neuquén are by far the most unsatisﬁed actors with 23.8 points, whereas
dynamic and handmade producers have 52.1 and 44.9 points, respectively. This
result allows us to hypothesize that there is a structural conﬂict between producers
that may compromise the social feasibility of the public policy.
On the other hand, columns 2 to 6 show individual maximum satisfaction, that is,
the maximum satisfaction that each actor can achieve in a social organization (i.e.,
the social structure of the Cluster) . It is interesting to compare the maximum
satisfaction of producers of Neuquén (column 4) with handmade producers (column
6). When Neuquén producers obtain the highest satisfaction (64,8 points) , hand-
made producers obtain a negative satisfaction (−65.5) (column 4). Inversely, when
Table 3 Actors, relations, stakes, and effect functions
Coordinator 
of the 
cluster
Ministry of 
agriculture
Producers 
of Neuquén
Dynamic 
producers
Handmade 
producers
The 
relevance 
of the 
relaƟons
InformaƟon
.
.
.
.
.
5.5
2.0
2.5
0.5
0.5
0.0
CoordinaƟon
.
.
.
.
.
8.5
3.0
1.5
0.5
0.5
2.0
Funding
.
.
.
.
.
14
1.0
3.5
3.0
3.0
3.5
RegulaƟons
.
.
.
.
.
4.5
2.0
2.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
Commercial 
lobby
.
.
.
.
.
4
0.5
0.0
3.0
0.5
0.0
Quality and 
innovaƟon 
lobby
.
.
.
.
.
3.5
0.0
0.0
0.5
3.0
0.0
CriƟcal mass
.
.
.
.
.
9.5
1.5
0.0
2.5
2.5
3.0
Handmade 
lobby
.
.
.
.
.
1.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.5
19
Integrating Computer Simulation
411

handmade producers get maximum satisfaction (86.6), Neuquén producers get
negative satisfaction (−55) (column 6). Here we can make more precise our
structural conﬂict hypothesis: there is a deep conﬂict between these two types of
producers that may affect the sustainability of the Cluster.
Furthermore, in this scenario depicted by column 4, the total satisfaction of the
organization is extremely low: 3.5 points. For this reason, we can conclude that it is
structurally unlikely that producers of Neuquén can achieve their goals in this social
game. Conversely, when handmade producers’ satisfaction is maximized (column
6), the total satisfaction of the Cluster rises to 154.7. We can infer that the social
structure of the Cluster beneﬁts handmade producers more than Neuquén produc-
ers; thus, it is more likely for the former to achieve their goals.
Table 4 Behavioral space of relations grouped by class intervals and theoretical interpretation
associated
Interval
Interpretation
Interval
Interpretation
R1 Information
R2 Coordination
[−5.0;
−1.0]
Skimps on information
[−5.0;
0.0]
Rather passive position, does not
actively seek to articulate the
producers
[−1.0;
1.0]
Gives as less information as
possible
[0.0;
5.0]
Actively seeks the articulation,
cooperation and dialogue among
producers
[1.0;
5.0]
Gives enough information
[5.0;
10.0]
Shares information thoroughly
R3 Funding
R4 Regulation
[−8.0;
−2.0]
Weak funding
[−10.0;
−5.0]
Lack of norms
[−2.0;
2.0]
Moderate funding
[−5.0;
0.0]
Soft and ﬂexible norms
[2.0;
8.0]
Strong funding
[0.0;
5.0]
Moderate normative density
[5.0;
10.0]
Rigid and strict norms
R5-R6-R8—Three types of lobby
R7 Critical mass
[−7.0;
−2.0]
Weak lobby activity
[−9.0;
−4.0]
Balkanization of the Comarca:
the producers are atomized, and
they do not reach a minimal of
organization
[−2.0;
2.0]
Moderate lobby activity: the
actor seeks to defend its own
interests but tends to negotiate
[−4.0;
2.0]
Moderate level of organization: a
low acceptable level of collective
action in order to participate in
the Cluster
[2.0;
7.0]
Strong lobby activity: the actor is
prone to an inﬂexible position for
protecting its own interests
[2.0;
7.0]
High level of collective action
412
L. G. Rodríguez Zoya

Table 5 Maximum satisfaction
Global
Coordinator of the
Cluster
Ministry
Producers of
Neuquén
Dynamic
producers
Handmade
producers
State of the
relations
Information
9
9
9
10
10
8
Coordination
5
5
5
−5
5
5
Funding
8
8
5
−2
8
6
Regulations
3
1
10
−10
−10
0
Commercial lobby
7
2
−7
7
7
−7
Quality and innovation
lobby
7
7
−7
7
7
7
Critical mass
1
3
−9
−1
0
7
Handmade lobby
7
7
−7
−7
7
7
Max.
satisfaction
Coordinator
56.5
60.4
7.4
−20.2
40.5
53.9
Ministry
50.9
44.1
61.5
−2.9
20.6
42.0
Producers of Neuquén
23.8
−9.9
−34.9
64.8
28.0
−55.0
Dynamic producers
52.1
48.3
−0.9
27.3
52.4
27.2
Handmade producers
44.9
66.8
22.5
−65.5
37.5
86.6
Total
228.2
209.7
55.6
3.5
179.1
154.7
19
Integrating Computer Simulation
413

5.3
Simulation Analysis
Simulation on SocLab is the dynamic representation of the social game. Social
actors have bounded rationality and limited information; thus, they do not know a
priori (i.e., before the game) what the best way they should behave in order to
achieve their goals is. SocLab provides a trial-error and reinforcement algorithm
[56]. At each simulation step, “each actor adjusts the state of the relations he
controls in order to obtain from others an acceptable level of ‘satisfaction’” [50]. If
each actor obtains an acceptable level of social satisfaction, he or she does not
modify his behavior any longer (i.e., the sates of the relations he controls); thus, the
social organization reaches a stationary state and the social game is self-regulated.
When this occurs, we say that the simulation converges.
We have conducted one hundred simulations of 25.000 steps. The average number
of steps is 19996.62 before the convergence is reached. We are faced with quite a
complex social game, since “the length of simulations is a good measure of the
difﬁculty of actors to ﬁnd how to cooperate” [52]. The ﬁrst row of Table 6 reproduces
global maximum satisfaction, whereas rows 2 to 5 show simulations results.
Let us provide a theoretical interpretation of the simulation results. First, it is
relevant to compare the total satisfaction obtained by simulation (196.42 points)
with global maximum satisfaction (228.2 points). The social game reaches a sta-
tionary state near its structural possibilities since only 32 points of potential sat-
isfaction (228.2−196.42) is not obtained by the social dynamics of the Cluster.
Second, it is worth pointing out that the Ministry and handmade producers increase
their social satisfaction levels due to the social game. The Ministry’s satisfaction
increases from 50.9 to 59.18, and handmade producers’ satisfaction does so from
44.9 to 50.26. We can conclude that both actors beneﬁt from the social game since
they have the highest satisfaction. Third, producers of Neuquén get a drastic
reduction in their satisfaction (from 23.8 to 4.22 points); they are the losers of the
social game. This allows us to raise the question concerning the social feasibly of
the Cluster since the producers of Neuquén were the promoters of the initiative.
Table 6 The satisfactions and power of the actors (simulation results)
Coordinator of
the Cluster
Ministry Producers of
Neuquén
Dynamic
producers
Handmade
producers
Total
Global Max.
Satisfaction
56.5
50.9
23.8
52.1
44.9
228.2
Satisfaction
42.5
59.18
4.22
40.26
50.26
196.42
Power
76.3
93.0
29.5
18.9
15.5
Absolute
powera
76.3
117.0
34.5
18.9
48.2
Cooperative
powerb
76.3
105.0
32.0
18.9
31.8
aAbsolute power is the absolute sum of the contributions of an actor to the satisfaction of others
bCooperative power is the sum of the positive contributions of an actor to the satisfaction of others
414
L. G. Rodríguez Zoya

Concerning power, it is important to stress that producers of Neuquén are the
most powerful actors among the three types of producers with 29.5 points, whereas
dynamic producers have 18.9 points and handmade producers only 15.5 points. All
in all, although Neuquén producers have double power in comparison with hand-
made producers, this is not enough for the former to exert that amount of power in
such a way that results in a higher level of satisfaction.
6
Conclusion
The theory of complex problems challenges science and politics, the relation
between our strategies for knowledge construction, and our strategies for trans-
forming and acting in the world. Integrating computer simulation and social theory
is one way to enrich the research, planning, and management of practices involving
complex problems. The future of a complex problem is neither predicted nor dis-
covered; it is imagined and built. Thus, SocLab is a research strategy that helps us
understand the possibilities and limits of a social game. In other words, a SocLab
simulation model is not a predictive model but a possibilistic one.
SocLab may help us enrich planning and management practices. In concrete
terms, we can use the social satisfaction indicator provided by SocLab as a
quantitative measure of the social feasibility of public policy. This insight allows us
to formulate a theoretical hypothesis: if a social organization reaches a stationary
state and some key actors have a low level of social satisfaction, that social system
is not sustainable over time, even if the total satisfaction approximates the global
maximum satisfaction. To conclude, we envision using SocLab’s social simulation
as a strategy to enhance the research, planning, and management of complex
problems of contemporary societies and support the public deliberation process and
public decision making. A computer model, like any scientiﬁc model, should not be
used in a prescriptive and unreﬂexive manner, but as an instrument of thought to
improve our process of reasoning about the complexity of social life.
Lastly, if the Enlightenment pursued the conquest of the future based on its faith
in human reason, which was grounded on a worldview based on such values like
order, certainty, and linearity of time, the critique of rationality must not lead us to
abandon rational thinking altogether but to reconceive it. The idea of complex
problems encourages the emergence of a more humble and reﬂective reason that
gravitates towards complexity, uncertainty, and a non-linear conception of time. To
imagine and create new possibilities for social life, this is the challenge with which
complex problems impregnate our present.
19
Integrating Computer Simulation
415

Core Messages
• The future of a complex problem is neither predicted nor discovered; it is
imagined and constructed.
• Integrating computer simulation and social theory is one way to enrich the
research, planning, and management of complex problems.
• Social simulation with SocLab helps us understand the possibilities and
limits of a social game.
References
1. Waldrop MM (1992) Complexity: the emerging science at the edge of order and chaos
2. Mitchell M (2009) Complexity. A guided tour. Oxford University Press, Nueva York
3. Morin E (1977–2006) El Método. 6 volúmenes. Cátedra, Madrid
4. García R (2006) Sistemas complejos. Conceptos, método y fundamentación epistemológica
de la investigación interdisciplinaria. Gedisa, Barcelona
5. Miller JH, Page SE (2007) Complex adaptive systems: an introduction to computational
models of social life. Princeton Studies in Complexity, Princeton
6. Prigogine I, Nicolis G (1997) La estructura de lo complejo. Alianza, Madrid
7. Solé R (2009) Redes complejas. Del genoma a Internet. 1º edn. Tusquets, Barcelona
8. Rodríguez Zoya L (2019) How and why to model the complexity of thought systems. In:
Complexity
applications
in
language
and
communication
sciences.
Springer-Verlag,
Switzerland
9. Rodríguez Zoya L, Rodríguez Zoya P (2019) Problematización y problemas complejos.
Gazeta de Antropología 35(2):1–17
10. Simon H (1962) The architecture of complexity. Proc Am Philos Soc 106(6):467–482
11. Piaget J (1970) Psychologie et Épistémologie. Société Nouvelle des Éditions Gonthier, Paris
12. Piaget J (1979) Tratado de lógica y conocimiento cientíﬁco. I. Naturaleza y métodos de la
epistemología, vol I. Paidós, Buenos Aires
13. Morin E (1988) La Méthode III: La connaissance de la connaissance. Seuil, Paris
14. Foucault M (1988) On problematization. The history of the present 4:16–17
15. Maturana H, Varela F (1972) Autopoietic system. Facultad de Ciencias, Santiago de Chile
16. Maturana H, Varela F (1988) The tree of knowledge. Shambhala, Boston and London
17. von Foerster H (1974) Cybernetics of CYBERNETICS. University of Illinois, Urbana Illinois
18. von Foerster H (2003) Understanding understanding: essays on cybernetics and cognition.
Springer-Verlag, New York
19. Morin E (1990) Introducción al Pensamiento Complejo. Gedisa, Barcelona
20. Matus C (1987) Política, planiﬁcación y gobierno. Fundación ALTADIR, Washington D.C
21. Matus C (2007) Teoría del Juego Social. Universidad Nacional de Lanús, Remedios de
Escalada
22. Longino HE (1990) Science as social knowledge: values and objectivity in scientiﬁc inquiry.
Princeton University Press, Princeton
23. Putnam H (1992) Realism with a human face. Harvard University Press, Cambridge
24. Restivo S (1992) Science, society and values, 1º edn. Leigh University Press, Betlehem
25. Barnes B (1977) Interests and the growth of knowledge. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London
416
L. G. Rodríguez Zoya

26. Solís C (1994) Razones e intereses. La historia de la ciencia después de Kuhn, Paidós,
Barcelona
27. Solís C (1998) Alta tensión: ﬁlosofía, sociología e historia de la ciencia. Paidós, Barcelona
28. Sen A (1987) On ethics and economics. Basil Blackwell, Oxford
29. Monod J (1970) El Azar y la Necesidad. Ensayo sobre la ﬁlosofía natural de la biología
moderna, 2000 edn. Tusquets, Barcelona
30. Harding S (2006) Science and Social Inequality. Feminist and Postcolonial Issues. University
of Illinois Press, Chicago
31. Moscovici S (2001) Social representations. New York University Press, New York
32. Herrera A (1972) Ciencia y política en América Latina. Siglo 19I, Buenos Aires
33. Herrera A, Scolnick HD, Chichilnisky G, Gallopin GC, Hardoy JE, Mosovich D, Oteiza E,
Romero Brest GLd, Suarez CE, Talavera L (2004) Catastrofe o nueva sociedad? Modelo
mundial latinoamericano 30 años despues. Instituto Internacional de Medio Ambiente y
Desarrollo, Buenos Aires
34. Varsavsky O (1971) Proyectos nacionales. Planteo y estudios de viabilidad. Ediciones
periferia, Buenos Aires
35. Varsavsky O (1972) Hacia una política cientíﬁca nacional. Ediciones Periferia, Buenos Aires
36. Piaget J, García R (2008) Psicogénesis e historia de la ciencia. Siglo 19I, México DF
37. García R (2000) El conocimiento en construcción. De las formulaciones de Jean Piaget a la
teoría de los sistemas complejos. Gedisa, Barcelona
38. Putnam H (2002) The collapse of the fact/value dichotomy and other essays. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, MA
39. Braudel F (1968) La Historia y las Ciencias Sociales, 1984th edn. Alianza Editorial, Madrid
40. Alexander JC, Giesen B, Münch R (1987) The micro-macro link. University of California
Press, California
41. Morin E (1973) El paradigma perdido. Ensayo de bioantropología, 1996 edn. Kairós,
Barcelona
42. Weaver W (1948) Science and complexity. Am Sci 36:536–544
43. Varsavsky O (1975) Marco Histórico Constructivo para estilos sociales, proyectos nacionales
y sus estrategias. Centro Editor de América Latina, Buenos Aires, Argentina
44. Varsavsky O (1982) Obras Escogidas. Centro Editor de América Latina, Buenos Aires
45. Monod J (1972) Chance and necessity. Vintage Book Edition, New York
46. Hummon N, Fararo TJ (1995) The emergence of computational sociology. J Math Sociol 20
(2–3):79–87
47. Crozier M (1964) Le phénomène bureaucratique. Seuil, Paris
48. Crozier M, Friedberg E (2010) L’acteur et le système. Seuil, Paris
49. Friedberg E (1997) Le pouvoir et la règle. Seuil, Paris
50. Sibertin-Blanc C, Roggero P, Adreit F, Baldet B, Chapron P, El-Gemayel J, Mailliard M,
Sandri S (2013) SocLab: a framework for the modeling, simulation and analysis of power in
social organizations. J Artif Soc Soc Simul 16(4):1–30
51. Roggero P, Sibertin-Blanc C, Maillard M, Adreit F, Vautier C, Sandri S (2007) Formalisation,
modélisation et simulation orientée agents des systèmes d’action concrets: approche complexe
de la sociologie de l’action organisée. Université des Sciences Sociales, Tolouse, France,
Rapport de recherche
52. Sibertin-Blanc C, Terán O (2014) The efﬁciency of organizational withdrawal vs commit-
ment. Paper presented at the Social Simulation Conference (SSC), Barcelone, Spain, Sept
2014
53. Adreit F, Roggero P, Sibertin-Blanc C, Vautier C (2009) Using soclab for a rigorous
assessment of the social feasibility of agricultural policies. Int J Agric Environ Inf Syst 2
(2):1–15
54. Rodríguez Zoya L, Aguirre JL, Roggero P (2018) Uso de SocLab para modelar y simular el
clientelismo político. Revista Mexicana de Sociología 80(3):639–673
19
Integrating Computer Simulation
417

55. Rodríguez Zoya L (2020) Applied social simulation for public policy. In: Aguilera
Ontiveros A, Abrica Jacinto N (eds) Exploration of computational sociology. El Colegio de
San Luis, San Luis Potosí, México, pp 121–154
56. El Gemayel J, Chapron P, Adreit F, Sibertin-Blanc C (2011) Quand et comment les acteurs
sociaux peuvent-ils coopérer? Un algorithme de simulation pour la négociation de leurs
comportements. Revue d’Intelligence Artiﬁcielle 25(1):43–67
Leonardo G. Rodriguez Zoya is a full-time researcher at the
National Scientiﬁc and Technical Research Council of Argentina.
He holds a double Ph.D. in Sociology from the University of
Toulouse, France, and in Social Sciences from the University of
Buenos Aires, Argentina. He leads a study group on interdisci-
plinarity and complexity in Social Sciences at the Gino Germani
Research Institute of the University of Buenos Aires. He is the
founder and director of the “Community of Complex Thought”
(https://pensamientocomplejo.org/) and of the “Latin American
Publishing
Community”
(http://comunidadeditora.org/),
a
non-commercial and open access publishing house.
418
L. G. Rodríguez Zoya

20
Rethinking Managerial Control
in the Contemporary Context
Jean-Yves Le Corre and Thierry Burger-Helmchen
“The goal of management control systems is to implement
organizational strategies. Organizations that are able to
efﬁciently meet their strategic objectives are the best performers
in the long run.”
Robert Newton Anthony
Summary
Classical managerial control theories mostly focus on performance indicators,
like the number of pieces produced. More recent theories focus on behavior
control. All theories are specialized in controlling a speciﬁc unit of the ﬁrm, i.e.,
the employee, the team, or a subsystem. Therefore, agency theory-based control
and system-based control have their limits. In this chapter, we advocate for a
more holistic approach that takes into account the culture of the ﬁrm but also of
the geographic region studied. Indigenous research is presented as a possible
way to improve managerial control and harmonize western and eastern
countries’ views on managerial control (we take several examples from North
America, Europe, and China). We also propose a general guideline for
conducting indigenous research on managerial control. Finally, we raise some
concerns about the risk of using control to spread speciﬁc ideologies in ﬁrms that
can be harmful in the long run.
J.-Y. Le Corre
Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University, Suzhou, China
e-mail: JeanYves.LeCorre@xjtlu.edu.cn
J.-Y. Le Corre  T. Burger-Helmchen (&)
University of Strasbourg, BETA, CNRS, INRAE, 61 Avenue de la Foret Noire, 67085
Strasbourg, France
e-mail: burger@unistra.fr
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
N. Rezaei (ed.), Integrated Science, Integrated Science 1,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65273-9_20
419

The concept map of the chapter
The code of this chapter is 01101001 01110100 01110010 01101110
01101100 01100001 01110100 01101001 01101111 01101110 01100101
01101111 01101110 01101110 01100001 01111010 01001001 01101001
01100001 01110100.
1
Introduction
Managerial control theories can be traced back to the ﬁrst writers of management.
In one of the ﬁrst textbooks about management, Fayol listed control and planning,
organization, stafﬁng, and leadership as one of the manager’s functions [1]. Today,
the focus on organizational control has become a large part of management science
and economics, commonly used in the subﬁelds of ﬁnance, accounting, manage-
ment information systems, organizational theory, and, more recently, innovation
and creativity management [2].
In modern theories of the ﬁrm, managerial control is deﬁned as the main
mechanism for strategic implementation. It is also a way to exercise management
power and organizational, political inﬂuence. More recently, managerial control
420
J.-Y. Le Corre and T. Burger-Helmchen

started to include cultural and philosophical perspectives, building a riverbed for
ideological approaches.
This chapter addresses those issues in the following sections. The ﬁrst part
highlights some of the standard theories of managerial control and their links with
classical theories of the ﬁrms. The second part investigates some cultural, philo-
sophical, and ideological approaches of managerial control. The last part of the
chapter calls for the development of indigenous research in managerial control to
overcome limitations to the actual global, standardized view.
2
Classical Theories of the Firm and Managerial Control
In her famous book on organization theory, Hatch introduces control by quoting
Tannenbaum [3, 4]. This author highlighted that classical theories of the ﬁrm often
base their control view on much older works. Thereby theories of the ﬁrm authors
show limited attention given to controlling (for most of them).
“Organization implies control. A social organization is an ordered arrangement of indi-
vidual human interactions. Control processes help circumscribe idiosyncratic behaviours
and keep them conformant to the rational plan of the organization. Organizations require a
certain amount of conformity as well as the integration of diverse activities. It is the
function of control to bring about conformance to organizational requirements and
achievement of the ultimate purposes of the organization. The coordination and order
created out of the diverse interests and potentially diffuse behaviours of members is largely
a function of control.”
Tannenbaum, 1968: 3
Theories of the ﬁrm incorporated managerial control based on the assumption that
different individuals have different reasons for participating in organizations.
Therefore, ﬁrms face the problem of ensuring conﬂicts of interest, personal agendas,
and self-interest. Since the organization is composed of individuals with different
interests, the manager must exercise control. Managerial control theory focuses on
mechanisms for controlling behaviors to ensure that self-interest is minimized.
This part of the chapter will introduce three control theories of organizations
linked to three theories of the ﬁrm. Control concepts can be applied at the indi-
vidual, unit, or organizational level, and are often applied to all three levels. More
recent theories take a “big-picture approach” when older theories are more focused
on a speciﬁc level.
The ﬁrst theory presented involves performance evaluation and feedback. This
method shares many characteristics with the description of the ﬁrm as a complex
system [5]. The second theory, called agency theory, is rooted in economics and
accounting [6]. This theory of the ﬁrm focuses on controlling based on contracts
designed to govern employees to serve organizational owners (such as sharehold-
ers) rather than their own interests. The third type of theories compares the market
and bureaucracy, groups, and clans as alternative forms of organizational control,
and raises the issue of using culture as a control mechanism.
20
Rethinking Managerial Control in the Contemporary Context
421

2.1
A System-Level Approach to Control
In this approach, the ﬁrm is depicted as a set of subsystems. The current state of
each system is compared to the desired state, and any differences between the two
will trigger adjustments. Organizational control processes aim to identify the dif-
ference between the current level and the expected level and trigger adjustments
when a difference is found. In this approach of the ﬁrm, organizational control
processes are a part of the strategy implementation.
The environment provides contextual elements that impact the development and
execution of the strategy globally at the ﬁrm level and each strategy for respectively
each subsystem. Strategy-related goals are run through the entire hierarchy until
each organization member understands its role in the overall strategic plan. Then,
individual-level goals deﬁned in the context of unit and organization-level goals
begin as activities that will cause the organization to achieve the desired output, of
course, provided that the strategy and goals have been fully considered and clearly
communicated.
Strategies and goals are only used to direct the organization in a speciﬁc
direction. Actions that occur throughout the organization will implement and realize
the strategy. Therefore, strategists rely on members of other organizations to act in
ways that produce strategic goals (rather than pursue their own interests). To ensure
that these actions take place, management personnel have established a control
system to monitor and adjust the process of implementing the strategy. In this view,
the control system is consistent with the organizational target system, supporting
and encouraging individuals and units to develop in the direction of strategic
deﬁnition.
The challenge for the managers of each subsystem is to focus the attention of the
employees and to make clear links between goals and actions. This is particularly
difﬁcult in an unstable environment, known as the “VUCA” context where each
subsystem can react differently due to high volatility, uncertainty, complexity, and
ambiguity [7]. Setting goals or standards of acceptable behavior related to goals is
the ﬁrst step in developing control systems in such situations. The next step is for
measuring and monitoring compliance with goals and standards and providing
feedback. The feedback is based on the comparison between the actual performance
and the standard set and is communicated to trigger adjustment when a deviation
occurs. This requires two things. First, it depends on an understanding of the
technology used by those constrained by the control system. Second, the organi-
zational goals must be speciﬁc to the task to be controlled. If these two conditions
are not met, the deﬁnition of task control will be unclear, the control system will be
hindered by ambiguity, and employees and managers will lack a clear focus [8].
Once the goals and tasks are deﬁned in the whole system level, goals or standards
can be set to encourage activities to achieve the goals for each subsystem. Two
methods can be used for this: control outputs and/or behavior control.
Output control focuses on the results of task activities and depends on the
measurement of these results. Output control can be developed at the individual or
subsystem level. It is a simple piece counting system. In such a piece-rate system,
422
J.-Y. Le Corre and T. Burger-Helmchen

employees are paid for the number of products they produce in a given time. Of
course, depending on the ﬁrm’s aim, or the sector of activity, such counting
measures need to be adapted, but the overall logic remains the same. Quality can
also be the focus of output control. Calculating the number of defects for a single
product will be an example of a single level output metric focused on quality. When
applied to a subsystem, the output is deﬁned as the collective result of the work of
the set of individuals, for example, the number of products assembled by all
members of the subsystem.
When it is not easy to measure output at any level or in any subsystem, for
example, in teaching (output is new learning) or customer service (output is cus-
tomer satisfaction), behavioral control can often be used. Behavioral control
depends on knowing which behaviors will produce the required level of perfor-
mance. An example is the use of behavioral indicators (such as proven knowledge
or enthusiasm for the subject) to evaluate teaching. When such indicators are
known, behavior control can be performed. However, when it comes to teaching,
output measures and behavior measures have their own limits [9, 10].
There are many problems that frustrate the design and implementation of per-
formance evaluation systems, among which the most important is ambiguity.
Ambiguity makes certain organizational activities extremely difﬁcult to measure
behavior or output metrics. Creativity and innovation are examples. As we all
know, the output here is difﬁcult to measure because it takes a long time to identify
ideas, innovative solutions, or designs [11]. Behavior is also difﬁcult to identify
because the deﬁnition of appropriate behavior changes with each new customer,
product, problem, or situation. However, years of research have made some pro-
gress in controlling creativity and innovation, and its emergence is generally
regarded as an inspirational problem [12].
In situations where it is difﬁcult to deﬁne the output being ambiguous about
appropriate behavior, uncertainty may cause managers to use the control system
inappropriately. That is, the uncertainty that cannot control output or behavior can
ironically lead to stronger expectations for these controls [13]. For example, in an
R&D laboratory, everyone generally admits that the time spent in the laboratory is
not more important than the lack of observable inspiration or creativity. However,
time in the laboratory can be used to evaluate performance, as this is the only
objective indicator available [14]. The result of this approach is an overemphasis on
what really matters. By emphasizing all aspects of work behavior, the control
system can control all aspects of work behavior, and the control system may impair
the required performance [15].
Another problem with performance evaluation systems is that they are prone to
negative reactions among people under control. For example, there is an intention to
ﬁnd a way to meet the needs of the system. The control subject can achieve this
goal by focusing only on the measured content and ignoring the underlying goals of
the system. No set of measures can capture all aspects of strategy and goals equally
well. If measures become the focus of activities, other aspects of performance will
also be affected [16].
20
Rethinking Managerial Control in the Contemporary Context
423

Unit-level control usually depends on converting unit goals into ﬁnancial goals
like budgets [17, 18]. It determines the number of resources that the unit will use to
carry out its work. The budget allows managers to know what resources will be
available to achieve the set goals in a given period and to monitor the performance
of the budget period by comparing actual costs with budget costs. In many orga-
nizations, statistical reports tailored to the performance of a particular unit are used
to provide feedback on this information to the unit, which then makes
self-adjustment. The report focuses on information such as output, quality control
data, and other unit-level results.
2.2
Control in Agency Theory
In agency theory, the organization’s control issues are viewed from the perspective
of the organization owner (investor) and external stakeholders (such as under-
writers, creditors, and potential investors). The relationship between the owner
(called the principal) and the manager (called the agent) is the core issue of the
theory [19].
Managers are called agents to indicate that they should act for the client’s
interests when acting on behalf of the client, not for their own beneﬁt. The agency
problem involves the risk that the agency will serve its own interests rather than
those of the principal. Agency theory focuses on the way of controlling the
self-service behavior of the agency to ensure the protection of the principal’s
interests. Although agency theorists explain agency problems based on the rela-
tionship between company owners and managers who hire them to act on their
behalf, the theory can be generalized to the relationship between lower-level
management and its subordinates [9].
In agency theory, the issue of the divergence of interests is resolved through the
conclusion of a contract, so that the agent’s own interests are consistent with those
of the principal. The contract stipulates measures and promises rewards so that
agents will serve their own interests when meeting contract requirements. This is
done by providing rewards that the agent considers desirable, and building these
rewards based on activities that serve the interests of the principal. Therefore, the
issue of the divergence of interests between the principal and the agent is dealt
through a contract, and the principal delegates the work to their agent through the
contract at the agreed price [20]. The principal and the agent sign the contract to act
on their behalf because they cannot or do not want to be present all the time to
protect their own interests. However, because no one was present, the agents who
were unwilling to perform their duties in a completely responsible manner were
willing to accept opportunism. In other words, the agency theory assumes that it is
not always possible to rely on the agent to fulﬁll the agreement. They may avoid
performing duties, work, and responsibilities. In agency theory, this dilemma is
explained based on information [21].
The ability of the principal to know whether his agent is evading depends on the
information available to the principal. A situation of complete information indicates
424
J.-Y. Le Corre and T. Burger-Helmchen

that the principal knows whether their agent is right. When possible, direct
observation can provide complete information, but it takes much time, so that the
client may wish to operate the organization personally. Also, because management
involves many unobservable aspects, direct observation may not be possible.
Incomplete information means that agents may or may not be caught, so they will
face the temptation to minimize efforts [22].
From the perspective of agency theory, the question of whether to choose
behavior or result control is a cost issue related to collecting the required infor-
mation. This information needs to minimize the agent’s chance of evasion.
Behavioral control requires the use of additional management to perform such
activities, or the development of information systems (such as cost accounting,
budgeting, and formal reporting). Without conventional technology, management
and information systems will be more difﬁcult to develop and more expensive to
use [23].
As behavioral control becomes less feasible, output control becomes more
attractive. When it is easy to measure the output (for example, the number of
shipments), the cost of output control is the lowest, but if it is difﬁcult to measure
the output (for example, morale and quality are as important as the production
quantity), the attractiveness of the output control will be reduced. When an orga-
nization faces an uncertain future, output also becomes problematic. In other words,
agents only partially determine the results of their organization, technology, and
environment, and are also partially responsible. Because the control of results keeps
agents accountable for unforeseen circumstances, results measurement forces them
to assume some related risks.
Several authors suggest that organizations can adopt multiple control strategies
[2, 24]:
• The ﬁrst is to design a simple routine job so that behavior can be easily observed
and rewarded;
• The second control strategy is to design a more complex and interesting job and
invest in information systems (such as budget systems, audits, or other man-
agement) to gain knowledge about behaviors and reward them based on those
speciﬁc actions;
• The third option is to design more complicated and interesting work, but use
simpler evaluation schemes (for example, proﬁtability or income) and reward
based on the evaluation results. In this strategy, risk rewards replace measures
and precise job design; and
• The fourth option no longer emphasizes performance evaluation but is based on
more holistic indicators. This is the idea of selection, training, and socialization
as an alternative to agency-based control systems. Organization theorist, William
Ouchi, described this idea.
The following section turns to this approach, championed by Ouchi, where
economic and ﬁnancial indicators become less important, and other forms of control
emerge.
20
Rethinking Managerial Control in the Contemporary Context
425

2.3
Controls with Markets, Groups, and Bureaucracies
For Ouchi [25], the problem of control can be expressed as “the problem of
achieving cooperation between individuals who have some different goals.” He
pointed out three different sources of control in an organization to solve this
problem: markets, bureaucracies, and clans (or groups). Table 1 summarizes his
views.
Market control is carried out through the competition. When an organization
participates in the free market, prices and proﬁts can be used to evaluate and control
its performance. In competition, price is regarded as an indicator of economic
performance because it is assumed that the comparison of price and proﬁt between a
group of competitors in a free market can assess their relative efﬁciency.
For example, those organizations with the lowest cost can afford the lowest
price, so they can compete most effectively. Similarly, organizations that consis-
tently provide products or services of higher value (e.g., higher quality and more
practicality) than their competitors may charge additional fees. Both of these
conditions contribute to the organization’s income. In either case, the performance
of the organization will be reﬂected in the prices that its products or services receive
on the market, which, in turn, will affect its revenue and proﬁts. In this way, the
market controls the organization because low proﬁts force the organization to
improve or suffer consequences [26].
By establishing a proﬁt center, market control can also be used at the unit level,
within a department of a multi-sector organization. This form of market control
simulates the market within the organization by allowing units to conduct economic
transactions. For example, this situation occurs when one department sells its
products to another department. In this internal market, transfer prices allow the
accounting system to calculate unit proﬁts in the same way as the entire organi-
zation. This is noted in some cases by allowing the department to purchase inputs
from external suppliers at prices where internal prices are not competitive, or to sell
products to external customers when these customers offer better prices than
internal customers, and so competition rules come into play [27]. When depart-
ments in an organization operate as proﬁt centers, senior management can compare
the performance of each department like shareholders. Then, top management
attempts to invest in its various departments to maximize the return of the total
portfolio of the business operated by the organization. In this way, organizations
can use the market to control their departments, which are competing for the highest
level of proﬁts [28].
Market control strategies are effective only when an organization or unit pro-
duces products or services that can be deﬁned and priced. Competition makes the
price meaningful. Without competition, the price cannot indicate internal efﬁciency
because it cannot be compared with other ﬁrms or units [29]. If there is no com-
petition and there is no market, prices will usually expand as in other monopoly
situations. When neither there is a competition, nor it is possible to simulate
competition effectively, another control mechanism must be found. When markets
fail, organizations often turn to bureaucracy.
426
J.-Y. Le Corre and T. Burger-Helmchen

Table 1 Principal characteristics of control by markets, bureaucracies or clans [3, 25]
Source
Mechanism
Assumptions
Forms
Examples
Focus
Market
Price/proﬁt
Competition/economic
exchange
Output control
Output schedules/budgets
Results
Bureaucracy
Rules/surveillances
Legitimate
authority/hierarchy
Behavioral control
Auditing/direct supervision
Actions
Clan
Commitment/socialization
Established
tradition/trust
Ceremonial or
symbolic control
Training/indoctrination/certiﬁcation
Values/attitudes
20
Rethinking Managerial Control in the Contemporary Context
427

Bureaucracy relies on a combination of rules, procedures, documentation, and
surveillance to achieve control [30]. The focus of the bureaucracy is the stan-
dardization of behavior. Bureaucracy is not a unit that rewards in response to
market forces, but rewards individuals for observing established rules and regula-
tions. Bureaucracy depends on the existence of a legal authority level for managing
bureaucracy. In the bureaucratic control system, the basic control mechanism
involves the close supervision and guidance of subordinates to their superiors.
Rules usually describe the process to be completed or the output and quality
standards to be achieved [31]. Supervisors and managers assess the degree of
compliance with rules and procedures. The difference between the rules and the
pricing mechanism of the market control system is that prices involve comparing
the value of the output generated by individual buyers or sellers, while rules are
more or less arbitrary standards [32].
The pricing mechanism does not require intervention, and according to the rules,
managers must set standards, observe performance, and evaluate it to determine
whether performance is satisfactory. This management function is expensive.
Therefore, market control is more effective than bureaucratic control. However,
because many organizations cannot meet price conditions, bureaucracy provides an
important and widely used alternative. Similarly, when it is difﬁcult to monitor due
to limited knowledge of the behavior that produces output, the form of controlled
behavior is not applicable [33]. If the results are difﬁcult to identify or appear
infrequently, the output control will also be invalid. In this case, rational means of
control through the market or bureaucracy will not succeed, and organizations must
rely on their social system to limit the dispersion of goals and chaos. In that
situation, a clan approach may be the solution (Table 2).
Cultural values, norms, and expectations provide the main control mechanism
for organizations that use clan control. Such a system requires socialization. Once
employees have socialized, they have internal control because they are committed
to the organization’s goals and practices [34].
Clan control depends on an implicit understanding of the values and beliefs that
guide the behavior of its members. This internal understanding helps guide and
coordinate the activities of the organization. The organization’s norms and values
deﬁne the limits of appropriate behavior, and there are reasons to sanction any
behavior that is not suitable in the system. For those members who often have to
sacriﬁce some or all of their own interests to become members of the clan society,
this also represents a high degree of commitment to the system [35].
Table 2 When to measure behavior when to measure outcomes [3, 25]
Knowledge of the transformation process
Perfect
Imperfect
Ability to measure outputs
High
Behavior or outcome control
Outcome control
Low
Behavior control
Clan control
428
J.-Y. Le Corre and T. Burger-Helmchen

Organizations with a large number of professionals are especially a model of
clan control because professionals are highly socialized about their professional
norms and expectations, and their professional commitment and attention to pro-
fessional reputation help control their behavior. However, professional commitment
may run counter to the interests of the organization, and when doing so, most
professionals will give up the interests of the organization to be loyal to their
professional interests [36]. Once this is done, the personal value will guide em-
ployees to do as expected and desired by the organization without the costs asso-
ciated with bureaucratic control mechanisms, so monitoring will largely be
unnecessary. However, the potentially harmful effects of such control strategies,
such as increasing the potential for collective thinking (i.e., unable to challenge
each other’s ideas and eventually embarked on an unstable path) and limited
innovation, need to be considered [37].
All organizations will have social and information systems, but their degree of
dependence and development on these systems will vary with the type of control
system they prefer to implement. Using organizational culture becomes a strong
control system when clans or groups have aligned the interests. The culture of the
ﬁrm becomes a control mechanism pushing sometimes much more than simple
work control. In those situations, some ﬁrms may be vectors of ideology with the
help of their control mechanism.
3
International Settings, Ideologies, and Control
Several authors proposed the clan control hypothesis because culture inﬂuences
behavior through norms, values, expectations, and beliefs. Managers can control
behavior by controlling these aspects of culture [38]. We can identify two groups:
those who do not believe that culture can be controlled and those who believe
managers can effectively control culture.
3.1
Managers Cannot Reinforce Control with Organizational
Culture
Cultural conceptualization often describes the organization as a homogenous entity.
When this kind of homogeneity is observed, it is often found at the top management
level. After many promotions, the managers who fully support the ﬁrm’s business
tend to be part of the culture. Therefore, if culture is the controlling force, its
clearest application is at a higher level rather than a lower level. Senior managers
are controlled by the ﬁrm culture, but the ability of senior management to use
culture to control subordinate members is questionable. Simply because lower-level
employees do not have the seniority, history, and background necessary to
understand the ﬁrm culture completely and to identify with it personally, therefore,
it is the culture that controls management, not the other way around [39].
20
Rethinking Managerial Control in the Contemporary Context
429

3.2
Managers Can Reinforce Control with Organizational
Culture
Many other researchers believe that managers can inﬂuence the values and beliefs
shared by the members of the organization and control their behavior accordingly
[38]. These theorists did not question the assumption that clan control is possible
but attacked it on moral and ideological grounds.
Ideology is a system of thought that allows one group to rule over another.
Cultural domination refers to the process of engineering consensus by developing a
system that conveys and supports ideological beliefs. It is this well-designed con-
sensus that raises false awareness and forms the focus of intense criticism of cul-
tural change programs, total quality management, business process reengineering,
and other popular management initiatives that use participatory rhetoric to gain
worker support [40]. For instance, family control is depicted as an ideology
designed to support the hegemony of managers coming from the same family.
Non-managers accepted and practiced this ideology, so they fell into a false con-
sciousness and gave up their own interests to pursue the interests of the family.
Some researchers interpret those organizations as neo-Marxism.
The standardization and coordination process helps routinize work activities to be
consistent with the organization’s strategy and goals. However, when managers
neglect the need for autonomy, organizations suffer from a lack of innovation [41–43].
3.3
Interaction of Ideology and Control
Recently, the concept of ideology has been grabbed by organizational scholars and
applied to management practice. Some researchers see ideology as a negative
approach to control. In contrast, others see the positive aspects of ideology; ide-
ology is a medium by which people make history a conscious actor, whether in an
organization or within a country [44]. In this sense, ideology should be regarded as
an important tool for change, rather than an obstacle like the traditional deﬁnition.
In an ideological organization, participation depends on a sense of identity (for
example, the positioning of a leader by a loyal follower). Members maintain par-
ticipation in ideological organizations because they believe in the organization’s
purpose, feel personal satisfaction, and enjoy increased self-esteem due to
participation.
The control itself is an ideology. In other words, one of the ways to maintain
hegemony in an organization is to support the dominance of top management
through a control structure. Therefore, the belief that control is essential to the
success of an organization gives powerful people the right to dominate. This belief
can be described as an ideology-control ideology. Reinterpreting all organizational
theories from an ideological perspective is one of the important topics put forward
by postmodern organizational theorists.
430
J.-Y. Le Corre and T. Burger-Helmchen

4
What Response Can Indigenous Research Methods Give
to Those Challenges?
The question of reviewing managerial control theories and reconceptualizing
management control models has fostered intense debate in recent years. Several
scholars have pointed out that the common body of knowledge on managerial
control currently available so far has not managed to embrace the complexity of
managerial control systems [45, 46]. Also, Otley [46] noted that managerial control
theory has long been criticized for its undeﬁned theoretical foundations, particularly
regarding rationality being a fundamental concept in managerial control theory.
One of the main criticisms of traditional managerial control theory is its incapacity
to provide a holistic, uniﬁed, and consistent model that embeds contradictions so
that they can be an integral part of the model itself instead of being a limitation of
the model itself. There is evidence in recent literature that the traditional view on
managerial control, based on a scientiﬁc perspective, would need to be confronted
against a more holistic and human-based view.
Despite many publications related to the Contingency Theory of Performance
Management Systems, the literature in management accounting has implicitly
focused on a deterministic and objective understanding of control systems instead
of acknowledging their complex and holistic nature. Studies remain compart-
mented, in particular, because the disciplines of organizational behavior, psychol-
ogy, and social sciences, in general, may lack the level of practicality required in
management disciplines like accounting.
4.1
Indigenous Management Research
Would alternative research methods, like Indigenous Management Research (IMR),
be able to path the way towards a more multidisciplinary approach and holistic view
of managerial control systems? How could those methods help embrace alternative
paradigmatic assumptions so as to rethink managerial control systems in the con-
temporary global context? By facilitating the emergence of new theories, IMR helps
to respond to increasing complexity [47].
Advocates of IMR argue that suitable methodologies are necessary to create new
knowledge where existing theories cannot provide a suitable response to a partic-
ular problem or phenomenon. Leung argued that IMR could contribute to the
development of universal theories. However, experts insist that IMR should be able
to follow some principles in order to achieve this role [48]. In particular, IMR
should address the need for the complementarity of qualitative and quantitative
methods to help develop and validate new concepts from empirical research and
should adopt a multi-level perspective to develop an understanding of the new
phenomena [49]. Jing and Ven emphasize the unique attribute of indigenous re-
search to reﬂect the uniqueness of local constructs and contexts [47]. Li et al.
(2012) stated that IMR must bring a local (emic) perspective as opposed to a foreign
20
Rethinking Managerial Control in the Contemporary Context
431

(etic) point of view and should refrain from building universal principles or
knowledge [50]. IMR also requires a relationship between scholars and practi-
tioners involving negotiation and collaboration in a learning community, promoted
by supporters of Engaged Scholarship. Van de Ven deﬁnes Engaged Scholarship as
“a participative form of research for obtaining the views of key stakeholders to
understand a complex problem in its particular context”, then doing research “more
penetrating and insightful” [47, 51]. He argued that emic inquiry can be as
objective and valid as etic research and provided several examples of engaged
indigenous research works to support his views.
IMR builds its foundation on qualitative research methods, whose methods and
procedures have been the subject of numerous publications in the late eighties and
nineties. Eisenhardt proposed a process of building theory from case study research
and argued that empirical inductive qualitative research is an especially appropriate
approach in new topic areas, where the resultant theory is “often novel, testable, and
empirically valid” [52]. In this perspective, investigators in theory-building case
study research should formulate a research problem and possibly specify some
potentially important variables, with some reference to existent literature. Quanti-
tative methods can be used as a research method only when concepts have reached
a certain level of maturity.
Indigenous Knowledge is often deﬁned as the opposite of scientiﬁc knowledge,
still contributing to scientiﬁc, theory-based knowledge by allowing to form new
scientiﬁc knowledge. Some authors emphasized the distinctive role of theory in
qualitative research as relating to the expression of a subjective reality more than
the clariﬁcation of an objective one [53]. According to Tsui, it is necessary to
distinguish between various sources of knowledge depending on their relevance to
the context and understand how they complement each other [54].
Indigenous methods of management research have been advocated to reduce
western-centric theories of management. Western centric theories are based on a
values system adapted to western societies. Therefore those approaches (or even
philosophies) gave actionable solutions to the phenomenon studied [48, 55]. Meyer
declared that “more management research should be able to make major contri-
butions, for instance, by explaining context-speciﬁc variables and effects and by
drawing on traditional Asian thought in developing new theories” [56]. Holtbrüggge
argued that management theories are not adequately reﬂected by traditional Western
and called for more context-speciﬁc research for drawing on indigenous thought to
ensure that new theories who better ﬁt to emerging markets [57]. Tsui argued for the
need for high-quality indigenous research in building the body of global manage-
ment knowledge, using inﬂuential studies on management in the Chinese context
[54]. In his view, both context-speciﬁc research and context-embedded research are
needed in international management knowledge and should comprise three types of
models: context-free, context-bounded, and context-speciﬁc. A multi-level approach
is required in building global management knowledge by combining several sources
of management knowledge with various degrees of contextualization, including
context-speciﬁc indigenous management knowledge. IMR would then play a critical
role in building global management knowledge.
432
J.-Y. Le Corre and T. Burger-Helmchen

4.2
What Is Indigenous Management Research?
Eisenhardt [52] indicates that “building theory from case studies is a research
strategy that involves using one or more cases to create theoretical constructs,
proposition and/or midrange theory form case-based, empirical evidence.” She
also stresses the unique characteristic of theory building from cases: “(…) emphasis
is in developing constructs, measures, and testable theoretical propositions makes
inductive research consistent with the emphasis on testable theory within main-
stream deductive research.” She notes the importance of creating theoretical con-
structs from empirical evidence and argues that investigators in theory-building
case study research should possibly specify some potentially important variables,
whether derived from existent literature or from practical concerns.
IMR can be deﬁned as “the study of a unique local phenomenon or a unique
element of any local phenomenon from a local perspective to explore its local
relevance, and, if possible, its global relevance as well” [50]. Those authors also
explained the role of IMR in relation to Western theories: “A study that examines a
local phenomenon entirely with a modiﬁed or expanded Western theory informed
by a local perspective, it may qualify as indigenous because the research con-
tributes to theory development by adoption of a local perspective.” They noted that,
however, “a study that examines a local phenomenon from the perspective of
Western theories or constructs cannot qualify as indigenous (…)” and proposed a
typology of IMR based on the nature of the local phenomenon and the source of
theoretical perspective, as well as an integrative framework of IMR.
According to the current literature, IMR has the following main characteristics as
compared to other qualitative research methods:
• The importance of integration of both positivism and constructivism in the
approach;
• The focus on context is essential because context-speciﬁc research allows “to
ground the phenomenon up close and in sufﬁcient detail to capture its unique
essence, and theory”;
• Once the indigenous construct elaborated, adapted quantitative measures should
be produced to allow empirical research; and
• The relationship between the researcher and the participants in conducting
indigenous research projects must be restated, arguing that researchers are most
likely to be able to advance current theory and practice through active Engaged
Scholarship.
4.3
IMR in Managerial Control Theory Today
Several authors noticed that Ancient Chinese theories of control might provide a
good example of the potential contributions of IMR in the ﬁeld of managerial
control. The researchers in [58] have provided evidence of practices of managerial
20
Rethinking Managerial Control in the Contemporary Context
433

control compared to Western theories, by using ethnographic methods, more than
grounded research, and through extensive content analysis and triangulation.
IMR might still be, however, in its infancy in the ﬁeld of managerial control.
Some may argue that this may be the result of excessive compartmentalization in
management disciplines towards accounting but also due to an excessive focus on
quantitative research in accounting research.
Table 3 provides an example of the different steps that could apply when
investigating managerial control concepts under the IMR methodology, based on
some recent research works conducted at the University of Strasbourg (BETA
Laboratory) by a group of researchers involved in managerial control.
5
Conclusion
This chapter reviewed some of the classical managerial control approaches and their
links with theories of the ﬁrm. We conclude this chapter by proposing a more
holistic approach based on local philosophies or ideologies that ﬁt better ﬁrms
Table 3 Research toward indigenous management
Project phase
Outcomes
Research methods
1. Theory grounding
(mostly qualitative) -
content-based
• Making use of ﬁeld notes to
record the impressions occurring
in the observed phenomena
• Crafting instruments and
protocols for multiple data
collection
• Developing a theoretical model
based on a priori constructs
• Creating data structure
• Empirical, inductive
• Multiple data collection
methods
• Qualitative data (surveys,
group observations, and
focus group session)
• Quantitative data
(quasi-experimental
methods)
• Triangulation of evidence
2. Theory testing
(mostly quantitative)
• Analysis of mediation or
moderation
• Developing hypotheses on core
relations of the theory of
peripheral elements or context
• Finding behavioral patterns
• Elicitation of individual
preferences
• Scenario-based experiments
and/or classroom
experiments
(computer-based)
• Statistical methods
3. Theory-building
(mostly qualitative)
process-based
• Analyzing within-case data
• Searching for cross-case patterns
in order to shape hypotheses
• Building internal validity, raising
the theoretical level, and
sharpening construct deﬁnitions
• Sharpening generalizability,
improving construct deﬁnition
• Multiple data collection
• Within-case analysis
• Triangulation of data
• Cross-case pattern search
using divergent techniques
• Iterative tabulation of
evidence for each construct
434
J.-Y. Le Corre and T. Burger-Helmchen

depending on their organizational culture. Many researchers pinpointed that west-
ern and eastern cultural differences in management should be overcome or com-
bined to obtain a more balanced approach to managerial control.
Core Messages
• Agency-based control theory cannot be applied in an uncertain world
where innovation and creativity are key.
• Many managerial control approaches are mixed with hierarchical control,
market control, and clan/group control.
• The temptation to use organizational culture or even national culture to
reinforce control is high in many countries.
• Several researchers claim that control must be adapted to local climate and
culture, giving rise to indigenous research.
• The
general
design
of
indigenous
research
is
close
to
classical
methodology.
• Indigenous researchers give much more importance to small signs and
weak signals, like researchers in complexity frameworks.
References
1. Burger-Helmchen T, Hussler C, Muller P (2019) Management. Vuibert, Paris
2. Bollinger SR (2020) Creativity and forms of managerial control in innovation processes:
tools, viewpoints and practices. Eur J Innov Manag 23:214–229. https://doi.org/10.1108/
EJIM-07-2018-0153
3. Hatch M-J (2018) Organization theory: modern, symbolic, and postmodern perspectives, 4th
ed. Oxford University Press, Oxford
4. Tannenbaum AS (1968) Control in organizations. McGraw-Hill, New York
5. Heraud J-A, Kerr F, Burger-Helmchen T (2019) Creative management of complex systems,
1st edn. Wiley-ISTE, Hoboken, NJ
6. Vimrová H (2017) Management control systems through the lens of the agency theory. In:
Procházka D (ed) New trends in ﬁnance and accounting. Springer Proceedings in Business
and Economics. Springer, Cham
7. Elkington R (2018) Leadership decision-making leveraging big data in vuca contexts.
J Leadersh Stud 12:66–70. https://doi.org/10.1002/jls.21599
8. Burger-Helmchen T, Llerena P (2008) A case study of a creative start-up: governance,
communities and knowledge management. J Innov Econ 1:127–148
9. Besanko D, Dranove D, Shanley M, et al (2017) Management stratégique : principes
économiques fondamentaux pour manager. De Boeck université
10. Lecorche V, Burger-Helmchen T (2019) L’inﬂuence du lieu dans l’acquisition de
compétences entrepreneuriales: le cas du séminaire BEST. La Revue des Sciences de
Gestion 299–300:13–26. https://doi.org/10.3917/rsg.299.0013
20
Rethinking Managerial Control in the Contemporary Context
435

11. Dechamp G, Szostak B (2016) Organisational creativity and the creative territory: the nature
of inﬂuence and strategic challenges for organisations. Management 19:61–88
12. Lill P, Wald A, Munck JC (2020) In the ﬁeld of tension between creativity and efﬁciency: a
systematic literature review of management control systems for innovation activities. Eur J
Innov Manag. https://doi.org/10.1108/EJIM-11-2019-0329 (ahead-of-print)
13. Adler PS, Chen CX (2011) Combining creativity and control: understanding individual
motivation in large-scale collaborative creativity. Acc Organ Soc 36:63–85. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.aos.2011.02.002
14. Ecker B, van Triest S, Williams C (2013) Management control and the decentralization of
R&D. J Manag 39:906–927. https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206311411507
15. Barros RS, Ferreira AMDS da C (2019) Bridging management control systems and innovation:
the evolution of the research and possible research directions. Qualitative Research in
Accounting & Management 16:342–372. https://doi.org/10.1108/QRAM-05-2017-0043
16. Davila A, Epstein MJ, Manzoni J-F (2014) Performance measurement and management
control: behavioral implications and human actions. Emerald Publishing Limited, Bingley
17. Cools M, Stouthuysen K, Van den Abbeele A (2017) Management control for stimulating
different types of creativity: the role of budgets. J Manag Account Res 29:1–21. https://doi.
org/10.2308/jmar-51789
18. Laperche B, Burger-Helmchen T (2019) Innovation: the Janus face of ﬁnance. J Innov Econ
Manag 29:1–5. https://doi.org/10.3917/jie.029.0001
19. Bowman EH, Kogut BM (1995) Redesigning the ﬁrm. Oxford University Press, USA
20. Hart O (1995) Firms, contracts and market structure. Oxford University Press, Oxford
21. Williamson OE (1985) The economic institutions of capitalism: ﬁrms, markets, relational
contracting. Free Press, New York
22. Cohendet P, Llerena P (2003) Routines and incentives: the role of communities in the ﬁrm.
Ind Corp Change 12:271–297. https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/12.2.271
23. Mackey JT, Deng FJ (2016) Examining the role of management control systems in the
creation of an innovative culture. Int J Innov Technol Manag 13:1640002. https://doi.org/10.
1142/S0219877016400022
24. Eisenhardt KM (1985) Control: organizational and economic approaches. Manage Sci
31:134–149. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.31.2.134
25. Ouchi WG (1980) Markets, Bureaucracies, and Clans. Adm Sci Q 25:129–141. https://doi.
org/10.2307/2392231
26. Geroski PA (1997) What can economics offer strategy? Int J Econ Bus 4:215–228
27. Anthony R, Govindarajan V, Hartmann F et al (2014) Manag Control Syst. McGraw-Hill
Education, New York
28. Langlois RN, Foss NJ (1999) Capabilities and governance: the rebirth of production in the
theory of economic organization. Kyklos 52:201
29. Hill CWL, Hitt MA, Hoskisson RE (1992) Cooperative versus competitive structures in related
and unrelated diversiﬁed ﬁrms. Org Sci 3:501–521. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.3.4.501
30. Baker M, Ruback RS, Wurgler J (2004) Behavioral corporate ﬁnance: a survey. Natl Bur
Econ Res. http://www.nber.org/papers/w10863.pdf
31. Winter S (1975) Optimization and evolution in the theory of the ﬁrm. In: Day RH, Groves T
(eds) Adaptive economic models. Academic Press, New York, pp 730–743
32. Weber J, Schäffer U (2019) Is ensuring management rationality a controlling task? In:
Schäffer U (ed) Behavioral controlling. Springer Fachmedien, Wiesbaden, pp 87–111
33. Barney J, Lee W (2000) Multiple considerations in making governance choices: implications
of transaction cost economics, real options theory and knowledge-based theories of the ﬁrm.
In: Foss NJ, Mahnke V (eds) Competence, governance, and entrepreneurship: advances in
economic strategy research. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 304–317
34. Hendry J (2001) Missing the target: normative stakeholder theory and the corporate
governance debate. Bus Ethics Q 11:159–176. https://doi.org/10.2307/3857875
35. Arrow KJ (1974) The limits of organization. WW Norton & Co, New York
436
J.-Y. Le Corre and T. Burger-Helmchen

36. Mintzberg H, Lampel J, Ahlstrand B (2005) Strategy safari: a guided tour through the wilds of
strategic management. Free Press, New York
37. Burger-Helmchen T, Llerena P (2012) Creativity, human resources and organizational
learning. In: Buenstorf G (ed) Evolution, organization and economic behavior. Edward Elgar
Publishing, Cheltenham, pp 155–184
38. Ashkanasy NM, Wilderom CPM, Peterson MF (2010) The handbook of organizational
culture and climate, 2nd ed. SAGE Publications, Inc, Thousand Oaks
39. Malmi T, Bedford DS, Brühl R, et al (2020) Culture and management control interdepen-
dence: an analysis of control choices that complement the delegation of authority in Western
cultural regions. Account Organ Soc 101116. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aos.2020.101116
40. Ghoshal S (2005) Bad management theories are destroying good management practices. Acad
Manag Learn Edu 4:75–91. https://doi.org/10.5465/amle.2005.16132558
41. Aas TH, Breunig KJ, Hydle KM, Pedersen PE (2015) Innovation management practices in
production intensive service ﬁrms. Int J Innov Mgt 19:1550055. https://doi.org/10.1142/
S1363919615500553
42. Neukam M, Guittard C (2018) Reach for the stars: knowledge sharing in international
organizations. J Innov Econ Manag 27:9–35. https://doi.org/10.3917/jie.027.0009
43. Neukam MN (2017) Managing the fuzzy front-end in multicultural teams. Eur J Innov Manag
20:578–598. https://doi.org/10.1108/EJIM-11-2016-0112
44. Weick KE (2009) Making sense of the organization: the impermanent organization. Wiley,
Hoboken
45. Demartini C (2013) Performance management systems. Springer publisher, Berlin
46. Otley D (2018) A complexity view of managerial control systems. J Manag Account
47. Jing R, Ven AH (2011) Indigenous management research in China from an engaged
scholarship perspective. Manag Organ Rev 8:123–137
48. Leung K (2009) Never the Twain shall meet? Integrating Chinese and western management
research. Manag Organ Rev 5:121–129. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1740-8784.2008.00135.x
49. Li J, Zhang Q, Wang X (2018) Leader humility and constructive voice behavior in China: a
dual process model. Int J Manpow 39:840–854
50. Li PP, Leung K, Chen CC, Luo J-D (2012) Indigenous research on Chinese management:
what and how. Manag Organ Rev 8:7–24. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1740-8784.2012.00292.x
51. Van de Ven AH (2007) Engaged scholarship: a guide for organizational and social research.
Oxford University Press, Oxford
52. Eisenhardt KM (1989) Building theories from case study research. Acad Manag Rev 14:532–550
53. Ahrens T, Chapman CS (2006) Doing qualitative ﬁeld research in management accounting:
positioning data to contribute to theory’. Account Organ Soc 31:819–841
54. Tsui AS (2004) Contributing to global management knowledge: a case for high quality
indigenous research. Asia Pac J Manag 21:491–513. https://doi.org/10.1023/B:APJM.
0000048715.35108.a7
55. Van de Ven AH, Meyer AD, Jing R (2018) Opportunities and challenges of engaged
indigenous scholarship. Manag Int Rev 14:449–462. https://doi.org/10.1017/mor.2018.28
56. Meyer K (2006) Asian management research needs more self-conﬁdence’. Asia Pac J Manag
23:119–137
57. Holtbrügge FA (2013) Indigenous management research. Manag Int Rev 53:1–11. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11575-012-0160-1
58. Rindova VP, Starbuck WH (1997) Ancient Chinese theories of control. J Manag Inq 6:144–
159. https://doi.org/10.1177/105649269762008
20
Rethinking Managerial Control in the Contemporary Context
437

Jean-Yves Le Corre
is a Practice Academic at International
Business
School
Suzhou
(IBSS),
Xian-Jiaotong
Liverpool
University, a Deputy Head of the Department of Accounting at
IBSS and Project Leader of IBBS@Data Mining Lab. Previ-
ously, he had worked in internal audit and controlling positions
in multinational corporations as well as in a large international
consulting ﬁrm. He holds a Engineering Diploma, a MSc. in
Management from University of London, and a MSc. of
Research in Management granted by the consortium of CFVG's
Doctoral Programme in Vietnam (Franco-Vietnamese Center of
Management). He obtained his PhD degree (Doctor of Philos-
ophy in Business Administration) from Bulacan State University,
Republic of the Philippines. He is a Sloan Fellow from London
Business School (U.K). His research studies aim to address
contemporary issues in the theory and practice of managerial
control in the modern context of globalisation, interconnected-
ness, multi-culturalism and digitalisation from Western-Eastern
perspectives.
He
is
currently
conducting
his
research
at
BETA-UMR 7522 CNRS. He is the Chief Editor of the weblog
http://www.bestofmanagement.com
Thierry Burger-Helmchen is professor of Management Science.
He is a researcher at BETA-UMR 7522 CNRS. He is the author
of more than 40 articles in peer-reviewed journals, and he
published several books (textbooks and research books) in
economics and management. His research topics are innovation
and creativity management (more information at http://www.
burger-helmchen.com/).
438
J.-Y. Le Corre and T. Burger-Helmchen

21
Innovation and Altruism: A New
Paradigm Defining the Survival
of Corporations?
Sophie Bollinger and Marion Neukam
“Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful, engaged citizens
can change the world. In fact, it always has.”
Margaret Mead
Summary
In 1920, Henry Ford claimed that “the company must make a proﬁt, or it will die.
However, if you try to run a business solely on proﬁt, then it will also die
because it will no longer have a purpose”. A century later, his statement remains
strikingly relevant. In this chapter, we highlight the urgency for ﬁrms to rethink
their corporate strategy and redeﬁne their position within society in a larger
context. We summarize how our understanding of performance has evolved
from a purely ﬁnancial standpoint towards global performance, emphasizing
corporate social responsibility. However, current evolutions, intensiﬁed by the
2019–2020 coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, reveal that this is no
longer enough in an increasingly complex and uncertain environment. Firms
must innovate, reinvent themselves to survive, and thus need highly motivated,
fully committed employees. Thus, we argue that ﬁrms should refocus on their
fundamental raison d’être. In a short overview, we refer here to the concept of
S. Bollinger  M. Neukam (&)
Université de Strasbourg, Université de Lorraine, AgroParisTech, CNRS, INRAE, BETA, 61,
Avenue de la Forêt Noire, Strasbourg 67085, France
e-mail: mneukam@unistra.fr
S. Bollinger
e-mail: sophie.bollinger@unistra.fr
S. Bollinger  M. Neukam
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Strasbourg, France
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
N. Rezaei (ed.), Integrated Science, Integrated Science 1,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65273-9_21
439

“purpose”, which has far broader implications than merely relying on a
commitment to society or a tangible ﬁnancial outcome. We ultimately argue that
actions count more than words. Only by exhibiting truly altruistic behavior,
shaping its organizational purpose, will a ﬁrm be able to offer an organizational
setting in which employees feel comfortable innovating and thus provide
offerings that meet society’s actual needs and interests. In the process, we reﬂect
on what the ﬁrm of tomorrow should look like.
Green Idea’s Machina by Flora
(Made by Flora)
The code of the chapter is 01111001 01101111 01010011 01100011
01110100 01100101 01101001.
440
S. Bollinger and M. Neukam

1
Introduction
As illustrated by the Edelman Trust Barometer [1], the population is continuously
losing trust in business, and 56% of all participants think that capitalism is doing more
harm to society than good. These tendencies should be alarming for our corporate
world as we understand it today. This is why, already a decade ago, Porter and Kramer
[2] published a well-known Harvard Business Review article advocating for a new
organizational paradigm based on what they called a “Shared Value Theory”. The
authors explained that the next generation of corporate innovation would be based on
companies which can generate not only economic value, but also value for society in a
broader sense. While this approach has attracted considerable attention from scientists
and practitioners, its shortcomings have also been pointed out. Some of these critics
address the academic foundations of the article, which did not mention existing
scholarship on corporate social responsibility (CSR), corporate social performance
(CSP), stakeholder theory, or social innovation [3]. Furthermore, Crane et al. [3] noted
the existing challenges for ﬁrms dealing with the trade-off between societal (and
environmental) requirements and ﬁnancial, proﬁt-oriented goals. Regardless, Porter
and Kramer [2] appear to have been deﬁnitely on to something, considering that since
then, a movement proposing more humanism-oriented management has emerged. The
idea there is to reconnect a company’s ﬁnancial performance with its ecosystem and
society in a broader sense by creating a common sense and shared value that take
precedence over organizational boundaries [4, 5].
In this chapter, we aim to contribute to ongoing discussions on CSR, social
innovation, or any other related topic. We focus on the long-term survival of ﬁrms:
for that purpose, the shared value theory of Porter and Kramer is a valuable starting
point. The optimization of production processes, with the famous example of Ford,
has given way to optimizing information and knowledge management processes
around the late 1990s. Today, scholars argue that only ﬁrms that can optimize their
innovation processes by continuously providing innovative solutions will survive
[6]. Cohendet et al. [7] described the “routinization of creativity” as the new
organizational requirement for long-term existence. Considering the current eco-
nomic context, innovation and creativity play a signiﬁcant role in ﬁrms’ strategies.
Global competition continuously intensiﬁes, and ﬁrms need innovation to reinforce
their competitive advantages, gain market shares, and expand [8–10]. Creativity
within ﬁrms is not only a nice-to-have feature of highly educated employees but a
fundamental prerequisite within the innovation process [11, 12]. Firms need to
focus on the creative potential of their employees and to create an environment
where individuals can be truly creative. In this chapter, we propose to take this idea
one step further. As Duval [13] explained, alluding to the Coronavirus pandemic:
“The year 2020 feels like the end of a cycle for innovation management”. As other
leading innovation management scientists [14–16], we will suggest here that the
time has come to humanize our innovation management system.
Hence, we argue that there is a crucial link between creativity and a ﬁrm’s
engagement towards society, shaping its “reason for existence” and thus its
so-called “organizational purpose” [17]. Creativity derives from the intrinsic
21
Innovation and Altruism: A New Paradigm
441

motivation of individuals to not only share technological knowledge but to engage
in a creative dialog with their peers [18]. At the same time, there has been a trend
whereby highly qualiﬁed employees ﬁnd the sole prospect earning a ﬁxed salary at
the end of the month no longer sufﬁcient to be completely dedicated to their ﬁrm’s
mission statement. Consequently, ﬁrms do not fully exploit their creative potential:
according to a global survey about workforce engagement, no more than 17% of a
ﬁrm’s workforce is entirely engaged in its activities [14]. Employees are looking for
a deeper meaning for their lives and searching for purpose in their everyday life at
work. If a ﬁrm is not able to align with this pursuit of personal, inner motivation to
contribute to society, talented people will be tempted to quit the ﬁrm, and their
knowledge will be lost [19–21].
However, ﬁrms are confronted with a critical trade-off: to what degree may they
engage in a societal activity, providing the opportunity for their employees to
self-actualize and remain competitive? What business model can they adopt? How
are they able to balance tensions between divergent socio-economic objectives to
remain competitive?
This chapter proposes a review of relevant streams in the scientiﬁc literature
providing several possible approaches for ﬁrms to tackle these issues. In the ﬁrst
section, we describe a shift from a purely ﬁnancial understanding of organizations
to a more global approach, considering CSR as a reinforcing factor for securing a
sustainable competitive advantage [22]. In the second section, we discuss the
current applications of CSR and its shortcomings.
This brings us in a third section to the social and solidarity economy (SSE) as a
potential solution. Firms operating in the ﬁeld of social economy have already
developed creative tools for ﬁnancial controlling that still enable innovation [23].
Nevertheless, the social and solidarity economy still has a limited impact on global
business, meaning that it does not offer a completely satisfying answer to our
trade-off. This leads us to dig deeper and consider a ﬁrm’s purpose, reaching
beyond proﬁt maximization and still providing a viable business model [17]. This
“reason for existence” enhances an employee’s motivation to engage in corporate
activities and fosters workplace creativity and innovation. Accordingly, in the
fourth section, we propose a shift towards a new managerial paradigm, combining
innovation and altruistic actions and shaping a trustworthy organizational purpose
beyond purely economic considerations. Lastly, we call for further empirical
research to study the viability of new human-centered business models, which seek
to alleviate socioeconomic tensions and reposition ﬁrms within society.
2
From Financial to Global Performance
In the past, the term “performance” has been reduced by scientists and practitioners
alike to its ﬁnancial dimension, meaning ensuring ﬁnancial proﬁtability. This
limited measurement of business performance is now considered outdated and
excessively simplistic. Johnson and Kaplan [24], later cited by Löning et al. [25],
for instance, argued that short-term measurements urgently need to be replaced by
442
S. Bollinger and M. Neukam

multiple non-ﬁnancial indicators, more suitable due to their better predictive value
regarding a ﬁrm’s objectives of long-term stability.
Following a similar trajectory, the concept of “global performance” emerged in
the late 1990s in the French Plan Commission [26, 27]. That institution deﬁned
global performance as the translation of sustainable development at the ﬁrm level
[26, 28]. This involves a multidimensional perspective whereby three dimensions—
economic, social, and environmental—are considered. This concept displays
afﬁnities with the work of Elkington [29], who developed the “Triple Bottom Line”
or “Triple P”, standing for “People, Planet, Proﬁt”, which could be interpreted as an
ideal model for integrated or balanced performance, aggregating the same three
dimensions of sustainable development.
By the 1950s already, CSR had become a widely used term amongst scholars
and professionals to describe this sustainable development at the corporate level.
CSR is deﬁned by the European Commission “as a concept whereby companies
integrate social and environmental concerns in their business operations and in
their interaction with their stakeholders on a voluntary basis” [30 p. 8]. The
concept emerged in the United States with Bowen [31] and was then further
developed in the 1970s [32, 33]. However, the topic of sustainability did not make
it into the political debate before the 1980s. CSR was ﬁnally included on the agenda
of the 2002 Earth Summit in Johannesburg, which large companies also attended.
While the American notion of CSR has roots in biblical precepts of charity and
stewardship [26], the European concept is geared towards responding to environ-
mental challenges linked to sustainable development.
Previously, most ﬁrms considered CSR purely as an opportunity to develop a
competitive advantage. A striking example is Patagonia, a Californian eco-designed
technical clothing company for mountain and surﬁng sports, founded in 1972. The
company adopted an activist stance, claiming that “our company exists to save the
planet”. Similarly, Vaude Sport, a German manufacturer of mountain equipment,
has been active on environmental issues since 1974 and is now part of the economy
for the Common Good movement, applying CSR as a differentiating factor.
Another example from the banking sector is the NEF, created in 1983, which also
offers a CSR alternative to traditional banks.
In many further cases, CSR is represented as a triangle [27] to highlight the three
pursued objectives: economic (wealth creation for all stakeholders through sus-
tainable production and consumption patterns), ecological (conservation and
management of resources), and social (equity and participation of all social groups).
The underlying principle is to balance these three dimensions to ensure that the
pursuit of one objective does not happen to the detriment of the other two.
From a similar perspective, Germain and Trébucq [34] deﬁne three slightly
different dimensions of what they call “global responsibility”. The ﬁrst is the
objective of social responsibility. This consists in combining the imperatives of
economic proﬁtability and compliance with legal obligations with the adoption of
ethical behaviors in line with social standards and expectations, as well as adding a
more voluntary and discretionary philanthropic component. The second is societal
sensitivity, measured according to four possible postures a ﬁrm may have towards
21
Innovation and Altruism: A New Paradigm
443

CSR-driven activities, summarized by the so-called “RCAP scale” (rejection,
contestation, adaptation, and anticipation). In a position of rejection, a ﬁrm is
opposed to any change. When it opts for contestation, it generally sticks only to the
legal minimum, whereas adaptation goes beyond that. Anticipation allows a ﬁrm to
secure an original position as a leader and avant-gardist. The third and last di-
mension proposes, from a more pragmatic perspective, a non-exhaustive list of
areas in which responsibility can be exercised. Depending on the period under
consideration and the sector to which the ﬁrm belongs, these may relate more
speciﬁcally to the environmental, social, shareholder, or product quality and safety
issues.
Considering the obvious tensions that arise between economic, social, and
environmental components, actually applying a consistent CSR strategy and, in
doing so, integrating it into a truly global performance is not easy for ﬁrms’
managers. Various authors underline the resulting ambiguity in management sci-
ence [27, 35]. Pesqueux [35], for instance, criticizes the vague notion of “perfor-
mance”, as well as the equally vague and polysemic qualiﬁer of “global”. Renaud
and Berland [27] go one step further by asking if measuring global performance
might not be a myth or a utopia.
In light of this and in order to retain this polysemic nature, this chapter uses the
deﬁnition of global performance suggested by Bourguignon [36, p. 934]: “the
achievement of organizational objectives, regardless of the nature and variety of
those objectives. This achievement can be understood in the strict sense (result,
outcome) or the broad sense of the process leading to the result (action)”.
In line with this deﬁnition, we apply a conventional approach to global per-
formance, in which actors need to compromise between divergent interests. Hence,
the three dimensions (economic, social, environmental) require a co-construction
between a ﬁrm’s various stakeholders.
In this sense, global performance in management science is rooted in stakeholder
theory: social considerations are no longer outside of the ﬁrm’s scope and become
part of its strategic reasoning [36]. Stakeholder theory goes back to Freeman [36],
who offers an alternative vision of ﬁrms and their ecosystem. In that context, a
stakeholder can be deﬁned as “any group or individual that may affect or be
affected by the achievement of the company’s objectives” [36, p. 46]. In stakeholder
theory, a ﬁrm’s ecosystem is not just competitive and commercial. One should
move beyond a purely economic vision of the company and consider socio-political
variables when conducting strategic analyses. It is not surprising that Freeman’s
work on stakeholder theory and the concept of CSR resonated simultaneously. The
ﬁrm’s stakeholders’ expectations constitute the starting point for deﬁning assess-
ment criteria for global performance. However, considering that stakeholders have
different levels of impact on a ﬁrm’s business, they play a more or less important
role in constructing a ﬁrm’s strategy. In combination with the so-called convention
theory [27, 37, 38], global performance should therefore be analyzed as a social
convention that is co-constructed and negotiated between the head of a ﬁrm and its
stakeholders.
444
S. Bollinger and M. Neukam

3
Current Trends of CSR and Global Performance
According to Porcher and Porcher [39], there are two conceptions of CSR at work.
On the one hand, we have an optimistic vision in which ﬁrms are embedded in
communities with the potential to address parts of social or environmental problems
jointly. On the other, a pessimistic vision sees the only responsibility of businesses
as proﬁt maximization [40]. In the latter case, the choice of investing in CSR is
purely strategic and marketing-driven.
Today, CSR has become a widely shared concept in the business community,
and nearly all medium and large companies have a dedicated department at their
disposal. This implies, however, that in most cases, CSR is not transversally
integrated into every department of a ﬁrm, but mostly localized within a separate
team, free agents that mainly develop actions from a marketing and corporate
communication perspective. This trend raises the question of the real values
underlying CSR reporting. Which actions are part of a marketing strategy, and
which ones reﬂect a genuine commitment to social and environmental interests?
In the 1950s, Bowen [31] already criticized CSR as not much more than a fad.
There are many examples of companies using CSR solely as an opportunity for
communication aimed at stakeholders; in that sense, a godsend allowing to gain
market shares without actually implementing concrete actions. Jay Westerveld, an
American environmentalist, coined the term “greenwashing” in a 1986 essay
regarding the hotel industry’s practices, accusing it of falsely promoting towel reuse
as part of an environmental program when it was a cost-cutting measure. Green-
washing can take many forms. A ﬁrm can, for instance, spend more money on
promoting environmental actions than on the actions themselves. Others use cor-
porate communication to promote a positive, green image to increase sales. This
communication is selective, presenting only one part of reality [41], making it
difﬁcult to distinguish between actual social engagement and a simple marketing
campaign. A recent example of this type of greenwashing is the fashion brand
H&M, which was accused of greenwashing in 2019 by the Norwegian Consumer
Authority for its ostensibly eco-responsible “Conscious” line because it did not
provide sufﬁcient information on the actual environmental beneﬁts of the clothes.
The fast-fashion brand disputed these accusations and highlighted sustainable
materials developed, such as Pinatex, as an alternative to leather. It is currently
working in close collaboration with the Norwegian authorities to adapt its adver-
tising campaign. In 2019, Ryanair was also accused of greenwashing in the United
Kingdom, and an ad was banned by the advertising regulator. The ad claimed that
the company had the lowest CO2 emissions among major European airlines. Still,
Ryanair denied the accusation of greenwashing, pointing to ﬁgures showing a 25%
lower consumption per trip than other airlines.
A recent Novethic study [42] underlines that with regards to the COVID-19
crisis, ﬁrms with a responsible and sustainable strategy are the most resilient and
resistant to economic and ﬁnancial shocks: “in its latest analysis published on
March 25, Bank of America Merrill Lynch notes that the most ‘social’ companies
21
Innovation and Altruism: A New Paradigm
445

outperformed the benchmark indices by 5 to 10 points on the stock market. This is
the case in the United States but also in Europe and Asia”. These ﬁgures support
the idea of an added-value of social commitment for ﬁrms. Speciﬁcally, in the
post-pandemic period, it is assumed that CSR will ensure a ﬁrm’s long-term sur-
vival [43]. As a consequence, some ﬁrms have even gone one step further by
committing to producing masks (1083, Razer, Kering, LVMH, Gucci, Melitta,
Labonal), hydroalcoholic gel (Ricard, L’Oréal, Dior, Bürkert) or by providing
equipment (Décathlon) for hospitals, medical teams and the public at large.
According to the Edelman Trust Barometer [1], ethics and social commitment are
indeed even stronger drivers of trust than technological competence. Amid the
COVID-19 crisis, economists such as Benjamin Coriat have still called for dis-
tinguishing between truly collective-oriented activities and what he described in an
interview with the French newspaper La Marseillaise of April 27 2020 as
“COVID-washing”, cynically using the crisis as an opportunity for brand
marketing.
Considering the latest criticisms about CSR, stigmatized ﬁrms, and those who
claim to have environmental concerns that are not reﬂecting their practices, the CSR
label has been dramatically losing value. According to Reich [44], CSR does not
exist, and ﬁrms are not able to make the requirements of CSR compatible with the
main thrust capitalist business, which, according to the author, is proﬁt. The concept
of CSR tends to be perceived as no longer sufﬁcient in light of currently mounting
global challenges. In that sense, Creuzet and Seghers [45] are also rather critical
about CSR: “The plasticity of capitalism has perfectly assimilated the codes of CSR
in order to empty it of its substance better and keep it out of regalian functions and
the production tool, far from the boards of directors where the profound mecha-
nisms of value creation and sharing are discussed” [45, p. 8]. The authors consider
reporting on CSR indicators as a “duty of compliance”, but few ﬁrms have taken
trustworthy measures for social or environmental actions.
In light of this discussion, we agree that CSR is no longer enough for society to
recognize the real value of a ﬁrm’s business. This leads us straight to the social and
solidarity economy (SSE), which provides an alternative approach to reconciling
social actions with economic considerations.
The SSE, a relatively recent sector of activity, currently accounts for around 10%
of GDP in Europe. Even if deﬁnitions vary across European countries—in some
cases, the term refers to the third sector or social enterprises [46]—most actors
agree that its principles are those of an economy based on the values of democratic
and participatory governance, of limited proﬁt and social utility. Service prevails
over proﬁt, and the social dimension is integrated into economic life. From this
point of view, CSR is also a topical issue for SSE [47]. Indeed, the values and
fundamental principles of this sector converge with most aspects of CSR. While
sustainable, human, and environmental development is key concerns for SSE
actors, they remain optional for other actors committed to CSR.
As a result of its ambitions, actors in this sector play a considerable role in social
and societal responsibility due to speciﬁc characteristics such as purpose, demo-
cratic governance, or limited proﬁt [48]. They are accordingly represented as the
446
S. Bollinger and M. Neukam

next generation of actors putting humans at the center of their business model while
relying on strong social values. Considering these intentions, this sector appears to
be well suited to resolving the tensions mentioned above between economic
imperatives and social commitment. However, even if CSR should be part of its
DNA, researchers have identiﬁed heterogeneous practices in the SSE sector,
ranging from social washing to genuine integration of values [48–51].
Consequently, despite its promising approach to a humanistic business model,
SSE might not have the capacity to act as a leading model for tomorrow’s economy.
Indeed, despite an increasingly growing place in the global economy, SSE does not
have the necessary level of political inﬂuence on a global economy, with limited
possibilities of economic expansion, creating a glass ceiling effect [46]. Indeed,
SSE has speciﬁcities that make it unlikely to spread across the economy. The reality
of SSE is little-known, and the sector is not a priority of the European economy.
SSE organizations are diverse. Their deﬁnitions vary, including from a legal
standpoint, and clarifying this seems necessary. Lastly, a change of scale requires a
shared collective ambition, a strategy of growth, and conquest. While the ﬁnancial
and health crises have been conducive to this, it is uncertain whether these con-
ditions can be met. According to Hiez [52], while SSE is a “potential source of
inspiration”, it has “never been realized”. Still, breaking this glass ceiling is one of
the main objectives of the French High Commissioner for Social and Solidarity
Economy and Social Innovation Christophe Itier, as he explained in an interview
for the French magazine Alternatives Economiques in 2019.
A response to the shortcomings of SSE has been the introduction of so-called
“mission-based enterprises”, i.e., ﬁrms that deﬁne themselves statutorily by having
a social or environmental purpose in addition to proﬁt-making objectives. This legal
framework proposes to go further than what CSR has been able to offer and may
enable society to overcome the limitations of SSE recognition. The ﬁrst ﬁrms with a
mission-based statute emerged after the 2008 economic crisis in the United States.
A new beneﬁt corporation, social purpose corporation, and public beneﬁt corpo-
ration
statutes
were
requested
by
shareholders
themselves,
and
the
ﬁrst
mission-oriented, hybrid companies were born. Their ﬁrst objective was to cir-
cumvent the ﬁduciary obligations speciﬁc to United Kingdom law, which lead to
maximizing ﬁnancial value for shareholders to the detriment of all other stake-
holders. The idea of these entrepreneurs was to develop a new form of capitalism.
Another example is France, where similar ﬁduciary obligations do not exist. The
“Loi Pacte”, signed on April 11, 2019, has raised questions about the deﬁnition and
role of business in the twenty-ﬁrst century. The law allows French ﬁrms to modify
their statutes to become a mission-oriented company. The mission is, in such cases,
enshrined in the statutes, and internal and external monitoring institutions ensure
that it is properly implemented. With these legal developments, proﬁt is no longer
the only reason for companies to exist. In 2019, the leaders of two hundred French
companies in the Business Roundtable network signed a declaration stating that it is
in the best interests of business to “promote an economy that serves all citizens”.
This echoed the much older ofﬁcial European Commission’s Green Paper, which
“recogni[z]es the business role for the accomplishment of sustainable development
21
Innovation and Altruism: A New Paradigm
447

and that companies can manage their operations in such a way as to enhance and
economic growth and increase competitiveness whilst ensuring environmental
protection and promoting social responsibility” [30, p. 30]. This has been con-
sidered as a “socio-productive” compromise by Chassagnon [53], who saw it as a
milestone in the movement towards “participatory capitalism”. The author argues
that while there have been advances in favor of SSE values, the associated goals
reﬂect purposes of “controlation”, a mix between control and manipulation.
Hiez [52] has noted a weakening of SSE as a result of these latest legal de-
velopments. As the author explained during a conference, there has been a
“muddling of the SSE” with the emphasis on “shining a light on virtuous capitalist
companies”.
The case of the French mutual insurance company MAIF is a highly relevant
example. Because of its mutualist nature, it is an ex ofﬁcio part of an SSE under-
taking. Despite this, the ﬁrm has chosen to commit to becoming a mission-oriented
company, therefore introducing internal and external control mechanisms to ensure
the mission is fulﬁlled. MAIF president, Dominique Mahé, has explained to the
press that this was a means to consolidate the company’s mutualist model: not a
change of direction but a challenge requiring a deeper commitment. He also
described this as a strategic decision, to be understood as a means of communi-
cating and asserting their commitments. “No doubt it is better to go ahead and say
it!” [54].
4
Purpose: The Key to Success for the Firm of Tomorrow
The example of mission-based companies underlines the trend towards focusing on
social and environmental purpose within business strategies. In contrast to CSR, the
organizational purpose of a ﬁrm is a concept that extends much further than merely
indicating its commitment to society, and cannot be reduced to a tangible ﬁnancial
outcome [55–57]. It deﬁnes a ﬁrm’s reason for existence and represents, therefore, a
“concrete goal or objective for the ﬁrm that reaches beyond proﬁt maximization”
[17, p. 327]. Hence, it rests on “a set of common beliefs that are held by and guide
the actions of employees” [56, p. 3] and represents a crucial motivational factor for
employees, ensuring a company’s success [58–61].
Even if market success cannot be directly traced back to a ﬁrm’s purpose via
speciﬁc ﬁnancial indicators, several authors still argue that purpose creates value. In
line with stakeholder theory, Freeman and Ginena [58] have contended that indi-
viduals are more than purely rational economic actors seeking proﬁt maximization.
This means focusing on a ﬁrm’s purpose creates trust between individuals and their
employer, and in a second step, enhances innovation and growth by providing
meaning [62]. It also fosters corporate identiﬁcation and improves job performance
[63, 64], enabling managers to arbitrate between divergent objectives of a ﬁrm’s
stakeholders by creating a shared vision [61]. All in all, it is argued that a strong
purpose based on social engagement provides the basis for long-term success [62, 65].
448
S. Bollinger and M. Neukam

Still, Henderson and Van den Steen [17] point out that ﬁrms are confronted with
a trade-off between the investment in social actions shaping that purpose and the
ﬁnancial health of the business. Focusing on the case of the Bodyshop, Husted and
Allen [66] illustrate that issue by explaining that ﬁrms need to balance social
commitment and ﬁnancial health in order to remain ﬁnancially stable. The company
sought to invest in social actions that met the needs of a wide array of stakeholders.
However, an increasingly tough international competition on an international level
forced it to take a step back and favor proﬁt over social commitment. About
“greenwashing” or “social-washing”, which reduce CSR to purely marking-driven
activities, Henderson and Van den Steen [17] have even argued that a ﬁrm’s pur-
pose will only be effective when the measures it takes are less ﬁnancially proﬁtable.
This is also the reason why researchers seeking a path towards humanistic man-
agement argue that performance measures should extend beyond ﬁnancial prof-
itability and also consider aspects such as responsibility and even altruism.
One solution to manage this trade-off has been proposed by Wolf and Mair [61].
Considering that, in most cases, the motivations of stakeholders are too different,
ﬁrms should focus on the concept of “small wins”. This implies that each small step
towards the bigger-picture goal should be celebrated, communicating to all stake-
holders that a speciﬁc action at hand allowed the company to align its activities with
its fundamental purpose, even if it might have a slightly negative impact on some
stakeholders (social purpose versus economic growth for instance).
According to the authors, this enables ﬁrms to transition towards a hybrid
solution between non-proﬁt and for-proﬁt, where the multiple interests of varying
stakeholders are balanced within a viable organization. However, mission drift has
been identiﬁed as an important risk for such social enterprises: the ﬁrm can lose
track of its initial social mission due to economic challenges.
In the next section, we attempt to demonstrate that economic viability and social
mission are not necessarily contradictory elements, but somewhat interdependent
variables within a bigger (symbiotic) picture, supporting innovative and thus
competitive ﬁrms.
5
Combining Innovation and Altruism to Stay
Competitive
The previous sections have shown that today’s societal challenges cannot be
addressed by politics or society alone and that ﬁrms urgently need to play their part
in this bigger picture [45]. The question remains of why exactly this purpose will be
so important in the future and of how to handle the trade-off between meaningful
activities shaping a ﬁrm’s organizational purpose and its ﬁnancial performance. As
an initial response to that question, Mattera and Baena [22] combined stakeholder
theory and innovation theory and found that CSR may indeed reinforce a ﬁrm’s
sustainable competitive advantage by increasing its innovation activity.
21
Innovation and Altruism: A New Paradigm
449

When Giget and Hillen [67] studied 200 leading ﬁrms, including those listed in
the CAC 40 and SBF 120, they found that innovation is the key element of ﬁrms’
strategies. However, the authors emphasize society’s striking dissatisfaction with
the latest innovations developed. In line with the innovation paradox identiﬁed by
the World Bank’s study, the authors claim that there has never been so much
technological progress that correlates so poorly with what society expects. They
argue that many indicators suggest that we are at the dawn of a new decade in
which innovation will have to refocus on people. The closing commitment of the
World Economic Forum of Davos in 2018 also went in this direction by declaring
that “the new imperative for innovation is social innovation. Today, society de-
mands, and even expects, that companies, both public and private, serve the goal of
real improvement in life and society”. A total of 190 countries and several hundred
companies have committed to embark on this path; the United Nations adopted 17
sustainable development goals in 2015. As in the case of global performance, the
measurement of innovation would no longer be performed using the technology
readiness level (TRL) as it has been widely used until today but integrates a social
dimension measured by a societal readiness level (SRL) [see for instance 68, 69].
In addition to a sustainable approach to business, innovation capacity has been
identiﬁed as a crucial element for ﬁrms’ long-term survival in an increasingly
unstable and globally dispersed environment [8–10, 70, 71]. Innovation not only
generates short term cash-ﬂows but also enables ﬁrms to launch new solutions
regularly and thus to create long-term stability [72]. Consequently, ﬁrms need to
focus on the creative potential of their employees and foster a suitable environment
[18, 73, 74].
Creativity is clearly no longer just a nice-to-have feature of highly educated
employees but a fundamental prerequisite within the innovation process [11, 12],
which leads to competitive advantage and its renewal [75]. However, creativity
depends signiﬁcantly on an individual’s intrinsic motivation to innovate [73].
Therefore, having discussed the societal, political, and economic challenges of CSR
and their implications for a company’s global performance in the previous sections
of this chapter, we now need to take a more in-depth look at the individual level to
fully understand how these challenges relate to creativity and by extension to
innovation.
When it comes to creativity, innovation management theories often rely on
insights from social psychology. Amabile [73] argued that the motivation of indi-
viduals to share technological knowledge and to engage in a creative dialogue with
their peers depends on intrinsic as well as extrinsic motivational factors. Managers
can directly inﬂuence extrinsic motivation. However, they need to carefully choose
adapted incentives to foster motivation considering that poorly chosen extrinsic
factors may even have a negative impact [76]. For instance, it has been proven that
purely monetary incentives reduce creativity [18, 77, 78]. However, when a ﬁrm
provides an environment where individuals experience the necessary psychological
well-being, are allowed to make mistakes, and can engage in an open dialogue with
their superiors, this has a much higher positive impact on their creativity [12, 18].
450
S. Bollinger and M. Neukam

Besides extrinsic factors, the intrinsic motivation of individuals to engage in
creative behavior plays a crucial role [18, 79]. Intrinsic motivation depends not only
on the work environment but also on the individual’s ability to bring passion, free-
dom, curiosity, self-realization, and a sense of challenge into their daily activity
[18, 80–82]. Consequently, having a meaningful job is a crucial prerequisite for
individuals to be motivated. The only prospect of earning a monthly salary is no
longer sufﬁcient for employees to be completely dedicated to a ﬁrm’s activity [20, 56].
Recent approaches of humanistic management, therefore, focus on a ﬁrm’s
purpose and advocate an alignment between the ﬁrm’s and the employee’s indi-
vidual purpose of increasing their intrinsic motivation and of creating value [2, 19,
62]. Those approaches identify a ﬁrm’s purpose as the missing link between an
individual’s motivation to engage in creative behavior and a company’s global
performance, including genuine CSR activities [17]. This is why Hollensbe et al.
[62] propose expanding motivation theory by integrating this dimension of a ﬁrm’s
identity and purpose. According to them, employees look for a deeper meaning for
their lives, searching for this purpose in their everyday work. From a similar
perspective, Aguado and Retolaza [4] propose to extend motivation theory by
adding a spiritual dimension referring to the concept of the transitive motivation of
Melé [83], shifting from an individual-centered approach to the consideration of
others.
This correlation between creativity, intrinsic self-centered motivation, and the
consideration of social well-being rely on an important part of research in psy-
chology in the vein of Snyder and Omoto [84]. In their research about altruistic and
egoist behavior, the latter concludes that even volunteers should be reminded not
only of their importance for society but also of the personal rewards of their activity
in order to remain motivated for their job. Vecina et al. [85] go one step further in
this direction by evidencing two important but yet distinct factors that managers
should consider: the commitment of employees to remain in their job and their
engagement to provide high-quality work. The authors found that to increase
commitment; managers should boost the identiﬁcation of employees with their
company by communicating on corporate values, objectives, and results. To pro-
mote individual engagement, however, managers are urged to design meaningful
tasks and establish problem-solving mechanisms. In other words, they should
enable employees to work in an inspiring environment. Encouraging creativity
positively inﬂuences individual well-being and self-determination and, therefore,
intrinsic motivation [81, 86, 87]. Gartenberg et al. [56] conﬁrmed that employees
perform better when their work is highly meaningful. Considering that the search
for meaning is a fundamental reason for existence in life [21, 88], the design of such
meaningful tasks gains a central role for managers to keep employees motivated.
The innovation process needs to give the individual a central place, considering
that the higher the intrinsic motivation, the higher the creativity and expected task
output [73]. However, Pirson [89] notes that management theories have ignored
human-centered approaches for a long time. Like Freeman and Ginena [58], the
author goes on to argue that a purely economistic rationale, where individuals are
considered as pure value maximizers, is no longer sufﬁcient to account for an
21
Innovation and Altruism: A New Paradigm
451

individual’s decision-making process. In combination with the earlier mentioned
transitive motivation, we conclude that managers should take steps to positively
impact not only extrinsic motivational factors through ﬁnancial advantages and
improvements to working environments but also the intrinsic motivation of their
employees by giving them meaningful work.
Speciﬁcally, regarding this last aspect, Sagnak and Kuruöz [21] introduce
altruistic behavior into the workplace. To them, altruism means that the “moral
value of an individual’s action depends on the effect of the consequences only on
other people, regardless of the individual’s self” (p. 448). This means that leaders
should display a truly altruistic behavior in the workplace to make work meaningful
for their employees. In this sense, altruism in ﬁrms entails performing activities
with no other (economic) end than contributing to society. This ties in with the
notion of transitive motivation, reﬂecting a shift of attention towards others within
management.
Crucially, such altruistic behavior needs to be authentic to increase well-being
indeed. It should, therefore, not only be part of a marketing campaign but fully
integrated into the ﬁrm’s strategy. This is also in line with research identifying a
positive link between CSR and innovation, which shows this link to be positive
only if CSR is considered part of the corporate strategy [90].
Expanding innovation and creativity theories in management science by con-
sidering genuinely altruistic social actions whose organizational purpose is aligned
with individuals’ intrinsic motivation appears to be a key challenge for tomorrow’s
ﬁrms.
More and more emerging business models combine an altruistic leadership style
with an innovative environment by proposing new organizational formats. An
example of this is the French startup NIU, which has developed an excellent
innovative product while following fundamental ethical guidelines: a sun cream that
does not have a negative impact on the ecosystem or human health. In addition to
its commitment to clean up 1 m2 of beach per tube sold, NIU is backed by an NGO,
enabling it to donate the entirety of its proﬁts to a noble cause: the reintroduction of
corals.
6
Conclusion
This chapter has aimed at providing a fresh approach to ﬁrms’ long-term global
performance. Having considered the latest trends regarding CSR and its integration
into global performance, we conclude that a paradigm shift for innovation man-
agement is urgently needed. As the Edelman Trust Barometer [1] illustrates, with
movements such as Fridays For Future, #metoo, and various other protests against,
for instance, income inequality, society has begun to take global challenges into its
own hands. In light of the decreasing trust towards corporations, ﬁrms need to ﬁnd
new ways to regain their role within society—together with society.
452
S. Bollinger and M. Neukam

Figure 1 shows the evolution of ﬁrms’ core objectives over time, based on the
literature review discussed in this chapter Since the industrial revolution, the pri-
mary consideration for companies was ﬁnancial performance. As ﬁrms began
facing mounting global competition in the early twentieth century, innovation
played a central role in ensuring growth, based on the fundamental work of
Schumpeter [91]. Then, CSR emerged in the mid-twentieth century and took a
central stage in the political debate, with an increasing emphasis on societal con-
siderations. Over the last decade, as global challenges intensiﬁed, these consider-
ations have begun to be integrated in corporate values, leading to a reconsideration
of the fundamental purpose of ﬁrms—values and purpose are now key elements to
attract and motivate talents. To proceed towards a sustainable business strategy in
the future, the ﬁrm of tomorrow could follow a new paradigm, combining four
contrasting but fundamental elements: ﬁnancial performance, innovation, CSR, and
purpose.
This evolution has been reinforced by accelerated digitalization since the onset
of the COVID-19 pandemic. As Hamel [14] has pointed out, during the crisis,
societies have quickly shifted from optimizing the operating model to digitalizing
the business model; they now urgently need to humanize their management model.
In reference to Aldridge and Walz [92], Hamel argues that management must put
people’s interest ﬁrst and calls for a greater movement towards “Humanocracy”. In
the context of stakeholder theory, this implies not only focusing on a ﬁrm’s direct
stakeholders (customers, employees, suppliers, …) but also on citizens and, more
broadly, society as an important factor for a company’s business.
Fig. 1 Evolution of ﬁrms’ objectives
21
Innovation and Altruism: A New Paradigm
453

The example of the COVID-19 crisis further shows that the notion that a ﬁrm
only exists to make a proﬁt is highly outdated. It has conﬁrmed once and for all that
in the future, competitive advantages will be achieved thanks to a human-centered
approach. With this “re-humanization” of the organizational sphere, the objective is
not to implement CSR in the form of purely marketing-driven activities, but to gain
full awareness of individuals’ aspirations. Innovation is nothing else but the out-
come of the collaborative work of motivated people working together towards a
common goal. However, we are currently observing a generational shift where
highly skilled people quit well-paid corporate positions to dedicate themselves to a
meaning-driven activity for society. Firms need to incorporate these altruistic ten-
dencies in their innovation management models. Even though, as in any crisis, the
short-term survival of our economy after the COVID-19 pandemic is primarily
about ﬁnancial stability, innovation should not be cut down [15]. CSR and sus-
tainable development have become even more pressing concerns, and ﬁrms are
expected to align their activities with the aspiration of all stakeholders—including
employees and society in a broader sense.
This chapter aims to contribute to a vision of what a company should look like in
this new normal. Solely relying on some different CSR activities will no longer be
sufﬁcient. If a ﬁrm wants to liberate the creativity and innovative capacity of highly
motivated employees in the future, it must focus on its corporate identity and, thus,
on the fundamental values describing its organizational purpose. Managers should,
therefore, focus on intrinsic motivational factors. As Aguado and Retolaza [4] have
pointed out, this requires introducing ethical motives into management to
strengthen the human quality of organizations. It is all about people, and the real
winners in the future will be those who translate this approach into concrete
managerial actions.
We propose that purpose, altruistic social and environmental engagement,
innovation, and ﬁnancial performance should not be considered distinct elements
that coexist in a ﬁrm, creating tensions between them. Instead, a few early rare
examples of viable business models show that they can exist in symbiosis as a real
integrated system. Our ambition is, therefore, not to create a balance between
divergent objectives but to go beyond this notion of balance in order to create a
harmonious system that reconciles potential tensions. Symbiosis does exist in
nature as a process where two different species of animals help each other to
survive. Take, for instance, the example of bacteria that aid digestion in the human
body. Without these bacteria, we get sick. This symbiotic relationship becomes vital
for both species, making them interdependent. We believe that within ﬁrms, a
similar symbiosis could be reached for the dimensions of altruistic engagement,
ﬁnancial performance, and innovation: a ﬁrm’s purpose should connect these dif-
ferent dimensions, as shown in Fig. 2.
While many startups have recently achieved this goal by shaping their business
model with a relatively small number of stakeholders, how would such a transition
towards symbiosis be possible for a mature company? The question remains open,
and a ﬁeld study is necessary to solve this problem.
454
S. Bollinger and M. Neukam

Indeed, the main limitation at this stage of our research is that practical expe-
rience is still lacking: we have proposed a purely theoretical analysis of the latest
related trends. These reﬂections need to be combined with practical insights from
in-depth studies. This is why we concur with Pirson’s [89] calling for more qual-
itative research on the role of performance in the outcome variables of well-being.
We have already mentioned the emergence of new sustainable business models
among startups, where altruism and innovation form a single unit. On the one hand,
qualitative research will require analyzing the viable business models of these
companies that have already internalized a humanistic approach to management. On
the other, it should also provide guidelines for existing businesses to manage the
transformation towards this new era of innovation management. In our case, we will
consider comparing insights from the social and solidary economy with observa-
tions from the industrial sector via an explorative study. This will hopefully enable
us to identify a viable equilibrium between ﬁnancial stability and genuinely
purpose-driven activities, so that actors may create a sustainable future together.
All in all, we think that the paradigm shift evidenced by Porter and Kramer [2],
even though it has been described unﬁnished, contains—in essence—an important
message for organizations: the survival of the ﬁttest still applies. In this case,
however, the ﬁttest will be the organizations that manage to give purpose to their
talents, invest in activities consolidating their position within a healthy social and
economic network in an altruistic manner and thus enabling innovation perfor-
mance in the long run.
Fig. 2 Symbiosis of
tomorrow’s ﬁrm
21
Innovation and Altruism: A New Paradigm
455

Core Messages
• New paradigm: We have reached the threshold of a new paradigm for
management and innovation management in particular.
• Current trends suggest that corporate social responsibility (CSR) is no
longer sufﬁcient for ﬁrms to regain social credibility.
• Altruistic leadership requires investment in activities without expecting
ﬁnancial returns, which leaves us wondering how to ﬁnd the right equi-
librium between ﬁnancial stability and a humanistic management style.
• Considering that the search for meaning is a fundamental driving force for
individuals, it also impacts their intrinsic motivation to engage in creative
activities.
• Combining altruism and innovation within a viable business model is a
crucial challenge for tomorrow’s ﬁrms.
References
1. Daniel J, Edelman Holdings, Inc. (2020) Edelman trust barometer. In: 2019 Edelman trust
barometer. https://www.edelman.de/en/research/2019-edelman-trust-barometer. Accessed 11
June 2020
2. Porter ME, Kramer MR (2011) Creating shared value. Harv Bus Rev 89:62–77
3. Crane A, Palazzo G, Spence LJ, Matten D (2014) Contesting the value of “creating shared
value”. Calif Manag Rev 56:130–153
4. Aguado R, Retolaza JL (2020) Humanistic management in the corporation: from self-interest
to dignity and well-being. In: Virtuous cycles in humanistic management. Springer, Berlin,
pp 151–161
5. Donaldson T (2017) Donaldsonian themes: a commentary. Bus Ethics Q 27:125–142
6. Fagerberg J, Mowery D, Nelson R (2005) The Oxford handbook of innovation. Oxford
University Press, New York
7. Cohendet P, Llerena P, Simon L (2014) The routinization of creativity: lessons from the case
of a video-game creative powerhouse. J Econ Stat 234:120–141
8. Chanal V, Mothe C (2005) Comment concilier innovation d’exploitation et innovation
d’exploration: une étude de cas dans le secteur automobile. Revue Française de Gestion
31:173–191
9. Meyssonnier F (2015) Quel contrôle de gestion pour les startups? Comptabilité Contrôle
Audit 21:33–61
10. Reid SE, De Brentani U, Kleinschmidt EJ (2014) Divergent thinking and market visioning
competence: an early front-end radical innovation success typology. Ind Mark Manage
43:1351–1361
11. Cohendet P, Harvey J-F, Simon L (2013) Managing creativity in the ﬁrm: the fuzzy front end
of innovation and dynamic capabilities. In: Burger-Helmchen T (ed) The economics of
creativity: ideas, ﬁrms and markets. Routledge, Oxon, pp 131–150
12. Parjanen S (2012) Experiencing creativity in the organization: from individual creativity to
collective creativity. Interdiscip J Inf Knowl Manag 7:109–128
456
S. Bollinger and M. Neukam

13. Duval M (2020) A new generation of collective intelligence digital platform. In: XXXI ISPIM
innovation conference innovating in times of crisis. Virtual
14. Hamel GK (2020) The quest for resilience. In: XXXI ISPIM innovation conference
innovating in times of crisis. Virtual
15. O’Connor G (2020) Innovating in turbulent times. In: XXXI ISPIM innovation conference
innovating in times of crisis. Virtual
16. Verganti R (2020) Innovation and design in the new normal. In: XXXI ISPIM innovation
conference innovating in times of crisis. Virtual
17. Henderson R, Van den Steen E (2015) Why do ﬁrms have “purpose”? The ﬁrm’s role as
carrier of identity and reputation. Am Econ Rev 105:326–330
18. Amabile TM (1998) How to kill creativity. Harv Bus Rev 76:76–87
19. Fisher CD (2010) Happiness at work. Int J Manag Rev 12:384–412
20. May DR, Gilson RL, Harter LM (2004) The psychological conditions of meaningfulness,
safety and availability and the engagement of the human spirit at work. J Occup Organ
Psychol 77:11–37
21. Sagnak M, Kuruöz M (2017) Authentic leadership and altruism: the mediating role of
meaningfulness. Univ J Educ Res 5:447–452
22. Mattera M, Baena V (2015) The key to carving out a high corporate reputation based on
innovation: corporate social responsibility. Soc Responsib J 11:221–241
23. Raedersdorf S (2015) Entreprendre dans l’économie sociale et solidaire: entre contrôle et
créativité? Innovations 48:69–85
24. Johnson TH, Kaplan RS (1987) Relevance lost: the rise and fall of management accounting.
Harvard Business School Press, Boston
25. Löning H, Malleret V, Méric J et al (2008) Le contrôle de gestion: organisation, outils et
pratiques, 3e édition. Dunod, Paris
26. Quairel-Lanoizelée F, Capron M (2004) Mythes et réalités de l’entreprise responsable. La
Decouverte, Paris
27. Renaud A, Berland N (2007) Mesure de la performance globale des entreprises. Poitiers
28. Reynaud E (2003) Développement durable et entreprise : vers une relation symbiotique?
Angers
29. Elkington J (1997) Cannibals with forks: triple bottom line of the 21st century business.
Capstone Publishing Ltd, Oxford
30. European Commission (2001) Green paper: promoting a european framework for corporate
social responsibility. In: European commission. https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/
detail/en/DOC_01_9. Accessed 20 July 2020
31. Bowen HR (1953) Social responsibilities of the businessman. University Of Iowa Press, Iowa
City
32. Ackerman RW (1976) Social challenge to business. Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
Massachussets
33. Carroll AB (1977) Managing corporate social responsibility. Scott Foresman & Co, Glenview
34. Germain C, Trébucq S (2004) La performance globale de l’entreprise et son pilotage :
quelques réﬂexions. Semaine sociale Lamy 35–41
35. Pesqueux Y (2007) La notion de performance globale. In: 27ème Congrès de l’Association
Francophone de Comptabilité. Tunis
36. Bourguignon A (1995) La performance, essais de déﬁnition. Revue française de comptabilité
26:61–66
37. Freeman RE (1984) Strategic management: a stakeholder approach. Cambridge University
Press, Boston, Massachusetts
38. Cazal D (2011) RSE et théorie des parties prenantes: les impasses du contrat. Revue de la
régulation Capitalisme, institutions, pouvoirs online
39. Persais E (2006) Comment rendre la RSE opérationnelle dans six grandes entreprises
françaises? In: Rosé JJ (ed) Responsabilité sociale de l’entreprise. De Boeck Supérieur,
Bruxelles, pp 215–238
21
Innovation and Altruism: A New Paradigm
457

40. Porcher S, Porcher T (2012) RSE, parties prenantes et événements rares: le cas de deux
marées noires. La Revue des Sciences de Gestion 115–123
41. Friedman M (1962) Capitalism and freedom. University of Chicago Press, Chicago
42. Vargas É (2020) Greenwashing et publicité: peut-on faire conﬁance aux entreprises?
Apres-demain 53:21–23
43. Héraud B (2020) Face à la crise du Covid-19, les stratégies des entreprises les plus
responsables et durables sont payantes. In: Novethic. https://www.novethic.fr/actualite/
entreprise-responsable/isr-rse/face-a-la-crise-du-covid-19-les-strategies-durables-des-
entreprises-sont-payantes-148420.html. Accessed 17 June 2020
44. He H, Harris L (2020) The impact of Covid-19 pandemic on corporate social responsibility
and marketing philosophy. J Bus Res 176–182
45. Reich RB (2008) Supercapitalisme: le choc entre le système économique émergent et la
démocratie. Vuibert, Paris
46. Creuzet GF, Seghers V (2020) Vers un capitalisme d’intérêt collectif. Futuribles 5–26
47. Perard P, Stokkink D (2015) Les réseaux de l’économie sociale et solidaire en Europe. In:
Holcman R (ed) Economie Sociale et Solidaire. Dunod, pp 249–276
48. Roman-Cervantes C, Gonzalez-Morales O (2018) Corporate social responsibility of social
economy enterprises. Nova Science Publishers Inc, New York
49. Blanc J (2008) Responsabilité sociale des entreprises et économie sociale et solidaire: des
relations complexes, Économies et sociétés, Développement,
croissance et progrès.
Economies et Sociétés. Presses de l’ISMEA, Paris, pp 55–82
50. Combes M (2005) Quel avenir pour la Responsabilité Sociale des Entreprises (RSE)? Manag
Avenir 4:131–145
51. Martinet A-C, Payaud MA (2007) Formes de RSE et entreprises sociales. Une hybridation des
stratégies. Revue française de gestion 11:199–214
52. Maurel C, Pantin F (2017) Les comportements en matière de RSE des sociétés coopératives:
homogénéité discursive et hétérogénéité des pratiques. Revue de l’organisation responsable
12:25–40
53. Hiez D (2019) Le droit de l’ESS, source de conspiration. In: 7ème Rencontres Du GESS—
Gestion Des Entreprises Sociales et Solidaires. Valence
54. Chassagnon V (2019) L’économie sociale de l’entreprise capitaliste. In: 7ème Rencontres Du
GESS—Gestion Des Entreprises Sociales et Solidaires. Valence
55. Telﬁzian L, Toucas-Truyen P (2020) En bref. RECMA 356:17–28
56. Bartlett CA, Ghoshal S (1994) Changing the role of top management: beyond strategy to
purpose. Harv Bus Rev 72:79–88
57. Gartenberg C, Prat A, Serafeim G (2019) Corporate purpose and ﬁnancial performance.
Organ Sci 30:1–18
58. Thakor AV, Quinn RE (2013) The economics of higher purpose. ECGI-Finance Working
Paper
59. Freeman RE, Ginena K (2015) Rethinking the purpose of the corporation: challenges from
stakeholder theory. Notizie di Politeia 31:9–18
60. Gibbons R, Henderson R (2012) Relational contracts and organizational capabilities. Organ
Sci 23:1350–1364
61. Mourkogiannis N (2006) Purpose: The starting point of great companies. Palgrave, London
62. Wolf M, Mair J (2019) Purpose, commitment and coordination around small wins: a proactive
approach to governance in integrated hybrid organizations. VOLUNTAS: Int J Volunt
Non-proﬁt Organ 30:535–548
63. Hollensbe E, Wookey C, Hickey L et al (2014) Organizations with purpose. Acad Manag J
57:1227–1234
64. Liden RC, Wayne SJ, Sparrowe RT (2000) An examination of the mediating role of
psychological empowerment on the relations between the job, interpersonal relationships, and
work outcomes. J Appl Psychol 85:407
458
S. Bollinger and M. Neukam

65. Michaelson C, Pratt MG, Grant AM, Dunn CP (2014) Meaningful work: connecting business
ethics and organization studies. J Bus Ethics 121:77–90
66. Brammer S, Millington A (2008) Does it pay to be different? An analysis of the relationship
between corporate social and ﬁnancial performance. Strateg Manag J 29:1325–1343
67. Husted BW, Allen DB (2007) Strategic corporate social responsibility and value creation
among large ﬁrms: lessons from the spanish experience. Long Range Plan 40:594–610
68. Giget M, Hillen V (2018) Les nouvelles stratégies d’innovation 2018–2020: vision
prospective 2030. Les Éditions du Net, Saint-Ouen
69. Gupta K (2017) Do economic and societal factors inﬂuence the ﬁnancial performance of
alternative energy ﬁrms? Energy Econ 65:172–182
70. Munir MT, Mansouri SS, Udugama IA et al (2018) Resource recovery from organic solid
waste using hydrothermal processing: Opportunities and challenges. Renew Sustain Energy
Rev 96:64–75
71. Kleinschmidt EJ, De Brentani U, Salomo S (2007) Performance of global new product
development programs: a resource-based view. J Prod Innov Manag 24:419–441
72. York JG, Venkataraman S (2010) The entrepreneur–environment nexus: uncertainty,
innovation, and allocation. J Bus Ventur 25:449–463
73. Garcia R, Calantone R (2002) A critical look at technological innovation typology and
innovativeness terminology: A literature review. J Prod Innov Manag 19:110–132
74. Amabile TM (1996) Creativity and innovation in organizations. Harvard Business School
Background Note 396–239
75. Rice M, Kelley D, Peters L, Colarelli O’Connor G (2001) Radical innovation: triggering
initiation of opportunity recognition and evaluation. R&D Manag 31:409–420
76. Burger-Helmchen T, Frank L (2011) La création de rentes: une approche par les compétences
et capacités dynamiques. Innovations 2:89–111
77. Lazaric N, Raybaut A (2014) Do incentive systems spur work motivation of inventors in high
tech ﬁrms? A group-based perspective. J Evolut Econ 24:135–157
78. Hennessey BA, Amabile TM (1998) Reality, intrinsic motivation, and creativity. Am Psychol
53:674–675
79. Owan H, Nagaoka S (2011) Intrinsic and extrinsic motivation for inventors. RIETI Discussion
papers 11-E-022:1–50
80. Bénabou R, Tirole J (2006) Incentives and prosocial behavior. Am Econ Rev 96:1652–1678
81. Amabile TM (1983) The social psychology of creativity: a componential conceptualization.
J Pers Soc Psychol 45:357–376
82. Attanasi G, Curci Y, Llerena P, et al (2019) Looking at creativity from east to west: risk
taking and intrinsic motivation in socially and culturally diverse countries. BETA UMR7522
Working Paper: 2019–38
83. Staw BM (1989) Intrinsic and extrinsic motivation. In: Leavitt HJ, Pondy LR, Boje DM
(eds) Readings in managerial psychology, 4th edn. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
London, pp 197–209
84. Melé D (2003) The challenge of humanistic management. J Bus Ethics 44:77–88
85. Snyder M, Omoto AM (1992) Volunteerism and society’s response to the HIV epidemic. Curr
Dir Psychol Sci 1:113–116
86. Vecina ML, Chacón F, Marzana D, Marta E (2013) Volunteer engagement and organizational
commitment in non-proﬁt organizations: what makes volunteers remain within organizations
and feel happy? J Commun Psychol 41:291–302
87. Dolan P, Metcalfe R (2012) The relationship between innovation and subjective well-being.
Res Policy 41:1489–1498
88. Ryan RM, Deci EL (2000) Intrinsic and extrinsic motivations: classic deﬁnitions and new
directions. Contemp Educ Psychol 25:54–67
89. Frankly VE (1992) Mans’ search for meaning: an introduction to logotherapy, 4th edn.
Beacon Press, Boston
21
Innovation and Altruism: A New Paradigm
459

90. Pirson M (2019) A humanistic perspective for management theory: protecting dignity and
promoting well-being. J Bus Ethics 159:39–57
91. Bocquet R, Le Bas C, Mothe C, Poussing N (2013) Are ﬁrms with different CSR proﬁles
equally innovative? Empirical analysis with survey data. Eur Manag J 31:642–654
92. Schumpeter JA (1934) The theory of economic development: an inquiry into proﬁts, capital,
credit, interest, and the business cycle. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachussets
93. Aldridge MJ, Walz T (1982) Beyond management: humanizing the administrative process.
University of Iowa Working in Welfare, Iowa City
Sophie Bollinger is a Doctor in Management Science. She is an
Associate Professor at the BETA laboratory (Research center on
theoretical and applied economics) of the University of Stras-
bourg, France, and studies the management of innovation
processes in various sectors. She also has professional experi-
ence in auditing at an international auditing company where she
worked with many ﬁrms of various sizes and from different
sectors of activity (distribution, industrial, automotive, chemical,
pharmaceutical, biotechnology). This rewarding background
gave her the opportunity get in touch with actors in general
and ﬁnancial management, to learn about their interests, the tools
they use to increase their ﬁnancial performance and to gain
greater awareness of the needs of those ﬁrms. Additionally, she
has worked in the ﬁnancial department of two non-proﬁt
organizations in the social and solidarity economysector,
allowing her to explore a fast-changing part of our economy.
Her research has since focused on the challenges of reconciling
strong social objectives with the need for ﬁnancial control.
Marion Neukam is an Associate Professor at the BETA
laboratory (Research center on theoretical and applied eco-
nomics) of the University of Strasbourg, France. Her research
falls at the intersection of international and innovation manage-
ment. It examines the international challenges and opportunities
of innovation management, with a focus on the successful
transition of disruptive innovative ideas created by dispersed
teams, from the early innovation phase to later steps of the
innovation process. Key areas of interest are CSRstrategies and
their impact on motivation and thus on the innovation and
creative capacity of globally dispersed teams, as well as
knowledge and community management and open innovation
as further sub-categories of management theories. Informed by
previous professional experiences as Innovation Manager in an
international industrial ﬁrm, her research not only aims to
provide theoretical reﬂections about disruptive innovation, but
also to yield insights for managers of industrial ﬁrms, liable to
help them to establish a compelling innovation management
approach.
460
S. Bollinger and M. Neukam

22
Integrated Science 2050: Science
Without Borders
Amene Saghazadeh, Adela Acitores Suz, Antonia Viu,
Chih-Fu Wu, Christopher Ryan Maboloc, Dustin Hellberg,
Ewa Rzechowska, Henrik Thorén, Henry H. Bauer, Jan Kłos,
Jan Treur, Jean-Yves LeCorre, Karolina Żyniewicz,
Laura de Miguel Álvarez, Leonardo G. Rodríguez Zoya,
Marion Neukam, Monika Michałowska, Ortwin Renn, Rory Allen,
Pedro E. Moscoso-Flores, Raúl Díaz-Obregón Cruzado,
Silvia Nuere, Sophie Bollinger, Thierry Burger-Helmchen,
Thomas Görnitz, Tilia Stingl de Vasconcelos Guedes, Xiao Dou,
Žilvinas Svigaris, and Nima Rezaei
Summary
In considering the changing world, the authors of the Integrated Science:
Science without Borders were asked how you would see the future of your ﬁeld
30 years later. The present chapter publishes authors’ views on this subject in
2050. Authors have integrated science into the person, thinking of complex
problems, artiﬁcial intelligence, management under changing conditions, and a
sustainable future.
A. Saghazadeh (&)  N. Rezaei
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Tehran, Iran
e-mail: amen.usern@gmail.com
A. Saghazadeh
Research Center for Immunodeﬁciencies, Children’s Medical Center, Tehran University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran
That whose existence is necessary must necessarily be one
essence.
Avicenna
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
N. Rezaei (ed.), Integrated Science, Integrated Science 1,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65273-9_22
461

A. A. Suz  R. D.-O. Cruzado  S. Nuere
Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
e-mail: adela.acitores@upm.es
R. D.-O. Cruzado
e-mail: raul.diazobregon@upm.es
S. Nuere
e-mail: silvia.nuere@upm.es
A. Viu
Literature Department, Universidad Adolfo Ibáñez, Santiago, Chile
e-mail: antonia.viu@uai.cl
A. Viu  P. E. Moscoso-Flores
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Santiago, Chile
e-mail: pedro.moscoso@uai.cl
C.-F. Wu
Department of Industrial Design, Tatung University, Taipei, Taiwan
e-mail: wcf@gm.ttu.edu.tw
C. R. Maboloc
Ateneo de Davao University, Davao City, Philippines
e-mail: ryanmaboloc75@yahoo.com
D. Hellberg
Department of English Studies, University of the Bahamas, Bahamas, USA
e-mail: dchellberg@gmail.com
D. Hellberg
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Bahamas, USA
E. Rzechowska  J. Kłos
John Paul II Catholic University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland
e-mail: ewa.rzechowska@kul.lublin.pl
J. Kłos
e-mail: klosjan@kul.pl
E. Rzechowska  J. Kłos
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Lublin, Poland
H. Thorén
Department of Philosophy, Lund University, Lund, Sweden
e-mail: henrik.thoren@ﬁl.lu.se
H. Thorén
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Lund, Sweden
462
A. Saghazadeh et al.

H. H. Bauer
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA, USA
e-mail: hhbauer@vt.edu; hhbauer@spamarrest.com
J. Treur
Social AI Group, Department of Computer Science, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
e-mail: j.treur@vu.nl
J.-Y. LeCorre
Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University & University of Strasbourg, BETA, CNRS, INRAE,
Strasbourg, Alsace, France
e-mail: JeanYves.LeCorre@xjtlu.edu.cn
K. Żyniewicz
Artes Liberales Faculty, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland
e-mail: karolinazyniewicz@gmail.com
L. de Miguel Álvarez
Universidad Internacional de La Rioja, Logroño, Spain
e-mail: laura.demiguel@unir.net
L. G. Rodríguez Zoya
National Scientiﬁc and Technical Research Council of Argentina, Gino Germani Research
Institute, University of Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina
e-mail: leonardo.rodriguez@conicet.gov.ar
L. G. Rodríguez Zoya
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Buenos Aires, Argentina
M. Neukam  S. Bollinger
BETA, UMR 7522, Strasbourg, France
e-mail: mneukam@unistra.fr
S. Bollinger
e-mail: sophie.bollinger@unistra.fr
M. Neukam  S. Bollinger
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Strasbourg, France
M. Michałowska
Medical University of Łódź, Łódź, Poland
e-mail: monika.michalowska@umed.lodz.pl
O. Renn
Institute for Advanced Sustainability Studies (IASS), Potsdam, Germany
e-mail: ortwin.renn@iass-potsdam.de
O. Renn
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Potsdam, Germany
22
Integrated Science 2050: Science Without Borders
463

R. Allen
Department of Psychology, Goldsmiths, University of London, London, UK
e-mail: r.allen@gold.ac.uk
R. Allen
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), York, UK
P. E. Moscoso-Flores
Philosophy Department, Universidad Adolfo Ibáñez, Santiago, Chile
S. Nuere
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Madrid, Spain
T. Burger-Helmchen
University of Strasbourg, University of Lorraine, BETA, CNRS, INRAE, Strasbourg, Alsace,
France
e-mail: burger@unistra.fr
T. Görnitz
Department of Physics, J. W. Goethe-University, Frankfurt/Main, Germany
e-mail: goernitz@em.uni-frankfurt.de
T. Görnitz
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Frankfurt/Main, Germany
T. S. de Vasconcelos Guedes
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Mödling, Austria
e-mail: comunic@tiliastingl.com
X. Dou
College of Fine Arts, Guangdong Polytechnic Normal University, Guangzhou, China
e-mail: douxiao0808@outlook.com
Ž. Svigaris
Department of the History of Philosophy and Analytic Philosophy, Vilnius University,
Vilnius, Lithuania
e-mail: zilvinas.svigaris@fsf.vu.lt; svigaris@3t.lt
Ž. Svigaris
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Vilnius, Lithuania
N. Rezaei (&)
Research Center for Immunodeﬁciencies, Children’s Medical Center, Tehran University of
Medical Sciences, Dr. Qarib St, Keshavarz Blvd, Tehran 14194, Iran
e-mail: rezaei_nima@tums.ac.ir
N. Rezaei
Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran
464
A. Saghazadeh et al.

The light integrated science can throw on our thinking of complex problems
[Adapted with permission from the Association of Science and Art (ASA),
USERN; Made by Nastaran Hosseini].
22
Integrated Science 2050: Science Without Borders
465

nimarezaei.usern@gmail.com
The puzzle of the Integrated Science: Science Without Borders.
466
A. Saghazadeh et al.

1
Introduction
Over the last three decades, the world has witnessed accelerated urbanization [1],
increased Canopy mortality rate [2], decreased summer monsoon rainfall [3],
increased incidence of mental issues in children and adolescents, increased incidence
of neuroendocrine tumors [4], increased risk of environmental droughts under global
warming [5], changes in vegetarian growth due to climate changes [6], increased
proportion of term low birthweight infants [7], continued risk of hunger in Zim-
babwe and the Central African Republic [8], increased global vegetation browning
[9], increased inequality of wealth and income in most countries [10], increased
incidence of breast cancer in most countries [11], the global epidemic of the
metabolic syndrome [12], et al. Eventually, when we look at the current pandemic of
coronavirus disease (COVID), we are tempted to call the year 2020, the decade
2020s, and even the twenty-ﬁrst century as the worst chance we could have to live.
This view is, however, wrong, given that the above is a mere small portion of
complex problems people have been exposed to over the last three decades. There is
another side of the coin: Life expectancy is increasing in almost all countries
globally, including most countries of the Global South. The number of people living
in absolute poverty has steadily declined, and the percentage of people who suffer
malnutrition [13]. Referring to Germany, the number of fatal accidents at work
decreased from almost 5000 in 1960 to less than 400 in 2014; the number of trafﬁc
accidents from 22,000 in 1972 to 3700 in 2014; the number of fatal heart attacks and
strokes decreased from 109 cases per 100,000 to 62 in the time period between 1992
and 2002 [14]. In addition, the number of chronic illnesses as well as fatal diseases
from environmental pollution or accidents has steadily declined over the past three
decades. Conventional risks in terms of accidents and most illnesses have been
successfully reduced in all OECD countries [15].
Looking at the two sides of the coin reminds us that tragic accidents and pre-
mature death are not consequences of fate but, most often, the results of human
action or inaction. For many of them, we, humans, are responsible, and for the rest
of them, we, humans, have done less than we should and could do. What would
happen to the world if people continue to live with similar so far inappropriate
approaches to complex problems?
In Integrated Science: Science without Borders, we could see that the science
which is viewed by scientists and researchers as of high value may be beneﬁted
from the work of integration, without which, as we can see so far, being far away
from diversity in the changing world.
Last but not least, the authors of Integrated Science: Science without Borders
come to share their personal view of integrated science in the future 30 years with
the hope that the book will be welcomed and read by the next generation.
22
Integrated Science 2050: Science Without Borders
467

2
Integrated Person
In our rapidly changing world, we need to learn more about the human person
vis-a-vis societies on the move, cultural trends, and technological inventions. The
point is to answer whether our environment is still favorable to our development, in
the most profound humanistic sense, or not. To answer this question, we need a
reliable picture of the person and an adequate report on what is changing and what
remains constant. Now that we have gained historical knowledge about the dan-
gerous trends and ideologies of the twentieth century, there are still witnesses to
World War Two; there are inequalities worldwide, there are spots of glaring in-
justice—there are fears and hopes that accompany our experience. Now is the right
time to think about the true picture of the person, their vital milieu, the values they
need to grow; therefore, I anticipate a more and more important role for personalism
in the future to come. Personalism seeks to grasp both the static aspect of the person
(what the person is) and the dynamic aspect (the power of adaptation amid the
maelstrom of changes). We need the kind of personalism which seeks to render an
integrated picture of the person—in their social, political, and economic aspects.
The person cannot grow as a one-sided being (Jan Kłos 2020).
3
Integrated Thinking
In the coming decades, researchers will have to accept the complexity of the
problems they study and the need to deﬁne them in a non-reductionist manner,
requiring the changing man to be considered against changing relational,
socio-cultural, and technological contexts. Adopting such an extended approach to
problem deﬁnition will give more room for studying what is not yet unknown or is
insufﬁciently recognized. It will also give a more signiﬁcant role to qualitative
analyses enabling more detailed knowledge of individual cases to examine their
internal transformations. The outcome of the analyses will be classiﬁable dynamic
constructions and/or rules describing them, easily translatable into real human
actions, rather than the numerical indicators. The generalized descriptions of cases
(revealing their characteristics though) can potentially become an empirical basis
for constructing multi-variant models giving an insight into the changeability and
internal diversity of phenomena. The importance of the theoretical conceptualiza-
tion of the multi-variant nature of phenomena is likely to increase and present the
paths and genesis of their mechanisms. This research approach will need to rely
more on artiﬁcial tools and perhaps fuzzy logic. As it seems, in the case of studies
on incompletely deﬁned phenomena, it can provide a link between research ap-
proaches focused on the internal diversity of problems and the existing theories and
knowledge resources (Ewa Rzechowska 2020).
One of the reasons behind our collaboration and using an experimental method
of writing was the need to propose something that is a sign of the transformation
our culture and civilization are currently undergoing. We believe that becoming
liminal is happening right now; it is changing our understanding of the world and
468
A. Saghazadeh et al.

ourselves, putting dichotomies and binary vision of the world in shadow. The
creative process should not be limited to one ﬁeld of humanities or sciences, nor
should it be enclosed within any single one of them. We are of the opinion that the
entwinement of art and humanities in general and of bio art and philosophy, in
particular, will pave the way for a new conceptual framework in which to develop
new concepts and solutions to the problems we are currently facing. Our text is an
important step in this approach in which dichotomies and borders will no longer
matter. By 2050, such collective and transdisciplinary thinking will have yielded
new methods and approaches to help us to understand the outside and the inside. In
this way, we boldly go where no one has gone before (Monika Michałowska and
Karolina Żyniewicz 2020).
From the current context in which we live and projecting it into the future, we
state that the future of the Humanities should be linked to the development of new
forms of living. This means that Humanities must collaborate in ﬁnding new ways
to face the current challenges from a perspective that allows us to open alternatives
in ways of thinking about phenomena and of acting in accordance with them. This
requires new bases that explore the languages and materialities at the foundations of
the different ways of building knowledge. The latter, for example, by searching for
inter and transdisciplinary methodologies focused on conjunctive and disjunctive
overlaps between the Natural Sciences and the Social Sciences, thus recognizing—
in their differential crossings—common grounds for the development of new
political and ethical modes of human coexistence, according to a vision of
knowledge that prioritizes the environment and attending to its processes of
transformation and allowing technical progress to harmonize with the needs of our
planet (Pedro E. Moscoso-Flores and Antonia Viu 2020).
Nowadays, people can search and ﬁnd answers to their questions, doubts, and
concerns with simple access to information throughout the Internet. However,
teaching continues anchored in the nineteenth century, where the teacher remains
the only one able to pass on knowledge. This hierarchy, instead of creating a playful
learning environment founded on personal initiative and creativity, encourages
passive, unmotivated students. The future is about changing the way of teaching, in
short, promoting critical thinking. It is, therefore, about receiving the method-
ological bases that guide in the search for knowledge. However, looking exclu-
sively for knowledge is an incomplete act; we must train the individual in the
know-how. The frenetic pace of technological and epistemological advances also
causes an acceleration of knowledge obsolescence. People must learn to constantly
question their early training and sometimes even be able to change their profession.
However, this attitude will not be possible if we compartmentalize knowledge, and
if we do not allow scientiﬁc and artistic ﬁelds to merge. The personal concern must
lead us through various ways to enrich knowledge, to make us better people,
socially and intellectually, to adapt to new learning spaces. Industrial society has
played a fundamental role in education, training the individual for this technical
growth, but has forgotten the fundamental role of culture and art. Therefore, the
so-called humanities disciplines have been relegated in education, losing their
essential presence. During the three months conﬁned because of the COVID-19
pandemic, art, painting, literature, music, and dance have accompanied human
22
Integrated Science 2050: Science Without Borders
469

beings, giving them an environment of well-being, relaxation, and harmony. The
interest is to avoid human beings cataloging themselves as a scientiﬁc or artistic
person for the rest of their lives. This possibility of meeting and understanding
encourages us to think the future based on a world reﬂecting the physical, mental,
and emotional complexity, always in harmony with nature (Silvia Nuere, Laura de
Miguel Álvarez, Adela Acitores Suz, and Raúl Díaz-Obregón Cruzado 2020).
4
Integrated Science
4.1
Open-Ended to Freedom
The history of the separation of the disciplines obeys both epistemic and political
factors. Consequently, the future of integrated science must contemplate both
variables. The future of science integration cannot be reduced to an epistemological,
methodological, or technical problem concerning how to articulate and integrate
knowledge, nor to a reconceptualization of the power relations that structure the
ﬁelds of specialized knowledge. In the future, integrated science may favor two
opposing trends. On the one hand, the integration of the sciences may involve the
concentration and appropriation of knowledge in a few hands, accentuating the
democratic deﬁcit of knowledge and cognitive, social, and economic inequality. On
the other hand, the integration of the sciences can also strengthen cognitive
democracy, freedom of thought, social solidarity, and bio-anthropo-cosmic ﬂour-
ishing. It is impossible to predict which trend will prevail because societies and
civilization as a whole is a complex, uncertain, non-deterministic, and open-ended
social game. However, the construction of the desired future depends on our present
actions as protagonists of the social game. Integrated science presupposes ethics,
that is, a way of being and living in which the other, the different, is not a rival to be
annulled, eliminated, or submitted, but recognized as an equal with his values,
knowledge, and desires. Consequently, the future of integrated science depends on
our ability to develop in practical terms the ethics of otherness to build a form of life
in freedom (Rodriguez Zoya Leonardo 2020).
4.2
Open-Ended to Unlaws
The current undervaluing of negative results in science has contributed to the ‘ﬁle
drawer problem’ and thence to the replication crisis in psychology. In the future,
techniques such as Bayesian statistical modeling, to replace null hypothesis signiﬁ-
cance testing, and procedures such as the pre-registration of experiments, will help to
correct this. One problem with Bayesian model comparison is that to be valid; it
assumes that the hypotheses being tested include the true one. This condition is
seldom if ever met, and this creates a philosophical problem: what, exactly, is the
validity of the results of Bayesian hypothesis testing? There is an alternative approach
based on the concept of the Kullback-Leibler distance between a model and reality,
which uses the Akaike Information Criterion and its variants to compare hypotheses.
470
A. Saghazadeh et al.

However, this lacks the extensive body of mathematical knowledge developed in
support of the Bayesian formulation. I predict that a modiﬁed version of Bayesianism,
incorporating some of Akaike’s ideas and perhaps using mixed statistical models,
will combine the advantages of both. In philosophy, I hope that the concept of unlaws
will be accepted by those philosophers who believe that science consists of discov-
ering the laws of nature and who have concluded—understandably but erroneously—
that the scientiﬁc process is fundamentally unsound. The inclusion of unlaws in our
picture will bring about a more rounded and satisfying, as well as a more accurate
appreciation of the world in which we live (Rory Allen 2020).
5
Artificial Intelligence in the Society
5.1
A Social Robot
Humans will be fully aware of their physical makeup in all respects, that they are just
sophisticated robots, so that they may state ‘I am a robot!’. Also, they will be aware
that all living entities from animals, plants, and micro-organisms to viruses have many
characteristics in common with them. A wide variety of non-human robots and other
smart artifacts will occur with various human characteristics making them
human-like, such as being able to have their own goals, plans, and autonomy and
perform internal simulation of processes occurring in the external world, including
other human or non-human entities. They will have conscious thoughts and imagi-
nation based on internal simulation and make decisions based on evaluating different
decision options. Furthermore, they will have human-like capabilities such as reading
other entities’ minds, having emotions, regulating their emotions, having situational
awareness, showing empathy for others, attributing ownership and responsibility to
actions of themselves and of others, and making empathic joint decisions and plans
with humans and non-human entities. Moreover, they will be responsive to their
environment, adaptive and learn, and decide when to be adaptive or learn, and form,
strengthen, loosen or break up social relationships to other entities in an adaptive
manner. Like humans, they will also perform self-interpretation and explain their own
behavior, refer to themselves, have self-awareness, and have a notion of ‘self’ or ‘I’ so
that they sometimes will state ‘I am a robot!’. All of this is based on well-designed,
scientiﬁcally justiﬁable computational models for such human- or life-like charac-
teristics taking into account knowledge from human-related disciplines such as
Biology, Neuroscience, Cognitive Science, and Social Sciences. For all of the char-
acteristics mentioned above, anno 2020 there are already ﬁrst computational models
that over the years can be further improved and reﬁned (Jan Treur 2020).
There is no doubt that social robots will play vital roles in people’s daily lives
and be of great help in human life in the future. They can be applied to in-home
companion services that provide companionship for children, older people, and
those living solitary lives. Robots used in education will beneﬁt the sharing of
educational resources. There will still be numerous discussions in the next decade
22
Integrated Science 2050: Science Without Borders
471

on how robots can establish intuitive, safe, and natural interactions and how to
better designed their function and artiﬁcial emotions to meet the needs of end-users.
However, with the breakthrough of technology, these issues will be solved. In
30 years, more attention will be paid to the ethical issues in the use of social robots
in human society, how to protect people’s privacy and psychological needs. It can
be predicted that more social and psychological studies will emerge in this area
(Chih-Fu Wu and Xiao Dou 2020).
5.2
A New Type of Consciousness
The modern global world, which has become overly consumeristic, has not only
reached but also crossed a certain threshold, that according to Alphonso Lingis, is
the sign that the era of materialism is coming to an end. The fact that artiﬁcial
intelligence is arising coincidentally with the sunset of the materialistic age is not
accidental. It is just another evident sign conﬁrming Jean Gebser’s insightful
comment almost half a century ago that the mental structure of consciousness had
reached the limit of its potential. At the same time, it is worth mentioning brilliant
Henri Bergson’s observation that after the materialistic world exhausts its attrac-
tiveness, the cultural tendencies will turn to the phenomenon of life itself. That is
why we already see apparent signs of a new type of consciousness arising. These
predictions may become dominant in 30–50 years, and we can witness the begin-
ning of a new civilization. After leaving the material world to technological tools
such as artiﬁcial intelligence, the dominance of deﬁciency-based consciousness will
step aside, and culture will turn to unexplored but rich psychical qualities of
humanity, such as sympathy, empathy, and integral balance. This life-afﬁrming and
self-sustaining stage of culture, together with the integral consciousness, can unfold
along with the profound awareness, which was developed for centuries in different
spiritual traditions around the globe, and is ready to become a vital part of the
curriculum of the modern educational system (Žilvinas Svigaris).
In 2050, not only many food products will be being produced in new ways
without having to kill animals, but also the experimental generation of simple living
biological structures will have been achieved. This will have become possible
because then the quantum-physical principles are so well understood that, in
addition to factual information, i.e., the genome, also the quantum relations, i.e., the
coherent and thus entangled organizational structures in cells and organs, can be
taken into account. Technical systems of artiﬁcial information processing will,
among other things, support such complex experimental processes, even though
these systems themselves, fortunately, cannot have consciousness. Consciousness is
a form of quantum information that can experience and know itself. Consciousness
enables freedom, and freedom allows one to do what one wants and, if not nec-
essarily, what one should. The Protyposis allows one to understand that con-
sciousness is based on the “uniware” existing only in the biological realm. The term
uniware describes the—during life—irresolvable unity of such Protyposis phe-
nomena, which in everyday life reasonably are distinguished as body and psyche,
472
A. Saghazadeh et al.

i.e., as hardware and software. It is the uniware that enables a scientiﬁc explanation
of the mutual inﬂuence of “body” and “soul.” An esoteric denial of scientiﬁc
contexts will be on the retreat in 2050, as will narrowed materialistic thinking that
ignores the action of mental and spiritual structures on the physique. No opaque
algorithm of an artiﬁcial intelligence structure can ultimately take over its role.
Moreover, if a positive conclusion can be drawn from the last 30 years in the year
2050, this will be possible because, in addition to technical progress, people’s
intellectual and emotional abilities have also developed (Thomas Görnitz 2020).
5.3
Ethics
Information ethics will matter in the next 30 years because by then, social media
platforms would have tremendous power and control over the cultural, economic,
and political activities of people. The technological reality will determine how the
forces of globalization and consumerism manage capitalism, making states and
governments less signiﬁcant. There will be issues about the right to privacy,
surveillance, and security, proﬁling, and cybercrimes. The question to ask is, should
decisions be left to computers? Robots and AI will be taking over many of the
industrial activities in the developed world, while Third World societies will con-
tinue to struggle against the hegemonic divide in the world. It is for this reason that
philosophy must deﬁne for itself its important role in identifying the directions and
strategies when it comes to the advances in AI and nanotechnology. Technological
innovations are inevitable, and societies should be engineered so that our com-
munities become adaptable to such changes. Philosophy plays that integrative role
of analysis with the help of the sciences and its functional role of making the
applications of modern devices conform to our aim of realizing the good life for
everyone (Christopher Ryan Maboloc 2020).
6
Management
6.1
Smart Approaches
A more human-based approach is emerging in management science. We think that
research in this direction will develop further, beyond a purely rational vision of
management. We live in a fast-changing, unstable, digital, and increasingly glob-
alized world. From this point of view, our mental ability to fully comprehend our
environment is increasingly challenged. Big data, artiﬁcial intelligence, and social
media risk causing a mental overload leading to mental disorders. Currently, not
unlike the 1968 revolutions, the numbers of social dropouts are rising, especially
among the younger generations. More and more people appear to be searching for
deeper meaning in their lives, having environmental considerations beyond their
own generations and thus developing a truly collective approach to global
22
Integrated Science 2050: Science Without Borders
473

challenges. We are convinced that the next ten to twenty years will be an exciting
period for management science because technological progress will continue, but
the human response to it might profoundly change. Our perception of business will
evolve, and so will our understanding of what a ﬁrm is, how it operates, and where
it is located. As awareness of the fragility of our future is raised due to environ-
mental and social challenges and the media scrutiny they attract, smart approaches
to a truly sustainable way of life will be required, addressing no longer purely
corporate interests, but society as a whole (Sophie Bollinger and Marion Neukam
2020).
6.2
Holistic, Multipoint, Multi-shareholder Firm Perspective
The business world will strongly evolve in the next thirty years. During the
COVID-19 lockdown, we, like so many, witnessed the reaction of managers around
the world. Many ﬁrms upgraded their information systems, changed their rules of
work, their practices of measurement for productivity and performance. Such events
may occur in the future, triggering each time new modiﬁcations in ﬁrms. Firms in
North American, Europe, Africa, Asia did not all react in the same way. We believe
that in the future, ﬁrms around the world will benchmark much more their man-
agement and leadership practice. The actual economic-classical ﬁrm theory
approach will probably be less important in favor of a more holistic, multipoint,
multi-shareholder perspective. At the same time, we think that each ﬁrm will locally
adapt more strongly to the rules and control practices to ﬁt the story of the ﬁrm.
While a new normal emerges worldwide, pockets of indigenous management will
ﬂourish (Jean-Yves LeCorre and Thierry Burger-Helmchen 2020).
6.3
Hybrid Departments
With the recent emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have seen the world
become remade in months, not years. To speculate a bit based on prevailing
institutional responses, the humanities are in trouble. In fact, university learning is
in trouble. When a university is seen not as a crucible of new and competing ideas
but rather as a corporate entity whose sole purpose is to make money, it endangers
the entire notion of higher education. Pushing classes online will endanger the
careers of professors by farming classes out to adjuncts in online forums. I believe
that hybrid departments and true interdisciplinary research will help to stiﬂe these
moves. Of course, the disciplines will always be distinct, but they need not be so
distinct that they cannot overlap in new, exciting, and necessary ways (Dustin
Hellberg 2020).
474
A. Saghazadeh et al.

6.4
Science-Technology-Society (STS) Departments
Science-Technology-Society (STS) departments will be found in Colleges of Sci-
ence rather than as now in Liberal Arts or Social and Human Sciences. Nowadays,
faculty often have joint appointments with History, Philosophy, or Sociology; by
2050, joint appointments will also be common with Political Science and Eco-
nomics as well as with physical and biological sciences.
Presidential Science Advisors may still come from the ranks of scientiﬁc re-
searchers, but a requirement will also be strong credentials in STS, and perhaps
even only in STS (Henry H. Bauer 2020).
7
Conclusion: A Sustainable Science for a Sustainable
Future?
The future is—by deﬁnition—uncertain. In order to avoid this uncertainty and to be
able to make the “right” decisions, we have always relied on oracles, wizards,
dreams, or even more recently on forecasts, calculations, trends etc. If we use trends
to forecast the future of communication science, we quickly end up looking into the
latest developments in the ﬁeld of digitalization and visualization of communication
as well as into the subject “social media.” The consequences of these trends for
human communication are partly already understood today:
• Digitalised social networks have become more than just a “place of entertain-
ment”; they have also become politically relevant;
• Professionalism (trained journalists) is increasingly losing room for the “viral”
dissemination of content;
• Trust mechanisms are shaken, and information is increasingly losing value;
• The exchange of information gains spatial and temporal extension but is
increasingly losing the reference to the context; and
• The democratization of knowledge and science is taking place.
Are we heading towards a self-determined and, at the same time, cooperative
individualism? Or do we, as a society, will prefer to return to an authoritarian
system that dictates what is “credible”? What if we would act with the premise that
it is not the future that has to shape our decisions today, but rather our decisions
today shape our future? With every new decision, our social reality changes. Our
ideals are our compass. Let us stay awake for changes, face our ideals, and be
courageous in our decisions (Tilia Stingl de Vasconcelos Guedes 2020).
In my view, the tradition of transdisciplinary is still in a niche within the sci-
entiﬁc communities. Due to the increase of “wicked problems” and the intercon-
nectedness of all domains of private and public life, as we had just witnessed in the
COVID crisis, modern societies are more and more dependent on inter- and
transdisciplinary policy advice. I envision that transdisciplinary approaches will
22
Integrated Science 2050: Science Without Borders
475

become mainstream within the next decades providing appropriate and robust
knowledge for a successful transformation towards a sustainable future. This
transdisciplinary vision of sciences will include the traditional and still important
curiosity driven research tradition but it will be enriched by goal-oriented, strategic
research concepts as well as catalytic research methods to deﬁne and design dis-
course architectures for an effective interaction between science, politics and society
(Ortwin Renn 2020).
What will my ﬁeld—that is to say, the philosophy of sustainability science—
look like in 30 years? How can this ﬁeld contribute to an integrated science? At this
junction, when we appear to be frightfully close to losing control over climate
change and democracies across the globe are under immense pressure, it is hard to
engage in the kind of dispassionate and descriptive prognosticating one imagines
previous generations of scientists could afford to do. Instead, we have to ask: if we
(who? one wonders) ﬁnd a path through the thicket and the thorns, how could my
ﬁeld have contributed? What questions do we need to pursue? It seems to be the
most pressing problem of a somewhat philosophical nature concern precisely the
role science can play in supporting environmentally and socially sustainable soci-
eties. What would such a science look like? Three decades from now I see a
philosophy of science that engages in full with these problems, closely involved
both with science and society (Henrik Thorén 2020).
Core Messages
• The integrated person has a personality trait to incorporate all social,
political, and economic aspects into life.
• Integrated thinking based on a multi-variant knowledge system enables the
integrated person to deal with complex problems effectively.
• A social robot resulting from the integration of human emotions into ar-
tiﬁcial intelligence might serve society.
• Management under changing conditions of life is possible with methods
that consider the integration of smart, hybrid, and holistic, multipoint,
multi-shareholder perspective approaches into organizations.
• A sustainable future comes to ﬂy with a sustainable, integrated science
(Fig. 1).
476
A. Saghazadeh et al.

References
1. Chen M, Zhang H, Liu W, Zhang W (2014) The global pattern of urbanization and economic
growth: evidence from the last three decades. PLoS ONE 9(8):e103799
2. Senf C, Pﬂugmacher D, Zhiqiang Y, Sebald J, Knorn J, Neumann M, Hostert P, Seidl R
(2018) Canopy mortality has doubled in Europe’s temperate forests over the last three
decades. Nat Commun 9(1):1–8
3. Choudhury BA, Saha SK, Konwar M, Sujith K, Deshamukhya A (2019) Rapid drying of
Northeast India in the last three decades: climate change or natural variability? J Geophys Res
Atmos 124(1):227–237
4. Chauhan A, Yu Q, Ray N, Farooqui Z, Huang B, Durbin EB, Tucker T, Evers M, Arnold S,
Anthony LB (2018) Global burden of neuroendocrine tumors and changing incidence in
Kentucky. Oncotarget 9(27):19245
5. Vicente-Serrano SM, Quiring SM, Peña-Gallardo M, Yuan S, Domínguez-Castro F (2020) A
review of environmental droughts: increased risk under global warming? Earth Sci Rev
201:102953. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.earscirev.2019.102953
6. Wang G, Wang P, Wang T-Y, Zhang Y-C, Yu J-J, Ma N, Frolova NL, Liu C-M (2019)
Contrasting changes in vegetation growth due to different climate forcings over the last three
decades in the selenga-baikal basin. Remote Sens 11(4):426
7. Takemoto Y, Ota E, Yoneoka D, Mori R, Takeda S (2016) Japanese secular trends in
birthweight and the prevalence of low birthweight infants during the last three decades: a
population-based study. Sci Rep 6(1):1–6
Fig. 1 The group ﬂight of birds (sciences) and the reﬂection of their co-ﬂying (integrated science)
in the sea
22
Integrated Science 2050: Science Without Borders
477

8. Otekunrin OA, Otekunrin OA, Sawicka B, Ayinde IA (2020) Three decades of ﬁghting
against hunger in Africa: progress, challenges and opportunities. World Nutr 11(3):86–111
9. Pan N, Feng X, Fu B, Wang S, Ji F, Pan S (2018) Increasing global vegetation browning
hidden in overall vegetation greening: insights from time-varying trends. Remote Sens
Environ 214:59–72
10. Chaturvedi BK (2019) Poverty and development: global problems from an Indian perspective.
J Glob Ethics 15(1):55–66
11. Chen Z, Xu L, Shi W, Zeng F, Zhuo R, Hao X, Fan P (2020) Trends of female and male breast
cancer incidence at the global, regional, and national levels, 1990–2017. Breast Cancer Res
Treat 180(2):481–490
12. Saklayen MG (2018) The global epidemic of the metabolic syndrome. Curr Hypertens Rep 20
(2):12
13. Rosling H, Rosling O, Rosling Rönnlund A (2018) Factfulness: ten reasons we’re wrong
about the world-and why things are better than you think. Flatiron Books, New York
14. Lucas K, Renn O, Jaeger C, Yang S (2018) Systemic risks: a homomorphic approach on the
basis of complexity science. Int J Disaster Risk Sci 9(3):292–305
15. Oecd I (2003) Emerging risks in the 21st century: an agenda for action
478
A. Saghazadeh et al.

Index
A
Ability, 15, 44, 45, 105, 112, 114, 120, 153,
182–184, 203, 216, 218, 229, 230,
241, 242, 252, 291, 297, 313, 314,
323, 324, 326, 328, 331, 385, 424,
429, 451, 470, 473
Abstractions, 51, 101, 104, 106, 107, 189, 193,
202, 262, 265, 293–295, 297, 307
Accumulation, 47, 306, 316
Act, 15, 18, 21–23, 29, 45, 54, 55, 82, 111,
112, 120, 171, 185, 191, 200, 224,
261, 270, 283, 285, 289, 292, 325,
328, 355, 402, 422, 424, 469, 475
Actants, 239, 240, 244, 245, 250, 251, 253
Activities, multidisciplinary, 85, 96
Activities, non-scientiﬁc, 8
Actor Network Theory (ANT), 239
Actors
actors, non-scientiﬁc, 132, 136, 138, 139
Adaptation
adaptation levels, 364, 365
adaptation principles, 342, 343, 345–347,
354, 356
adaptation process, 63, 342, 345, 355, 363
adaptive networks, 335, 336, 338, 339, 342,
343, 346, 348, 354–358, 363, 365,
366, 370–372
adaptive processes, 335, 338, 342, 369, 370
adaptive temporal-causal network models,
342, 372
Aesthetics, 66, 109, 115–118, 120, 124, 161,
221, 224, 228, 243, 264, 380
Agency
agency problems, 424
agency theory, 419, 421, 424, 425
agents
agents, virtual, 335, 379, 384, 385
Aggregation, 335, 339, 341, 344–346, 348,
352–354, 356–358, 362, 369
Agreement method of, 170, 171
Algorithms, 72, 73, 308, 324, 414, 473
Alter Ego, 289
Altruism, 449, 452, 455, 456
Ambiguity, 49, 50, 136, 138, 139, 380, 422,
423, 444
Analysis, structural, 411
Animals, 4, 44, 64, 83, 110, 111, 119, 183,
186, 192, 201, 237, 240, 241,
244–246, 249, 259, 266, 294, 296,
308, 355, 380, 383, 454, 471, 472
Answers, 9, 69, 71, 172, 174, 224, 229, 282,
283, 297, 308, 469
Antennae
antenna, 176, 177, 246
antenna length, 176
Anthropocentric vision, 235, 237, 241, 243,
245
Anthropomorphism, 377–380, 383, 385, 386,
388
Anti-matter, 190
Anxiety, 7, 16, 238
Apparatus, new conceptual, 253
Appearance, 4, 102, 192, 199, 213, 226, 228,
261, 262, 305, 379, 380, 382, 384,
385, 387–389
Applications tasks, 377, 386, 387, 389
Approaches
approaches, hybrid, 113
approaches, ideological, 421
approaches, processual, 68, 69, 72
approaches, p-value, 91
approaches, scientiﬁc, 127, 130, 197
approaches, smart, 473, 474
approaches, systematic, 372
approaches, system-level, 422
Approximations, 174, 193
AQIs, 182, 184, 190, 203, 204
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer
Nature Switzerland AG 2021
N. Rezaei (ed.), Integrated Science, Integrated Science 1,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65273-9
479

Architecture, 66, 69, 71, 72, 136, 138, 139,
207, 214, 305, 338, 339, 476
Art
art, bio, 235, 237, 238, 242, 243, 249, 251,
252, 254, 469
art work of, 47
artistic practice, 115, 119, 124, 219, 239
artists
artists, bio, 239, 249–251
artists, young, 227
artist’s health condition, 245
artwork, 208, 227, 371
Art and science, 119, 207–209, 217, 222, 223,
225, 229
Art and science approach, 217
Artiﬁcial intelligence, 59, 74, 302, 303, 307,
321, 326, 327, 337, 461, 471–473,
476
Artistic practice, 250
Assemblage, 258, 260, 263, 264, 266–268, 276
Assent
notional assent, 44
real assent, 40, 45, 46, 51, 52
Assessment, 21, 88, 94, 95, 127, 139, 145, 147,
152, 153, 183, 195, 203, 248, 266,
385, 444
Atom
atomic nuclei, 187, 190, 191, 194
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), 177, 384
Awareness
awareness, modes of, 313
B
Balance, 16, 208, 230, 386, 442, 443, 449, 454,
472
Baldwin, 62–64
Baquedano, Manuel, 269
Base network
base network structure, 344, 345
base states, 347, 348
base state values, 348, 354
Behavior
behavioral scientists, 11
behavior, altruistic, 440, 452
behavior control, 419, 422, 423
behavior, human, 59, 62, 111, 112, 115,
385
behavior, robot’s, 385
Being, 7–9, 11, 13, 17, 19, 21, 22, 27, 28, 30,
39–43, 46, 49–52, 54–57, 61,
67–69, 81, 85, 87, 90–95, 100, 105,
110, 112, 113, 116–118, 121, 122,
131, 139, 154–156, 166, 170,
182–184, 186–191, 197–204,
207–216, 217, 218, 220, 221, 223,
224, 227, 229, 230, 235–245,
247–254, 258, 260, 264, 267, 284,
290, 293, 294, 296, 304, 305, 309,
312, 313, 315, 324, 325, 328, 329,
331, 332, 338, 347, 355, 358, 370,
371, 386, 408, 423, 431, 467, 468,
470–472
Beliefs, scientiﬁc, 88
Beneﬁt orientation, 134
Bias, systematic, 169, 170
Big Bang, 189, 190
Biology
biologists, 87, 124, 155, 156, 176, 182,
183, 286, 293, 326, 404
bio-network, 238
Bird, 33, 164, 347, 477
Bits, 81, 182, 184, 186, 189, 190, 203, 204
Bodies
bodies, biological, 264
bodies, non-human, 260, 270
body language, 380, 384, 385, 388, 389
Bonding, 119, 191, 335, 338, 343, 346–349,
352, 372
Borders
borders, important, 1, 12
borders, world-deﬁning, 12
Border zone, 239, 249
Boundaries
boundary object concept, 154–156
boundary objects, 145, 147, 154–157
Brain, 2, 14, 17, 24, 28, 33, 92, 110, 171, 202,
263, 295, 326–328, 337, 343, 355,
370, 371, 385
Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor (BDNF),
355
Bureaucracy, 421, 426, 428
Business models, 442, 447, 452–456
C
Cancer, 15, 17, 18, 93, 121, 467
Capacity, 5, 23, 43, 44, 46, 116, 209, 214, 216,
220, 227, 229, 230, 236, 246,
263–265, 277, 295, 296, 327,
408–410, 439, 447, 450, 454
Care
caring, 17, 238, 242, 243
Carrier, 54, 129, 136, 139, 183, 197, 198, 201,
202
Cases
cases, hard, 86, 95
cases, individual, 72, 73, 468
Casting of heart and mind, 56
Catalytic
480
Index

catalytic research, 132, 135–140, 476
catalytic research concepts, 135, 137, 138
Causality
causal pathways, 363–365, 372
Cells
cell content, 202
cells, red, 358, 366
Certitude, 40, 44–47, 53, 54
Changeability
changing, 73
changing world, 3, 61, 62, 461, 467, 468
Character
character, moral, 47, 55
Chemistry
chemical processes, 192–194, 198
chemical reactions, 94, 192, 198–200, 324
Chile, 258, 260, 267–269, 271, 273, 275, 276,
280
Chilean, 257, 258, 269, 277, 278
Cities, 268, 269, 303
Claims, 10, 11, 50, 54, 87, 111, 112, 114,
121–123, 128, 131, 135, 136, 138,
147, 148, 167, 175, 248, 262, 274,
293, 312, 397
Classic
classic science approaches, 131
classical physics, 164, 182, 185, 186, 191,
196, 200, 202
classical physics, framework of, 196
Client, 134, 424, 425
Climate change, 13, 87, 127, 128, 146, 147,
399, 467, 476
Clusters, 348, 353, 354
Co-ﬂy, 477
Co-ﬂyer, xii
Coherence, 105, 107, 196
Collaboration, 9, 17, 22, 27–30, 89, 124, 131,
147, 149, 155, 156, 223, 225, 432,
445, 468
Combination functions
combination function weights, 339, 344,
345, 358
Commitment
commitment social, 446, 447, 449
Common elements, 336, 337
Communication
communication cues, 377, 379–381, 383,
387–389
communication cues, nonverbal, 377, 379,
383, 387–389
communication sciences, 136, 281, 475
communication systems, 289–291
Communities, scientiﬁc, 135, 138, 475
Companies, 29, 95, 227, 311, 330, 441, 443,
445, 447, 448, 450, 453, 455
Competition, 29, 172, 426, 441, 449, 453
Complexity
complexity, organizational, 403
complexity, science, 395–398
complexity science and complex thought,
397, 398
complexity theory, 395, 397, 398
Complex problems
complex globalized problems, 3
complex molecules, 191, 200
complex problem processing, 7
complex problems, idea of, 397, 415
complex problems, management of, 405,
415, 416
complex problems, managing, 395–397,
404
complex problems, new, 3, 6, 13, 33
Complex problem-solving, 1, 5, 7, 33
Complex processes, 63, 260, 370
Complex thought, 395–398, 400
Compost, 257, 258, 260–263, 276
Computations
computational models, 372, 395, 397, 406,
410, 471
Computers, 6, 149, 152, 170, 281, 308, 310,
324, 326–329, 332, 337, 338, 379,
395, 397, 406, 409, 410, 415, 416,
473
Conception
conception, inclusive, 106, 107
conception, scientiﬁc, 118
Concepts
concepts, humanism, 207–210, 212
concepts, scientiﬁc, 118, 323
Conceptualize
conceptualizations, 19, 64, 67, 68, 74, 405,
429, 468
conceptualized phenomena, 59, 73
Conditions, 3, 14, 16, 17, 22–24, 30, 63, 68,
69, 72, 99, 102–104, 106, 115, 118,
122, 124, 129, 131, 133, 134, 136,
155, 161, 166, 172, 200, 245, 249,
250, 259–265, 271, 285, 330, 331,
351, 354, 422, 426, 428, 447, 470,
476
Connections
connections, incoming base, 340, 357
Connection weights
connection weights, initial, 350
Conscience, 42, 54, 55, 267, 282
Consciousness
Index
481

consciousness and self-assurance, 292
Consensus, scientiﬁc, 86, 87, 95, 128
Conservation, 24, 161, 163, 164, 443
Consumption, 306, 310, 311, 313, 316, 325,
443, 445
Contemplation, intellectual, 55
Contestation, 444
Context
context active, 315
context changing, 59, 66, 73, 74, 315
Contract, 133, 421, 424
Contrarians, 88
Contrast
contrast interdisciplinarity by, 84, 85
contrast scientiﬁc truth claims, 128, 131,
136
Control
control group, 169, 170
control state, 359, 360
control system, 32, 420, 422, 423, 425, 428,
429, 431
control system, managerial, 431
control, behavioral, 20, 423, 425
control, clan, 428–430
control, function of, 421
control, market, 426, 428, 435
Controversy, 377, 388, 397, 398
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR), 439,
441–454, 456
Corporate social responsibility. See CSR
Correlation, 88, 90, 176, 193, 197, 451
Cosmos, 105, 181, 183, 185, 187, 190, 212,
266
Coulomb ﬁelds, 194
Countries
developing countries, 14, 15, 18, 19, 311
Coupled models, modular, 147, 154–157
Creativity, 29, 117, 161, 207, 227, 315, 316,
419, 420, 423, 435, 441, 442,
450–452, 454, 469
Cross-cultural unit of school science education,
19
Culture
culture, ﬁrm, 429
culture, organizational, 429, 430, 435
Cyborg, 237, 243, 246, 248
D
Death, 14–16, 47, 65, 110, 165, 236, 244, 250,
259, 261, 282, 283, 327, 467
Decisions, 3, 5, 13, 14, 20, 22, 39–41, 43, 51,
56, 61, 69, 72, 94, 127, 129, 138,
139, 150, 169, 221, 282, 284, 285,
289, 291, 297, 309, 311, 331, 332,
372, 378, 401, 402, 408, 415, 448,
452, 471, 473, 475
Declarations, 44, 50, 69, 270, 272, 447
Defense system, 364, 365, 366, 368
Deﬁnition, 3, 5, 8, 13, 24, 26, 29, 46, 61, 63,
73, 112, 123, 163, 175, 197, 237,
249, 250, 260, 262, 267, 281, 296,
346, 350, 352, 353, 362, 382, 422,
423, 430, 444, 446, 447, 468, 475
Democracy, 27, 311, 321, 330, 470
Demonstrators, 268, 270, 272, 275
Departments, 39, 59, 81, 111, 116, 124, 235,
257, 313, 377, 426, 439, 445, 474,
475
Depression, 7, 16, 355
Depths, 41, 49, 52, 200
Descartes, 102, 103, 106, 107, 173–175, 337
Description
description, processual, 62, 398
description, scientiﬁc, 186, 199
description, scientiﬁc problem, 138
Descriptive
descriptive categories, network of, 67, 71,
72
descriptive claims, 121, 122, 124, 125
Design
design, systematic knowledge base, 137
Despair, 49, 50
Despret, 237, 239, 241
Development
developmental phenomena, 63, 64
development legal, 447, 448
Devices
devices, integrative, 145, 147, 150, 156,
157
Dewey, 109, 115–120, 124
Dichotomies, 237–240, 243, 245, 251, 469
Differences
differences, cultural, 95, 387, 435
differences, method of, 170, 171
differentiation, functional, 285
Dignidad, 269, 272
Dignity Square, 269
Dimensions, 16, 21, 43, 51, 61, 134, 148, 152,
185, 187, 196, 221, 222, 226, 227,
230, 238, 245, 247, 253, 265, 267,
268, 305, 309, 358, 371, 372, 401,
402, 442–444, 446, 450, 451, 454
Disciplinary
disciplinary boundaries, 25, 26
Disciplines
disciplines, academic, 24, 25
disciplines, parent, 85
482
Index

Discourses, 24, 129, 130, 136, 137, 139, 262,
270, 316, 400
Discoveries, 93, 114, 115, 122, 124, 133, 174,
212, 301, 303, 308
Diseases, 2, 14–17, 33, 245, 323, 327, 329,
331, 467
Disembodied chatbots, 383
Disgust, 364–366, 368, 383, 384
Disorders, 2, 14–17, 33, 335, 336–338, 355,
356, 370, 372, 473
Distance, 28, 121, 163, 168, 172, 174, 175,
196, 197, 200, 218, 219, 242, 274,
290, 304, 307, 328, 352, 353, 354,
363, 382, 387, 388, 470
Distinguishing, 117, 146, 148, 286, 293, 446
Distribution, 69, 136, 176, 191, 192, 198, 238,
240, 270, 316, 439
Diversity
diversity, internal, 71, 72, 74, 468
Divisions, 12, 13, 33, 262
DNA, 201, 246, 326, 327, 447
Drexler, 325–328
Dynamic
dynamics, 5, 23, 55, 56, 59, 62–66, 68, 69,
72, 73, 133, 152, 153, 168, 192,
194–196, 202, 215, 227, 253, 281,
306, 316, 330, 337–339, 342–345,
354, 370–372, 407, 411, 414, 415,
468
dynamic systems, 56, 62, 65, 69
E
Economy
economy, solidarity, 439, 442, 446, 447
Education
educational systems, 21, 310, 312, 315,
317, 472
education, internationalized, 21, 22
education, system of, 9, 210
Effect functions, 410, 411
Einstein, 164, 184, 192, 193, 196, 330
Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen correlations, 192,
193
Electromagnetic waves, 164, 194
Electrons, 89, 174, 175, 187, 190–192, 194,
195
Embodiment
embodiment processes, 258, 267, 270, 277
Emotions, 5, 17, 46, 69, 209, 222, 223, 294,
295, 297, 328, 335, 336, 338, 355,
356, 360, 370, 372, 382–385, 471,
472, 476
Empathy, 223, 294, 372, 378, 471, 472
Employees, 12, 311, 316, 317, 419, 421–423,
428, 429, 439–442, 448, 450–454
Energy, 7, 22, 102, 106, 133, 134, 140, 152,
164, 182–184, 186, 187, 192,
194–199, 202–204, 223, 264, 265,
304, 316
Enframing, 329, 332
Engineers, 212, 304, 305, 308, 326–328
Enlightenment project, 312
Entanglements, 191, 199, 260, 263, 400, 401,
403
Entities, non-human, 471
Environment
environment interacting, 29
Equations, 51, 164, 165, 337, 338, 340, 344,
368, 369
Equilibrium
equilibrium equations, 342, 368, 369
equilibrium state, 348, 352, 353, 363
equilibrium values, 352, 353, 362, 369
Ethnicity, 17, 121, 123, 383
Everyday life, 2, 6, 19, 20, 22, 167, 184, 187,
198, 202, 305, 310, 316, 327, 332,
442, 472
Evidence, empirical, 10, 11, 166, 407, 410, 433
Evolution, 7, 64, 80, 110, 111, 114–116, 118,
121, 123, 124, 132, 133, 188–191,
200, 203, 210–213, 222, 295, 371,
398, 453
Exception, 270, 272, 291, 311, 357
Exchange, 21, 22, 29, 129, 136, 137, 154, 156,
157, 186, 191, 194, 195, 198, 199,
222, 228, 230, 295, 316, 336, 408,
475
Expectations, 92, 241, 289, 292, 380, 423, 428,
429, 443, 444
Experience
experience, cosmic, 99, 105
experience, personal, 68, 137, 221, 245,
251
experience, primary, 103
experience, sensory, 224, 250
Experiments, 82, 89, 90, 94, 133, 161, 165,
166, 168, 169, 172, 179, 195, 196,
250, 258, 315, 338, 470
Expertise, scientiﬁc, 95, 139
Experts, 25, 85, 86, 94, 138, 140, 223, 285,
327, 431
Extension, 11, 102, 113, 235, 251, 305, 450,
475
Eye gaze, 379, 380, 385–388
Index
483

F
Fabric, 170, 178, 269
Facial expressions
facial expressions, human-like, 384
Factors, causal, 169
Falsiﬁability, 10, 11, 109, 112, 120–122
Feedbacks, 5, 153, 370, 383, 421, 422, 424
Feeling state, 359, 360
Feynman, 194, 222, 322, 324, 325
Fields
ﬁelds, magnetic, 164, 191
ﬁelds, photon, 195
Findings, scientiﬁc, 113, 215
Firms, 324, 407, 419, 421, 426, 429, 434, 439,
441–447, 449, 450, 452–454, 456,
474
First Nations science systems, 19
Flight, 477
Flower, 164, 222, 243, 244
Flying, 477
Focus, 28, 41, 67, 82, 84, 130, 147, 167, 183,
198, 207, 210, 217, 219, 220, 243,
262, 272, 283, 286, 301, 302, 313,
337, 355, 356, 359, 377, 385, 387,
388, 404, 408, 419, 420, 422, 423,
428, 430, 433, 434, 439, 441,
449–451, 454
Forces
forces, evolutionary, 111, 112, 116
Formation, 21, 29, 55, 63, 136, 148, 188,
199–201, 210, 230, 265, 409
Framework, 21, 26, 62, 66, 68, 70, 73, 121,
130, 133, 147, 148, 151, 154, 157,
182, 186, 193, 196, 203, 215, 230,
238, 239, 249, 253, 323, 395, 397,
401, 406, 407, 409, 433, 447, 469
Freedom, 24, 39, 40, 46, 61, 92, 93, 118, 211,
230, 292, 314, 321, 329, 331, 332,
384, 451, 470, 472
Function
function, cognitive, 355
G
Galileo, 86, 165, 166, 168, 172
Gender, 14, 100, 111, 113, 121–124, 382, 383,
387
Geological, 83, 200, 260, 261, 263
Geology, 81, 82
Gestures, 384, 385
Global issues, 2, 7, 13, 30, 33
Globalization, 1, 12–14, 18, 33, 302, 324, 328,
473
Global management knowledge, 432
Global maximum satisfaction, 411, 414, 415
Global performance, 439, 442–444, 450–452
Goal-oriented research, 134, 135, 138, 140
Goals, 9, 12, 25, 26, 28, 29, 33, 128, 134, 135,
138, 139, 215, 323, 332, 372,
407–409, 412, 414, 422–424, 426,
428, 430, 441, 448, 450, 471
Gravitation, 173–175
Greenwashing, 445, 449
Griesemer, 154–156
Group
group ﬂight, 477
Growth, 9, 13, 15, 20, 23, 29, 112, 125, 152,
261, 272, 297, 301, 310–312, 323,
330, 331, 447–449, 453, 467, 469
H
Half-foreign conceptus, 364
Hand
handedness, 199
handmade producers, 411, 412, 414, 415
Happiness, 47, 325, 383, 384
Harbisson’s projects, 247, 248
Health
health, good, 364, 365
Heart, 45, 47, 56, 138, 173, 261, 266, 269, 307,
323, 328, 467
Hebbian learning
Hebbian learning functions, 362, 363
Heidegger, 225, 301, 303, 312, 329, 332
Hemispheres, 263, 295
History, 1, 8, 9, 11, 17, 22, 24, 39, 42, 56, 65,
71, 81, 82, 92, 94–96, 100, 120,
124, 183, 197, 203, 210, 213, 214,
216, 220, 223, 243, 249, 261, 262,
269, 301–303, 308, 311, 398, 399,
402, 405, 429, 430, 470, 475
Holistic, 62, 81, 133, 193, 214, 215, 227, 230,
389, 419, 431, 434, 474, 476
Homophily
homophily, bonding by, 346, 347
Human
human activity, 9, 59, 61, 64, 65, 74, 117,
227
human agency, 99, 101, 103, 104, 240
human beings, 41, 46, 67, 81, 87, 90, 105,
112, 113, 116, 117, 121, 209–212,
215, 216, 227, 229, 230, 237, 241,
290, 293, 324, 325, 469, 470
human body, 102, 173, 224, 237, 245, 250,
251, 259, 305, 324, 326, 337, 454
human brain, 326–328, 371
human characteristics, 372, 378, 471
human communities, 112
human composting, 258, 259, 263
484
Index

human cultures, 79, 84, 85
human development, 56, 59, 62, 63, 68,
227, 330, 331
human experience
human experience, diversity of, 163,
172
human experience, exceptionality of, 67
human facial expression studies, 383
human features, 379, 389
human freedom, 321, 329, 331, 332
human immune systems, 245
human intelligence
human knowledge, integral, 28
humanism, 207–216, 229, 230, 325, 441
humanists, 178, 215
humanitas, 210, 211, 230
humanities, 8, 24, 81, 82, 89, 109–117,
119–125, 163, 210, 215, 220, 225,
226, 229, 230, 237, 238, 395, 397,
398, 469, 474
humanities scholars, 113
human life, 48, 107, 117, 128, 323, 331,
332, 378, 471
human mind, 42, 62, 118, 327
humanoid robots
human-robot interaction. See HRI
humanoid robots, anthropomorphism in,
380
humanoid robots, nonverbal
communication cues of, 385
human perceptions, 303, 309, 378, 379
human person, 39–43, 51, 53, 56, 468
human relations, 242, 254, 302, 317
humans, 24, 30, 67, 111, 112, 115–117,
119–121, 124, 183, 186, 190, 197,
204, 230, 238–240, 244–246,
248–250, 254, 259, 266, 281,
284–286, 288, 290, 291, 294, 296,
303, 305–307, 309, 312, 322, 325,
329, 337, 371, 377–380, 382–388,
447, 467, 471
human selves, 111, 112, 117
human voices, 379, 382
Human-Robot Interaction (HRI), 378–380,
382, 385–389
Humpty Dumpty, 162, 163
Hybrid systems, 30
Hypercomplexity, 282, 283, 297
Hypotheses, 61, 67, 118, 122, 169, 172, 470
I
Iconic, 269
Ideaology
ideological organizations, 430
Illnesses, mental, 15–17
Images, 20, 43, 46, 48, 52, 57, 93, 371
IMMERS
immune system, 15, 88, 244, 245, 364
Inability, 48, 173, 260, 312, 313
Incentives, 133, 134, 450
Indigenous
indigenous knowledge, 21, 432
indigenous knowledge systems, 21
indigenous management research. See IMR
indigenous research, 419, 421, 431–433,
435
Indigenous Management Research (IMR),
431–434
Induction, 10, 72, 123, 174–176
Infections, 14, 15, 17, 127, 336, 337
Informatics, 24, 281, 337, 338
Information
information processing
information processing, intelligent, 182,
183, 197, 203, 204
information storage, 201
information systems
information, complete, 424, 425
information, factual, 128, 201, 472
information, stored, 201, 202
Ingredients, 151, 157
Injections, 244, 245
Injustice, 120, 269, 468
Innovation
innovation process, 439, 441, 450, 451
Inputs, 68, 148, 153, 337, 338, 426
Inquiry
inquiry, scientiﬁc, 8, 121, 127
Instrumentality
instruments, 23, 122, 221, 303–305, 307,
309, 312, 315, 317, 325
Integrated
integrated approach, transdisciplinary, 31
integrated assessment models (IAMs), 145,
147, 152, 153, 157
Integrated Assessment Models (IAMs), 147,
152, 153, 157
Integration
integration of science, 22, 84, 92, 96, 103
integration of science and technology, 22
Index
485

Integration (cont.)
integration, scientiﬁc, 103, 106
integration, the sciences, 88, 100, 101,
104–106, 470
Intellect
intelligence, 13, 59, 74, 110, 117, 119, 302,
303, 307, 321, 326, 327, 335, 337,
371, 461, 471–473, 476
Interconnections, 3, 5, 63, 64, 130, 227, 403
Interdisciplinary
interdisciplinary activities, 85
interdisciplinary research, 130, 474
Interests
interests, divergence of, 424
interests, extra-theoretical, 225
Internet, 14, 18, 27, 316, 324, 328, 329, 469
Interventions, notable, 269
Interview
interview, trailing, 69–71
Invariance
invariant, 9, 164, 165
Investigation, 9, 39, 41, 67, 68, 101, 102, 104,
127, 195, 199, 217–221, 323, 409
Ipseity, 99, 105
J
Journal of Artistic Research (JAR), 217
K
Kant, 48, 53, 100, 264, 312
Kantrowitz, 94, 95
Kilograms, 165
Knowledge
knowledge carriers, 129, 136, 139
knowledge claims, 135, 147, 148
knowledge construction, 396, 415
knowledge processes, 28
knowledge production
knowledge production, systematic, 6
knowledge recipients, 129
knowledge systems
knowledge, building, 218, 469
knowledge, disciplinary, 25, 133
knowledge, experiential, 129, 131
knowledge, expert, 127, 136
knowledge, instinctive, 167
knowledge, integrated, 28, 214
knowledge, meaningful, 82, 89
knowledge, non-scientiﬁc, 139
knowledge, process-related, 136
knowledge, reliablec, 10
knowledge, robust, 131, 135, 139, 140,
476
knowledge, sharing, 236, 240, 242
knowledge, structure of, 216, 398
knowledge, systematic, 6, 8, 131, 133,
137
knowledge, technological, 442, 450
knowledge, true, 101
knowledge, use scientiﬁc, 129
L
Laboratory, 133, 168, 172, 223, 239–241, 246,
249–251, 304, 327, 423, 434, 439
Ladder, 49, 148, 187
Language
language, natural, 72, 382, 397, 398
Laval-Jeantet’s project, 245, 246
Laws, 3, 52, 63, 86, 89, 114, 123, 125, 161,
163–165, 170, 173, 175, 177–179,
185, 270, 276, 286, 324, 326, 397,
471
Learning
learning process, 22, 129, 131, 356, 360
learning science, 2, 19
Legs, 176, 177, 384
Length, 83, 93, 165, 167, 176, 272, 414
Levels
levels, low, 365, 385, 415
levels, stress, 359, 360
Liberal Arts, 207, 210–215, 230, 475
Life
life paths, 61, 69, 71–73
life processes, 197, 370
life sciences
life, notion of, 265
life, political, 23, 24, 51, 133
life, process of, 203
process of, 239
Light, 7, 9, 14, 49, 53, 118, 128, 138, 162,
164–167, 170, 171, 184, 186, 190,
196, 198, 202, 224, 258, 263, 277,
297, 397, 444, 446, 448, 452, 465
Likeness, 269
Liminal beings
liminal beings, nonhuman, 249
liminality, 249–251, 253, 254
Little medical data, 245
Living
living beings, 182–184, 186, 189, 197–199,
201–204, 241, 249, 250
living world, 302, 303, 305, 307, 310,
314–316
Local phenomenon, 433
Logic, 42, 43, 47, 48, 53, 64, 117, 166, 167,
174, 175, 203, 258, 267, 268, 277,
307, 309, 315, 423, 468
Long-term effects, 245
486
Index

Loop, recursive, 398, 399, 404
Luhmann, 281, 285–293
M
Machines, 30, 115, 209, 223, 269, 275, 294,
322, 324, 326, 327, 330
Mainstream consensus, 86–88, 92, 93
Management
management information systems, 420
management research, 431–433
management science, 419, 420, 439, 444,
452, 473, 474
managerial control, 419, 420, 431, 433–435
managerial control theories, 419, 420, 431
managers, 29, 422–424, 428–430, 439, 444,
448, 450–452, 454, 474
Markets, 22, 29, 39, 324, 380, 426, 427, 432
Martians, 176, 177
Mass, 39, 49, 89, 162, 165, 174, 175, 183, 184,
187, 190, 198, 201, 304, 305, 310,
313, 325
Master, 109, 257, 281, 288, 305, 321, 329
Material content, 189
Mathematics
mathematical analysis, 338, 340, 341, 345,
346, 348, 359, 360, 362
mathematical formalizations, 337, 338
Mating, 114, 171
Matter
matter, moral, 55
Maturana, 291, 293, 400
Meaning
meaning, constraint of, 291
meaning, personal, 18, 20
Mechanisms, 28, 46, 60, 62, 63, 68, 73, 74, 87,
176, 177, 196, 245, 275, 283, 284,
292, 327, 336, 370, 421, 429, 446,
448, 451, 468, 475
Media art, 223, 224, 377
Medical consequences, 245
Medicine, 88–92, 173, 214, 235, 240, 322,
326–328, 336–339, 370
Mental disorders, 2, 14–16, 33, 370, 473
Meta
metaknowledge, 2, 25, 33
metamodels, 153
metaperspective, 2, 25, 33
metaphors, 47, 49, 55, 65, 66, 119–121,
151, 294
metaplasticity
metaplasticity, stress-related, 355
meta-theories, 59, 62, 67, 68, 73, 74
Methodologies
methodological complexity, 403
Mind, 2, 6, 12, 14, 16, 23, 33, 39, 42–45, 47,
48, 52, 56, 62, 92, 102, 112, 114,
117, 118, 124, 133, 149, 178, 181,
200, 210, 216, 264, 291, 295, 307,
312, 322, 324, 327, 370, 471
Minority, 20, 84, 86–88, 95, 115
Model
model coupling, 152–154
modeling approach
modeling approach, adaptive
network-oriented, 336, 338
modeling framework, 151, 154
modeling process
modeling, causal, 338, 363, 372
models
models, complicated, 153
models, computer, 152, 409, 410, 415
models, dynamic, 339, 342
models, expert, 153, 154
models, general feature of, 156, 157
models, integrated, 147
models, role of, 149, 154
models, scientiﬁc, 147
models, theoretical, 67, 304
Modern technology
modernity, 39, 41, 210, 215, 325, 404
Modes, 103, 105, 188, 238, 258, 260–263,
265–267, 274, 276, 277, 313, 314,
469
Modules, 137, 139, 152, 154, 155
Molecules
molecules, individual, 194, 195
molecules, single, 197
motivations, intrinsic, 442, 450–452, 454,
456
Movements
movements, head, 385, 386
Multidisciplinarity
multidisciplinarity, interdisciplinarity by
contrast to, 85
multidisciplinary, 25, 31, 32, 81, 84, 85, 95,
96, 207, 215, 216, 223, 225, 431
multidisciplinary teams, 95, 223, 225
Multisystem diseases, 2, 14, 15, 33
Music, 27, 113, 161, 163, 177, 178, 210, 214,
266, 469
Mysticism, 81, 82
N
Nano
nanocomputers, 326–328
nanomachines, 324, 326–328
nanoscience, 321, 322, 331
Index
487

Nano (cont.)
nanotechnology, 13, 321–327, 329–332,
473
nanotube, 325, 326
Nation’s victory, 269
Natural sciences/cultural, 8, 24, 110, 182, 184,
187, 202–204, 287, 397, 469
Nature
nature, human, 24, 53, 113, 236, 237, 248,
261
nature, scientiﬁc, 107, 217
Nature and foundations of science, 117
Networking
network format, standard temporal-causal,
335, 345, 369
network model
network model, adaptive, 335, 354, 355,
365
network model, ﬁrst-order adaptive,
335, 348
network model, ﬁrst-order adaptive
social, 346, 347
network model, fourth-order adaptive,
335, 363, 365–368, 370
network model, implemented, 342, 362,
369
network model, reiﬁed, 355, 359, 366
network model, second-order adaptive,
335
network reiﬁcation, 338, 343, 371, 372
networks
networks, biological, 371
networks, reiﬁed, 345
network structure, 339, 342–345, 347, 371,
372
network structure characteristics
network structure, reiﬁed, 345, 347
Neuquen producers of, 411, 412, 414, 415
Neuroscience
neuroscience, cognitive, 343, 355, 372
Newman, 39, 41, 42, 44, 45, 47–56
Newton, 114, 164, 166, 173–176, 337
Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs), 28,
138
Non-science, 1, 8–11, 22
Norms
normative claims, 121–125
Notion, 67, 85, 86, 147, 154, 155, 157, 163,
184, 237–240, 242, 243, 247–249,
257, 260–265, 267, 275, 276, 285,
312, 330, 336, 338, 370, 371, 372,
399, 443, 444, 452, 454, 471, 474
Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions (NPIs), 150
Nuances, 71, 72, 219
Number, 5, 7, 14, 27, 44, 51, 54, 83, 85, 89, 94,
95, 102, 113, 123, 133, 136, 152,
164, 165, 168–170, 174, 176, 185,
192, 194, 197, 227, 283–285, 335,
336, 339, 341, 346, 354, 396, 410,
414, 419, 423–425, 429, 454, 467,
473
O
Object
object of study, 218, 219, 409
objective scientiﬁc phenomena, 183
objectives, 24, 26, 128, 131, 134, 135, 139,
140, 218, 224, 257, 258, 328, 420,
439, 442–444, 447, 448, 451, 453,
454
objects
objects, scientiﬁc, 103, 155
Observers, 164, 285, 293, 294, 378
Occurrences, 19, 52, 62, 65, 365
Ontology, 43, 99, 104, 106, 237, 304, 312,
313, 316, 317
Operations, 65, 151, 265, 270, 286–288, 290,
292, 305, 307, 309, 443, 448
Operieren, 292
Options, 41, 42, 51, 128–130, 133–139, 259,
283, 284, 471
Organizations. See NGOs
non-governmental organizations, 28
Orthodoxies, 111, 122
Output
output control, 422, 423, 425, 428
Outsiders, 85, 86, 88
P
Paciﬁc, 29
Pains, 295, 314
Parameter
parameter, dimensionless, 165
parameter, persistence, 356, 358, 362
Parascience, 1, 8
Parent knowledge system, 23
Participants, 25–28, 135, 138, 168–170, 199,
382, 387, 388, 409, 433, 441
Particles, 165, 174, 175, 182, 187, 188,
190–192, 195, 197, 198, 203, 204,
261, 322
Passions, 42, 46, 47, 106
Pathogens, 335, 337, 364–366, 368
Paths, individual, 69, 73
Patients, 12, 15–18, 295
Performance
performance evaluation systems
488
Index

performance, ﬁnancial, 439, 441, 449,
453, 454
Person
person assents, 43
personalism, 39, 41, 468
personality, 56, 211, 212, 226, 230, 314,
380, 384, 476
personal system, 48, 54, 55
Perspective
perspective, local, 433
perspective, new, 163, 297
perspective, scientiﬁc, 135, 226, 241, 355,
431
Phases, 65, 129, 249
Phenomena
phenomena, non-human, 257, 261, 276
phenomena, observable, 193
phenomena, studied, 66, 69, 71–73
Philosophy
philosophy of science, 81, 93, 109, 118,
149, 151, 162, 401, 476
Photons
photons, virtual, 194, 195, 199
Physicists, 11, 82–85, 174, 192, 222
Physics, 30, 81–83, 85, 89, 90, 95, 102, 161,
164–166, 173, 181–186, 188–191,
193, 194, 196, 200, 202, 222, 223,
238, 240, 264, 322, 337
Piaget, 398, 399
Planes, 51, 52, 72, 261, 365
Planet, 110, 114, 116, 169, 176, 190, 212, 226,
227, 262, 266, 327, 443, 469
Planning, 119, 195, 219, 395–397, 400, 404,
405, 409, 415, 416, 420
Plants, 66, 67, 164, 186, 195, 249, 260, 471
Plasticity
plasticity, synaptic, 355
Plaza Italia, 269, 272
Policy
policymakers, 87, 94, 128, 133–135, 140
policymaking, 127, 128, 130, 134, 136–139
Population, 9, 15, 16, 150, 176, 177, 268, 270,
337, 364, 366, 388, 441
Porter, 441, 455
Power, 13, 17, 46, 47, 50–53, 55, 94, 123, 124,
127, 136, 139, 166, 171, 238, 239,
245, 262, 272, 277, 284, 293,
323–326, 371, 400, 409, 414, 415,
420, 468, 470, 473
Practice, scientiﬁc, 11, 23, 101, 105, 145, 157
Pragmatism, 115, 116, 119, 401
Pragmatist Foundation, 109, 123
Pre-Columbian Diaguita people, 269
Preferences, 113, 133, 135, 139, 241, 382, 386,
387
Preﬁx, 8, 25–27
Pregnancy, 335, 339, 363–366, 368
Pressure, 16, 49, 87, 177, 192, 193, 198, 199,
364, 476
Prices, 268, 426, 428
Primas, 192–194, 202
Principles, regulative, 192
Prizes, scientiﬁc, 30
Probability, 44, 45, 54, 89–91, 94, 138
Problematization
problematization process, 399, 401
problems
problems, complexity of, 7, 400
problems, complex national, 3
problems, conceptualize developmental,
61
problems, mind-body, 92
problems, nature of, 1, 3
problems, non-scientiﬁc, 129
problems, real, 398
Process knowledge
processes
processes, biochemical, 192, 194, 201,
204, 337
processes, biological, 183, 324
processes, cognitive, 114, 401
processes, creative, 207, 220, 469
processes, cultural, 22, 112
processes, developmental, 65
processes, evolutionary, 181, 339, 365,
372
processes, knowledge-sharing, 306
processes, knowledge management, 441
processes, mental, 343, 370
processes, multiple, 261, 270
processes, organizational control, 422
processes, psychological, 62, 87
processes, robust knowledge-based, 136
processes, scientiﬁc, 471
Products, 17, 148, 185, 199, 316, 328, 399,
423, 426, 472
Professionals, 25, 28, 29, 40, 57, 91, 96, 156,
207, 245, 246, 304, 312, 316, 317,
429, 439, 443
Proﬁt maximization
proﬁts, 442, 445, 448
Projects, 18, 21, 25, 26, 81, 85, 90, 93, 104,
149, 150, 207, 217, 220, 223–225,
235, 237, 240, 242–248, 250, 253,
267, 278, 301, 312, 316, 325, 404,
433
Index
489

Properties
properties, polarization, 198, 199
Propositions, 43–45, 53, 54, 112, 114, 148,
161, 174, 275, 291, 350, 351, 433
Protests, traditional focal point of, 269
Protons, 190, 191
Protyposis, 181, 182, 184, 186, 189, 190, 197,
203, 204, 472
Proximity, 199, 387, 388
Pseudoscience, 1, 8
Psychical phenomena, 63
Psychic systems, 282, 283, 286, 290–293
Psychology, 43, 45, 59, 62, 64, 65, 67, 89, 94,
102, 127, 161, 168, 169, 177–179,
285, 336–338, 401, 431, 450, 451,
470
Public policies, 88, 92, 93, 95, 127, 395,
409–411, 415
Purpose, ﬁrm’s, 442, 448, 449, 451, 454
Q
Qualitative
qualitative analyses, 65, 73, 74, 468
qualitative research, 225, 432, 433, 455
Quantum
quantum bits, 184–187, 189
quantum ﬁeld theory, 194, 197
quantum information
quantum information, absolute, 182,
190, 203
quantum mechanics, 192, 193
quantum particles, 182, 187, 190, 203, 204
quantum processes
quantum structures, simplest, 184, 187
quantum system, 185, 187, 200
quantum theory, 181–187, 191–193, 196,
197, 200, 203
Questions, open, 377, 379, 380, 386, 388
R
Ratiocination, 44, 45, 47
Rationale for Integration The sciences
rationality, 99, 105
Reactors, nuclear, 80, 94
Realism
reality
reality, actual, 305
reality, human, 111, 329
reality, non-binary, 253
reality, part of, 101, 445
reality, sciences study, 101
real-world problems, 3, 7, 9, 21, 28, 131,
146
Reason
reasoning, 42–44, 46, 47, 51, 53, 55, 100,
174–176, 237, 248, 402, 404, 415,
444
Relations
relations, causal, 110, 336, 337, 365, 370
relationships, 12, 16, 21, 29, 30, 39, 61, 63,
64, 66, 67, 72, 89, 92, 130–133, 147,
154, 156, 157, 164, 165, 195, 207,
208, 218, 220, 222, 224, 225, 227,
230, 243, 257, 259, 260, 265, 266,
274, 277, 283, 287, 289, 295, 296,
305–307, 329, 339, 370, 377, 380,
382, 386–389, 424, 432, 433, 454,
471
research traditions
research, value of, 209
Renaissance, 210–212, 230
Renaissance humanism, 211, 230
Renamed Plaza, 269
Repeated damage, subject of, 269
Representations, 41, 50, 114, 147, 149, 207,
225, 228, 251, 259, 262, 267, 340,
357, 403, 414
research artists, 217
Research
research approaches, 66, 148, 468
research artist, 217
research boundaries, 73, 74
research concepts, 128, 132, 134, 135, 137,
139, 476
research problems, 61, 432
research process, 68, 129, 130, 139, 148,
221
research traditions
research, applied, 134
research, artistic, 217, 218, 220
research, biomedical, 246, 250
research, educational, 208, 221
research, fundamental, 14
research, social sciences, 81
research, value of, 221
research, word, 219
Resources
resources, natural, 305
Response-ability, 241, 242, 252
Responsibility, 20, 70, 104, 226, 227,
241–244, 246, 262, 266, 288, 292,
297, 372, 410, 439, 441, 443, 444,
446, 448, 449, 456, 471
Result control, 425
Revolt, 258, 266–269, 271, 272, 274, 275, 277
Rewards, 424, 425, 428, 451
490
Index

Reynolds number, 165
Risks, 2, 13, 145, 150, 151, 245, 294, 323, 326,
327, 364, 425, 467
Ritual, 92, 114, 249, 250, 253, 254, 259, 314
RNA, 200, 201
Robot:robots
robot anthropomorphism, 379
robot appearances, 380, 382, 384, 385, 387
robot communication cues, 380
robots
robots, acceptance of, 379, 386
robots, i am a, 471
robots, mechanical, 380, 382, 388
robots, nonverbal communication cues
of, 385
robots, physical, 383
robots, social, 378, 380, 381, 389, 471,
472
Role
role matrices, 344, 357, 358, 366
role models
role, fundamental, 226, 227, 329, 332,
469
role, important, 119, 196, 245, 284, 321,
322, 337, 356, 370, 372, 444, 468,
473
role, integrative, 147, 149, 473
Rules, 24, 47, 53, 54, 67, 74, 117, 135, 138,
175, 238, 284, 309, 314, 315, 426,
428, 468, 474
S
Satisfaction, 387, 409, 411–415, 423, 430
Scale, 7, 81, 164, 195, 200, 207, 245, 265, 268,
274, 301, 303, 304, 307, 309, 311,
323, 324, 327, 371, 403, 444, 447
Science
science approach, 131, 217
science education, 1, 2, 7, 9, 10, 18–21, 24,
30
science education system
science education, cross-cultural, 20
science for all, 18, 19
science knowledge, 23
science matters, 215
Science and art, 2, 60, 118, 162, 208, 222–225,
229, 465
Science and technology
science and technology studies, 81, 96, 147
Science Court, 88, 95
Science Parks, 29
Science research collaboration
science studies, 79, 84, 101, 102
science works
science, applied, 24, 81, 87, 281
science, bad, 1, 8
science, basic, 87, 133
science, biological, 89, 96, 475
science, brain, 24
science, catalytic, 136
science, climate, 152
science, cognitive, 335, 372, 471
science, complex problems challenges,
415
science, computer, 281, 337, 338
science, culture of, 19
science, demarcation of, 1, 9, 10
science, development of, 230, 404
science, environmental, 24, 152
science, exact, 173
science, experimental, 165, 172
science, formal, 24, 337, 338, 397
science, fragmentation of, 313
science, good, 1, 8
science, history of, 58, 197, 401
science, human, 323, 475
science, individual, 79, 81, 82, 84, 96
science, institutional goal of— science,
integrated, 2, 7, 23, 24, 26, 27, 30,
33, 79, 81, 90, 92, 94, 321, 461,
465–467, 470, 476
science, integrating, 9, 79, 331
science, integration of, 22, 84, 92, 96,
103
science, integrative, 147
science, medical, 89–92, 96
science, modern, 61, 67, 79, 80, 101,
322, 323, 329, 330, 332, 404
science, natural, 8, 24, 110, 119, 182,
184, 187, 194, 197, 202–204, 287,
397, 469
science, nature of, 92, 96, 99, 106
science, new, 324, 325, 330
science, network, 338
science, philosophers of, 81, 149, 166,
174
science, physical, 82, 84, 89, 93
science, political, 94, 475
science, school, 19
science, social/safety system, 24
science, sociology of, 84, 115, 401
science, special, 99, 102, 104
science, sustainability, 131, 145, 476
sciences and humanities
science-society, 28
Science-Technology-Society. See STS
Science-Technology-Society (STS)
STSE (Science-T
echnology-Society-Environment),
23
Science-Technology-Society-Environment
(STSE), 23
Index
491

Scientiﬁc
scientiﬁc activity, 79, 81, 85–87, 93, 104,
406
scientiﬁc advice, 84, 92, 95, 127, 134
scientiﬁc approach
scientiﬁc approach, new, 127
scientiﬁc attitudes, 403
scientiﬁc basis, 89, 92
scientiﬁc claims, 87, 112, 114
scientiﬁc collaboration
scientiﬁc collaboration, international, 29
scientiﬁc collaboration, persistent, 30
scientiﬁc disciplines, 27, 83, 85, 130, 163,
335, 336, 338
scientiﬁc explanation, 8, 173, 179, 187,
204, 473
scientiﬁc ﬁelds, 84, 88, 152, 186, 217
scientiﬁc judgment, 94, 95
scientiﬁc knowledge
scientiﬁc knowledge, available, 94
scientiﬁc knowledge, new, 432
scientiﬁc methods, 8, 61, 62, 82, 86, 93, 96,
115, 122, 131, 134, 136, 212, 404
scientiﬁc quantities, 182, 203
scientiﬁc research, 67, 127, 132, 134, 135,
137, 172, 218, 219, 221, 323, 324,
398
scientiﬁc researchers, 313, 475
scientiﬁc research programs, 67
scientiﬁc research traditions, 132
scientiﬁc self-understanding, 135
scientiﬁc theories, 67, 84, 112, 173, 186,
197
scientiﬁc truth, 101, 104, 106, 107, 131,
195
scientiﬁc understanding, 82, 84, 88, 93, 94
scientism, 18, 117
scientists
scientists and artists, 221, 223, 224
scientists, integrating, 104
Screens, 272, 274, 383
Seamless, 81, 82
Sector, 18, 79, 87, 95, 152, 292, 316, 317, 423,
426, 439, 443, 444, 446, 447, 455
Self
self, conscious, 309, 314, 315
self-consciousness, 295
self-education, 315
self-interests, 11
self-knowledge, 105, 106
self-model states, 343–349, 352, 356–358,
362, 365, 366
self-model states, connection weight,
347
Self-modeling, 343, 371, 372
Self-models, 338, 343
Serena, 269
Services, 22, 26, 29, 271, 316, 330, 382, 426,
471
Set goals, 25, 26, 134, 424
Sex peptide, 171, 172
Shades, 49, 52, 247
Shared value theory, 441
Simulations, 305, 307, 348, 349, 354, 360, 366,
368, 414
Situations
situations, problematic, 331
situations, problematized, 400, 403
Smells, 171
Social
social actors, 140, 379, 400, 402, 408, 414
social contagion, 346, 347, 352, 353, 371,
372
social game, 407, 408, 412, 414–416, 470
social organization
social organization, agent-based toolkit
for modeling and simulating, 397,
406
social processes, 259, 291, 338, 403
social sciences, 281–283, 285, 286,
288–297, 397, 407, 415, 428
social sciences and medicine, 89–91
social systems, 226
societal readiness level (SRL), 450
society, 1, 2, 7, 9, 16, 18, 20–23, 28, 30, 52,
68, 79–82, 84, 88, 92–95, 123, 127,
129, 133, 134, 136, 137, 139, 140,
148, 207, 223, 227, 235, 239,
281–288, 290, 292, 295–297, 304,
310, 311, 313–315, 317, 321–325,
328–332, 428, 439–442, 446–454,
469, 471, 472, 474–476
society and culture, 84, 92
society, afﬂuent states deprive Third World,
322, 473
society, human, 82, 322, 324, 328, 331, 472
Socio-Scientiﬁc-lssues (SSI), 23
SocLab
SocLab, framework, 395, 406, 407
SocLab, meta-model of, 406–408
Socrates, 40, 314
Soldier, prominent, 269
Solidarities, 409
Solving, 3, 5, 7, 23, 25, 26, 129, 134, 135, 139,
168, 307, 451
Space
space, open, 269, 326
Spanish colonial period, 269
492
Index

Specialists, 83, 85, 157, 304, 310, 312, 313,
316, 317
Species, 6, 110, 111, 114–116, 118, 120, 121,
123, 241, 245, 248, 259, 266, 454
Speed factors, 344–347, 358
Squier, 249, 250
Stabilize, 183, 184, 197, 199, 203, 204, 359
Stakeholder
stakeholders, 26, 129, 131, 138, 156, 157,
424, 432, 441, 443–445, 447–449,
453, 454
stakeholder theory, 441, 444, 448, 449, 453
Stars, 190, 191, 214, 301, 315
State
states, mental, 291, 370
states, mixed, 186
state space, 184–187
state values, 348, 349, 354, 366
Statement
statement general, 174, 175
Statue, 269
Stone sculpture, 269
STPs, 29
Strata, 260–263, 274
Strategies, 20, 64, 134, 138–140, 149, 153,
269, 270, 277, 327, 400, 415, 420,
422, 425, 426, 429, 439, 441, 448,
450, 473
Streets, 268–270, 272
Stresses, 47, 52, 55, 56, 237, 241, 243, 433
Structural couplings
structures
structures, complex, 130, 187, 189, 297,
397
structures, modular, 145
structures, simplest, 187, 189
structures, social, 408, 411, 412
Students, 9, 12, 16, 18–22, 54, 83, 85, 93, 96,
169, 207, 216, 221–223, 268, 388,
469
Studia humanitatis, 208, 210, 211
Study of Science in Society, 81
Sub
subdisciplines, 30
subject, 13, 18, 24, 30, 31, 45, 46, 67–72,
74, 79, 87, 92, 96, 118, 122, 137,
151, 168, 169, 177, 186, 218, 219,
221, 225, 237, 238, 240, 248, 264,
265, 276, 281, 283, 295, 327, 398,
400, 423, 432, 461, 475
sub-models, 152, 153, 157
substance, 15, 16, 82, 95, 103, 106, 107,
136, 175, 186, 189, 190, 198, 261,
446
subsystem, 287, 370, 419, 422, 423
Superscience, 101, 103, 104
Sustainability
sustainable development, 3, 27, 127, 227,
443, 447, 450, 454
sustainable future, 138, 455, 461, 475, 476
sustainable science, 475
Switches
switches, left-hand, 170
switches, right-hand, 170
Symbolizes, 49, 269
Symmetry
symmetry group, 164
Symptoms, 3, 15, 16, 370
Syntax, 307, 308
Synthetic voices, 379, 382, 388, 389
system einwirken, 292
system processes, 183
system theories, 2, 5, 9, 10, 14, 15, 23, 33,
39, 41–43, 47, 48, 53–57, 61, 62, 65,
67, 69, 72, 73, 86, 88, 89, 95,
116–118, 122, 124, 131, 133, 134,
149, 152–154, 156, 164–166, 175,
178, 182–187, 193, 195, 200–203,
207, 281, 285, 288, 291
System
systems, 17, 19–24, 26, 30, 32, 210, 223,
226, 244, 245, 261, 262, 269,
281–297, 303–305, 307–312,
315–317, 324, 327–332, 337,
364–366, 368, 369, 383, 389,
396–398, 400–404, 407, 410, 415,
420–423, 425, 426, 428–432, 441,
454, 472, 474–476
systems knowledge, 133
systems of thought
systems, body, 15
systems, complete, 210, 389
systems, complex, 24, 165, 185,
396–398
systems, deductive, 48, 54
systems, deistic, 43
systems, dynamical, 337, 369
systems, internal, 55
systems, living, 54, 89, 223, 286
systems, molecular, 195
systems, nervous, 305
systems, observed, 400
systems, observing, 400
systems, particular, 165, 284
systems, person’s, 55, 294
systems, scientiﬁc, 131
systems, societal, 287
systems theory, general, 285, 286
systems theory, social, 281, 286, 292,
293
Index
493

systems, transport, 284, 329
systems, unstable, 182, 186, 203
systems, value, 401, 402
target systems, 149
T
Teachers, 18, 21, 22, 222
Teaching, 19, 21, 24, 80, 82, 127, 207, 208,
215, 221, 266, 423, 469
Teamwork, 6, 26, 27
Technology
technological zones, 23, 24
technology readiness level (TRL), 450
technology studies
technology, advanced, 322, 323, 330
technology, development of, 304, 316
technology, digital, 305–307
technology, essence of, 303, 329, 332
technology, science
education/educational, 24
technoscience, 22
Temperature, 102, 152, 163, 192, 193, 198,
199, 251
Temporal-causal network, 335, 339, 340, 342,
343, 345, 362, 369, 372
Tensions, 130, 131, 147, 237, 442, 444, 447,
454
Theorem
theoretical science, 99, 106
Therapy, 15, 241, 248, 338, 355, 357, 359, 360
Thinking
thinking, scientiﬁc, 100, 106
Third World, 321–323, 329, 473
Thought experiments, 102, 161, 165, 166, 168
Timing, 340, 344–346, 357
Tipping point, 347, 350–354
Tools
tools, molecular, 326, 327
Traces, 272, 274
Traditions, 130, 132, 310, 314, 401, 472
Trajectories, 11, 258–261, 263, 267, 269, 270,
274, 275, 277
Transdisciplinary
transdisciplinary discourse, 129, 138
transdisciplinary processes, 26, 138
transdisciplinary research, 128, 129, 131,
132, 139
transdisciplinary science, 139, 140, 147
Transformations
transformations, energy system, 133, 134
Trends, 18, 227, 311, 315, 316, 445, 452, 455,
456, 468, 470, 475
Technology Readiness Level (TRL), 450
Truth, 45, 47, 52–56, 81, 82, 95, 99, 101,
104–107, 112, 114, 117, 121, 122,
127, 131, 136, 138, 169, 174, 195,
217, 218, 220, 221, 225, 284, 306,
314, 332
Tuberculosis, 14, 15
U
Uncanny valley, 379, 380, 382, 384, 388
Uncertainty, 6, 53, 136, 138, 139, 241, 282,
283, 297, 402, 415, 422, 423, 475
Understanding
understanding, common, 128, 129, 261
understanding, human, 117, 118, 357
Unlaws, 161–170, 172, 173, 176–179, 470,
471
Users, 129, 136, 139, 316, 379, 380, 383, 387,
472
Utterances, 72, 289
V
Values
values, adaptive, 344, 346
values, ethical, 401, 402
values, ﬁxed, 358
values, human, 109, 212
values, initial, 348, 354, 359
values, numerical, 410
values, social, 314, 447
Variable
variables, 5, 66, 161, 163, 169, 185, 221,
339, 356, 432, 433, 444, 449, 455,
470
variable separation, 362, 363
Variants, 65, 72, 73, 135, 342, 344, 468, 470,
476
Velocity, 164, 165, 173, 185
Vibrations, 168, 199, 201, 246
Viewer, 220, 223, 224
Vinci, 207–209, 212, 213
Virtual characters, 379, 384
Viruses
COVID-19, 14, 272, 284, 330, 439
Vitruvius, 207, 209, 214, 215
Voices
voices, human-like, 382, 389
voices, robot's, 382, 386
W
Walls, 164, 271, 272, 274
War
World War I (WWI), 80
World War II (WWII), 80, 85, 94
Weights, 166, 339, 340, 343–345, 347–350,
352–355, 357, 358, 366
Western
Western and First Nations science systems
in teaching, 19
Western context, 20
494
Index

Western educational system, 312, 317
Western science, 20
Western theories, 433, 434
Woman, 211, 269
Words
words, real, 46, 48, 52
Work
work behavior
work, interdisciplinary process, 26
work, multidisciplinary process, 25
work, scientiﬁc, 59, 114, 115
workplace, 442, 452
World
World Food Pogramme (WFP), 17
World Health Organization (WHO), 14
worldview
world, complex, 283, 295, 296
world, external, 39, 40, 364, 471
world, imagined, 123
world, natural, 114, 306
world, scientiﬁc, 262
world, social, 123, 132, 154, 155, 397
world, subjective, 69
worldview of science—worldview,
techno-scientiﬁc, 313
Index
495

