T
al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯, Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n
EMILY J. COTTRELL
Department for Religious Studies
Leiden University
Leiden
The Netherlands
Abstract
‘Alı¯ b. Muh:ammad b. al-‘Abba¯s al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ (Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n),
an essayist and a stylist, was one of the main witnesses of
the intellectual activity of eleventh-century Baghdad and
Rayy during the Buyid period. He was one of the most
talented prose-writers in the history of Arabic literature
and worked as an erudite courtier and a copyist in the
main intellectual circles of his time (Abu¯ al-Fad˙l ibn al-
‘Amı¯d, Ibn ‘Abba¯d, Ibn Sa‘da¯n). He was close to the phi-
losopher Abu¯ Sulayma¯n al-Sijista¯nı¯.
There is no agreement on the birthplace of al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯,
and nowhere is an exact date given for his birth. From
a remark he makes on his being close to 90 years old in his
Epistle to the Qa¯d˙ı¯ Abu¯ Sahl, written in 400/1008, it has
been determined that he was born between 310/922 and
320/932, but according to al-Sha¯lijı¯ (introduction to
al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯, al-Risa¯la al-Bag˙da¯diyya [The Baghdad Epis-
tle]), the phrase ‘‘ninety and so’’ should be corrected into
‘‘seventy and so’’ and his birthdate should be put around
320–330/932–941. Although the biographers do not show
any agreement on his birthplace (given as Wasit, Shiraz,
or Nishapur), he seems to have been raised in Baghdad,
if we are to follow the Risa¯la al-Bag˙da¯diyya, where he
demonstrates his perfect intimacy with the most collo-
quial vocabulary of this city. The Risa¯la al-Bag˙da¯diyya
has been neglected by contemporary researchers though
it is expressly attributed to al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ by Ya¯qu¯t, as noted
by Muh:yı¯ al-Dı¯n (1949). The Risa¯la has been recently
reedited by ‘Abbu¯d al-Sha¯lijı¯, who brings several parallels
between
the
text
and
other
works
of
al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯,
conﬁrming his authorship (see al-Tawh:idı¯, al-Risa¯la al-
Bag˙da¯diyya, introd. pp 9–10).
Some classical writers like Ya¯qu¯t would like to see in al-
Tawh:ı¯dı¯ a Persian, but this should be excluded as Tawh:ı¯dı¯
himself claims that he could not understand Persian, when
it was used once in a majlı¯s (learned meeting) by Ibn
‘Abba¯d (see Berge´ 1990:115–116, quoting Akhla¯q, 306
and Imta¯‘, I, 77). Neverthless, it seems he died in the
Iranian city of Shiraz, which was famous for its Suﬁcon-
gregations and shrines and where he seems to have spent
the last part of his life, maybe in the entourage of the vizier
in Shiraz of S˙ams:a¯m al-Dawla, Abu¯ l-Qa¯sim al-Mudlijı¯
(vizier in 382–383/992–993), for whom he composed the
lost Muh:ad˙ara¯t wa-l-muna¯z˙ara¯t (Lessons and Disputes)
(extracts in Ya¯qu¯t, listed by S. M. Stern, EI2, p. 127a).
Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ received a traditional educa-
tion in the classical ﬁelds of grammar, theology, and
Islamic jurisprudence. He studied theology with the
Shafı¯‘ı¯ scholars Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid al-Marwarrudhı¯ (m. 362/
972) and Abu¯ Bakr al-Sha¯shı¯ (d. 365/975), and grammar
and logics with the Muʿtazilite grammarian Abu¯ Sa‘ı¯d
al-S˙ı¯ra¯fı¯ ibn al-Marzuba¯n (d. 367/977), a disciple of
al-Jubba¯’ı¯, and ‘Alı¯ ibn ‘I¯sa¯ al-Rumma¯nı¯ (d. 384/994),
who was also a well-versed mutakallim. In Suﬁsm,
al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ was a disciple of the Baghdad master Abu¯
Ja‘far al-Khuldı¯ (d. 348/959), who had been initiated by
the famous Suﬁal-Junayd (see Ibn al-Nadı¯m, al-Fihrist,
p. 183). One of al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯’s preserved works, the Isha¯ra¯t
al-Ila¯hiyya (The Divine Hints), a collection of personal
prayers (du‘a¯t) and lamentations that still awaits to be
studied, shows his genuine Suﬁleaning.
Al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ moved to different cities and was in Mecca
(353/964), then settled in Rayy at the court of Abu¯ al-Fad˙l
ibn al-‘Amı¯d (d. 360/970) the vizier of the Buyid prince
‘Ad˙ud al-Dawla. He returned to Baghdad after the death of
his patron and attended there a lecture by Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯in
361/971. He was not able to secure the protection of Abu¯
l-Fad˙l’s son, Abu¯ l-Fath: ibn al-‘Amı¯d, who succeded his
father and remained vizier for only two years before being
killed. Al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ endured from 367/977 the patronage of
Abu¯ al-Fath:’s successor, the former secretary Ibn ‘Abba¯d,
as he bitterly complained later on in his Akhla¯q (or
Dhamm, or Matha¯lib) al-wazı¯rayn (The Manners of the
Two Viziers). Ibn ‘Abba¯d, who had been given the vizierate
of Mu’ayyid al-Dawla, is portrayed in detail as a parvenu
Henrik Lagerlund (ed.), Encyclopedia of Medieval Philosophy, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9729-4,
# Springer Science+Business Media B.V., 2011

keeping the appearance of an intellectual who did not
hesitate to write on theological matters while being actu-
ally a conceited libertine. Al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ became famous for
the ingenuity of his curses toward S˙a¯h:ib ibn ‘Abba¯d (as
well as against Abu¯ al-Fad˙l ibn al-‘Amı¯d, also portrayed in
the book but not as much scorned as Ibn ‘Abba¯d), using
a range of sexual metaphors in describing the licentious
vizier. His blunt language, probably unbearable to the ears
of a number of religious scholars, earned him the title of
heretic in most medieval biographies (to the exception of
Ya¯qu¯t, who shows some enthusiasm and quotes him at
length). The Manners of the Two Viziers was so offensive
that it was certainly edited only after the death of Ibn
‘Abba¯d in 386/995.
At an epoch when the philosophical school of Baghdad
had reached its apogee, al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯naturally completed his
education by attending the circles of two of the main
philosophers of his time: Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯ (d. 364/974) and
Abu¯ Sulayma¯n al-Sijista¯nı¯ (d. after 391/1000). There he
was an active participant in the reception process of the
classical heritage that had been transmitted by such lumi-
naries as al-Kindı¯ and H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q. He copied the
lessons of al-Sijista¯nı¯in 371/981, and these notes form part
of the raw-material behind his Muqa¯basa¯t [Enlightments],
the compilation of which had started in 360/970 and was
achieved only after the death of Abu¯ Sulayma¯n al-Sijista¯nı¯,
which took place after 391/1000. At an unknown date, he
exchanged a correspondence with the Imami (twelver
Shı¯ʿite) philosopher Miskawayh, who was acting as the
treasure secretary of ‘Ad˙ud al-Dawla and as the director
of his library. It was published under the title al-Hawa¯mil
wa-l-shawa¯mil [Open (Questions) and Explicit (Answers)].
Al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ addressed to Miskawayh 175 questions on
various topics such as linguistics, ethics, and philosophy,
often with some strong religious or sociological connota-
tions. This work may have been composed in Rayy with
al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ trying to gain the favorable inﬂuence of
Miskawayh while serving him as faire-valoir. During one
of his stays at Rayy, probably at the court of Ibn al-‘Amı¯d,
al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ listened to a discussion of Abu¯ l-H˙ asan al-
‘Amirı¯ on ethical matters and metaphysics (see Muh:yı¯ al-
Dı¯n 1949:173).
Al-Tawh:ı¯d˙ı¯’s interest in philosophy, which has been
seen as part of his versatile character, should be seen in
the context of his classical theological background since
the debates of the theologians were either rooted in or
echoed by contemporary philosophical discussions. As
A. Amı¯n and S. A. S˙aqr put it (al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯, al-Hawa¯mil
wa-l-shawa¯mil [Open (Questions) and Explicit (Answers)],
introd. waw): ‘‘Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n was a philosopher with the
philosophers,
a
theologian
with
the
theologians,
a linguist with the linguists and a suﬁwith the suﬁs.’’ For
‘A. R. Muh:yı¯ al-Dı¯n, he came to philosophy as a man of
letters, a witness of his age, and because of the personalities
he became acquainted with (Muh:yı¯ al-Dı¯n 1949:175). For
W. al-Qa¯d˙ı¯, who studied al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯’s thought and edited
two of his works, his system rests on three fundamental
values: religion, learning, and morality, to which must be
added the additional, yet basic, value of reason (see al-
Qa¯d˙ı¯ 1970).
Al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯’s Sunnism (see al-Qa¯d˙ı¯ 2003) may have
been a cause of his frictions with Ibn ‘Abbad (contrast
Miskawayh’s most ‘‘Shı¯ʿite’’ short treatise, the Fawz al-
asg˙ar, or Small [Book] of Salvation). Refusing the pure
game of appearances at the courts, he vigorously attacked
his former employers on their morals as well as on subtle
theological issues in the case of Ibn ‘Abba¯d, who claimed
to be an accomplished scholar as well as an Ima¯mı¯ and
a Muʿtazilite (see Yafu¯t 2003, who insists on the different
Muʿtazilite currents at the time as a key to understand al-
Tawh:ı¯dı¯’s position). Another of his lost works was devoted
to the great stylist of Arabic prose al-Ja¯h:iz˙, himself
a Muʿtazilite (extracts of the Taqrı¯z˙ al-Ja¯h:iz˙ [Praise of
Ja¯h:iz˙]) listed by S. M. Stern in EI2, p. 127), who was
certainly a literary model for al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯.
Later on, he became the boon-companion of Ibn
Sa‘da¯n, vizier of ‘Ad˙ud al-Dawla’s successor S˙ams:a¯m al-
Dawla from 373/983 until 375/985. Al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ had been
introduced to Ibn Sa‘da¯n by the geometer Abu¯ al-Wafa¯’ al-
Bu¯zaja¯nı¯ (d. 376/986), one of the last translators of Greek
geometry and a commentator of Euclides, Diophantes,
and Ptolemy (see Ya¯qu¯t, XV, 7) and by the philosopher
Zayd ibn Rifa¯’, who was suspected of belonging to the
Brethren of Purity. For a time, on the initiative of al-
Bu¯zaja¯nı¯, Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n worked at the Baghdad hospital,
which had been established by ‘Ad˙ud al-Dawla in 372/982.
The circle of Ibn Sa‘da¯n was composed of the Christian
philosopher Ibn Zur‘a – who had translated Aristotle and
Nicolaus of Damascus – of al-Bu¯zaja¯nı¯, Miskawayh, of the
secretaries Ibn ‘Ubayd, Abu¯ l-Qa¯sim al-Ahwa¯zı¯, and the
future vizier Abu¯ Sa‘d Bahra¯m b. Ardashı¯r. It was a place of
intellectual discussion and intense scholarly activity. The
Imta¯‘ wa-l-mu’a¯nasa (Enjoyment and Familiarity), com-
posed by al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ at the request of Ibn Sa‘da¯n, reports
many of the debates held between the scholars. Several of
the philosophical questions discussed are also listed (see
e.g., Imta¯‘, III, 106–108 where the vizier asks questions on
the soul, its perfection, the spirit, humanity, nature, intel-
lect, resurrection, the souls of the animals . . .). Another
treatise the Risa¯la fı¯ l-s:ada¯qa wa-l-s:adı¯q (On Friendship),
one of his later works, was achieved by al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ in
400/1009 and dedicated to Ibn Sa‘da¯n. It contains several
1248 T
al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯, Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n

allusions to the circle ‘‘that was unrivalled in Iraq,’’ writes
al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯.
In philosophy, Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n considered Abu¯ Sulayma¯n
al-Sijista¯nı¯ as his true mentor. The way of life al-Sijista¯nı¯
was following, and the discussions on the ethical behavior
of ‘‘the Ancients,’’ were for al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ the only philosoph-
ical way worth being followed. He showed aversion for
dialectics (jadal) and seems to have followed a personal
mystical path that led him to write an important, though
neglected, Suﬁmasterpiece, the Isha¯ra¯t al-Ila¯hiyya. Abu¯
H˙ ayya¯n al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ was one of the greatest literary person-
alities of the Buyid period and of the whole history of
Arabic literature. He represents a certain apogee of the
adı¯b-model (both a man of letters and a humanist) deeply
inﬂuenced by Greek paideia. But he was a direct witness of
the attacks the humanism had started to suffer, that would
lead to its partial recuperation by some theologically ori-
ented circles, and to a ﬁnal coup de graˆce.
See
also:
▶Abu¯
Sulayma¯n
al-Sijista¯nı¯
al-Mant:iqı¯
▶Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯ʾ, Encyclopedia of ▶Miskawayh, Abu¯
ʿAlı¯ ▶Yah:ya¯ ibn ʿAdı¯
Bibliography
Primary Sources
al-Miskawayh (1987) Le Petit Livre du Salut (al-Fawz al-asg˙ar), ed. and
annotated trans. ‘Ud˙ayma S˙, Arnaldez R. al-Da¯r al-‘arabiyya li-l-kita¯b,
Tunis
al-Tawhı¯dı¯ Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n (n.d.) Rasa¯’il Abı¯ H˙ ayya¯n al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯, ed.
al-Keyla¯nı¯ I. T˙ala¯s li-l-dira¯sa¯t wa-l-tarjama wa-l-nashr, Damascus?
(contains: Risa¯la al-saqı¯fa, Risa¯la fı¯ ‘ilm al-kita¯ba, Risa¯la al-h:aya¯t,
Risa¯la fı¯ l-‘ulu¯m, Risa¯la ila¯ Abı¯ al-Fath: ibn al-‘Amı¯d, Risa¯la ila¯ Abı¯
al-Wafa¯’ al-muhandis al-Bu¯zaja¯nı¯, Risa¯la ila¯ l-wazı¯r Abı¯ ‘Abd Alla¯h
al-‘Arı¯d˙ wazı¯r S˙ams:a¯m al-Dawla, Risa¯la ila¯ l-qa¯d˙ı¯ Abı¯ Sahl ‘Alı¯ ibn
Muh:ammad)
al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n (1939–1944) al-Imta¯‘ wa-l-mu’a¯nasa, ed. Amı¯n A,
al-Zayn A. Cairo (several reeditions in Beirut and Cairo: 1953, 2002;
alternative edition by al-Mans:u¯r Khalı¯l (1997) Da¯r al-kutub
al-‘ilmiyya, Beirut) Lajna al-ta’lı¯f wa-l-tarjama wa-l-nashr
al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n (1951) Thala¯th rasa¯’il, ed. al-Keylanı¯ I. Damascus
(contains the Risa¯lat al-Saqı¯fa, Risa¯lat al-H˙ aya¯t and Risa¯lah fı¯ ‘ilm
al-kita¯ba) (repr Sezgin F et al (2000) Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n at-Tawh:ı¯dı¯. Texts
and studies. Islamic philosophy, vol 85. Frankfurt-am-Main) Institut
Franc¸ais d’E´tudes Arabes de Damas
al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n, and al-Miskawayh (1951) al-Hawa¯mil wa-l-
shawa¯mil, ed. Amı¯n A, S˙aqr A. Cairo (repr al-Hay’at al-‘a¯mma
li-qus:u¯r al-thaqa¯fa, Cairo, 2001) repr. F. Sezgin et al., Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n
at-T˙awh˙idi.Texts and Studies. Coll.: Islamic Philosophy vol. 84,
Frankfurt-am-Main, 2000
al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n (1964) Risa¯la al-s:ada¯qa wa-l-s:adı¯q, ed. al-Keyla¯nı¯ I.
Damascus (several reeditions; other edition by Mutawallı¯ S˙ala¯h: ‘A,
H˙ asan ‘A (1972) Cairo)
al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n (1965) Akhla¯q al-wazı¯rayn, ed. al-T˙anjı¯ MT.
Majma‘ al-‘ilmı¯ al-‘arabı¯, Damascus (the reprint by Da¯r Sa¯dir, Beirut,
1992 is more reliable than al-Keyla¯nı¯ Ibrahim (1961) Matha¯lib
al-wazı¯rayn. al-Majma‘ al-‘ilmı¯, Damascus). French translation:
al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n (2004) La Satire des deux vizirs, trans
Lagrange F. Actes Sud, Paris
al-Tawhı¯dı¯ Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n (1970) al-Muqa¯basa¯t, ed. Tawfı¯q H˙ usayn M.
Baghdad (alternative edition by al-Sandu¯bı¯ H˙ (1929). Cairo – of
which several reprints exist including Tunis 1991) Baghdad
University
al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n (1982) al-Isha¯ra¯t al-Ila¯hiyya, 2nd edn, ed. al-Qa¯d˙ı¯
W. Da¯r al-Thaqa¯fa, Beirut (alternative edition: al-Badawı¯ ‘AR (1951)
Divinae invocations. Cairo)
al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n (1988) al-Basa¯’ir wa al-dhakha¯’ir [or: Basa¯’ir
al-Qudama¯’], ed. al-Qa¯d˙ı¯ W. Da¯r S˙a¯dir, Beirut (older edn: Amı¯n A,
S˙aqr A (1953). Cairo)
al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n (1997) al-Risa¯la al-Baghda¯diyya, 2nd edn, ed.
al-Sha¯lijı¯ ‘A. Da¯r al-Jamal, Ko¨ln (First edition: Mat:ba‘a Da¯r al-kutub,
Beirut, 1980; the former edition, by Mez A, who did not identify
al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ as the author, contains the presentation of the manu-
scripts and a study of the vocabulary: see Mez A (1902) Abulkaˆsim
ein bagdaˆder Sittenbild von Muh:ammad ibn ah:mad abdulmut:ahhar
alazdi
[H˙ ika¯yat
Abı¯
al-Qa¯sim
al-Baghda¯dı¯].
Carl’s
Winter’s Universita¨tsbuchhandlung, Heidelberg)
Secondary sources
Biographies
Berge´ M (1990) Abu¯ Hayya¯n al-Tawhı¯dı¯. In: The Cambridge history of
Arabic literature: ‘Abbasid Belles-Lettres, ed. Ashtiany J. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, pp 112–124
Ghersetti A (2006) Tawh:ı¯dı¯, al-, Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n. In: Islamic medieval civili-
zation: an encyclopedia, vol 2, ed. Meri JW. Routledge, New York, pp
798–799
al-S˙afadı¯ (1962–2009) al-Wa¯fı¯ bi-l-wafaya¯t. Franz Steiner, Wiesbaden
Stern SM (1960) Abu¯ Hayya¯n al-Tawhı¯dı¯. In: Encyclopaedia of Islam, vol
1, 2nd edn, ed. Bearman PJ, Bianquis T, Bosworth CE, van Donzel E,
Heinrichs WP. Brill, Leiden, pp 126–127
al-Subkı¯ (1964–1976) T˙abaqa¯t al-shaﬁ‘iyya al-kubra¯, ed. al-T˙ana¯h:ı¯ MM,
al-H˙ ulu¯ ‘A-F. Mat:ba‘a ‘I¯sa¯ al-Ba¯bı¯ al-H˙ alabı¯, Cairo
al-Suyu¯t:ı¯ (1908) Bughyat al-wu’a¯t fı¯ t:abaqa¯t al-lughawı¯yı¯n wa-l-nuh:a¯t.
Mat:ba‘at al-Sa‘a¯da, Cairo
Watt M (1983) Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯. In: Encyclopaedia Iranica Online,
ed. Yarshater E et al. www.iranica.com
Ya¯qu¯t al-H˙ amawı¯ (1993) Mu‘jam al-udaba¯’: Irsha¯d al-arı¯b ila¯ ma‘rifat
al-adı¯b, ed. ‘Abba¯s I. Da¯r al-Gharb al-Isla¯mi, Beirut
Studies
‘Abd al-Razza¯q M (1949) Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯: sı¯ratuhu – atha¯ruhu.
al-Mu’assasa al-‘arabiyya li-l-dira¯sa¯t wa-l-nashr, Cairo (2nd edn,
Beirut 1979)
al-A‘sam M‘A (1978) Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n al-Tawh:dı¯ fı¯ kita¯b al-Muqa¯basa¯t. In:
Series of conferences on the history of Arabo-Islamic philosophy in
the 4th century held in EPHE, Sorbonne, in 1978. Da¯r al-Andalu¯s,
Beirut, 1983 (2nd edn)
Berge´ M (1963–1964) E´pıˆtre sur les sciences. Bulletin de l’Institut
d’Etudes Orientales de Damas 18:241–264
Berge´ M (1969) Conseils politiques a` un ministre. E´ pıˆtre d’Abu¯
Hayya¯n al-Tawhı¯dı¯ au vizir Ibn Sa‘da¯n al-‘A¯ rid˙. Arabica 16
(3):269–278
Berge´ M (1979) Pour un humanisme ve´cu: Abu¯ Hayya¯n al-Tawhı¯dı¯.
Institut Franc¸ais d’Etudes Arabes de Damas, Damascus
Keilani (= al-Keylanı¯) I (1950) Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯. Essayiste arabe du
IVe s. de l’He´gire. Institut Franc¸ais de Damas, Damascus (repr (2000)
Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n at-Tawh:ı¯dı¯. Texts and studies. Islamic philosophy, vol
85. Frankfurt)
al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯, Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n T
1249
T

Kraemer J (1993) Humanism in the renaissance of Islam. Brill, Leiden
pp 212–222
al-Qa¯d˙ı¯ W (1970) al-Raka¯’iz al-ﬁkriyya fı¯ naz˙rat Abı¯ H˙ ayya¯n al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯
ila¯ l-mujtama‘. al-Abh:a¯th 23:15–32
al-Qa¯d˙ı¯ W (2003) Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯: a sunni voice in the Shi‘i
century. In: Daftary F, Meri JW (eds) Culture and memory in medi-
eval Islam. Essays in honour of Wilferd Madelung. Tauris, London,
pp 128–159 (contains an up-to-date bibliography)
Rowson EK (1990) The philosopher as Litte´rateur: al-Tawhı¯dı¯ and his
predecessors. Z Gesch Arab-Islam Wiss 6:50–92
Versteegh CHM (1977) Greek elements in Arabic linguistic thinking. Brill,
Leiden
Yafu¯t S (2003) Madkhal li-qira¯’at Risa¯lat al-saqı¯fa li-Abı¯ H˙ ayya¯n
al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯. In: Yafu¯t S (ed) al-Nas:s: wa-l-ta¯’rı¯kh. Qira¯’a¯t ta¯rı¯khiyya.
Da¯r al-t:alı¯‘a, Beirut, pp 7–27 (already published in Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n
al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯, three special issues of al-Fus:u¯l (al-Hay’at al-Mis:riyya
al-‘amma li-l-kita¯b, Cairo 14(3)/14(4)/15(1), 1995–1996, in 14(3),
1995, pp 256–263))
Terms, Properties of
EGBERT BOS
Philosophy
University of Leiden
Leiden
The Netherlands
Abstract
In the theory of the properties of terms, the medievals
investigated the semantical properties of words used in
a proposition. According to them, terms not only had
signiﬁcation, a kind of essence, but also referred in
a context (notably a proposition) to different things (sub-
stances or accident, concepts or words). Several properties
are distinguished, the most prominent of which are sup-
position, copulation, appellation, ampliation, and restric-
tion. Individual logicians deﬁned these notions in
different ways.
The theory had its origins in the twelfth century and
developed until late in the fourteenth century. In the
twelfth century our sources are several anonymous tracts.
In the thirteenth century, Peter of Spain, William of
Sherwood, Lambert of Auxerre, and Roger Bacon were
the most prominent masters. In the fourteenth century,
William of Ockham and John Buridan were very
inﬂuential.
Introduction
The theory of the properties of terms is one of the impor-
tant innovations of medieval semantics. It emerged in the
twelfth century, and it developed until far into the
ﬁfteenth century. Even in the postmedieval period, inter-
esting, though less creative, traces of this theory can be
found. The medievals themselves did not consider the
theory as something new. In their view it only explained
what was implicit in Aristotle’s logic. However, from our
modern point of view, the theory is original.
The theory concerns the semantic properties of terms.
It attempts to analyze the presuppositions of natural lan-
guage, and deals with the meaning of a term mostly when
it is used in a proposition. The theory is about what terms
stand for, and their relation to other terms within a certain
context.
The expression ‘‘properties of terms’’ reminds one of
the properties of natural things. The medievals considered
this an apt comparison. As they themselves often say,
things are composed of form and matter, which constitute
their substance. The most important component of
a substance, such as a man, is the form, i.e., humanity.
A substance possesses properties, for instance, a stone’s
property moving downward. In the same way a term can
be said to possess form and matter. The form of the term is
the signiﬁcation, for instance, ‘‘horse-ness’’ of ‘‘horse’’; its
matter
is
its
actual
occurrence
in,
for
instance,
a proposition. In this proposition, a term having
a signiﬁcation stands for something. This is the property
of supposition.
The form of a concrete individual thing is stable, but
its matter can change. Likewise, the form of a term, its
signiﬁcation, is stable; that to what it stands for, can
change. The things for which a term like ‘‘man’’ stands in
the proposition ‘‘a man runs’’ are different from those to
which the same term ‘‘man’’ stands for in ‘‘some men were
not running,’’ of from that ‘‘man’’ stands for in ‘‘man is
a three letter word.’’ But some authors, such as Peter of
Spain and Buridan, seem to claim that ‘‘man’’ supposits
for all men in any proposition, but propositions are veri-
ﬁed by different quantities of men, according to the
syncategoremata.
In medieval semantics the notion of signiﬁcation is
used in two ways: primarily for a kind of nucleus or what
a term essentially means, secondarily for the things a term
stands for. The ways in which a term, which already
possesses the primary kind of signiﬁcation, stands for
other things (be they material things or concepts), vary.
The things denoted may be, and often are, things in the
outside world, such as an individual man or horse, but
they may also be things in the mind, for instance, the
concept of ‘‘man’’ or that of ‘‘horse,’’ or even the terms
‘‘man’’ or ‘‘horse’’ themselves in their material occurrence,
for instance ‘‘man’’ in ‘‘man is a noun’’ or in ‘‘man has
three letters.’’
1250 T
Terms, Properties of

Problems
The medieval theory of the properties of terms is compli-
cated and, unfortunately, it is not always clear what it
involves (Spade 2000).
As to the historical development of the theory, it is still
unclear whether we can distinguish speciﬁc traditions in
different parts of Europe. More concretely, the question is
whether there is a split between the traditions in Paris and
in Oxford, the traditional centers of study in the Middle
Ages. Is the development continuous, or is there a break,
in particular in the last quarter of the thirteenth century,
during which modism (a kind of universal grammar) was
prominent, at least in Paris?
As to the contents of the theory, we are also left with
systematical questions. Which exactly are the properties of
terms? To which level of language or to which kinds of
terms do they belong? Traditionally three levels of lan-
guage are distinguished: spoken, written, and mental lan-
guage (the latter are concepts in the mind as part of
a mental language). The question is, for instance, whether
mental terms possess properties. Further, do only subject
terms possess the properties, or predicate terms as well?
Does the theory of the properties, especially supposition
theory, form a single theory? If not, was it at least initially
a single theory? Can it be compared with modern seman-
tics, in which formalization plays a part? If so, to what
extent, and in the semantics of which authors?
In this entry I shall concentrate on the most prominent
properties of the terms, and discuss them within the
context of individual theories. I shall discuss the proper-
ties within the framework of the rest of the semantics of
a speciﬁc theory or a period or logician. I prefer this
approach above the one in which an individual property,
such as supposition, is discussed in connection with the
same notion as interpreted by other logicians, and in
which the relation between the properties is not made
clear. I hope the reader will be presented with material to
interpret texts of a speciﬁc period or of a particular author.
The most prominent properties of terms are (1) signi-
ﬁcation (signiﬁcatio; this notion should be taken in con-
trast to the other properties); (2) supposition (suppositio);
(3) copulation (copulatio); (4) ampliation (ampliatio);
(5)
restriction
(restrictio);
and
(6)
appellation
(appellatio). Relation (relatio), remotion (remotio), and
alienation (alienatio) are also discussed in tracts as prop-
erties, but these will not be dealt with here. Neither shall
we discuss the divisions of supposition, except for a few
interesting aspects.
The deﬁnition of each property varies among logi-
cians. The deﬁnitions of supposition, copulation, etc.,
are connected with the deﬁnition of signiﬁcation, just as
the conception of material properties of an individual
thing varies with the conception of its form.
History
In the twelfth century we ﬁnd some important sources for
the theory in the form of anonymous tracts, notably the
Fallacie Parvipontane, the Cum sit nostra, the Ut dicit, and
the Introductiones Parisienses.
In the thirteenth century, the author we usually refer
to as Peter of Spain, but whose identity is not yet ﬁxed,
wrote a textbook called Tractatus, which became very
popular. The book was especially inﬂuential in Paris and
in the continent. In England, William of Sherwood and
Roger Bacon were active. They have some common char-
acteristics (it may be noted that William was also active in
Paris, and that Roger was inﬂuenced by, and reacted to
continental doctrines): both studied and/or worked in
Paris. In the late thirteenth century modism occupied
a prominent place, and even seemed to suppress logic, at
least in Paris.
In the fourteenth century William of Ockham’s logic
was well known. He was primarily active in England. On
the continent, John Buridan was a prominent master. He
placed Ockham’s logic in the background.
The overall history of the theory of the properties of
terms is not yet written, especially because many tracts still
await an edition. Many historical and systematical ques-
tions such as the one mentioned above still need to be
solved.
The Early Period
Aristotle considered the relationships between language,
thought and reality in his logical works, for example in his
De interpretatione, Sophistical Refutations, and his Topics.
In the De interpretatione, he deals with propositions, the
constituents of syllogisms, in the Sophistical Refutations he
examined the ways in which someone can be deceived by
a certain way of speech or writing used by his opponent. In
his Topics Aristotle explained on what kind of grounds an
argument could be based. These works became known in
Latin in western Europe around 1150, and were especially
inﬂuential on medieval semantics.
Not only logic, but grammar also had language as its
object. The authoritative works on grammar were those by
Donatus (IVth c.) and Priscian (VIth c.). From these
authors the medievals learned the notions of ‘‘paronymy,’’
or ‘‘denominatives’’ (for instance, ‘‘white’’ from white-
ness’’), ‘‘homonymy’’ or ‘‘equivocation’’ (but equivocation
is also a fallacy in the Sophistical Refutations) (for instance,
in the case of ‘‘man,’’ when ‘‘man is a kind’’ is said in
contradistinction to ‘‘man’’ in ‘‘man is white’’), and
Terms, Properties of T
1251
T

‘‘univocation’’ (meaning of terms having a single deﬁni-
tion, for instance ‘‘horse’’).
Further, they learned from the grammarians the
notion of imposition, i.e., the way in which terms have
been given meaning by being applied to things. Priscian
taught that names have the function of signifying sub-
stance together with quality. In general, his grammar was
semantically oriented.
Initially, logic and grammar could hardly be separated.
From the eleventh century onward, the gap between logic
and grammar widened. In general, one can say that the
medievals distinguished very well between these two
sciences.
Signiﬁcation was the basic notion. In the earlier period,
we see different deﬁnitions. In the Introductiones ad
logicam, for instance, ‘‘signiﬁcation’’ is identiﬁed with
the presentation of some form to the intellect (De Rijk
1967a), or, in the Introductiones Parisienses as ‘‘that which
is principally given by a term for understanding’’ (De Rijk
1967b).
Signiﬁcation was distinguished in primary and sec-
ondary. For instance, in Anselm of Canterbury’s De
grammatico (1033–1109), one ﬁnds a distinction between
signiﬁcare per se, i.e., the signiﬁcation of a form and
signiﬁcare per aliud, which was also called appellare; in
the latter case, the thing signiﬁed was meant (Gombocz
1992). This opposition comes back in various forms.
The early development of the notion of signiﬁcation
and the other properties can be followed in, for instance,
the Introductiones Parisienses (De Rijk 1967b). After the
deﬁnition of signiﬁcation just given, the author deﬁnes the
other properties of terms. Supposition is a property of
a word, he says, because it signiﬁes in the way of
a substantive or as something existing, like a substantive
term does. It is attributed both to the subject term and the
predicate term. Copulation is a property of an adjective.
Appellation is, according to him and as is usually said, the
present belonging of something with another thing, or
a property of a term because it signiﬁes present things.
Therefore, a word like ‘‘Antichrist’’ (an individual who is
not alive now, though he will live in the future, according
to faith) does not have appellation, though it has suppo-
sition and signiﬁcation.
The Introductiones Parisienses contains accounts that
bear resemblance to later tracts, though the deﬁnitions
used are different. For instance, in an afﬁrmative propo-
sition in which a common term is subject, and the verb is
of the present tense, the supposition is only for things of
the present, for instance, of ‘‘man’’ in ‘‘a man can run,’’
and of ‘‘daisy’’ in ‘‘a daisy is considered to be a beautiful
ﬂower.’’ Further, the anonymous already seems to know
the property of ampliation of a term, for instance, of
‘‘man’’ in ‘‘all man were.’’ Here ‘‘man’’ supposits for men
in the present and in the past. In ampliation the extension
of what the term stands for is widened.
In the Cum sit nostra, the property supposition is
deﬁned as the signiﬁcation of an utterance that can func-
tion as the subject in a proposition (sermo subicibilis), as
opposed to a predicate (De Rijk 1967b). Supposition here
is ascribed to a subject term. It differs from signiﬁcation,
he says, for supposition means ‘‘to bring its content under
other thing.’’
Supposition may be univocal or equivocal, he adds,
depending on the term. ‘‘Man’’ is a univocal word, and
‘‘dog’’ is equivocal (it may stand for a barking animal, or
a seadog, or a star). Univocal supposition is primary.
Supposition is further divided into simple and per-
sonal. Simple supposition is when a common term
supposits for a common form, for instance in ‘‘man is
the worthiest of all creatures.’’ Here the term stands for
something common, which is on the one hand not
exactly the form of a man, but on the other hand neither
a logical notion, like ‘‘species.’’ This proposition is difﬁ-
cult to interpret and was frequently debated in the Mid-
dle Ages.
The anonymous asks what kind of supposition ‘‘man’’
has in ‘‘man is a species.’’ It is not a simple supposition, he
says, like many would say in the thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries. He interprets it as discrete supposition, in the
sense that ‘‘man’’ is the proper name of something incor-
poreal, viz., a logical notion.
Personal supposition is, he says, the supposition for
something inferior, for instance ‘‘man’’ in ‘‘a man runs.’’
Here ‘‘man’’ supposits for this man and for that man (he
explains it as if there is ampliation).
Appellation is deﬁned as signiﬁcation, without time, of
a predicable term; ‘‘without time,’’ he says, to distinguish
this property from that of a verb. He immediately adds
another formulation, viz., that appellation is a property of
a common term as far as it is compared with the singular
things under it. He gives an example: ‘‘man is an animal’’
in which the subject term ‘‘man’’ is compared with the
singulars under it. In the alternative formula, appellation
apparently also belongs to a subject term.
Another property to be discussed is restriction. The
anonymous says that in ‘‘a white man runs,’’ ‘‘man,’’
a common term, is restricted. In ‘‘all men can be,’’ ‘‘man’’
is ampliated, however. The difference with the Questiones
Parisienses is clear in this respect.
The ﬁnal property is copulation. In the Cum sit nostra,
copulation is restricted to a verb. In the Introductiones
Parisienses, it is connected to an adjective.
1252 T
Terms, Properties of

From this discussion, it is clear that there are differ-
ences between an English tract (viz., the Cum sit nostra)
and a continental one, viz., the Introductiones Parisienses.
De Rijk assumed a Paris–Oxford split (Peter of Spain
1972). To what extent this is correct and for which period
are matters still open to discussion. It is generally con-
ceded that apart from displaying differences, the two tra-
ditions also have a common ground and have inﬂuenced
each other (De Libera 1982).
We may conclude that appellation is the notion that
obtained prominence above and before supposition. The
grammarians originally used it as the property according
to which a term denotes all the things under it. In
a proposition it was made clear which things the term
for which the term stands. Originally appellation is the
central notion, not supposition. This is especially evident
in the Fallacie Parvipontane.
Peter of Spain (Thirteenth Century)
Peter of Spain is the author of the most famous of all
medieval handbooks on logic and semantics. He com-
posed his Tractatus, later called Summule logicales, in
around 1235 (Peter of Spain 1972). Until recently, Peter
was thought to be the later pope John XXI, but this is no
longer accepted (Spruit 2000). His exact identity is not
certain.
According to Peter, signiﬁcation has an extensional and
an intentional side. He deﬁnes it as the presentation of
something by way of a conventional word.
The counterpart of signiﬁcation is supposition and
copulation. Peter deﬁnes supposition as the acceptance of
a substantival term for something. In the proposition ‘‘a
man runs,’’ ‘‘man’’ supposits, e.g., Socrates. Peter’s use of
‘‘acceptance’’ is remarkable. Supposition is here less
a property of a term than a term as far as it is understood
by someone. Supposition is equally related to existing and
nonexisting things. Roger Bacon, who will be discussed
below, takes a different position with respect to reference
to nonexistent things or empty classes, as we shall see.
Peter makes a division of supposition. He divides it
into common and discrete (i.e., when a term stands for an
individual). Common supposition is subdivided into nat-
ural and accidental. Accidental supposition is further
divided into simple and personal. The notions of natural,
personal, and simple supposition Peter discusses also fea-
ture in the tradition, although differently deﬁned.
Natural supposition is the natural capacity of a term to
have supposition for all actual and possible individuals
belonging to the universal term, e.g., ‘‘ﬂower.’’ It owes this
capacity to its signiﬁcation. According to this aspect, the
term is able to supposit for things, within or without
a context, within or without a proposition. So natural
supposition is a kind of extensional counterpart of signi-
ﬁcation. The latter is independent from any usage. The
notion of natural supposition is clearly an extension of his
semantics. It resembles Sherwood’s habitual supposition,
which I shall explain below.
Simple supposition belongs to a general term, Peter
says. An example in subject position is ‘‘man is
a species’’; however, it can also occur with a term in
predicate position, e.g., ‘‘man is an animal,’’ where ‘‘ani-
mal’’ has simple supposition. Another example is ‘‘of all
contraries is the same discipline.’’ ‘‘Discipline’’ is in pred-
icate position and has simple supposition. The next kind
of occurrence Peter distinguishes is when a term (‘‘man’’)
immediately follows an exceptive word, e.g., ‘‘every animal
except man is irrational.’’ Here there is no descent to ‘‘this
man.’’ It is clear that simple supposition is ambiguous: it
refers to both a logical notion and to a kind of reality, for
instance, animality.
Peter deﬁnes personal supposition as the acceptance of
a common term for its inferiors, for instance of a man in
‘‘a man runs.’’
Peter clearly distinguishes between supposition and
making a proposition true. For in ‘‘a man runs,’’ ‘‘man’’
has personal and determinate supposition, i.e., an indeﬁ-
nite term or a term to which a sign such as ‘‘some’’ is added
(‘‘some man runs’’) supposits for every man, both running
and not running. Still, the proposition is true when only
a single man runs. Although the term ‘‘man’’ supposits for
men both running and not running, the proposition is
true for a single running man. We may conclude that
Peter’s notion of supposition is wide: it includes
nonexisting things.
Copulation is the acceptance of an adjectival term for
something. Peter does not devote more words to it.
Ampliation is also acknowledged as a property of
a term; it is discussed in Peter’s short tract IX. Together
with restriction, it is taken as a further reﬁnement of
personal supposition. Ampliation is the extension of
a common term from a smaller range to a wider, for
instance in (Peter’s example) ‘‘a man can be the Anti-
christ,’’ ‘‘man’’ supposits not only for men that are, but
also for men that can be. Such an ampliation occurs, Peter
says, when a common noun is used in combination with
a verb such as ‘‘can,’’ or with an adjectival noun like
‘‘possible,’’ as in ‘‘that a man is the Antichrist is possible,’’
or with an adverb like ‘‘of necessity’’ in ‘‘man of necessity is
an animal,’’ where ‘‘man’’ is ampliated to have supposition
for the present and the future (note that Peter does not
mention the past, to which ampliation does not seem to be
possible according to him). Speciﬁc expressions possess
Terms, Properties of T
1253
T

ampliative force, such as ‘‘can,’’ ‘‘necessity,’’ not just any
noun or adverb.
Restriction is deﬁned as the limitation of a common
term from a wider to a smaller range of supposition. It
occurs in virtue of an adjectival noun, for instance, in
‘‘white man,’’ where ‘‘man’’ is restricted in its supposition
(note that Peter does not give a proposition with a copula).
It can also occur in virtue of a verb, for instance in ‘‘man
runs’’; or it occurs in virtue of a participle, for instance,
‘‘man’’ in ‘‘a running man disputes,’’ or, ﬁnally, it can
occur in virtue of what he calls an ‘‘implication,’’ for
instance, of ‘‘man’’ in ‘‘man who is white, runs.’’
In this tract, Peter adds the interesting comment that
there is a difference between strict logic and common
usage, for instance, when we say ‘‘nothing is in the box.’’
There is something in the box, viz., air. The same applies to
‘‘the queen arrives’’ said in the Netherlands. Here ‘‘queen’’
is restricted by usage to Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands.
Peter hardly devotes any attention to appellation. He
deﬁnes it as the acceptance of a common term for an
existing thing. He wishes to exclude terms like ‘‘Cesar,’’
‘‘Antichrist,’’ and ‘‘chimera.’’ Appellation has been moved
to the background. It is a kind of restricted supposition, in
a proposition with a verb in the present tense, and it has
become a secondary notion. As such it is a counterpart of
supposition.
William of Sherwood (1200/1210–1266/
1272)
Independent from Peter’s Tractatus, William of Sherwood
composed his Introductiones ad logicam about 1230–1240,
before he devoted himself to theological studies (William
of Sherwood, 1995). Peter of Spain’s Tractatus consists of
separate treatises discussing the different subjects of logic,
such as the properties of terms; William conceived his
theory as a whole.
His deﬁnitions of the properties of terms, signiﬁcation
included, differ from those of Peter. William deﬁnes it
as a presentation of a form to the intellect. On the basis
of signiﬁcation there is supposition, copulation, and
appellation.
According to Sherwood, signiﬁcation means that
something is presented to the understanding. What is
presented is a form, a universal nature. His deﬁnition of
signiﬁcation can be called ‘‘intensional.’’
Sherwood deﬁnes supposition as the ordering of some
thought under another thought. His deﬁnition of suppo-
sition is different from that of Peter of Spain, who deﬁned
it as ‘‘acceptance.’’ Sherwood does not use ‘‘supponere’’ in
the sense of ‘‘supponere pro.’’ His deﬁnition concerns
actual supposition (not habitual supposition, which
I shall discuss below), when a predicate is joined to
a subject. It reminds us of earlier grammatical theories.
Supposition is divided into material and formal.
Material is when a word supposits for an expression as
such, or for the word in combination with its signiﬁca-
tion, as he says (for instance, ‘‘man’’ in ‘‘man is
monosyllabic’’).
Formal supposition is when a word supposits for its
signiﬁcate. It is subdivided into simple and personal. Sim-
ple supposition is when a word ‘‘supposits for its
signiﬁcate, and signiﬁcatively.’’ This formula is also used
by Ockham, but with this important difference that in his
intensionalistic semantics Sherwood interprets the suppo-
sition of ‘‘man’’ in ‘‘man is a species’’ as simple supposi-
tion, but explains that the term supposits for its signiﬁcate.
Sherwood adds that personal supposition is when a term
‘‘supposits its signiﬁcate,’’ that is, for some thing, for
instance, ‘‘man’’ in ‘‘a man runs.’’
The primary notion in Sherwood’s semantics is appel-
lation. He deﬁnes it as the property according to which the
meaning of a term can be said of something by way of the
verb ‘‘is.’’ So appellation is connected with the present
tense. It may be ampliated or restricted. This use of appel-
lation reminds us of the grammarians. Supposition is
secondary, and is taken in a grammatical sense, like ‘‘put-
ting as a grammatical subject.’’ It should be added that
Sherwood takes ‘‘to supposit’’ transitively, and not intran-
sitively (in the sense of ‘‘to supposit for,’’ as in, e.g., John
Buridan).
The other two properties he discusses are copulation
and appellation. He distinguishes between actual and
habitual copulation. Actual copulation is a property of
a term as predicate. Appellation is the property of a term
when it denotes individual existing things that are present
at the moment when the proposition is uttered.
William’s theory is characteristic in that, according to
him, supposition stands for things in the present, and
therefore takes the function of appellation. If one refers
to other things, this is by way of adjuncts being added to
a noun. Sherwood deﬁnes appellation as an extensio-
nalistic counterpart of signiﬁcation. In signiﬁcation the
extensionalistic aspect is implied, and appellation brings it
to the fore (De Rijk 1982).
William distinguishes between habitual and actual
supposition and, similarly, between habitual and actual
copulation. Habitual supposition resembles Peter of
Spain’s natural supposition. Though it is called ‘‘supposi-
tion,’’ it bears resemblance to signiﬁcation. Habitual sup-
position is deﬁned as belonging to a term as far as it can
fulﬁll the function of subject term in a proposition. This
habitual supposition is the signiﬁcation of existing things
1254 T
Terms, Properties of

in a context. But William does not say that this is
a proposition. But what exactly is it?
De Rijk distinguishes between a depth structure of
a term (its signiﬁcation) and a surface structure (habitual
supposition). Though this kind of supposition resembles
Peter of Spain’s natural supposition, the point of differ-
ence is that in Sherwood the term stands for presently
existing things. Habitual copulation is also a kind of sig-
niﬁcation, by which something is characterized as prop-
erty (De Rijk 1982).
Roger Bacon (c. 1214–1292/1294)
Roger Bacon is especially interested in language as it is
used. He realizes that meanings of words can vary
according to new impositions, which are given by men.
A conventional sign has as its immediate signiﬁcate some-
thing in the outside world. The concept is only a natural
sign in the sense of an index, secondarily signiﬁed.
In his Summulae dialectices (an early, but mature work,
dating c. 1250; later works are his De signis and Compen-
dium studii theologiae) Bacon discusses the properties of
terms, of which he names three: supposition, appellation,
and copulation (De Libera 1982).
He deﬁnes signiﬁcation: it is the property of a word, or
term, on account of itself, and not in relation to any other
term. Therefore, he says, a term has signiﬁcation both
inside and outside a proposition.
Supposition is taken in many ways, Roger says. He
deﬁnes it as a property of a subject term, in as far as it
supposits
for
something
else
and
is
subject
in
a proposition. The term must be actually used in such
a proposition.
Supposition is divided into simple and personal. Sim-
ple supposition is when a term does not stand for its
inferior, but for the word. He takes it more or less in the
same way as Peter of Spain, that is, when a term ‘‘man’’
stands for a word itself (man is a word),’’ for man as the
worthiest of creatures, for a meaningful word (‘‘man is
a noun’’), for man as monosyllabic, and for man as
a species (‘‘man is a universal’’).
Personal supposition is when a term stands for its
inferiors, such as ‘‘man’’ in ‘‘man runs.’’ This means that
‘‘man’’ supposits for present man, and it implies that the
verb
‘‘runs’’
does
not
exercise
inﬂuence
on
the
supposition.
Roger presents two views on appellation: some say that
a term of itself appellates present things as appellated, past
and future things and is common to beings and nonbeings
(this gives room for a semantics of empty classes, for
instance, of ‘‘Cesar’’ in ‘‘Cesar is a man’’). Others say that
a term only applies to present things, and is not common
to being and nonbeing, or past, present, and future,
according to Aristotle.
Roger notes that the ﬁrst view is the common one. He
investigates and rejects it. This view comes close to the one
advocated in the Cum sit nostra, and to what Sherwood
labels as the ‘‘improper account.’’ Roger chooses the sec-
ond view, which is close to Sherwood’s ‘‘proper account.’’
Bacon’s characteristic claim is that a term cannot be com-
mon to being and nonbeing. If it stands for things that are
not present, this is due to equivocation; then it is
ampliated. One might say that he does do justice to pred-
ication with regard to empty classes.
Appellation is a property of both subject and predicate
terms. He attacks the concept of appellation for all possi-
ble referents. This reminds us of the Parisian notion of
natural supposition, like we have seen. Due to his strict
conception of supposition Bacon does not need restric-
tion. Supposition itself is limited. He opposes conceptions
of supposition that include more than present referents,
for instance in the way Peter of Spain does.
Lastly, Roger discusses copulation. However, he can be
brief, because there is no difﬁculty, he says. Adjectives,
verbs, and adverbs that signify something predicable,
have copulation. ‘‘Copulation’’ means that the meaning
(res signiﬁcata) of a term is joined to another term as
‘‘adjacent inclination.’’ It is an adjectival mode of signiﬁ-
cation, in which something is meant as a property. Cop-
ulation has lost its function as a property of terms in this
period. Supposition takes over its role. This could be
regretted, for logically an adjectival term plays a different
role than a substantival term (Jacobi 1992).
William of Ockham (c. 1285–1348)
To understand Ockham’s semantics, one should be aware
of his ontological presuppositions. Reality consists of indi-
vidual substances and individual properties. Mental con-
cepts
are
important
as
guides
for
interpreting
conventional
signs.
This
is,
in
short,
Ockham’s
nominalism.
The concepts themselves are constructions of the
mind, produced by abstraction following the direct cog-
nition of individual things, existing inside or outside the
knower. He opposes any form of reiﬁcation of names in
logic and grammar. Words signify what they signify in
different ways. His semantics is connected with his theory
of knowledge.
The mental concepts are signs. Signs have become the
central notion in fourteenth-century logic. In comparison
with Peter of Spain and William of Sherwood, Ockham is
much more interested in signiﬁcation. Logic is about
signs, and Ockham clearly distinguishes logic from,
Terms, Properties of T
1255
T

e.g., physics, a ‘‘real’’ science. ‘‘Real science’’ is about
concepts related to things (the medievals called these
‘‘ﬁrst intentions’’); logic is a ‘‘rational’’ science and about
second intentions (which are concepts denoting concepts,
so concepts on a higher level).
Concepts are fundamental in order to be able to talk
and write successfully. These are for all men the same,
French or English, and are a kind of universal language,
having a sort of universal grammar.
Language is essential in Ockham’s philosophy for
Ockham, because thought is performed in language
(mental, spoken, or written). Signiﬁcation is a central
notion for Ockham, referring to Augustine. It is deﬁned
in the ﬁrst part of his Summa logicae (Guillelmi de
Ockham Summa logicae, 1972). In chap. 26–37 he gives
a kind of philosophical dictionary, which students should
learn in the pursuit of truth.
Ockham takes signiﬁcation in many ways. He favors
the second sense. Signiﬁcation is not linked to the present,
like Bacon said, and is not inﬂuenced by change or
destruction of something. This mode of signiﬁcation
shows an omnitemporal range. Signiﬁcation can be called
‘‘omnitemporal denotation.’’ He takes it extensionally.
The key word in Ockham’s semantics is supposition. It
is a property by virtue of which a term, be it a subject or
predicate term, stands for something. A propositional
context is required for this two-name theory of reference.
Prior to its having supposition, a term has signiﬁcation.
A general term signiﬁes all those things of which it can be
truly said (Read 2006).
Ockham distinguishes between three kinds of suppo-
sition: personal, simple, or material. Personal supposition
(which together with simple supposition is called formal
supposition, just like in Sherwood) is primary. In this way,
a term supposits for its signiﬁcate. For example, in ‘‘every
man is an animal,’’ ‘‘man’’ supposits for things in the
outside world, of which it is true to say that it is an animal.
In ‘‘every vocal noun is a part of speech’’, ‘‘noun’’ supposits
for words. In ‘‘every species is a universal,’’ ‘‘species’’
supposits for particular species, for instance horse.
A term may also supposit for imaginable things. Ockham
does not give an example; perhaps he only means that the
list is not complete.
Simple supposition occurs when a term supposits for
an intention in the mind, e.g., in ‘‘man is a species’’; here
‘‘man’’ supposits for the logical construct ‘‘man.’’ Material
supposition is said to occur when a term supposits for
a spoken or written word and is not taken signiﬁcatively,
e.g., in ‘‘man is a noun,’’ ‘‘man’’ supposits for the material
or written entity. Whether material supposition also
occurs on the mental level is still a matter of discussion
among scholars. It seems to be the case in some respects,
and that means that there is equivocity in mental lan-
guage. Ockham rejects ampliation.
There are several problems connected with this divi-
sion. Firstly, one should note that, according to Ockham,
personal supposition is primary. It is what is called ‘‘in
virtue of speech’’ that every term in a proposition should
be taken according to this kind of supposition. When
a term is taken in personal supposition, it stands for things
it signiﬁes naturally, e.g., ‘‘man’’ signiﬁes individual men,
‘‘noun’’ signiﬁes words, etc. Ockham expresses this as
follows: ‘‘every man is an animal, therefore this man is
an animal and that man is an animal,’’ etc. Thus there is no
reference to some distributive entity in the sense of Plato,
which does not exist. In this analysis, the antecedent is
extensionally equivalent with the consequent.
Ockham explicitly says that in personal supposition
a term does not stand for a thing, but to its signiﬁcate. Here
he criticizes Sherwood, it seems, who speaks about the
signiﬁcation of things. In simple supposition a term does
not stand for its signiﬁcate, Ockham says. He criticizes
among others Peter of Spain. According to Ockham,
a term having simple supposition supposits for an act of
the mind. This corresponds to his conception of
universals.
Simple supposition seems to be connected with
material supposition rather than to personal supposi-
tion. This last form does not seem to belong to the same
genus.
Ockham also deals with the expression ‘‘man’’ in ‘‘man
is the worthiest of creatures.’’ Some realist philosophers
taught that ‘‘man’’ here has simple supposition, for it is
false, they say, that this man or that man is the most
worthy among creatures. The proposition is therefore
false, Ockham says, when ‘‘man’’ is taken in personal
supposition. However, one should pay attention to the
author’s intention in that he clearly wanted to distinguish
man from all other corporeal creatures. One should there-
fore not take every proposition ‘‘in virtue of speech’’ as
Ockham sees it. He is not a radical empiricist.
John Buridan (c. 1292–1362)
Important though he is as a logician, Ockham was not very
inﬂuential on the continent. It could be said that in the
fourteenth century John Buridan dominated semantics on
the continent, especially in Paris. His tract on supposi-
tions, part of his Summulae, was very inﬂuential in Europe
(John Buridan 1998).
1256 T
Terms, Properties of

Like Ockham, Buridan is a nominalist. He acknowl-
edges only individual substances and individual accidents,
both existing on themselves. How these two kinds form
a unity does not seem to be his main concern. His interest
is in semantics, and traditional metaphysical questions are
solved semantically.
A human being possesses the power to express a word
(spoken or written) according to the institution given in
order to make his thoughts clear. Buridan is especially
interested in the conventional level, and takes that more
seriously than any of his predecessors. For instance, to the
single word ‘‘chimera’’ correspond three different con-
cepts, viz., those of goat, stag, and lion.
Signiﬁcation is primarily a property of conventional
signs. These are labels of concepts and can be replaced at
will. Concepts determine the truth of a proposition, so
they have objective value, but Buridan interprets them as
the way in which man approaches reality. Man is not an
objective, calculating being who automatically reproduces
truth, but one who speaks or writes true, or false, propo-
sitions depending on the way under which he understands
reality.
Buridan develops his theory on the properties of terms
in the framework of his commentary on Peter of Spain. It
should be noted that this text of Peter’s is not the original
one, and Buridan does not follow it slavishly. Every now
and then he seems to be annoyed with it.
Supposition can be divided into personal and material,
thus into two kinds, not three, as is traditionally the case.
Personal supposition is when a subject or predicate has
supposition in a proposition for its ultimate signiﬁcate(s),
for instance, the term ‘‘man’’ – not the term ‘‘chimera,’’
because this does not possess a single ultimate signiﬁcate
in reality.
Material supposition is when a term has supposition
for itself, or for a like term, or for a concept (which is
called its immediate signiﬁcate), according to which it is
imposed to signify. For instance, the term ‘‘man’’ in ‘‘man
is monosyllabic,’’ and ‘‘man’’ in ‘‘man is a species.’’
In Buridan’s material supposition, simple supposi-
tion is included. He is well aware that some adopt the
property of simple supposition, for instance of ‘‘man’’
in ‘‘man is a species.’’ He rejects it, however, and adds
that Aristotle had already done so. Buridan calls both
cases ‘‘material supposition,’’ in line with his ontology.
Simple supposition suggests the existence of universals
outside the mind, and this kind does not exist, other
than the ‘‘ancients’’ say. Universals are just concepts, by
which the mind conceives more than one thing in an
indifferent way.
Buridan deﬁnes the notion of natural supposition in
another way than Peter of Spain does. Natural supposition
is, for instance, of ‘‘thunder’’ in ‘‘thunder is a sound in the
cloud.’’ The term stands for all occurrences of thunder in
the past, present, future, and possible tense. Taken this
way, it is a scientiﬁc proposition.
Other properties of terms Buridan acknowledges are
appellation, ampliation, and restriction, not copulation,
a property that does not play a part any more. Appellation
is the property of a term according to which a term put in
a proposition appellates its form, i.e., those things which the
term connotes, and it appellates them as adjacent, either in
the present, or in the past, or in the future, or in possibility.
Buridan gives an example: ‘‘The just devil runs.’’ He ana-
lyses it as follows: the subject of this proposition (‘‘just
devil,’’ i.e., this complex term) does not supposit for any-
thing. Still, ‘‘just’’ appellates justice, as adjacent to the devil
for which the term ‘‘devil’’ would have supposition if it
would be the subject or the predicate of the proposition.
There is an interesting case of appellation in propo-
sitions with a verb denoting an inner act of the mind,
such as ‘‘to know,’’ ‘‘to promise.’’ The famous example is
‘‘I know the one coming’’ (cognosco venientem). The term
‘‘coming’’
appellates
‘‘to
come.’’
The
proposition
expresses that I know the one only as far as he is coming.
Still, he may be my father, whom I know very well, but at
that moment I do not know that he is the one coming. In
this case, ‘‘you know the one coming’’ is false, though in
fact it is your father. If one says, ‘‘the coming one, you
know,’’ in which the substantival adjective is put before
the verb, the proposition is true. According to that word
order, the aspect of coming does not fall under the
scope of the verb ‘‘to know,’’ and is not necessary for
the truth of the proposition.
Ampliation is the widening of the supposition of a
term, e.g., ‘‘A’’ in ‘‘A will run’’ which means, Buridan says
that ‘‘what is or will be A, will run.’’ It is ampliated beyond
its ‘‘status,’’ Buridan says. By ‘‘status’’ he means the con-
dition by which a term signiﬁes all its signiﬁcates in the
present.
Restriction is also a property of a term, e.g., of ‘‘man’’
in ‘‘every white man will run.’’ Here ‘‘man’’ is restricted
within its status, and stands for all men in the present and
future, due to the verb in the future, but is restricted to
white men.
See also:
▶Anselm of Canterbury ▶John Buridan
▶Peter of Spain ▶Roger Bacon ▶Supposition Theory
▶Universals
▶William
of
Ockham
▶William
of
Sherwood
Terms, Properties of T
1257
T

Bibliography
Primary Sources
Buridanus Johannes (1998) Summulae. De suppositionibus, ed. Van der
Lecq R. Ingenium, Nijmegen
de Libera, A (1982) The Oxford and Paris traditions in logic. In:
Kretzmann N, Kenny A, Pinborg J (eds) Stump E (asst ed) The
Cambridge history of later medieval philosophy. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge, pp 174–187
de Libera A (1986) Les Summulae dialectices de Roger Bacon. I: De
termino. II: De enuntiatione (continuabitur). Archives d’ histoire
doctrinale et litte´raire du Moyen Age 53:139–189
de Rijk LM (1967a) Logica modernorum. A contribution to the history of
early terminist logic. Vol 2, Part one. The origin and early develop-
ment of the theory of supposition. Van Gorcum, Assen
de Rijk LM (1967b) Logica modernorum. A contribution to the history of
early terminist logic. Vol 2, Part two. The origin and early development
of the theory of supposition. Texts and indices. Van Gorcum, Assen
Guillelmi de Ockham (1974) In: Boehner Ph, Ga´l G, Brown S (eds)
Summa logicae, St. Bonaventure University
Peter of Spain (1972) Tractatus called afterwards Summule logicales. First
critical edition from the manuscripts with an introduction by de Rijk
LM. Van Gorcum, Assen
William of Sherwood (1995) Introductiones in Logicam. Einfu¨hrung in
die Logik. Lateinisch-Deutsch. Felix Meiner, Hamburg
Secondary Sources
de Libera A (1986) The Oxford and Paris traditions in logic. In: The
Cambridge history of later medieval philosophy (. . .), pp 174–187
de Rijk LM (1982) The origins of the theory of the properties of terms. In:
Kretzmann N, Kenny A, Pinborg J (eds) Stump E (asst ed) The
Cambridge history of later medieval philosophy. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge, pp 161–173
Dufour CA (1985) Die Lehre der Proprietates Terminorum. Sinn und
Referenz in mittelalterlichen Logik. Philosophia, Mu¨nchen/Ham-
den/Wien
Gombocz W (1992) Sprachphilosophie in der Scholastik. In: von Dascal
M, Gherhardus D, Lorenz K, Meggle G (hrsg.) Sprachphilosophie.
Ein
internationales
Handbuch
zeitrgeno¨ssischer
Forschung
[Handbuch zur Sprach- und Kommunikationswissenschaft; Bd. 7].
Walter de Gruyter, Berlin/New York, pp 56–75
Hackett J (2007) Roger Bacon. Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy.
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/medieval-terms/
Jacobi K (1992) Die Lehre der Terministen. In: Sprachphilosophie (. . .),
pp 580–596
Meier-Oeser S (1995) In: Ritter J, Gru¨nder K (eds) Signiﬁkation.
Historisches Wo¨rterbuch der Philosophie, vol 9. Aschwabe, Basel,
pp 759–795
Meier-Oeser S (2003) Medieval semiotics. Stanford encyclopedia of phi-
losophy. http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/medieval-terms/
Read S (2006) Medieval theories: properties of terms. Stanford encyclo-
pedia
of
philosophy.
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/medieval-
terms/
Spade PV (2000) Why don’t medieval logicians ever tell us what they’re
doing? Or, what is this, a conspiracy? http://www.pvspade.com/
Logic/index.html/
Spruyt J (2001) Peter of Spain. Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy.
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/medieval-terms/
Tha¯bit ibn Qurra
DAVID C. REISMAN
Department of Classics and Mediterranean Studies
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL
USA
Abstract
Tha¯bit ibn Qurra (836–901) was an inﬂuential ﬁgure in
the Kindı¯ Circle, a group of scholars who popularized the
classical, scientiﬁc, and philosophical texts in Muslim
society under the reign of the early ‘Abba¯sid dynasty. He
is primarily known for his translations, commentaries,
and expositions in astronomy and the exact mathematical
disciplines, but he ﬁgures also in the Neoplatonic inter-
pretation of Aristotelian philosophy.
Tha¯bit ibn Qurra (836–901), astronomer, mathematician,
and philosopher, worked at the Islamic ‘Abba¯sid court
during the classical stage in medieval Muslim intellectual
history. He was a major ﬁgure in the so-called Kindı¯ Circle
and so participated in the project in which the philosopher
al-Kindı¯(d. after 870) sought to popularize the philosoph-
ical and scientiﬁc works which the Muslim world inherited
from the Greeks as part of the Graeco–Arabic translation
movement. Of S˙a¯bian origin and thus of this partially
pagan but certainly scholarly community of H˙ arra¯n,
Tha¯bit was well-prepared to start his career with knowl-
edge of the important languages (Greek, Syriac, and Ara-
bic) that were the main tools of the translation movement
and of the scholarly discussions that took as fundamental,
philosophical and scientiﬁc principles, those of the pre-
Islamic Aristotelian and the subsequent Neoplatonic com-
mentary tradition (of both pagan and Christian Greek
Near Eastern communities).
In the ﬁeld of philosophy, Tha¯bit’s familiarity with the
Aristotelian corpus is evident from his compendia and
abridgments of parts of the Aristotelian logical Organon
(Categoriae, De interpretatione, Analytica priora). Indica-
tive of his philosophical studies is an acute presentation of
Aristotle’s Metaphysics and his translation (or reportedly
‘‘correction’’) of Themistius’ paraphrase of Aristotle’s
work. One work, his Concise Exposition of Aristotle’s
Metaphysics, gives us indication of Tha¯bit’s intellectual
allegiances and achievements. In this work, the concentra-
tion of attention is directed toward the ‘‘theological’’ core
1258 T
Tha¯bit ibn Qurra

(the metaphysica specialis) of Chaps. 6–9 in the book
Lambda and the content concerned with a type of recon-
ciliation of its doctrines and Islamic (or at least mono-
theistic) tenets. Examples of this effort is to be seen in his
attribution of will to the vague and pagan articulated
‘‘First Principle’’ and his Islamic-inspired choice of the
term tawh:ı¯d to describe its ‘‘unicity.’’ As a result of these
pieces of evidence, we can conclude that Tha¯bit ascribed
to the ‘‘theologizing’’ interpretation that was very impor-
tant to the success of the Kindı¯ cycle of works in medieval
Islamic intellectual circles. The overall content of this
most important philosophical work ascribed to Tha¯bit
displays an original and percipient understanding of
Aristotelian doctrine. While clarifying Aristotle’s posi-
tion on the two subjects of the First Mover being the
cause of corporeal substance’s existence and the First
Principle being cause of the universe’s existence from
eternity,
Tha¯bit
is
quite
skilled
at
introducing
and providing solutions for the logical consequences of
Aristotle’s arguments. The structure of the work also
evinces Tha¯bit’s expert knowledge of Neoplatonic com-
mentaries; this is especially evident in his prolegome-
non’s inclusion of the points of information expected in
the earlier works.
While Tha¯bit displays an appreciation for the ancient
philosophical tradition as well as acumen applied to its
problems, he was and is best-known for his work in astron-
omy (and its attendant ﬁelds of astrology and mathemat-
ics). In astronomy he not only clariﬁed many aspects of the
heritage of Ptolemy, but also contributed original thought
that would lead eventually to the common perception of
astronomy as an exact science. These contributions
included a new empiricist approach to astronomical data
and at the same time a ‘‘mathematizing’’ trend in astronom-
ical research by the use of geometrical models. His thought
in the ﬁeld of mathematics is displayed in a textual dialogue
with his contemporary ʿI¯sa¯ b. Usayyid. Three issues were
addressed. In one, Tha¯bit propounded the Neoplatonic
doctrine that numbers have an existence separable from
numbered things. In another, he defended the view that
inﬁnite numbers actually exist. This research into ﬁnitude
and inﬁnitude were to be of some importance to the Mus-
lim philosophical tradition, particularly when applied to
the question of divine knowledge of universals (the topic
of the third question) as well as discussions on the post-
mortem existence of particularized or individuated human
souls. This correspondence is to be included in the vast
mathematical corpus composed by Tha¯bit which includes
treatises on geometry (planes and their terminations; the
study of planes in relation to discrete substances; the mag-
nitudes of pure ﬁgure) as well as mathematics proper (trea-
tises on discrete numeration, etc.).
Tha¯bit’s intellectual heritage was of profound impor-
tance to developments in the medieval Arabic ﬁelds of
philosophy and the exact sciences. His penchant for the
Platonic tradition was perhaps the most inﬂuential trend
in determining what of the Platonic corpus would be
translated and how its implications for the relevant ﬁelds
of research would be addressed. His approach to those
ﬁelds would have major implications for the development
of philosophy and the exact sciences at least until the later
medieval age.
See also: ▶al-Kindı¯, Abu¯
Yu¯suf Yaʿqu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q
▶Mathematics and Philosophy in the Arab World
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Morelon R (1987) Tha¯bit ibn Qurra, œuvres d’astronomie. Les Belles
Lettres, Paris
Reisman DC, Bertolacci A (2009) Tha¯bit ibn Qurra’s ‘‘Concise exposition
of Aristotle’s Metaphysics’’: text, translation, and commentary. In:
Rashed R (ed) Tha¯bit ibn Qurra. Science and philosophy in ninth-
century Baghdad. De Gruyter, Berlin/New York, pp 715–776
Sabra AI (1968) Tha¯bit ibn Qurra on Euclid’s Parallels Postulate.
J Warburg Courtauld Inst 31:12–33
Sabra AI (1997) Tha¯bit ibn Qurra on the inﬁnite and other puzzles.
Z Gesch Arab-Islam Wiss 11:1–33
Sayili A (1958) Sabit ibn Kurran’nin Pitagor teoremini tamimi. Beleten
Turk Tarih Kurumu 22:527–549
Suter H (1986) U¨ ber die Ausmessung der Parabel von Tha¯bit b. Kurra
al-Harrani. In: Suter H (ed) Beitra¨ge zur Geshichte der Mathematik
und Astronomie im Islam, vol 2. Insitut fu¨r Geschichte der Arabisch-
Islamischen Wissenschaften an der Johann Wolfgang Goethe-
Universita¨t, Frankfurt am Main, pp 413–434
Secondary Sources
Carmody FJ (1960) The astronomical works of Tha¯bit b. Qurra. Univer-
sity of California Press, Berkeley/Los Angeles
Lemay R (1997) Acquis de la tradition scientiﬁque grecque confronte´s aux
re´alite´s des civilisations me´die´vales: cas particulier de l’astrologie-
cosmologie. In: Hasnawi A, Elamrani-Jamal A, Aouad M (eds)
Perspectives arabes et me´die´vales sur la tradition scientiﬁque et
philosophique grecque. Peeters, Leuven
Le´vy T (1987) Figures de l’inﬁni: les mathe´matiques au miroir des cul-
tures. E´ditions du Seuil, Paris
Morelon R (1994) Tha¯bit b. Qurra and Arab astronomy in the 9th
century. Arab Sci Philos 4:111–139
Pines S (1986) Tha¯bit ibn Qurra’s conception of number and theory of the
mathematical inﬁnite. In: Stroumsa S (ed) The collected works of
Shlomo Pines, vol 2. Brill, Leiden, pp 423–429
Rosenfeld BA, Grigorian AT. Tha¯bit Ibn Qurra. In: Dictionary of scientiﬁc
biography, vol 13. Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York, pp 288–295
Tha¯bit ibn Qurra T
1259
T

Themistius, Arabic
ELISA CODA
Istituto Italiano di Scienze Umane
Palazzo Strozzi
Florence
Italy
Abstract
From the sixth century onward, some of Themistius’
works were translated into semitic languages. Lost in
Greek, some of Themistius’ works have come down to
us, either in part or in their entirety, through Arabic (or
Hebrew) translations. The Arabic bio-bibliographical
sources mention a great amount of his texts. Arabic
readers got acquainted, to different degrees, with the Ara-
bic or the Syriac version of his Paraphrases of Aristotle’s
Prior and Posterior Analytics, Categories, Topics, On Gen-
eration and Corruption, Physics, On the Soul, of Book
Lambda of the Metaphysics, On the Heavens, Poetics, Ethics
and of some of Aristotle’s zoological works. Only few of
these Arabic translations have come down to us. However,
fragments of these texts are transmitted through Averroes
and a few other Arabic authors. Several of these Arabic
versions were in turn translated into Hebrew in the thir-
teenth century. Part of Themistius’ Paraphrase of the Prior
Analytics has come down to us in Hebrew. Moreover, the
Hebrew translations of his Paraphrases of Book Lambda of
Aristotle’s Metaphysics and of Aristotle’s On the Heavens
are extant in their entirety. Both of them are extant also in
Latin translations made from the Hebrew in the sixteenth
century. Among his works preserved in Arabic, there are
also a discourse on Government and a treatise on logic,
namely, the Treatise in Response to Maxim on the Reduction
of the Second and Third Figures of the Syllogism to the First
One, both lost in Greek. In addition, the ps-al-Kindı¯’s On
how to Dispel Sorrow, preserved in Arabic, has been traced
back to a lost work by Themistius. Finally, some passages
that are not related to his or that determined work are also
attributed to Themistius by a number of Arab and Jewish
authors.
Themistius’ Paraphrases Extant in Greek
Themistius (c. 317–387 CE) was a Greek rhetorician and
commentator, who wrote extensively on the Aristotelian
corpus, embedding in his paraphrases materials from more
ancient authors, chieﬂy from Alexander of Aphrodisias.
Themistius describes the origin and the aim of his philo-
sophical production in different ways: his paraphrases
contain what Themistius learned from and inherited by
his teachers (Oration 23,294d–295a); Themistius wrote
paraphrases as a result of his ofﬁcial activity as teacher
(CAG V/1: 1,7–10; CAG V/3: 1,1–5).
Themistius’ Paraphrases of Aristotle’s works which
have come down to us in the Greek original are those of
the Posterior Analytics (CAG V/1), Physics (CAG V/2), and
of On the Soul (CAG V/3).
Even though most of Themistius’ paraphrases are lost
in Greek, many quotations of them are extant in the
works
of
Simplicius
(c.
490–560 CE),
Philoponus
(c. 490–570 CE), and a few other ancient authors
(Eustratius of Nicaea, CAG XXI/1: 11,5–9; Sophonias,
CAG
XXIII/1:
1,11–22;
Theodorus
Metochites,
ed.
Mueller: p 95–96). More of the works of Themistius was
known to Syriac and Arabic authors than has survived in
Greek.
Several information about Themistius’ paraphrases
available in Byzantium are contained in the Suda Lexicon
(ed. Adler A.: 690–691) and in Photius’ Bibliotheca
(Cod. 74, ed. Henry R., vol. 2: 154; Benakis 1987, p 352).
Modern scholarship maintains that the translation of
Boethius’ De differentiis topicis by Maximus Planudes
granted an indirect access to Themistius’ Paraphrase of
Aristotle’s Topics (Todd 2003:62 and n. 33). From the
eleventh century, his paraphrases were several times
copied by Greek scribes together with Aristotle’s works
or sometimes in marginal scholia. Besides these copies,
several quotations from his paraphrases were also cited
in anthologies together with other commentaries (Todd
2003: notes 34–35).
Themistius’ philosophical works were quoted and
discussed by several Arab (and Jewish) authors, whose
writings
count
–
together
with
the
Graeco-Latin
translations – as a major source of the knowledge of his
paraphrases in medieval Europe. An Arabic translation of
his Paraphrase of Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics was the
basis of the Latin translation by Gerard of Cremona
(c. 1144–1187). Themistius became known in medieval
Europe through this Latin translation and from the
quotations contained in Arabic sources. Besides the trans-
lations and the indirect transmission through Arabic
sources, the Latin West also got acquainted with him
from other works. The ps-Augustinian De decem categoriis
(ed. Minio-Paluello 1965) provided an indirect access to
his Paraphrase of the Categories, lost in Greek. Analo-
gously, the Paraphrase of the Topics was to a certain extent
known in the Latin world through several quotations in
Boethius and Cassiodorus. From the thirteenth century
onward, some of Themistius’ paraphrases started to be
translated from Greek original into Latin and commented
1260 T
Themistius, Arabic

by Latin authors. The Greek original of his Paraphrase
of Aristotle’s On the Soul was translated into Latin
by William of Moeberke in Viterbo, 1267. Moeberke’s
Latin translation is extant and edited (Corpus Latinum
Commentariorum
in
Aristotelem
Graecorum/I
1957).
Another Latin translation of this Paraphrase was carried
out in Venice, 1481, by Ermolao Barbaro the Younger; this
translation was also based on the Greek original. Barbaro
the Younger’s Latin translation has been repeatedly
published (Todd 2003), and is edited, too (CAG Versiones
Latinae/XVIII 1978). Another annotated Latin translation
of chapter 3 (paragraphs 4–13) of his Paraphrase of
Aristotle’s On the Soul by Ludovico Norgarola was carried
out in Verona, s. XVI (c. 1554). Norgarola’s Latin transla-
tion was based on the Greek original; it has been repeat-
edly published (Todd 2003). Several versions (s. XVI,
1582–1588) of a Latin translation of his Paraphrase by
Federico Bonaventura have come down to us and these
have been repeatedly published (Todd 2003).
Themistius’ Paraphrase of Aristotle’s Posterior Analyt-
ics was translated from the Greek into Latin by Ermolao
Barbaro the Younger (1454–1493) between 1471 and 1480,
in Naples. This translation too is published (Todd 2003).
Paolo Orsatto revised and commented Barbaro the Youn-
ger’s Latin translation of this Paraphrase. Orsatto’s Latin
translation of this text has come down to us undated and
incomplete. It is extant in a single manuscript (Milan,
Biblioteca Ambrosiana D 129 inf., s. XVI, fols. 34r–60v)
(Todd 2003). Ermolao Barbaro the Younger translated
from Greek the Paraphrase of Aristotle’s Physics. This has
been repeatedly published (Todd 2003).
From the sixteenth century onward, Themistius’ Para-
phrases of the Posterior Analytics, Physics, and On the Soul
were several times commented and annotated by Italian
Humanists; the commentaries which are available for us
are those of Marcantonio Zimara, Ludovico Norgarola,
Federico Pendasio, and Federico Bonaventura; scholars
also debate on the identity of the author of an anonymous
commentary, conventionally called Anonimus (‘‘Anonimus
Venetus’’) (Todd 2003).
Spurious Works
The Paraphrase of the Prior Analytics (CAG XXIII/3),
preserved in Greek and transmitted under the name of
Themistius is commonly agreed to be spurious; it is attrib-
uted to Sophonias (Rose 1867; Walzer 1963). The Para-
phrase of parts of Aristotle’s Parva naturalia (CAG V/6)
transmitted under the name of Themistius is also spurious
and should be attributed to Sophonias (Wendland 1903).
Ermolao Barbaro the Younger translated it into Latin (In
librum de insomniis paraphrasis, In librum de divinatione
per somnum paraphrasis, In librum de memoria et
reminiscentia paraphrasis, and In librum de somno et vigilia
paraphrasis): these translations have been printed several
times (Todd 2003).
Syriac, Arabic, and Hebrew Translations of
Themistius’ Paraphrases
From the sixth to the eighth century, during the early
moment of Aristotle’s reception into the eastern Christian
society, in the Syriac world, several of Themistius’ works
have been translated into Syriac – an Aramaic dialect,
which became soon a major literary language and was
used for exegetical and philosophical works. None of the
Syriac translations of his paraphrases have come down
to us.
After the rise of Islam, between the ninth and the tenth
century, several of Themistius’ Paraphrases have been
translated from the Greek original or from previous Syriac
translation into Arabic (Endress 1997; D’Ancona Costa
2002). Several of these Arabic translations were in turn
translated into Hebrew in the Middle Ages. Some of the
Arabic translations of his works are at present available;
others, lost in Arabic, have come down to us in Hebrew.
Valuable information about the assimilation of his works
into Arabic have also been preserved to us by the Arabic
bio-bibliographical sources; some attributions in these
sources are, however, dubious (see below).
Prior Analytics
The Greek original of Themistius’ Paraphrase of the Prior
Analytics is lost. The Arabic bio-bibliographers mention
an Arabic translation of this text by Abu ‘Uthman al-
Dimashqı¯ (d. c. 900) (K. al-Fihrist, Flu¨gel: 249,8; Ibn al-
Qift:ı¯ 36). This Arabic translation is however lost, but parts
of it are at present available into some excerpta translated
in Hebrew by Todros Todrosi (ﬂ. around 1330), towards
the half of fourteenth century (Zonta 1994; Hasnawi
2002). The Hebrew version of these excerpta includes the
following passages of his Paraphrase on the An. Pr.: 24a3–
24b20;
24b19–21;
25a1–3;
25a14–16;
27b10–29a18;
30a15–30b7; 32b5–32b23; 37a32–37b11. The text pre-
served in Hebrew is different from the spurious one attrib-
uted to him in Greek. It is considered genuine and is
edited (Rosemberg and Manekin 1988).
Posterior Analytics
According to the Arabic bio-bibliographical sources,
Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus (d. 940) translated into Arabic
the ﬁrst and the second books (K. al-Fihrist, Flu¨gel:
249,13). Matta¯’s Arabic translation is no longer extant.
Themistius, Arabic T
1261
T

An Arabic translation of the Paraphrase has served as
a basis for the Latin translation by Gerard of Cremona
carried out in Toledo. Gerard’s Latin translation is edited
(O’Donnell 1958).
Themistius
developed
an
original
exegesis
of
Aristotle’s enumeration of the four types of inquiry
(Post. An. 2,1,89b23ff.: to` o῾´ti, to` diόti, ei e᾽´sti, tί e᾽´sti).
He overcame the Aristotelian dichotomy between inqui-
ries about statements and about substances, referring
Aristotle’s
enumeration
exclusively
to
substances.
According to Themistius, one should ﬁrst inquire
‘‘whether a simple thing exist’’ (ei e᾽´sti) and then ‘‘what
it is’’ (o῾´ti e᾽´sti) (CAG V/1: 42,5–14). This interpretation
was endorsed by other commentators (Anonymous com-
mentator CAG XIII/3: 547,10–548,9) and it is widespread
in medieval Arabic and Latin thought.
Topics
The Greek original of Themistius’ Paraphrase of Aristotle’s
Topics is lost. He himself mentions this work in his Para-
phrase of the Posterior Analytics (CAG V/1: 42,15). The
bio-bibliographical sources mention an Arabic translation
(K. al-Fihrist, Flu¨gel: 249,23; Ibn al-Qift:ı¯ 37). Some frag-
ments are transmitted through Boethius and Averroes
(Stump 1974; Brague 1999; Hasnawi 2007).
Categories
Lost in Greek, this work is mentioned by Themistius
himself in his Paraphrase of the Physics (CAG V/2: 4,26).
He refers to Aristotle’s Categories in his Paraphrase of
On the Heavens (CAG V/4: Hebr. 10,14 and 29; 103,20);
the exact source of these passages is unclear. The text is
known to Simplicius (CAG VIII: 1,10). The Fihrist men-
tions Themistius among the commentators of this work
(K. al-Fihrist, Flu¨gel: 248,21).
Physics
The Fihrist mentions an Arabic translation of this Para-
phrase (K. al-Fihrist, Flu¨gel: 250,22–23). This Paraphrase
was known in the circle of Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus (Endress
1977:35). Some occasional references to the opinion of
Themistius (according to Stern, not in the form of direct
quotation) are reproduced in an MS housed in Leiden
(MS Leiden, Wermar 583), which contains the text of the
Physics as it was studied in the Baghdad school (Stern
1956:40; Lettinck 1994).
On the Soul
In the K. al-Fihrist, we are told that Is:ha¯q b. H˙ unayn
(d. 911) translated it in its entirety (K. al-Fihrist, Flu¨gel:
251,12). Is:ha¯q’s Arabic translation is extant and edited.
This translation counts as an independent witness that
helps in improving the Greek text (Lyons 1955, 1973:
XIII; Browne 1986). Among the Arab authors who refer to
his Paraphrase by name are Avicenna, Avempace, and
Averroes. Several of their references to him are, however,
concerned with minor points. The main inﬂuence of his
exegesis on the Arabic thought concerns his interpretation
of Aristotle’s account on intellect and its implications for
the issue of the immortality of the soul. These sources
frequently mention his authority in opposition to
Alexander of Aphrodisias’ interpretation, in particular,
regarding the issue of the immortality of the intellect
and that of the nature of the passive and speculative
intellects.
Book Lambda of the Metaphysics
The Greek original is lost. The Fihrist credits Matta¯ ibn
Yu¯nus with an Arabic translation of this paraphrase.
(K. al-Fihrist, Flu¨gel: 251,29–30). Parts of this Arabic
translation are at present extant (chapter 1, a portion
from chapter 2, and chapters from 6 to 10) and published
(Badawı¯ 1947). The Arabic version of the Paraphrase has
been in turn translated into Hebrew by Moshe ibn Tibbon
(d. c. 1283) in 1255. And again, Tibbon’s Hebrew transla-
tion of Themistius’ Paraphrase was in turn translated into
Latin by Moshe Finzi in 1558. Tibbon’s Hebrew transla-
tion is extant and edited together with Finzi’s Latin trans-
lation (CAG V/5 1903). At variance with what is said in the
Fihrist (see above), one of the Arabic MSS (Badawı¯
1947:329,2) credits Is:ha¯q b. H˙ unayn with the Arabic trans-
lation, saying also that Is:ha¯q’s translation has been in turn
corrected by Tha¯bit ibn Qurra (d. 901). This attribution is
also attested by one of the Hebrew MSS (MS B quoted in
Landauer 1903: V). Some scholars agreed with this attri-
bution (Badawı¯ 1947 Intro: 16ssq.; Pines 1987).
The edited parts of the Arabic translation (Badawı¯
1947) are shorter than the corresponding chapters of the
Hebrew translation. About the identity of the translator
and the relation between the Arabic and the Hebrew
versions, two hypotheses have been advanced: (1) the
extant parts of the Arabic translation are an abridgment
of the longer text (Badawı¯1947; Pines 1987); (2) they trace
back to two Greek recensions, which have been translated
into Arabic by the same person (discussed in Pines
1981:177 n. 3). The debate on this point is still open
(Pines 1981, 1987; Brague 1999). Tibbon’s Hebrew version
has been used to complement the Arabic one and the two
both are translated into French (Brague 1999; Martini
2003:263). Finally, T. Farhat has detected a long quotation
in Ibn Taymiyya (Geoffroy 2003:420). The inﬂuence of
1262 T
Themistius, Arabic

Themistius’ Paraphrase on the medieval Arabic and Jewish
philosophers lays on his interpretation of divine intellec-
tion as it is exposed in Book Lambda of the Metaphysics.
Aristotle’s God is designated as the First Intellect; following
Aristotle’s formulation, Themistius asserts that God
intelligizes only Himself and nothing that is extraneous to
Himself. But, according to him, this means that God intel-
lects all the existents, because they are not extraneous to
Him. According to him, Aristotle’s God is both the cause of
the cosmos and of the Nomos (Ar. na¯mu¯s, Hebr. nimmus)
obeyed throughout the cosmos (Pines 1987:189–190), and
this allows him to add that God intelligizes the existents
because He is their cause and producer. It has been dem-
onstrated that his conception of God was inﬂuenced by
Plotinus’ description of Nous (Pines 1981). Among the
Arab authors who refer to his exegesis are al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯,
al-Mas‘udı¯ (c. 893–956, Kita¯b al-tanbı¯h wa-l-ishra¯f: 163),
al-‘A¯mirı¯ (d. c. 992, Badawı¯ 1947:18), Avicenna (In
Metaph. Lambda, ch. 7:26–27; ch. 9:31; Shifa¯’, Metaph.
VIII 6:358–359, VIII 7:363, IX 2:393); Averroes (Long
comm. of the Metaph., ed. Bouyges: 1410, 4–5; 1492,3;
1494; 1635,4–1636,13; Epitome on the Metaph., see refer-
ences in Brague 1999:28). His interpretation was inﬂuent
also on the medieval Jewish authors. Among the Jewish
authors who refer to his Paraphrase or to his interpretation
of Aristotelian God are Maimonides (Guide of the Per-
plexed I, 68; I, 69; III, 21), Falaquera (b. c. 1223, Moreh
ham-Moreh ed. Bisseliches 1837: 76), and Gersonides (The
Wars of the Lord V, 3, ch. 12).
On the Heavens
The Greek original is lost. Some fragments are transmitted
through
Simplicius
and
Philoponus.
In
the
bio-
bibliographical sources, we are told that the Paraphrase
was translated into Arabic, but this Arabic translation is
lost. The Fihrist (K. al-Fihrist, Flu¨gel: 250,30) attributes an
Arabic translation, or rather the emendation of a previous
Arabic translation to Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯ (m. 974). According
to Ibn al-Sarı¯(al-S˙ala¯h:, d. c. 1153), Themistius’ Paraphrase
was ﬁrst translated from Syriac into Arabic by Matta¯ ibn
Yu¯nus; then, Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯ revised this translation (ed.
Tu¨rker: 57,24–58,1 and 68,7–9). The existence of a Syriac
translation is a problematical issue still opened. His Para-
phrase has come down to us in the Hebrew translation of
Zerah:yah ben Yit:ha¯q ben Shealtiel H˙ en (Gracian) ha-
Sefardi carried out in Rome in 1284. This Hebrew trans-
lation has come down to us and it is edited (CAG V/4
1902; see Zonta 1994). Zerah:yah’s Hebrew translation of
Themistius’ Paraphrase was in turn translated into Latin
by Moshe Alatino (d. 1605), between 1568 and 1573.
Alatino’s Latin translation of Themistius’ Paraphrase was
ﬁrst published in Venice by Simone Galignano in 1574;
both the Hebrew and the Latin versions are edited
(CAG V/4 1902). Themistius developed an original inter-
pretation of Aristotle’s use of the term ‘‘heaven’’ (the
discussion on this deﬁnition also refers to a passage of
the Physics IV, 5,212b7–13). He distinguishes between the
outermost sphere and the inner spheres. According to
him, the Aristotelian use of the term ‘‘heaven’’ refers to
the outermost sphere. Since the outermost sphere does not
have anything surrounding it, it has as its place the convex
surface of the sphere immediately surrounded by it.
Hence, the place of the outermost sphere is an equal and
separate limit, but not a surrounding limit. The place of all
the other spheres is the limit of the body surrounding
them, that is, the concave surface of the spheres which
respectively surround them. At variance with the place of
the outermost sphere, the place of all the other spheres is
a surrounding, equal, and separate limit, and it is what is
called an essential place (see also CAG V/2: 120). Several
quotations of the Paraphrase of On the Heavens are pre-
served by Averroes (the passages are listed in Carmody
2003:763). The Hebrew is quoted by Yis:h:aq Abravanel
(1437–1508, She’elot u’Tesˇuvot le Rabbi Saul Ha-Kohen
1574, ﬁrst noted by Steinschneider, Die Hebra¨ischen
U¨ bersetzungen: 126 n. 127; also mentioned in Zonta
1994:418 n. 65) and by the translator Zerah:yah itself,
who quotes it (CAG V/4: Hebr. 1,29–2,1) in his own
commentary on Maimonides’ Guide (noted by Ravitzky
‘The thought of Zerahiah’ 101). It has been shown that
the Paraphrase inﬂuenced Crescas (c. 1340–1410/1411,
Wolfson 19712:396–397, 432–437, 597).
On Generation and Corruption
Themistius refers to this Aristotelian work in his Para-
phrase of On the Heavens several times (CAG V/4: Hebr.
65,32; 140,16sq.; 129,29sq.; 162 9–14); the source of these
passages has not been inquired yet.
The bio-bibliographical sources credit Themistius
with a Paraphrase of Aristotle’s On generation and corrup-
tion (K. al-Fihrist, Flu¨gel: 251,6; see also Rashed 2003:
312). This text is lost both in Greek and in Arabic. The
existence of this Paraphrase by Themistius is disputed by
some scholars (Todd 2003:60 n. 12).
Epitome by Themistius of Aristotle’s Zoological
Works and the Paraphrase of Aristotle’s De
sensu et sensato
In his Paraphrase of On the Heavens Themistius refers to
Aristotle’s De animalibus (CAG V/4: Hebr. 61,13 and
62,16) and De motu animalium (CAG V/4: Hebr. 65,3);
Themistius, Arabic T
1263
T

the source of these passages is unclear. A Paraphrase of
Aristotle’s zoological writings attributed to Themistius,
lost in Greek, has come down to us in Arabic (Badawı¯
1971). This attribution is challenged (Zimmerman and
Brown 1973:323–324; Mattock 1976).
Themistius’ Paraphrase of Aristotle’s De sensu is lost in
Greek; this work is mentioned by Themistius himself
in his Paraphrase of On the Soul (CAG V/3: 70,8 and
77,26–27). He refers to Aristotle’s De sensu in his Para-
phrase of On the Heavens (CAG V/4: Hebr. 74,9); the
source of these passages has not been enquired yet. The
existence of this Paraphrase by Themistius is disputed by
some scholars.
Poetics
A Paraphrase of Aristotle’s Poetics, lost in Greek, is men-
tioned in the bio-bibliographical sources (K. al-Fihrist,
Flu¨gel: 250,5; Ibn al-Qift:ı¯ 38); it has been argued that the
notice of the Fihrist seems to be conﬁrmed by Fa¯ra¯bı¯
(Arberry 1937). The existence of this Paraphrase by
Themistius is still challenged by some scholars (Todd 2003).
Ethics
The bio-bibliographical sources (K. al-Fihrist, Flu¨gel:
252,3; Ibn al-Qiftı¯ 42) credit Themistius with a Paraphrase
of Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics. An Arabic translation is
also mentioned, which is now lost. This attribution is
challenged (Walzer 1963; Ghorab 1972).
Other Works
A discourse by Themistius on the virtue (Perı` arete¯s), lost
in Greek, is extant in Syriac translation and published (ed.
Sachau, Inedita Syriaca, 1870 (repr 1968):17–47; also
edited by Doneway-Norman 1974, in Themistii Orationes
with Latin trans. by March R: 7–71; German trans. by
Gildemeister-Bu¨cheler
(1872)
Rheinisches
Museum
27:438–462). Lost in Greek, it is extant in Syriac and
published a discourse by Themistius on friendship (ed.
Sachau, Inedita Syriaca, 1870:48–75).
The Fihrist (K. al-Fihrist, Flu¨gel: 253,24–27) credits
Abu¯ ‘Uthma¯n al-Dimashqı¯ with the Arabic translation of
a discourse by Themistius’ On Government, lost in Greek.
ThisArabictranslationisextantandpublished(MSIstanbul,
Ko¨pru¨lu¨
I
1608,
ed.
Cheikho,
al-Mashriq
18
(1920):881–889; also edited by Shahid I, in Themistii
Orationes 73–119; see also Gutas 1975:47).
A work lost in Greek attributed to Themistius, the
Treatise in response to Maxim on the reduction of the
second and third ﬁgures of the syllogism, to the ﬁrst
one (Ma¯qa¯la fı¯-l-radd ‘ala¯ Maqsı¯mu¯s fı¯ tah:lı¯l al-tha¯nı¯
wa-l-tha¯lith ila¯ al-awwal), is extant in Arabic. This text is
published and translated into French (Badawı¯ 1947, 1968)
and lies in the background of some developments by al-
Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (Martini Bonadeo 2008).
In addition, a writing by al-Kindı¯ On How to Dispel
Sorrow has been traced back to a lost work on happiness
attributed to Themistius. Kindı¯’s text is published together
with the Italian translation (Ritter and Walzer 1938;
Druart 1996; Martini Bonadeo 2008:227–228); however,
Themistius’ authorship has been challenged.
Several Arab and Jewish authors credit Themistius
with passages that are not related to his or that determined
work. Fa¯ra¯bı¯ mentions Themistius’ opinion regarding the
date of composition of Archytas’ treatise on Categories:
according to Fa¯ra¯bi, Themistius said that there were two
authors named Archytas, only one of them ﬂourished
before Aristotle. Still according to Themistius apud
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, the Archytas who wrote the treatise on Catego-
ries, coming after Aristotle, could not be the source of
Aristotle’s
work
(Kita¯b
al-alfa¯z˙
al-musta‘malah
fı¯’l-mant˙iq, ed. Mahdi 1968:109,7–12; see Zimmerman
1981; Martini Bonadeo 2008).
Al-Sijista¯nı¯ (c. 913–987 CE) quoted several passages
attributed to Themistius, dealing with the deﬁnition of
happiness (Muntakha¯b S˙iwa¯n al-h:ikma, ed. Dunlop
1979:101); this passage is also quoted by al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯
(R. fı¯-l-S˙ada¯qa wa-l-s:adı¯q, ed. Keilani: 193). The inﬂuence
of Themistius’ work on friendship has been detected in
Miskawayh (s. X–XI, Tahdhı¯b al-akhla¯q ed. Tamim: p 139;
Rosenthal 1940:402–405).
See also: ▶Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus ▶Abu¯ Sulayma¯n
al-Sijista¯nı¯ al-Mant:iqı¯ ▶Alexander of Aphrodisias and
Arabic Aristotelianism ▶Alexandrian Tradition into
Arabic: Philosophy ▶al-ʿA¯mirı¯, Abu¯ l-H˙ asan ▶Arabic
Philosophical Texts, Jewish Translations of ▶Arabic
Texts: Natural Philosophy, Latin Translations of ▶Aris-
totle, Arabic ▶Boethius’ De topicis differentiis, Commen-
taries on ▶Categories, Commentaries on Aristotle’s ▶De
caelo, Commentaries on Aristotle’s ▶De generatione et
corruptione, Commentaries on Aristotle’s ▶Ethics, Arabic
▶Ethics, Jewish ▶Eustratios of Nicaea ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯
Nas˙r ▶Gersonides ▶Greek Texts Translated into Hebrew
▶Hasdai Crescas ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad
al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna)
▶Isaac Israeli ▶John Philoponus ▶al-Kindı¯, Abu¯ Yu¯suf
Yaʿqu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q ▶Logic, Arabic, in the Latin Middle Ages
▶Logic in the Arabic and Islamic World ▶Logic, Jewish
▶Metaphysics ▶Miskawayh, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ ▶Moses Maimon-
ides ▶Natural Philosophy, Arabic ▶Nicomachean Ethics,
Commentaries
on
Aristotle’s
▶Parva
naturalia,
1264 T
Themistius, Arabic

Commentaries
on
Aristotle’s
▶Philoponus,
Arabic
▶Philosophical Psychology, Jewish Tradition ▶Plato,
Arabic ▶Posterior Analytics, Commentaries on Aristotle’s
▶Prior Analytics, Commentaries on Aristotle’s ▶Sergius
of Reshʿayna¯
▶Sophonias ▶Syllogism, Theories of
▶al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯,
Abu¯
H˙ ayya¯n
▶Theophrastus,
Arabic
▶Translations from Greek into Arabic ▶Translations
from Greek into Syriac ▶Yah:ya¯ ibn ʿAdı¯
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Ibn al-Nadı¯m (1871–1872) Kitab al-Fihrist, I–II, ed. Flu¨gel G, Ro¨diger,
Mu¨ller. Leipzig; English trans:
Dodge B (1970) Al-Nadı¯m. The
Fihrist, a tenth-century survey of Muslim culture. Columbia Univer-
sity Press, New York/London
Ibn al-Sarı¯ (al-S˙ala¯h:) (1964) Ibnu¨’s:-S˙alah:, In De coelo ve onun s¸erhleri
hakkindaki tenkitleri, ed. Tu¨rker M; Aris¸tirma 2:1–79
Themistius. Traite´ de The´mistius en re´ponse a` Maxime au sujet de la
re´duction de la deuxie`me et de la troisie`me figure a` la premie`re. In:
Badawı¯ ‘A (1968) La transmission de la philosophie grecque au
monde arabe. Vrin, Paris
Themistius (1884) Themistii quae fertur in Aristotelis Analyticorum
priorum librum I paraphrasis, ed. Wallies M. CAG = Commentaria
in Aristotelem Graeca XXIII/3. Reimer, Berlin
Themistius (1900) In Aristotelis Analyticorum Posteriorum Paraphrasis,
ed. Wallies M. CAG V/1. Reimer, Berlin
Themistius (1900) In Aristotelis Physica paraphrasis, ed. Schenkel H.
CAG V/2. Reimer, Berlin
Themistius (1900) In Libros Aristotelis De anima paraphrasis, ed. Heinze
R. CAG V/3. Berlin
Themistius (1902) In libros Aristotelis De caelo paraphrasis (Hebraice et
Latine), ed. Landauer S. CAG V/4. Reimer, Berlin
Themistius (1903) In Aristotelis metaphysicorum librum paraphrasis
(Hebraice et Latine), ed. Landauer S. CAG V/5. Reimer, Berlin
Themistius
(1903)
Themistii
(Sophoniae)
In
Parva
naturalia
commentarium, ed. Wendland P. CAG V/6. Reimer, Berlin
Themistius (1966) On Aristotle On the Soul, trans. Todd RB. Duckworth,
London
Themistius (1999) Paraphrase de la Me´taphysique d’Aristote: livre
Lambda traduit de l’he´breu et de l’arabe, translated from Arabic
and Hebrew by Brague R. Vrin, Paris
Secondary Sources
Badawı¯ ‘A (1947) Aristu ‘inda l-‘Arab. Dirasa Islamiyya, Cairo
Badawı¯ ‘A (1971) Commentaires sur Aristote perdus en grec et autres
e´pıˆtres, publie´s et annote´s. El Machreq Editeurs, Beyrouth
Benakis L (1987) Grundbibliographie zum Aristoteles-Studium in
Byzanz. In: Wiesner J (ed) Aristoteles: Werk und Wirkung, II. de
Gruyter, Berlin/New York, pp 352–379
D’Ancona Costa C (2002) Commenting on Aristotle: from Late Antiquity
to the Arab Aristotelianism. In: Geerlings W, Schulze C (eds) Der
Kommentar in Antike und Mittelalter. Brill, Leiden/Boston/Ko¨ln
Elamrani Jamal (1989) Organon. Tradition syriaque et arabe. Les Cate´-
gories. In: Goulet R, Hadot P (eds) DPhA I = Dictionnaire des
Philosophes Antiques I-III (Supple´ment). CNRS Editions, Paris,
pp 507–513
Endress G (1977) The works of Yahya ibn ‘Adı¯. An analytical inventory.
Reichert, Wiesbaden
Endress G (1997) The circle of al-Kindı¯. Early Arabic translations from the
Greek and the rise of Islamic philosophy. In: Endress G, Kruk R (eds)
The ancient tradition in Christian and Islamic Hellenism. Studies
on the transmission of Greek philosophy and sciences dedicated to
H.J. Drossart Lulofs on his ninetieth birthday. CNWS Research,
Leiden, pp 43–76
Ghorab AA (1972) The Greek commentators on Aristotle quoted in al-
‘Amiri’s ‘As-Sa‘ada wa‘l-Is’ad. In: Stern SM, Hourani A, Brown
V (eds) Islamic philosophy and the classical tradition. Essays
presented by his friends and pupils to Richard Walzer on his seven-
tieth birthday. University of South Carolina Press, Columbia,
pp 77–88, in part 84–86
Gutas D (1975) Greek wisdom literature in Arabic translation. A study
of Graeco-Arabic gnomologia. American Oriental Society, New
Haven
Hasnawi A (2002) Topic and analysis: the Arabic tradition. In: Sharples
R (ed) Whose Aristotle? Whose Aristotelianism? Aldershot/Burling-
ton/Singapore/Sydney, pp 28–62
Lettinck P (1994) Aristotle’s Physics and its reception in the Arabic World,
with an edition of the unpublished parts of Ibn Bajja’s Commentary
on the Physics. Brill, Leiden/New York/Ko¨ln
Lyons MC (1973) An Arabic translation of Themistius’ Commentary on
Aristotle’s De anima. Cassirer, Oxford
Martini C (2003) Mise a` jour bibliographique de la Me´taphysique.
Tradition syriaque et arabe. In: DPhA (Supple´ment). CNRS Editions,
Paris, pp 259–264
Martini C (2008) al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯. L’ armonia delle opinioni dei due sapienti: il
divino Platone e Aristotele. PLUS, Pisa
Mattock JN (1976) The supposed Epitome by Themistius of Aristotle’s
zoological works. In: Dietrich A (ed) Akten des VII. Kongresses fur
Arabistik und Islamwissenschaft. Go¨ttingen 15 bis 22 August 1974.
Abh Ak Wiss Go¨ttingen Phil-hist 3 Kl 98, pp 260–277
Peters FE (1968) Aristoteles Arabus. The oriental translations and com-
mentaries on the Aristotelian corpus. Brill, Leiden
Pines S (1981) Les limites de la me´taphysique selon al-Farabi, Ibn-Bajja et
Maimonides: sources et anthe`ses de ces doctrines chez Alexandre
d’Aphrodise et chez Themistius. Misc Mediev 13(1), pp 211–225
Pines S (1987) Some distinctive metaphysical conceptions in Themistius’
Commentary on Book Lambda and their place in the history of
philosophy. In: Wiesner J (ed) Aristoteles: Werk und Wirkung, II.
de Gruyter, Berlin/New York, pp 177–204 (repr The collected works
of Shlomo Pines III. Magnes, Jerusalem, pp 267–294)
Rashed M (2003) De generatione et corruptione. Tradition arabe. In:
DPhA (Supple´ment). CNRS Editions, Paris, pp 304–314
Todd
R
(2003)
Themistius.
In:
Catalogus
translationum
et
commentariorum: medieval and renaissance Latin translations
and commentaries. The Catholic University of America Press,
Washington, pp 57–102
Walzer R (1963) Greek into Arabic. Essay on Islamic philosophy. Oriental
studies I. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Wolfson HA (19712) Crescas’ Critique of Aristotle. Problems of Aristotle’s
Physics in Jewish and Arabic philosophy. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge
Journal Articles
Arberry AJ (1937) Fa¯ra¯bı¯ canons of poetry. Riv Stud Orient 17:266–278,
270 (Arabic), 276 (English)
Browne GM (1986) Ad Themistium Arabum. Ill Classic Stud
11:223–245
Browne GM (1998) Ad Themistium Arabum II. Ill Classic Stud
23:121–126
Themistius, Arabic T
1265
T

Druart Th (1996) La philosophie morale arabe et l’antiquite´ tardive.
Bulletin d’E´tudes Orientales 48:183–187
Frank RM (1958–1959) Some textual notes on the oriental versions of
Themistius’ Paraphrase of Book L of the Metaphysics. Cah Byrsa
8:215–230
Geoffroy M (2003) Remarques sur la traduction Ust˙a¯t¯ du livre Lambda de
la Me´taphysique, chapitre 6. Rech Theol Phil Med 70:417–436
Hasnawi A (2007) Boe`ce, Averroe`s et Abu¯ al-Baraka¯t al-Bagda¯dı¯, te´moins
des e´crits de The´mistius sur les Topiques d’Aristote. Arabic Sci Philos
17:203–265
Lyons MC (1955) An Arabic translation of Themistius’ Commentary on
Aristotle’s De anima. Bull Sch Orient Afr Stud 17:426–435
O’Donnell JR (1958) Themistius’ Paraphrases of the Posterior Analytics in
Gerard of Cremona’s translation. Mediev Stud 20:239–315
Ritter H, Walzer R (1938) Studi su al-Kindi II. Uno scritto morale inedito
di al-Kindı¯ (Temistio peri alypias?). Memorie della Reale Accademia
Nazionale dei Lincei VI/8:5–63
Rose V (1867) U¨ ber eine angebliche Paraphrase des Themistios. Hermes
2:191–214
Rosemberg Sh, Manekin Ch (1988) Themistius on modal logic. Excerpts
from a commentary on the Prior Analytics attributed to Themistius.
Jerus Stud Arabic Islam 11:83–103
Rosenthal F (1940) On the knowledge of Plato’s philosophy in the Islamic
world. Islam Cult 14:387–402
Stern SM (1956) Ibn Al-Samh˙. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of
Great Britain and Ireland No. 1/2: 31–44
Stump E (1974) Boethius works on the Topics. Vivarium 12/2:77–93
Watt JW (1995) From Themistius to al-Farabi. Platonic political philos-
ophy and Aristotle’s Rhetoric in the East. Rhetorica 13/1:17–41
Zimmermann FW, Brown HVB (1973) Neue arabische U¨ bersetzungs-
texte aus dem Bereich der spa¨tantiken griechischen Philosophie.
Islam 50:313–324
Zonta M (1994) Hebraica veritas: Temistio, Parafrasi del De coelo.
Tradizione e critica del testo. Athenaeum 82/1:403–428
Theodore Metochites
BO¨ RJE BYDE´N
Department of French, Italian and Classical Languages
Stockholm University
Stockholm
Sweden
Abstract
Theodore Metochites (Theodo¯ros Metochite¯s, 1270–
1332) was a Byzantine statesman, author, philosophical
scholar, and patron of the arts. His philosophical works
include paraphrases of Aristotle’s natural philosophy, an
introduction to Ptolemaic astronomy, and a collection of
‘‘philosophical and historical’’ essays. A leitmotif running
through the latter as well as his numerous speeches and
poems is his insistence on the instability of things in the
sensible world. This has ethical consequences: the proper
demeanor under these conditions is to rise above the tide
of joy and grief by means of unceasing reﬂection. It also
has
epistemological
consequences:
according
to
Metochites, nothing can be known with certainty outside
the ﬁeld of mathematics. Since we ourselves are part of the
sensible world, our intellectual capacity is limited: this is
why even the truths of Christianity cannot be the object of
knowledge but only of faith. Without doubt, Metochites’
reﬂective practices, arguing pro and contra, and his
vaguely skeptical theory of knowledge reinforce each
other. He has often been regarded as a prime exponent
of Byzantine humanism (although the very concept has
been controversial). Indeed, it may even be tempting to
bestow on him the epithet ‘‘Renaissance man,’’ not only on
account of his encyclopedism (spanning poetry and prose
on the most diverse topics) and his quest for synthesis
(trying to combine philosophy and eloquence as well as to
integrate the contemplative and active lives), but also in
view of his criticism of Aristotle, his sympathy for skepti-
cism, his ﬁdeism, and his interest in literary self-
representation.
Life
Theodore Metochites was born in Constantinople as the
son of George Metochites, archdeacon of the Hagia Sophia
and a fervent supporter of the union of the Eastern and
Western Churches, agreed upon at the Second Council of
Lyons. When, in 1283, the agreement of Lyons was repu-
diated by the new emperor Andronicus II Palaeologus,
George
Metochites was exiled
and imprisoned;
as
a consequence, Theodore spent his adolescence in Asia
Minor, devoting himself to studies. His extraordinary
talents brought him to Andronicus II’s attention already
in 1290/1291; he was made a Senator in c. 1292, and from
c. 1305 he played the role of mesa´zo¯n, or personal advisor
to the emperor. His ofﬁcial duties did not stop him from
pursuing his literary and scholarly interests: according to
his pupil, the historian Nikephoros Gregoras, he spent his
days administering the empire and his nights engrossed in
his books. Finally reaching the position of Grand
Logothete in 1321, he was removed from power in 1328
by Andronicus III’s victory in the civil war; after a brief
period of exile he withdrew to the Chora monastery in
north Constantinople, where he died.
Metochites was largely an autodidact. He learned some
astronomy from Manuel Bryennius, and later passed it on
to Gregoras. There is no evidence that he was the teacher
of Gregory Palamas, as is sometimes claimed. Besides his
literary and scholarly pursuits, he is remembered for hav-
ing commissioned a splendid refurbishment of the church
of the Chora monastery (today the Kariye Museum).
1266 T
Theodore Metochites

Works
Apart from his Letters, all known works by Metochites
survive. He wrote 20 Poems in dactylic hexameter, 18
Orations (Logoi), and three voluminous works on philos-
ophy, as
deﬁned by Metochites and his contemporaries:
the Stoicheiosis astronomike (1316/1317); the Paraphrases
of Aristotle’s Writings on Natural Philosophy (c. 1320); and
a collection of ‘‘philosophical and historical’’ essays, the
Semeioseis gnomikai (c. 1326).
The Stoicheiosis astronomike comprises two volumes.
In the ﬁrst, Metochites sets out the Handy Tables of
Ptolemy and his commentator Theon and supplements
them with theoretical accounts based on Ptolemy’s Alma-
gest; in the second, he offers an arithmetical and geomet-
rical propaedeutics to the study of astronomy as well as
a summary of the whole of the Almagest. In the extensive
preface, Metochites describes the current state of mathe-
matical and, in particular, astronomical studies in Byzan-
tium, and attempts to specify the place of astronomy
within the framework of philosophy in general. Being
the ﬁrst serious Greek work in its ﬁeld for hundreds of
years, the Stoicheiosis astronomike was a major contribu-
tion to the revival of learning in early Palaeologan
Byzantium.
The 39 books of Paraphrases of Aristotle’s Writings
on Natural Philosophy were designed to facilitate the
understanding of Aristotle’s doctrines by reporting
them in a plain and straightforward manner and inte-
grating explanatory material from the Greek commenta-
tors. They were translated into Latin in the sixteenth
century by Gentian Hervet, and were then praised for
their clarity and conciseness, but they made no discern-
ible impact.
Finally, the Semeioseis gnomikai was described by
Metochites in one of his poems as a picture (or statue)
of his mind and a journal of his thoughts, i.e., as an
intellectual self-portrait. It moves freely, but not ran-
domly, from discussions of classical authors, notably
Plato and Aristotle, over ethical, political, and epistemo-
logical questions, to meditations on different aspects of
Greek and Roman history. Many of these themes are also
found in Metochites’ oratory and poetry, but the internal
structure of the Semeioseis gnomikai strongly indicates that
it is no commonplace book but was conceived from the
outset as a literary whole. Many of the themes are indeed
also known from one or another of those late antique
Platonic philosophers who cultivated a literary – if some-
times inaccessible – style, such as Philo of Alexandria,
Plutarch, Maximus of Tyre, and Synesius.
Metochites himself is notorious for his thorny style,
especially in his poems, and also in some of his prose. Even
his own pupil, Gregoras, criticized him for this; he put it
down to his teacher’s refusal to model himself on any
ancient orator. In his Logos 13, Metochites defends the
ideal of stylistic ‘‘forcefulness’’ (deino´te¯s) which sometimes
prescribes complexity rather than clarity. But in Semeioseis
gnomikai 26, he heavily emphasizes the Platonic opposi-
tion between philosophy and rhetoric, contending that it
is appropriate for philosophical thoughts to be couched in
simple and unadorned language. It seems likely that he is
pleading his own cause in both cases. Especially the prose
of his Paraphrases is plain (and repetitive) to the point of
monotony. In the Semeioseis gnomikai he attempted to
bridge the dichotomy by combining a philosophical con-
tent with natural eloquence: in spite of Gregoras, he seems
to have drawn inspiration particularly from Synesius and
Plutarch.
Thought
Metochites’ parallel careers as an imperial ofﬁcial and
a writer conspired to make him extraordinarily sensitive
to the traditional dilemma of whether a contemplative or
an active life should be preferred. Many of his essays linger
on this theme. In fact, he does view the active life in a more
favorable light than probably any Byzantine thinker before
him; but in the end he comes down clearly on the side of
contemplation, provided that it is chosen for the right
reasons. The interest he shows in the choice-and-motive
aspects of moral action is unusual in Byzantium and may
suggest familiarity with Aristotelian ethics.
In Metochites’ opinion, contemplation is the appropri-
ate response to the fact that the realm of human affairs is so
fundamentally unstable that we can never be certain of any
set of circumstances in our lives, no matter how well we are
doing. But through contemplation we can raise ourselves so
high above the vicissitudes of our lives as to be able to deal
with this uncertainty; recognizing the bright and the dark
sides of every situation will teach us to bear adversity with
cheerfulness and success without elation.
These are familiar sentiments, harking back to popular
philosophy of all periods. It has often been claimed that
the doctrinal inﬂuence of such sources as the four above-
mentioned Platonic philosophers on Metochites is so
massive that it threatens to compromise his Christian
orthodoxy. Especially, two leading twentieth-century
Byzantinists,
Hans-Georg
Beck
(1952:108–110)
and
Herbert Hunger (1978:52), both regarded his preoccupa-
tion with the arbitrary rule of Tyche (or Fortune) in the
realm of human affairs as the sign of a fatalism that could
only with difﬁculty be squared with the Christian belief.
But this inference seems to be mistaken. It is true that
Metochites denies the existence of any apparent justice in
Theodore Metochites T
1267
T

the way that prosperity is distributed in the world. For-
tune, he says, is absolutely inscrutable to the human mind.
But this means, according to him, that it has to be taken on
faith, ‘‘from the Fathers as well as the Philosophers,’’ that
Fortune is ultimately the expression of Providence. Those
who base their belief in Providence on their own limited
and biased understanding of what is good and just will run
the risk of losing it when Fortune turns against them (Sem.
28; 53; 66).
The real power behind Metochites’ Fortune is there-
fore not Heimarmene (or Fate), as Beck thought, but
Providence. Throughout his work, Metochites takes
a consistently ﬁdeist attitude toward theology, which
allows him to preserve his faith in goodness, justice, and
order in the face of apparent evil, injustice, and chaos. In
fact, he inveighs strongly against determinism in the realm
of human affairs (since such affairs involve chance and free
choice) in his Stoicheiosis astronomike (1.5). On the other
hand, he equally strongly afﬁrms the causal inﬂuence of
the motions and aspects of the heavenly bodies on natural
processes – taking care, however, to underline the
subordination of these motions and aspects to Providence.
In Semeioseis gnomikai 58, he confronts head-on the
question of whether it is better to exist or not to exist.
He ﬁnds much to be said in favor of the latter alternative;
still, hope and faith persuade us that it is better to exist.
Faith, because the goodness of existence is dependent
on the goodness of the Creator and Upholder’s will;
hope, because the pain and trouble of this life can be
balanced only by the prospect of eternal bliss in the
next life.
By the same token, it can only be, in Metochites’ view,
on account of our own nature as partly irrational creatures
that it is impossible for us to have scientiﬁc knowledge of
the divine realm, for this realm must be assumed to be free
from plurality and change. However, Metochites also
holds that scientiﬁc knowledge is impossible of the natural
realm; and this, he thinks, is due mainly to the fact that
natural objects are intrinsically unstable, just like human
affairs. He refers to Heraclitus for the doctrine that every-
thing in the sensible world is in ﬂux, and to the ancient
Skeptics for the ‘‘not unreasonable’’ inference that there
will always be cogent arguments against any view about
anything in this world. He was the ﬁrst Greek author in
hundreds of years to see more than perversity in Skepti-
cism: he emphasized its kinship with Socratic elenchus.
Metochites’ epistemological pessimism as regards the
natural realm contributed to lessening his admiration for
Aristotle, who was considered ﬁrst and foremost an
authority on logic and natural philosophy. He criticizes
the Stagirite for having promised scientiﬁc knowledge in
ﬁelds where it is not to be had, out of intellectual vanity.
His criticism is interesting for its focus on human vice; it
provides a link in the history of Byzantine anti-Aristote-
lianism, from Michael Psellos to George Gemistos
Plethon,
and
points
forward
to
Renaissance
anti-
Aristotelians like Gianfrancesco Pico della Mirandola.
Sandwiched between the epistemologically deﬁcient
realms of human affairs and natural objects and the exces-
sive realm of the divine, the mathematical realm provides
the only proper objects for scientiﬁc knowledge. According
to Metochites, mathematical objects (including, preemi-
nently, astronomical ones) are simple and stable; accord-
ingly, our conceptions of them are deﬁnitive, which is
proved by the unanimous agreement among mathemati-
cians (as opposed to natural philosophers). In his Poem 10
(On Mathematics), he describes mathematical objects as
being only apparently the products of abstraction from
sensibles, and actually unconsciously preexisting in reason
(or ‘‘mind’’), in a way that suggests that he aligned himself
with the ‘‘projectionism’’ of Iamblichus and Proclus. If so,
he seems to have shared the rationalist epistemology of his
contemporaries Choumnos and Barlaam, if only with
regard to mathematics.
See also: ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶Epistemology, Byzan-
tine ▶Metaphysics, Byzantine ▶Nikephoros Blemmydes
▶Nikephoros
Gregoras
▶Philosophical
Psychology,
Byzantine ▶Philosophy, Byzantine ▶Skepticism
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Metochites Theodore (1821) Miscellanea philosophica et historica, ed.
Mu¨ller CG, Kiessling T. F. C. G. Vogel, Leipzig
Metochites Theodore (1943) Aristotelis de somno et vigilia liber adiectis
veteribus translationibus et Theodori Metochitae commentario, ed.
Drossaart Lulofs HJ. Burgersdijk & Niermans: Templum Salomonis,
Leiden
Metochites Theodore (1962) Logos 13, ed. Sˇevcˇenko I. In: Sˇevcˇenko I (ed)
La vie intellectuelle et politique a` Byzance sous les premiers
Pale´ologues: E´tudes sur la pole´mique entre The´odore Me´tochite et
Nice´phore Choumnos. Corpus Bruxellense Historiae Byzantinae.
Subsidia 3. E´ditions de Byzantion, Brussels, pp 189–217
Metochites Theodore (1983) Poem 12, ed. Cunningham M, Featherstone
J, Georgiopoulou S. Harv Ukr Stud 7:100–116
Metochites Theodore (2002a) Logos 10 (E¯thikos), ed. Polemis ID. In:
Polemis ID (ed) Theodo¯ros Metochite¯s, E¯thikos e¯ Peri paideias.
Eisago¯ge¯,
kritike¯
ekdose¯,
metaphrase¯,
se¯meio¯seis.
2e¯
ekdose¯,
anatheo¯re¯mene¯. Ekdoseis Kanake¯, Athens
Metochites
Theodore
(2002b)
Semeioseis
61,
ed.
Byde´n
B.
In:
Ierodiakonou K (ed) Byzantine philosophy and its ancient sources.
Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 209–212
Metochites Theodore (2002c) Theodore Metochites on ancient authors
and philosophy: Semeioseis gnomikai 1–26 & 71. A critical edition
1268 T
Theodore Metochites

with introduction, translation, notes, and indexes by Hult K. With a
contribution by Byde´n B. Studia Graeca et Latina Gothoburgensia 65.
Acta Universitatis Gothoburgensis, Go¨teborg
Metochites Theodore (2003) Stoicheiosis astronomike 1:1–5, ed. Βyde´n
B. In: Βyde´n B (ed) Theodore Metochites’ Stoicheiosis astronomike
and the study of natural philosophy and mathematics in early
Palaiologan Byzantium. Studia Graeca et Latina Gothoburgensia
66. Acta Universitatis Gothoburgensis, Go¨teborg, pp 383–474
Metochites Theodore (2005) Theodore Metochites on Aristotle’s De
memoria, ed. Bloch D. CIMAGL 76:3–30
Metochites Theodore (2006) Poem 10 (On Mathematics), ed. Polemis ID.
In: Polemis ID (ed) Theodo¯ros Metochite¯s, Peri tou mathe¯matikou
eidous te¯s philosophias, kai malista peri tou harmonikou. Poie¯ma 10.
Eisago¯ge¯, kritike¯ ekdose¯, metaphrase¯, se¯meio¯seis. Adolf M. Hakkert,
Amsterdam
Secondary Sources
Beck HG (1952) Theodoros Metochites: Die Krise des byzantinischen
Weltbildes im 14. Jahrhundert. C.H. Beck, Munich
Byde´n B (2002) To every argument there is a counter-argument:
Theodore Metochites’ Defence of Scepticism (Semeiosis 61). In:
Ierodiakonou K (ed) Byzantine philosophy and its ancient sources.
Oxford University Press, Oxford
Byde´n B (2003) Theodore Metochites’ Stoicheiosis astronomike and the
study of natural philosophy and mathematics in early Palaiologan
Byzantium. Studia Graeca et Latina Gothoburgensia 66. Acta
Universitatis Gothoburgensis, Go¨teborg
Hunger H (1978) Die hochsprachliche profane Literatur der Byzantiner,
2 vols. Handbuch der Altertumswissenschaft 12.5.1–2. C.H. Beck,
Munich
Polemis ID (2002) Theodo¯ros Metochite¯s, E¯thikos e¯ Peri paideias.
Eisago¯ge¯,
kritike¯
ekdose¯,
metaphrase¯,
se¯meio¯seis.
2e¯
ekdose¯,
anatheo¯re¯mene¯. Ekdoseis Kanake¯, Athens
Polemis ID (2006) Theodo¯ros Metochite¯s, Peri tou mathe¯matikou eidous
te¯s philosophias, kai malista peri tou harmonikou. Poie¯ma 10.
Eisago¯ge¯, kritike¯ ekdose¯, metaphrase¯, se¯meiso¯seis. Adolf M. Hakkert,
Amsterdam
Sˇevcˇenko I (1962) La vie intellectuelle et politique a` Byzance sous les
premiers Pale´ologues: E´tudes sur la pole´mique entre The´odore
Me´tochite et Nice´phore Choumnos. Corpus Bruxellense Historiae
Byzantinae. Subsidia 3. E´ditions de Byzantion, Brussels
Theodore Prodromos
PANTELIS GOLITSIS
Aristoteles-Archiv, Institut fu¨r Griech. u. Lat. Philologie
Freie Universita¨t Berlin
Berlin
Germany
Abstract
Theodore Prodromos (c. 1100–1156/1158 or c. 1170) was
mainly active as a court poet by Irene Doukaina and John
II Komnenos, and his works had important inﬂuence on
later Byzantine literature. As a man of broad classical
culture, Prodromos also dealt with ancient philosophy,
especially with Aristotle’s Organon and Porphyry’s Isagoge.
Although he conﬁned himself to traditional topics in
Byzantine philosophy, his critical sense toward ancient
authorities combined with his writing and rhetorical skills
make of his philosophical work a ﬁne example of twelfth
century Byzantine scholarship, which continued to be
highly regarded in later centuries.
Biography
Theodore Prodromos lived in twelfth-century Constanti-
nople, but the exact dates of his life are unknown
(c. 1100–1156/1158 or c. 1170). Similarly, relatively little
is known about the events of his life (Kazhdan 1984). In
one of his poems, Prodromos reports that he was edu-
cated by his grandfather and uncle but he elsewhere
names as ‘teachers’ his peers Stephen Scylitzes, metropol-
itan of Trebizond, and Michael Italicos, metropolitan of
Philippopolis. His father had wanted him to become
a soldier, but his fragile health obliged Prodromos to
devote himself to scholarship and writing (Ho¨randner
1974 XXXVIII:11–40). He eventually became a poet lau-
reate at the court of Irene Doukaina and, after the latter’s
death, at that of her son John II Komnenos (1118–1143),
where he mainly composed poetic panegyrics to praise
the military victories of the emperor and his noble gen-
erals. Prodromos also wrote prose and taught rhetoric
and grammar, probably at one of the schools set under
the patronage of the Patriarchate (Ho¨randner 1974:27–
28). His career ended with the death of John II.
Prodromos retired to the Church of the Holy Apostles,
where he was occasionally writing verses for the Byzantine
nobility, and died as a monk, having changed his name to
Nicholas. As a poet and, more generally, as a man of
letters, Prodromos enjoyed great popularity among his
contemporaries, and his literary works were widely imi-
tated by later generations (Ho¨randner 1972). He was
a less proliﬁc writer in philosophy, though not necessarily
deprived of any inﬂuence in later centuries.
Thought
Prodromos’ philosophical work focuses exclusively on
logic. His major contribution to this ﬁeld, at least
quantitatively, is his still unpublished (Cacouros 1992)
Commentary on the second book of Aristotle’s Posterior
Analytics. In it, Prodromos overtly criticizes Aristotle for
his elliptical style and tries to restore the meaning of the
Aristotelian text through various additions and, also, by
rearranging the original phrasing (Cacouros 1989:327–328).
Theodore Prodromos T
1269
T

The Commentary became a standard work in Byzantine
philosophical curricula by the end of thirteenth century
(see the Byzantine list of Commentaries on Aristotle
published by Hayduck 1885:V) and was later adapted
by the eminent Byzantine scholar John Chortasmenos
(c. 1370–1431) to fulﬁll contemporary educational needs
(Cacouros 1995–1996:347–352). It is not certain, however,
that it was originally conceived to serve didactic purposes.
In its prologue (Brandis 1836:241a1–9), Prodromos states
that in writing the Commentary, he does not mean to
condemn the attempts made by previous exegetes but to
test his own skills in such a difﬁcult task. At least once, he
is critical of Eustratios of Nicaea, on whose comments
Prodromos’ own Commentary is largely based (Cacouros
1989:333–334). It is perhaps not unlikely that Prodromos
was prompted to produce a better commentary than the
existing ones by ‘literary’ friends such as Stephen Scylitzes
and Michael Italicos.
Another philosophical work by Prodromos, much
shorter than the Commentary on the second book of
the Posterior Analytics, was written at the request of
Michael Italicos. It is called On ‘Great’ and ‘Small’
(Tannery 1887) and sets out to prove, in quite an original
way, that the great and the small are not relatives, as
Aristotle has it in the Categories, ch. 6, but quantities.
Prodromos gives six arguments, mostly based on linguistic
points, to support his thesis, and then takes up another six
in order to demonstrate, also against Aristotle, that the
great and small are contraries (Ierodiakonou 2005:28–29).
Finally, Prodromos composed a philosophical dia-
logue in which he combines Plato’s elenctic method with
Lucien’s satirical style. The dialogue bears the title
Xenedemos, or, Predicables (Cramer 1836) and sets out
to unveil, again on linguistic grounds, the difﬁculties
arising from Porphyry’s doctrine in the Quinque voces
(Isagoge).
Compared to the extensive work of Aristotelian
scholars of the preceding generation, like Eustratios and
Michael of Ephesus, Prodromos’ overall philosophical
work represents a return to traditional philosophical
themes in Byzantium, namely, themes from Aristotle’s
Organon and Porphyry’s Isagoge. At the same time, how-
ever, it is a ﬁne example of the high-level scholarship of the
twelfth century; in Prodromos’ case, broad classical cul-
ture, critical assessment of ancient authorities, and elegant
style seem to have assured the survival of his philosophical
oeuvre in Byzantium.
See also: ▶Categories, Commentaries on Aristotle’s
▶Eustratios of Nicaea ▶Logic, Byzantine ▶Posterior
Analytics, Commentaries on Aristotle’s
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Brandis Christian (1836) Scholia in Aristotelem. Aristotelis Opera IV.
Georg Reimer, Berlin (repr. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin, 1961)
Cacouros Michel (1992) Le Commentaire de The´odore Prodrome au
second livre des Analytiques poste´rieurs d’Aristote. Unpublished
PhD thesis, Paris
Cramer John Antony (1836) XenέdZmος Z᾽`jonaί. In: Cramer JA (ed)
Anecdota
graeca
e
codicibus
manuscriptis
Bibliothecarum
Oxoniensium,
vol
III.
Typographeum
academicum,
Oxford,
pp 204–215 (repr. Hakkert, Amsterdam, 1963)
Hayduck
Michael
(1885)
Stephani
in
librum
Aristotelis
De
interpretatione
commentarium.
Commentaria
in
Aristotelem
Graeca XVIII.3. Georg Reimer, Berlin
Ho¨randner
Wolfgang
(1974)
Theodoros
Prodromos.
Historische
Gedichte. Wiener Byzantinistische Studien XI. Verlag der O¨ sterrei-
chischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Wien
Tannery Paul (1887) The´odore Prodrome, Sur le Grand et le Petit
(a` Italicos). Annuaire de l’Association pour l’encouragement des
e´tudes grecques en France 21:104–119
Secondary Sources
Cacouros M (1989) Recherches sur le commentaire ine´dit de The´odore
Prodrome sur le second livre des Analytiques Poste´rieurs d’Aristote.
Atti della Accademia Pontaniana 38:313–338
Cacouros M (1995–1996) La tradition du Commentaire de The´odore
Prodrome au deuxie`me livre des Seconds Analytiques. Diptycha
6:329–354
Ho¨randner W (1972) Prodromos-Reminiszenzen bei Dichtern der
Nika¨nischen Zeit. Byzantinische Forschungen 4:88–104
Ierodiakonou K (2005) The Byzantine reception of Aristotle’s categories.
Synthesis Philosophica 39:7–31 (French trans: La re´ception byzan-
tine des Cate´gories d’Aristote. In: Bruun O, Corti L (eds) Les
Cate´gories et leur histoire. Vrin, Paris, 2005, pp 307–339)
Kazhdan A (1984) Theodore Prodromus: a reappraisal. In: Kazhdan A,
Franklin S (eds) Studies on Byzantine literature of the eleventh
and twelfth centuries. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
pp 87–114
Theology Versus Philosophy in
the Arab World
TANELI KUKKONEN
Department of History
University of Jyva¨skyla¨
Jyva¨skyla¨
Finland
Abstract
When describing the relationship between theology and
philosophy in the medieval Islamic setting it is necessary
to start with a few qualiﬁcations. First, and most
1270 T
Theology Versus Philosophy in the Arab World

importantly, theology and philosophy were never formally
ranked as academic disciplines the way they were in the
Catholic universities. Rather, kala¯m, or speculative theol-
ogy, and falsafa, or the continuation of Greek philosophy
in an Arabic milieu, developed in parallel, under socio-
economic conditions that overlapped in part (the spon-
sorship of rulers, the needs and ambitions of the educated
classes) yet were largely independent of one another. This
already changes signiﬁcantly the dynamics of the conver-
sation that took place between (1) the advocates of this or
that theological creed or methodology, and (2) those who
endorsed the philosophical agenda of the late antique
school traditions.
Second, one should abstain from treating either the-
ology or philosophy as monolithic entities that would have
remained unchanging through centuries of evolution and
interaction. The very conception of the enterprise of the-
ology was in ﬂux throughout the classical period of
Islamic civilization; and although practitioners of falsafa
liked to present their heritage as a unitary body of knowl-
edge with a solid sense of identity and aims, in truth the
philosophers’ interests, too, varied with the times, ranging
from logic and natural philosophy to metaphysics and
moral psychology. Jews, Christians, and Muslims (Sunni
and Shı¯ʿite) alike practiced both disciplines, which led to
further variations in tone and emphasis.
The overall picture is one of increasing cross-pollina-
tion. One of the signal developments of later times is how
philosophical schemata, principally of the Avicennan vari-
ety, begin to inﬂuence the very organization of theological
tracts. Conversely, the later philosophical tradition speaks
more about h:ikma (wisdom, sophia) than of falsafa, mark-
ing a stage in the development of Arabic philosophy where
grand cosmological schemes and questions of soteriology
begin to assume central stage. In this respect it becomes
more like natural theology in the Christian sense of the
word.
Nonetheless it is true that for a few centuries, at least,
relations between authors in the theological and philo-
sophical traditions ranged from the merely inimical to the
emphatically hostile, and that this colored the way that
histories of Islamic intellectual life were written both
within the Islamic world and without. This is to say that
although the reality on the ground, as it were, was mostly
one of mutual inﬂuence and interaction, on the level of
rhetoric and polemic there were many who considered it
advantageous to present the relation of kala¯m to falsafa as
being antagonistic – and doubtless some who saw the
reality of the situation in this light as well.
Yet this is the ﬁnal cautionary note we must sound: the
representations of kala¯m and falsafa that we ﬁnd in
individual authors are always just that, representations.
They reﬂect the way certain historically situated thinkers
wished to present the world to their readers, and so their
descriptions of the two traditions are always particular to
them, not representative of some universal judgment on
the part of an entire culture. It is furthermore important to
recognize that besides theology the religious sciences
encompassed such disciplines as for instance Islamic juris-
prudence (ﬁqh) and the study of the Prophetic traditions
(h:adı¯th). These disciplines were indeed more central to the
overall Muslim experience than theology was: and the
possible threat that philosophy posed to their autonomy
and social standing was to many the more serious threat.
Islamic Philosophical Theology
The beginnings of the science of kala¯m, which translates as
‘‘speech’’ and which thus may correspond to logos with all
the allusions that word carries, are still partly under
a shroud (For studies see van Ess 1991–1995; Frank
2005–2008.) Doubtless the growing intellectual needs of
the rapidly expanding Muslim community explain much:
the explication of the fundamentals of religion (us:u¯l al-
dı¯n) without recourse either to the ‘Uthmanic codex, the
contested Prophetic traditions (h:adı¯th), or the divergent
paths of Islamic law will have been desirable both in the
face of increasing doctrinal controversy and in terms of
interfaith dialogue and polemic. Kala¯m provided a tool for
explicating the Muslim worldview in more reﬁned terms
than mere Scriptural exegesis would allow: it provided the
basis for an Islamic metaphysics, which in turn served as
the foundation for speculation in domains such as natural
philosophy and ethics.
It is difﬁcult to imagine this happening without some
inﬂuence from the overall Levantine intellectual milieu
which the Muslims came to inhabit. Still, attempts to
trace the origins of this or that kala¯m doctrine or approach
to some speciﬁc ancient philosophical school (or indeed
Christian theology) have all ﬂoundered, to the point that
in this stage of the research it seems safer to assume that
Islamic theology developed largely along independent
lines. It is, for instance, highly doubtful that the atomism
developed by the Muʿtazilite theologians, and later the
other schools, would have had much to do with either
Epicurus or Empedocles, seeing as how no primary
sources in translation have been identiﬁed and the inﬂu-
ence of second-hand reports must be considered negligi-
ble; and at any rate the atomism of the mutakallimu¯n was
very much its own creature. The same goes for the theo-
logians’ metaphysics, which appropriated the vocabulary
of substance and accident (jawhar, ‘arad˙), but interpreted
these terms in a way so far removed from the Greek
Theology Versus Philosophy in the Arab World T
1271
T

mainstream that it cannot have arisen out of a corruption
or a misunderstanding of Aristotelian ontology (contrary
to what some Muslim Peripatetics, and later historians of
philosophy, may have liked to think). A third example
comes from the supposed inﬂuence of the Stoic school,
which once was a favorite source of speculation among
historians, but has now been widely discredited as a
hypothesis, for simple lack of evidence (see Gutas 1994).
With Richard Frank, it seems better to afﬁrm the possibil-
ity of kala¯m theology being philosophical in approach and
method without thereby having to reduce it to Greek
philosophy, either by way of inﬂuence or through an
unﬂattering comparison.
At least in two areas the inﬂuence of the late antique
school tradition on early Muslim speculation is nonethe-
less plain to see. In the ﬁrst place, the method for theo-
logical disputation itself appears to have been an
adaptation of Aristotelian dialectic, more or less con-
sciously taken up in early encounters with Christian theo-
logians long since accustomed to its application in
theological disputes (see Rissanen 1993). In the second,
certain cosmological problems and puzzles, having to do
with how the world relates to its transcendent cause, were
taken over from late antique debates. Going back to pre-
Plotinian Platonism, philosophers and theologians (Jew
and Christian) had argued over whether the world was
eternal, created out of nothing, or formed out of a pre-
existent matter: Muslims discussed these problems not
only with great vigor, but with obvious recourse to ancient
materials. Notably, the Muslim theologians drew on the
works of John Philoponus (d. 574) when developing their
proofs for the world necessarily having a limited past,
a move that would later set them in opposition to the
Arabic Aristotelians. These two early examples of an
early, ‘‘native,’’ and theological use of Aristotle are
reﬂected in the fact that the two Aristotelian treatises
ﬁrst picked up for translation into the Arabic were the
Topics and the Physics (We also have a report of a late-
eighth-century refutation of Aristotelian theology. Given
that this predates the translation both of Aristotle’s Meta-
physics and of the so-called Theology of Aristotle, the refu-
tation is likely to have had the Physics proof for a Prime
Mover as its target).
Islamic Religious Philosophy
The rising Islamicate civilization absorbed into itself many
foreign disciplines and intellectual traditions; it is not
immediately apparent why it was philosophy (falsafa)
which came under special scrutiny from the side of the
theologians and other self-appointed guardians of Islamic
orthodoxy. Indeed, early on, such disciplines as for
instance astrology and magic received more attention,
and criticizing them provided a way for philosophers to
burnish their Islamic credentials; though the speculations
of the later Greek philosophers regarding the reality of
celestial inﬂuence meant that it was typically only the
practice and the knowledge-claims of the astrologers that
were called into question, and the ﬁrst ‘‘philosopher of the
Arabs,’’ Ya‘qu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q al-Kindı¯ (d. c. 870), could still
embrace astrology, but only because so still did the upper-
class social world in which he moved. Indeed, a favorite
trope in the philosophical literature ever since al-Kindı¯’s
times was to claim that Islam itself advocated a rational
and measured approach to reality, and to recommend
philosophy as a straight path toward fulﬁlling God’s com-
mand to examine the heavens and the earth and the
Prophet’s exhortation to seek knowledge (Endress 1990;
for a later echo see, e.g., Averroes, Fas:l al-maqa¯l). Thinkers
outwardly skeptical or disdainful of revelation were few
and far between: Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯ (d. 925 CE) is very
much an outlier in this regard, an example of a passing
phase in Islamic courtly life when even outspoken free-
thinkers were tolerated (Stroumsa 1999).
The explanation for why philosophy was singled out
for attention is to be sought in two directions. In the ﬁrst
place, late antique philosophy was explicitly religious and
salviﬁc in orientation, and its overall shape therefore
presented a problem to Islamic teaching in a way that the
more instrumentally understood arts and sciences did not.
Even though the Syriac and Arabic adaptors and trans-
lators took pains to excise any traces of polytheism, and
even though the theism propounded by Aristotle and his
commentators was of a seemingly neutral character, it still
occupied essentially the same intellectual space as the
teachings of the Prophet and – hardly less important –
took away from the work of the theologians themselves.
Either one tradition or the other – either the Greek
starting-points to explaining the cosmic order and
humanity’s place in it, or the Prophetic – had to yield to
the truth claims made by its opposing number. And even if
a harmony was sought, one tradition had to be read on the
other’s terms, which was enough to set off alarms.
The philosophers’ metaphysics and cosmology formed
one half of this equation; their perfectionist moral psy-
chology, the other. Whatever the particulars of their meta-
physics,
the
fala¯sifa
all
conveyed an
ordered and
interlinked cosmos in which corporeal entities derive
from a First Principle or First Cause by means of a series
of immaterial and/or celestial hierarchies. This stood in
stark contrast to the occasionalist worldview adopted by
the theologians, and it would take until the twelfth century
before serious attempts at mediation were made. As for the
1272 T
Theology Versus Philosophy in the Arab World

philosophers’ psychology and ethics, here the sticking
point was the notion that the perfection and destiny of
humankind would lie in a life of contemplation, as
opposed to the more traditional Islamic virtues of lawful
obedience and adoration. The charge that would ring
through the centuries was that philosophy taught people
to be antinomians, in spirit if not in practice (or vice versa:
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s famous criticism went that even though
Avicenna proclaimed the philosophers to be the most
law-abiding Muslims of all, the philosopher’s habit of
wine-drinking was enough to show his boast to be vacu-
ous: Munqidh, 44).
Both these points could be ﬁnessed. Jahm ibn S˙afwa¯n
(d. 746 CE), for instance, who is one of the earliest Islamic
theorists
to
receive
serious
attention
from
the
doxographers, in his teachings exhibits many of the hall-
marks of late antique Platonism, but is nonetheless able to
pass for a kala¯mı¯ thinker. And Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ thought as a whole
shows the wealth of conceptual possibilities that lay in
merging Neoplatonic cosmology with a distinctly Islamic
outlook on revelation and history. More importantly
still, the literature that grew around the Sufi movement
shows a widespread adoption of Platonic-Aristotelian
moral psychology, complete with a tripartite division of
the soul and an intellectualist approach to the disclosure of
the divine mysteries. (Here, several centuries of similar
efforts on the part of Christian spiritual authors will have
helped.)
More than any factual disagreement, what ﬁnally
pushed philosophy beyond the reach of any easy annexa-
tion was its proponents’ claim to have privileged access to
a superior method for achieving certitude and, consonant
with this, the means to judge the relative merits of other
disciplines. This would mean not only ﬁnding a place for
Prophetic revelation within philosophy – itself an act of
subjugation – but also the liberty to interpret religious
propositions in accordance with the dictates of pure rea-
son. This was an affront not only to theologians but to the
practitioners of the more traditional religious disciplines
of jurisprudence (ﬁqh) and Qurʾa¯nic exegesis.
Such claims are associated above all with Abu¯ Nas:r
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (d. 950), the ‘‘second teacher’’ of philosophy
after Aristotle, who established Aristotle’s theory of
demonstration (burha¯n) as the centerpiece to all subse-
quent philosophizing in the Peripatetic mould. Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s
works neatly tie in logic and metaphysics with epistemo-
logical and psychological concerns: the world has a certain
necessary ordering and its universal features make it
accessible to human reason, which in turn makes its rep-
resentation possible in scientiﬁc discourse and its further
investigation feasible using the tools of Aristotelian
syllogistic. But theologians correctly discerned in all this
a necessitarianism that was unpalatable not because it
derived cosmic order from a divine principle, but because
it presumed to dictate the terms for such an interface
between the mundane and divine, and through this to
circumscribe the nature of the divine itself.
Philosophers Against Theologians
The conﬂict between the theologians and the philosophers
in Islam is usually presented in terms of the theologians
being the aggressors (and typically also anti-rational dog-
matists), while the philosophers on this telling of the story
get to act the part of innocent defenders of reasonable and
peaceful coexistence. In light of these Enlightenment his-
toriographical prejudices it is worth noting how in the
historical materials, it is the philosophers who early on
settle on a polemical invective against the professional
theologians, without any recorded provocation on the
part of the latter. From al-Kindı¯ to Avicenna, and from
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯to twelfth-century Andalusia, nary a philosopher
can be found who would have a kind word to say either
about kala¯m or about its practitioners.
Al-Kindı¯ initiates this trend with a volley against those
who would ‘‘peddle in religion even as they lack religion’’
(On First Philosophy, 1:104.5 Abu¯ Rı¯da). The tone is apol-
ogetic in the extreme: al-Kindı¯ presents the philosophical
project as being identical with the aims of Islam, though
not impinging on it in any way – both aim at understand-
ing the transcendent Truth and in acting in accordance
with that Truth – while his unnamed opponents are
strangers to the truth (g˙arba ‘an al-h:aqq), in thrall to
their vices, and intent upon seizing power. Al-Kindı¯
laments how in his time such wretched people can none-
theless be renowned for their speculative acumen (naz˙ar):
one or another theological party is meant, though more
than this it is difﬁcult to say.
Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ expanded this polemic through establishing
a general theory of religions – one that, moreover, set
religion into a subordinate relation to philosophy.
According to al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, any veridical religion presents the
essential ﬁndings of philosophy in more palatable form, in
the shape of likenesses and images which faithfully repre-
sent – though they do not adequately capture – the true
natures
or
realities
of
things
(h:aqa¯’iq
al-ashya¯’,
a formulation already found in al-Kindı¯). Assent to reli-
gious propositions, moreover, is achieved through rhetor-
ical or poetic persuasion, not by means of demonstration
or dialectic: the latter mode of reasoning lies beyond the
ken of those who cannot adequately comprehend the
nature of scientiﬁc premises, that is, the multitude (al-
jumhur, al-a¯mma: Attainment of Happiness, 90 Ya¯sı¯n).
Theology Versus Philosophy in the Arab World T
1273
T

What this means is that neither the raw notions nor
the reasonings presented by religion correspond to reality
in any straightforward manner: at best they are simulacra,
or likenesses, designed by a teacher to guide people to
believe and behave in accordance with a higher truth
which they are unable to perceive clearly for themselves
(see Mahdi 1972).
The picture al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ paints of religion is perhaps
unﬂattering, but there is no reason to doubt that he
meant it as an enthusiastic, even uplifting, endorsement
of how God, providential nature, and the prophets work in
concert to secure the maximal degree of happiness for all
humankind. An unsettling corollary to al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s theory,
however, is that it makes of the kala¯m theologians
a profession without a proper function. The true structure
of reality is worked out by the philosophers, after all, while
the transmission and safekeeping of the symbols of faith is
the province of the religious authorities; but as the latter
base themselves on rhetoric and poetics, dialectic no lon-
ger has any place in any well-functioning society. On this
understanding, the theologians can only be meddlers (or
worse, rank amateurs), building sandcastles on conten-
tious premises. Thus we ﬁnd Ibn Sı¯na¯ (the Latin Avicenna,
980–1037), for instance, situating kala¯m reasoning on
a line that stretches from dialectic to rank sophistry
(Gutas 2005; cf Marmura 1991–1992); while Ibn Rushd
(Averroes, 1126–1198) expends considerable energy on
pointing out the precise ways in which the theologians,
especially the Ashʿarites, had gone astray in their attempts
at legitimate inference – where they had wrongly tried to
pass off dialectical, rhetorical, or sophistic arguments as
being certain and irrefutable. Averroes even blames the rise
in sectarianism on the theologians trying their hand at
something they were not equipped to do (Kashf, 251
Qa¯sim; cp. Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Attainment, 50 Ya¯sı¯n).
Averroes’ efforts, however, belong to a different era,
one in which the quality of the philosophers’ own infer-
ences had been called into question. His attempts at
reversing the ﬂow of the discussion were unsuccessful as,
following upon al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s (1058–1111) incisive analysis
of the Peripatetic philosophers’ premises, few people were
willing to accept at face value anymore their claims to
demonstrable truth in matters metaphysical. This did
not result in any lessening of the inﬂuence of philosophy
on theology, indeed, the opposite is the case; it is to this
paradoxical development that we turn next.
Theologians Against Philosophers
Already before the 1095 CE publication of al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s
famous treatise purporting to expose The Incoherence of
the Philosophers, theologians evidently felt comfortable
encountering the philosophers on their home turf. Thus
for instance Sahl ibn Fad˙l al-Tustarı¯, an eleventh-century
Karaite
Jew
mutakallim
much
inﬂuenced
by
late
Muʿtazilite theology, could quite cleverly criticize the
notion
associated
with
Avicenna
that
existence
is
a something added (za¯’id) to essence and to do this,
moreover, by way of referring to the Peripatetic tradition.
Contrasting Aristotle’s Metaphysics book Gamma with his
Categories, al-Tustarı¯ concludes that any attempt at
treating existence as a univocal notion is doomed to failure
(Madelung
and
Schmidtke
2006:75–107).
All
this
bespeaks an intimate familiarity with philosophical teach-
ing, as does the speed with which theologians rushed to
adopt certain Avicennan tenets in the century following
upon his death (Yahya Michot has in this connection
spoken of a veritable Avicennan pandemic in the sixth/
twelfth century; but even this may be putting the temporal
markers too late).
Two things change with al-G˙ aza¯lı¯. First, his investiga-
tions carried unprecedented legal weight. Al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ was
not content to criticize the philosophers as a philosopher
or even theologian would, instead, donning the cloak of
a Sha¯ﬁ‘ite jurist, he issued a legal determination and
declared that on three counts the Peripatetic philosophers
were to be charged with unbelief (kufr). On as many as
17 additional points Avicennan philosophy might count as
innovation and heresy, which was a non-punishable
offence: but as long as the philosophers taught the eternity
of the world, God’s ignorance of particulars, and a purely
spiritual interpretation of resurrection, they fell outside
the boundaries of Islam as a whole and therefore were
deserving of being put to death as apostates (Taha¯fut,
226–227 Marmura).
Because al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ was a widely followed and respected,
albeit also controversial, thinker already in his lifetime,
this decree received widespread attention, and made it
more tricky for subsequent generations of philosophers
to claim straightforward allegiance to the Peripatetic-
Avicennan stream of falsafa (see Griffel 2000). Though
one should be careful not to overstate the practical impact
of al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s fatwa¯, or the level to which people of
a philosophical persuasion were in any way actually per-
secuted – this was, for one thing, leavened by al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s
own subsequent exploration of the limits of religious
tolerance, which for him reached far indeed – at
a minimum we may note that the three doctrines singled
out by al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ henceforth became inhospitable terrain
for philosophical exploration in Islam. Even theories such
as perpetual creation (h:udu¯th azalı¯) had to be carefully
phrased so as to make clear that eternalism of the
offending Aristotelian type did not result thereby.
1274 T
Theology Versus Philosophy in the Arab World

Second, al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s very public wrestling with philos-
ophy resulted in his appropriating a large amount of
philosophical teaching into his own thought, to the
point that critics charged him with becoming ensnared
in the philosophers’ nets: and in this al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ was not
alone, but instead representative of a wider movement that
was well underway by his time. Al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ had liked to
point out how the philosophers often fell short of their
own apodeictic ideal, an approach later radicalized in Ibn
Taymiyya’s
(1263–1328)
thoroughgoing
nominalism,
which denied to the philosophers even the capacity to
put forward valid deﬁnitions. Yet in the process of devel-
oping his criticisms, al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ effectively put syllogistic
reasoning and scientiﬁc demonstration on exactly that
pedestal which Fa¯ra¯bı¯ had envisioned for it. In The Just
Balance al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ moreover argued that the art of valid
inference was not the exclusive province of the Greek
philosophers, rather, the Messenger of God himself had
reasoned syllogistically, and in so doing instructed his
people in the same art (Rudolph 2005). Equally as impor-
tantly, al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ in his autobiography contended that the
saints and the Sufis had taught ethics long before the
philosophers did (Munqidh, 24–25 Salı¯ba & Ayya¯d). This
provided
a
formal
justiﬁcation
not
only
for
the
longstanding practice of teaching Greek-derived moral
psychology in conjunction with Islamic spirituality, but
also for appropriating Aristotelian faculty psychology as
its theoretical backdrop. Finally, al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s cosmology
and metaphysics borrow liberally from Avicenna, even as
he insists on putting an Ashʿarite spin on these materials:
and in this too he was followed by countless theologians
who came after. In these three interlocking areas of doc-
trine, therefore – logic, psychology, and metaphysics – the
practice of Islamic theology was transformed by its
encounter with Avicenna, even as attitudes toward philos-
ophy hardened on the surface level.
The ways in which all these changes played out are
complex and resist easy summarization. Much further
study is needed before we have an adequate conception
of the developments, especially in the eastern part of the
Islamic world. A few examples will have to sufﬁce.
1. Consider ﬁrst ‘Umar al-Suhrawardı¯ (1145–1234),
who moved in the highly politicized intellectual circles of
the Caliph al-Na¯s:ir li-Dı¯n Alla¯h. Suhrawardı¯ could
simultaneously boast of washing the ink out of every copy
of Avicenna’s Healing in Baghdad’s libraries, and in his
Expose´ of the Infamies of the Philosophers present as his
own a cosmology and epistemology that is plainly of
Neoplatonic provenance. In keeping with al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s
programme of situating Suﬁsm in a respectable Islamic
context, Suhrawardı¯ claimed that his vision had a greater
authority than the speculations of the philosophers, since it
was divinely inspired and thus came from the same source
as the prophetic proclamations (see Ohlander 2008:
291–303).
2. Second, when we move from the centers of Muslim
learning to its periphery, we may take the example of
Mah:mu¯d ibn Mala¯h:imı¯ (d. 1141), a Muʿtazilite teacher
from a period when that particular school of theology had
fallen into disrepute if not yet obscurity. From the side-
lines, Mala¯h:imı¯’ can gleefully observe how theologians
from the Sha¯ﬁ‘ite and H˙ anaﬁte legal traditions were fast
going the way of the Christians, with their Hellenizing
(yu¯na¯nı¯) tendencies and elaborate metaphysical specula-
tions. These would only serve to lead them further astray
from valid rational principles of authentic Muslim origin –
a clear recognition on Mala¯h:imı¯’s part that a displacement
of some sort had occurred. Again, this assessment comes
coupled with in an inability to perceive the extent to which
Muʿtazilite teaching itself had become pervaded with phil-
osophical content (Madelung 2007).
3. Third, we have Ibn Khaldu¯n’s famous verdict that
the theologians, following in the footsteps of al-G˙ aza¯lı¯,
had meddled in philosophy to the point of confusing
the two traditions (Muqaddima, 3:52, 3:153–154). Ibn
Khaldu¯n’s own opinion was that theology should begin
from articles of faith as established by tradition; but this
again represents a very particular view of kala¯m, and not
one that is borne out by the historical materials in all their
richness. All in all, the notion that either the theological or
the philosophical tradition would have had pure essences,
ones whose subsequent contamination should be cause for
concern, appears to be an odd and ahistorical claim –
although sadly not one to which later historians would
have been immune.
See also: ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r ▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid
Muh:ammad ▶Ibn Khaldu¯n, Abu¯ Zayd ʿAbdarrah˙ma¯n
▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes)
▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Kala¯m ▶al-Kindı¯, Abu¯
Yu¯suf Yaʿqu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q
Bibliography
Primary Sources
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ Abu¯ Nas:r (1981) Kita¯b tah:sı¯l al-sa‘a¯da (The attainment of
happiness), ed. Ya¯sı¯n J. Da¯r al-Andalus, Beirut
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid (1969) Al-munqidh min al-d˙ala¯l (The deliverer
from error), 2nd edn, ed. Ayya¯d K, Salı¯ba J, printed together with
Jabre F’s French translation in the UNESCO bilingual edition Erreur
et de´livrance. Librairie Orientale, Beirut
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid (2000) Taha¯fut al-fala¯sifa. In: The incoherence of
the philosophers, 2nd edn, ed. after Bouyges, trans. Marmura ME.
Brigham Young University Press, Provo
Theology Versus Philosophy in the Arab World T
1275
T

Ibn Khaldu¯n (1967) Al-muqaddima (The introduction), 2nd edn, 3 vols,
trans. Rosenthal F. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Ibn Rushd Abu¯ l-Walı¯d Muh:ammad ibn Ah:mad (1964) Kita¯b al-kashf ‘an
mana¯hij al-adilla fı¯ ‘aqa¯’id al-milla (Exposition of the methods of
proving the tenets of religion), 2nd edn, ed. Qa¯sim M. The Anglo-
Egyptian Library, Cairo
Ibn Rushd Abu¯ l-Walı¯d Muh:ammad ibn Ah:mad (2001) Fas:l al-maqa¯l. In:
The decisive treatise and the epistle dedicatory, ed. and trans.
Butterworth CE. Brigham Young University Press, Provo
al-Kindı¯ Ya‘qu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q (1950) Rasa¯’il al-Kindı¯ al-falsaﬁyya, 2 vols, ed.
Abu¯ Rı¯da M. Da¯r al-ﬁkr al-‘arabı¯, Cairo
Secondary Sources
Endress G (1990) The defense of reason: the plea for philosophy in the
religious community. Z Gesch Arab-Islam Wiss 6:1–49
Endress G (2006) Reading Avicenna in the Madrasa: intellectual geneal-
ogies and chains of transmission of philosophy and the sciences in
the Islamic East. In: Montgomery JE (ed) Arabic theology, Arabic
philosophy. From the many to the one: essays in celebration of
Richard M. Frank. Peeters, Leuven, pp 371–422
Frank RM (2005–2008) Texts and studies on the development and history
of Kala¯m, 3 vols. Ashgate, Aldershot
Griffel F (2000) Apostasie und Toleranz im Islam. Die Entwicklung zu
al-Gazalis Urteil gegen die Philosophie und die Reaktionen der
Philosophen. E. J. Brill, Leiden
Gutas D (1994) Pre-Plotinian philosophy in Arabic (other than Platonism
and Aristotelianism): a review of the sources. In: Haase W, Temporini
H (eds) Aufstieg und Niedergang der Ro¨mischen Welt, II, vol 36.7.
Walter de Gruyter, Berlin, pp 4939–4973
Gutas D (2005) The logic of theology (Kala¯m) in Avicenna. In: Rudolph
U, Perler D (eds) Logik und Theologie. Das Organon im arabischen
und im lateinischen Mittelalter. E. J. Brill, Leiden, pp 58–72
Hartmann A (1979) Eine orthodoxe Polemik gegen Philosophen und
Freidenker. Der Islam 56(2):274–293
Madelung W (2007) Ibn al-Mala¯h:imı¯’s refutation of the philosophers. In:
Adang C, Schmidtke S, Sklare D (eds) A common rationality:
Mu‘tazilism in Islam and Judaism. Ergon, Wu¨rzburg, pp 331–336
Madelung W, Schmidtke S (2006) Rational theology in interfaith com-
munication. Abu¯ l-H˙ usayn al-Bas:rı¯’s Mu‘tazilı¯ theology among the
Karaites in the Fa¯t:imid Age. E. J. Brill, Leiden
Mahdi M (1972) Alfarabi on philosophy and religion. Philos Forum
4(1):5–26
Marmura ME (1991–1992) Avicenna and the Kalam. Z Gesch Arab-Islam
Wiss 7:172–206
Ohlander ES (2008) Suﬁsm in an age of transition. ‘Umar al-Suhrawardı¯
and the rise of the Islamic mystical brotherhoods. E. J. Brill, Leiden
Rissanen S (1993) Theological encounter of Oriental Christians with
Islam during early Abbasid rule. A˚ bo Akademis, A˚ bo
Rudolph U (2005) Die Neubewertung der Logik durch al-Gaza¯lı¯. In:
Rudolph U, Perler D (eds) Logik und Theologie. Das Organon im
arabischen und im lateinischen Mittelalter. E. J. Brill, Leiden, pp 73–97
Stroumsa S (1999) Freethinkers of medieval Islam. E. J. Brill, Leiden
Taylor RC (1998) Averroes’ philosophical analysis of religious proposi-
tions. In: Aertsen JA, Speer A (eds) Was ist Philosophie im
Mittelalter? Walter de Gruyter, Berlin, pp 888–894
van Ess J (1991–1995) Theologie und Gesellschaft im 2. und 3.
Jahrhundert Hidschra: Eine Geschichte des religio¨sen Denkens in
fru¨hen Islam, 6 vols. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin
Theophrastus, Arabic
CARMELA BAFFIONI
Dipartimento di Studi e Ricerche su Africa e Paesi Arabi
Facolta` di Studi Arabo-Islamici e del Mediterraneo
Universita` degli Studi di Napoli L‘Orientale
Napoli
Italy
Abstract
Theophrastus, a relative of Aristotle and his successor in the
Peripatetic school, is well documented in Arabic sources,
particularly with regard to logic. He is known by the Arabs
as a translator of and a commentator on Aristotle and as the
author of works, some now lost, on minerals and on general
questions. Many of his doctrines in physics, psychology, and
metaphysics were developed in Muslim thought. Testimo-
nies refer to his scientiﬁc interests, his idea of nature as
a mixture of mechanics and teleology, and his apophatic
idea of knowledge of God. He introduces ideas about the
intellect that were later developed by Averroes. With regard
to morals, Theophrastus emphasized qualities that would
become the basic features of the ideal philosopher and the
ideal ruler in Islam.
Biographical Information
Theophrastus is frequently quoted in Arabic sources,
partly because of his presumed relationship to Aristotle –
he may have been confused with Speusippus, the son of
Aristotle’s sister; the Arabs also refer to him as the son of
Aristotle’s brother or of his maternal aunt – and because
he was his spiritual successor. The major source for the
Arabic Theophrastus is Gutas 1992, which contains all
texts, including manuscript sources, in which Theophrastus
is named or quoted; sometimes his name is difﬁcult to
identify. Gutas describes the main lines of Theophrastus’
thought as known by the Arabs. He is presented as
a translator of and a commentator on Aristotle’s Categories
and De interpretatione and of some of Aristotle’s works on
physics (cf. Abu¯ l-Faraj ibn al-T˙ayyib, a Nestorian philos-
opher, physician, and theologian, d. 1043, and known in
the Latin world as Abulfaragius Abdalla Benattibus).
The philosopher al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (d. 950) reports that after
the defeat of Cleopatra at Actium in 31 BCE, the Roman
emperor Augustus found in the Egyptian libraries manu-
scripts of Aristotle’s works written in his lifetime and in
that of Theophrastus (Gutas 1992:95). Books attributed to
1276 T
Theophrastus, Arabic

Theophrastus include On the Soul and On Meteorology, On
Sensation, On Metaphysics, and On the Causes of Plants, in
a single book, and Natural Questions. These titles can be
recognized in the well-known De sensu et sensibilibus,
Metaphysics,
De
causis
plantarum,
and
Physicorum
opiniones; whether the title On Education, also in a single
book, corresponds to the Characteres is uncertain. Several
of these works were translated into or commented on in
Arabic. A work on Democritus that is related to Theo-
phrastus might be that quoted by Diogenes Laertius (= 68
A 34 Diels-Kranz [Fragmente der Vorsokratiker ed.]). An
anonymous Latin source (Gutas 1992:439) states that
Theophrastus wrote a Book on Causes that is no longer
extant in Greek but only in Arabic, and that it was trans-
lated into Latin by a certain David. Ibn al-Nadı¯m (tenth
century), author of al-Fihrist, the ‘‘index’’ of names of
authors and works in different ﬁelds of knowledge, refers
to a book by Theophrastus entitled On Problems. Qust:a¯ b.
Lu¯qa¯, a physician and translator of the ninth century, is
said to have relied on Theophrastus in his Book on the
Difference Between the Spirit and the Soul.
Aristotle never wrote about minerals and metals –
though he states the contrary at the end of Book III of his
Meteorologica – but Theophrastus wrote a treatise De
lapidibus and a work on metals, now lost. He also wrote
about fossils, corals, petriﬁed plants, and salts in other lost
works (Lettinck 1999:301). Writings in Arabic on these
matters indicate that these works may have been seminal in
the later tradition. The eleventh century scientist al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯
refers to Theophrastus’ statement that a container is heavier
if ﬁlled with lead than if it is ﬁlled with gold or silver.
From the S˙iwa¯n al-h:ikma – The Cupboard of Wisdom,
a history of Greek and Arabic philosophy written by Abu¯
Sulayma¯n al-Sijista¯nı¯ al-Mant:iqı¯ (d. c. 985) – we know
that on his deathbed Theophrastus reproached nature for
giving humanity so short a life.
Thought
Logic
Logic is by far the best-documented section in Gutas’ col-
lection. According to the Arab sources, Theophrastus wrote
a commentary on Aristotle’s Categories and a Book on
afﬁrmative and negative (propositions). Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ states
that it was written on the line of Aristotle’s De
interpretatione, where ‘‘the things sought’’ (al-mat:lu¯ba¯t)
were discussed, not syllogistic premises, to distinguish them
from ‘‘the other opposite pairs’’ (sa¯’ir al-mutaqa¯bila¯t).
Numerous testimonies, among them Avicenna (d. 1037)
and Averroes (d. 1198), describe Theophrastus’ involve-
ment in the clariﬁcation of premises in syllogisms, partic-
ularly of the nature of absolute and existential premises
(Gutas 1992:153–185). Arabic authors also mention The-
ophrastus’ theories about Aristotle’s modal syllogisms; al-
Fa¯ra¯bı¯ claims that he also studied hypothetical syllogisms,
and Averroes reports his interest in Aristotle’s topics.
Nature and Natural Phenomena
The eleventh century heresiographer al-Shahrasta¯nı¯ ascribes
to Theophrastus, as well as to Aristotle, Plato, Porphyry, and
Plutarch, the theory reported by Themistius according to
which the nature of the world is a single and general nature,
while every species of plant and animal is distinguished by
a proper nature. Nature is also seen as the principle of
motion and rest in things. It manages everything in the
world wisely, even though it has no life, potency, or will.
Al-Shahrasta¯nı¯ counts Theophrastus among those who
met Plato and reported that he said that the world has
a creator.
The S˙iwa¯n al-h:ikma attributes to Theophrastus the
theory that heaven is the abode of all the stars and earth
the abode of all humans, who are similar to the stars
because of their rational souls and intellect. The Arab
Galen states that according to Theophrastus rain results
from compression and pressure, and that the ﬁne parts of
water vanish from ice when it melts leaving the muddy
and heavy parts behind. With regard to odors, the Pseudo-
Platonic Arabic Book of Tetralogies attributes to Theo-
phrastus the idea that bad smells fall because of their
density and rise because of their rarity.
God
According to an anonymous Arabic source, Theophrastus
believed in the eternal preexistence of God; he thought
that God is beyond substance, that He originated
everything, having no originator Himself; that He is not
associated with things but is contrary to them; and that He
has neither before nor after, nor parts or organs of sense.
Soul
The S˙iwa¯n al-h:ikma reports that according to Theophras-
tus the soul is able to ﬂy and to alight wherever it wishes,
thanks to its ‘‘hidden wings’’ (cf. Plato), and that it
observes everything without being observed.
Albert the Great places Theophrastus with Porphyry,
Themistius, and Arab thinkers such as Avicenna, al-G˙ aza¯lı¯
(d. 1111), and al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ as a representative of the theory of
three different modes of knowledge: (i) the incomplete, (ii)
Theophrastus, Arabic T
1277
T

that supported by a ‘‘habit’’ that helps the intellect, and (iii)
that which is good by its nature, illuminated by the universal
intellect. The S˙iwa¯n al-h:ikma distinguishes between innate
understanding, which is compared to the earth, and under-
standing through listening, which is compared to a seed, and
to water that brings out what lies in the depths of the earth.
Intellect
The question of intellect is a major topic in the history of
Muslim thought. In Averroes, it underwent substantial
transformations in all his works on the soul, and more so
in those surviving in Latin translation only. One of the most
debated issues is the nature of the so-called material intellect.
According to Averroes’ Commentarium magnum in De
anima, Aristotle’s opinion that the ‘‘material’’ intellect is
neither a body nor a form in the body led Theophrastus
and Themistius to believe that it was a substance that could
neither be created nor destroyed. The ‘‘theoretical’’ intellect
was for Aristotle the result of the composition of the ‘‘mate-
rial’’ and the ‘‘actual’’ intellect, which is the intellect that
abstracts forms in matter in so far as it is joined to the
‘‘agent’’ intellect. Theophrastus and Themistius hence
inferred that the ‘‘acquired’’ intellect was the ‘‘agent’’ intel-
lect, sometimes weakened, and sometimes strengthened
because of its mixture with the ‘‘material’’ intellect. With
regard to the ‘‘material’’ intellect, taken to be a potential
substance similar to primal matter in its reception of forms
(cf. Averroes’ De connexione intellectus abstracti cum
homine), Theophrastus remarked that primal matter cannot
conceive of or make distinctions, nor can it be said to be an
abstract thing. Qualities such as simplicity, abstraction,
impassibility, and separation from the body, ascribed by
Aristotle to the ‘‘material’’ intellect, cannot be proper to
a ‘‘preparedness’’ only. Echoes of this debate were preserved
by the thirteenth century Suﬁand thinker Ibn Sab‘ı¯n in the
Sicilian Questions addressed to the Emperor Fredrick II of
Hohenstaufen. Here it is stated that, according to Theo-
phrastus and Themistius, the ‘‘material’’ intellect is eternal
and the human intellect is a composition of this ‘‘material’’
(passive) intellect and of an ‘‘actual’’ intellect. They also
shared the idea that the ‘‘material’’ intellect survives the
death of the body, a theory linked to Plato’s opinion that
the objects of intellect existing in us are eternal and that
learning is recollection.
Morals
The S˙iwa¯n al-h:ikma ascribes to Theophrastus the saying
that control of desire is as difﬁcult as control of anger – that
is to say that no good thing is easy to achieve. The eleventh
century Egyptian historian and savant, Mubashshir b. Fa¯tik,
who was one of the most important collectors of gnomic
sayings, recalls that according to Theophrastus, the edu-
cated person (adı¯b) is one who speaks of the good qualities
of people and conceals the evil. The S˙iwa¯n al-h:ikma also
emphasizes qualities that will become proper to the ideal
philosopher in Islam and included among them those of
the ruler, whether philosopher or Imam, of the ‘‘perfect
cities’’ described by al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ and the Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’.
These include eloquence as separation of truth and lies,
generosity, piety, sound judgment, and justice. Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯
reports that the followers of Theophrastus placed puriﬁ-
cation of morals at the basis of knowledge because, as
Plato said, ‘‘whoever is not clean and pure should not
approach the clean and pure’’ (Gutas 1992:295; a similar
position is reported by Abu¯ l-Faraj ibn al-T˙ayyib). The
more a soul leaves aside worldly pleasures, the more easily
it acquires philosophy, becoming like a lamp luminous in
itself, and illuminating others. From this, it can be inferred
that it becomes similar to those, including some ancient
wise men, who were illuminated by the lamp of prophecy,
as al-Shahrasta¯nı¯ says. Again, philosophy is the wealth of
the soul, which grants its survival; people must also learn
how to make a good use of worldly wealth. A saying
reported by the famous physician and translator H˙ unayn
b. Ish:a¯q emphasizes the importance of action over speech.
The tenth century writer al-Mas‘u¯dı¯, one of the main,
if debatable, sources for Arabic thought, counts Theo-
phrastus among the representatives of the political philos-
ophy (al-falsafa al-madaniyya) that began with Socrates
and continued with Plato and Aristotle. The S˙iwa¯n
al-h:ikma reports Theophrastus’ answer to Alexander the
Great about what makes a king’s rule good: ‘‘When the
subjects obey the king and the king acts according to
tradition and justice’’ (Gutas 1992:455). It should be
noted that the Arabic words for tradition and justice,
sunna and ‘adl, correspond to the political and religious
rule of the Prophet.
Muslim thinkers of different persuasions shared and
developed theories on physics, psychology, and ‘‘meta-
physics’’ – ‘‘theology’’ for the Arabs – similar to those
attributed to Theophrastus; this could inform inspection
of the Greek sources of Muslim philosophy. But the avail-
able witnesses testify that Theophrastus had no good
opinion of music, unlike many Muslim thinkers who
relate to music the ability to inﬂuencing moral behavior.
See
also:
▶Abu¯
Sulayma¯n
al-Sijista¯nı¯
al-Mant:iqı¯
▶Doxographies, Graeco-Arabic ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r
▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid Muh:ammad ▶Ibn Masarra,
Muh˙ammad ibn ʿAbdalla¯h ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad
ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Ibn Sabʿı¯n, ʿAbd al-
H˙ aqq ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Ibn al-T˙ayyib
1278 T
Theophrastus, Arabic

▶Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯ʾ, Encyclopedia of ▶al-Mubashshir ibn
Fa¯tik ▶Natural Philosophy, Arabic ▶Porphyry, Arabic
▶al-Shahrasta¯nı¯, Muh:ammad ibn ʿAbd al-Karı¯m
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Fortenbaugh William W, Gutas Dimitri et al (eds) (1992) Theophrastus of
Eresus. Sources for his life, writings, thought and inﬂuence, 2 vols.
Brill, Leiden/New York/Ko¨ln
Translations
Alon Ilai (1985) The Arabic version of Theophrastus Metaphysica.
Jerusalem Studies in Arabic and Islam 6:163–217
Secondary Sources
Bafﬁoni C (1982) Atomismo e antiatomismo nel pensiero islamico.
Istituto Universitario Orientale, Napoli
Bafﬁoni C (2006) History, language and ideology in the Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’
View of the Ima¯mate. In: Michalak-Pikulska B, Pikulski A (eds)
Authority, privacy and public order in Islam. Peeters, Leuven, pp 17–27
Bafﬁoni C (2008) Further elements on the political commitment of the
Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’. In: Bredi D et al (eds) Scritti in onore di Biancamaria
Scarcia Amoretti. 3 vols, Edizioni Q, Roma, vol I, pp 55–66
Daiber H (1992) The meteorology of Theophrastus in Syriac and Arabic
translation. In: Fortenbaugh WW, Gutas D (eds) Theophrastus. His
psychological, doxographical and scientiﬁc writings. Transaction,
New Brunswick/London
Davidson HA (1992) Alfarabi, Avicenna, & Averroes, on intellect. Their
cosmologies, theories of the active intellect, & theories of human
intellect. Oxford University Press, New York/Oxford
Gutas D (1985) The life, works, and sayings of Theophrastus in the
Arabic tradition. Rutgers University Studies in Classical Humanities,
vol 2. Transaction Books, New Brunswick, pp 63–102
Lettinck P (1999) Aristotle’s Meteorology and its reception in the Arab
world with an edition and translation of Ibn Suwa¯r’s Treatise on
meteorological phenomena and Ibn Ba¯jja’s Commentary on the
meteorology. Brill, Leiden/Boston/Ko¨ln
Rosenthal F (1983) Political justice and the just ruler. In Kraemer JL,
Alon I (eds) Religion and government in the world of Islam. Pro-
ceedings of the colloquium held at Tel-Aviv University, 3–5 June
1979, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, pp 92–101
Thierry of Chartres
HENRIK LAGERLUND
Department of Philosophy
The University of Western Ontario
London, ON
Canada
Thierry of Chartres (c. 1085–1156) succeeded Gilbert of
Poitier at the Cathedral school at Notre Dame. He is
mostly known for his contributions in theology.
See also: ▶Dominicus Gundissalinus ▶Gilbert of Poitiers
Bibliography
Ha¨ring N (1964) Thierry of Chartres and Dominicus Gundissalinus.
Pontiﬁcal Institute, Toronto
Ha¨ring N (1971) The commentaries on Boethius by Thierry of Chartres
and his school. Pontiﬁcal Institute, Toronto
Thomas Aquinas
ALEXANDER W. HALL
Department of Philosophy
Clayton State University
Morrow, GA
USA
Abstract
Thomas Aquinas was a scholastic theologian who was
active in the thirteenth century when scholars of the
Latin west were assimilating the nearly complete Aristote-
lian corpus (rendered into Latin by 1200). These writings
transformed every ﬁeld of philosophical enquiry, and
reﬂected a worldview that led some medievals to assert
that philosophical reasoning does not agree with revela-
tion, on points including freedom of will, personal
immortality, and God’s awareness of creation. Against
this, Aquinas argued that valid reasoning cannot contra-
dict articles of faith, as both ﬂow from God. This famous
synthesis of faith and reason helped to develop an intel-
lectual culture that allowed for the development of Aris-
totelian
empiricism
alongside
scholasticism’s
deeply
embedded Platonic elements. Yet Aquinas was no mere
apologist. Just as he produced numerous excellent com-
mentaries on Aristotle, Aquinas likewise developed
a metaphysics asserting a distinction between being and
essence with respect to all entities save God. Joining to this
distinction the medieval doctrine of the convertibility of
goodness, truth, and being (the transcendentals), Aquinas
develops a Christian Aristotelianism that informs his nat-
ural theology, ethics, theory of natural law, philosophy of
mind, and philosophy of language (treated in this entry).
Aquinas’ proofs for God’s existence adduce the existence
of contingent entities (for whom essence and existence are
distinct) to demonstrate that of a necessary entity (for
whom essence and existence are identical), viz., God.
Through the aforementioned convertibility of the tran-
scendentals, as maximally existent, God is maximally
good. Carrying this over to philosophy of mind, ethics,
and natural law theory, Aquinas explains our free actions
in terms of an innate desire for happiness, the chief human
Thomas Aquinas T
1279
T

good, which desire is, at bottom, a desire for the beatiﬁc
vision in which the highest possible happiness is obtained.
Aquinas’ philosophy of language then seeks to regulate the
signiﬁcation of theological discourse, bearing in mind
God’s unique nature.
Biography
Thomas
Aquinas
(1224/1226–1274)
was
born
to
Landulph Count of Aquino and Dame Theodora of the
Neapolitan Caricciolo family at the family’s castle in
Roccasecca, Italy (then part of the Kingdom of the Two
Sicilies). The youngest son, Aquinas was given as an oblate
to the Benedictine abbey of Monte Cassino in 1230/1231,
likely with the aim of his acquiring the lucrative abbacy
some day. Owing to renewed strife between Pope Gregory
the IX and Emperor Frederick II, Aquinas was moved
from Monte Cassino to the University of Naples in
1239, preceding Frederick’s capture of the abbey that
November.
Naples was central to Aquinas’ spiritual and intellec-
tual formation. Here he studied Aristotle, Maimonides,
Averroes, and Avicenna, and was inspired by friars John
of San Giuliano and Thomas of Lentini to join the
Dominican order around April of 1244. Aquinas’ joining
a mendicant order upset his family’s ambitions, but the
friars’ foresight placed Aquinas on the road to Rome
prior to Theodora’s arrival in Naples to dissuade him.
Aquinas again eluded his mother at Rome, departing for
Bologna just before her arrival. At this point, Theodora
organized a group that took Aquinas in the region of
Acquapendente, whence he was ultimately conﬁned to
castle Roccasecca.
Consequent on Aquinas’ refusal to change his mind
and Innocent IV’s disposal of Emperor Frederick (an ally
of the Aquino family), Aquinas was returned in 1245 to the
Dominicans, who sent him to Paris. Aquinas remained
there for about 3 years, likely pursuing his studies of the
liberal arts (begun at Naples) and starting work in theol-
ogy, while serving as an assistant to Albert the Great.
In 1248, Aquinas followed Albert to Cologne, where
Albert had been sent to aid in establishing a studium
generale, or house of study designed to train the order’s
ablest students, mainly to serve as lectors at provincial
studia, where they would organize disputations and lec-
ture on the Bible and Peter of Lombard’s Sentences. At
Cologne, Aquinas studied philosophy and theology under
Albert, and perhaps began lecturing as a biblical bachelor,
as required during the ﬁrst year of one’s formation as
a master in theology. He also produced literal commen-
taries on the Bible, and perhaps De principiis naturae (On
the Principles of Nature).
Aquinas returned to Paris in 1252 to begin the next
stage in his formation as a bachelor of the Sentences,
lecturing
and
producing
his
Scriptum
super
libros
Sententiarum (Commentary on the Sentences), as well as
De ente et essentia (On Being and Essence). In 1256,
Aquinas received his license to teach and was appointed
regent master at the University of Paris, against the pro-
tests of secular masters who resented the growing strength
of the mendicant orders. As regent, Aquinas taught,
commented on the Bible, and participated in disputations.
Other writings from this time include several disputed
questions as well as the Expositio super librum Boethii De
trinitate (Commentary on Boethius’ De trinitate).
Aquinas left Paris for Italy in 1259, where he spent
a decade teaching at various cities and writing (Summa
contra gentiles (begun at Paris), Sententia super De anima
(Commentary on Aristotle’s De anima), and the First Part
of the Summa theologiae, among other works). Aquinas
ended these travels at Rome in 1265, where he was sent to
establish a studium and serve as its regent master.
In 1268, the order sent for Aquinas to serve an unprec-
edented second regency at Paris, where his talents were
needed to combat secular attacks against the mendicants’
rights to teach, and also to check the spread of Latin
Averroism (see below), while simultaneously persuading
conservative theologians that Aristotelianism need not
pose a threat to Christian teaching. Aquinas’ staggering
output from this period – including On the Perfecting of
the Spiritual Life, On the Unicity of Intellect Against the
Averroists, and On the Eternity of the World – reﬂects these
concerns.
Aquinas left Paris for Naples in 1272 to establish
another studium and serve as its regent master. In Decem-
ber 1273, while saying mass, he had a religious experience
that led him to cease writing. He disclosed to his friend
and assistant Reginald of Piperno that in light of what had
been revealed to him, he deemed his writings to be worth
less than straw, and that he now wished to die. In February
of 1274, Aquinas suffered an injury journeying to the
Council of Lyons. While convalescing with his niece in
the castle of Maenza, Aquinas requested that he be moved
to the Cistercian abbey at Fossanuova, lest the Lord ﬁnd
him in a castle and not a religious house; he died here on
March 2, 1274.
Aquinas matured during the ﬂowering of scholasti-
cism. By 1200, western scholars had rendered nearly all
of Aristotle’s writings into Latin, marking a dramatic shift
from the early twelfth century, when only Boethius’ trans-
lations of Categories and De interpretatione enjoyed wide
circulation. The appearance of Aristotle’s writings precip-
itated a series of bans, prohibitions, and ultimately
1280 T
Thomas Aquinas

condemnations, beginning in 1210, when the Provincial
Council of Paris forbade the teaching of Aristotle’s natural
philosophy by the Parisian arts masters. In 1215, the Papal
legate Robert de Courc¸on upheld the ban and added
a prohibition against lecturing on Aristotle’s Metaphysics;
and in 1231, Pope Gregory IX maintained the prohibition
and appointed a commission to correct the prohibited
books. The prohibition was likewise maintained by
Popes Innocent IV and Urban IV; nonetheless, when
Aquinas was ﬁnishing his studies as a bachelor of the
Sentences in Paris, Aristotelian philosophy dominated the
scene.
The conservative reaction to Aristotle grew from the
fear that his work could be used in some way to under-
mine Christian teachings, which is just what happened in
the mid-thirteenth century, when Siger of Brabant and
other Parisian arts masters, reading Aristotle in light of
the commentaries of Averroes (the Latinized name of the
twelfth-century
Islamic
philosopher
Ibn
Rushd),
interpreted Aristotle in a way that contradicted certain
tenets of faith, and argued that philosophical insight into
the ordinary course of nature does not always agree with
revealed truth. Aquinas attacked these Latin Averroists (or
Radical Aristotelians) during his second Parisian regency,
claiming that they misconstrued Aristotle, particularly
concerning certain ramiﬁcations of Aristotle’s claim that
the human intellect is immaterial (De anima III.4–5).
Siger had concluded that there can exist only one such
immaterial intellect, as entities are not multiplied save
through matter. Aquinas’ aforementioned De unitate
intellectus contra Averroistas (On the Unicity of Intellect
Against the Averroists) argues that a careful reading of
Aristotle cannot support this position. What is important
to note is that Siger advanced his claims as true according
to philosophy, suggesting that philosophy and theology
could arrive at different truths. One of Aquinas’ greatest
contributions, his famous synthesis of faith and reason,
was an insistence that this was not the case. While admit-
ting that some truths of faith cannot be established on the
authority of reason, Aquinas denies the possibility of valid
demonstrations contradicting these teachings (Summa
theologiae (ST) Ia.46.2; Summa contra gentiles (SCG)
II.32). Even so, the efforts of Aquinas and like-minded
thinkers were not immediately successful. Three years
following Aquinas’ death, Latin Averroism led to the Con-
demnation of 1277, instigated by the Bishop of Paris,
Stephen Tempier, and drafted with the aid of Henry of
Ghent. Among the condemned propositions were 19
drawn from Aquinas’ writings (in 1325, 2 years after
Aquinas’ canonization, the Condemnation was repealed
to the extent it touched on his works).
After his death, Aquinas’ philosophy found support
among his fellow Dominicans, and Pope Pius V declared
him a Doctor of the Church in 1567, during the period of
Second Thomism (dating roughly through the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries), which included thinkers such
as Cardinal Cajetan, Domingo de Soto, and John of St.
Thomas. Perhaps the most important revival of Aquinas’
teachings grew out of Pope Leo XIII’s 1879 encyclical
Aeterni patris, which recommended Aquinas as ‘‘the
prince and master of all Scholastic doctors,’’ so as to
furnish Catholic intellectuals addressing modernism with
sound philosophical and theological principles. The
period following Aeterni Patris has seen the foundation
of numerous centers of Thomistic study, an interest in
Aquinas’ thought spreading outside Catholic circles, and,
with this, the growth of an intellectual climate generally
amenable to the development of medieval philosophy.
Metaphysics and Natural Philosophy
Key to Aquinas’ metaphysics is his distinction between
essence (essentia) and existence (esse). De ente et essentia
(DEE) describes the essence or nature of an entity as the
principle on account of which it belongs to a speciﬁc
natural kind (as humanity is the essence of man) (chap. 1).
Essences (also termed ‘‘forms’’) are either substantial or
accidental. A substantial form is the aforementioned
principle making a thing to be what it is. Aquinas (con-
troversially) maintained that individuals possess but one
substantial form, regardless of the essential predicates we
ascribe them (ST Ia.76.3c; Sententia super De anima (In
DA) II.1.224). Since entities (conceived as Aristotelian
substances) belong to natural kinds through substantial
forms, any other forms must belong to entities through
accidental modes of being, whose presence or absence does
not specify an entity as a member of some natural kind.
Aquinas opposes any Platonist reiﬁcation of essences,
yet insists that essence and existence are distinct princi-
ples, with existence making an entity to be in actuality,
which is contrasted with being in potentiality. Potentiality
belongs to an entity which can be in a certain way but does
not currently have that way of being, whereas actuality
belongs to what is (De principiis naturae (DPN), chap. 1).
Transitions from potentiality to actuality are cases of sub-
stantial and accidental change. Substantial change is the
generation of one substance following the corruption of
another, as when a human becomes a corpse, which is
a new type of thing that is human only in an equivocal
sense (ST Ia.76.8; SCG IV.81).The matter underlying
substantial change is conceived as in potentiality to all
forms and thus termed ‘‘prime matter’’ (DPN, chap. 2).
Accidental change, on the other hand, involves a substance
Thomas Aquinas T
1281
T

taking on or losing an accidental form, without itself being
corrupted. Thus, generation absolutely speaking (to sub-
stantial form) and generation with qualiﬁcation (to acci-
dental form) require a being in potentiality (matter),
nonbeing in actuality (privation), and an actualizing prin-
ciple (form) (DPN, chap. 1).
To these principles are added agents and ends (DPN,
chap. 3). Agents are required as no form, whether sub-
stantial or accidental, renders itself to be in actuality, as it
would then have to preexist itself. Needed, then, is an
agent whose activity accounts for the coming to be of the
form. Again, agents (even unintelligent agents) are
inclined toward ends, though it does not follow that all
agents deliberate. Therefore, change requires four causes:
an agent (efﬁcient cause), matter (material cause), form
(formal cause), and an end (ﬁnal cause). As a logically
prior antecedent to change, privation is a principle, but
does not count as a cause in the strong sense that requires
a cause to produce an effect; were privation a cause in this
sense, mere lack of form would bring about change.
Also important to Aquinas’ metaphysics is the con-
vertibility of the transcendentals: being, truth, and good-
ness (Quaestiones disputatae de veritate (QDV) 1.1).
‘‘Being,’’ ‘‘truth,’’ and ‘‘goodness,’’ along with ‘‘thing,’’:
‘‘one,’’ and ‘‘something,’’ comprise the ﬁve transcenden-
tals: predicates true of all existent things qua existent.
Considered absolutely, each being is a thing, or something
with an essence, and every being is undivided and hence,
one. In relation to other things, every being is itself and
not some other, and thus something, and in a sense involv-
ing relation to the soul’s appetitive and intellective powers,
every being is true and good, good inasmuch as it is
desired, and desired to the extent it is a being in actuality
(ST Ia.5.5c), that is, a being in actuality with respect to its
speciﬁc perfections. Truth, on the other hand, is a mode of
being involving a conformity of intellect and object when,
in cognizing, intellect receives its object’s likeness. Thus,
entities are termed ‘‘true’’ in the way food is ‘‘healthy,’’
both predicates signifying a mode of being whereby the
subject acts on another. In the case of truth, this action
results in an isomorphic (or true) conformity of the intel-
lect with its object (QDV 1.4). In the proper and primary
sense, though, something is true to the extent it conforms
to God’s divine idea of it (QDV 1.4). This latter sense
relates to actuality, for things can fall short of divine
ideas to the extent they fail to evidence or actualize the
potentialities belonging to their speciﬁc kinds. Accord-
ingly, there is a correspondence between actuality and
goodness dependent on God’s creative intent. Most prop-
erly speaking, a thing is good to the extent it actualizes the
potentialities God has determined with respect to its
species, and hence the better an entity is, the more in
actuality it is with respect to these potentialities.
Natural Theology: The Five Ways
Aquinas’ Five Ways demonstrate God’s existence by argu-
ing that he is the necessary condition of certain readily
observable phenomena (ST Ia.2.3). Though each demon-
stration culminates in the claim that its subject is God, the
rationale for these identiﬁcations does not emerge until
subsequent investigations into their subject. Demonstra-
tion from a state of affairs to the existence of its cause is
demonstration ‘‘that (quia),’’ whereas demonstration
‘‘propter quid (that on account of which)’’ explains
a state of affairs through an insight into the essence of its
cause. This latter form of demonstration is characteristic
of science viewed as an organized body of knowledge,
which is not to say that scientists adhere to the stipulations
governing the construction of demonstrations as outlined
in Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics, but rather that scientiﬁc
explanation accounts for effects in terms of the natures of
their causes. Aquinas admits that in this life we cannot
acquire
the
knowledge
needed
to
produce
a demonstration propter quid with God as its subject;
however, reasoning from creation viewed as God’s effect,
we can provide a demonstration quia of his existence (ST
Ia.2.2).
Aquinas’ reliance on states of affairs to demonstrate
God’s existence breaks with the Anselmian claim that the
proposition ‘‘God exists’’ is self-evident because its pred-
icate is contained in a proper notion of the subject (ST
Ia.2.1). Aquinas allows that a proper notion of the divine
essence would render God’s existence self-evident, but
denies the availability of such insight in this life; hence,
God’s existence is self-evident ‘‘in itself (secundum se)’’ but
not ‘‘to us (quoad nos).’’
Aquinas’ First Way observes that things are in motion
or moved (the verb movetur allows either rendering).
Following Aristotle, Aquinas recognizes three types of
mobile change: in quantity, quality, or place (Sententia
super Physicam V.3). From the general principle that any-
thing in motion is moved by another, Aquinas concludes
that there must be a ﬁrst unmoved mover, for unless there
is an exception to this general principle, we could ask for
an explanation of every motion in terms of a previous
mover ad inﬁnitum, never arriving at a ﬁrst mover whose
activity is responsible for the existence of the last.
It is important to note that this discussion of ﬁrst and
last involves ontological rather than temporal priority.
Aquinas’ example of a staff moved by a hand illustrates
that the unfolding effect requires an agent’s ongoing activ-
ity; thus, the causal series is synchronic or ordered per se,
1282 T
Thomas Aquinas

in contrast with a diachronic series ordered per accidens
(accidentally), where events are conceived as unfolding
independently of their temporally prior antecedents, as
one blow of a hammer follows another. Thus, Aquinas’
proof culminates with an unmoved mover continually
actualizing the potentiality of all other movers (moving
or moved), supporting Aquinas’ belief that God continu-
ally pours forth being into creation (SCG II.30.3).
Aquinas establishes that what is moved is moved by
another through the description of change (or motion)
as the reduction of potentiality to actuality. Every change
is a generation (substantial or accidental) out of matter
and potency, as when tinder catches ﬁre. The reduction
from potentiality to actuality requires an agent in actu-
ality with respect to the form that is communicated.
Tinder does not catch itself on ﬁre, rather it is lit (and
thus its potentiality actualized) by what is in actuality
with respect to ﬁre, say a match. Note that not every
change involves an agent communicating a form it actu-
ally possesses. Alcohol, for instance, can inebriate but is
not itself inebriated. Aquinas’ point is that within the
cause there is an element in actuality with respect to the
property communicated, inasmuch as when in actuality
this element produces such and such a property in an
appropriately disposed patient. Given an entity’s inabil-
ity to communicate to itself a motion with respect to
which it stands in potentiality (by means of that part of
itself that is in potentiality with respect to the motion),
the principle that every mover is moved stands, with the
aforementioned caveat that an unmoved mover is
required to account for there being now any motion.
Moreover, as Aquinas subsequently notes, the ﬁrst
mover must be pure actuality; otherwise its activity
would require the activity of another mover, and so on
ad inﬁnitum (ST Ia.3.1c).
Like the First Way, Aquinas’ Second, Third, and
Fourth Ways demonstrate the existence of an entity that
is pure actuality, the Second and Third as they conclude
with the existence of an uncaused cause, and the Fourth,
since it accounts for gradations of perfection in terms of an
entity that is ‘‘maximally existent (maxime entia).’’
Recalling Aquinas’ distinction between existence and
essence, we may note that the ﬁrst four Ways imply the
identity of existence and essence in God, as any composi-
tion of existence and essence requires an accounting that
involves potentiality within the composite (ST Ia.3.4c).
Finally, as goodness, truth and being are, for Aquinas,
convertible, he elsewhere argues that the ﬁrst being, who
is maximally good, possesses every perfection, including
those Christians traditionally ascribe to the divine essence
(ST Ia.4.2; SCG I.28.2).
Philosophy of Language: Theological
Discourse
A term’s signiﬁcation (what it brings to mind) derives
from experience, which does not equip us with the idea
of a wholly simple entity possessed of every perfection.
Rather than admit language’s inability to properly refer-
ence the divine essence, Aquinas regulates the signiﬁcation
of theological discourse through the Aristotelian notion of
focal meaning.
Aristotle sought an element common to our various
uses of the term ‘‘being,’’ which can refer to both substances
and accidents (Metaphysics (Met.) IV.2, 1003b5–11). Tech-
nically, the term is equivocal as it signiﬁes differently in
different contexts. Nonetheless, the various signiﬁcations
are related. Employing terminology developed by Pseudo-
Augustine, Boethius, and Simplicius in their commentar-
ies on Aristotle’s Categories, medievals generally claimed
that the term ‘‘being’’ is equivocal ‘‘by design (a consilio),’’
like the term ‘‘healthy’’ said of both medicine and patient,
rather than equivocal ‘‘by chance (a casu),’’ as ‘‘bat’’ said of
baseball bats and certain nocturnal ﬂying mammals.
Equivocal terms of any type are contrasted with univocals,
which supposit for (or refer to) disparate individuals
conceived under a single concept, as ‘‘person’’ said of
Aquinas and Aristotle. Note analogy and univocity are
context dependent; for instance, ‘‘healthy’’ when said of
two different persons is subordinated to one idea and
thereby functions univocally.
As concerns the term ‘‘being,’’ Aristotle noted that it is
said primarily of substances and in a secondary or deriv-
ative sense of accidents (Met. IV.2, 1003b5–11). Thus, the
various uses of the term are uniﬁed through a focal mean-
ing appropriate to the primary analogue, to which the
term most properly applies. Following Aristotle’s Greek,
this species of equivocation is sometimes referred to as an
instance of ‘‘pros hen (toward one)’’ equivocation, where
the various signiﬁcations of a designedly equivocal term
are distinguished through what the medievals term anal-
ogy ‘‘of attribution (per attributionem),’’ which involves
signiﬁcation in a ‘‘prior and posterior manner (per prius et
posterius),’’ with the analogous term referring properly to
the primary analogue, and in a derivative or posterior
sense to the secondary analogues.
In addition to analogy of attribution, medieval
thinkers also recognized analogy of proportionality
(proportionalitas),
likewise
inherited
from
Aristotle,
where a relation holding between members of a set is
clariﬁed through a comparison to another set whose
members stand in a similar relationship: thus the sepion
is to the squid, as the spine is to the ﬁsh, and the backbone
is to land animals (Posterior Analytics, II.14, 98a20–23).
Thomas Aquinas T
1283
T

In De veritate, composed during Aquinas’ ﬁrst Parisian
regency, this species of analogy is used to name God
(II.11c), but most scholars agree that Aquinas’ later
works favor the use of analogy of attribution. Seeing
analogy of attribution at play in theological discourse,
Aquinas notes that our notions of the traits we ascribe to
God derive from creatures, whose modes of existence
furnish the everyday or baseline signiﬁcation of our lan-
guage (ST Ia.13.6c). Ordinary signiﬁcation cannot then do
justice to the intention of the theologian, who understands
the ramiﬁcations of divine simplicity. Accordingly, God
talk must annex notions of supereminence, causality, and
simplicity, recognizing that to ascribe a perfection x to the
divine essence requires that we understand that God is
the cause of x in creatures and that God possesses x in the
highest possible degree, but in a manner that does not
violate divine simplicity. The adjustment does not sup-
pose that we can comprehend what it is for x to exist in this
manner, but it allows Aquinas to plot a middle ground
between idolatry (the worship of a creature) and a negative
theology such as that of the inﬂuential twelfth-century
Jewish philosopher Moses Maimonides, who claimed
that we know of God only what he is not (Guide for the
Perplexed I.58).
Philosophy of Mind: Psychology
The human soul is the substantial form of the human
being, coming into existence as part of a matter–form
composite (DEE, chaps. 2, 5). The soul (termed ‘‘intellect’’
in its function as the principle of intellectual operation)
can grasp the essence of material entities; hence intellect is
immaterial, since a particular material conﬁguration
would impede such knowledge. Moreover, though knowl-
edge originates with sensation (see below), intellect
acquires its concepts through an activity that is proper to
it, and thus intellect functions apart from matter and is
subsistent, for whatever acts must be in actuality (ST
Ia.75.2). Since it subsists, soul survives the death of the
body, undergoing an interim of reward or punishment
(SCG IV.91), after which the soul is reunited with its
body in the Last Judgment (SCG IV.79, 96). Nonetheless,
while separate from body, soul lacks the organs necessary
for it to perform its proper function, which is to know
sensibles. Hence it is contrary to soul’s nature (contra
naturam) to subsist in this way (SCG IV.79.10) (cf., In
DA III.5.745).
Awareness of an extramental essence begins when our
external senses transmit impressions of some extramental
entity x in the form of sensible species, described by
Aquinas as immaterial representations of extramental
objects (In DA II.24.553). The internal sense dubbed
phantasia transforms these sensible species into an inter-
nal representation of x, termed a ‘‘phantasm,’’ by means of
a modiﬁcation of some bodily organ (ST Ia.85.1c, ad 3).
Aquinas’ account suggests that it is through this represen-
tation, not the sensible species, that we initially become
conscious of extramental entities. Thus far, perception is
a physical phenomenon, accounted for by various internal
and
external
organs;
but
after
the
generation
of
a phantasm, the intellect begins its work. First, the aspect
termed ‘‘active intellect’’ extracts from the phantasm an
intelligible species, which conforms to the essence or
quiddity of x (ST Ia.84.7), but not as the form of any
particular entity. Thus an intelligible species prescinds
from material considerations or physical representations
such as are given through the phantasm (ST Ia.85.1, ad 3);
nonetheless, as its attending to phantasms is a necessary
condition of the active intellect’s production of an intelli-
gible species, the intellect grasps the essence as one that
exists in matter. This non-eidetic grasp of the essence or
quiddity on account of which an extramental entity falls
under certain genera and species is then stored in what is
termed the ‘‘possible’’ (or, more loosely, ‘‘passive’’) intel-
lect, allowing us to retain our concept and hone it through
further investigation (ST Ia.79.2, ad 2; 85.5c).
Aquinas believes that human beings are free, though
they necessarily desire the good. He develops this position
in light of a discussion of four types of necessity
corresponding to Aristotle’s four causes (ST Ia.82.1). Nat-
ural necessity arises from internal material and formal
principles. Thus, a substance composed of contraries is
necessarily corruptible (material) and the interior angles
of a triangle necessarily equal 180 (formal). By contrast,
necessity of the end emerges because of something extrin-
sic, such as food required for living. Finally, necessity with
respect to coercion obtains when an action is compelled by
some external agent. Only this last type of necessity is
incompatible with free will.
That we desire the good is a natural necessity, under-
lying all action of the will in the way the principle of
noncontradiction governs the speculative intellect (ST Ia.
IIae.94.2c). Since we naturally desire the good, we are, on
occasion, subject to necessity of the end, because there
may be only one way to acquire the good we desire. That
this second type of necessity does not preclude free will
seems clear enough; we would not ordinarily say that
a person who chooses to go on a journey lacks a free will
because he must book a ﬂight. However, it may seem that
natural necessity robs the will of its freedom. Aquinas’
response emerges in his discussion of intellect and will.
1284 T
Thomas Aquinas

Will is an appetitive power, naturally moved by its
object, which is happiness (ST Ia.82.1c). Aquinas distin-
guishes between intellectual and sensitive appetitive
powers, classifying the will as intellectual owing to its
reliance on intellect, which conceives the good that
moves the will (ST Ia.82.3, ad 2). More speciﬁcally, the
will is moved by particulars conceived as standing under
universal types, as one is moved to hatred or desire when
conceiving some particular under the type thief or good,
respectively (ST Ia.80.2). The good conceived by intellect is
an unmoved mover acting on will through ﬁnal causality,
while the will itself acts as an efﬁcient cause with respect to
diverse faculties, setting them in motion to attain the
desired end (ST Ia.80.2). Though intellect initially sets
will in motion through intellect’s apprehension of
a particular under a universal, will’s efﬁcient causality
extends to intellect (ST Ia.82.4). Finally, we may note that
intellect does not generally present will with only one
cognized good; instead, intellect furnishes will with
a variety of goods among which will is free to choose (ST
Ia.82.2, ad 3). This, coupled with will’s ability to direct the
intellect to consider even more goods, or the same goods
under different aspects, accounts for freedom of will.
Though oriented to the good, when presented with
a variety of goods, will is free to choose which to pursue.
Ethics and Natural Law
Moral philosophy has three branches: ethical, domestic,
and political (In NE I.1.6). What we should and should
not do is ultimately determined with reference to the chief
human good (ST Ia.IIae.1.6), which we have seen is hap-
piness (ST Ia.82.1c). Following Aristotle, Aquinas accepts
that what functions well is good, and thus a human who
functions well will be a good human, or a human who has
acquired the human good. The human good is happiness,
so a human who functions well will be happy (In NE
I.10.128). That human beings have a function, Aquinas
accepts on several grounds, including the belief that it
would be absurd to suppose something ordained by divine
intelligence should lack a purpose (In NE I.10.121). Our
function is what makes us unique vis-a`-vis other animals,
namely our rationality (In NE I.10.126). To function
well requires possession of the appropriate virtue; thus,
the virtue of a knife is sharpness as the function of the
knife is to cut. Hence successful moral reasoning involves
several factors; since the intellect is divided in terms of
practical and speculative applications, to which there cor-
respond various intellectual virtues. However, we have
seen that human beings are likewise motivated by intel-
lectual and sensitive appetitive faculties, whose proper
functioning requires moral virtues, whose role is to ensure
that what we desire is conducive to our overall good. The
moral virtues depend on reason if they are to show them-
selves in activity conducive to our well-being, for without
the intellectual virtues of prudence (which grasps means
to ends), and understanding (which supplies the deliber-
ations of prudence with the requisite ﬁrst principles)
(among other places, see In NE VI), the mere possession
of appropriate desire would be insufﬁcient to ensure our
welfare (ST Ia.IIae.58.4, ad 3). Thus the activity of the
appetitive faculties that these virtues perfect may be
termed rational in a broader sense, inasmuch as they can
obey the regulation of reason in the manner a child obeys
her parents or a youth the counsel of wise friends (In NE
I.20.240). Conversely, as prudence is right reason about
what should be done, it depends on the rectitude of our
appetites as concerns the desired end, and thus prudence
(a virtue of the practical intellect) depends on the moral
virtues, which dispose us toward the proper end (ST Ia.
IIae.57.4c). Morality consequently supposes the exercise of
deliberation and volition in accord with the intellectual
and moral virtues, respectively.
While it is true that happiness is man’s chief end, our
ultimate happiness is not found in this life. Rather the
greatest human happiness will come only in the beatiﬁc
vision, ‘‘for man and other rational creatures attain to
their last end by knowing and loving God’’ (ST Ia.
IIae.8.2c) (cf., ST Ia.IIae.3.8c). Attainment of our ultimate
end requires the supernatural virtues of faith, hope,
and charity, which are acquired through grace (ST IIa.
IIae.1–46). Nonetheless, Aquinas believes that our lives
on earth afford a measure of happiness; indeed, our incli-
nation to pursue that happiness serves as the ﬁrst principle
of morality underpinning God’s natural law. Natural law is
the eternal law ruling creation as subject to God’s provi-
dence, imprinted on creatures in the form of proper incli-
nations (ST Ia.IIae.91.2c). The ﬁrst precept of natural law
is that we should seek good and shun evil, the moral
equivalent of the principle of noncontradiction (ST Ia.
IIae.94.2c). What humans pursue and avoid is determined
by their nature as rational, animate substances, which,
among other things, inclines them to preserve their own
being, mate and raise offspring, and live together in peace-
able society. To the extent we are aware of and follow these
desires in an appropriate manner, we follow natural law,
and this brings us happiness.
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Jack Zupko and James Doig for
helpful comments and suggestions.
Thomas Aquinas T
1285
T

See also: ▶Aesthetics ▶Albert the Great ▶Albertism
▶Anselm of Canterbury ▶Arabic Texts: Philosophy,
Latin Translations of ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek,
Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶Aristotle,
Arabic ▶Being ▶Boethius ▶Categories ▶Categories,
Commentaries on Aristotle’s ▶Causality ▶Certainty
▶Change and Motion ▶Consciousness ▶Divine Power
▶Emotions ▶Epistemology ▶Essence and Existence
▶Ethics ▶Form and Matter ▶Happiness ▶Henry of
Ghent ▶Heresy ▶Ibn Rushd (Averroes), Latin Transla-
tions of ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d
(Averroes) ▶Induction ▶Internal Senses ▶Knowledge
▶Liberal Arts ▶Mental Representation ▶Mental Word/
Concepts ▶Mereology ▶Metaphysics ▶Moses Maimon-
ides ▶Natural Law ▶Natural Philosophy ▶Nicomachean
Ethics, Commentaries on Aristotle’s ▶Parisian Condem-
nation of 1277 ▶Peter Lombard ▶Philosophical Psychol-
ogy ▶Posterior Analytics, Commentaries on Aristotle’s
▶Proofs of the Existence of God ▶Realism ▶Sense Per-
ception, Theories of ▶Siger of Brabant ▶Species, Sensible
and Intelligible ▶Substance, Accident and Modes ▶Syl-
logism, Theories of ▶Terms, Properties of ▶Thomas
Aquinas, Political Thought ▶Thomas of Vio (Cajetan)
▶Thomism ▶Truth, Theories of ▶Universals ▶Univer-
sities and Philosophy ▶Virtue and Vice ▶Voluntarism
and Intellectualism ▶Will, Weakness of
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Note, an up to date bibliography of English translations of Aquinas may
be found
at http://www.home.duq.edu/bonin/thomasbibliography.
html; additionally many English translations are available online at
http://www.josephkenny.joyeurs.com/cdtexts/index.htm. Finally, Latin
editions of Aquinas’s writings are available at http://www.corpustho-
misticum.org/iopera.html
Anselm (1998) Anselm of Canterbury: the major works, edited with an
introduction by Davies B, Evans GR. Oxford University Press,
Oxford
Aquinas Thomas (1882–) Sancti Thomae de Aquino opera omnia, ed.
Commissio Leonina. Polyglot Press, Rome (A listing of Leonine
editions may be found at http://leonina.nerim.net/?Opera)
Aquinas Thomas (1912–1936) The Summa theologica (trans: the Fathers
of the English Dominican Province), 2nd rev. edn, 22 vols. Burns,
Oates & Washbourne, London (repr. 5 vols, Christian Classics, West-
minster, 1981)
Aquinas Thomas (1952–1954) Truth (Quaestiones disputatae De
veritate), 3 vols (trans: Mulligan RW, McGlynn JV, Schmidt RW).
Henry Regnery, Chicago
Aquinas Thomas (1964) Commentary on Aristotle’s Nicomachean ethics
(Sententia Libri Ethicorum), 2 vols (trans: Litzinger CI). University
of Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame
Aquinas Thomas (1975) Summa contra gentiles (trans: Pegis AC et al).
University of Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame
Aquinas Thomas (1993) On there being only one intellect (De unitate
intellectus contra Averroistas) (trans: McInerny R). Aquinas against
the Averroists. Purdue University Press, West Lafayette
Aquinas Thomas (1994) Commentary on Aristotle’s De Anima (Sententia
Libri De anima) (trans: Foster K, Humphries S, intro: McInerny R).
Dumb Ox Books, Notre Dame
Aquinas Thomas (1995) Commentary on Aristotle’s Metaphysics (Sen-
tentia super Metaphysicam) (trans and intro: Rowan JP, preface:
McInerny R). Dumb Ox Books, Notre Dame
Aquinas Thomas (2007a) Commentary on Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics
(Sententia super Posteriora analytica) (trans, intro, and comment:
Berquist R, preface: McInerny R). Dumb Ox Books, Notre Dame
Aquinas Thomas (2007b) Thomas Aquinas on the principles of nature
(De principiis naturae) (trans: Klima G). In: Klima G, Allhoff F,
Vaidya AJ (eds) Medieval philosophy: essential readings with com-
mentary. Blackwell, Malden
Aquinas Thomas (2007c) Thomas Aquinas on being and essence (De ente
et essentia) (trans and annot: Klima G). In: Klima G, Allhoff F, Vaidya
AJ (eds) Medieval philosophy: essential readings with commentary.
Blackwell, Malden
Aristotle (1984) The complete works of Aristotle: the revised Oxford
translation, 2 vols, ed. Barnes J. Bollingen Series. Princeton Univer-
sity Press, Princeton
Henry of Ghent et al (1963) Condemnation of 219 propositions. In:
Lerner
R,
Mahdi
M
(eds)
Medieval
political
philosophy:
a sourcebook (trans: Fortin EL, O’Neill PD). Free Press, New York
Maimonides Moses (1995) The guide of the perplexed (an abridged
edition with intro and comment: Guttmann J, trans from the Arabic
by Rabin C, new intro: Frank DH). Hackett, Indianapolis
Secondary Sources
Ashworth J (1991) Signiﬁcation and modes of signifying in thirteenth-
century logic: a preface to Aquinas on analogy. Mediev Philos Theol
1:39–67
Ashworth J (1992) Analogy and equivocation in thirteenth-century logic:
Aquinas in context. Mediev Stud 54:94–135
Coppleston FC (1955) Aquinas. Penguin Pelican, Baltimore
Davies B (ed) (2002) Thomas Aquinas: contemporary philosophical
perspectives. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Davies B (2003) Aquinas. Continuum, London
Gilson E (1994) The Christian philosophy of St. Thomas Aquinas (trans:
Shook LK). University of Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame
Jordan MD (1992) The alleged Aristotelianism of Thomas Aquinas.
Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto
Kretzmann N (1997) The metaphysics of theism: Aquinas’s natural the-
ology in Summa contra gentiles I. Clarendon, Oxford
Kretzmann N (1999) The metaphysics of creation: Aquinas’s natural
theology in Summa contra gentiles II. Clarendon, Oxford
Kretzmann N (2000) The metaphysics of providence: Aquinas’s natural
theology in Summa contra gentiles III. Mediev Philos Theol
9(2):3–183
Kretzmann N, Stump E (eds) (1993) The Cambridge companion to
Aquinas. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
McInerny R (2003) Praeambula Fidei: Thomism and the God of the
philosophers. The Catholic University of America Press, Washington
McInerny R (2004) Aquinas. Polity Press, Cambridge
Shanley B (2002) The Thomist tradition. Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht
Shanley B (trans and comment), Pasnau R (intro) (2006) The treatise on
the divine nature: Summa Theologiae I 1–13. Hackett, Indianapolis
Stump E (2003) Aquinas. Routledge, New York
1286 T
Thomas Aquinas

Torrell J-P (1996) Saint Thomas Aquinas, vol 1: The person and his work
(trans: Royal R). The Catholic University of America Press,
Washington
Torrell J-P (2003) Saint Thomas Aquinas, vol 2: Spiritual master (trans:
Royal R). The Catholic University of America Press, Washington
Weisheipl JA (1974) Thomas D’Aquino: his life, thought and work. The
Catholic University of America Press, Washington
Wippel J (2000) The metaphysical thought of Thomas Aquinas. Mono-
graphs of the Society for Medieval and Renaissance Philosophy 1.
The Catholic University of America Press, Washington
Thomas Aquinas, Political
Thought
HOLLY HAMILTON-BLEAKLEY
Brampton
UK
Abstract
Thomas Aquinas (1224/1225–1274) is considered to be
one of the greatest thinkers in the history of philosophy,
and is most famous for his attempts to interpret and
expound Aristotelian philosophy within a Christian
framework. His political philosophy thoroughly reﬂects
this Christian Aristotelianism, where man has an end
designated by God, operating through nature, and the
ultimate purpose of political institutions is to enable
man to reach this end. Breaking with the traditional
Augustinian view of political institutions as a result of
man’s sinfulness, Aquinas argued that man was by nature
a political animal, both because he had natural impulses to
gather with others of his kind and discuss political con-
cepts such as justice and right, and because political insti-
tutions could best create the conditions that man needed
to reach his end of a life of virtue. Because politics is vested
with the purpose of man’s moral development, political
freedom for Aquinas therefore becomes associated with
the regime which leads man to his own good – that is, to
a life of rational, virtuous action.
Thomas Aquinas (1224/1225–1274) was an Italian theo-
logian and philosopher, and is regarded not only as the
most famous ﬁgure in medieval thought, but also as one of
the greatest philosophers of all time. He lived and worked
at a turning point in the history of philosophy, when the
Aristotelian corpus became available to the Latin west.
Under his teacher, Albert the Great, Aquinas was among
the ﬁrst in his generation to be thoroughly schooled in
Aristotelian philosophy. Although Aristotle’s philosophy
was regarded as suspect by many at the time, Aquinas
made it his life’s ambition to integrate Aristotelian philos-
ophy into Christian theology. This article will discuss
Aquinas’ political thought, which has its deepest inspira-
tion and orientation in Aristotle, most especially in the
way in which it asserts political existence as essential for
enabling man to access the goods necessary for him to live
a fully human life: namely, virtue and freedom.
Aquinas was born in 1224 or 1225, near Naples. After
beginning his studies in Naples in the liberal arts in 1239,
he was sent by the Dominican Order to study theology at
the University of Paris, arriving there in 1245. Here he met
Albert the Great, who was passionate about absorbing the
new Aristotelian corpus. He followed Albert to Germany,
and studied under him from 1248 to 1252. Aquinas
returned to Paris in 1252 and completed his commentary
on the Sentences of Peter Lombard in 1256, after which he
held one of two Dominican chairs in theology. His most
important works were accomplished later in his life: from
1265 to 1270, he wrote the Prima pars and Prima secundae
of his Summa theologiae, and in the last ﬁve years of his life
he wrote most of his Aristotelian commentaries, as well as
the Secunda secundae and (the unﬁnished) Tertia pars of
the Summa. The discussion here of Aquinas’ political
thought draws from his commentaries on Aristotle’s
Nicomachean Ethics (Sententia libri ethicorum, referred to
as SLE) and Politics (Sententia libri politicorum, referred to
as SLP), his treatment of law and the virtues in the Summa
theologica (ST), and his De regimine principum (DRP),
a short work dedicated to the King of Cyprus written in
the late 1260s.
Aquinas’ political thought has to be approached via
his interpretation of Aristotle’s political thought, but per-
haps more especially, Aristotle’s moral thought. First of all,
the Aristotelian corpus, speciﬁcally the Nicomachean Ethics
and the Politics, provided a new language with which
philosophers could discuss political concepts. In his Poli-
tics, Aristotle had asserted that man was by nature
a political animal. Using William of Moerberke’s Latin
translation of the Politics, Aquinas made the term animal
sociale et politicum, or animal civile central to his political
thought as a description of what man was by nature (SLP,
Book I, ch. 1/b, lines 69–154).
Following Aristotle, Aquinas argued that it was natural
for man, more than for any other animal, to live sociably
with others of his kind. This is because man has physical,
intellectual, and moral needs which can only be ﬁlled
within a social context (DRP, p. 3). For other animals,
nature has equipped them with the physical attributes
necessary for protection and the enhancement of their
Thomas Aquinas, Political Thought T
1287
T

survival, such as a natural coat of hair, very sharp teeth,
horns, claws, etc. Man, on the other hand, has reason, by
which he can plan how to go about reaching both his
physical and spiritual ends. Yet, man’s individual reason
cannot provide him with all the guidance he needs when
one considers all that is necessary for human life. Thus,
nature dictates that man live in association with other men
so that he can beneﬁt from the knowledge and resources of
a community. Furthermore, man has the power of speech,
which demonstrates not only his need to communicate
with others, but also his ability to discuss and deliberate
with others about what is right and wrong, just and unjust.
This is a further indication of not only his social nature,
but of his political nature. Social nature and political
nature for Aquinas are inextricably linked, for there can-
not be society without a presiding political authority to
ensure the common good and unify the community.
Adopting the language, and therefore the concept of
man as political by nature, was enough to make a decisive
break with the prevailing Augustinian idea of political
institutions as a result of man’s sinful nature. That man
was by nature a ‘‘social’’ being was a concept already ﬁrmly
entrenched in the Latin west, due to the ideas of both
Cicero and the Church fathers, especially Augustine. How-
ever, for Augustine, the archetypal natural society of man
was the community of saints in heaven, where men were
equals and no man had dominion over another; this,
indeed, would have been the organization of man in the
state of innocence (Markus 1970:223). Political institu-
tions, by contrast, because they were by deﬁnition coer-
cive, were characterized by the dominion of man over
man, in the same way that a master has dominion over
his slaves. They came into being only in the post-lapsarian
world of sin.
For Aquinas, political institutions are indeed by deﬁ-
nition coercive, and they are characterized by the domin-
ion of man over man. However, this dominion is not that
of master and slave, but one of a master over free men,
where the master rules the men in a way that beneﬁts their
own ends, rather than rule them for the master’s own
beneﬁt, as a slave is ruled (ST, 1a, qu. 96, art. 4). Further-
more, this dominion would have existed in the state of
innocence, for two reasons. First, because in that state, as
now, man would have lived a social existence, and, as we
have seen, there can be no social life unless there is
a political authority to enable the community to remain
intact. Second, because in that state, as now, there would
have been a natural inequality among men. Men were free
agents in the state of innocence; thus, some would have
advanced further than others in righteousness. These men,
then, should exercise their gifts and be in authority over
the rest, and it is after the order of nature that they do so
(ST, 1a, qu. 96, art. 3). Thus, political institutions, like the
family, are a natural part of our human existence; they
would have existed if there had been no sin.
This begs the question, however, of what it means for
something
to
be
‘‘natural.’’
Aquinas’
challenge
to
Augustine’s notion of politics incorporated an idea of
natural as what would have been compatible with man in
his pre-lapsarian state. While this is part of what Aquinas
understands by ‘‘nature,’’ the essence of his understanding
of what is natural comes from Aristotelian teleology.
Aristotle’s account of teleology is based on the idea
that certain things come-to-be and exist ‘‘by nature.’’
Those things that exist by nature have their own speciﬁc
end, dictated by their form, and they change for the sake of
that end through their natural impulses. The attainment
of their end signiﬁes the completion of their development.
Nature is therefore a cause, and what is ‘‘natural’’ is what-
ever exists in the way that it does because it has an ‘‘innate
impulse’’ to become that way (Miller 1995:37). In this
sense, man is by nature a political animal – and political
institutions are natural – because man has natural
impulses to gather with other humans, and the end toward
which human association impels itself is the political
organization of the city.
Yet, natural impulses in humans are much less deter-
ministic in ensuring the accomplishment of a designated
end than in other natural beings (Salkever 1990:69).
Aquinas argues that the natural impulse to be in society
does not seem to be enough to sustain social existence.
The art of rulership is needed to complete nature by
building upon the natural impulses of individual men to
create a community, and this function is one way in which
the ruler features prominently in Aquinas’ political
thought. Aquinas argues that men, as individuals, pursue
their own interests, and that this behavior is ultimately
destructive of social life, as ‘‘the particular interest and the
common good are not identical’’ (DRP, p. 5). In order
for the city to exist, ‘‘there must be some principle
productive of the good of man.’’ The ruler is this separate
‘‘principle’’ – the formal cause of the city, imposing the
form of the common good upon the matter of individual
men, who have gathered together by natural impulses. He
does this speciﬁcally in his role as lawgiver, as it is through
his laws that he directs men toward the common good.
The ruler’s role as the formal cause of the city is
reinforced as he is compared both to God as the creator
and formal cause of the world, and to the soul as the
formal cause of the body (DRP, p. 69). God’s function as
creator was not only to create things themselves, but also
included
the
‘‘orderly
distribution’’
of
all
things
1288 T
Thomas Aquinas, Political Thought

throughout the universe. By the same token, the soul, as
the actuality of a living thing, is what makes a whole out of
thing’s various parts by ordering those parts in a function
that is above their individual functions. Hence, as the
formal cause of the city, the ruler creates an integral
whole – a unity – out of an array of individual men by
ordering them toward the common good.
In light of comparing the ruler with God and with the
soul, it follows that Aquinas sees that the best way to create
unity in the city is through a government carried out by
one person (DRP, pp 11–13). Although there has been
much discussion about Aquinas’ position on the ‘‘mixed
constitution’’ (see for instance Blythe), which for reasons
of space I cannot discuss here, the point of the matter is
that he believes the best constitution under which man can
live is a monarchy.
Thus, Aquinas sees the city as natural for man because
he has natural impulses toward it, although those impulses
are not enough to sustain it. However, Aquinas considers
the city as natural for man in a further, fundamentally
important way, for what is natural is not only what comes
to be through natural impulse, but also any ‘‘condition’’
necessary for the fulﬁllment of man’s own end given to
him by nature, the attainment of which ensures his com-
plete development as a human being (Hamilton-Bleakley
1999:589).
This end is to attain a character such that one consis-
tently acts according to the dictates of reason – that is, it is
to develop the intellectual and moral virtues. For Aquinas,
to act according to reason is to act in a way that is uniquely
human. Man differs from irrational creatures in that he
is the master, dominus, of what he does (ST, 1a2ae, qu. 1,
art. 2). He is dominus of his actions through a faculty
which includes both his reason and his will – it is rational
desire, a ‘‘deliberate willing.’’ Man is dominus of his actions
when he uses his reason to determine what goal he will
move toward, as well as uses his will to put himself in
motion toward that goal, rather than ‘‘being moved’’ by
something else. In this way, as a rational being he is his
own cause – sui causa est – and thus considered free. The
man who carries out this action unique to humans in the
best way possible is the virtuous man.
However, once again, man is separate from all other
natural beings in that he is much less determined through
impulse to reach his end designated by nature. For
Aquinas, man does have a kind of impulse toward his
end, what he calls a naturalis inclinatio for virtuous action
(ST, 1a2a, qu. 63, art. 1). It is identiﬁed with man’s natural
understanding of general principles of right and wrong
(synderesis), as well as with man’s natural appetite for
the good – which is a general, universal tendency toward
the good – both of which are the basis of Aquinas’ natu-
ral law. Yet, this natural inclination is only the begin-
ning (inchoatio), or seeds (seminalia) of virtue – what
Aquinas calls ‘‘natural’’ virtue (SLE, vol. 2, Book 6, ch. 11,
lines 20–40). In order for man to attain true virtue – that
is, ‘‘moral’’ virtue – and thus reach his end, he must
develop the virtue of prudence, or practical wisdom,
which is the ability to understand how to apply general
moral principles of reason in a particular situation (ST,
2a2ae, qu. 47, art. 3). The most important of all the
practical virtues, prudence is the quality whereby a man
rules himself toward the good. Prudence will ensure that
man acts rightly on a consistent basis, and this repeated
right action will develop his natural inclinations into vir-
tuous habits in his character.
However, there is a reciprocal relationship between
prudence and moral virtue: prudence guides the appetite
toward the moral virtues, but a man needs properly habit-
uated appetites in order for prudence to function properly
(ST, 1a2ae, qu. 58, arts. 4 and 5). Hence, man needs an
external guide to help him develop both his prudence and
his moral virtue, and this guide comes from the law issued
by political institutions (ST, 1a2ae, qu. 95, art. 1). For
Aquinas, the ruler is to ensure that the actions of his
subjects are good, by enacting laws and attaching rewards
and punishments which ‘‘dissuade men from evildoing’’
and ‘‘induce them to do good’’ (DRP, p. 83). The repeated
right action demanded by the law forms virtuous habits in
the subject’s appetites, and the law is a model of reason for
the subject to emulate as he develops his prudence. In this
way, political rule is natural to man, because it creates
conditions necessary for the fulﬁllment of human nature.
Not only is the city the place where the virtues are
developed, it is also the place where they are exercised to
their fullest extent, by both ruler and subject, and in this
way the city is, again, essential to a well-lived human life.
Prudence and justice are singled out by Aquinas as the
most important civic virtues for the ruler and the subject.
As we have seen, prudence in general is the virtue whereby
man rules and commands himself toward the good. Polit-
ical rulership, however, is prudence on a larger scale, in
that it is concerned with actions that will bring about the
common good, not just the good of the individual. Fur-
thermore, if prudence in the individual is the ability to act
virtuously in a particular situation, prudence on a larger
scale must include the ability to guide members of the
community, through law, in their actions, so that they
might develop into virtuous human beings. For Aquinas,
then, the prudence possessed by the ruler, or what he calls
regnative or legislative prudence, is the most perfect spe-
cies of prudence (ST, 2a2ae, qu. 50, art. 1).
Thomas Aquinas, Political Thought T
1289
T

The moral virtue of justice, too, most properly belongs
to the ruler (ST, 2a2ae, qu. 58, art. 6). Particular justice
orders one rightly toward the good of another individual
person. But general or legal justice has as its object the
common good, and it directs the activity of all the other
moral virtues beyond their own proper ends by setting
them toward the further end of the common good. In this
sense it is the sovereign moral virtue, essentially distinct
from the rest of the moral virtues – although, as a moral
virtue it still needs the direction of prudence to function
properly. The ruler exercises his legal justice (together with
his legislative prudence) by enacting laws which enable his
subjects to see beyond their own ends and act for purpose
of the common good.
His laws do more than this, however: they allow his
subjects to ‘‘develop the motivation’’ to act for the com-
mon good. In this way, his laws enable his subjects to
develop ‘‘and exercise’’ a kind of legal justice as well,
where they experience the attachment to the common
good which is morally perfecting (Weithman 1992:371).
Aquinas does not see the act of obeying the law as one
where the subject is merely forced – or moved upon – to
behave in a certain way. Instead, virtue is exercised
through political obedience: subjects who obey the law
willingly have within themselves a righteousness which
allows them to ‘‘move themselves’’ toward the common
good (ST, 2a2ae, qu. 50, art. 2). As we saw earlier, moving
oneself toward a particular end is the mark of a rational,
and therefore virtuous man. Moving oneself in obeying
the law is the mark of a man who possesses not only a kind
of legal justice, but also the virtue of political prudence –
the species of prudence speciﬁc to subjects who rule and
direct themselves toward the common good. Thus, the
laws of the city provide the unique circumstances neces-
sary for subjects to live a fully virtuous life.
Having discussed the two ways in which Aquinas sees
political rule as natural to man – because it is a result of
natural impulse, and because it is necessary for the fulﬁll-
ment of human nature – we must recall that the ‘‘natural-
ness’’ of political rule is dependent upon it’s ‘‘rightness.’’
Despotic or tyrannical rule, akin to the dominion a master
has over a slave, is not natural. Indeed, we have seen that
Aquinas uses freedom as a characteristic which distin-
guishes the dominion natural to man from that which is
not. We have also seen that Aquinas deﬁnes the free man as
he who is ruled and directed toward his own proper good.
As man’s proper good is to become virtuous, subjects can
be free only if they are asked to obey laws which encourage
virtuous action.
Crucially, then, for Aquinas freedom can only be accom-
plished in subjection – in subjection to reason, that is, to law
(Hamilton-Bleakley 1999:599). Freedom for the individual
is not deﬁned as the absence of natural impulse, or as the
absence oflaw – spaceswhere neither nature nor the state has
a claim – but as the pursuing and embracing of the end
which nature has speciﬁcally given to man. Aquinas’ idea of
freedom is the ability to use and act in accordance with one’s
reason. Because Aquinas sees the government which guides
men according to their own good as the government ﬁtting
for free men, he therefore deﬁnes political freedom within
the framework of his distinctive notion of individual free-
dom. If man is free only when he is living avirtuous life, then
it is clear that freedom is found with coercive, but proper,
rule – that is, rational law, backed by coercive sanction. Men
must be in the city to be fully human and so to be truly free.
In linking political society – and political freedom – so
closely with man’s moral attainment, Aquinas differs not
only from the Augustinian view of the state as unable to
foster any meaningful development or exercise of virtue,
but also from the position of contemporary liberalism that
governments can be neutral with ‘‘regard to nearly all
human goods, normative goals and virtues.’’ The ubiquity
of this doctrine may make Aquinas’ political ‘‘perfection-
ism’’difﬁcult to countenance today. Yet, this perfectionism
comes out of a magisterial attempt to link man’s deepest
needs and impulses with his highest goals, and brings with
it an honesty about what conditions man needs if he is to
ﬂourish. Man’s end is a normative one, and political soci-
ety, rather than ignoring this fact, must instead embrace it,
and accept responsibility for its achievement.
See also: ▶Heresy ▶Natural Law ▶Natural Rights
▶Political Aristotelianism ▶Thomas Aquinas
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Aquinas Thomas (1948) De regimine principum. In: D’Entreves AP (ed),
Dawson JG (trans) Aquinas: selected political writings. Basil
Blackwell, Oxford
Aquinas Thomas (1964–1980) In: Gilby T et al (eds and trans) Summa
theologiae, 61 vols. Blackfriars, New York/London
Aquinas Thomas (1969) Sententia libri ethicrum. In: Opera omnia iussu
Leonis XIII P. M. edita cura et studio Fratrum Praedicatorum, Tomus
XL VII, vols 1and 2. Ad Sanctae Sabinae, Rome
Aquinas Thomas (1971) Sententia libri politicorum. In: Opera omnia
iussu Leonis XIII P. M. edita cura et studio Fratrum Praedicatorum,
Tomus XL VIII. Ad Sanctae Sabinae, Rome
Secondary Sources
Blythe JM (1986) The mixed constitution and the distinction between
regal and political power in the work of Thomas Aquinas. J Hist Ideas
47:54–65
Finnis J (1998) Aquinas. Moral, political and legal theory. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Oxford
1290 T
Thomas Aquinas, Political Thought

Hamilton-Bleakley H (1999) The art of ruling in Aquinas’s De regimine
principum. Hist Polit Thought 20:575–603
Kempshall MS (1999) The common good in late medieval political
thought. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Keys MM (2006) Aquinas, Aristotle and the promise of the common
good. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Markus RA (1970) Saeculum: history and society in the theology of St.
Augustine. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Miller F (1995) Nature, justice and rights in Aristotle’s politics. Oxford
University Press, Oxford
Salkever S (1990) Finding the mean. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Weithman PJ (1992) Augustine and Aquinas on original sin and the
function of political authority. J Hist Philos 30:353–376
Thomas Bradwardine
STEPHEN E. LAHEY
Department of Classics and Religious Studies
University of Nebraska
Lincoln, NE
USA
Abstract
Thomas Bradwardine (c. 1300–1349), Merton theologian
and Archbishop of Canterbury, famous both for his inno-
vative treatises on physics and mathematics and for his
vigorous attack on what he perceived as a revival of Pela-
gianism in Ockham’s thought regarding divine foreknowl-
edge and future contingents. Bradwardine was one of the
‘‘Calculators’’ of Merton College, philosophers who
emphasized the need to incorporate mathematically pre-
cise reasoning into problems associated with Aristotelian
physics. His treatment of the relation of variation in the
velocities of moving objects to variation in the force and
resistance affecting velocity led him to postulate the need
for geometric, rather than arithmetic, ratios in under-
standing kinematics, which would eventually develop
into logarithmic mathematics. Bradwardine became inter-
ested in formal theology when investigating Ockham’s
account of how God knows created actions as contingen-
cies. His De causa Dei is a compendious refutation of every
imaginable species of reasoning that denies God certain,
necessary knowledge of all created action, representing the
high watermark of Augustinian determinism in pre-
Reformation western theology. Unless further manuscript
discoveries are made, particularly of his commentary on
the Sentences, it is unlikely that Bradwardine’s theological
position can be connected to his earlier mathematically
oriented thinking. Bradwardine was a member of the
inﬂuential circle of thinkers associated with the Bishop
Richard de Bury of Durham, and was closely associated
with Edward III; Black Death limited the duration of his
occupation of the see of Canterbury to little more than
a month.
Thomas Bradwardine (c. 1300–1349) began his career as
a theologian and natural philosopher at Merton college
in the 1320s, and began service to Edward III in 1339 as
royal chaplain. He was elected Archbishop of Canterbury
in August, 1348, but because the election had bypassed
Edward’s permission, he had to stand aside and allow John
Ufford to occupy the see at Canterbury. When Ufford died
later that year, Bradwardine was elected again, and Edward
appears to have allowed his chaplain to become Arch-
bishop in July of 1349. Black Death had been devastating
English society for several months, and it claimed
Bradwardine only 38 days after his accession. Despite the
fact that he likely had left Oxford toward the end of the
1330s, the immediate effects of his presence were felt
well into the 1360s and 1370s, when Wyclif was active.
Bradwardine was a member of the circle of Richard de
Bury, Bishop of Durham, which was an inﬂuential group
of scholars including Walter Burley, Richard Fitzralph,
Robert Holcot, Walter Chatton, and Richard Kilvington.
Bradwardine’s extant works are generally divided into
two distinct groups: the mathematical/physical treatises
associated with his time at Merton college, and two theo-
logical works concerning the problem of God’s eternal
knowledge andhuman freedom. The formergroup includes
the treatises associated with the Geometria speculativa,
Arithmetica speculativa (a textbook based on Boethius’
Arithmetica), De continuo (a refutation of spatiotemporal
atomism), Ars memorativa, Insolubilia, De fallaciis, and
two sets of Quaestiones regarding problems in physics.
The latter group includes De futuris contingentibus and
De causa Dei contra Pelagium, as well as Sermo Epinicius,
preached before Edward III following the battle of Nevill’s
Cross in 1346. His commentary on the Sentences survives
in fragmentary form, as yet unpublished. A number of
other works associated with Bradwardine remain in man-
uscript, awaiting further analysis.
Mathematics and Physics
‘‘Mathematics,’’ Bradwardine wrote, ‘‘is the revelatrix of
truth, has brought to life every hidden secret, and carries
the key to all subtle letters.’’ Bradwardine’s Geometria
speculativa shows his fascination with the foundations of
geometric and mathematical theory, containing treatises
on stellated polygons, isoperimetric ﬁgures, and solid
geometry, each development of medieval commentaries
on ancient mathematics, and his De proportionibus,
his most important contribution to medieval scientiﬁc
Thomas Bradwardine T
1291
T

reasoning. De proportionibus attempts to improve Aristo-
telian mechanics by addressing mathematical inconsis-
tencies that had begun to trouble medieval natural
philosophers. The Mertonians William Heytesbury,
Richard Swineshead, and John Dumbleton would make
use of Bradwardine’s study of the relations of quantities
in their own speculative physics, as would Galileo in the
seventeenth century. Particularly signiﬁcant in the trea-
tise is Bradwardine’s attempt to explain the relation of
variation in the velocities of a moving thing to variation
in the forces and resistances that affect velocity. The
traditional understanding in Aristotelian physics relied
on the axiom that motion occurs only when the motive
force is greater than the resistance offered, so that veloc-
ity is explained as proportionate to the ratio of force to
resistance. Bradwardine reasoned that if we begin with
a motion in which the force is greater than the resistance,
and if we continually double the resistance while holding
the force constant, at some point the resistance will be
greater than the force. The problem lies in the axiom of
velocity being proportionate to the ratio of force to
resistance; as the velocity decreases in proportion to the
increase of resistance, there will still be a velocity assign-
able at the point that resistance is greater than force. This
would mean there would be a measurable, albeit tiny,
velocity
assignable
to
a
stationary
object.
Better,
Bradwardine argued, to recognize that velocities vary
arithmetically, while the ratios of force to resistance
vary geometrically. The immediate signiﬁcance of this
realization of the need for geometric ratios in measuring
velocity was the need for a more advanced mathematics
than had been applied in kinematics. It had been thought
that calculations based on the direct proportionality of
quantities would serve, but Bradwardine’s discovery
demanded a return to ancient mathematics, where he
recognized the basis for logarithmic reasoning. It quickly
became apparent that the use of Bradwardine’s logarithmic
function in expressing the quantity deﬁned by the relation
of two other quantities was of great value not only in
kinematics, but in a wide range of questions regarding
quantitative and qualitative change. The formal method
of logarithms would not appear until John Napier’s work
in 1614 provided the mathematical foundation for their
uniform and widespread application in calculation.
De causa Dei
William Ockham had argued that statements of the form
‘‘X will occur at Time N’’ have a truth value contingent
upon what will happen in the future, so knowing them
must be a different sort of knowledge than knowing
statements about the present or the past, for which the
truth value is already clear. Since this is a natural fact about
such future contingent statements, God’s knowledge, too,
must be that ‘‘X will occur at Time N’’ is true contingent
upon X’s occurrence. The difference between our fallible
and uncertain knowing and God’s infallible and perfect
knowledge is that, while for us knowing X or knowing not
X involves reasoned recognition of the opposition of
X and not X, and the steps involved in resolving which
of the two opposites are the case, for God, knowing X or
knowing not X entails no reasoned recognition of the
opposition, and no reasoned resolution of whether X or
not X is the case. Ockham’s resolution of the puzzle was
not necessarily a departure from earlier thinkers like
Grosseteste or Peter Lombard, but his nuanced treatment
of the relation of God’s eternal knowledge and the contin-
gency of created action suggested that we might be able to
earn salvation on our own merit, without grace. In short,
it was possible to interpret Ockham’s approach as
countenancing elements of Pelagianism. Bradwardine
began to address the problem in the 1320s, in his Sentence
commentary,
and
in
De
futuris
contingentibus.
Bradwardine’s interest in the subject developed, and after
he had become a member of Bury’s circle, he compiled De
causa Dei, a polemic refutation of ‘‘the Pelagians.’’ This
massive work is not constructed along a recognizably scho-
lastic model, but appears instead to be a Summa
encompassing all that Bradwardine understood to be
involved in explaining grace, merit, human salvation, and
God’s knowing and willing. Each topic Bradwardine
addresses ﬁnds its way back to God’s unmediated causal
inﬂuence over creation. At the heart of Bradwardine’s the-
ology is the fundamental truth that nothing occurs that is
not willed by God. On the face of it, this seems so deter-
ministic as to be fatalist. If all that happens is in accord with
God’s will, then the revealed certainty that some will be
damned and others saved amounts to double predestina-
tion. Bradwardine’s position was not so extreme. Even if
God is co-agent in every created action, including the evil
that men do, He is neither responsible for evil nor is His
foreknowledge the cause of man’s damnation.
Bradwardine’s position that God is co-agent in all
human actions rules out Pelagianism, but it also demands
an account of how we, not God, are responsible for evil.
This is particularly a problem if (a) God necessarily knows
all that will occur in creation, (b) necessarily, all that God
knows will occur, will occur, and (c) if God’s will and
knowing are identical, then if God knows that a thing will
occur, God necessarily wills that it occur. Bradwardine felt
that necessitas consequentis, or absolute necessity, is
1292 T
Thomas Bradwardine

commensurate with God’s foreknowledge without leading
to a fatalistic determinism. Talk of God knowing a thing
before it happens, or of a thing being necessary because God
knows it ahead of time, is confused. God is eternal, and
eternality is not a mode in which ‘‘before’’ or ‘‘ahead of
time’’ applies. Hence, if God eternally wills that man act
freely in time, the freedom of human action is not limited
by the necessity of the divine willing. Bradwardine balances
God’s eternal foreknowledge and human freedom by
distinguishing between kinds of antecedent necessity.
Bradwardine argues that some antecedent necessity is
wholly absolute, but some is relative. Relative antecedent
necessity can describe the secondary cause of an event, or it
can describe the ﬁrst cause. Peter may be free to choose to
sin through an antecedent necessity relative by virtue of his
being a member of the human species (a secondary cause of
Peter’s existence), or by virtue of God’s willing (the primary
cause of all created act). Peter’s choice may be partially
determined by being a member of the human species, but
his biological form does not compel his choice. God’s will is
compulsory by virtue of its being the sufﬁcient cause of
every
effect
in
creation,
including
human
willing.
Bradwardine believes he has preserved God’s eternal fore-
knowledge by making relative antecedent necessity com-
mensurate with necessitas consequentis. The statement ‘‘If
God knows that man would sin, then man’s sinning is
necessary’’ is true, but escapes fatalism by decreeing that
man’s sinning is free by virtue of God’s willing it to be so.
Relating the two sets of Bradwardine’s bodies of work
has been a matter of disagreement. Until recently, the theo-
logically oriented analysis of De causa Dei has been under-
stood to be a signiﬁcant departure from Bradwardine’s
earlier work catalyzed by personal epiphany, an approach
that allows the reader the freedom to disregard the trea-
tises on mathematics and kinematics. Dolnikowski has
argued that at least one commonality, namely time, unites
the two bodies of work. By understanding the medium of
time as the focus of his study of velocity and the mathe-
matics by which we measure movement through it, and
applying it to the relation of extratemporal divine under-
standing of events occurring within it, she argues, we are
much better able to understand the continuity of
Bradwardine’s philosophical theology.
See also: ▶Future Contingents ▶Insolubles ▶John
Dumbleton ▶Modal Theories and Modal Logic ▶Oxford
Calculators ▶Richard Fitzralph ▶Richard Kilvington
▶Richard Swineshead ▶Robert Holcot ▶Walter Burley
▶Walter Chatton ▶William Heytesbury ▶William of
Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Genest Jean-Franc¸ois (ed) (1979) Le De futuris contingentibus de Thomas
Bradwardine. Recherches Augustiniennes 14:249–336
Gillmeister H (ed) (1983) An intriguing fourteenth-century document:
Thomas Bradwardine’s De arte memorativa. Archiv fu¨r das Studium
der neueren Sprachen und Literaturen 220:111–114
Green-Pedersen N-J (ed) (1982) Bradwardine (?) on Ockham’s doctrine
of consequences: an edition. Cahiers de l’Institute de moyen age grec
et latin 42:85–150
Lamar Crosby H (ed) (1955) Thomas of Bradwardine: his Tractatus de
Proportionibus: its signiﬁcance for the development of mathematical
physics. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison
Lauge Olaf Nielsen (ed) (1982) Thomas Bradwardine’s treatise on ‘incipit’
and ‘desinit’: edition and introduction. Cahiers de l’Institute du
Moyen Age Grec et Latin 42:1–83
Molland AG (ed) (1989) Thomas Bradwardine, Geometria speculativa.
Steiner, Stuttgart
Murdoch John (1957) Geometry and the continuum in the fourteenth
century: a philosophical analysis of Thomas Bradwardine’s ‘Tractatus
de Continuo’. PhD dissertation, University of Wisconsin
Thomas of Bradwardine (1618) In: Saville H (ed) De causa Dei contra
Pelagium et de virtute causarum a suos Mertonenses libri tres. Ex
ofﬁcina Nortoniana, apud Ioannem Billivm, London
Secondary Sources
Busard HLL (1998) Zwei mittelalterliche Texte zur theoretischen
Mathematik: die ‘Arithmetica speculativa’ von Thomas Bradwardine
und die ‘Theorica numerorum’ von Wigandus Durnheimer. Arch
Hist Exact Sci 53(2):97–124
Dolnikowski EW (1995) Thomas Bradwardine: a view of time and a vision
of eternity in fourteenth-century thought. Brill, Leiden
Genest J-F (1992) Pre´de´termination et Liberte´ Cre´e´e a` Oxford au XIVe
Sie`cle: Buckingham contre Bradwardine. Vrin, Paris
Genest J-F (2002) Les Premiers E´crits The´ologiques de Bradwardine:
Textes Ine´dits et De´couvertes Re´centes. In: Evans GR (ed) Medieval
commentaries on the sentences of Peter Lombard. Brill, Leiden, pp
395–421
Leff G (1957) Bradwardine and the Pelagians. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge
Molland AG (1978) An examination of Bradwardine’s ‘Geometry’. Arch
Hist Exact Sci 19(2):113–175
Molland AG (1996) Addressing ancient authority: Thomas Bradwardine
and Prisca Sapientia. Ann Sci 53:213–233
Oberman H (1957) Archbishop Thomas Bradwardine: a fourteenth cen-
tury Augustinian. Kemink & Zoon, Utrecht
Spade PV (1988) Insolubilia and Bradwardine’s theory of signiﬁcation in
his lies, language and logic in the late middle ages. Variorum, Lon-
don, pp 115–134
Sylla ED (2007) The origin and fate of Thomas Bradwardine’s De
proportionibus velocitatum in motibus in relation to the history of
mathematics. In: Laird WR, Roux S (eds) Mechanics and natural
philosophy before the scientiﬁc revolution. Springer, Dordrecht, pp
67–119
Tachau K (1988) Vision and certitude in the age of Ockham: optics,
epistemology and the foundation of semantics. Brill, Leiden
Takahashi K (1984) The mathematical foundations of Bradwardine’s rule.
Hist Sci 26:19–38
Thomas Bradwardine T
1293
T

Thomas of Sutton
GYULA KLIMA
Department of Philosophy
Fordham University
New York, NY
USA
Abstract
Thomas of Sutton (Thomas Anglicus) O.P. (c. 1250–1315)
was an early defender of Aquinas’ doctrine at Oxford,
where he spent most of his career engaged in debates
with the greatest opponents of Aquinas’ tenets, such as
Duns Scotus and Henry of Ghent.
Thomas of Sutton, an Oxford Dominican around the turn
of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, was one of the
earliest defenders of Aquinas’ doctrine, when it was still
regarded as innovative and highly controversial.
The earliest deﬁnite information we have about his life
is that he was ordained deacon at Blythe (York) in 1274,
from which we may guess that he was born around 1250.
He became a friar at the Oxford convent by 1282, before
which he had probably been a fellow of Merton College. It
was also before entering the order that he wrote two short
treatises defending the Thomistic position of the unity of
substantial forms: Contra pluralitatem formarum and De
productione formae substantialis. At Oxford, he was in
close contact with two fellow Dominicans, Richard
Knapwell and William Hothum, who were also busy
defending Thomistic positions. Sutton incepted as master
sometime between 1291 and 1300, and lectured at Oxford
till his death after 1315.
Sutton’s most signiﬁcant works are his Quaestiones
ordinariae and four sets of Quodlibeta, both existing in
modern critical editions. But his smaller works were also
inﬂuential and presented such authentic defenses of
Aquinas’ positions that some of them were attributed to
Aquinas himself. However, all this is not to say that
Sutton’s work lacks originality. But his originality does
not lie in proposing new, innovative positions. Rather,
the most valuable aspect of his contribution is his ability
to reduce disagreements over conclusions to subtle differ-
ences of interpretation of an apparently shared, common
stock of principles, yielding a more profound understand-
ing of these principles, as well as of the Thomistic posi-
tions themselves. Perhaps, this is the most transparent in
Sutton’s ability to reduce the differences over the issue of
the
plurality
of
substantial
forms
to
different
interpretations of metaphysical principles he shares with
his opponent, Henry of Ghent, concerning the relation-
ships between essence and existence in creatures, and the
idea of creaturely participation in divine being. But similar
observations would apply to Sutton’s rejection of both
Henry’s and Scotus’ conception of individuation, in
favor of a Thomistic position, identifying the principle of
individuation with designated matter, or to his subtle
arguments concerning the central Thomistic thesis of the
real distinction between the essence and existence of crea-
tures, and the identity thereof in God.
See
also:
▶Henry of
Ghent
▶John
Duns
Scotus
▶Thomas Aquinas ▶Thomism
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Przezdziecki Joseph J (ed) (1955) Selected questions from the writings of
Thomas of Sutton. In: O’Donnell RJ (ed) Nine medieval thinkers.
A collection of hitherto unedited texts (Studies and texts 1). Pontif-
ical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto, pp 309–378
Thomas of Sutton (1969) In: Schmaus M unter Mitarbeit von Gonza´lez-
Haba M (eds) Quodlibeta. Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften,
Mu¨nchen
Thomas of Sutton (1970) Tractatus de esse et essentia. In: Sen´ko W (ed)
Trzy studia nad spus´cizna˛ i pogla˛dami Tomasza Suttona dotycza˛cymi
problemu istoty i istinenia. Studia Mediewistyczne 11:111–280
Thomas of Sutton (1977) In: Schneider J (ed) Quaestiones ordinariae.
Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Mu¨nchen
Thomas of Sutton (1978) In: Schneider J (ed) Contra quodlibet loannis
Duns Scoti. Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Mu¨nchen
Thomas of Sutton (1979) In: Wlodek S (ed) De productione formae
substantialis. Archives d’histoire doctrinale et litte´raire du Moyen
Aˆ ge 46:127–176
Thomas of Sutton (1980) De pluralitate formarum. In: S. Thomae
Aquinatis
Opera
omnia.
Frommann-Holzboog,
Stuttgart-Bad
Cannstatt
Secondary Sources
Klima G (2001) Thomas of Sutton on the nature of the intellective soul
and the Thomistic theory of being. In: Aertsen J et al (eds) Nach der
Verurteilung von 1277. Philosophie und Theologie an der Universita¨t
von Paris im letzten Viertel des 13. Jahrhunderts. Studien und Texte,
Miscellanea Mediaevalia 28. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin/New York, pp
436–455
Klima G (2002) Thomas Sutton and Henry of Ghent on the analogy of
being. Proc Soc Mediev Logic Metaphys 2:34–44. http://faculty.
fordham.edu/klima/SMLM/PSMLM2/PSMLM2.pdf
Klima G (2005) Thomas Sutton on individuation. Proc Soc Medieval
Logic Metaphys 5:70–78. http://faculty.fordham.edu/klima/SMLM/
PSMLM5/PSMLM5.pdf
Roensch FJ (1964) Early Thomistic school. The Priority Press, Dubuque,
pp 44–50
Sharp D (1934) Thomas of Sutton O.P., his place in scholasticism and an
account of his psychology. In: Revue Ne´oscolastique de philosophie.
Louvain, Socie´te´ philosophique de Louvain; Universite´ catholique de
Louvain (vol 36, pp 332–354; vol 37, pp 88–104, 219–233)
1294 T
Thomas of Sutton

Thomas of Vio (Cajetan)
BENJAMIN HILL
Department of Philosophy
The University of Western Ontario
London, ON
Canada
Abstract
Thomas Cajetan, also known as Thomas de Vio, was one
of the most signiﬁcant ﬁgures in the Thomistic revival of
the sixteenth century and in the development of Neo-
Thomism in the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
His lasting contributions were as a commentator on
Thomas’ philosophy. He wrote an important commentary
on On Being and Essence as well as the very ﬁrst complete
commentary on the Summa theologica. His commentaries
have routinely been printed in editions of Thomas’ works,
including the Leonine edition, and many Thomists read
and understand them through Cajetan’s prism. Cajetan’s
systematization of Thomas’ conception of analogical
terms (The Analogy of Names) has also proved extremely
inﬂuential, even though scholars now consider it as not
reﬂective of Thomas’ view and even downright confused.
Although Cajetan was a Thomist and his philosophical
reﬂections largely took the form of commentaries on
Thomas and Aristotle, he forwarded a number of novel
and even anti-Thomistic positions. Included among these
are the acceptance of a mitigated Averroism regarding our
knowledge of the personal soul’s immortality, his analysis
of analogical terms, and his understanding of being (esse).
Thomas Cajetan was born as Jacopo Vio in Gaeta in
February 1468. He entered the Dominican order in 1484
and adopted the name Tommaso out of respect for
St. Thomas Aquinas, with whom he believed he had
a special afﬁnity because he was born only 40 km from
Aquinas’ birthplace. He began his studies in 1488, ﬁrst at
Naples and then at Bologna, and then in 1491, he moved
to Padua to complete his Masters in Theology in 1494. In
1493, he began lecturing on Lombard’s Sentences and soon
was asked to ﬁll Padua’s chair of Thomistic metaphysics,
from which Valentino da Camerino had just resigned. At
the time, Padua was a hotbed of an Averroist and natural-
istic brand of Aristotelianism. This was to prove inﬂuen-
tial on Cajetan’s thinking, as will be discussed below.
It was during his year as Padua’s professor of Thomis-
tic metaphysics that Cajetan lectured on Thomas’ On
Being and Essence, which formed the basis for his
important commentary on it (1496). After this, Cajetan
taught at various places in northern Italy, including Pavia
and Milan. During this period of teaching, he composed
a number of commentaries on Aristotle and Porphyry, as
well as the anti-Averroist work The Inﬁnity of the First
Mover (published in his Opuscula omnia in 1506). His
famous The Analogy of Names (1498) also dates from
this period, and it was around this time that he began
working
on
his
commentary on
Thomas’
Summa
theologica (published 1508–1523), the ﬁrst complete com-
mentary ever written.
In 1501, Cajetan was moved to Rome to begin his long
and distinguished career as a Dominican administrator
and Church ofﬁcial. He was, by all accounts, an effective
administrator. He was elected Master General of the
Dominican order in 1508 and held that post for 10 years.
During this period, his intellectual activities turned
toward ethical and ecclesiastical questions. Many believe
that he was largely responsible for the ﬁnal break up of the
conciliar movement and the reassertation of the primacy
of Papal power. Those interested in political and moral
philosophy will ﬁnd his works from this early period,
when he was a Church administrator, most interesting.
He also played a signiﬁcant role in organizing and orches-
trating the Fifth Lateran Council (1512–1517), whose
Apostolici regiminis of the eighth session is famous
among philosophers for causing Pomponazzi much grief
and for being cited by Descartes in the dedicatory letter to
the Sorbonne, included in the ﬁrst edition of the Medita-
tions. Interestingly, he did not agree with the injunction
that all Christian philosophers should teach that the soul is
naturally immortal and refute arguments that it is not. He
cast one of the two votes (out of 130) against this clause in
the council’s pronouncement. During this period, he also
continued working on his commentary on the Summa.
Cajetan was made a cardinal in 1517, and in 1518, he
was dispatched to Germany as the Pope’s legate. He
became embroiled primarily in Pope Leo X’s ﬁght against
Charles V’s ascension as Holy Roman Emperor. But dur-
ing his time in Germany, he was also charged with
confronting Luther. In the fall of 1518, he was to examine
Luther and determine whether the heresy proceedings
against Luther ought to continue. He carefully studied
Luther’s published works and met him face to face in
Augsberg on October 12–14, 1518 to discuss his theolog-
ical positions. He identiﬁed two errors in Luther: one
concerning the sufﬁciency of faith for absolution and the
other concerning the basis for the granting of indulgences.
Luther, however, would not budge and Cajetan had
little choice but to recommend that heresy proceeding
be continued. When he returned to Rome in 1520, he
Thomas of Vio (Cajetan) T
1295
T

was involved in writing the ofﬁcial condemnation of
Luther’s error.
The remainder of Cajetan’s life was dominated by
occasional battles against the Reformation and Biblical
exegesis. Between 1525 and his death in 1534, he wrote
against Zwingli, Luther, Melanchton, and Henry the VII’s
attempts to have his marriage against Catherine of Aragon
annulled. But the majority of his intellectual efforts went
into Biblical exposition. Although largely traditional in
tone and content, he was concerned to avail himself of
the latest fruits of the humanists’ philological and trans-
lational labors in his analyses. He died in Rome in 1534.
The impact of Cajetan’s thought was profound. It
dominated Dominican, and to a large extent Catholic,
thinking throughout the sixteenth and seventeenth centu-
ries. It was quite common for his commentary to be
printed and bound with editions of Thomas’ Summa
(and the same goes for many of Aquinas’ commentaries).
Thus, most of the people studying Thomas in Italy and
northern Europe during the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries read him through a Cajetanian lens. Indeed, it
is said that during the Council of Trent, which established
the Catholic Counter-Reformation, a copy of Thomas’
works always sat on the table – and it is likely that this
copy also contained Cajetan’s commentary. Another indi-
cator of his prominence might be the hostility that non-
Dominicans, like Francisco Sua´rez, showed for his work.
He ranks alongside Durandus as the thinker Sua´rez most
frequently and pointedly targeted in his Metaphysical Dis-
putations. Cajetan’s thought also exerted a signiﬁcant
inﬂuence on the Neo-Thomistic movement of the late
nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The Leonine edition
of Thomas’ works also included his commentaries, for
instance. And again, for the Neo-Thomists, he was not
only a reliable commentator on Aquinas, but also the ﬁrst
and foremost of them.
As a thinker, Cajetan was neither a dogmatist nor
a reactionary. He tended to be conventional, if not some-
what conservative, but he was a sympathetic and thought-
ful thinker who was not afraid to engage and even adopt
new ideas when the arguments required them. As a result,
although he is rightly considered a Thomist, there are
several notable points on which his thoughts differs con-
siderably from Thomas’. Sometimes these differences are
due to expansions or developments of Thomas’ ideas. But
at other times, they are due to rejections and alterations of
Thomas’ ideas. Three such differences are discussed below.
Like Thomas, Cajetan was no Averroist and wrote
extensively against it. Even so, a number of Averroist ideas
did ﬁnd their way into his thought, especially regarding the
immortality of the soul. Renaissance Averroism regarding
the soul involved a nexus of issues. Its core consisted of the
denial of the personal immortality of the soul, but it could
be construed in a number of senses, including ontological,
epistemological, and interpretative ones.
More extreme Averroists defended in an ontological
sense the thesis that the individual soul was not immortal.
This ontological sense of the thesis could manifest in
a variety of ways:
●
That there is only one intellect;
●
That the single, impersonal intellect is immortal;
●
That the intellect is not a substantial form;
●
That the intellect is only a bodily power;
●
That the intellect is naturally mortal;
●
That the intellect is naturally mortal but supernatu-
rally immortal;
●
That the intellect is in some (proper) sense naturally
mortal and in some (improper) sense naturally
immortal;
●
Etc. . .
Given such a variety in the characterization of the ontolog-
ical sense of Averroism, anti-Averroism needed to address
a number of topics. First, the anti-Averroists needed to
defend the plurality of intellective souls. Second, they
needed to defend the immortality of the intellective soul.
They did not need to establish that the intellective soul was
immaterial in order to defend its immortality, although
that was one way to do it. It was considered sufﬁcient to
defend Aristotle’s thesis that the intellect had at least one
power that did not require a corporeal organ. Finally, anti-
Averroists needed to defend the claim that this immortality
of the intellective soul was natural to the soul.
Less extreme Averroists might contend that the thesis
be understood only in an epistemological sense. Thus,
rather than asserting that the personal soul is not immor-
tal, they would be asserting what can be naturally demon-
strated about the soul. For example, these more moderate
Averroists might hold merely:
●
That natural reason demonstrates that there is only
one intellect;
●
That natural reason demonstrates that a single, imper-
sonal and immortal intellect obtains;
●
That natural reason demonstrates that the intellect is
not a substantial form;
●
That natural reason demonstrates that the intellect is
only a bodily power;
●
That natural reason demonstrates that the intellect is
naturally mortal;
●
That natural reason demonstrates that the intellect is
naturally mortal but supernaturally immortal;
1296 T
Thomas of Vio (Cajetan)

●
That natural reason demonstrates that the intellect is
in some (proper) sense naturally mortal and in some
(improper) sense naturally immortal;
●
That it is not demonstrable that there is not only one
intellect;
●
That it is not demonstrable that a single, impersonal
and immortal intellect does not obtain;
●
That it is not demonstrable that the intellect is
a substantial form
●
That is it not demonstrable that the intellect is not only
a bodily power;
●
That it is not demonstrable that the intellect is not
naturally mortal;
●
That it is not demonstrable that the intellect is not
naturally mortal and only supernaturally immortal;
●
That it is not demonstrable that the intellect is in some
(proper)
sense
naturally
mortal
and
in
some
(improper) sense naturally immortal;
●
Etc. . .
The reasons why one might resist asserting any of the
ontological senses of the Averroist thesis even though
natural reason demonstrates them would have been theo-
logical: reason teaches p but faith (or the Church) teaches
not-p, and assent ought to be regulated by faith or the
Church whenever they conﬂict. To counter this more
moderate epistemological version of Averroism, anti-
Averroists needed to show that natural reason does not
demonstrate any of the ontological senses of the Averroist
thesis and show that their opposites are in fact demon-
strable. Thus, we can see the concern in the Fifth Lateran
Council’s Apostolici regiminis that all Christian philoso-
phers (and not only the theologians) prove the demonstr-
ableness of the Church’s teaching regarding the natural
immortality of the personal soul.
Finally, an even more moderate Averroism would
involve maintaining merely that Aristotle taught the
Averroist thesis in any of the above ontological and epis-
temological senses. This was a time, remember, when the
authority of Aristotle was still quite signiﬁcant, and to
maintain that ‘‘Aristotle hath said it’’ was tantamount to
maintaining that natural reason unaided by revelation
established it. Thus, Averroism in this weakest of senses
was comparable to Averroism in the epistemological sense,
if not in the end the same as Averroism in the epistemo-
logical sense.
The central claim in this debate over Averroism
concerned the relationship between abstract thought and
phantasms. If phantasms were necessary for abstract
thought, as Aristotle suggested (Aristotle 1984), then it is
impossible to conceive of an intellective power that does
not make use of a corporeal organ. This follows because
phantasms were widely acknowledged to be corporeal, or
at least corporeally based, images and the best – indeed the
only – candidate for a cognitive power that does not
involve a corporeal organ was considered to be abstrac-
tion. This was the point around which Pomponazzi’s
infamous defenses of Averroism revolved.
During the controversy generated by Pomponazzi,
some Dominicans (e.g., Francesco Silverstri, Bartolomeo
Spina, and Crisotomo Javelli, among others) blamed
Cajetan for enabling Pomponazzi’s arguments. To be sure,
Cajetan adopted some positions that look very similar to
Pomponazzi’s. He accepted, for example, the claim that if
cognition is not possible without phantasms, immortality
is impossible. Furthermore, he maintained that the intellect
was in some sense naturally mortal and in some sense
naturally immortal. It was naturally mortal because it was
a material form, which is in the body as a subject and so has
its being bound up with the body. But it was also naturally
immortal, because it was not a form educed from matter
and was able to operate independently of the body. His
position does not qualify as Averroism in the ontological
sense, however, because he does not assert that the soul is
immortal only in some improper sense or that the soul is
mortal, properly speaking.
As early as his Commentaria in De anima Aristotelis
(1509), however, like Pomponazzi, he accepted an
Averroist interpretation of Aristotle on the basis of
Aristotle’s commitment in De anima 3.7 (Aristotle 1984)
that all cognitions require phantasms. But what is of
interest is his slide into epistemological Averroism. Men-
tion has already been made of his opposition to teaching
prescription in the Fifth Lateran Council’s Apostolici
regiminis. This was reﬂective of his growing doubts regard-
ing the demonstrability of the personal soul’s immortality,
which culminated late in his life in the claims that the
soul’s immortality was a mystery and an article of faith
analogous to the Trinity and the Incarnation and that
there is no demonstration of the soul’s immortality.
Cajetan’s second signiﬁcant divergence from Thomas
concerned his understanding of esse. He maintained that
the esse essentiae or esse quiditativum (the being of essence)
and the esse existentiae actualis or esse existentiae (the
being of actual existence) are really distinct. Both are
independent components of creatures, and creatures are
composed of these two elements. Apparently, Capreolus
deeply
inﬂuenced
Cajetan’s
development
of
this
distinction.
Cajetan’s motivation for making this distinction, and
defending its reality, seems to have been the Thomistic
Thomas of Vio (Cajetan) T
1297
T

problem of the duality of being: Being in Thomas appears
to have both an essential and an accidental character. Ens,
according to Thomas, is not included in the genus of
substance and all things except God are beings by virtue
of having ens added to their natures – thus, being seems to
be accidental. Yet in adding ens to their natures, no new or
additional nature is added to them; ens is, properly speak-
ing, constituted by nothing other than the essence to
which it is added.
Cajetan, by developing this distinction between esse
essentiae and esse existentiae actualis was able to develop
a middle way of resolving this tension. Matter and form
combine to produce the nature that has esse essentiae. This
is a complete entity which is now capable of receiving esse
existentiae actualis. But in the receiving of esse existentiae
actualis, no new thing is produced. The entity possessing
esse essentiae receives existence and becomes a creature now
existing in the world of substances. But in receiving exis-
tence, it was not receiving a new nature and thereby being
transformed into a new thing. It was receiving simply a new
way of being and, as a result, it was being perfected. Thus,
esse existentiae actualis is the being that properly speaking
belongs to the category of substance. It is the being that
marks things existing in creation. Esse essentiae, on the
other hand, is the being that arises within each of the
categories, the id quod est of a thing. The upshot of
Cajetan’s view is that essences have a kind of conceptual
priority over existence, and even though in actual existence
a thing is conceptually constituted only by its essence, its
actual existence descends onto it through some other efﬁ-
cient cause. Thus, there is something essential about being
and something accidental about it. Cajetan’s position on
this very abstruse topic is a subtle one, and it deserves much
deeper scrutiny than it has heretofore received.
Cajetan’s third, and most important, divergence from
Thomas concerned his analysis of analogy. A doctrine of
analogy was the medieval means for addressing questions
about polysemous words, which are words that despite
having different meanings are nonequivocal because those
meanings are conceptually connected in fundamental or
important ways and they share a common etymology.
Cajetan’s little work De nominum analogia (The Analogy
of Names) was extremely inﬂuential in both the sixteenth
century and during the Neo-Thomistic revival of the late
nineteenth and twentieth centuries (unfortunately so
according to his critics: cf. McInerny 1992 and Ashworth
2008 with the glowing Forward and Introduction to
Cajetan 1959) and constituted a revolutionary shift in
understanding analogical terms.
Cajetan structured his analysis around a threefold
division of analogical names. First, according to him,
there is the analogy of inequality. This occurs when there
is a common word for the analogous things and that
common word is supported by a common notion, but
the
two
analogous
things
partake
in
the
nature
corresponding to that notion unequally. The example he
used was the word ‘‘body’’ applied to the corruptible,
terrestrial bodies and to the incorruptible, heavenly bod-
ies. Both types of objects are called bodies and they are
called bodies because they exist in three-dimensional
space. But they partake of this corporeality unequally,
since terrestrial bodies are corruptible because their cor-
poreality is constituted by their materiality whereas heav-
enly bodies, because they are not composed of matter, do
not have corruptible corporeal natures. This sort of poly-
semy, Cajetan believed, applied to all genus terms, not just
‘‘body.’’ But this sort of analogy he dismissed as
unimportant and improper.
The second sort of analogical name was the analogy of
attribution. This occurs when there is a common word
and the common word is supported by a common notion,
but the analogous things are differently related to that
common notion. ‘‘Health’’ was Cajetan’s example here.
When applied to a human, it is applied most properly
because it picks out a perfection obtaining within the
human. But when applied to medicine or urine it is
applied analogically, because even though those things
implicate the same notion of health as the human case,
they implicate it not by picking out the perfection of
health in their subjects but because their subjects ‘‘cause’’
health (the medicine case) or ‘‘signify’’ health (the urine
case). Only the attribution of health to the human involves
an intrinsic denomination; the other two analogous cases
are analogous precisely because they involve an extrinsic
denomination.
The third sort of analogical name, according to
Cajetan, was the analogy of proportionality. This was
subdivided further into metaphoric and proper senses of
proportionality. Strictly speaking, only the latter subdivi-
sion involved analogical words in any genuine or proper
sense. In this case, the analogical word and the notion
supporting it are the same only proportionally. Cajetan’s
thinking here is rooted in the mathematical understanding
of proportionality. While the precise nature of what he
had in mind is a bit obscure, it does seem to require that
an actual similarity obtain between the analogous things.
In other words, the things denominated by the analogical
terms have to both formally contain the analogical prop-
erty to some degree.
Current critics have not been kind to Cajetan’s analy-
sis. It has been attacked as an interpretation of Thomas’
thinking about analogy. It has also been attacked as
1298 T
Thomas of Vio (Cajetan)

a representative example of the medieval tradition of anal-
ogy. But it has been attacked most fervently as even being
a logically coherent doctrine.
Cardinal Cajetan was an inﬂuential commentator on
Thomas and a signiﬁcant thinker in his own right. Under-
standing his distinctive contributions is crucial to under-
standing Thomasism in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries, as well as the Neo-Thomistic movement of the
late nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
See also: ▶Essence and Existence ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙am-
mad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Thomism
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Aquinas Thomas (1882–) Opera omnia. Typographia Polyglotta Vaticana,
Rome
Aristotle (1984) De anima. The complete works of Aristotle: the revised
Oxford translation, ed. Barnes J. Princeton University Press,
Princeton
Cajetan Thomas (1934) Scripta philosophica: Opuscula oeconomico-
socialia. Missionaria Dominicana, Rome
Cajetan Thomas (1934) Scripta philosophica: Commentaria in Porphyrii
Isagogen ad Praedicamenta Aristotelis. Angelicum, Rome
Cajetan Thomas (1936–) Scripta theologica. Angelicum, Rome
Cajetan Thomas (1938–1939) Scripta philosophica: Commentaria in De
anima Aristotelis. Angelicum, Rome
Cajetan
Thomas
(1939)
Scripta
philosophica:
Commentari
in
Paredicamenta Aristotelis. Angelicum, Rome
Cajetan Thomas (1952) Scripta philosophica: De nominum analogia. De
conceptu entis. Angelicum, Rome
Cajetan Thomas (1959) The analogy of names and the concept of being,
2nd edn, trans. Bushinski EA, Koren H. Duquesne University Press,
Pittsburgh
Cajetan Thomas (1962) Aristotle: On Interpretation. Commentary by
Saint Thomas and Cajetan, trans. Oesterle J. Marquette University
Press, Milwaukee
Cajetan Thomas (1964) Commentary on being and essence, trans.
Kendziersk L, Wade F. Marquette University Press, Milwaukee
Cajetan Thomas (1978) Cajetan responds: a reader in reformation con-
troversy, ed. Wicks J. Catholic University of America Press,
Washington
Cajetan Thomas (1994) Cajetan et Luther en 1518: edition, traduction, et
commentaire
des
opuscules
d’Augsbourg
de
Cajetan
(trans:
Morerod C). E´ditions Universitaires, Fribourg
Cajetan Thomas (1995) Opuscula omnia. Olms, Hildesheim (Facsimile
repr of Leiden, 1587)
Cajetan Thomas (2000–2003) Summa totius theologiae S. Thomae de
Aquino. Olms, Hildesheim
Cajetan Thomas (2005) Opera omnia quotquot in Sacrae Scripturae
expositionem reperiuntur. Olms, Hildesheim (Facsimile repr Leiden,
1639)
Sua´rez Francisco (2009) Disputationes metaphysicae. Olms, Hildesheim
Secondary Sources
Ashworth EJ (1992) Analogical concepts: the fourteenth-century back-
ground to Cajetan. Dialogue 31:399–413
Ashworth EJ (1995) Sua´rez on the analogy of being: some historical
background. Vivarium 33:50–75
Ashworth EJ (2007) Metaphor and the logicians from Aristotle to Cajetan.
Vivarium 45:311–327
Ashworth EJ (2008) Les the´ories de l’analogie du XIIe au XVIe sie´cle. Vrin,
Paris
Burns JH (2008) Regimen medium: executive power in early-modern
political thought. Hist Polit Thought 29:213–229
Constant E (2002) A reinterpretation of the Fifth Lateran Council Decree
Apostolici regiminis (1513). Sixt Century J 33:353–379
De Roover R (1976) Cardinal Cajetan on ‘Cambium’ or exchange deal-
ings. Philosophy and humanism: renaissance essays in Honor of Paul
Oskar Kristeller, ed Mahoney EP. Brill, Leiden, pp 423–453
Dewan L (2007) A text from Cajetan touching on existence. Acta
Philosophica: Pontiﬁcia Universita della Santa Croce 1:295–306
Hochschild J (2001) The semantics of analogy according to Thomas de
Vio Cajetan’s De nominum analogia. PhD thesis, Notre Dame
Hochschild J (2001) Words, concepts, and things: Cajetan on the subject
of the categories. Dionysius 19:159–166
Hochschild J (2003) Did Aquinas answer Cajetan’s question? Aquinas’s
semantic rules for analogy and the interpretation of De nominm
analogia. Proc Am Cathol Philos Assoc 77:273–288
Hochschild J (2005) Analogy, semantic, and hermeneutics: the concept
versus judgment critique of Cajetan’s De nominum analogia. Mediev
Philos Theol 11:241–260
Hochschild J (2005) The rest of Cajetan’s analogy theory: De nominum
analogia chapters 4–11. Int Philos Q 45:341–356
Hochschild J (2010) The semantics of analogy: rereading Cajetan’s
De nominum analogie. University of Notre Dame Press, Notre
Dame
Ka¨rkka¨inen P, Lagerlund H (2008) Philosophical psychology in 1500:
Erfurt, Padua, and Bologna. In: Psychology and philosophy: inquiries
into the soul from late scholasticism to contemporary thought.
Springer, Dordrecht, pp 27–45
Kennedy LA (1989) The ﬁfteenth century and divine absolute power.
Vivarium 27:125–152
Krause A (2000) Zue Analogie bei Cajetan und Thomas von Aquin: Eine
Analyse. Boch Philos Jahrb Antike Mittelalt 5:272–275
Kuntz P (1982) The analogy of degrees of being: a critique of Cajetan’s
analogy of names. New Scholasticism 56:51–79
Leijenhorst C (2007) Cajetan and Sua´rez on agent sense: metaphysics and
epistemology in late Aristotelian thought. Forming the mind: essays
on the internal senses and the mind/body problem from Avicenna to
the medical enlightenment, ed. Lagerlund H. Springer, Dordrecht,
pp 237–262
Lohr C (1975) Renaissance Latin Aristotle commentaries: Authors
C. Renaiss Q 28:689–741
Lohr C (1988) Latin Aristotle Commentaries-II: renaissance authors.
Olschki, Firenze
Martin C (2007) Rethinking renaissance Averroism. Intellect Hist Rev
17:3–28
Maurer A (1966) Cajetan’s notion of being in his commentary on the
sentences. Mediev Stud 28:268–278
McCanles M (1968) Univocalism in Cajetan’s doctrine of analogy. New
Scholasticism 42:18–47
Meagher R (1970) Thomas Aquinas and analogy: a textual analysis.
Thomist 34:230–253
Montagnes B (1963) La doctrine de l’analogie de l’e´tre d’apre`s Saint
Thomas d’Aquin. Be´atrice-Nauwelaerts, Paris (Macierowslei EM
(trans) (2004) The doctrine of analogy of being according to Thomas
Aquinas. Marquette University Press, Milwaukee)
Thomas of Vio (Cajetan) T
1299
T

McInerny R (1992) Aquinas and analogy: where Cajetan went wrong.
Philos Top 20:103–124
O’Connell M (1976) Cardinal Cajetan: intellectual and activist. New
Scholasticism 50:310–322
Peterson L (1994) Cardinal Cajetan (Thomas de Vio) and Giles of Rome.
Individuation in scholasticism, ed. Gracia JJE. SUNY Press, Albany
Reilly J (1971) Cajetan’s notion of existence. Humanities Press, New York
Salatowsky S (2006) De anima: Die Rezeption der aristotelischen
Psychologie
im
16.
und
17.
Jahrhundert.
John
Benjamins,
Amsterdam
Spruit L (1994) Species Intelligibilis: from perception to knowledge. Brill,
Leiden
Spruit L (2008) Renaissance views of active perception. Theories of
perception in medieval and early modern philosophy, ed. Knuuttila
S, Ka¨rkka¨inen P. Springer, Dordrecht, pp 203–224
Wells N (1968) On last looking into Cajetan’s Metaphysics. New Scholas-
ticism 42:112–117
Thomas Wylton
CECILIA TRIFOGLI
Philosophy Faculty
All Souls College, University of Oxford
Oxford
UK
Abstract
Thomas Wylton was an English philosopher and theolo-
gian who was ﬁrst active as a master of Arts at Oxford
(c. 1288–1304) and then at the Faculty of Theology of
Paris (c. 1304–1322). His major extant works are
a commentary on Aristotle’s De anima, a commentary
on Aristotle’s Physics, and a Quodlibet. Wylton is a major
exponent of Latin Averroism. He defends Averroes view
on the material intellect, arguing that Averroes’ does not
posit the material intellect as a substance separate from
man but as the substantial form of man. He also maintains
that Averroes can account for the union between intellect
and man better than the Catholics. Wylton’s interpretation
of Averroes had a strong inﬂuence on John of Jandun.
Although a comprehensive picture of Wylton’s philosoph-
ical and theological thought has not yet been drawn, it has
clearly emerged that Wylton’s ontology is strongly realist
and inﬂuenced in part by that of Scotus. For example,
Wylton maintains not only that a relation is a thing dis-
tinct from the relata but also that the distinction between
the two relata and their existence are not necessary for the
reality of the relation between them. Furthermore, he
holds that it is necessary to posit successive things (typi-
cally, motion and time) as distinct from permanent things.
Like Scotus, he maintains that divine attributes are for-
mally distinct.
Thomas Wylton was Fellow of Merton College from about
1288 until 1301 and master of Arts at Oxford until 1304.
He then went to Paris to study theology and became
master there in 1312. He taught theology in Paris probably
until 1322. He was appointed chancellor of St Paul’s
Cathedral in London in 1320, although it is likely that he
took this position only in 1322. The position of Chancellor
was vacated in 1327, so Wylton must have died by
that date.
Three major works by Wylton are extant: a question-
style commentary on De anima, a question-style commen-
tary on the Physics, and a Quodlibet. The two Aristotelian
commentaries were most probably written by Wylton as
master of Arts in Oxford. The Quodlibet was most prob-
ably disputed in Paris in Advent 1315. In addition to these,
we have several questions by Wylton on a large variety of
philosophical and theological topics. Wylton also wrote
a commentary on the Sentences, which has not yet been
identiﬁed.
Wylton was a prominent and inﬂuential ﬁgure as
a master of theology at Paris. He had disputes with the
most important among his contemporaries over a variety
of controversial issues. For example, he debated with Peter
Auriol on the nature of relations, on the problem of the
inﬁnite power of God and on the nature of theology and
virtue; with William Alnwick on the issue of the eternity of
the world; with Henry of Harclay on the inﬁnite; with Guy
Terrena on the nature of the beatiﬁc act and on the prob-
lem of ﬁnal causality; with Durand of St. Pourc¸ain on the
nature of intellection. Wylton’s treatment of future con-
tingents had a strong inﬂuence on John Baconthorpe.
Wylton ﬁrst became known to historians of medieval
philosophy especially for being a major exponent of Pari-
sian Averroism. In his Quaestio disputata de anima
intellectiva Wylton discusses the following problem
about the catholic opinion on the intellective soul: on
the assumption that the intellective soul is subsisting,
created but incorruptible, and numerically distinct in dis-
tinct men, as the Catholics posit, can one establish with
natural necessary arguments that the intellective soul is the
form of the human body? The Catholic opinion does posit
that the intellective soul is the form of the human body.
Wylton accepts that the Catholic opinion is true but he
also declares that he accepts its truth only by faith without
being able to provide natural necessary arguments in favor
of it. The problem with the Catholic opinion is the tradi-
tional one of the unity of body and soul, namely that the
1300 T
Thomas Wylton

intellective soul does not seem to be so intrinsically linked
to the human body as it would be required by its status of
substantial form of that body. In discussing this problem,
Wylton compares the Catholic conception of the intellec-
tive soul and Averroes’ conception of the material intellect
and maintains that Averroes can offer an account of the
union between intellect and body more satisfactory than
that of the Catholics. Wylton defends this bold claim by
offering an interpretation of Averroes’ view according to
which the ontological status of the material intellect of
Averroes is essentially the same as that of the intellective
soul of the Catholics: also the material intellect, as the
intellective soul, is the (substantial) subsisting form of
the human body and thus an intrinsic formal component
of man. With this interpretation, Wylton departs from the
common opinion about Averroes’ view that posits that for
Averroes the material intellect is a substance separate from
man, while the only intrinsic components of man are the
body and the sensitive soul and that man thinks in virtue
of the union of the material intellect with man, which
takes place through the phantasms present in man. In
Wylton’s view, this common opinion must be rejected
because it makes Averroes’ view contradictory. Wylton’s
interpretation, however, is apparently in contrast with the
major thesis of Averroes about the intellect that there is
only one material intellect for all men. Wylton’s claim that
the material intellect is the substantial form of man com-
bined with the thesis of the unity of the intellect implies
that all men share the same substantial form. But this is
a conclusion that not everyone is ready to accept. For it
seems to imply realism about universals: the existence of
universal natures as common components to individuals
of the same kind. Wylton, however, is a realist about
universals and formulates a realist solution to the one-
many problem that arises from the unity of the intellect,
and ascribes this solution to Averroes. For Wylton, in
positing that there is only one material intellect for all
men, Averroes also makes the realist assumption that
there is only one human nature in all men. Since the
material intellect primarily is a perfection of human
nature and only derivatively of this or that individual
man, the unity of the intellect is not incompatible with
its status of substantial form of man. Wylton uses this
interpretation to substantiate his claim that Averroes can
defend the unity between intellect and body better than
the Catholics. His main point is that the intellective soul of
the Catholics is separable, while the material intellect of
Averroes is inseparable. In the Catholic view, the intellec-
tive soul of Socrates is primarily a perfection of Socrates
and despite that, it exists as separate from Socrates after
Socrates’ death. The material intellect of Averroes, how-
ever, is not primarily a perfection of Socrates but of
human nature, and the material intellect is not separable
from human nature: human nature, unlike Socrates, is
eternal as the material intellect is. Wylton’s defense of
Averroes had a strong impact on John of Jandun, the
most eminent exponent of Latin Averroism.
Recent studies have shed light on other aspects of
Wylton’s thought, above all his realist ontological orien-
tation. Investigations into his physical theories have
revealed his realist opposition to Averroes concerning
the ontological status of motion and of time. Wylton
argues that motion and time are two distinct successive
things, not reducible to permanent things. In particular,
motion is a thing inhering in the mobile substance dur-
ing its change and distinct from the mobile substance
itself and the formal determinations acquired and lost by
it during a change; time is a quantity inhering in motion
and in no way dependent on the human soul. Some of
Wylton’s views in natural philosophy have remarkable
similarities with those of Walter Burley, who names
Wylton as his master. Wylton’s strong realism also
appears in his view about relations. He holds that
a relation is a real thing distinct from the things related
(relata), for example, the relation of similarity with respect
to whiteness between two white things is a thing distinct
from the two white things and their whitenesses. He even
maintains that the extramental existence and the distinc-
tion of the relata are not necessary conditions for the
extramental reality of a relation. For example, in his
view, the relation of lordship is real, but the relata are
one and the same, that is, a creature. Furthermore, matter
has real relation to non-existing forms. Similarly, the rela-
tion of ﬁnal causality between a ﬁnal cause and its effect is
real despite the fact that the ﬁnal cause does not exist when
this relation holds. Some aspects of Scotus’ ontology had
an inﬂuence on Wylton. For example, following Scotus,
Wylton maintains that divine attributes are formally dis-
tinct. Wylton appears to be an original and complex phi-
losopher, although a comprehensive picture of Wylton’s
philosophical and theological thought has not yet been
drawn.
See also: ▶Causality ▶Divine Power ▶Durand of St.
Pourc¸ain ▶Form and Matter ▶Future Contingents
▶Guido Terreni ▶Henry Harclay ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙am-
mad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶John Baconthorpe
▶John Duns Scotus ▶John of Jandun ▶Natural Philos-
ophy ▶Peter Auriol ▶Realism ▶Time ▶Universals
▶Walter Burley ▶William of Alnwick
Thomas Wylton T
1301
T

Bibliography
Primary Sources
None of Wylton’s works has been edited in its entirety, but editions of
a number of his questions have appeared in various journals. See
secondary sources Jung-Palczewska 1997; Nielsen-Noone-Trifogli
2003; Nielsen-Trifogli 2006; Senko 1964; Trifogli 1990; Trifogli-
Nielsen 2005; Trifogli 2007
Secondary Sources
Dumont SD (1998) New questions by Thomas Wylton. Documenti
e studi sulla tradizione ﬁlosoﬁca medievale 9:341–381
Henninger MG (1990) Thomas Wylton’s theory of relations. Documenti
e studi sulla tradizione ﬁlosoﬁca medievale 1:457–490
Jung-Palczewska E (1997) La Question quodlibe´tique De inﬁnitate vigoris
Dei de Thomas de Wylton. Archives d’Histoire Doctrinale et
Litte´raire du Moyen Age 64:347–403
Nielsen LO, Trifogli C (2006) Questions on the beatiﬁc vision by Thomas
Wylton and Sibert de Beka. Documenti e studi sulla tradizione
ﬁlosoﬁca medievale 17:511–584
Nielsen LO, Noone TB, Trifogli C (2003) Thomas Wylton’s question on
the formal distinction as applied to the divine. 14:327–388
Senko W (1964) Tomasza Wiltona Quaestio disputata de anima
intellectiva. Studia Mediewistyczne
Trifogli C (1990) Il problema dello statuto ontologico del tempo nelle
Quaestiones super Physicam di Thomas Wylton e di Giovanni di
Jandun. Documenti e studi sulla tradizione ﬁlosoﬁca medievale
1(2):491–548
Trifogli C (1995) Thomas Wylton on motion. Archiv fu¨r Geschichte der
Philosophie 77:135–154
Trifogli C (2007a) Thomas Wylton on ﬁnal causality. In: Fidora A, Lutz-
Bachmann M (eds) Erfahrung und Beweis. Die Wissenschaften von
der Natur im 13. und 14. Jahrhundert. Akademie Verlag, Berlin
Trifogli C (2007b) The quodlibet of Thomas Wylton. In: Schabel C (ed)
Theological quodlibeta in the Middle Ages, the fourteenth century.
Brill, Leiden
Trifogli C, Nielsen LO (2005) Thomas Wylton’s questions on number, the
instant and time. Documenti e studi sulla tradizione ﬁlosoﬁca
medievale 16:57–117
Thomism
ISABEL IRIBARREN
Department of Catholic Theology
Strasbourg University
Strasbourg
France
Abstract
In a broad sense, Thomism denotes a form of philosoph-
ical and theological thought, which draws its main inspi-
ration from the teaching of Thomas Aquinas. Despite
differences in context and emphasis, all forms of Thomism
purport to follow Aquinas’ doctrine in its principles or
main conclusions. In its original scholastic form, Tho-
mism represented the magisterial solution determined by
Aquinas, whose adherents were normally, but not always,
members of the Dominican order. The development of
Thomism from the end of the thirteenth to the end of the
sixteenth century can be traced in four main stages:
(1) a ﬁrst stage, roughly from Aquinas’ death in 1274 to
the end of the thirteenth century, is marked by the
Correctoria controversy, as Dominicans undertook the
defense of Thomist teaching in face of external opposition
arising from Church authorities and the Franciscan order.
(2) On a second stage, from the beginning of the four-
teenth century to Aquinas’ canonization in 1323, Thomist
teaching is declared the ofﬁcial doctrine of the Dominican
order in an effort to dissipate internal opposition and
reafﬁrm its doctrinal credibility after the 1277 condemna-
tion. Although Thomism is still a matter of interpretation,
it is during this period that it begins to be established as
a distinct philosophy. (3) On a third stage, from Aquinas’
full rehabilitation in 1325 to the end of the fourteenth
century, Thomist doctrine gains in normative value.
Although opposition still persists, it purports to act as
a theological authority within the Church at large.
(4) Finally, after a period of relative recession as a result
of Dominican unpopularity during the Immaculate Con-
ception controversy, the ﬁfteenth century witnesses
a gradual revival of Thomism extending well into the
sixteenth. Commentaries on the Summa proliferate; Tho-
mism becomes increasingly systematized and divorced
from the dialectical character it owed to its scholastic
origins.
Corpus of the Article
In a broad sense, Thomism denotes a form of philosoph-
ical and theological thought which draws its main inspi-
ration from the teaching of Thomas Aquinas. Despite
differences in historical context and philosophical empha-
sis, all forms of Thomism purport to follow Aquinas’
teaching in its principles, methodology, and conclusions
in order to defend, develop, or comment on it. In its
original
form,
Aquinas’
teaching
is
embedded
in
a speciﬁc institutional milieu determined on the one
hand by the University and on the other by the Dominican
order. The schools modeled Thomism in a twofold way:
through the reception of classical philosophy, especially
Neoplatonism and Aristotle, and through their method-
ology, exempliﬁed in the scholastic exercise of dialectical
inquiry of authoritative sources toward the solution of
doctrinal questions. In this context, Thomism represents
the solution determined by Aquinas in opposition to other
1302 T
Thomism

possible solutions advanced by other masters. Its adher-
ents were normally, but not always, members of the
Dominican
order.
Their
institutional
afﬁliation
to
Aquinas’ doctrine did not exclude a selective use of Tho-
mist sources, conﬂicting interpretations, or in some cases
even the inﬂuence of rival forms of scholasticism, such as
that represented by Duns Scotus.
The reception of Aquinas’ teaching throughout the
Middle Ages was thus subject to differences in emphasis
and orientation which escape a systematic development.
What follows is an attempt to trace the historical evolution
of Aquinas’ doctrine taking into account its multiple, and
sometimes conﬂicting, expressions. The chief features of
Thomist philosophy will be presented as they are brought
to the foreground of the debate at each stage of its
evolution.
The development of Thomism during the period run-
ning from the end of the thirteenth to the end of the
sixteenth century can be traced in four main stages:
(1) a ﬁrst stage, roughly from Aquinas’ death in 1274 to
the end of the thirteenth century, is marked by the Domin-
ican defense of Thomist teaching in face of external oppo-
sition arising from Church authorities and the Franciscan
order; (2) on a second stage, from the beginning of the
fourteenth century to Aquinas’ canonization in 1323,
Thomist teaching is increasingly institutionalized as it is
declared the ofﬁcial doctrine of the Dominican order in an
effort to dissipate internal opposition and reafﬁrm its
doctrinal credibility after the 1277 condemnation; (3) on
a third stage, from Aquinas’ full rehabilitation in 1325 to
the end of the fourteenth century, Thomist doctrine is
promoted as a theological authority, despite the persis-
tence of opposition in some quarters; (4) ﬁnally, after
a period of relative recession as a result of Dominican
unpopularity during the Immaculate Conception contro-
versy, the ﬁfteenth century witnesses a gradual revival of
Thomism extending well into the sixteenth. Thomism
becomes increasingly systematized and divorced from
the dialectical character it owed to its scholastic origins.
(1) A ﬁrst manifestation of Thomism takes place
toward the end of the 1270s and all throughout the
1280s, as a group of Oxford and Paris Dominicans rally
in defense of the teachings of Thomas Aquinas. The ensu-
ing controversy formed part of a wider conﬂict concerning
the reception of Aristotle’s natural philosophy, which had
culminated in the 1277 condemnation issued by the
bishop of Paris Stephen Tempier. Bishop Tempier and his
commission of theologians were responding to a wave of
‘‘radical Aristotelianism’’ at the University of Paris, in
which some philosophers (notably Siger of Brabant and
Boethius of Dacia) were boasting an autonomous use of
natural reason and propagating views not dissimilar to
those
of
Averroes,
Aristotle’s
Arabic
commentator.
Although not directly targeted, Aquinas’ teaching was
indirectly compromised insofar as a number of the
condemned errors bore manifest afﬁnity with Thomist
theses.
Soon after the condemnation, on March 18, 1277,
Robert
Kilwardby,
archbishop
of
Canterbury
and
a Dominican, issued a prohibition at Oxford involving
30 suspect propositions in the domains of logic, grammar,
and natural philosophy. The latter included the Thomist
thesis of the unicity of the substantial form, only implicit
in Tempier’s condemnation. Against the established expla-
nation of the gradual composition of the embryo,
Aquinas’ thesis advanced an interpretation of Aristotle’s
hylomorphic theory, whereby the generation of a sub-
stance takes place by the disappearance of a previous
form and the succession of a radically new substantial
form. In this view, it is not possible for a composite sub-
stance to coexist with other forms, on the principle that
the existence of one composite is due to the presence of one
form. Underlying this position is Aquinas’ belief that in all
corporeal beings, apart from composition of matter and
form, there is composition of essence and existence (esse).
Esse actualizes only one form, such that the composition
of esse with several forms would necessarily entail several
substantial forms, and hence a plurality of actually existing
beings. Consequently, in human beings the vegetative and
the sensitive souls must disappear at the arrival of the
intellectual soul, divinely infused. Aquinas’ ontology is
thus incompatible with any model requiring the presence
of previous forms within the composite. In this light,
rather than an anti-Thomist bias, Kilwardby’s interven-
tion manifests the reaction of the scientiﬁc establishment,
still attached to the old physics of the elements away from
the new challenges of Aristotelian ontology.
Otherwise for the Franciscans William of la Mare and
John Pecham, for whom Aquinas’ theory entailed serious
theological dangers to do notably with the numerical
identity of Christ’s body living and dead. Indeed, if the
body is what it is wholly by virtue of the soul and matter
has no disposition of its own, then, at the separation of
body and soul, Christ’s dead body would cease to be
identiﬁed with his living body. At the sight of such prob-
lems, William felt encouraged to issue a ‘‘corrective’’ of
Aquinas’
teaching.
Composed
toward
1278,
the
Correctorium fratris Thomae presents a list of 118 ‘‘erro-
neous and dangerous’’ propositions extracted from
Aquinas’ works. Among them, some 13 had already been
condemned by Tempier in 1277 – a parallel which William
hastens to point out in order to strengthen his case.
Thomism T
1303
T

William’s Correctorium was endorsed by the 1282 Francis-
can general chapter in Strasbourg, thus becoming the
order’s ofﬁcial view of Aquinas’ doctrine. A further attack
took place in 1286, launched by Kilwardby’s successor to
the archbishopric of Canterbury, the Franciscan John
Pecham. An old adversary of Aquinas, Pecham ratiﬁed
his predecessor’s prohibition, this time condemning the
30 propositions that some Oxford masters, notably the
young Dominican Richard Knapwell, had allegedly
maintained in disobedience to Kilwardby’s censure. This
second assault, coming from the rival order and with all
the ideological weight this involved, awakened a concerted
movement within the Dominican order in defense of their
most famous doctor.
The Dominican reaction manifested itself in two
forms. On the one hand, in the legislation issued at sub-
sequent general chapters, encouraging the support,
defense, and promotion of Aquinas’ doctrine (notably
the capitular legislations of 1278, 1279, and 1286).
Dominican defense was also expressed in literary form in
a series of treatises devoted to the unicity of form theory,
and in the composition of polemical writings sarcastically
entitled Correctoria corruptorii, in allusion to William’s
ﬁrst attack. Young Dominicans such as Thomas of Sutton,
Richard Knapwell, and Robert Orford at Oxford, and John
of Paris and Giles of Lessines at Paris devoted themselves
to the defense of Aquinas’ innovative theses, particularly
the doctrine of the unicity of the substantial form, but also
the related theses of the pure potentiality of matter, the
spirituality of separate substances, individuation by mat-
ter, and the real distinction between essence and existence.
Non-Dominican masters were also involved in the con-
troversy: the well-known Augustinian theologian, Giles of
Rome, suffered on his own count for having supported the
Thomist theses, while the secular master Godfrey of
Fontaines took his part in defending the credibility and
intellectual competence of Aquinas.
For all its zeal, the allegiance to Aquinas’ theses
revealed by these early disputes does not seem to have
gone beyond a literal afﬁliation to a particular way of
‘‘determining’’ a question which at best resulted in lucid
clariﬁcations of important theories. Moreover, not all
Dominicans
welcomed
Aquinas’
innovations
(recall
Kilwardby), and even if some of them had acted in the
defensive, they seem to have been prompted mostly by
esprit de corps. A case in point is William of Huthum, one
of the earliest defenders of Aquinas, and certainly the most
prominent ﬁgure among them (he was provincial of the
order in England in 1282 and again in 1290). Although
William remained sceptical about the theological value of
the unicity of form theory, presumably prompted by the
need to safeguard his order’s doctrinal reputation, he
nevertheless pleaded a degree of intellectual freedom in
matters which remained open to inquiry.
(2) Fourteenth-century Thomism is characterized on
the one hand by the increasing institutionalization of
Aquinas’ teaching within the Dominican order, and on
the other by the Dominican effort to reestablish its cred-
ibility after the 1277 condemnation. Aquinas’ teaching
became established as the order’s ofﬁcial doctrinal line in
1309. Conformity with Thomist doctrine was reinforced
in 1313 at the general chapter in Metz, promoting Tho-
mism as the ‘‘common opinion,’’ and again in 1316,
encouraging tighter control of the content of lectures
and writings issued within the order. These directives
were in all likelihood issued in order to ﬁght internal
dissidence represented notably in the writings of James
of Metz and Durand of St. Pourc¸ain. Heading the order’s
endeavor to enforce doctrinal uniformity in accordance to
Aquinas’ teaching were Hervaeus Natalis (d. 1323), master
general of the order from 1318, and John of Naples, an
active campaigner for Aquinas’ canonization. Apart from
producing a defense of Aquinas’ doctrine (Defensio
doctrinae fratris Thomae, between 1307 and 1309),
Hervaeus took personal care in correcting all forms of
deviation (examples are his Correctiones super dicta
Durandi in Quol. Aven. I, 1315 and Responsio ad Jacobum
Metensem, 1310). With Hervaeus, John of Naples took
a leading part in the commission examining Durand’s
work. A conscientious Thomist from his early years as
master, John’s efforts to reestablish Aquinas’ doctrinal
credibility are exempliﬁed by a quodlibetal question
concerning the canonical value of Tempier’s 1277 con-
demnation (Quodl. 6, 2: Utrum licite possit doceri Parisius
doctrina fratris Thomae quoad omnes conclusiones ejus).
Other leading Dominicans who were active in the promo-
tion of Aquinas’ teaching at the time were Pierre de la
Palud, John of Lausanne, and Gerard of Bologna.
Although their Thomism did not manifest itself in
literal adherence to Aquinas’ teaching, the concerted activ-
ity of Dominicans like Hervaeus and John of Naples was
decisive for the development of Thomism into an
established philosophy. The promotion of Thomism
followed a twofold strategy: on the one hand, it attempted
to assimilate Aquinas’ doctrine to the ‘‘common opinion’’;
on the other, it sought to afﬁliate it to a classical philo-
sophical tradition – mainly Neoplatonist and Aristotelian
in origin – deemed integral to the good exercise of theol-
ogy. On the ﬁrst count, Franciscan intellectual achieve-
ments had much to contribute as Hervaeus ostensibly
borrowed from Scotist insights (notably the notion of
‘‘formal distinction’’). John, for his part, proposed
1304 T
Thomism

enhanced interpretations of Aquinas’ theses as he sought
to chase away internal contradictions. By ﬁling down
ambiguities and incorporating alien insights, second-
generation Thomists were endeavoring to invest Aquinas’
teaching with the coherence and soundness that could
merit the relative approval accorded to the common opin-
ion. In this sense, it is no mean homage to the success of
Thomism that Dante, writing his Comedy at around the
same time, should have drawn signiﬁcant inspiration from
Thomist teaching, to the point of attributing to Aquinas
a privileged place in his Paradise.
On the second count, second-generation Thomists
rallied themselves in the defense of those theses, of Neo-
platonist and Aristotelian afﬁnity, which seemed particu-
larly exposed to the 1277 condemnation and its doctrinal
priorities. The unifying strand in Tempier’s otherwise
unsystematic syllabus appeared to be the emphasis on
God’s absolute power, the notion of God as absolutely
free and as inﬁnitely superior to his creation. Yet, central
Thomist tenets, notably the veto on multiplying angels
within one and the same species on account of their
immateriality, appeared to subordinate God’s power to
the natural laws of his creation. This impression was only
reinforced by Aquinas’ metaphysics of participation and
the connected theory of the analogy of being, which pur-
ported to establish an essential continuity between the
natural and the supernatural order. The Thomist under-
standing of universals and the resulting explanation of
cognition as a process of abstraction appeared as yet
another expression of a view which downplayed the plu-
rality and contingency of creation in favor of its reduction
to a set of rational principles. Moreover, Aquinas’ convic-
tion on the pertinence and salutary role of reason in the
explanation of the natural order was easily afﬁliated,
failing a more nuanced analysis, to the doctrine of the
‘‘double truth’’ and the radical separation of philosophy
and theology. Finally, the Thomist emphasis on the
intellect as controlling faculty over the will, an emphasis
which informed Aquinas’ explanation of moral action,
contributed to the general impression of Thomist doctrine
as running counter to the philosophical – mainly
Franciscan – tendency imposing itself at the time which
rather placed the accent on the will, on God’s inﬁnity, and
on the contingency of creation. An illustrative example of
the contrast between the Thomist outlook, much attached
to Aristotelian philosophy, and the fourteenth-century
emerging view is the much-debated issue of sacramental
causality. Governed by the Aristotelian thesis whereby the
cause is efﬁcacious by virtue of an infused quality inherent
in it, Thomists maintained that the sacrament produces its
effect on account of a superadded virtue which is infused
at the moment of the institution of the sacrament and
which ‘‘disposes’’ the soul to receiving grace. In contrast to
this view, Franciscan theologians and some non-Thomist
Dominicans advanced a ‘‘contractual’’ explanation of cau-
sality whereby the efﬁcacity of the sacrament rests on the
‘‘pact’’ voluntarily established between man and God at the
institution of the sacrament. But Thomists’ heavy reliance
on Aristotle’s view of causality and inherent value led them
to dismiss contractual causality as tantamount to denying
true causality to the sacraments and reduce them to noth-
ing more than mere signs.
Still suffering the consequences of the 1277 condem-
nation, fourteenth-century Thomists would endeavor to
disengage Aquinas’ teaching from all kind of philosophical
necessitarianism, while at the same time reassert the ben-
eﬁts of classical philosophy in the explanation of theolog-
ical truths. Aquinas’ later sobriquet of Doctor angelicus is
highly illustrative of the kind of philosophical and theo-
logical tradition Thomists were keen to safeguard: with
angels at its center as ‘‘mediating intelligences,’’ the Tho-
mist worldview would guarantee the essential continuity
of the natural with the supernatural order and the intelli-
gibility of God’s plan.
Ecclesiastical intervention came in handy, as the doc-
trinal promotion of Thomism was crowned in 1323 with
Aquinas’ canonization by Pope John XXII. A ﬁrst biogra-
phy of Aquinas was written by William of Tocco for the
occasion, while the pope commissioned the transcription
of the Summa for the pontiﬁcal library. Aquinas’ work was
praised as a ‘‘miracle of doctrine,’’ for the Dominican
doctor had performed ‘‘as many miracles as he had written
articles.’’ Despite the repercussions of the 1277 condem-
nation, Aquinas’ canonization revealed the papacy’s
strong reliance on the doctrinal uniformity of Thomism,
deemed to bring stability at a time when the church was
troubled by the quarrels over apostolic poverty with the
Franciscans.
(3) A direct consequence of Aquinas’ canonization was
his full rehabilitation in 1325, as the concerted action of
the University of Paris and Bishop Stephen Bourret
brought about the ofﬁcial revocation of the 1277 condem-
nation ‘‘insofar as it touched on Aquinas’ doctrines.’’ That
the condemnation was not revoked as a whole was all the
more revealing of Aquinas’ selected status as a theological
authority. Illustrative of this new stage of Thomist ‘‘ortho-
doxy’’ is the appearance of one last tract against Durand of
St. Pourc¸ain, probably prompted by the persistence of his
inﬂuence within the order. Written around the time the
veto on Aquinas’ teaching was lifted and shortly after the
canonization, Durandellus’ Evidentiae contra Durandum
(1325) reﬂects the inﬂuence which the canonization
Thomism T
1305
T

exerted on the expansion and authority of Thomist teach-
ing. The purpose of the Evidentiae is not so much to
engage in criticism of Dominican dissidence, but to pre-
sent evidence of the soundness of Thomism by using
Durand’s discredited theses as a critical vehicle. Whereas
Hervaeus’ Thomism showed the resilience of times of
controversy, the Thomist elements in the Evidentiae are
presented in a way more suitable for commentary than
interpretation. Durandellus makes a normative use of the
Thomist corpus, as he adduces quotations from Aquinas’
works for the sake of proof in his arguments against
Durand. The value of the Evidentiae thus resides in its
being probably the ﬁrst example we possess of Aquinas’
writings being treated as a locus theologicus, as obliged
theological reference.
The rapid headway of Thomism did not exclude crit-
icism from other quarters. The Immaculate Conception
controversy is a case in point, as it saw the Dominicans
temporarily expelled from the University of Paris. Follow-
ing Aquinas’ teaching and in opposition to Franciscans,
who followed Duns Scotus and most of the University
establishment, Thomists maintained that Mary was con-
ceived in the natural way and that as such she was not
exempt from the transmission of original sin. Guiding the
Thomist view was the need to safeguard the truth and the
value of Christ’s universal redemption. The problem
presented by a Thomist minority was not only doctrinal
but also institutional: since his canonization, Aquinas’
teaching had acquired normative value and his opinion
was supposed to call for obedience not only within the
Dominican order but also within the Church at large. The
doctrinal tension between Thomism and the University
establishment is well illustrated by the case of the Spanish
Dominican John Montson. In his inaugural lecture at
Paris in 1387, Montson declared that Mary was conceived
in sin and that the contrary view was heretical. Montson’s
audacity deeply offended the magisterial opinion, which
had reached a consensus in favor of the immaculist view.
Far from retracting, Montson claimed Aquinas’ authority
in order to justify his view. He was subsequently censured
by the University and excommunicated by the bishop of
Paris who, capitalizing on Montson’s blunder, prohibited
any preaching or teaching against the immaculist view.
The affair transcended University jurisdiction as Montson
decided to bring his case to the Avignon pope, Clement
VII. The pope readily supported Montson’s appeal, but the
University delegation ﬁnally succeeded in obtaining
Montson’s condemnation. Revealing of Aquinas’ theolog-
ical ascendancy at Paris, the University’s authorities has-
tened to add that Montson’s condemnation was brought
about ‘‘without prejudice to the reverence owed to saint
Thomas and his doctrine.’’ For it is not the soundness of
Aquinas’ doctrine which they have condemned and
reproved, but Monston’s ‘‘distortion of it by altering its
sense towards the contradiction of faith’’ (Chartularium, II
pp. 497–498). Thomism had fallen victim to the political
paradoxes of the Schism: while the University was keen to
safeguard the authority of the Common Doctor as a way to
reinforce its own magisterial authority, the Avignonese
pope, at the mercy of French priorities, was compelled to
condemn the Dominican destabilizer. The controversy
was ﬁnally settled in 1439, when the Council of Basle
afﬁrmed the belief in the Immaculate Conception as
pious opinion and in accordance with the Catholic faith.
Although he was unable to present his case at the Council,
the Spanish Dominican John of Torquemada had pre-
pared a treatise on the matter arguing in favor of the
Thomist thesis. In his hands, Thomism was intended to
serve as a stronghold for the pontiﬁcal faction against
Conciliar views. Other unyielding Thomists continued to
teach against the Immaculate Conception throughout the
ﬁfteenth and the beginning of the sixteenth century.
A notable example is Vincent Bandelli, a Dominican
from Lombardy and master general of the order in 1501.
It is an eloquent commentary not only on the normative
weight Thomism had acquired within the order, but also
on
Dominicans’ strong
institutional
attachment
to
Aquinas, that most of them continued to teach against
the Immaculate Conception despite the University’s ofﬁ-
cial requirement to defend it and the Church’s proclama-
tion of its feast day in 1476.
(4) At the beginning of the ﬁfteenth century, with the
Immaculate
Conception
controversy
still
impairing
Dominican doctrinal credibility, the work of John
Capreolus (c. 1380–1444), a native of Languedoc, was
decisive in reviving the authority of Thomism. Written
in four volumes, John’s Defensiones theologiae Divi
Thomae (1409–1432) constitutes a comprehensive defense
of Thomism against critics from all quarters: Tempier’s
1277 syllabus, William of la Mare, Henry of Ghent,
Godfrey of Fontaines, Duns Scot, Peter Auriol, Durand
of St. Pourc¸ain, William of Ockham, Gregory of Rimini, to
mention only the most notable. In responding to each
objection, John offers a lucid interpretation of Aquinas’
teaching as he both attempts to harmonize conﬂicting
texts and reassesses alternative interpretations from previ-
ous Thomists such as Hervaeus Natalis and John of
Naples. Among the vast material he considers, John
devotes particular attention to Nominalism, especially
the way in which this view was expressed in terministic
logic. Not in vain was he called the ‘‘Prince of Thomists’’ :
John’s seminal work sets the precedents for the great age of
1306 T
Thomism

commentaries on Aquinas’ Summa in the sixteenth cen-
tury. Indeed, though Peter Lombard’s Sentences remained
the ofﬁcial text at University and in Dominican schools,
Aquinas’ Summa was gradually taking its place as the main
theological reference.
Testifying to this is the ﬂow of abbreviations, concor-
dances, and indices of Aquinas’ works composed at the
time, as well as epitomes or compendia summarizing his
thought for study purposes. The Thomist corpus was thus
gradually coming to embody an intellectual tradition
whose transmission had to be guaranteed. In this tradi-
tion, literal adherence to Aquinas’ writings set the stan-
dards for true doctrine and philosophical soundness.
Marking the revival of scholasticism in the sixteenth
century is Cajetan’s (Thomas de Vio, 1469–1534) mon-
umental commentary on Aquinas’ Summa, composed
between 1507 and 1522. Despite some divergences (he
remains sceptical about Aquinas’ demonstration of the
immortality of the soul), Cajetan’s commentary remains
to this day a classical reference for Thomist scholars.
Written precisely at the time when Luther was develop-
ing his theological ideas on justiﬁcation, Cajetan’s Tho-
mism gains in topical signiﬁcance if we take into
account that he played an important part in mediating
with Luther. Cajetan’s embassy was bolstered a few years
later by the Council of Trent (1545–1563), recognizing the
substance of Thomist teaching as an expression of true
doctrine. In 1567, 3 years after the Council’s last session,
Pius V promoted Aquinas to the rank of Doctor of the
Church and ordered the ﬁrst complete printed edition of
his works.
Another famous commentator of Aquinas’ Summa
around the same period is John of St Thomas (1589–
1644), a Spanish Dominican who, as his name intended
to show, devoted himself to safeguarding the guiding
principles and main conclusions of Aquinas’ thought
against more syncretistic forms of commentary, such as
that practiced by the Spanish Jesuit Francisco Sua´rez
(1548–1617). Sua´rez’s ﬁrst work, De verbo incarnato
(1590) is a commentary on Aquinas’ view of Redemption
as it appears expounded in the third part of the Summa.
Sua´rez attempts to reconcile the Thomist view with Duns
Scotus’ position, according to which the ﬁnal cause of the
Incarnation is not Redemption, as Aquinas sees it, but the
manifestation of the perfection of God’s creation. On this
view, the Incarnation would then have taken place even
without the Fall. With Sua´rez, the tradition of interpreta-
tion of Aquinas’ works begins to evolve into a vast philo-
sophical synthesis which is more accurately described as
Aristotelico-Thomistic. An illustrative example is his
Disputationes metaphysicae, in which he attempts to
integrate Aristotle’s teaching with that of Aquinas’ into
a coherent body of knowledge. In contrast to the tradi-
tional scholastic commentaries, the aim is not to gloss
Aristotle’s work but rather to offer a systematic treatment
independent of the letter and adapted to contemporary
theologians. But reliance on Aquinas’ work did not always
go hand in hand with ﬁdelity to his teaching, as Sua´rez was
brought to question the Thomist view on grace and its
relation to human freedom in a famous controversy which
opposed Jesuits to Dominicans. Following the Molinist
line (after the Jesuit theologian Luis de Molina) and
hoping in that way to safeguard human free will, Sua´rez
claims that what renders grace efﬁcacious is not the divine
gift itself, as Thomists maintain, but God’s foreknowledge
that man will freely cooperate with this gift in certain
circumstances. This view was widely adopted by Jesuits
and became the prevalent non-Thomist position on the
issue.
The period immediately following Sua´rez witnesses
the development of the Summa Commentary into
a literary genre in its own right. The Cursus theologicus,
composed by the Carmelites of Salamanca between 1631
and 1701, is a noteworthy example. This monumental
commentary on Aquinas’ Summa was completed with
the aim of forming a comprehensive corpus of sound
theological teaching. The Salmanticenses’ treatment of
Thomism, one which reﬂects not institutional afﬁliation
but a systematic philosophical approach, is revealing of
the status Thomism had acquired at this time as a coherent
body of doctrine setting the standard for the solution to
major philosophical and theological questions. It is on this
platform that the nineteenth-century Church will resort to
Thomist doctrine as the ofﬁcial Catholic response to mod-
ern philosophy. The founding charter of Neo-Thomism,
Leo XIII’s bull Aeternis patris (1879), thus inaugurates
a new epoch in the history of Thomism, one unsuspected
by medieval minds.
See also: ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶Causality ▶Durand of
St. Pourc¸ain ▶Essence and Existence ▶Form and Matter
▶Giles of Rome ▶Hervaeus Natalis ▶Ibn Rushd,
Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Intuitive
and Abstractive Cognition ▶James of Metz ▶John
Capreolus ▶John Duns Scotus ▶John of Paris ▶John
Pecham ▶Natural Philosophy ▶Parisian Condemnation
of 1277 ▶Peter Auriol ▶Robert Kilwardby ▶Siger of
Brabant ▶Species, Sensible and Intelligible ▶Thomas
Aquinas ▶Thomas of Sutton ▶Thomas of Vio (Cajetan)
▶Universals
▶Voluntarism
and
Intellectualism
▶William of Ockham
Thomism T
1307
T

Bibliography
Primary Sources
De´niﬂe
Henri, Chatelain
Emile
(eds)
(1889–1891)
Chartularium
Universitatis Parisiensis, 2 vols. Delalain, Paris
Durandellus (2003) Nicolai Medensis (Durandelli) Evidentiae contra
Durandum, 2 vols, ed. Stella PT. Corpus Philosophorum Medii
Aevi: Opera Philosophica Mediae Aetatis Selecta, vol 3 (completed
by Lanczkowski M, Imbach R). Francke, Tu¨bingen/Basle
Reichert
Benedictus
Maria
(ed)
(1889/1899)
Acta
capitulorum
generalium Ordinis Praedicatorum. Monumenta Ordinis Fratrum
Praedicatorum Historica, 3 and 4. Istituto Storico Domenicano,
Rome, vol 1, 1889, vol 2, 1899
Ripoll Thomas (ed) (1730) Bullarium Ordinis Fratrum Praedicatorum,
sub auspiciis Clementis XII, vol 2 (1281–1430). Mainardi, Rome
Thomas Antoninus Hendrik (ed) (1965) Constitutiones antiquae
Ordinis Fratris Praedicatorum. In: De oudste constituties van
de Dominicanen, Voorgeschiedenis, tekst, bronnen, ontstaan
en
ontwikkeling
(1215–1235).
Bibliothe`que
de
la
Revue
d’Histoire Eccle´siastique, 42.2. Publications Universitaires de Lou-
vain, Louvain
Walz Angelus (ed) (1923–1924) Ordinationes capitulorum generalium de
sancto Thoma eiusque cultu et doctrina. In: Analecta Sacri Ordinis
Fratrum Praedicatorum, Rome, 16:168–173
Secondary Sources
(1992) Storia del tomismo: fonti e reﬂessi. In: Atti del IX Congresso
tomistico internazionale (Studi tomistici, 45). Pontiﬁcia Accademia
di S. Tommaso et di religione cattolica, Cite´ du Vatican
Burbach M (1942) Early Dominican and Franciscan legislation regarding
St Thomas. Mediev Stud 4:139–158
Callus DA (1946) The condemnation of St. Thomas at Oxford. Aquinas
Papers, no 5. Blackfriars, London
Chenu M-D (1957) Introduction a` l’e´tude de Saint Thomas d’Aquin.
Vrin, Paris/Montreal
Decker B (1967) Die Gotteslehre des Jakob von Metz. Untersuchungen
zur Dominikanertheologie zu Beginn des 14. Jahrhunderts. In:
Haubst R (ed) Beitra¨ge zur Geschichte der Philosophie des
Mittelalters.
Texte
und
Untersuchungen,
begru¨ndet
von
C.
Baeumker, 42.1. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Garrigou-Lagrange R (1943) Thomisme. In: Vacant A, Mangenot E,
Amann E (eds) Dictionnaire de The´ologie Catholique, 15.1.
G. Beauchesne, Paris, pp 823–1023
Gauthier A (1961) Introduction historique a` S. Thomas d’Aquin. Contra
Gentiles, vol 1 (trans: Bernier R, Corvez M). Lethielleux (Leonine
edition), Paris, pp 7–123
Gillon L-B (1943) Thomas d’Aquin. Signiﬁcation historique de la
the´ologie de saint Thomas. In: Vacant A, Mangenot E, Amann
E (eds) Dictionaire de The´ologie Catholique, 15.1. G. Beauchesne,
Paris, pp 651–693
Gilson E´ (1944) Le Thomisme: introduction a` la philosophie de Saint
Thomas d’Aquin. Vrin, Paris
Glorieux P (ed) (1927) Les premie`res pole´miques thomistes. Bibliothe`que
thomiste, vol 9. Le Saulchoir, Belgium
Hinnebusch WA (1966) The history of the Dominican Order, 1: origins
and growth to 1500. Alba House, New York
Iribarren I (2001) Responsio secundum Thomam and the search for an
early Thomistic school. Vivarium 39:255–296
Kennedy LA (1987) A catalogue of Thomists, 1270–1900. University of St
Thomas, Houston
Mandonnet P (1913) Premiers travaux de pole´mique thomiste. Rev Sci
Philos The´ol 7:46–70; 245–262
Mandonnet P (1923) La canonisation de saint Thomas d’Aquin.
Me´langes Thomistes. Bibliothe`que Thomiste, 3. Le Saulchoir, Paris/
Kain, pp 3–47
Mortier DA (1903–1920) Histoire des maıˆtres ge´ne´raux de l’Ordre des
fre`res preˆcheurs, 8 vols. Alphone Picard et ﬁls, Paris
Prouvost G (1996) Thomas d’Aquin et les Thomismes. Le Cerf, Paris
Robiglio A (2007) Appunti sulla prima scuola tomista (1274–1323). I.
Aspetti sociali. ESD, Bologna
Roensch FJ (1964) Early Thomistic school. Priory Press, Iowa
Saint Thomas au XIVe sie`cle (1997) Monographic volume. Revue
thomiste 97
Wippel JF (1995) Thomas Aquinas and the condemnation of 1277. Mod
Schoolman 72:233–272
Thomism, Byzantine
JOHN A. DEMETRACOPOULOS
Department of Education
University of Patras
Patras
Greece
Abstract
Shortly after Thomas Aquinas’ death, his thought spread
not only in Europe but also in the Christian East. This
transmission was a side effect (or even part) of the mis-
sionary activity of the Dominicans in the East. From the
beginning (c. 1300) up to the end of Byzantine Thomism,
Aquinas was almost exclusively noted for his arguments
on behalf of the Filioque. Yet Demetrios Kydones’ transla-
tion of the Summa contra Gentiles in 1354 and Demetrios
and Prochoros Kydones’ translation of the Summa
theologiae in the few subsequent years showed to the
Byzantines that the range and the quality of Aquinas’
thought was wider and higher than the Latins’ use of his
arguments in the discussion between the Roman See and
the Byzantine Church allowed them to recognize. The
reaction by the earliest Byzantine readers of Aquinas
(Demetrios Kydones himself, John VI Cantakouzenos,
and Neilos Kabasilas) bears marks of a ‘‘culture shock.’’
Byzantines were particularly impressed by the apologetic
skills of Aquinas, which they put in the service of their own
discussions with Islam. In this context, Demetrios
Kydones translated Aquinas’ De rationibus ﬁdei and De
articulis ﬁdei, too. At the purely philosophical level,
Aquinas promoted Byzantine Aristotelianism. This was
used by Nicholas Kabasilas in order to combat Gregory
Palamas’ repudiation of human knowledge and by
1308 T
Thomism, Byzantine

Prochoros
Kydones
in
order
to
combat
Gregory
Palamas’ distinction between God’s ‘‘essence’’ and ‘‘ener-
gies.’’ It was also fervently embraced by George Scholarios
(Gennadios II) in order to defeat George Gemistos’
(Plethon) paganism. Scholarios also contributed to the
Byzantines’ knowledge of Aquinas’ commentaries on
Aristotle’s writings by translating some of them (on the
De interpretatione, De anima, Physics, and Posterior
Analytics) into Greek.
Historical and Literary Facts
Byzantine Thomism, that is, the Greek translation, spread,
and inﬂuence of several important writings of Thomas
Aquinas (1225–1274) on Late Byzantine theological and
philosophical thought (fourteenth to ﬁfteenth century)
forms the most important part of the spread of Aquinas’
thought in the Christian East. It is divided into three
phases.
From the Beginning of the Byzantines’
Acquaintance with Aquinas (c. 1300) up to
Demetrios Kydones’ Translation (1354) of the
Summa Contra Gentiles
This phase is obscure, because of the scarcity of the rele-
vant evidence. The origins of Byzantine Thomism are
connected with the history of the missionary activity of
the Dominican friars in Byzantium from the last decades
of the thirteenth century onward. In late 1299, the Domin-
ican Guillaume Bernard de Gaillac arrived at Constanti-
nople, where he learnt Greek and translated (not earlier
than 1305) into Greek some parts of Thomas’ works
(probably Summa theologiae I, qu. 36, art. 2–4 and
Summa contra Gentiles IV, 24–25, which touch upon the
Filioque). A report of the Latins’ arguments for the
Filioque by Manuel Moschopoulos (c. 1265–c. 1316) prob-
ably reﬂects this translation. In 1307, Guillaume and his
company, expelled by the emperor Andronikos II (1282–
1328), moved to Pera (by then a Genovese colony near the
capital city of the Byzantine state); there, their convent
became a channel of transmission of Scholastic theology,
especially that of Aquinas, in Byzantium. Most probably,
it was a member of this convent, Philip de Bindo
Incontri (or Philip of Pera), who taught Demetrios
Kydones (c. 1324 – c. 1397) Latin, by using Aquinas’
Summa contra Gentiles as a means of practicing translation
from Latin into Greek.
From 1354 to the End of the
Fourteenth Century
Within less than a year, Demetrios Kydones produced
a translation of the entire Summa contra Gentiles. The
ﬁrst readers of the translation, namely, the emperor,
John VI Cantakuzenos and Kydones’ former teacher,
Neilos Kabasilas, were startled by the apologetic skills of
Aquinas. Soon afterward, Demetrios converted to Cathol-
icism (1357), and in collaboration with his younger
brother
Prochoros
(c.
1330–c.
1369),
carried
out
a translation of the Summa theologiae. He also translated
Thomas’ De rationibus ﬁdei contra Saracenos, Graecos et
Armenos ad cantorem Antiochenum, and De articulis ﬁdei et
Ecclesiae sacramentis ad archiepiscopum Panormitanum, as
well as Chaps. 53–54 of Bernardus Guidonis’ (c. 1261–
1331) Vita sancti Thomae Aquinatis, where a list of
Aquinas’ writings is contained. In addition, Prochoros
translated the De spiritualibus creaturis, the Prologue of
Thomas’ Commentary on Aristotle’s Metaphysics and
some questions of the ﬁrst book of Thomas’ Commentary
on the ‘‘Sentences.’’
From the Third to the Sixth Decade of the
Fifteenth Century
Another
Latin-learned
scholar,
George
Scholarios
(Gennadios II) (c. 1400–c. 1472), translated some other
Thomistic works: the De ente et essentia (along with
Armadur de Bellovisu’s Commentary on it), Commentary
on Aristotle’s ‘‘De interpretatione,’’ the Commentary on
Aristotle’s
‘‘De
anima,’’
part
of
the
Commentary
on Aristotle’s ‘‘Physics,’’ and the De fallaciis (probably not
a genuine work). Scholarios’ version of Aquinas’ Com-
mentary on Aristotle’s ‘‘Posterior Analytics’’ is not extant.
Besides, he elaborated, for personal use, a compendium of
the Summa contra Gentiles and of the Ia and the Ia IIae
of the Summa theologiae (as well as two of Florilegia
Thomistica), which he constantly used in his writings
instead of having recourse to the full texts themselves.
Influence on Speculative Thought
Byzantine authors who beneﬁted from the fact that some
of Aquinas’ writings became available in Greek are to be
found not only among the pro-Latin circles (Prochoros
Kydones,
Manuel
Kalekas,
Bessarion,
Andreas
Chrysoberges etc.) and among the circles of open-minded
thinkers (such as Nicholas Kabasilas) who did not exhibit
any hostility to the ‘‘Latins’’; even professed anti-Latin
authors
(such
as
John
VI
Cantakuzenos,
Joseph
Bryennios, Makarios Makres, Manuel II Palaiologos,
Markos Eugenikos, and Scholarios) did not deprive them-
selves of reading Aquinas (among other Christian Latin
authors translated into Greek) and borrowing from him
whatever they regarded useful. Even George Gemistos
(Plethon) (c. 1360–1452 or 1454), a professedly anti-
Christian author who, like most of his contemporary
Thomism, Byzantine T
1309
T

intellectuals, did not know Latin, was heavily inﬂuenced
by the Summae; he not only integrated into his own
writings some important Thomistic doctrines and argu-
ments; he also composed a ﬂorilegium of extracta from the
Summae for his own use, which testify to a careful reading
of these works. In addition, his disciple with the eclectic
and independent mind, Cardinal Bessarion (1403–1472),
elaborated an abridgment of the Ia IIae.
This is a list of concrete cases of Thomas’ inﬂuence on
Late Byzantine philosophical thought:
1. Producing numbered arguments both for and against
a statement on any topic, imitating the structure of
Aquinas’ ‘‘articuli.’’ Some authors compounded some
of their works after this pattern (see, e.g., Nicholas
Kabasilas’ De rationis valore and Contra Pyrrhonem;
George Scholarios’ Against the Impasses Ignorantly
Imputed by Plethon to Aristotle).
2. Anti-Palamite ethical Aristotelianism. Against Greg-
ory Palamas’ (1296–1357) repudiation of secular
knowledge and philosophical
thinking, Nicholas
Kabasilas
(c.
1325–post
1391),
based
both
on
Aristotle’s ethical writings and on Aquinas’ Summa
theologiae, defended human ‘‘reason’’ as a means of
attaining truth and acting morally, that is, as a means
of ‘‘perfection.’’
3. Anti-Palamite defense of the unity of God. Prochoros
Kydones (On the Essence and Energy of God), John
Kyparissiotes (c. 1310? – post 1377; That It Is Impossi-
ble to Find The Difference Between Essence and Opera-
tion in the Case of God; An Introductory Exposition of
Some Fundamental Theological Statements), Manuel
Calecas (c. 1350?–1410; On Essence and Energy; Prin-
ciples of the Catholic Faith), and Bessarion (A Reply to
the ‘‘Chapters’’ of Marcos Eugenicos) rejected the high
degree of reality attributed by Gregory Palamas to the
distinction between God’s ‘‘essence’’ and ‘‘energies’’ by
using, inter alia, Aquinas’ doctrine of the coincidence
of the absolute properties of God (‘‘being-x’’) with His
being (esse).
4. Thomistic Palamism. Several defenders of the afore-
said
Palamite
distinction,
such
as
John
VI
Cantakuzenos (c. 1892–1393; Third Letter to the Cath-
olic Archbishop of Constantinople Paul), Manuel II
Palaiologos (1350–1425; On the Procession of the Holy
Spirit), and Marcos Eugenikos (1394–1445; On the
Non-Composite Character of the Distinction between
God’s Essence and Energies), described it as drawn ex
parte subjecti by using the term epinoia, which, in
Demetrios Kydones’ translation of the Summa contra
Gentiles, renders the Latin intelligentia and intentio.
George Scholarios (Against the Followers of Akindynos;
On the Way God’s Energies Are Distinguished From
Each Other as Well as From God’s Essence, to Which
They Belong and in Which They Abide; cf. his excursus
within his translation of the Armadur de Bellovisu’s
Commentary on Aquinas’ De ente et essentia) offered
the highest philosophical elaboration to this trend;
according to him, Aquinas’ analogia entis implies
that the ‘‘divine names’’ not only differ really from
each other according to their deﬁnition but also cor-
respond to some ‘‘forms’’ actually existing in God,
though in such a way that God’s inﬁnity renders
their plurality harmless for His simplicity.
5. George Scholarios defended the rationality of Christian
faith against Plethon’s pagan attack on it by means
of Aquinas’ Christian Aristotelianism. Scholarios’
counterattack regarded especially Plethon’s doctrines
of the plurality of divine beings as well as of ‘‘fate.’’
Scholarios defended the Christian doctrines of one God
and His Providence, which makes room for free will.
See also: ▶Augustine in Byzantium ▶Demetrios Kydones
▶George
Scholarios
(Gennadios
II)
▶Nicholas
Chamae¨tos Kabasilas ▶Prochoros Kydones ▶Thomas
Aquinas ▶Thomism
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(1976–2002) Demetriou Kydone, Thoma Akyinatou Summa theologike
exellenistheisa, vols 15–18 (IIa IIae, qu. 1–79), ed. Leontsinis G,
Glykophrydi-Leontsinis A, Demetracopoulos PhA, Brentanou M,
Sideri S, Photopoulou P, Kalokairinou H. Athens (ﬁve issues, in
Modern Greek)
Demetracopoulos JA (2004) Apo ten historia tou byzantinou thomismou:
Plethon kai Thomas Akuinates. Greek Byzantium and Latin West:
philosophy – studies, 2. Appendix III and IV. Athens (in Modern
Greek)
Mercati G (1931) Notizie di Procoro e Demetrio Cidone, Manuele Caleca
e Teodoro Meliteniota ed altri appunti per la storia della teologia e
della letteratura bizantina del secolo XIV. Studi e Testi, 56. Citta` del
Vaticano
Secondary Sources
Demetracopoulos
JA
(2010a)
Demetrios
Cydones’
translation
of
Bernardus Guidonis’ list of Thomas Aquinas’ writings and the his-
torical roots of Byzantine Thomism. In: Speer A, Wirmer D (eds),
1308. Eine Topographie historischer Gleichzeitigkeit. Walter de
Gruyter, Berlin/New York, pp 827–881
Demetracopoulos JA (2010b) Palamas transformed. Palamite interpreta-
tions of the distinction between God’s, essence’ and, energies’ in Late
Byzantium. In: Hinterberger M, Schabel C (eds), Greeks, Latins, and
Intellectual
History
1204–1500
(Recherches
de
The´ologie
et
Philosophie Me´die´vales. Bibliotheca, 9), Peeters, Leuven,pp 263–372
1310 T
Thomism, Byzantine

Demetracopoulos PhA (1982) Demetrius Kydones’ translation of the
Summa Theologica. Jahrb O¨ sterreich Byz 32(4):311–320
Fyrigos A (2004) Tomismo e anti-Tomismo a Bisanzio (con una nota sulla
Defensio S. Thomae adversus Nilum Cabasilam di Demetrio
Cidone). In: Molle A (ed) Tommaso d’Aquino e il mondo bizantino.
Venafro, pp 27–72
Kianka F (1981) Demetrius Cydones (c. 1324–c. 1397): intellectual and
diplomatic relations between Byzantium and the West in the 14th
century. Doctoral dissertation, Fordham University
Kianka F (1982) Demetrius Kydones and Thomas Aquinas. Byzantion
52:264–286
Papadopoulos
StG
(1967)
Hellenikai
metaphraseis
thomistikon
ergon. Philothomistai kai antithomistai en Byzantio. Symbole eis
ten historian tes byzantines theologias. Doctoral dissertation, Theo-
logical Faculty of the University of Athens, Athens (in Modern
Greek)
Papadopoulos StG (1974) Thomas in Byzanz. Thomas-Rezeption und
Thomas-Kritik in Byzanz zwischen 1354 und 1435. Theol Philos
49:274–304
Podskalsky G (1974) Die Rezeption der thomistischen Theologie bei
Gennadios II. Scholarios (ca 1403–1472). Theol Philos 49:305–323
Time
PETER ADAMSON1, CECILIA TRIFOGLI2
1Philosophy Department
King’s College London
London
UK
2Philosophy Faculty
All Souls College, University of Oxford
Oxford
UK
Abstract
In both the Arabic and Latin traditions, medieval philos-
ophers discussed time largely by responding to Aristotle’s
Physics. Though there are exceptions, like Abu¯ Bakr
al-Ra¯zı¯, most medieval philosophers agree with Aristotle’s
account and try to solve problems and objections that can
be raised about it. Several such problems appear in both
the Latin and Arabic traditions. For instance, how does
time relate to eternity, and is eternity, properly speaking,
timeless? Again, Aristotle relates time to motion; but can
time in fact be understood as something real distinct from
motion? If so, time and motion are two distinct extra-
mental things; if not, there is only a conceptual distinction
between the two, so that they are essentially one and the
same extra-mental thing viewed in different ways. Like
motion, time is successive, and another problem that
arises in both Arabic and Latin is how something can
exist when its parts do not coexist simultaneously. Finally,
Aristotle’s assumption that there is only one time is seen
as problematic, because of the ontological status of the
attribute of motion that Aristotle identiﬁes as time. In
thirteenth-century Latin philosophy, various solutions
are adopted to save the unity of time, the most inﬂuential
being that of Averroes.
In Plato’s Timaeus (37d), time is described as a ‘‘moving
image of eternity.’’ In Aristotle’s Physics, it is described as
the ‘‘number’’ or ‘‘measure’’ of motion and rest (220a24–
5, 221b7–8). These two deﬁnitions already suggest the
major themes encountered in medieval theories of time.
Plato’s contrast of time to eternity stands behind an inﬂu-
ential late ancient view, found in Plotinus (see especially
Enneads III.7), according to which eternity properly
speaking is not inﬁnite time, but rather timelessness. The
idea of eternity as timelessness becomes a way of under-
standing God’s eternity, and already plays a role in late
antique Christianity with Augustine (Confessions, Book XI)
and Boethius (Consolation of Philosophy, Book V). On the
other hand, late ancient Platonists like Plotinus did think
the physical cosmos is everlasting, though not ‘‘eternal’’ in
the sense of ‘‘timeless.’’ They also believed this was the view
of Plato himself, which allowed them to ﬁnd agreement
between Plato and Aristotle. Aristotle argued explicitly in
the Physics and On the Heavens that motion is eternal.
Because time is the measure of motion, it follows that time
is endless.
Already before the medieval period, there were dis-
senters from Aristotle’s picture of a God who causes ever-
lasting motion, which is then measured by everlasting
time. The most prominent critic was the Christian
Philoponus, who argued against the Neoplatonist consen-
sus that read Plato as endorsing the world’s eternity. While
this dispute did concern the nature of divine action, it also
involved more detailed questions about the nature of time.
For instance, Aristotle had argued that the instant or
‘‘now’’ (to nun) is not really a constitutive part of time.
Rather, time, like spatial extension, is divisible into indef-
initely small continuous parts, whereas the instant has no
extension at all. It is not a part of time, but a division
between two extended parts of time: for example the
present instant is a division between the past and future.
If this is right, then there can be no ﬁrst ‘‘instant’’ for the
world, because there would be no past from which to
divide off the future time. Philoponus thus pointed out
that Aristotle’s deﬁnition of the instant begs the question
against proponents of the world’s temporal createdness.
Aside from this question of creation, Aristotle’s concep-
tion of time and the instant seemed to pose other
Time T
1311
T

problems. For example, Augustine worries that if the pre-
sent instant is unextended, and only that which is present
exists ‘‘now,’’ then extended time will never exist.
These ancient discussions set the agenda for discus-
sions of time in the Arabic tradition. Al-Kindı¯ (d. c. 873)
cites Aristotle’s deﬁnition of time in the midst of
a discussion of whether the world is eternal (in the sense
of everlasting). He accepts this deﬁnition, but argues that
it can be used as part of an argument against the world’s
eternity. For time measures motion, and motion belongs
to body. But every body is ﬁnite in quantity, and it is
impossible for an inﬁnite motion, and hence inﬁnite
time, to belong to a quantitatively ﬁnite thing. Al-Kindı¯
is here exploiting not only the Aristotelian doctrine that
time depends ultimately on body, but also Aristotle’s
denial of actual inﬁnity. Al-Kindı¯ follows Philoponus by
further arguing that an inﬁnity of past time would be an
actual inﬁnity, and not a potential inﬁnity as Aristotle had
held. His main concern throughout these arguments,
which appear in the second section of On First Philosophy,
would seem to be ensuring that only God can be in any
sense actually inﬁnite. But al-Kindı¯ probably holds that
God was timeless and not everlasting, for he says in pass-
ing that God is the ‘‘cause of time.’’
The slightly later Jewish philosopher Saadia Gaon (d.
942) uses similar arguments, also under the inﬂuence of
Philoponus, in his own discussion of the eternity of the
world. But around the same time a very different approach
is taken by the doctor and philosopher Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯
(d. 925). As far as we can make out from the later sources
that report al-Ra¯zı¯’s view, he recognizes not one, but two,
sorts of time, which might be called ‘‘absolute’’ and ‘‘rel-
ative.’’ These are parallel to two sorts of space, or more
accurately ‘‘place.’’ Absolute place, which is compared to
an empty vessel, is what bodies come to occupy when God
forms the world. Relative place is like Aristotelian place:
the conﬁnes of a determinate body that is already located
in absolute space. Similarly, absolute time (which some
sources expounding al-Ra¯zı¯’s doctrine refer to as ‘‘eter-
nity’’) is inﬁnite, whereas the time relative to a given body
or motion is what numbers its ﬁnite temporal career. This
doctrine seems to be a correction of Aristotle: while ‘‘rel-
ative’’ time does supervene on the motions of bodies, al-
Ra¯zı¯ argues, ‘‘nonrelative’’ time must ﬁrst be present in
order that motions may occur within it. Just as empty
place or space is conceptually prior to the body that
occupies it, so absolute time could exist even if there
were no motion at all. He therefore makes time and
place two of the ﬁve principles which must exist in order
for a world to be generated. Notice that absolute time does
not seem to be comparable to the Neoplatonists’ timeless
eternity, of which relative time would be an image. Rather,
absolute time is a fundamental part of the framework of
the created universe. Al-Ra¯zı¯’s ‘‘correction’’ of Aristotle
would solve several other problems associated with the
supervenient conception of time. For instance, we need no
longer worry about which motion, if any, is privileged in
producing a single time that would coordinate all
motions. (Alexander of Aphrodisias had proposed that
the outermost celestial sphere should play this role, since
its motion is fastest.) As we will see, this question of
whether there is only one time was also taken up in the
Latin tradition.
Where al-Ra¯zı¯ subsumes Aristotle’s conception of rel-
ative time within a non-Aristotelian conception of abso-
lute time, Avicenna (d. 1037) accepts the Aristotelian
doctrine. But he also extends it in various ways. He agrees
with the Aristotelian position that time is indeﬁnitely
divisible, and in this respect analogous to spatial exten-
sion. Time is disanalogous to spatial extension, however,
in that the parts of time cannot exist together: this gives
time its distinctive ‘‘before and after’’ character. He also
agrees with Aristotle that the instant or ‘‘now’’ is
a durationless division in the temporal continuum, rather
than a kind of ‘‘time atom,’’ as may have been suggested by
some atomist accounts in Islamic theology (kala¯m). Under
the inﬂuence of Greek commentators on Aristotle’s Phys-
ics, Avicenna further suggests that the ‘‘now’’ can be
understood as ‘‘ﬂowing’’ in such a way as to create the
temporal continuum as it moves into the future. This
helps Avicenna to overcome an ancient objection to
Aristotle’s theory: if we concede that there is some
unextended instant which marks the beginning or end of
a change, then what marks the beginning or end of the
existence of the instant itself? Avicenna also builds on
Aristotle’s arguments against the ﬁrst moment of time,
as
follows.
If
the
world
‘‘begins,’’
this
implies
a ‘‘beforeness,’’ which cannot be reduced to the mere fact
that without God’s creation the world does not exist:
nonexistence could as easily come after the world ceases
to exist. Rather, genuinely temporal ‘‘beforeness’’ is con-
ceptually required for anything to begin. So, beginning
implies prior time.
In his Incoherence of the Philosophers, al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (d.
1111) strenuously objects to Avicenna’s depiction of the
universe as the eternal and necessary effect of God. It is not
the eternity of the world as such that bothers al-G˙ aza¯lı¯;
rather, he defends the possibility of the world’s beginning
1312 T
Time

in order to uphold God’s complete freedom with respect
to creation. While al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ is happy to say with al-Kindı¯
that time simply comes into existence when God creates
the world, he also thinks that God could create
a temporally bounded world after an inﬁnity of ‘‘empty’’
time, if He so chose. Even if God’s will is itself eternal, God
could
eternally
will
that
something
happen
at
a predetermined later moment. Al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ considers the
objection that God, being perfectly rational, would not
be able to choose between two equally good moments at
which to create the world. After all, before the world exists,
any two moments are indistinguishable, so God would
have to choose the moment for the world’s creation arbi-
trarily. Al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ retorts that such arbitrary choices are
paradigm instances of freedom. In an inversion of the
Aristotelians’ familiar analogies between space and time,
he points out that nontemporal features of the physical
cosmos must also be chosen arbitrarily. For instance, it
would not make any difference if the cosmos were slightly
smaller, or if the heavenly spheres rotated in the opposite
direction.
In the Latin tradition the most articulated speculations
about time take place within the conceptual background
of Aristotle’s philosophy of time. The Physics, the work
containing the ex professo treatment of time by Aristotle
(Book IV, 10–14), is ﬁrst translated into Latin in the
second quarter of the twelfth century and starts to
circulate widely around the middle of the thirteenth cen-
tury. The most eminent philosophers of the thirteenth and
fourteenth
centuries
write
commentaries
on
the
Physics – e.g., Robert Grosseteste, Roger Bacon, Albert
the Great, Thomas Aquinas, Giles of Rome, William of
Ockham, Walter Burley, John Buridan, and John of
Jandun. The Physics-commentaries are the standard
sources for the medieval reception of Aristotle’s theory of
time, but important discussions are also found in theo-
logical works. While medieval Latin philosophers gener-
ally accept the main ideas of Aristotle’s theory, they also
feel that it contains some open problems, which then
become matter of debate. The main controversial issues
are (1) the existence of time, (2) the extra-mental reality
of time and the relation of time to motion, and (3) the
unity of time.
1. Aristotle presents an argument against the existence of
time and leaves it without an explicit solution (Physics
IV.10). The argument concludes that time does not
exist, starting from the premise that no part of time
exists. The parts of time are the past and the future,
and neither the past nor the future exist. Only the
present exists, but the present is an indivisible instant
and not a part of time. It is clear that the argument
relies on the following criterion of existence: for
a divisible thing to exist, some of its parts must exist
now or simultaneously (simul). In the Latin tradition
those things that satisfy this criterion of existence are
called permanent entities (permanentia). A paradigm
example of a permanent thing is a material substance.
Thus, Aristotle’s argument raises the question of
whether permanent entities are the only class of
existing things. The standard answer to this question
is negative. The other relevant class of existing things is
that of successive entities (successiva), which include
not only time, but also motion. Unlike permanent
entities, successive entities are characterized by tem-
porally extended parts, i.e., parts that do not exist
simultaneously but follow one another in time. Medi-
eval Latin philosophers not only point out that
Aristotle’s argument is not conclusive against the exis-
tence of time because it is based on a criterion of
existence valid only for permanent things, but also
try to deﬁne a criterion for the existence of successive
entities. There are two main solutions to this problem.
(1) One posits that the existence of time is guaranteed
by the existence of the present instant – similarly,
the existence of a motion is guaranteed by the exis-
tence of its instantaneous present element (the
mutatum esse). Although the instant is not a part of
time but an indivisible element of it, it has two other
properties that explain its role in the existence of time.
One is that the instant is the common boundary at
which the past and the future join, the other is that
the instant is a persisting element in time ﬂowing
from the past to the future. (2) The other solution
envisages a distinct mode of existence for motion
and time taken as wholes, different from that of
permanent entities. In one formulation of this distinc-
tion, the being of a successive thing is in ﬁeri (in
becoming) while that of permanent entities is in
factum esse (in completed being). The distinction
between permanent and successive entities is generally
taken as primitive.
2. While the existence of motion and time as successive
entities is variously explained but commonly accepted,
a much more controversial issue is that of the
relation between motion and time. The question is
what kind of attribute of motion time is. Is time
a real, that is, extra-mental, attribute of motion or
Time T
1313
T

a mind-dependent attribute resulting from our activ-
ity of measuring the duration of a motion? On another
formulation, the question is whether there is a real
distinction between time and motion, so that time
and motion are two distinct extra-mental things, or
rather only a conceptual distinction between the two,
so that they are essentially one and the same extra-
mental thing viewed in different ways. Aristotle him-
self raises this question, when he asks whether the
existence of time depends on the human soul
(Physics IV.14). He argues that time does not exist
without the soul because time is a number and the
existence of number depends on the soul, because it
depends on the mental operation of counting.
Aristotle’s
dependence
claim
was
accepted
and
expanded by the Arabic commentator Averroes. He
maintains that only motion exists outside the soul, in
extra-mental reality, whereas time exists in the soul.
He speciﬁes that the relevant collection of which time
is a number is that of the before and after in a motion
(i.e., the collection of successive phases in a motion):
time exists as a result of the action of the soul of
numbering, i.e., discerning, the before and after in
a motion.
Averroes’ basic idea that time exists in the soul clearly
expresses a reductive view of time that posits that in
extra-mental reality there are not two distinct things
corresponding to time and motion respectively. Many
thirteenth- and fourteenth-century Latin philosophers
share Averroes’ reductive view. An eminent example is
William of Ockham, who claims that time is not an
extra-mental thing distinct from motion. On the contrary,
every extra-mental thing signiﬁed by the name ‘‘time’’ is
also signiﬁed by the name ‘‘motion.’’ Ockham speciﬁes,
however, that the names ‘‘motion’’ and ‘‘time’’ are not
synonymous because they have different nominal deﬁni-
tions. In addition to the extra-mental things signiﬁed by
the name ‘‘motion,’’ the name ‘‘time’’ co-signiﬁes the
human soul that numbers the successive phases of
a motion. Accordingly, for Ockham as for Averroes, what
makes the difference between the notions of motion and
time is the reference to a mental activity.
There was, however, also strong opposition to
Averroes’ reductive view. Many thirteenth-century com-
mentators – for example, Roger Bacon, Albert the Great,
William of Clifford, and many other anonymous English
commentators – think that the claim that the existence of
time depends on the soul is basically wrong. They argue
that this claim derives from mistaken assumptions about
the ontological status of number and that it conﬂicts with
other basic properties that Aristotle ascribes to time. The
thirteenth-century realists, however, while advocating that
time is an extra-mental thing distinct from motion, do not
provide very good arguments for this real distinction.
Some fourteenth-century realists are more successful in
this respect. For example, Walter Burley, Ockham’s most
inﬂuential opponent, argues that one needs to posit time
as an extra-mental thing distinct from motion in order to
account for the succession of past and future phases of a
motion. His idea is that past and future and more gener-
ally temporal succession are found both in time and in
every motion, but they belong to time primarily and to
motion only secondarily, that is, in virtue of time. Thus
what makes one phase of a motion past and another future
is that one is in past time and the other in future time.
3. Aristotle claims that there is just one time (Physics
IV.14). This claim, however, is regarded as highly
problematic because of the ontological status that
Aristotle ascribes to time. Time is an attribute of
motion so that motion is the subject of time; since
there are many motions, it seems to follow that there
are many times, as many as there are motions, given
the principle that the identity and diversity of an
attribute depends on that of its subject. The most
inﬂuential position on the unity of time is that of
Averroes. The Arabic commentator saves the unity of
time by restricting the subject of time to one motion,
the ﬁrst motion. In his view, time is an accident of the
ﬁrst motion alone, although it functions as a non-
inhering measure for all the other motions. Averroes’
solution is adopted with some modiﬁcations by the
major thirteenth-century philosophers, e.g., Albert the
Great, Thomas Aquinas, and Giles of Rome. Alterna-
tive solutions, however, are also proposed. Bonaven-
ture tries to explain the unity of time on the basis of
the unity of matter, which is the principle of every
motion: it is because there is just one matter underly-
ing every motion that there is also just one time. Roger
Bacon and Richard Rufus of Cornwall argue that all
simultaneous motions, qua simultaneous, are indis-
tinct and in some sense one, so that they form just one
subject for time. Accordingly, since time belongs to all
simultaneous motions insofar as they are simulta-
neous and hence one, the time of simultaneous
motions is one. In the fourteenth century the idea
that there are many times is accepted. For example,
Walter Burley posits that time is a successive quantity
that every motion necessarily has so that there are
necessarily many times as there are many motions,
although he admits that only the ﬁrst time, the time
1314 T
Time

inhering in the ﬁrst motion, has a privileged role in
measuring the duration of all the other motions.
See also: ▶Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯, Muh:ammad ibn Zakarı¯ya¯ʾ
(Rhazes) ▶Albert the Great ▶Alexander of Aphrodisias
and Arabic Aristotelianism ▶Aristotelianism in the
Greek, Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions
▶Augustine ▶Boethius ▶Bonaventure ▶Form and
Matter ▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid Muh:ammad ▶Giles of
Rome ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d
(Averroes) ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶John
Buridan ▶John of Jandun ▶al-Kindı¯, Abu¯ Yu¯suf Yaʿqu¯b
ibn Ish:a¯q ▶Natural Philosophy ▶Natural Philosophy,
Arabic
▶Natural
Philosophy,
Jewish
▶Philosophy,
Arabic ▶Realism ▶Richard Rufus of Cornwall ▶Robert
Grosseteste ▶Roger Bacon ▶Saadia Gaon ▶Thomas
Aquinas ▶Walter Burley ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Albert the Great (1987/1993) Physica. In: Hossfeld P (ed) Opera omnia,
IV. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Aquinas Thomas (1965) In: Maggiolo PM (ed) In octo libros Physicorum
Aristotelis Expositio. Marietti, Torino/Roma
Averroes (1562) Aristotelis de Physico Auditu. In: Aristotelis Opera cum
Averrois Commentariis, VIII. Venice (repr. Minerva, Frankfurt, 1962)
Bacon Roger (1935) Questiones supra libros octo Physicorum Aristotelis
(Questiones altere). In: Delorme FM, Steele R (eds) Opera omnia,
XIII. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Bonaventure (1938) Liber II Sententiarum. In: Opera theologica selecta,
II. Quaracchi/Florence
Buridan John (1509) Quaestiones super octo Physicorum libros
Aristotelis. Paris (repr. Minerva, Frankfurt, 1964)
Burley Walter (1501) In Physicam Aristotelis Expositio et Quaestiones.
Venice (repr. Olms, Hildesheim/New York, 1972)
Gaon Saadia (1948) The book of beliefs and opinions (trans: Rosenblatt
S). Yale University Press, New Haven/London
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (1997) The incoherence of the philosophers (trans: Marmura
M). Brigham Young University Press, Provo
Giles of Rome (1502) Commentaria in octo libros Physicorum Aristotelis.
Venice (repr. Minerva, Frankfurt, 1968)
Grosseteste Robert (1963) In: Dales RC (ed) Commentarius in VIII libros
Physicorum Aristotelis. University of Colorado Press, Boulder
John of Jandun (1488) Quaestiones super Physicam Aristotelis. Venice
Kilwardby Robert (1987) In: Lewry PO (ed) De Tempore et De Spiritu
Fantastico. Oxford University Press, Oxford
al-Kindı¯ (1974) On ﬁrst philosophy. In: Ivry A (ed) Al-Kindi’s metaphys-
ics. SUNY Press, Albany
Philoponus (1987) Against Aristotle on the eternity of the world (trans:
Wildberg C). Duckworth, London
al-Ra¯zı¯ (1939) Rasa’il falsaﬁyya. In: Kraus P (ed) Opera philosophica.
Imprimerie Paul Barbey, Cairo
al-Ra¯zı¯ (2007) On the ﬁve eternals. In: McGinnis J, Reisman DC (eds and
trans) Classical Arabic philosophy: an anthology of sources. Hackett,
Indianapolis
Richard Rufus of Cornwall (2003) In: Wood R (ed) In Physicam
Aristotelis. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Trifogli Cecilia (2007) Liber Quartus Physicorum Aristotelis. Repertorio
delle Questioni. Commenti Inglesi ca. 1250–1270. Sismel, Firenze.
Quaestiones super tertium et quartum librum Physicorum. English
commentators of the years ca. 1250–1270. Trifogli Cecilia (ed),
CD-Rom edition
William of Ockham (1985) Expositio in libros Physicorum Aristotelis. In:
Richter V, Leibold G (ed) Opera Philosophica, IV. St. The Franciscan
Institute, Bonaventure
Secondary Sources
Adams MM (1987) William Ockham, vol II. University of Notre Dame
Press, Notre Dame, pp 799–899
Adamson P (2007) Al-Kindıˆ. Oxford University Press, New York, chap. 4
Davidson HA (1969) John Philoponus as a source of medieval Islamic and
Jewish proofs of creation. J Am Oriental Soc 89:357–391
Dekker D-J (2001) Time and motion in Walter Burley’s late Expositio on
Aristotle’s physics. Early Sci Med 6(3):185–203
Dhanani A (1994) The physical theory of Kalam: atoms, space, and void in
Basrian Mu‘tazili cosmology. Brill, Leiden
Goodman LE (1992) Time in Islam. Asian Philos 2:3–19. Another version
in Balslev AN, Mohanty JN (1993) Religion and time. Brill, Leiden,
pp 138–162
Jeck UR (1994) Aristoteles contra Augustinum. Zur Frage nach dem
Verha¨ltnis von Zeit und Seele bei den antiken Aristoteleskom-
mentatoren, im arabischen Aristotelismus und in 13. Jahrhundert.
Gru¨ner, Amsterdam
Jolivet J (1993) Al-Kindıˆ, vues sur le temps. Arabic Sci Philos 3:55–75
Kukkonen T (2000) Possible worlds in the Tahafut al-Falasifa: al-Ghazali
on creation and contingency. J Hist Philos 38:479–502
Lettinck P (1994) Aristotle’s physics and its reception in the Arabic world.
Brill, Leiden
Maier A (1955) Metaphysische Hintergru¨nde der Spa¨tscholastischen
Naturphilosophie. Edizioni di storia e letteratura, Rome, pp
47–137
Mayer T (2007) Avicenna against time beginning: the debate between the
commentators on the Ishaˆraˆt. In: Adamson P (ed) Classical Arabic
philosophy: sources and reception. Warburg Institute, London,
pp 125–149
McGinnis J (1999) Avicenna on the now: text and commentary. Am Cath
Philos Quart 73:73–106
Porro P (1996) Forme e modelli di durata nel pensiero tardomedievale:
l’aevum, il tempo discreto, la categoria ‘‘quando’’. Leuven University
Press, Leuven
Sorabji R (1983) Time, creation and the continuum. Theories in antiquity
and the early Middle Ages. Duckworth, London
Trifogli C (1990) Il problema dello statuto ontologico del tempo nelle
Questiones super Physicam di Thomas Wylton e di Giovanni di
Jandun. Documenti e studi sulla tradizione ﬁlosoﬁca medievale
1:515–527
Trifogli
C
(2000)
Oxford
physics
in
the
thirteenth
century
(ca. 1250–1270). Motion, inﬁnity, place and time. Brill, Leiden
Trifogli C (2001) Averrroes’s doctrine of time and its reception in the
scholastic debate. In: Porro P (ed) The medieval concept of time.
Brill, Leiden, pp 57–82
Trifogli C (2002) The reality of time in the commentary tradition on
the physics: the case of Wylton and Burley. In: Il commento ﬁlosoﬁco
nell’Occidente
Latino,
secoli
XIII–XV.
Brepols,
Turnhout,
pp 233–251
Time T
1315
T

Toleration
CARY J. NEDERMAN
Department of Political Science
Texas A & M University
College Station, TX
USA
Abstract
Although the idea of toleration (understood as forbear-
ance of beliefs and practices different from one’s own)
is often supposed to be of modern invention, there
were many medieval authors who proposed philosophical
grounds for it. Broadly speaking, these medieval doctrines
of tolerance may be classiﬁed according to a fourfold
scheme: skepticism, functionalism, nationalism, and mys-
ticism. Each of the medieval paths to toleration defended
upon distinct philosophical principles, but all of them led
to the conclusion that differing views about theological
and religious truths could be permitted and discussed.
Toleration (or its cognate, tolerance) denotes the readiness
of an individual or a community to permit the presence and/
or expression of ideas, beliefs, and practices differing from
what is accepted by that individual or by the dominant part
of the community. Tolerance demands forbearance only; it
does not require approval or endorsement of the tolerated
ideas, beliefs, and practices. A tolerant person respects dif-
ferences between him/herself and other people; a tolerant
community respects differences between groups and/or
among individuals within the social totality. Toleration is
thus antithetical to the persecution or repression (systematic
or individualized) of ideas, beliefs, and practices that differ
from one’s own. Indeed, a tolerant person or society will
protect the ability of such ideas, beliefs, and practices to
persist even while acknowledging disagreement with them.
There is a widespread perception that the Middle Ages
was not a time during which toleration could be advocated,
let alone ﬂourish, due to the supposedly monolithic char-
acter of western Christendom. It is commonly supposed
that medieval Europe was a ‘‘persecuting society,’’ system-
atically stamping out all forms of heresy and deviation
(Moore 2006). Yet, as with so many generalizations about
the Middle Ages, this one does not fully match the evidence.
The research of political, ecclesiastical, and social historians
has demonstrated repeatedly how tolerant practices and
beliefs existed side-by-side with persecutorial urges: laypeo-
ple and churchmen alike pursued policies that protected
suspected heretics, dissenters, and sexual and social
‘‘deviants’’ (Nederman and Laursen 1996; Lansing 1998;
Laursen and Nederman 1998; Laursen 1999). In turn, medi-
eval authors of a philosophical bent adopted a range of
intellectual frameworks that generated principles of toler-
ance. Speciﬁcally, it is possible to identify at least four
strands of thought during the Middle Ages that endorsed
robust accounts of toleration. These may be labeled skepti-
cism, functionalism, nationalism, and mysticism.
It may be surprising to discover that a number of Latin
thinkers – including John of Salisbury (1115/1120–1180)
and William of Ockham (c. 1285–1349) – self-consciously
embraced versions of skeptical thought. John depicted
himself as a proponent of the Ciceronian ‘‘New Academy,’’
which had promoted a moderately skeptical methodology
of probabilism in matters of the truth. While John admit-
ted that some matters were beyond doubt – the existence
of God, for instance – he nonetheless advocated debate
over a wide range of theological, metaphysical, and moral
questions. For John, the human mind’s imperfection
meant that rash enthusiasm for certain answers was
bound to yield dogmatism rather than true understand-
ing. Hence, he insisted that individuals should reserve to
themselves a wide freedom of judgment in the examina-
tion of truth, such that each by his right (suo jure) may
defend whatever seems to him most probable. John even
describes the process by which such probable truths
are examined in public discourse as ‘‘the clash of ideas.’’
William of Ockham does not appear to have looked
back to ancient skepticism as a source of inspiration. Yet
Ockham still advocated a method of philosophical and
theological analysis that required signiﬁcant suspension of
coercive judgment in matters concerning heretical belief
(Shogimen 2001). In William’s view, the bare rebuke of an
erring Christian by an ecclesiastical superior – even the
pope – does not oblige the individual to give up his belief.
In part, this is because inquisitors and prelates themselves
are sometimes ignorant and fallible in matters of faith. But
more importantly, Ockham maintains that there is an
obligation on the part of the corrector to show plainly to
the erring individual that the belief in question is indeed
erroneous, to show this so plainly, indeed, that it could not
reasonably be denied that the error had been clearly dem-
onstrated. Ockham thus tightened considerably the con-
ditions required for punishing religious dissent. Although
he denies that it is simply up to the supposedly erring
individual to judge whether his error has been shown him,
Ockham allows for the possibility that experts judging the
matter could be wrong and would thus be condemning an
innocent person. But in no case should the individual set
aside his own conscience in deference to external author-
ity, even the highest external authority.
1316 T
Toleration

A second strand of toleration theory arises from the
emergence during the European Middle Ages of greater
acceptance of the worthiness of guarding the bodily
welfare of human beings than one ﬁnds in either ancient
pagan or early Christian society. The dignity of labor, the
morality of commerce, and the protection of the poor
from extreme deprivation formed key themes of politi-
cal, economic, and theological writings after about 1100.
In turn, these ideas support the claim that respect must
be accorded to all of the parts of society that contribute
to
the temporal maintenance
of the community,
a teaching that yielded a widespread functionalist
approach to political order. Such functionalism might
provide the foundations for a case on behalf of tolera-
tion, as in the writings of Marsilius of Padua (1275/
1280–1342/1343). According to Marsiglio, the material
welfare and harmony of society was the chief goal of the
political community; and this was best achieved when all
of the goods and services necessary for bodily human
existence were exchanged in orderly fashion. Thus, those
who adopted supposedly heretical views in matters of
faith, while they could be detached from the spiritual
community of the church, ought not to be excluded
thereby from interactions with fellow citizens involving
purely earthly needs. It remained beyond the power of
clerics, in Marsiglio’s view, to regulate the social and
economic exchanges that were required or useful
for maintaining the corporeal existence of the orthodox
and the heterodox alike. Rather, only the community
itself enjoyed competence to determine how temporal
human conduct should be governed. Religious dispute
per se constituted an inappropriate basis for determin-
ing who deserved to be excluded from or punished by
secular society.
Another theoretical framework that cradled a policy
of toleration during the Latin Middle Ages was the grow-
ing acceptance of the divinely-inspired naturalness of
human diversity. In earlier Christian times, thinkers
such as St. Augustine had castigated the signs of human
difference – for example, the plurality of languages – by
proclaiming them to be a token of God’s punishment of
mankind’s wickedness. By contrast, many medieval Latin
thinkers (under the inﬂuence of Aristotelian science as
well as the realities of European sociopolitical organiza-
tion) came to view differences of identity stemming from
region or place of birth – denoted by terms such as natio
and gens – as a wholly natural phenomenon, consonant
with the divine plan for salvation. Diversity of climate,
terrain, and physical resources quite reasonably produce
divergent qualities of character, temperament, and social
organization. These are not to be reviled or suppressed, but
respected as a feature of the wondrous pluralism of God’s
creation. Around 1400, Christine de Pizan (1365–1430)
found in nationalism the building blocks of a cosmopolitan
communalism that she employed to argue for tolerance as
a by-product of organic political order (Forhan 2002). By
the time Nicholas of Cusa (1401–1464) wrote De pace ﬁdei
in the middle of the ﬁfteenth century, ‘‘national’’ distinc-
tions could be seen to support ‘‘a variety of rites’’ that
nevertheless did not contradict the universal truths of
religion. Indeed, Nicholas subscribed to the position that
God would be worshipped more devoutly if each nation
took local pride in the unique qualities of its own wor-
ship. That later expressions of nationalism have signaled
chauvinism and intolerance should not deter us from
recognizing
that
nationality
and
national
self-
consciousness can be a source of tolerant ideas as well.
Inasmuch as human beings ﬁnd reasons to value forms of
natural diversity – whether those reasons are religious (as
in the Middle Ages), aesthetic, or biological – the possi-
bility of ‘‘nationalism’’ as a positive stimulus to tolerance
exists.
Finally, the mystical dimensions of religious ex-
perience have often yielded the basis for the principled
defense of toleration. Gustav Mensching has argued for
the
presence
of
an
‘‘instrinic,’’
as
distinct
from
a ‘‘political’’ or a ‘‘rationalistic,’’ conception of tolerance
located in the teachings of mystical religions (Mensching
1971). Mensching’s main insight was that many mystics
recognize the immanence and omnipresence of God in
Being and thus assert the requirement that all that is must
be respected and given its due, because in that way the
Divine itself is worshiped. Mysticism posits truth, but
a truth that is all-embracing and that may, in extreme
cases, embrace all creation as ready for salvation. In
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite, for instance, the stages
of mystical experience lead to the encounter with God in
all things, which in turn are recognized to be God’s
appearances (theophanias). The journey to mystical
insight entails a readiness to forbear differing or dissenting
visions, since these, too, reﬂect elements of the divine
cosmology. Such doctrines may be encountered through-
out the western Christian tradition (John Scotus Eriugena,
Meister Eckhart, Jacob Boehme). Indeed, perhaps among
the various possible foundations for toleration, mysticism
has been the most widely embraced and propounded in
the Middle Ages.
See also: ▶Heresy ▶Inquisition ▶John of Salisbury
▶John Scottus Eriugena ▶Marsilius of Padua ▶Meister
Eckhart ▶Nicholas of Cusa ▶Pseudo-Dionysius, the
Areopagite ▶William of Ockham
Toleration T
1317
T

Bibliography
Primary Sources
John of Salisbury (1992) Policraticus (trans: Nederman CJ). Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
Marsiglio of Padua (1994) In: Nederman CJ (ed) Defensor Minor and De
translatione Imperii. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Nicholas of Cusa (1990) In: Biechler JE, Bond HL (eds) On interreligious
harmony: text, concordance, and translation of de pace ﬁdei. Mellen
Press, Lewiston
Secondary Sources
Forhan KL (2002) The political theory of Christine de Pizan. Ashgate,
Aldershot/Burlington
Lansing C (1989) Power and purity: Cathar Heresy in medieval Italy.
Oxford University Press, Oxford
Laursen JC (ed) (1999) Religious toleration: ‘‘the variety of rites’’ from
Cyrus to Defoe. St. Martin’s Press, New York
Laursen JC, Nederman CJ (eds) (1998) Beyond the persecuting society:
religious toleration before the enlightenment. University of Pennsyl-
vania Press, Philadelphia
Mensching G (1971) Tolerance and truth in religion (trans: Klimkeit H-J).
University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa
Moore RI (2006) The formation of a persecuting society, 2nd edn.
Blackwell, Oxford
Nederman CJ (2000) Worlds of difference: European discourses of toler-
ation, c. 1100–1550. Pennsylvania State University Press, University
Park
Nederman CJ, Laursen JC (eds) (1996) Difference and dissent: theories of
toleration in medieval and early modern Europe. Rowman and
Littleﬁeld, Lanham
Shogimen T (2001) From disobedience to toleration: William of Ockham
and the medieval discourse of fraternal correction. J Ecclesiast Hist
52:599–622
Torquemada, John
▶John Torquemada
Translations from Greek into
Arabic
CRISTINA D’ANCONA
Dipartimento di Filosoﬁa
Universita` di Pisa
Pisa
Italy
Abstract
The Greek philosophical heritage has been transmitted
uninterruptedly from late Antiquity onward in languages
other than Greek: ﬁrst, into Latin (from the fourth century
CE onward), then, into Syriac and Armenian (respectively,
from the sixth century to the tenth, and from the sixth
century to the seventh), then again into Arabic, from the
eighth century to the tenth. The earliest Graeco-Arabic
translations of philosophical texts date from the Umayyad
era, but the main stream belongs to the ﬁrst two centuries
of the ‘Abba¯sid Caliphate, and can be subdivided into
three stages: ﬁrst, some Aristotelian, Peripatetic, and Neo-
platonic writings were translated, that set the agenda for
Arabic–Islamic philosophy; then came the translation of
the Aristotelian corpus almost in its entirety, accompanied
by some commentaries and other works by Alexander of
Aphrodisias, Porphyry, Themistius, and Philoponus; then
again, in the second half of the tenth century, earlier
Graeco-Syriac versions were translated into Arabic and
earlier Arabic translations were revised; further commen-
taries on Aristotle were translated. Clearly recognized by
Muslim scholars of the classical age as ancient and non-
Islamic in its origin, falsafa – the loan word for
jilοsοjίa – became soon an intellectual option facing
others in the cultivated Muslim milieus.
The Stages of the Reception of Greek
Philosophical Works
Once settled in Damascus, the ﬁrst capital of the Islamic
empire, the Umayyads (r. 661–750) developed a courtly
civilization that, starting from the practical needs of
a chancellery (diwa¯n) written in Persian (al-fa¯rsiyya) or
in Byzantine Greek (al-ru¯miyya) – the languages of the
conquered countries – evolved soon toward the ﬁrst
assimilation of non-Islamic literature. In his Kita¯b al-
Fihrist (Book of the Catalogue: see Appendix) Ibn al-
Nadı¯m records that the founder of the Umayyad dynasty
Mu‘awiyya (r. 661–680), in his fondness for the sciences
and especially for alchemy – called ‘‘the Art, al-s:ina‘a’’ –
ordered a group of Greek philosophers from Egypt to
translate for him the books on this subject matter from
classical Greek (al-yu¯na¯nı¯) and Coptic. According to Ibn
al-Nadı¯m, ‘‘This was the ﬁrst translation in Islam from one
language into another’’ (K. al-Fihrist, p. 242.8–242.11
Flu¨gel, trans Dodge 1970:581). Among the topics that
attracted the interest of the learned audience at the Caliphal
court, stands out the encyclopedic literature best exempli-
ﬁed by the ‘‘mirrors for princes’’ (on this literary genre see
O’Meara and Shamp 2006). Sa¯lim Abu¯ l-‘Ala¯’, secretary to
the Caliph Hisha¯m b. ‘Abd al-Ma¯lik (r. 724–743) patron-
ized the translation of a collection of pseudo-Aristotelian
letters on government (Grignaschi 1965–1966; Gutas
2006) that forms the core of the Sirr al-asra¯r, or Secretum
secretorum (survey: Zonta 2003b; see also Grignaschi 1967,
1318 T
Torquemada, John

1976; Manzalaoui 1974; van Bladel 2007; Maro´th 2006
(review: Gutas 2009)). Cosmology and ethics, two of the
topics touched upon in the ‘‘mirrors for princes,’’ seem to
have attracted the interest of the Umayyad court: the
earliest Arabic translation of two pseudo-Aristotelian
writings on these matters, De mundo and De virtutibus et
vitiis, can be traced back to this period (see respectively the
survey by Raven 2003 and Cacouros 2003).
With the so-called ‘Abba¯sid Revolution (on the
‘Abba¯sids see Young et al. 1990; Kennedy 2004) and the
new interpretation of Islam which took the upper hand
after the defeat of the Umayyads (750 CE), and was in
a sense symbolized by the foundation of the new capital
Baghdad (764 CE), the interest in Greek science and phi-
losophy increased in the cultivated Muslim milieus. The
ﬁrst translations of the ‘Abba¯sid era stem, once again, from
the Aristotelian tradition: a secretary to the Caliph al-
Mans:u¯r (r. 754–775), Ibn al-Muqaffa‘ (d. 756), either
translated a compendium of logical writings, or even
compiled it. This work contains a summary of Porphyry’s
Isagoge, and Aristotle’s Cat., De int., and An. Pr. (edition:
Da¯nishpazu¯h 1978). The authorship of Ibn al-Muqaffa‘
has been challenged, however, and this work has been
attributed to his son, Muh:ammad ibn ‘Abdalla¯h al-
Muqaffa‘, who was active under the reign of al-Ma’mu¯n
(Gabrieli 1932; Kraus 1934; on the contrary, Da¯nishpazu¯h
1978; Elamrani Jamal 1989 accept the father’s authorship).
Whatever the case, the earliest circulation of Aristotelian
works is reminiscent of the late Ancient pattern that
consisted of opening the Organon with Porphyry’s Isagoge,
a pattern apparent also in the Syriac logical tradition (see
Hugonnard-Roche 1989). The so-called enlarged Organon
of late Antiquity included also the Rhetoric and Poetics,
and it comes as no surprise that the earliest Arabic trans-
lation of the Rhetoric seems to date from this era (Aouad
1989c). The Kita¯b al-Fihrist (p. 249.18 Flu¨gel, henceforth
F) mentions also a translation of the Topics, made for the
Caliph al-Mahdı¯ (r. 775–785) by the Nestorian Patriarch
Timothy I (Brock 1999; Berti 2009). The Christian learned
communities of Syria, heirs to the Neoplatonized Aristo-
telianism of late antique Alexandria, did continue even
after the Muslim conquest to translate and comment upon
Greek secular works, especially in the ﬁeld of Aristotelian
logic: a fact that explains both the continuity between the
Syriac and Arabic reception of the Organon, and the never-
ceasing contribution given by the Christians of Syria to the
translations of scientiﬁc and philosophical works. In the
‘Abba¯sid era their contribution was decisive, as exempli-
ﬁed by the names of H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q and his son Ish:a¯q b.
H˙ unayn (see below). Besides the logical writings, also the
Physics was allegedly translated in the ﬁrst decades of the
‘Abba¯sid Caliphate: the K. al-Fihrist (p. 244.5–244.6 F)
records a translation, now lost, made for Ha¯ru¯n al-Rashı¯d
(r. 786–809). However, it was under the reign of al-
Ma’mu¯n (r. 813–833) that the translations from Greek
into Arabic became a relevant cultural phenomenon in
urban Islamic society. A ﬁerce supremacist of the Caliph-
ate over the religious authorities (see Sourdel 1962; Crone
and Hinds 1986; Cooperson 2005), al-Ma’mu¯n sided with
the Muʿtazilite doctrine of the created Qurʾa¯n, and initi-
ated the mih:na (inquisition) in order to impose this doc-
trine; the deﬁnition of the Qurʾa¯n as the created speech of
God counted as the premise to the idea that the sacred
Book was open to interpretation, especially for its
antropomorphic descriptions of God’s nature and deeds.
The elite of the learned men surrounding the Caliph, and
the Caliph himself, would have extracted from these
descriptions the tawh:ı¯d – the doctrine of divine Unique-
ness – in its purest form, reaching the idea of God as that
transcendent One whose attributes are nothing if not
images of a perfectly simple and immaterial principle,
and whose deeds are nothing if not rationality and justice.
Theories of this sort seem to form the theological back-
ground of what is nowadays called the ‘‘translation move-
ment’’ (Gutas 1998). The Caliph himself features in the
ancient sources as having instigated the translations from
Greek: a dream, mentioned in various sources, stages
Aristotle answering the questions addressed to him by al-
Ma’mu¯n; Ibn al-Nadı¯m, one of these sources, tells in as
many words that ‘‘this dream was one of the most deﬁnite
reasons for the output of books’’ (p. 243.9 F, trans Dodge
1970:584). There is no scholarly consensus about the ulti-
mate reasons for this forgery and its various versions
(different intepretations have been advanced by Gutas
1998, 1999; van Koningsveld 1998), but the commitment
of the Caliphal court to the assimilation of foreign sciences
is beyond doubt, as shown inter alia by the fact that the
Caliphs al-Ma’mu¯n and al-Mu‘tas:im are among the
addressees of the works of al-Kindı¯, the ﬁrst faylasu¯f
(jilόsοjος). The latter was appointed tutor to Ah:mad,
a son of al-Ma’mu¯n’s successor al-Mu‘tas:im, and directed
a circle of scholars and translators (see the entry on al-
Kindı¯ in this volume). Even though the princely library,
the famous Bayt al-h:ikma, is no longer viewed as an
academy for translations (see Pinto 1928; Eche 1967;
Balty-Guesdon
1992;
Micheau
1997;
Gutas
1998,
reﬂecting different interpretations), the sum of various
bits of information elicits the view that the milieu in
which both the translations and falsafa arose was the
‘Abba¯sid elite of the ﬁrst decades of the ninth century:
for a comprehensive view, see the all-embracing survey by
Endress (1987 and 1992, 1997).
Translations from Greek into Arabic T
1319
T

The translations done in the ﬁrst decades of the ninth
century, mostly – even though not exclusively – on the
demand of al-Kindı¯, include works by Plato, Aristotle,
Theophrastus,
the
Pseudo-Plutarch
(i.e.,
Aetius),
Nicomachus of Gerasa, Alexander of Aphrodisias, Ploti-
nus, Proclus, John Philoponus, and Olympiodorus. As
shown by Endress (1973), these translations share in the
same syntactical and terminological features, and at times
also in the same doctrinal adaptations of the original texts:
a fact that has allowed Endress (1987 and 1992, 1997) to
single out the existence of a group of translators and
scholars gathered around al-Kindı¯. The translations of
the so-called circle of al-Kindı¯ (or belonging more in
general to this stage) are the following.
Plato (Tim., Symp., Phaed., Resp.)
The
K.
al-Fihrist
(p.
246.15–246.16
F)
mentions
a translation of the Timaeus done by Ibn al-Bit:rı¯q, one of
the translators of the ‘‘circle of al-Kindı¯.’’ In addition to the
Timaeus, also the Symposium, Phaedo, and Republic were
known to a certain extent: since two of them appear in the
writings of al-Kindı¯ himself, who had no Greek, this
means that a translation of at least parts of these dialogues
had been done, unless Kindı¯’s borrowings stem from
a doxographical source. As for the Symposium, the section
178 A–212 C, that is, the speeches about love, is echoed in
Kindı¯’s epistle The Agreement of the Philosophers Regarding
the Signs of Passionate Love, lost to us but quoted by Ibn
Bakhtı¯shu¯, a physician of the eleventh century (Klein-
Franke 1973; Gutas 1988). As for the Republic, al-Kindı¯
was acquainted with the myth of Er (X, 614A–621D),
whose reworking appears in his Qawl fı¯ l-nafs al-
mukhtas:ar min kita¯b Arist:u¯ wa-Aﬂa¯t:u¯n wa-sa¯’ir al-fala¯sifa,
p. 279.3–279.13 Abu¯ Rı¯da (see Furlani 1922; Walzer 1937;
Genequand
1987–1988;
Endress
1994).
Finally,
the
pseudo-Aristotelian Kita¯b al-tuffa¯h:a (Liber de pomo),
that can be traced back if not to al-Kindı¯ (as surmised by
Atiyeh 1966:158–159) at least to his milieu, presupposes
that its author was acquainted with the Phaedo (Bielawski
1974; Aouad 1989a).
Aristotle (An. Pr., Soph. el., Phys., De caelo,
Meteor., De gen. an., De part. an., Parva nat.,
Metaph., Paraphrasis of the De anima)
The translation of the Prior Analytics by Ibn al-Bit:rı¯q is
neither extant nor even mentioned in the K. al-Fihrist, but
Ibn Suwa¯r alludes once to it in his ‘‘edition’’ of the Orga-
non (see Endress 1997:58; and, for the so-called edition of
the Organon, see the entry on Ibn Suwa¯r in this volume).
The K. al-Fihrist records a translation of the Sophistici
elenchi done by ‘Abd al-Ması¯h: ibn Na¯‘ima al-H˙ ims:ı¯, one
of the translators of the ‘‘circle of al-Kindı¯’’ (p. 249.26–
249.28 F; on the details about this translation, see
Hugonnard-Roche 1989:526–528). To this early Aristote-
lian corpus in Arabic belongs also the Physics, which
according to the K. al-Fihrist (p. 250.13–250.15 F) was
translated by Qust:a¯ ibn Lu¯qa¯ (see Gabrieli 1912), together
with Philoponus’ and Alexander’s commentaries (see
below for details). Other Aristotelian works translated by
scholars of the entourage of al-Kindı¯ include the De caelo
and the Meteorologica (De caelo: trans. Ibn al-Bit:rı¯q, men-
tioned in the K. al-Fihrist, p. 250.28 F; this translation is
edited by Badawı¯ 1961; see Endress 1966, 1995a;
Hugonnard-Roche 2003a; Meteorologica: ed. Schoonheim
2000; see also Schoonheim 2003). The De generatione
animalium and De partibus animalium, gathered under
the general heading Kita¯b al-H˙ ayawa¯n (Book on Animals),
were translated by Ibn al-Bit:rı¯q (K. al-Fihrist, p. 251.26 F;
both translations are edited: De gen. an., Brugman and
Drossaart Lulofs 1971; Kruk 2003:329, challenges Ibn
al-Bit:rı¯q’s authorship; De part. an., Kruk 1979; see also
Kruk 2003). The Parva naturalia were translated under
the heading Kita¯b al-h:iss wa-l-mah:su¯s (De sensu et
sensato), but the translation includes also other pieces of
the Parva nat. (see Daiber 1997:36–41; the edition, by
R. Hansberger, is forthcoming). As for the Metaphysics,
the K. al-Fihrist (p. 251.27–251.28 F) afﬁrms that the
translation was done by a certain Ust:a¯th for al-Kindı¯.
This early translation has partly come down to us,
thanks to Averroes’ Great Commentary (edition: Bouyges
1938–1952; surveys on the various translations of the
Metaphysics: Peters 1968; Martin 1989; Martini Bonadeo
2003). In addition to Aristotle’s own works, also a
paraphrasis of the De anima was translated by Ibn al-Bit:rı¯q
(or ‘‘abbreviated,’’ according to the K. al-Fihrist, p. 251.16
F). The Greek original is lost, but the editor, R. Arnzen, has
convincingly pointed to a Byzantine compilation drawing
mostly from Philoponus’ commentary on the De anima
(Arnzen 1998:80–139). This paraphrase is clearly acknowl-
edged as being a commentary (talkhı¯s:, p. 251.15 F), not
Aristotle’s own work. In other cases, however, texts by
philosophers no less different from Aristotle than Plotinus
and Proclus have been attributed to Aristotle himself:
these pseudepigrapha come from the ‘‘circle of al-Kindı¯’’
(see below, ‘‘Plotinus’’ and ‘‘Proclus’’).
Aetius
The
Placita
philosophorum
(SunagogZ
tω˜n
α᾽reskόnton) of the Pseudo-Plutarch, an abridgment of
the so-called Vetusta placita by Aetius (ﬁrst century BCE to
ﬁrst century CE), were translated by Qust:a¯ ibn Lu¯qa¯. This
1320 T
Translations from Greek into Arabic

work counts as the main source for the circulation in the
Arabic-speaking world of the Greek cosmological doc-
trines from the Presocratics to Stoicism (edition: Daiber
1980; see also Daiber 1994; Gutas 1994).
Nicomachus of Gerasa
The Arabic translation of the Introduction to Arithmetic by
the Bishop of Mosul H˙ abı¯b ibn Bih:rı¯z was reworked by al-
Kindı¯ himself (Endress 1997:55).
Alexander of Aphrodisias
The ﬁrst writings of Alexander translated into Arabic were
some of his personal works, and two commentaries lost in
Greek: on the Physics, and on the De gen. et corr. We are
told in the K. al-Fihrist that Qust:a¯ ibn Lu¯qa¯, the translator
of the Placita philosophorum (see above, ‘‘Aetius’’) trans-
lated the ﬁrst book of Alexander’s commentary on the De
gen. corr. (p. 251.4 F); as for the commentary on the
Physics, Qust:a¯ ibn Lu¯qa¯ translated Aristotle’s text ‘‘with
Alexander of Aphrodisias’ commentary’’ as for the ‘‘fourth
book,’’ which is said to contain further subdivisions; Ibn
al-Nadı¯m mentions also books V and VII, still under the
heading of Aristotle’s text with Alexander’s commentary
(see Lettinck 1994:3). Within the ‘‘circle of al-Kindı¯,’’some
of the so-called Quaestiones were translated, mostly of
cosmological nature (see Fazzo and Wiesner 1993). In
the Istanbul MS that contains the collection under scru-
tiny, Alexander’s Quaest. have been transmitted together
with some propositions of Proclus’ Elements of Theology,
under the general heading ‘‘What Alexander extracted
from Aristotle’s book called Theology’’ (see van Ess 1966;
Endress 1973). The Istanbul MS contains also two writings
whose Greek antecedent is lost, and whose linguistic and
doctrinal features are akin to the other translations of the
‘‘circle of al-Kindı¯’’: On Providence and On the Regimen of
the Heavens (both edited by Ruland 1976). Another cos-
mological writing is attributed to Alexander, which shares
the features of this group of translations: a treatise
(unknown in Greek) On the First Cause, Its Effects and
the Latter’s Movements (edition: Endress 2002). Finally, the
translation of Alexander’s question On Colours, while
attributed to Ish:a¯q b. H˙ unayn, has been connected to the
productions of the ‘‘circle of al-Kindı¯’’ (edition: Ga¨tje
1967).
Hippolytus of Rome
Hippolytus’ Refutatio omnium heresium lies in the back-
ground of the Kita¯b Amu¯niyyus fı¯ a¯ra¯’ al-fala¯sifa
(Ammonius’ Book on the Opinions of the Philosophers). As
shown by the editor of the Arabic text, U. Rudolph, Hip-
polytus’ survey of the Greek philosophical doctrines has
been adapted to the theological debates of ninth-century
Baghdad; this adapted doxographical survey has been
attributed to Ammonius, the commentator of Aristotle
of sixth-century Alexandria (edition: Rudolph 1989).
Plotinus
The so-called Theology of Aristotle, in fact a substantially
reworked translation of Enneads IV–VI, counts in a sense
as the pivot of this group of translations: in fact, the
information given at the beginning of the text permits
dating the translation and locating it precisely within the
context of the ‘‘circle of al-Kindı¯.’’ The names of the
translator and of the revisor of the translation are indi-
cated: ʿAbd al-Ması¯h: ibn Na¯‘ima al-H˙ ims:ı¯, the translator;
al-Kindı¯ himself, the revisor; also the addressee of the
revision is named: Ah:mad, son of the Caliph al-Mu‘tas:im.
The translation was then done during the reign of the
latter, in the forties of the ninth century (for more details
see the entry on Plotinus, Arabic in this volume).
Proclus
The epoch-making book by Endress (1973) has shown
that the translation of Proclus’ Elements of Theology, out
of which the famous Liber de causis was created, was done
within the ‘‘circle of al-Kindı¯.’’ To this early stage of the
Graeco-Arabic transmission belongs also the earliest
translation of the Eighteen Arguments Against the Chris-
tians on the Eternity of the World (for more details see the
entry on Proclus, Arabic in this volume).
John Philoponus
The De aeternitate mundi contra Proclum (i.e., Philoponus’
reply to Proclus’ Arguments just mentioned) was known to
al-Kindı¯, as shown by Davidson (1987). However, an
Arabic translation of this work had not yet been found,
when Davidson wrote his book; Hasnaoui (1994) has
shown that parts of the De aet. mundi in Arabic circulated
under the name of Alexander of Aphrodisias. In addition
to this, the K. al-Fihrist records Philoponus’ commentary
on the Physics, translated partly by Ibn Na¯‘ima al-H˙ ims:ı¯
(books V–VIII), and partly by Qust:a¯ ibn Lu¯qa¯ (books I–
IV, K. al-Fihrist, 250.18–250.20 F: see the entry on
Philoponus, Arabic in this volume).
Olympiodorus
According to the K. al-Fihrist (p. 251.5 F), a commentary
on the De gen. corr. (unknown in Greek) was translated by
Ust:a¯th, the translator of the Metaphysics.
Another set of translations of philosophical works,
different in style and focused on Aristotle and his
Translations from Greek into Arabic T
1321
T

commentators, was produced by H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q and his
associates. A quasi-contemporary of al-Kindı¯, H˙ unayn b.
Ish:a¯q (d. 873) was a Christian Nestorian, a physician and
scientist (see Bergstra¨sser 1913, 1925; Gabrieli 1924;
Meyerhof 1926; Haddad 1974; Strohmaier 1990). Together
with his son Ish:a¯q b. H˙ unayn (d. 911) and several trans-
lators associated with them in various ways (see Meyerhof
1926:702–713) H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q produced a new set of
translations. Since his mother tongue was Syriac, some
of these translations were into Syriac, and others into Ara-
bic; often a work originally translated into Syriac was
retranslated into Arabic, either in this same period – typi-
cally, a Syriac translation made by H˙ unayn was rendered
into Arabic by his son Ish:a¯q – or even later on, in the second
half of the tenth century. As a rule, the Syriac versions
mentioned in the bio-bibliographical sources are lost,
whereas the Arabic translations made out of them have
come down to us. The learned al-S˙afadı¯ (d. 1363: see
Rosenthal in EI2, VIII, cols 783–785) contrasts the word
for word method of the early translations with the under-
standing of the sentence as a whole, typical of the trans-
lations of H˙ unayn and his associates (English trans of al-
S˙afadı¯’s passage by Rosenthal 1975:17). This remark
counts as a witness of changing attitudes in the translation
technique, that can be viewed partly as an internal evolu-
tion – comparable to the change from the verbum de verbo
pattern of the Latin medieval translations to the Humanist
rendering – partly as a reaction, on the part of scientists and
scholars involved in the process of the assimilation of Greek
learning, to the harsh criticisms against the new literary
genre of the philosophical treatise, raised by belletrists like
the famous al-Ja¯h:ı¯z˙ (d. 868) or Ibn Qutayba (d. 890).
Another element should be added to the picture of a chang-
ing landscape, if compared with al-Ma’mu¯n’s times: under
al-Mutawakkil
(r.
847–861),
the
Caliphate
ofﬁcially
disavowed the Muʿtazilite doctrine and put an end to the
mih:na, reinstating the doctrine of the increated Qurʾa¯n as
the ofﬁcial creed of the state (see Madelung 1974).
The translations produced by H˙ unayn and his associ-
ates include other works by Plato and especially Aristotle;
Theophrastus; Galen; other works by Alexander of
Aphrodisias;
Porphyry;
perhaps
Iamblichus,
and
Themistius;
ﬁnally,
other
works
by
Proclus,
John
Philoponus, and Olympiodorus.
Plato (Tim., Leges, Resp. [?], Soph. [?])
As we have seen before, a translation of the Timaeus had
been done by Ibn al-Bit:rı¯q, and Ibn al-Nadı¯m afﬁrms that
either H˙ unayn made another translation, or he revised Ibn
al-Bit:rı¯q’s one (p. 246.15–246.16 F). Neither has come
down to us. H˙ unayn is credited also with the translation
of the Laws (p. 246.5–246.6 F), but this translation is no
longer extant: traces of it survive in al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯’s India
(Gabrieli 1947). There is no scholarly consensus about
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s acquaintance with it: according to some, his
compendium of the Laws (edition: Gabrieli 1952) was
made on the basis of this translation, whereas other
scholars think that al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ made use of the Arabic ver-
sion of an epitome, possibly by Galen (see Parens 1995;
Gutas 1997; Druart 1998; Harvey 2003). If one has to trust
the K. al-Fihrist, H˙ unayn commented upon the Republic
(p. 246.5 F), but no further details are given. A translation
of the Republic, be it partial or integral, should have
existed, because the Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’ and possibly al-
‘A¯mirı¯ are acquainted with it; in addition, Averroes
commented upon it (see the entry on Plato, Arabic in
this volume). Finally, the K. al-Fihrist credits Ish:a¯q with
the translation of a dialogue that might be the Sophist (the
Arabic
skeleton
points
to
that),
accompanied
by
a commentary of an author whose name might be read
‘‘al-Imqı¯du¯rus’’ (Olympiodorus? Be this as it may,
a commentary by Olympiodorus on the Sophist is
unknown in Greek).
Aristotle (Cat., De int., An. pr., An. po., Top.,
Phys., De caelo, Meteor., De gen. corr., De an.,
Metaph., Eth. Nic.)
The translation of the Categories is attributed to H˙ unayn
in the K. al-Fihrist (p. 248.20 F), but in the Paris MS that
contains the Arabic Organon (see Hugonnard-Roche
1993) it is attributed to Ish:a¯q (edition: Badawı¯ 1980; see
Elamrani Jamal 1989:510–512). The De interpretatione is
an example of the translations into Syriac and Arabic
mentioned above: it was translated by H˙ unayn into Syriac
and by Ish:a¯q into Arabic (p. 249.1 F; edition: Badawı¯ 1980;
see Hugonnard-Roche 1989:513–515). The Prior Analytics
too were translated into Syriac, partly by H˙ unayn, partly
by Ish:a¯q (p. 249.6 F), but what has come down to us in the
Paris MS mentioned above is the Arabic version of
a certain Tadha¯rı¯ (Theodorus), a scholar of the circle of
H˙ unayn. As for the Posterior Analytics, the K. al-Fihrist
(p. 249.11–249.12 F) mentions a translation into Syriac by
H˙ unayn (partial) and Ish:a¯q (complete), adding that this
translation – lost to us – was the basis for the Arabic
translation by Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus (edition:
Badawı¯ 1980; for the translations of Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯, see
below). The same is true for the Topics: the Syriac transla-
tion by H˙ unayn, mentioned in the K. al-Fihrist (p. 249.15
F) did not survive, whereas the Arabic version made by
two translators of this circle (Abu¯ ‘Uthma¯n al-Dimashqı¯
and Ibra¯him ibn ‘Abdalla¯h) has come down to us (edition:
Badawı¯ 1980). Ish:a¯q translated into Arabic the Physics
1322 T
Translations from Greek into Arabic

(edition: Badawı¯ 1984), and H˙ unayn, according to the
testimony of the K. al-Fihrist (p. 250.28–250.29 F),
corrected the translation of the De caelo by Yah:ya¯ ibn al-
Bit:rı¯q. H˙ unayn also wrote a summary of the Meteorology
(edition: Daiber 1975). The De gen. corr., allegedly trans-
lated into Arabic in this period (see Rashed 2003), has
come down to us only in part, together with Alexander’s
commentary (translated by Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯: see below).
As for the De anima, the translation that has come down
to us (edition: Badawı¯ 1954) is attributed to Ish:a¯q, but it
has convincingly been argued that it is not by him (see the
status quaestionis by Elamrani Jamal 2003). Ish:a¯q is
credited also with a version of the Metaphysics (p. 251.26
F), which might be either a fresh translation, or a revision
of Ust:a¯th’s (there is no scholarly consensus on this point;
see Mattock 1989; Martin 1989; Martini Bonadeo 2002,
2003; Bertolacci 2006). To this period belongs also the
Concise Exposition of Aristotle’s Metaphysics by the astron-
omer, mathematician and philosopher Tha¯bit ibn Qurra,
actually focused only on chapters 6–9 of Book Lambda
(edition: Reisman and Bertolacci 2009). Finally, the K. al-
Fihrist (p. 252.2F) credits Ish:a¯q with the translation of the
Nicomachean Ethics (edition: Badawı¯ 1978; Akasoy and
Fidora 2005).
Theophrastus
To this period belongs the translation of the De causis
plantarum and De sensu et sensato (K. al-Fihrist, p.
252.8–252.9F).
Both
translations
are
attributed
to Ibra¯him ibn Bakku¯s (Rashed 2003:306–312; see the
entry on Theophrastus, Arabic in this volume). Albeit
attributed to Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯ in the K. al-Fihrist (see
below), the manuscript tradition credits Ish:aq b. H˙ unayn
with the translation: see Alon (1985) and Gutas (2010).
Tabula Cebetis
This Neopythagorean writing (c. ﬁrst-century BCE) was
possibly translated in this period, because Miskawayh (d.
1030) made use of it: see Rosenthal (1978).
Nicolaus Damascenus
A
compendium
of
Aristotle’s
philosophy
(edition:
Drossaart Lulofs 1965) was translated into Syriac by
H˙ unayn (Nicolaus Damascenus’ authorship of this work,
unknown in Greek, has been challenged by Fazzo 2008).
The De plantis was translated by H˙ unayn (edition:
Drossaart Lulofs and Poortman 1989).
Galen (Philosophical Works)
As stated by H˙ unayn himself in the Epistle he wrote on
his translations of Galen’s works (edition: Bergstra¨sser
1925), he translated into Syriac and Arabic a great
amount of writings by Galen, mostly on medicine. As
for the philosophical works, H˙ unayn translated the De
moribus (see Klein-Franke 1979), and the Compendium
of the Timaeus (lost in Greek). According to its editors,
P. Kraus and R. Walzer, H˙ unayn’s translation was
into Syriac, and the Arabic version that has come down
to us (edition: Kraus and Walzer 1951) was made by
one of H˙ unayn’s pupils, ‘I¯sa¯ b. Yah:ya¯ b. Ibra¯hı¯m
(Kraus
and
Walzer
1951:18–22).
H˙ unayn
himself
says in his Epistle (p. 51.5–51.9 Bergstra¨sser) that he
translated Galen’s writing about the immobility of
the First Mover (lost in Greek but mentioned in
Galen’s De libris propriis), ﬁrst into Arabic, and then
into Syriac; then again, the Syriac version was translated
into Arabic (by the same ‘I¯sa¯ b. Yah:ya¯ b. Ibra¯hı¯m men-
tioned above), because H˙ unayn’s Arabic version had
been lost.
Alexander of Aphrodisias
As we saw before, the writings by Alexander translated
within the circle of al-Kindı¯ were mostly devoted to
cosmological topics. To H˙ unayn and his school we owe
the translation of two writings on soul and its faculties,
whose impact on subsequent Arabic philosophy has
been momentous: the short De intellectu, translated by
Ish:a¯q (edition: Finnegan 1956; Badawı¯ 1971), and the De
anima, lost in Arabic, but partly preserved in Hebrew
(translated into German by M. Steinschneider together
with I. Bruns’ edition of the Greek text, Suppl. Ar. II.1,
1887). Other personal works by Alexander can be traced
back to this period: a couple of short writings on sense
perception; several Questions, a treatise on the differentia
speciﬁca, another treatise on time (lost in Greek), and the
treatise On the Principles of the Universe mentioned above
(see Goulet and Aouad 1989). Among the commentaries,
H˙ unayn translated into Syriac Alexander’s On the Meta-
physics, at least as far as Book Lambda is concerned: this
translation is lost to us, but in his own Long Commentary
on the Metaphysics Averroes quotes several passages from
the Arabic translation, made by Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ on the
basis of H˙ unayn’s Syriac version (K. al-Fihrist, p. 251.29 F;
edition of the Arabic fragments: Freudenthal 1885; on the
translation by Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯, see below). Thanks to the
quotations in Averroes’ commentary, parts of Alexan-
der’s genuine exegesis of Book Lambda can be recovered
(it should be recalled that only books Alpha to Delta are
by Alexander, in the Greek text transmitted under his
name). To Ish:a¯q the K. al-Fihrist (p. 249.24 F) attributes
also the translation of Alexander’s commentary on the
Topics.
Translations from Greek into Arabic T
1323
T

Porphyry
Abu¯ ‘Uthma¯n al-Dimashqı¯, the translator of the Topics,
translated also the Isagoge (edition: Badawı¯ 1980).
A translation of Porphyry’s commentary on the Categories
is mentioned in the K. al-Fihrist (p. 248.20 F), as well as
that of the commentaries on the Physics (p. 250.21–250.22
F) and the Nicomachean Ethics, made by Ish:a¯q (p. 252.2 F).
The three works are lost in Greek (see the entry on Por-
phyry, Arabic in this volume).
Iamblichus (?)
A commentary on the Golden Verses, unknown in Greek, is
attributed to Iamblichus in the Arabic tradition; the Ara-
bic translation can be traced back to this period (edition:
Daiber 1995).
Themistius
Ish:a¯q b. H˙ unayn translated Themistius’ paraphrase of the
De anima (edition: Lyons 1973). An epistle on government
in Arabic translation is extant (edition: Salı¯m Sa¯lim 1970),
as well as a treatise, unknown in Greek, on the reduction of
the syllogistic ﬁgures (edition: Badawı¯ 1947). Finally, Ibn
al-Nadı¯m mentions a commentary (tafsı¯r) by Themistius
on the Nichomachean Ethics (K. al-akhla¯q), in Syriac,
extant in the ‘‘manuscript’’ of Ish:a¯q (see the entry on
Themistius, Arabic in this volume).
Proclus
The Eighteen Arguments Against the Christians on the Eter-
nity of the World were translated again by Ish:a¯q. Nine of
them have been found (edition: Badawı¯ 1955), including
the ﬁrst argument, lost in Greek (see Anawati 1956;
Badawı¯ 1968:72–73). To this period might be traced
back tentatively also the translation of two other writings
by Proclus, lost in Greek: the monograph On the Immor-
tality of the Soul, and the ﬁnal part of the commentary on
the Timaeus (see the entry on Proclus, Arabic in this
volume).
John Philoponus
Two writings lost in Greek – one of them fragmentarily
transmitted in Greek, while the other is unknown – have
been translated in this period. The ﬁrst writing is a treatise
against Aristotle’s doctrine of the eternity of the cosmos,
whose Greek fragments are preserved through Simplicius’
quotations (see Wildberg 1987) and whose Arabic version
is edited (Mahdi 1972); the second is a short treatise on the
contingent
nature
of
the
physical
world
(edition:
Troupeau 1984) (see the entry on Philoponus, Arabic in
this volume).
Olympiodorus
A commentary on Aristotle’s Meteorologica attributed to
‘‘Olympiodorus’’ in a MS housed in Tashkent (edition:
Badawı¯ 1971) was translated by H˙ unayn and corrected by
Ish:a¯q. This is the information given in the Tashkent MS,
but in the K. al-Fihrist the translation is attributed to Abu¯
Bishr Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus (see below). Be this as it may, the
work edited by Badawı¯ is different from Olympiodorus’
commentary which is extant in Greek.
The Last Stream
The last stream of translations of Greek philosophical
works can be located toward the middle of the tenth
century, and took place in an intellectual climate different
from that of the early ‘Abba¯sid Caliphate on several
counts. First, the broader context of Muslim urban society,
especially in the capital Baghdad, had changed: even
though the ‘Abba¯sids were ofﬁcially still in power, their
leadership was on the decline and the empire was de facto
dismembered: in 945, a new dynasty entered Baghdad
from northern Iran, the Buyids, of Shı¯ʿite allegiance (see
Kraemer 1992). Second, the Ashʿarite kala¯m (named after
Abu¯
H˙ asan
al-Ashʿarite,
d.
935)
had
supplanted
Mu‘tazilism in Sunni theology (see the entry Kala¯m in
this volume), establishing the tenet that God’s nature
and decrees cannot be scrutinized by man’s reason, to
the point that the Ashʿarite theologians (mutakallimu¯n)
maintained that God could without contradiction punish
those who did obey all his commands. Third, the various
linguistic and religious sciences, mostly grammar and law
(not to mention the h:adı¯th literature) had reached such
a high level of reﬁnement, that their specialists considered
the foreign sciences and their literary genre – the philo-
sophical treatise – as intruders whose pretensions were not
supported by an adequate command of true knowledge.
This is apparent in the famous argument that occurred at
the court of the Buyid vizier Ibn al-Fura¯t, between Abu¯
Bishr Matta¯ (d. 940), the head of the Aristotelian circle of
Baghdad, and Abu¯ Sa‘ı¯d al-Sı¯ra¯fı¯ (d. 979), the most illus-
trious belletrist of his time and the commentator of
Sibawayh’s Kita¯b, the authoritative textbook of Arabic
grammar. The focus of the argument was about the
claim for the universality of Aristotelian logic on the one
hand, and the impossibility to go beyond the limits of
every natural language, on the other. Should logic prevail
over grammar, as contended by Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯, trans-
lations would be possible and welcomed; should the lin-
guistic boundaries be insurmountable, as contended by
Abu¯ Sa‘ı¯d al-Sı¯ra¯fı¯, the assimilation of Greek thought
would be pointless (see Elamrani Jamal 1983; Endress
1986; Ouyang 1997:23–54). The literate and philosopher
1324 T
Translations from Greek into Arabic

al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯, to whom we owe the record of the dispute,
depicts Abu¯ Sa‘ı¯d al-Sı¯ra¯fı¯ as gaining the upper hand, and
it has convincingly been argued that al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s philoso-
phy of language, as well as his endeavor to build up
a systematic structure of knowledge, counts as an attempt
at providing the philosophic community with an adequate
reply to this defeat (see Martini Bonadeo 2008). To this
picture another element should be added, namely the
increasing concentration of the philosophical studies on
the interpretation of the Aristotelian corpus. The Baghdad
philosophers devoted themselves to the scholastic practice
of searching and studying ancient commentaries, analyz-
ing Aristotle’s texts and commenting upon them. Two
outstanding examples of this practice are the ‘‘Organon
of Baghdad’’ (see Hugonnard-Roche 1993) and a MS of
Aristotle’s Physics housed in Leiden that, like the ‘‘Orga-
non of Baghdad,’’ bears the traces of a detailed analysis
based on both Greek and Arabic commentaries (see
Giannakis 1993).
The translations produced by the Baghdad Aristote-
lians of the tenth century include, in addition to a single
work by Plato and several works by Aristotle, writings by
Theophrastus,
Nicolaus
Damascenus,
Alexander
of
Aphrodisias, Themistius, possibly Proclus, Simplicius,
and Olympiodorus.
Plato
Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯ is credited in the K. al-Fihrist (p. 246.5 F)
with the translation of Plato’s Laws. This translation is lost.
Aristotle (An. po., Soph. el., Topics, Rhetoric,
Poetics, De caelo, De gen. et corr., De sensu et
sensato, Book Lambda of the Metaphysics with
some commentaries)
As we have seen before, H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q translated into
Syriac the Posterior Analytics: on the basis of this transla-
tion, Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ produced the Arabic version that
has come down to us (edition: Badawı¯ 1980). In addition
to the old translation of the Sophistici elenchi done by ʿAbd
al-Ması¯h: ibn Na¯‘ima al-H˙ ims:ı¯ within the ‘‘circle of
al-Kindı¯’’ (see above), two other Arabic versions of this
Aristotelian work are extant, that can be traced back to the
circle of Baghdad directed by Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯. The infor-
mation given by Ibn al-Nadı¯m in the K. al-Fihrist does not
match the account provided by Ibn Suwa¯r, the ‘‘editor’’ of
the so-called Organon of Baghdad (see the details in
Hugonnard-Roche 1989:526–528; see also the entry on
Ibn Suwa¯r in this volume). For the purposes of the present
survey, it will sufﬁce to say that both Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ and
Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯ did deal with the Soph. el., either by trans-
lating it or by correcting previous translations. As for the
Topics, Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯ made an Arabic version on the basis
of Ish:a¯q’s Syriac text: this translation, mentioned in the K.
al-Fihrist (p. 249.15–249.16 F), is quoted in the marginal
notes of the ‘‘Organon of Baghdad’’ (see Endress 1977:26).
A pupil of Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯, Ibn al-Samh: (see the entry on
Ibn al-Samh: in this volume) corrected the old version of
the Rhetoric, dating from the early ‘Abba¯sid age (edition:
Lyons 1982; see Aouad 1989c:457). Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ trans-
lated into Arabic the Poetics, possibly from the Syriac
version made by H˙ unayn: this translation is edited
(Tkatsch 1928), and the mention of a translation by Yah:ya¯
ibn ‘Adı¯ in the K. al-Fihrist (p. 250.4–250.5 F) possibly
points to Yah:ya¯’s correction of Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯’s transla-
tion (Hugonnard-Roche 2003b:211). A partial translation
of the De caelo is attributed to Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ (p. 250.29
F). As we have seen before, H˙ unayn corrected the old
version by Ibn al-Bit:rı¯q, and one of the three Arabic trans-
lations that are extant in the MSS might be the correction,
either by H˙ unayn or by Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯, of the old version
(one of the three versions is edited: Badawı¯ 1961). The
reference work on the Arabic De caelo is Endress (1966);
see also the up-to-date status quaestionis by Hugonnard-
Roche (2003a). Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ is credited also with the
translation of the De gen. corr. (p. 251.4 F), but this
information might point to the lemmas of the commen-
tary by Alexander of Aphrodisias (see below, and Rashed
2003:305). As for the De sensu et sensato, the wording of
Ibn al-Nadı¯m is controversial and points either to Abu¯
Bishr Matta¯, or to another translator, Abu¯ ‘Amr al-T˙abarı¯,
a pupil of Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯ (see Hasnaoui 1996). Abu¯ Bishr
Matta¯ was particularly interested in Book Lambda of
Aristotle’s Metaphysics: the K. al-Fihrist credits him with
the translation of this book, accompanied by the com-
mentaries of Alexander of Aphrodisias and Themistius (p.
251.28–251.30;
see
below).
Among
the
pseudo-
Aristotelian works translated by the scholars of this
group, there is the Arabic version from Syriac of the De
virt. et vit. (edition: Kellermann-Rost 1961) and Economics
(see Zonta 2003a:249), as well as the Arabic version of
a compendium of the Nicomachean Ethics, known as
Summa Alexandrinorum (see Dunlop 1974, 1976).
Theophrastus
The K. al-Fihrist attributes to Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯ the transla-
tion of the Metaphysics (p. 252.11 F; edition: Alon
1985; Gutas 2010). According to Endress (1974:498), the
translation from Syriac into Arabic of the Signs of High
(K. al-A¯tha¯r al-‘ulwiyya), attributed to Ibn Suwa¯r in the
K. al-Fihrist (p. 265.9 F) points to Theophrastus’ Meteo-
rology; on the Syriac and Arabic versions of this work, see
Daiber (1992).
Translations from Greek into Arabic T
1325
T

Nicolaus Damascenus
The K. al-Fihrist (p. 264.26 F) credits ‘I¯sa¯ ibn Zur‘a, one of
the pupils of Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯, with the Arabic translation of
the Syriac version of the compendium of Aristotle’s phi-
losophy (see the entry on Ibn Zur‘a in this volume).
Alexander of Aphrodisias
Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯ was acquainted with Alexander’s commen-
tary on the Categories. This work is lost in Greek, but Ibn
al-Nadı¯m says in the K. al-Fihrist (p. 248.23–248.25)
that Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯ suspected that a commentary ascribed
to Iamblichus was in fact by Alexander, because of the
expression ‘‘Alexander said’’ he read in it. In addition, Ibn
al-Nadı¯m reports a saying by Abu¯ Sulayma¯n al-Sijista¯nı¯,
a pupil of Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯, according to whom the latter
translated the Categories together with Alexander’s com-
mentary, a work of three hundred leaves. This passage in
the K. al-Fihrist is somehow controversial (see the note by
A. Mu¨ller to the edition Flu¨gel, vol II, p 114, and the
different renderings by Endress 1977:25; Gutas 2007:22).
The K. al-Fihrist (p. 250.7 F) credits Abu¯ Rawh: al-S˙a¯bı¯
with the translation of Alexander’s commentary on the
Physics, lost in Greek: Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯ corrected this transla-
tion. Also, a translation by Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ of part of the
ﬁrst book of Alexander’s commentary on the De caelo (lost
in Greek) is mentioned in the K. al-Fihrist (p. 250.29–
250.30 F); a correction by Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯ is mentioned
(p. 264.1–264.2 F; see Hugonnard-Roche 2003a:287).
Another commentary by Alexander of Aphrodisias lost
in Greek, but known to the Baghdad Aristotelians, was
that on the De gen. et corr. It was allegedly translated by
Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ in its entirety, whereas the ancient trans-
lation by Qust:a¯ ibn Lu¯qa¯ was limited to the ﬁrst book
(K. al-Fihrist, p. 251.4 F; see above for the translation by
Qust:a¯ ibn Lu¯qa¯). Matta¯’s translation has not come down
to us; however, parts of Alexander’s commentary on
the De gen. et corr. have been recovered in Arabic transla-
tion, and the terminology and style point to him, both
for Aristotle’s lemmas and Alexander’s commentary
(see Serra 1997; Gannage´ 2005). As we have seen before,
Alexander’s commentary on Book Lambda of the Meta-
physics was translated into Syriac by H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q; this
translation was in turn translated into Arabic by Abu¯ Bishr
Matta¯ (see above for details). Finally, Alexander’s De
providentia, lost in Greek and translated for the ﬁrst time
within the circle of al-Kindı¯, was translated again by Abu¯
Bishr Matta¯ (edition: Ruland 1976; see also Thillet 2003).
Themistius
Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ translated Themistius’ paraphrase of the
An. po. (K. al-Fihrist, p. 251.28 F; the Arabic version is lost,
but it was known to Averroes and formed the basis of the
medieval Latin translation). Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ also trans-
lated the paraphrase of the De caelo, lost in Greek
(p. 250.30 F), as well as that of Book Lambda, lost in
Greek too (French translation: Brague 1999). Also the
paraphrase of the Physics was known: a Syriac translation
is mentioned (K. al-Fihrist, p. 250.22–250.23 F), and
Themistius’ exegeses are recorded here and there in the
Leiden MS of the Physics (see above). (For all this, see the
entry on Themistius, Arabic in this volume.)
Proclus
Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯was acquainted with Proclus’ De decem dub.
circa providentiam (see Endress 1973:30). Even though this
does not imply that he provided a translation, Yah:ya¯’s
quotations are worth noting as a witness of some sort of
circulation in the Arab-speaking world of this work, which
is lost in Greek. Later on, a scholar belonging to this
current of thought, Abu¯ l-Faraj ibn al-T˙ayyib (see the
entry on Ibn al-T˙ayyib in this volume) dealt with a com-
mentary on the Golden Verses, allegedly by Proclus (see
Linley 1984), as well as with the Tabula Cebetis (see above).
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite
An Arabic translation of the pseudo-Dionysian corpus was
done in the eleventh century (see Treiger 2005).
Simplicius
The translation of the commentary on the Categories is
mentioned
(K.
al-Fihrist,
p.
248.21–248.22
F)
in
a somehow confused relationship with the work of
a certain ‘‘Theon,’’ which is said to be extant in Syriac
and Arabic (see Gutas 2007:22).
Olympiodorus
The K. al-Fihrist (p. 251.5 F) credits Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ with
the translation of Olympiodorus’ commentaries on the De
gen. et corr. (p. 251.5 F) and Meteorologica (p. 251.8 F).
The Works Translated: An Overview
The knowledge of Presocratic philosophy has been only
indirect in the Arab world: the doctrines of the early cos-
mologists were known through the doxographies of the
Hellenistic and Imperial ages, whereas the ‘‘Pythagorean’’
doctrines were known either through the Neopythagorean
writings like the Tabula cebetis, or through the Neoplatonic
accounts, often presenting Pythagoras as a forerunner of
the doctrines held in late Platonism. The knowledge of
Plato’s doctrines was based more on accounts by later
philosophers, on surveys, and on spurious collections of
‘‘sayings,’’ than on a direct acquaintance with the corpus of
the dialogues. Still, some of them were known to a certain
1326 T
Translations from Greek into Arabic

extent: Timaeus, Symposium, Phaedo, Republic, Leges. As
for Aristotle, the entire corpus was known, with the excep-
tion of the Politics and the Constitution of the Athenians.
Among the pseudepigrapha, a prominent place is due to
the pseudo-Theology of Aristotle, produced within the
‘‘circle of al-Kindı¯’’ out of Plotinus’ Enneads, and to the
Liber de causis, produced within the same circle out of
Proclus’ Elements of Theology. The early school of Aristotle
was also known to a certain extent: some Theophrastus
was translated, and his teaching was also indirectly known
through the translation of Aetius’ Placita philosophorum,
which ultimately traces back to Theophrastus’ collection
of the Fusikω˜n dόxai. Also the Aristotelianism before
Alexander of Aphrodisias had some sort of circulation in
Syriac and Arabic, through Nicolaus Damascenus. The
philosophy of the Imperial age was widely known, both in
Syriac and Arabic: the doxographical traditions, some Plu-
tarch of Chaeronaea (in Syriac), Galen, Nicomachus
of Gerasa, and Alexander of Aphrodisias – the latter signif-
icantly moulding the reception of Aristotle’s own works –
feature in all the stages of the assimilation of Greek learning.
A pivotal role was played by Neoplatonism, both in setting
the agenda of the Arabic–Islamic philosophy and in shaping
the main frame of falsafa as a systematic knowledge,
through the reception of the late Ancient scholastic
pattern. Plotinus’ and Proclus’ doctrines gained wide cur-
rency under Aristotle’s name (see Rosenthal 1974); Por-
phyry, Iamblichus, Themistius, Philoponus, Simplicius,
and Olympiodorus circulated among the learned inter-
ested in the Greek philosophical heritage.
Appendix: The Kita¯b al-Fihrist
The ﬁrst of a series of Arab bio-bibliographies that reach
out to the seventeenth century, the Kita¯b al-Fihrist is an
outstanding testimony of the intellectual life in tenth
century Baghdad. Its author, Abu¯ l-Faraj Muh:ammad
ibn Ish:a¯q al-Warraq al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ ibn al-Nadı¯m al-Maws:ı¯lı¯
(d. 990), known as Ibn al-Nadı¯m (‘‘son of the boon com-
panion’’) and boon companion himself, was in touch with
scholars in the capital and abroad: among them, the belle-
trist al-Marzuba¯nı¯ (d. 994), Abu¯ Sulayma¯n al-Sijista¯nı¯,
Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯, and Ibn Suwa¯r. Starting from the catalog
of his father’s bookshop (see Endress 1987:451 for
al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯’s
account
of
the
bookshop
quarter
in
Baghdad), Ibn al-Nadı¯m restlessly searched for informa-
tion about books and learned men both of the past and of
his own time, visiting Bassora, Kufa, Mosul and possibly
Aleppo, so that his Catalogue became ‘‘an encyclopaedia of
medieval Islamic culture’’ (Dodge 1970:xix). Of Shı¯ʿite
allegiance (see Stewart 2009), Ibn al-Nadı¯m organized
his work according to a systematic account of the sciences,
including language and the Holy Scriptures (the Torah,
the Gospel, other holy books, and the Qurʾa¯n: chapter I);
grammar (the schools of Bassora and Kufa: chapter II);
history, genealogy, government literature, court literature
(chapter III); poetry (pre-Islam and Umayyad poetry;
poetry of the ‘Abba¯sid age: chapter IV); religious sects
(Muʿtazilites, Shı¯ʿites, and other: chapter V); Law (Sunni
schools of law, legal authorities of the Shı¯‘a: chapter VI);
falsafa (Greek philosophers, Arab philosophers, mathe-
matics and astronomy, medicine: chapter VII); stories
and fables (chapter VIII); non-Islamic sects and religions
(the S˙a¯bians, Manicheism, other sects, religions and fur-
ther information on India and China: chapter IX). An
autograph of this monumental work was housed in the
Caliph’s library at Baghdad: the famous geographer and
biographer Ya¯qu¯t (d. 1229) claims he made use of the
K. al-Fihrist in the handwriting of Ibn al-Nadı¯m himself,
shortly before the Mongol sacking of Baghdad (1258), that
put an end to the ‘Abba¯sid Caliphate. In the sacking, the
library was destroyed, and the autograph of the K. al-
Fihrist with it. Luckily, other copies survived elsewhere.
Other biobibliographical surveys, working on the basis of
the K. al-Fihrist throughout the centuries, have added
further materials to it: the History of the Learned Men
(Ta’rikh al-h:ukama¯’) by Ibn al-Qift:ı¯ (d. 1248), the Sources
of Information on the Classes of Physicians (‘Uyu¯n al-anba¯’
fı¯t:abaqa¯t al-at:ibba¯’) by Ibn Abı¯Us:aybi‘a (d. 1270), and the
Clariﬁcation of the Doubts About the Names of Books and
Subdivisions (Kashf al-Z˙unu¯n ‘an asa¯mı¯ l-kutub wa-l-
funu¯n) by H˙ ajjı¯ Khalı¯fa (Katib Celebi, d. 1658), that in its
turn served as a basis for d’Herbe´lot’s Bibliothe`que orientale
(1697). Edited in 1881 on the basis of the defective MSS
housed in Paris, Istanbul, Vienna and Leiden by Gustav
Flu¨gel, and in 1971 by Rı¯d˙a Tajaddud on the basis of other,
more complete MSS (Dublin and Istanbul), the K. al-Fihrist
has been translated into English by Bayard Dodge in 1970.
See also: ▶Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus ▶Abu¯ Sulayma¯n
al-Sijista¯nı¯ al-Mant:iqı¯ ▶Alchemy in the Arab World
▶Alexander of Aphrodisias and Arabic Aristotelianism
▶Alexandrian Tradition into Arabic: Medicine ▶Alexan-
drian Tradition into Arabic: Philosophy ▶al-ʿA¯mirı¯, Abu¯
l-H˙ asan ▶Arabic Texts: Philosophy, Latin Translations of
▶Aristotle,
Arabic
▶Doxographies,
Graeco-Arabic
▶Ethics ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r ▶Galen, Arabic ▶Ibn
Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes)
▶Ibn al-Samh: ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Ibn
Suwa¯r (Ibn al-Khamma¯r) ▶Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯ʾ, Encyclopedia
of ▶Kala¯m ▶al-Kindı¯, Abu¯ Yu¯suf Yaʿqu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q
▶Logic in the Arabic and Islamic World ▶Mathematics
in the Arab World ▶Medicine in the Arab World
Translations from Greek into Arabic T
1327
T

▶Natural
Philosophy,
Arabic
▶Philoponus,
Arabic
▶Philosophy, Arabic ▶Plato, Arabic ▶Plotinus, Arabic
▶Political
Philosophy,
Arabic
▶Porphyry,
Arabic
▶Presocratics in the Arab World ▶Proclus, Arabic
▶Qust:a¯ ibn Lu¯qa¯ ▶al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯, Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n ▶Tha¯bit
ibn Qurra ▶Themistius, Arabic ▶Theophrastus, Arabic
▶Translations from Greek into Syriac
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Abu¯ Rı¯da M‘A (ed) (1950–1953) Rasa¯’il al-Kindı¯ al-falsaﬁyya, h:aqqaqaha¯
wa-ah:rajaha¯ ma‘a muqaddima. . . Muh:ammad ʿAbd al-Ha¯dı¯ Abu¯
Rı¯da, I–II. Da¯r al-ﬁkr al-‘arabı¯, Cairo (Cairo, 19782)
al-Ahwani AF (ed) (1962) Kita¯b al-nafs li-Arist:u¯t:a¯lı¯s. Da¯r Ih:ya¯’ al-Kutub
al-‘Arabiyya, Cairo
Akasoy AA, Fidora A (eds) (2005) Aristotle. The Arabic version of the
Nicomachean Ethics, with an introduction and annotated transla-
tion by Dunlop DM. Brill, Leiden/Boston
Alon I (1985) The Arabic version of Theophrastus’ Metaphysica. Jerus
Stud Arabic Islam 6:163–217
Arnzen R (ed) (1998) Aristoteles’ De Anima. Eine verlorene spa¨tantike
Paraphrase in arabischer und persischer U¨ berlieferung. Arabischer
Text
nebst
Kommentar,
Quellengeschichtlichen
Studien
und
Glossaren. Brill, Leiden/New York/Ko¨ln
Badawı¯ ‘A (ed) (1947) Arist:u¯ ‘inda l-‘Arab. Dira¯sat wa-nus:u¯s: g˙ayr
manshu¯ra. Maktabat al-Nahd˙a al-Mis:riyya, Cairo
Badawı¯‘A (ed) (1954) Arist:u¯t:a¯lı¯s fı¯l-nafs. Maktabat al-Nahd˙a al-Mis:riyya,
Cairo
Badawı¯ ‘A (ed) (1955) Al-Aﬂa¯t:u¯niyya al-muh:datha ‘inda l-‘Arab.
Maktabat al-Nahd˙a al-Mis:riyya, Cairo (repr Wika¯lat al-Mat:bu¯‘a,
al-Kuwayt, 1977)
Badawı¯ ‘A (ed) (1961) Arist:u¯t:a¯lı¯s fı¯ l-Sama¯‘ wa-l-Atha¯r al-‘ulwiyya.
Maktabat al-Nahd˙a al-Mis:riyya, Cairo
Badawı¯ ‘A (ed) (1966) Aﬂu¯t:ı¯n ‘inda l-‘arab. Plotinus apud Arabes.
Theologia Aristotelis et fragmenta quae supersunt. Da¯r al-Nahd˙a
al-Mis:riyya, Cairo
Badawı¯ ‘A (ed) (1971) Commentaires sur Aristote perdus en grec et autres
e´pıˆtres, publie´s et annote´s. El Machreq Editeurs, Beyrouth
Badawı¯ ‘A (ed) (1978) Al-Akhla¯q, ta’lı¯f Arist:u¯t:a¯lı¯s, tarjama Ish:a¯q ibn
H˙ unayn. Wika¯lat al-Mat:bu¯‘a, al-Kuwayt
Badawı¯ ‘A (ed) (1980) Mant:iq Arist:u¯. I-III. Wika¯lat al-Mat:bu¯‘a/Da¯r al-
qalam, al-Kuwayt/Beirut
Badawı¯ ‘A (ed) (1984) Arist:u¯t:a¯lı¯s. Al-T˙abı¯‘a. Tarjama Ish:a¯q ibn H˙ unayn,
I–II. al-Hay’a al-Mis:riyya al-‘Amma li-l-Kita¯b, Cairo
Bardenhewer O (ed) (1882) Die pseudo-aristotelische Schrift ueber das
reine Gute bekannt unter dem Namen Liber de causis. Herder‘sche
Verlagshandlung Freiburg im Breisgau (repr Frankfurt a.M., 1961)
Bergstra¨sser G (ed) (1925) H˙ unayn ibn Ish:a¯q u¨ber die syrischen und
arabischen Galen-U¨ bersetzungen, zum ersten Mal herausgegeben
und u¨bersetzt. In: Abhandlungen fu¨r die Kunde des Morgenla¨ndes
Bouyges M (ed) (1938–1952) Averroe`s. Tafsir Ma ba‘d at-Tabi‘at (‘‘Grand
Commentaire’’ de la Me´taphysique). Imprimerie Catholique, Beirut
Brague R (ed) (1999) The´mistius. Paraphrase de la Me´taphysique
d’Aristote (Livre Lambda), traduit de l’he´breu et de l’arabe, int.,
notes et indices. Vrin, Paris
Brugman J, Drossaart Lulofs HJ (ed) (1971) Aristotle. Generation of the
Animals. The Arabic translation commonly ascribed to Ya¯h:ya¯ ibn
al-Bit:rı¯q. Brill, Leiden
Daiber H (ed) (1975) Ein Kompendium der aristotelischen Meteorologie
in der Fassung des H˙ unayn ibn Ish:a¯q. Brill, Leiden
Daiber H (ed) (1980) Aetius Arabus. Die Vorsokratiker in arabischer
U¨ berlieferung. F. Steiner, Wiesbaden
Daiber H (ed) (1992) The Meteorology of Theophrastus in Syriac and
Arabic tradition. In: Fortenbaugh WW, Gutas D (eds) Theophrastus.
His psychological, doxographical, and scientiﬁc writings. Transac-
tion, New Brunswick/London, pp 166–293
Daiber H (ed) (1995) Neuplatonische Pythagorica in arabischem
Gewande. Der Kommentar des Iamblichus zu den Carmina Aurea.
Ein verlorener griechischer Text in arabischer U¨ berlieferung. North-
Holland, Amsterdam/New York/Oxford/Tokyo
D’Ancona C (ed) (2003) Plotino. La discesa dell’anima nei corpi (Enn. IV
8[6]). Plotiniana Arabica (pseudo-Teologia di Aristotele, capitoli
1 e 7; ‘‘Detti del Sapiente Greco’’). Il Poligrafo, Padova
Da¯nishpazu¯h MNT (ed) (1978) Mant:iq Ibn al-Muqaffa‘. Anjuman-i
Sha¯hansha¯hı¯ Falsafah-i Tihra¯n, Tehran
Dieterici F (ed) (1882) Die sogenannte Theologie des Aristoteles aus
arabischen Handschriften zum ersten Mal herausgegeben. J. C.
Hinrichs’sche Buchhandlung, Leipzig (repr Rodopi, Amsterdam,
1965)
Dietrich A (ed) (1964) Die arabische Version einer unbekannten Schrift
des Alexander von Aphrodisias u¨ber die Differentia Speciﬁca.
Nachrichten der Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Go¨ttingen.
Philologisch-historische Klasse
Dodge B (1970) al-Nadı¯m. The Fihrist, a tenth-century survey of Muslim
Culture. Columbia University Press, New York/London
Drossaart-Lulofs H-J (ed) (1965) Nicolaus Damascenus on the philoso-
phy of Aristotle. Fragments from the ﬁrst ﬁve books translated from
the Syriac with an introduction and the commentary. Brill, Leiden
(repr 1969)
Drossaart Lulofs HJ, Poortman ELJ (eds) (1989) Nicolaus Damascenus De
plantis. Five translations. North-Holland, Amsterdam
Druart Th-A (ed) (1998) Le sommaire du livre des Lois de Platon
(G˘ awa¯mi‘ Kita¯b Nawa¯mis li-Aﬂa¯t:u¯n) par Abu¯ Nas:r al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, e´d.
critique et introduction. Bull E´tudes Orient 50:109–155
Endress G (ed) (1973) Proclus Arabus. Zwanzig Abschnitte aus der
Institutio
Theologica
in
arabischer
U¨ bersetzung.
Imprimerie
Catholique, Wiesbaden/Beirut
Endress G (ed) (1994) Al-Kindı¯ u¨ber die Wiedererinnerung der Seele.
Arabischer Platonismus und die Legitimation der Wissenschaften im
Islam. Oriens 34:174–221
Endress G (ed) (2002) Alexander Arabus on the First Cause. Aristotle’s
First Mover in an Arabic treatise attributed to Alexander of
Aphrodisias. In: D’Ancona C, Serra G (eds) Aristotele e Alessandro
di Afrodisia nella tradizione araba. Il Poligrafo, Padova, pp 19–74
Ferrari C (ed) (2006) Der Kategorienkommentar von Abu¯ l-Farag˘
‘Abdalla¯h ibn at:-T˙ayyib. Text und Untersuchungen. Brill, Leiden/
Boston
Finnegan J (1956) Texte arabe du Perιnοu˜ d’Alexandre d’Aphrodise,
Me´langes Unir. Saint-Joseph’ 33:157–202
Flu¨gel G (ed) (1871–1872) Kita¯b al-Fihrist = Ibn al-Nadı¯m, Kita¯b al-
Fihrist, mit Anmerkungen hrsg. von Flu¨gel G. I, II (=Ro¨diger,
Mu¨ller). F.C.W. Vogel, Leipzig
Freudenthal J (ed) (1885) Die durch Averroes erhaltenen Fragmente
Alexanders zur Metaphysik des Aristoteles untersucht und u¨bersetzt
von Freudenthal J mit Beitra¨gen zur Erla¨uterung des arabischen
Textes von Fra¨nkel S. Verlag der Ko¨niglichen Akademie der
Wissenschaften, Berlin
Gabrieli F (ed) (1952) Alfarabius. Compendium Legum Platonis, ed. et
latine vertit Gabrieli F, Plato Arabus III. in aedibus instituti
1328 T
Translations from Greek into Arabic

Warburgiani, Londinii. Corpus Platonicum Medii Aevi. . . ed.
Klibansky R (Kraus, Nendeln, Liechtenstein, 1973)
Gannage´ E (2005) Alexander of Aphrodisias. On Aristotle on coming-to-
be and perishing. Duckworth, London
Ga¨tje H (1967) Die arabische U¨ bersetzung der Schrift des Alexander von
Aphrodisias u¨ber die Farbe. Nachrichten der Akademie der
Wissenschaften zu Go¨ttingen. Philologisch-historische Klasse
Ga¨tje H (1971) Studien zur U¨ berlieferung der aristotelischen Psychologie
im Islam. C. Winter, Heidelberg
Genequand Ch (ed) (2001) Alexander of Aphrodisias on the cosmos. Brill,
Leiden/Boston/Ko¨ln
Georr Kh (ed) (1948) Les Cate´gories d’Aristote dans leurs versions syro-
arabes. E´dition de textes pre´ce´de´e d’une e´tude historique et critique
et suivie d’un vocabulaire technique. Institut Franc¸ais de Damas,
Beyrouth
Gutas D (ed) (1975) Greek wisdom literature in Arabic translation.
A study of Graeco-Arabic gnomologia. American Oriental Society,
New Haven
Gutas D (ed) (2010) Theophrastus on ﬁrst principles (known as
Metaphyiscs). Greek text and medieval Arabic translation, edited
and translated with introduction, commentaries and glossaries, as
well as the medieval Latin translation, and with an excursus on
Graeco-Arabic editorial technique. Brill, Leiden/Boston
Ivry AL (1974) Al-Kindi’s Metaphysics. A translation of Ya‘qu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q
al-Kindı¯’s Treatise ‘On ﬁrst philosophy’ (fı¯ al-Falsafah al-U¯ la¯), with
introduction and commentary. State University of New York Press,
Albany
Kellermann-Rost M (ed) (1961) Ein pseudoaristotelischer Traktat u¨ber
die Tu¨gend. Edition und U¨ bersetzung der arabischen Fassungen des
Abu¯ Qurra und des Ibn at:-T˙ayyib. Dissertation, University of
Erlangen
Kraus P, Walzer R (eds) (1951) Galeni compendium Timaei Platonis
aliorumque dialogorum synopsis quae extant fragmenta. Plato
Arabus I. Warburg, London (Kraus, Nendeln, 1973)
Kruk R (ed) (1979) The Arabic version of Aristotle’s Parts of Animals:
book XI–XIV of the Kita¯b al-H˙ ayawa¯n. Royal Netherlands Academy
of Arts and Sciences, Amsterdam/Oxford
Linley N (ed) (1984) Ibn at˙-T˙ayyib. Proclus’ Commentary on the Pythag-
orean Verses, SUNY Press, New York, Buffalo
Lyons MC (ed) (1973) An Arabic translation of Themistius’ Commentary
on Aristotle’s De anima. Cassirer, Oxford
Lyons MC (ed) (1982) Aristotle’s Ars rhetorica. The Arabic version.
Pembroke Arabic Texts, Cambridge
Mahdi M (ed) (1972) The Arabic text of Alfarabi’s Against John the
Grammarian. In: Medieval and Middle Eastern Studies in honor of
Aziz Suryal Atiya, ed. Hanna SA. Brill, Leiden, pp 268–284
Maro´th M (ed) (2006) The correspondence between Aristotle and
Alexander the Great. An anonymous Greek novel in letters in Arabic
translation. The Avicenna Institute of Middle Eastern Studies,
Piliscsaba
Martini Bonadeo C (ed) (2008) Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯. L’armonia delle opinioni
dei due sapienti, il divino Platone e Aristotele, introduzione,
testo arabo, traduzione e commento, prefazione di Endress G.
Plus, Pisa
Mu¨ller A (ed) (1882–1884) Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybi‘a, ‘Uyu¯n al-anba¯’ fı¯ t:abaqa¯t
al-at:ibba¯’, ed. Ibn al-T˙ah:h:a¯n I (=Mu¨ller A). al-Matba’a al-Wahbiya
Cairo/Ko¨nigsberg (repr Sezgin F (1995) Islamic medicine, vols 1–2.
Frankfurt a. Μ.)
Mu¨ller A, Lippert J (eds) (1903) Ibn al-Qift:ı¯, Ta’rih˘ al-h:ukama¯’, auf Grund
der Vorarbeiten A. Mu¨llers hrsg. von Lippert J. Dieterich’sche
Verlagsbuchhandlung, Leipzig
Reisman DC, Bertolacci A (2009) T¯a¯bit ibn Qurra’s concise exposition of
Aristotle’s Metaphysics: text, translation, and commentary. In:
Rashed R (ed) T¯a¯bit ibn Qurra. Science and philosophy in ninth-
century Baghdad. de Gruyter, Berlin/New York, pp 715–776
Rosenthal F, Walzer R (eds) (1943) Alfarabius. De Platonis philosophia.
Plato Arabus II. Corpus Platonicum Medii Aevi. . ., ed. Klibansky R.
The Warburg Institute, London (Kraus, Nendeln, Liechtenstein,
1973)
Rudolph U (ed) (1989) Die Doxographie des pseudo-Ammonius. Ein
Beitrag zur neuplatonischen U¨ berlieferung im Islam. Steiner,
Stuttgart
Ruland H-J (ed) (1976) Die arabische Fassungen von zwei Schriften des
Alexander von Aphrodisias: u¨ber die Vorsehung und u¨ber das
liberum arbitrium, Diss Univ Saarbru¨cken
Ruland H-J (ed) (1978) Die arabische U¨ bersetzung der Schrift des Alex-
ander von Aphrodisias u¨ber die Sinneswahrnehmung. Nachrichten
der Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Go¨ttingen. Philologisch-
historische Klasse
Ruland H-J (ed) (1979) Zwei arabische Fassungen der Abhandlung des
Alexander von Aphrodisias u¨ber die universalia (Quaestio I 11 a).
Nachrichten der Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Go¨ttingen.
Philologisch-historische Klasse
Ruland H-J (ed) (1981) Die arabische U¨ bersetzung der Schrift des Alex-
ander von Aphrodisias u¨ber das Wachstum (Quaestio I 5).
Nachrichten der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Go¨ttingen. I.
Philologisch-historische Klasse
Salı¯m Sa¯lim M (ed) (1970) Risa¯la Tha¯mistiyu¯s ila¯ Yu¯liya¯n al-Ma¯lik fı¯
l-siya¯sa wa-tadbı¯r al-mamlaka. Da¯r al-kutub, Cairo
Schoonheim PL (ed) (2000) Aristotle’s Meteorology in the Arabico-Latin
tradition. Brill, Leiden
Tajaddud R (1971/19733) Kita¯b al-Fihrist li-n-Nadı¯m. Marri Offset Print-
ing, Tehran
Thillet P (ed) (2003) Alexandre d’Aphrodise. Traite´ de la providence,
Perιprοnοίaς, version arabe de Abu¯ Bisˇr Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus, intro-
duction e´dition et traduction. Verdier, Paris
Tkatsch J (ed) (1928) Die arabische U¨ bersetzung der Poetik des
Aristoteles und die Grundlage der Kritik des griechischen Textes.
Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien, Wien/Leipzig
Troupeau G (ed) (1984) Un e´pitome´ arabe du De contingentia mundi
de Jean Philopon. In: Lucchesi E´, Saffrey HD (eds) Me´morial
Andre´-Jean Festugie`re. Antiquite´ paı¨enne et chre´tienne. Cramer,
Gene`ve, pp 77–88
Yaltakaya S (1941–1943) H˙ ajjı¯ Khalı¯fa, Kasˇf al-Z˙ unu¯n ‘an asa¯mı¯ l-kutub
wa-l-funu¯n, I–II. Millı¯ Ejitim Basimevi, Istanbul
Secondary Sources
(various dates) EI2 = Encyclope´die de l’Islam, Nouvelle e´dition (. . .). Brill/
Maisonneuve & Larose, Leiden/Paris
(1989) DPhA = Dictionnaire des Philosophes Antiques, publie´ sous la
direction de Goulet R avec une pre´face de Hadot P, vol I. CNRS
E´ditions, Paris (2000, vol III; 2003, Supple´ment)
Adamson P (2003) The Arabic Plotinus. A philosophical study of the
Theology of Aristotle. Duckworth, London
Adamson P (2006) Al-Kindı¯. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Altheim F, Stiehl R (1962) New fragments of Greek philosophers. II.
Porphyry in Arabic and Syriac translations. East West 13:3–15
Altmann A, Stern SM (1958) Isaac Israeli. A Neoplatonic philosopher of
the early tenth century. His works translated with comments and an
outline of his philosophy. Oxford University Press, Oxford (repr
Greenwood, Westport, 1979)
Translations from Greek into Arabic T
1329
T

Anawati GCh (1956) Un fragment perdu du De aeternitate mundi de
Proclus. In: Me´langes de philosophie greeque offerts a` Mgr Die`s par
ses e´le`ves, ses colle`gues, ses amis, Vrin, Paris 1956 (repr (1974) E´tudes
de Philosophie Musulmane, Vrin, Paris, pp 224–227)
Aouad M (1989a) Le De Pomo. In: DPhA I, pp 539–541
Aouad M (1989b) La The´ologie d’Aristote et autres textes du Plotinus
Arabus. In: DPhA I, pp 541–590
Aouad M (1989c) La Rhe´torique. Tradition syriaque et arabe. In: DPhA I,
pp 455–472
Arnzen R (2003) De anima. Paraphrase arabe anonyme. In: DPhA Suppl.,
pp 359–365
Atiyeh GN (1966) Al-Kindı¯: the philosopher of the Arabs. Islamic
Research Institute, Rawalpindi
Badawı¯ ‘A (1968) La transmission de la philosophie grecque au monde
arabe. Vrin, Paris
Balty-Guesdon M-G (1992) Le Bayt al-H˙ ikma. Arabica 39:131–150
Baumstark A (1975) Aristoteles bei den Syrern vom 5. bis 8. Jahrhunderts.
Syrische Texte herausgegeben, u¨bersetzt und untersucht. 1. (einziger)
Band.
Syrisch-arabische
Biographien
des
Aristoteles.
Syrische
Kommentare zur ΕΙSΑGOGΗ des Porphyrios. Scientia, Aachen
(Neudruck der Ausgabe Leipzig 1900)
Bergstra¨sser G (1913) H˙ unayn ibn Ish:a¯k˙ und seine Schule: Sprach- und
literaturgeschichtliche
Untersuchungen
zu
den
arabischen
Hippokrates- und Galen-U¨ bersetzungen. Brill, Leiden
Bergstra¨sser G (1932) Neue Materialen zu H˙ unayn ibn Ish:a¯qs Galen-
Bibliographie. Abhandlungen fu¨r die Kunde des Morgenla¨ndes
Berti V (2009) Vita e studi di Timoteo I, patriarca cristiano di Baghdad.
Ricerche sull’epistolario e sulle fonti contigue. Peeters, Leuven
Bertolacci A (2006) The reception of Aristotle’s Metaphysics in Avicenna’s
Kita¯b al-Sˇifa¯’. A milestone of western metaphysical thought. Brill,
Leiden
Bielawski J (1974) Phe´don en version arabe et la Risa¯lat al-Tuffa¯h:a. In:
Barral JM (ed) Orientalia Hispanica sive studia F. M. Pareja
octogenario dicata. Brill, Leiden, pp 120–134
Brock S (1993) The Syriac commentary tradition. In: Burnett Ch (ed)
Glosses and commentaries on Aristotelian logical texts. The Syriac,
Arabic and medieval Latin traditions. The Warburg Institute, London,
pp 3–18 (repr Brock S (1999) From Ephrem to Romanos. Interactions
between Syriac and Greek in Late Antiquity. Variorum, Ashgate)
Brock S (1999) Two letters of the Patriarch Timothy from the late eighth
century on translations from Greek. Arabic Sci Philos 9:233–246
Cacouros M (2003) Le traite´ pseudo-aristote´licien De virtutibus et vitiis.
In: DPhA Suppl., pp 506–546
Cooperson M (2005) Al-Ma’mun. Oneworld, Oxford
Crone P, Hinds M (1986) God’s Caliph. Religious authority in the ﬁrst
centuries of Islam. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Daiber
H
(1994)
Hellenistisch-kaiserzeitliche
Doxographie
und
philosophische Synkretismus in islamischer Zeit. In: Haase W,
Temporini H (eds) Aufstieg und Niedergang der Ro¨mischen Welt,
II 36.7, de Gruyter, Berlin/New York, pp 4974–4992
Daiber H (1997) Salient trends of the Arabic Aristotle. In: Endress G,
Kruk R (eds) The ancient tradition in Christian and Islamic
Hellenism. Studies on the transmission of Greek philosophy and
sciences dedicated to H.J. Drossaart Lulofs on his ninetieth birthday.
CNWS, Leiden, pp 29–41
Daiber H (1999) Bibliography of Islamic philosophy, I–II. Brill, Leiden/
Boston/Ko¨ln
D’Ancona C. Greek sources in Arabic and Islamic philosophy. Available
at: http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/arabic-islamic-greek/
D’Ancona C (2002) Commenting on Aristotle: from Late Antiquity to the
Arab Aristotelianism. In: Geerlings W, Schulze Ch (eds) Der
Kommentar
in
Antike
und
Mittelalter.
Beitra¨ge
zu
seiner
Erforschung. Brill, Leiden/Boston/Ko¨ln, pp 201–251
D’Ancona C (2008) Aristotle and Aristotelianism. In: Encyclopaedia of
Islam Three. Brill, Leiden/Boston, pp 153–169
D’Ancona C, Taylor RC. Le Liber de Causis. In: DPhA Suppl., pp 599–647
Davidson HA (1987) Proofs for eternity, creation and the existence of God
in medieval Islamic and Jewish philosophy. Oxford University Press,
New York/Oxford
Di Martino C (2003) Parva naturalia. Tradition arabe. In: DPhA Suppl.,
pp 375–378
Dunlop DM (1959) The translations of al-Bit:rı¯q and Ya¯h:ya¯ (Yuh:anna¯) b.
al-Bit:rı¯q. J R Asiat Soc 140–150
Dunlop DM (1974) The manuscript Taimur Pasha 290 and the Summa
Alexandrinorum. Arabica 21 (1974):252–263; 23 (1976):313–314
Dunlop DM (1982) The Arabic tradition of the Summa Alexandrinorum.
Arch Hist Doct Litt M-Age 49:253–263
Eche Y (1967) Les bibliothe`ques arabes publiques et se´mi-publiques en
Me´sopotamie, en Syrie et en E´gypte au Moyen Age. Institut Franc¸ais
de Damas, Damas
Elamrani Jamal A (1983) Logique aristote´licienne et grammaire arabe
(E´tude et documents). Vrin, Paris
Elamrani Jamal A (1989) Organon. Tradition syriaque et arabe. Les
Cate´gories. In: DPhA I, pp 507–513
Elamrani Jamal A (2003) De anima. Tradition arabe. In: DPhA Suppl.,
pp 346–358
Endress G (1966) Die arabischen U¨ bersetzungen von Aristoteles’ Schrift
De Caelo. Inaugural-dissertation, Bildstelle der J. W. Goethe
Universita¨t, Frankfurt a. M
Endress G (1974) The Arabic version of Aristotle’s Meteorology. Oriens
23–24:497–509 (Review of Petraitis C)
Endress G (1977) The works of Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯. An analytical inventory.
Reichert, Wiesbaden
Endress G (1986) Grammatik und Logik. Arabische Philologie und
griechische Philosophie im Widerstreit. In: Mojsisch B (ed)
Sprachphilosophie in Antike und Mittelalter, Gru¨ner. Amsterdam,
pp 163–299
Endress G (1987) Die wissenschaftliche Literatur. In: Ga¨tje H (ed)
Grundriss der Arabischen Philologie. II. Literaturwissenschaft,
Reichert, Wiesbaden, pp 400–530
Endress G (1990) The defense of reason. The plea for philosophy in the
religious community. Z Gesch Arab-Islam Wiss 6:1–49
Endress G (1991) Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus. In: EI2, VI, pp 844–846
Endress G (1992) Die wissenschaftliche Literatur. In: Fischer W (ed)
Grundriss der Arabischen Philologie. III. Supplement, Reichert,
Wiesbaden, pp 3–152
Endress G (1995a) Averroes’ De caelo. Ibn Rushd’s cosmology in his
commentaries on Aristotle’s On the Heavens. Arabic Sci Philos 5:9–49
Endress G (1995b) Sa‘ı¯d b. Ya‘qub al-Dimasˇqı¯. In: EI2, VIII, pp 858–859
Endress G (1997a) The circle of al-Kindı¯. Early Arabic translations from
the Greek and the rise of Islamic philosophy. In: Endress G, Kruk
R (eds) The ancient tradition in Christian and Islamic Hellenism.
Studies on the transmission of Greek philosophy and sciences ded-
icated to H.J. Drossaart Lulofs on his ninetieth birthday. CNWS,
Leiden, pp 43–76
Endress G (1997b) L’Aristote Arabe. Re´ception, autorite´ et transformation
du Premier Maıˆtre. Medioevo 23:1–42
Endress G (2003) Mathematics and philosophy in medieval Islam. In:
Hogendijk JP, Sabra AI (eds) The enterprise of science in Islam: new
perspectives. The MIT Press, Cambridge, pp 121–176
Endress G (2006) Organizing scientiﬁc knowledge: intellectual traditions
and encyclopaedias of the rational sciences in Arabic Islamic
1330 T
Translations from Greek into Arabic

Hellenism. In: Endress G (ed) Organizing knowledge. Encyclopaedic
activities in the pre-eighteenth century Islamic world. Brill, Leiden,
pp 103–133
Endress G (2007) Building the library of Arabic philosophy. Platonism
and Aristotelianism in the sources of al-Kindı¯. In: D’Ancona C (ed)
The libraries of the Neoplatonists. Proceedings of the meeting of the
European Science Foundation Network ‘‘Late Antiquity and Arabic
Thought’’. . .. Brill, Leiden, pp 319–350
Fazzo S (2003) Alexandros d’Aphrodisias. Supple´ment. In: DPhA Suppl.,
pp 64–70
Fazzo S (2008) Nicolas, l’auteur du Sommaire de la philosophie
d’Aristote. Doutes sur son identite´, sa datation, son origine. Revue
des E´tudes Grecques 121:99–126
Fazzo S, Wiesner H (1993) Alexander of Aphrodisias in the Kindı¯ circle
and in al-Kindı¯’s cosmology. Arabic Sci Philos 3:119–153
Filius LS (2003) La tradition orientale des Problemata Physica. In: DPhA
Suppl., pp 593–598
Furlani G (1922) Una risaˆlah di al-Kindıˆ sull’anima. Riv Trimest Stud
Filos Relig 3:50–63
Gabrieli G (1912) Nota bio-bibliograﬁca su Qust:a¯ ibn Lu¯qa¯. In:
Rendiconti della Reale Accademia dei Lincei. Classe di scienze
morali, storiche e ﬁlologiche, serie V, 21, 341–382
Gabrieli F (1924) H˙ unayn ibn Ish:a¯q. Isis 6:282–292
Gabrieli F (1932) L’opera di Ibn al-Muqaffa‘. Riv Stud Orient 13:197–247
Gabrieli F (1947) Le citazioni delle Leggi platoniche in al-Biruni. La Parola
del Passato 2:309–313
Ga¨tje H (1971) Studien zur U¨ berlieferung der aristotelischen Psychologie
im Islam, Carl Winter, Heidelberg
Genequand Ch (1987–1988) Platonism and Hermetism in al-Kindı¯’s Fı¯
al-nafs. Z Gesch Arab-Islam Wiss 4:1–18
Geoffroy M (2002) La tradition arabe du Perιnο~u d’Alexandre
d’Aphrodise et les origines de la the´orie farabienne des quatre
degre´s de l’intellect. In: D’Ancona C, Serra G (eds) Aristotele
e Alessandro di Afrodisia nella tradizione araba. Il Poligrafo, Padova,
pp 191–231
Giannakis E (1993) The structure of Abu¯ l-H˙ usayn al-Bas:rı¯’s copy of
Aristotle’s Physics. Z Gesch Arab-Islam Wiss 8:251–258
Giannakis E (1995/1996) Fragments from Alexander’s Lost Commentary
on Aristotle’s Physics. Z Gesch Arab-Islam Wiss 10:157–185
Giannakis E (2002–2003) The quotations from John Philoponus’ De
aeternitate mundi contra Proclum in al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯’s India. Z Gesch
Arab-Islam Wiss 15:185–195
Goulet R, Aouad M (1989) Alexandros d’Aphrodisias. In: DPhA I,
pp 125–139
Grignaschi M (1965–1966) Les Rasa¯’il ‘Arist:a¯t:a¯lı¯sa ila¯-l-Iskandar de Sa¯lim
Abu¯-l-‘Ala¯ et l’activite´ culturelle a` l’e´poque omayyade. Bull E´tudes
Orient 19:7–83
Grignaschi M (1967) Le roman e´pistolaire classique conserve´ dans la
version arabe de Sa¯lim Abu¯-l-‘Ala¯’. Le Muse´on 80:211–264
Grignaschi M (1976) L’origine et les me´tamorphoses du Sirr al-asra¯r. Arch
Hist Doct Litt M-Age 43:7–112
Gutas D (1981) Classical Arabic wisdom literature: nature and scope.
J Am Orient Soc 101:49–86
Gutas D (1983) Paul the Persian on the classiﬁcation of the parts of
Aristotle’s philosophy: a milestone between Alexandria and Bagdad.
Der Islam 60:231–267
Gutas D (1988) Plato’s Symposion in the Arabic tradition. Oriens
31:36–60
Gutas D (1992) Theophrastus of Eresus: sources for his life, writings,
thought and inﬂuence, ed. and trans. Fortenbaugh WW, Huby PM,
Sharples RW (Greek and Latin) and Gutas D (Arabic). Brill, Leiden
Gutas D (1994) Pre-Plotinian philosophy in Arabic (other than Platonism
and Aristotelianism): a review of the sources. In: Haase W, Temporini
H (eds) Aufstieg und Niedergang der Ro¨mischen Welt, II 36.7. de
Gruyter, Berlin/New York, pp 4939–4973
Gutas D (1997) Galen’s Synopsis of Plato’s Laws and Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Talkhı¯s:. In:
Endress G, Kruk R (eds) The ancient tradition in Christian and
Islamic Hellenism. Studies on the transmission of Greek philosophy
and sciences dedicated to H.J. Drossaart Lulofs on his ninetieth
birthday. CNWS, Leiden, pp 101–119
Gutas D (1998) Greek thought, Arabic culture. The Graeco-Arabic trans-
lation movement in Baghdad and early ‘Abba¯sid society (2nd–4th/
8th–10th centuries). Routledge, London
Gutas D (1999) The ‘Alexandria to Baghdad’ complex of narratives.
A contribution to the study of philosophical and medical historiog-
raphy among the Arabs. Documenti e studi sulla tradizione ﬁlosoﬁca
medievale 10:155–193
Gutas D (2006) The Greek and Persian background of early Arabic
encyclopedism. In: Endress G (ed) Organizing knowledge. Encyclo-
paedic activities in the pre-eighteenth century Islamic world. Brill,
Leiden, pp 91–101
Gutas D (2007) In: Huby P (ed) Theophrastus of Eresus. Sources for his
life, writings, thought and inﬂuence. Commentary vol 2: Logic. With
contributions on the Arabic materials by Gutas D. Brill, Leiden
Gutas D (2009) On Graeco-Arabic epistolary ‘Novels’ (Review of Maro´th
2006). Middle East Lit 12:59–70
Haddad R (1974) H˙ unayn ibn Ish:a¯q apologiste chre´tien. Arabica
21:292–302
Harvey S (2003) Did Alfarabi read Plato’s Laws? Medioevo 27:51–68
Hasnaoui A (1994) Alexandre d’Aphrodise vs Jean Philopon: notes sur
quelques traite´s d’Alexandre ‘perdus’ en grec, conserve´s en arabe.
Arabic Sci Philos 4:53–109
Hasnaoui A (1996) Un e´le`ve d’Abu¯ Bisˇr Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus: Abu¯ ‘Amr
al-T˙abarı¯. Bull E´tudes Orient 48:25–34
Hugonnard-Roche H (1989) L’Organon. Tradition syriaque et arabe. In:
DPhA I, pp 502–528
Hugonnard-Roche H (1993) Remarques sur la tradition arabe de l’Orga-
non d’apre`s le manuscrit Paris, Bibliothe`que Nationale, ar. 2346. In:
Burnett Ch (ed) Glosses and commentaries on Aristotelian logical
texts. The Syriac, Arabic and medieval Latin traditions. Warburg,
London, pp 19–28
Hugonnard-Roche H (2001) La tradizione della logica aristotelica. In:
Storia della scienza, vol IV, sez. I. La scienza siriaca. Coordinamento
scientiﬁco di Teixidor J, collaborazione di Contini R. Istituto della
Enciclopedia Italiana, Roma, pp 16–26
Hugonnard-Roche H (2003a) De caelo. Tradition syriaque et arabe. In:
DPhA Suppl., pp 283–294
Hugonnard-Roche H (2003b) La Poe´tique. Tradition syriaque et arabe. In:
DPhA Suppl., pp 208–218
Hugonnard-Roche H (2003c) Pseudo-Aristote, De Plantis. In: DPhA
Suppl., pp 499–505
Hugonnard-Roche H (2004) La logique d’Aristote du grec au syriaque.
E´tudes sur la transmission des textes de l’Organon et leur interpre´-
tation philosophique. Vrin, Paris
Ivry AL (2001) The Arabic text of Aristotle’s De Anima and its translator.
Oriens 36:59–77
Kennedy H (2004) The court of the caliphs. The rise and fall of Islam’s
greatest dynasty. Weidenfeld & Nicolson, London
Klein-Franke F (1973) Zur U¨ berlieferung der platonischen Schriften im
Islam. Isr Orient Stud 3:120–139
Klein-Franke F (1979) The Arabic version of Galen’s Perιe᾽yω˜n. Jerus
Stud Arabic Islam 1:125–150
Translations from Greek into Arabic T
1331
T

Kraemer Joel L (1965) A lost passage from Philoponus Contra
Aristotelem in Arabic translation (Simpl. De Caelo I, 3, 270b5–11).
J Am Orient Soc 75:318–327
Kraemer Joel L (1992) Humanism in the Renaissance of Islam. The
cultural revival during the Buyid Age. Brill, Leiden/New York/Ko¨ln
Kraus P (1934) Zu Ibn al-Muqaffa. Riv Stud Orient 14:1–20 (repr (1994)
Alchemie, Ketzerei, Apokryphen im fru¨hen Islam. Gesammelte
Aufsa¨tze hrsg. u. eingeleitet von Brague R. Olms, Hildesheim/
Zu¨rich/New York)
Kruk R (2003) La zoologie aristote´licienne. Tradition arabe. In: DPhA
Suppl., pp 329–334
Lameer J (1994) Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ and Aristotelian syllogistics. Greek theory and
Islamic practice. Brill, Leiden/New York/Ko¨ln
Leder S et al (eds) (1996) Ibn an-Nadim und die mittelalterliche arabische
Literatur. Beitrage zum 1. Johann Wilhelm Fuck-Kolloquium (Halle
1987). Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden
Lettinck P (1994) Aristotle’s Physics and its reception in the Arabic world,
with an edition of the unpublished parts of Ibn Ba¯jja’s Commentary
on the Physics. Brill, Leiden/New York/Ko¨ln
Lettinck P (2002) Aristotle’s ‘Physical’ works in the Arabic world.
Medioevo 27:22–52
Madelung W (1974) The origins of the controversy concerning the crea-
tion of the Koran. In: Barral JM (ed) Orientalia Hispanica sive studia
F. M. Pareja octogenario dicata. Brill, Leiden, pp 504–525
Mahdi M (1967) Alfarabi against Philoponus. J Near East Stud
26:233–260
Manzalaoui M (1974) The pseudo-Aristotelian Kita¯b Sirr al-asra¯r. Facts
and problems. Oriens 23–24:147–257
Martin A (1989) La Me´taphysique. Tradition syriaque et arabe. In: DPhA
I, pp 538–534
Martini Bonadeo C (2002) Le traduzioni arabe della Metaﬁsica di
Aristotele. Libri A e a. In: D’Ancona C, Serra G (eds) Aristotele
e Alessandro di Afrodisia nella tradizione araba. Il Poligrafo, Padova,
pp 75–112
Martini Bonadeo C (2003) La Me´taphysique. Tradition syriaque et arabe.
Mise a` jour bibliographique. In: DPhA Suppl., pp 259–264
Martini Bonadeo C (2004) OS ΕΡOΜΕΝΟΝ. Alcune interpretazioni di
Metaph. L 7. In: Celluprica V, Chiaradonna R, D’Ancona C (eds)
Aristotele e i suoi esegeti neoplatonici. Logica e ontologia nelle
interpretazioni greche e arabe. Bibliopolis, Napoli, pp 213–243
Mattock JN (1989) The early translations from Greek into Arabic: an
experiment in comparative assessment. In: Endress G (ed) Akten des
Zweiten
Symposium
Graeco-Arabicum.
Gru¨ner,
Amsterdam,
pp 73–102
Meyerhof M (1926a) New light on H˙ unayn ibn Ish:a¯q and his period. Isis
8:685–724
Meyerhof M (1926b) Les versions syriaques et arabes des e´crits gale´niques.
Byzantion 3:33–51
Micheau F (1997) Les institutions scientiﬁques dans le Proche-Orient
me´die´val. In: Histoire des sciences arabes, 3. Technologie, alchimie
et sciences de la vie, sous la direction de Rashed R. E´ditions du Seuil,
Paris, pp 233–254
O’Meara D, Shamp J (2006) Miroirs de prince de l’Empire romain au IVe
sie`cle. Academic, Fribourg
Ouyang W (1997) Literary criticism in medieval Arabic Islamic culture.
The making of a tradition. Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh
Parens J (1995) Metaphysics as rhetoric. Alfarabi’s summary of Plato’s
Laws. State University of New York Press, Albany
Peters FE (1968) Aristoteles Arabus. The Oriental translations and com-
mentaries on the Aristotelian corpus. Brill, Leiden
Pines S (1972) An Arabic summary of a lost work of John Philoponus. Isr
Orient Stud 2:294–326 (repr The collected works of Shlomo Pines, II,
pp 320–352)
Pines S (1986) The spiritual force permeating the cosmos according to
a passage in the Treatise On the Principles of the All ascribed to
Alexander of Aphrodisias. In: Pines S, Studies in Arabic versions of
Greek texts and in Medieval Science, The Magues Press, Brill,
Jeonsalem – Leiden 1986 (The Collected Works of Shlomo Pines
II), pp 252–255
Pines S (1987) Some distinctive metaphysical conceptions in Themistius’
commentary on book Lambda and their place in the history of
philosophy. In: Wiesner J (ed) Aristoteles. Werk und Wirkung, II.
de Gruyter, Berlin/New York, pp 177–204 (repr The collected works
of Shlomo Pines III, pp 267–294)
Pinto O (1928) Le biblioteche degli Arabi nell’eta` degli Abbasidi.
Biblioﬁlia 30:139–165
Platti E (1983) Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯, the´ologien chre´tien et philosophe arabe.
Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta, Leuven
Rashed M (2003) De generatione et corruptione. Tradition arabe. In:
DPhA Suppl., pp 304–314
Raven W (2003) De mundo. Tradition syriaque et arabe. In: DPhA Suppl.,
pp 481–483
Rosenthal F (1937) Arabische Nachrichten u¨ber Zenon den Eleaten.
Orientalia 6:21–67 (repr (1990) Greek philosophy in the Arab
world. A collection of essays. Variorum, Aldershot)
Rosenthal F (1940) On the knowledge of Plato’s philosophy in the Islamic
world. Islam Culture 14:387–422 (repr Greek philosophy in the Arab
world)
Rosenthal F (1941) Some Pythagorean documents transmitted in Arabic.
Orientalia 10:104–115, 383–395
Rosenthal F (1970) Knowledge triumphant. The concept of knowledge in
medieval Islam. Brill, Leiden
Rosenthal F (1974) Plotinus in Islam: the power of anonymity. In: Plotino
e il Neoplatonismo in Oriente e in Occidente. Atti del convegno
internazionale Roma, 5–9 ottobre 1970. Accademia Nazionale dei
Lincei, Roma, pp 437–446 (repr Greek philosophy in the Arab world)
Rosenthal F (1975) The classical heritage in Islam. Routledge & Kegan
Paul, London
Rosenthal F (1978) The symbolism of the Tabula Cebetis according to
Abu¯ l-Faraj Ibn at:-T˙ayyib. In: Recherches d’Islamologie. Recueil
d’articles offert a` Georges C. Anawati et Louis Gardet par leurs
colle`gues et amis. E´d de l’ Institut Supe´rieur de Philosophie – Peeters,
Louvain/Louvain-la-Neuve, pp 273–283 (repr Greek philosophy in
the Arab world)
Schoonheim PL (2003) Me´te´orologiques. Tradition syriaque, arabe et
latine. In: DPhA Suppl., pp 324–328
Schrier OJ (1997) The Syriac and Arabic versions of Aristotle’s Poetics. In:
Endress G, Kruk R (eds) The ancient tradition in Christian and
Islamic Hellenism. Studies on the transmission of Greek philosophy
and sciences dedicated to H.J. Drossaart Lulofs on his ninetieth
birthday. CNWS Research, Leiden, pp 259–278
Serra G (1997) La traduzione araba del De generatione et corruptione di
Aristotele citata nel Kita¯b al-Tas:rı¯f attribuito a G˘ a¯bir. Medioevo
23:191–288
Sourdel D (1962) La politique religieuse du caliphe ‘abbaside al-Ma’mu¯n.
Rev E´tudes Islam 30:27–48
Stewart DJ (2009) Ibn al-Nadı¯m’s Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ contacts. J R Asiat Soc 19:21–40
Strohmaier G (1990) H˙ unayn ibn Ish:a¯q al-Iba¯dı¯. In: EI2, III, p 578
Thomann J (2003) La tradition arabe de la Physiognomonie d’Aristote.
In: DPhA Suppl., pp 496–498
1332 T
Translations from Greek into Arabic

Treiger A (2005) New evidence on the Arabic versions of the Corpus
Dionysiacum. Le Muse´on 118:219–240
van Bladel K (2007) The Syriac sources of the early Arabic narratives
of Alexander. In: Ray HP, Potts DT (eds) Memory as history: the
legacy of Alexander in South Asia. Aryan International, New Delhi,
pp 54–75
van Ess J (1966) U¨ ber einige neue Fragmente des Alexander von
Aphrodisias und des Proklos in arabischer U¨ bersetzung. Der Islam
42:48–68
van Koningsveld PS (1998) Greek manuscripts in the early Abbasid
Empire: ﬁction and facts about their origin, translation and destruc-
tion. Bibl Orient 55, col 345–372
Walzer R (1937) Un frammento nuovo di Aristotele. Stud Ital Filol Class
14:127–137 (repr (1963) Greek into Arabic. Essays on Islamic phi-
losophy. Cassirer, Oxford, pp 38–47)
Walzer R (1950) The rise of Islamic philosophy. Oriens 3:1–19
Walzer R (1962) Platonismus in der islamischen Philosophie (arabische
U¨ bersetzungen aus dem griechischen). In: Antike und Orient im
Mittelalter. Miscellanea Mediaevalia 1. de Gruyter, Berlin, pp 179–195
Walzer R (1970) L’e´veil de la philosophie islamique. Revue des E´tudes
Islamiques 38:7–42, 207–241
Watt J, Aouad M (2003) La Rhe´torique. Tradition syriaque et arabe
(comple´ments). In: DPhA Suppl., pp 219–223
Wildberg Ch (1987) Philoponus. Against Aristotle on the Eternity of the
World. Cornell University Press, Ithaca
Young MJL, Latham JD, Serjeant RB (eds) (1990) Religion, learning and
science in the ‘Abba¯sid Period. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge
Zimmermann FW (1981) Al-Farabi’s Commentary and Short Treatise on
Aristotle’s De interpretatione. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Zimmermann FW (1986) The origins of the so-called Theology of Aris-
totle. In: Kraye J, Ryan WF, Schmitt C-B (eds) Pseudo-Aristotle in the
Middle Ages. The Theology and other texts. The Warburg Institute,
London, pp 110–240
Zimmermann FW (1994) Proclus Arabus rides again. Arabic Sci Philos
4:9–51
Zonta M (2003a) Les E´thiques. Tradition syriaque et arabe. In: DPhA
Suppl., pp 191–198
Zonta M (2003b) Pseudo-Aristote, Secretum secretorum. In: DPhA
Suppl., pp 648–651
Translations from Greek into
Syriac
EMILIANO FIORI
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
Leiden
The Netherlands
Abstract
As for the philosophical and scientiﬁc texts are concerned,
we can observe three periods of the translation activity
from Greek into Syriac: the ﬁrst (second–ﬁfth century) is
characterized by the interest in popular philosophy of
ethical content and gnomic form; in the second, (sixth
century) the translations focus on the Aristotelian logic
and physics; the third one (seventh–ninth century) is still
focused on Aristotle but is marked by a change in the
translation style, from a more periphrastic to a more literal
one. Short information about the key ﬁgures (Sergius of
Resh‘ayna¯, Athanasius of Baladh, James of Edessa, George
of the Arabs, and H˙ unayn b. Ish:aq) is given.
As it is impossible to outline a complete overview of
the Syriac translation activity throughout the centuries,
we will limit ourselves to the philosophical texts and to
some scientiﬁc literature, excluding the biblical, patristic,
or narrative texts.
First Period: The So-Called Popular
Philosophy
Greek philosophy had its ﬁrst impact on Syriac culture
already by the second century, in the form of little texts,
often of gnomic form and ethical content, and often trans-
mitted in little collections (see Bettiolo 2003; Brock 2003).
It is commonly believed that they were composed by and
for a cultivated and not necessarily Christian milieu, a
urban – mainly Edessene – audience located in Mesopo-
tamia between the second and the ﬁfth century, although
it is impossible to reach a more detailed description of the
circumstances of these earlier translations. To this period
belong the translations of some Pythagorean sayings (Levi
della Vida 1910; Possekel 1998), of collections of sentences
by the Pseudo-Menander (Bettiolo 2003) and by a
Pseudo-Plato, of a ‘‘Socratic’’dialogue, of two of Plutarch’s
moralia, and of one of Isocrates’ orations. Works by
Lucian of Samosata and by the fourth century rhetor
Themistius are also preserved (all the texts above edited
in De Lagarde 1858; Sachau 1870).
Second Period
Philosophy made its real entrance in the Syriac-speaking
cultivated world only at the beginning of the sixth century,
with the ﬁrst translations of Aristotle’s logical and physical
works (overview in Brock 1993) along with commentaries
on them. Plato was never translated into Syriac. The
Categories were translated (Gottheil 1892–1893; see
the study of all the extant Syriac versions by Georr 1948),
presumably in the ﬁrst half of the century, by an anony-
mous translator, and have been commented at length by
Sergius of Resh‘ayna¯ (d. 536), who nevertheless did not
know the translation just mentioned. Porphyry’s Isagoge as
well was translated by an anonymous author in the ﬁrst
Translations from Greek into Syriac T
1333
T

half of the sixth century (Freimann 1897; Brock 1988). The
same Sergius wrote a short introduction to the whole
logical
œuvre
of
Aristotle
(partial
translation
in
Hugonnard-Roche 2004). He also translated two other
works
of
the
Aristotelian
tradition:
the
pseudo-
Aristotelian treatise De mundo (De Lagarde 1858; Ryssel
1880–1881), and perhaps Alexander of Aphrodisias’ On
the Principles of the Universe. Sergius is most of all famous
for his translation into Syriac of the pseudo-Dionysian
Corpus, and for having introduced Galen into Syriac: the
ninth-century doctor and translator H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q
informs us that he had translated some 30 works of
Galen’s: four fragments, three of which attributed to him
by Sachau (1870), have come down to us: from the Ars
medica, from the De alimentorum facultatibus, and from
the De simplicium medicamentorum temperamentis et
facultatibus. A short treatise on the inﬂuence of the
moon, based on the De diebus decretoriis was edited by
Merx (1885).
Two other logical texts from the Organon are preserved
in anonymous translations: the De interpretatione (for the
text see Hoffmann 1869) and the Prior Analytics until I, 7:
for these works, scholars could not give a precise date, so
that at present it is not possible to determine their context.
We also have a version of Theophrastus’ Metereology
(Daiber 1992; Wagner and Steinmetz 1964).
Third Period
Between the seventh and the eighth century, after the
Muslim conquest, the West Syrian monastic cenacle of
Qenneshre, on the western bank of the Euphrates, pro-
duced a great amount of philosophical and scientiﬁc work,
both in the form of translations and commentaries. It is in
these works that we can clearly detect the main change of
the Syriac translation technique analyzed by Brock (1979,
1983, 2004): from a periphrastic style to a more literal one,
with a much more abundant presence of Greek borrow-
ings in the new translations (for Greek loanwords in
Syriac, see Brock 1975, 1996; Schall 1960).
The initiator of Qenneshre’s ﬂourishing period was
Severus Sebokht (d. 666/7). He is well-known for a wide
scientiﬁc production, but not for translations. His main
disciples and successors were Athanasius of Baladh
(d. 687), James of Edessa (d. 708), and George of the
Arabs (d. 724). Athanasius revised in 645 the ﬁrst anony-
mous translation of the Isagoge, edited by Freimann
(1897); other translations by him of Aristotelian texts are
lost, but we know that he translated the Prior and the
Posterior Analytics, the Topics and the Sophistici elenchi:
that is to say that he is the only Syriac scholar of the ﬁrst
millennium who, as far as we know, translated the entire
Organon which, as an heritage of the Alexandrian com-
mentary tradition, was neither usually translated nor
commented upon beyond the Prior Analytics. James of
Edessa, for example, did not go beyond the An.pr.;
he revised the sixth-century anonymous translation of
the
Categories
(Schu¨ler
1897),
translated
the
De
interpretatione (even if this translation is attributed to
the sixth century Syriac philosopher Probus in the
manuscript which transmits it), and the Prior Analytics.
George of the Arabs translated the same three works in
a more literal way (Furlani 1925). In the same monastery
a certain Phokas substantially revised Sergius’ version
of the Dionysian Corpus, which he translated together
with John of Scythopolis’ scholia (Van Esbroeck 1997).
After George, almost nothing has survived of the Syriac
translations. The most important translator, both into
Syriac and Arabic, under the ‘Abba¯sids is Hunayn b. Ish:a¯q
(ninth century), but it is difﬁcult to single out any frag-
ments of his Syriac translations. We know about them
from a letter that he wrote in 856, where he displays the
list of his Syriac translations of Galen’s works. He
retranslated many of Galen’s works into Syriac, because
of his severe judgment on many of Sergius’ translations
(Brock 2004). We know that he also produced new ver-
sions of the Categories and the De interpretatione, but they
are no longer extant.
To the third era of the Syriac translations probably
belongs also the version of Nemesius of Emesa’s De
natura hominis, which is known only from fragments
quoted by eighth and ninth century authors, and for
linguistic reasons should not be dated before the seventh
century.
See also: ▶Sergius of Reshʿayna¯ ▶Translations from
Greek into Arabic
Bibliography
Primary Sources
De Lagarde Paul (1858) Analecta Syriaca. Teubner, Leipzig (repr. Zeller,
Osnabrck, 1967)
Freimann Aron (1897) Die Isagoge des Porphyrius in den syrischen
U¨ bersetzungen. Berlin
Furlani Giuseppe (1925) La versione e il commento di Giorgio delle
Nazioni all’Organo aristotelico. Stud Ital Filol Class 3:305–333
Gottheil Richard James Horatio (1892–1893) The Syriac versions of the
Categories of Aristotle. Hebraica 9:166–215
Hoffmann Johann Georg Ernst (1869) De Hermeneuticis apud Syros
Aristoteleis. J. C. Hinrichs, Leipzig
Merx Adalbert (1885) Proben der syrischen U¨ bersetzung von Galenus’
Schrift u¨ber die einfache Heilmittel. Z Dtsch Morgenl Ges
39:237–305
Sachau Eduard (1870) Inedita Syriaca. K. K. Hof- und Staatsdruckerei,
Halle (repr. G. Olms, Hildesheim, 1968)
1334 T
Translations from Greek into Syriac

Schu¨ler Salomon (1897) Die U¨ bersetzung der Categorien des Aristoteles
von Jacob von Edessa. Berlin
Van Esbroeck Michel (1997) La triple pre´face syriaque de Phocas. In: De
Andia Y (ed) Denys l’Are´opagite et sa poste´rite´ en Orient et en
Occident. E´tudes Augustiniennes, Paris
Wagner Ewald, Steinmetz Peter (1964) Der Syrische Auszug der
Meteorologie des Theophrast. Abhandlungen der Akademie der
Wissenschaften, Geist- u. Sozialwissenschaftlichen Klasse 1964–1.
Mainz
Secondary Sources
Bettiolo P (2003) Dei casi della vita, della pieta` e del buon nome. In:
Funghi MS (ed) Aspetti di letteratura gnomica nel mondo antico.
Olschki, Firenze, pp 83–103
Brock S (1975) Some aspects of Greek words in Syriac. In: Dietrich A (ed)
Synkretismus im syrisch-persischen Kulturgebiet; Abhandlungen
der Akad. der Wissensch. in Go¨ttingen, Phil-Hist. Klasse 96,
80–108
Brock S (1977) Greek into Syriac and Syriac into Greek. J Syriac Acad
3:1–17
Brock S (1979) Aspects of translation technique in antiquity. Greek
Roman Byz Stud 20:69–87
Brock S (1983) Towards a history of Syriac translation technique. In:
Lavenant R (ed) III Symposium Syriacum 1980 (=Orientalia
Christiana Analecta 221), pp 1–14
Brock S (1988) The earliest Syriac translation of Porphyry’s Eisagoge, I.
Edition. J Iraqi Acad Syriac Corp 12:316–366
Brock S (1993) The Syriac commentary tradition. In: Burnett C (ed)
Glosses and commentaries on Aristotelian logical texts. The Syriac,
Arabic and medieval Latin traditions. Warburg Institute, London,
pp 3–18
Brock S (1996) Greek words in Syriac: some general features. Studia
Classica Israelica 15:251–262
Brock S (2003) Syriac translations of Greek popular philosophy. In: Bruns
P (ed) Von Athens nach Bagdad. Zur Rezeption griechischen
Philosophie von der Spa¨tantike bis zum Islam. Norbert Borengasser,
Bonn, pp 9–28
Brock S (2004) Changing fashions in Syriac translation technique: the
background to Syriac translations under the Abbasids. J Can Soc
Syriac Stud 4:3–14
Daiber H (1992) The meteorology of Theophrastus in Syriac and Arabic
translation. In: Fortenbaugh W, Gutas D (eds) Theophrastus. His
psychological, doxographical and scientiﬁc writings. Transaction,
New Brunswick, pp 166–229
Georr Kh (1948) Les Cate´gories d’Aristote dans leurs versions syro-
arabes. Institut Franc¸ais de Damas, Beirut
Hugonnard-Roche H (2004) La logique d’Aristote du grec au syriaque.
Vrin, Paris
Levi della Vida G (1910) Sentenze pitagoriche in versione siriaca. Riv Stud
Orient 3:597–598
Possekel
U
(1998)
Der
‘Rat
der
Theano’.
Eine
Pythagoreische
Spruchsammlung in syrischer U¨ bersetzung», Le Muse´on 111:7–36
Ryssel V (1880–1881) U¨ ber den textkritischen Werth der syrischen
U¨ bersetzungen griechischer Klassiker, Theile I–II. Nicolai-Gymna-
sium, Leipzig
Schall A (1960) Studien u¨ber Griechische Fremdwo¨rter im Syrischen.
Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, Darmstadt
Zonta
M
(1991)
Nemesiana
syriaca:
new
fragments
from
the
missing Syriac version of the De Natura Hominis. J Semit Stud
37:223–248
Trinitarian Logic
SIMO KNUUTTILA
Faculty of Theology
University of Helsinki
Helsinki
Finland
Abstract
Two Trinitarian fallacies were discussed or at least men-
tioned by practically all theologians and logicians from
John Duns Scotus to the sixteenth century. One of these
was an expository syllogism: This God is the Father; this
God is the Son; therefore, the Father is the Son. This was
regarded as a fallacy because the premises were prima facie
true and the conclusion false. There was another similar
example in which the corresponding premises were uni-
versal propositions arranged in accordance with the ﬁrst
mood of the ﬁrst ﬁgure, the so-called Barbara. The reason
for the extreme popularity of these two examples was that
they were associated with two basic principles of syllogistic
logic. Some theologians argued that Trinitarian problems
showed that a special logica ﬁdei was needed to improve
the traditional logic, which was not universally valid. The
more inﬂuential approach was the view that these and
some analogous examples of Platonic ideas and their
instantiations demonstrated how the ﬁne structure of
syllogistic premises should be explicated in order to
avoid logical difﬁculties. It was thought that when this
was done, the logical problems in arguments involving
Trinitarian premises disappeared. Medieval logicians
found an analysis which became very inﬂuential; the theo-
logical background of this innovation explains why logi-
cians continued to quote the above fallacies in discussing
the principles of logic. The basis of the new analysis was
Abelard’s suggestion that the copula of an afﬁrmative
proposition indicates that the terms apply to the same
logical subject – this is the kernel of the identity theory
of predication, the details of which were particularly
developed in discussing the kinds of sameness relevant in
explaining how Trinitarian persons, being distinct from
each other, are the same as one and the same God.
In dealing with the question of how predication should be
understood in logic, Peter Abelard regarded the so-called
identity theory as one possibility, the copula of a sentence
like ‘‘An A is B’’ indicating that the terms ‘‘A’’ and ‘‘B’’ are
said of the same subject. He applied this non-Aristotelian
idea to the analysis of Trinitarian problem cases. Two of
Trinitarian Logic T
1335
T

these were dealt with by practically all medieval and early
modern logicians. The ﬁrst was the so-called expository
syllogism:
(A) The divine essence is the Father
The divine essence is the Son;
therefore, the Son is the Father.
This was regarded as a fallacy because the premises were
seemingly true and the conclusion false. There was
another similar example in which the corresponding pre-
mises were universal propositions arranged in accordance
with the ﬁrst mood of the ﬁrst ﬁgure syllogism:
(B) Every divine essence is the Father
Every Son is the divine essence;
therefore, every Son is the Father.
In his discussion of an example similar to (A), Abelard
states that the standard logical reading of ‘‘The divine
essence is the Father’’ is that that which is the divine
essence is the Father. This extensional sameness Abelard
calls idem quod sameness or the sameness of being
(identitas essentiae). The conclusion is not logically prob-
lematic when it is understood in this way; the same is both
the Father and the Son. It would be problematic only when
read in the sense of intensional sameness which Abelard
calls idem qui sameness or sameness of property (identitas
proprietatis), the Father and the Son being simply the
same, without any difference.
Abelard’s nontheological examples of extensional sin-
gular sameness show similarities with those employed in
contemporary discussions of the question of material
constitution. In Abelard’s terminology, when a and b are
essentially identical, they are numerically the same partic-
ular being. Things can be the same in this way without
exhibiting all the same properties or attributes. Referring
to a waxen image, Abelard says that the lump of wax and
the waxen image are essentially the same, even though they
have different properties; for example, the image is made
from wax but the lump of wax is not. Abelard did not
develop any metaphysics of the Trinity on the basis of this
and similar examples, which were meant to demonstrate
the distinction between various notions of identity.
Regarding God as metaphysically simple, without any
complexities associated with the possession of parts,
forms, or properties, Abelard preferred to speak about
Trinitarian persons as different on the basis of what was
proper to them, believing that he had found a powerful
logical analysis of Trinitarian propositions which showed
that, while metaphysically problematic, they did not give
rise to any obvious logical inconsistency. The idea of
numerical or essential sameness of things with different
properties was the inﬂuential part of Abelard’s theory and
came to be employed in various ways in medieval
theology.
The reason for the extreme popularity of the two
Trinitarian fallacies mentioned above was that they were
associated with two basic principles of syllogistic logic.
The validity of the ﬁrst ﬁgure syllogistic moods was
explained by the dici de omni et nullo in the thirteenth-
century logic. These immediately evident principles
expressed the transitivity of inclusion in ﬁrst ﬁgure
moods and were seemingly denied in (B). The expository
syllogism as it was used and formulated by Ockham and
Buridan was a syllogistic mood with singular premises.
While some authors regarded the expository syllogism as
another immediately evident principle, there were others
who wanted to reduce it to the dici de omni et nullo. (A), an
alleged violation of a valid expository syllogism, became
part of this controversy.
Some fourteenth-century theologians argued that (A)
and (B) show that a special logica ﬁdei is needed to
improve the traditional logic, which is not universally
valid. The more inﬂuential approach was that these
examples suggested how the ﬁne structure of syllogistic
premises should be explicated in order to make logic
universally
valid.
It
was
argued
that
the
logical
problems
with
Trinitarian
and
some
analogous
Christological premises largely disappeared when this
was done.
William Ockham argued that since the middle term of
an expository syllogism could not be one and three, the
expository syllogism should not be applied to Trinitarian
examples with a middle term that signiﬁed the essence.
Ockham’s position was that theological doctrines associ-
ated with the Trinity or the Hypostatic Union involved
concepts the meaning of which was not sufﬁciently clear
to humans who, for this reason, should not apply logic
to these doctrines, except in certain unproblematic cases.
This did not restrict the universal validity of logic in
his view.
While Ockham’s position found some followers,
Adam Wodeham’s approach became more inﬂuential. He
argued that singular propositions should be universalized
in logic and consequently reduced the expository syllo-
gism to the dici de omni et nullo. As for (B), he stated that
the universal premise should be read as ‘‘Anything which is
A is B.’’ ‘‘Every A is B’’ is ambiguous because it may be
taken to mean that A as a single common nature is numer-
ically the same as those which are B. This is not
a ‘‘sufﬁciently universal’’ syllogistic proposition that
meets the requirements of the dici de omni et nullo, as
the phrase ‘‘which is A’’ explains. ‘‘Every essence is the
1336 T
Trinitarian Logic

Father’’ is true on the former reading but false on the
latter, since the persons, while numerically the same as
the essence, are numerically distinct from each other.
Singular theological propositions should be universalized
in this way in expository syllogisms. This solved most of
the logical problems, since universalized doctrinal formu-
lations were often false because of the intransitivity of the
numerical identity in the Trinity of three incommunicable
supposita (persons) each of these numerically the same as
the communicable essence. Ockham mentioned the same
analysis of universal premises, but as distinct from
Wodeham, he did not reduce expository syllogism to the
dici de omni et nullo.
Wodeham’s analysis was based on the identity theory
of predication, which became usual among fourteenth-
century logicians. In explicating the basic logical form of
a logical premise, Wodeham paid attention to the addi-
tional problem that among things of which A is correctly
said there may be things which the term A supposits for as
well as things which are numerically same as these,
although A does not supposit for them; therefore ‘‘which
is A’’ should be understood as ‘‘which is the same as that
which is A’’ and similarly with the predicate term. In order
to avoid the impression that these are merely ad hoc
theological considerations, Wodeham argues that similar
ideas could be applied to the Platonic ontology of real
common entities.
Some elements of this analysis of (A) and (B) were
often mentioned in late medieval and early modern
logical treatises as examples of how singular and univer-
sal propositions should be explicated in logic. These
matters were also discussed by Leibniz. The new formu-
lations were often associated with the identity theory of
predication which Paul of Venice later referred to as
praedicatio identica, but this expression had other mean-
ings as well, for example, in John Duns Scotus who
applied it to sameness without formal identity in the
Trinity.
See also: ▶Adam Wodeham ▶John Duns Scotus ▶Logic
▶Peter Abelard ▶Syllogism, Theories of ▶Trinity
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Abelard Peter (1969) Theologia christiana, ed. Buytaert EM, Corpus
Christianorum Continuatio Medievalis 12. Brepols, Turnholt
Duns Scotus John (1950, 1956) Ordinatio I.2.2 and I.4.2. In: Opera
omnia, vols 2 and 4, ed. Balic´ C et al. Typis Polyglottis Vaticanis,
Vatican City
Paul of Venice (1990) Quaestio de universalibus. In: Johannes Sharpe,
Quaestio super universalia, ed. Conti A. Olschki, Florence
William
of
Ockham
(1974)
Summa
logicae,
ed.
Boehner
Ph,
Ga´l G, Brown S, Guillelmi de Ockham Opera philosophica 1.
St. Bonaventure University, St. Bonaventure
Wodeham Adam (1512) Super quattuor libros Sententiarum (abbreviated
by Henry Totting of Oyta). Paris, I.33.1–I.33.3
Secondary Sources
Brower JE (2004) Trinity. In: Brower JE, Guilfoy K (eds) The Cambridge
companion to Abelard. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
pp 223–257
Gelber HG (1974) Logic and the trinity: a clash of values in scholastic
thought 100–1333. Dissertation, University of Wisconsin, Madison
Hallamaa O (2003) Defending common rationality: Roger Roseth on
Trinitarian Paralogisms. Vivarium 41, pp 84–119
Knuuttila S (2008) Trinitarian fallacies, identity and predication. In:
Ka¨rkka¨inen P (ed) Trinitarian theology in the medieval west.
Luther-Agricola-Society, Helsinki, pp 69–87
Maieru` A (1981) Logica aristotelica e teologia trinitaria: Enrico Totting da
Oyta. In: Maieru` A, Paravicini Bagliani A (eds) Studi sul XIV secolo
in memoria di Anneliese Maier, Storia e letteratura 151. Edizioni di
storia e letteratura, Rome, pp 481–512
Maieru` A (1988) Logic and trinitarian theology: De modo predicandi ac
Sylogizandi in Divinis. In: Kretzmann N (ed) Meaning and inference
in medieval philosophy, Synthese historical library 32. Kluwer,
Dordrecht, pp 247–295
Shank MH (1988) Unless you believe, you shall not understand: logic,
University, and society in late medieval Vienna. Princeton University
Press, Princeton
Trinity
STEPHEN F. BROWN
Institute of Medieval Philosophy and Theology
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA
USA
Abstract
The teaching that there are three persons in God is
a fundamental Christian doctrine. It is taught in the Scrip-
tures, especially, but not exclusively, in John’s Gospel,
where we learn that the Word who is God became ﬂesh
and where Christ, the Word-made-ﬂesh, speaks of sending
‘‘to you from the Father the Spirit of truth who comes
from the Father.’’ Early Church councils established the
basic doctrine that the three persons of the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Spirit are one substance. Later theologians,
especially Sts. Augustine and Thomas Aquinas, attempted
to ﬁnd and explore analogies that might bring greater
understanding to this central article of the Christian
Creed.
Trinity T
1337
T

The term ‘‘Trinity’’ is the theological expression for one of
the chief mysteries of the Christian faith. It refers to the
three persons that are united in the one God. ‘‘Trinity’’
could be considered a summary expression for ‘‘three-in-
one.’’ The thirteenth-century theologian Thomas Aquinas
spoke of some truths of the Christian faith as natural and
some as supernatural. The former are truths that can be
discovered by human reason and in fact have been discov-
ered by some philosophers who have examined reality
more deeply. Such thinkers have proved the existence of
God and argued that God is one, and attempted to dem-
onstrate other necessary attributes that could be predi-
cated rightly of God. Supernatural truths are beliefs that
are not discoverable by human efforts but are only known
through God’s biblical revelation. Examples of supernat-
ural truths are the Incarnation (that God became man,
uniting Himself to a human nature in the person of Jesus
Christ) and the Trinity (that God, though one God, is
three persons – Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.).
The ‘‘three-in-one’’ character of God is taught in the
Christian scriptures and is afﬁrmed by the earliest Apostolic
Fathers. However, the main focus of authors of the early
Apostolic age, such as Clement of Rome and Ignatius of
Antioch, was on Christ himself, not on wrestling with prob-
lems of how Christ as the Son of God related to his heavenly
Father. Such questions arose with the next generation of the
Fathers, the Apologists, who had to confront the many
unsatisfactory attempts at reconciling the New Testament
revelation of Christ as the Son of God and the inherited view
that God is one. One faulty type of explanation is found in
the modalism of Sabellius and Praxeas. For Sabellius, God is
one, but he manifests himself in different ways in the story
of man’s redemption and salvation. For Praxeas, there is one
God who exists in such a way that when Christ sufferered it
was the Father, who alone is God, that suffered. Another
unsuccessful effort to reconcile the divinity of Christ with
the oneness of God is found in subordinationist explanation
that portrayed God the Father as a monarch at the expense
of Christ’s true divinity. The Word ‘‘through whom all
things were made’’ and the Word who ‘‘was made ﬂesh,’’
according to John’s Gospel, is not for subordinationists an
eternal Word, but is tied to the temporal and contingent
character of creation and the Incarnation.
The challenge to Patristic Apologists was to ﬁnd more
faithful ways of reconciling the unicity of God and the
divinity of Christ. In the Latin world, Tertullian, in chapter
II of his treatise Against Praxeas, attacked him for ‘‘think-
ing that one cannot believe in One Only God in any other
way than by saying that the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Spirit are the very selfsame Person.’’ Tertullian puts his own
position in positive terms by appealing to the rule of faith:
‘‘All are of One by unity of substance; while the mystery of
the dispensation is still guarded, which distributes the
Unity into a Trinity, placing in their order the three per-
sons: the Father, the Son, and Holy Spirit.’’ With Tertullian
we ﬁnd the vocabulary of Trinity, substance, and person,
key terms in later doctrinal discussions of the triune God.
However, the precise meaning of a term like ‘‘substance’’ is
lacking in Tertullian’s works and would need later clariﬁ-
cation. In the Greek world, St. Justin, in his Dialogue with
Trypho, not only declared that Christ was the Son of God in
the sense of the eternal Son of God; but also tried to explain
how this was the case. In this effort he was followed by
Athenagoras and also by Theophilus, who, in his Letter to
Autolycus (II, 22) offered the following analogy: ‘‘For
before anything came into being He had Him’’ (i.e., the
Logos) as counselor, being His own mind and thought.
Other Fathers searched for greater understanding of
the inner relationship of the Father and the Son by pur-
suing clues in the words of Christ himself. Christ had
spoken of coming forth or proceeding from the Father
(John 8:42). He also spoke of sending ‘‘to you from the
Father, the Spirit of truth who comes from the Father’’
(John 15:24). In efforts to grasp the meaning of these
expressions of ‘‘coming forth’’ and ‘‘coming from’’ later
Greek and Latin Fathers examined how they might better
understand a divine coming forth or procession. When we
hear the words ‘‘father’’ and ‘‘son’’ we might well imagine
that in some way a son comes from or proceeds from his
father. Still, a human father and his son are distinct sub-
stances. How can we understand that the divine Son
proceeds from the Father and yet is the same substance
as the Father? Origen, in his On the Principles (I, 2, 4), was
well aware of the limits of our analogies concerning God’s
inner nature. Still he attempted to portray in some small
way the nature of the generation of the Son:
"
For we must of necessity hold that there is something
exceptional and worthy of God which does not admit of
any comparison at all, not merely in things, but which
cannot even be conceived by thought or discovered by
perception, so that a human mind should be able to appre-
hend how the unbegotten God is made the Father of the
only-begotten Son: because His generation is as eternal
and everlasting as the brilliancy which is produced from
the sun. For it is not by receiving the breath of life that He is
made a Son, by any outward act, but by His own nature.
Elsewhere, Origen speaks of the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit as three hypostases or ‘‘persons’’ and afﬁrms that
they are homoousios or ‘‘of the same substance.’’ Despite
these contributions of Origen, there were also ambiguities
in other parts of his writings. He referred to the Father as
1338 T
Trinity

God (ho theos) and the Son as a second God (deuteros
theos). He also spoke of the Son as God insofar as He
contemplates the Father, but that he is no longer God
when he ceases to gaze at the Father. Some of these obser-
vations fed the subordinationist theses of Arius, who
declared that there was a time when the Logos did not
exist, thus making Him a demi-god between the Father
and the created world. Despite the ambiguities of Origen’s
position, the First Nicean Council borrowed Origen’s term
homoousios, that is ‘‘of the same substance,’’ to underscore
the truly divine nature of the Son. The counciliar Creed
thus declares that the Son ‘‘is begotten, not made, one in
being with the Father.’’
Debate did not end at this point, especially over
homoousios: some asked if ‘‘of the same substance’’ or
‘‘one in being’’ referred to a numerical sameness or one-
ness or a generic similarity. St. Athanasius fought the
subordinationists who portrayed the Holy Spirit as hold-
ing a rank inferior to the Father and the Son. Basing them-
selves on the assumption that the mission of the Holy Spirit
in the economy of salvation is to sanctify, the post-Nicean
subordinationists argued that the Spirit was only a creature
bringing salvation to men. Athanasius pushed further,
declaring that the Spirit’s role in salvation was to bring
both sanctiﬁcation and deiﬁcation to men, and that He
could not bring deiﬁcation unless He were God. Still,
Athanasius was not clear on the distinction between
ousia (substance) and hypostasis (person). It was the
Cappadocian Fathers, Sts. Basil, Gregory of Nyssa, and
Gregory of Nazianzen, who distinguished clearly the
unique divine ousia or substance and the three hypostases
or persons, by insisting on the real distinction between the
three
persons.
Thereafter,
the
Nicean
declaration
concerning homoousios (‘‘of the same substance’’) gained
greater currency, and at the second ecumenical council,
held at Constantinople in 381, the application of the basic
dogma concerning the Father and the Son was extended to
the Holy Spirit.
The ‘‘three-in-one’’ formulation of these councils
established the basic doctrine of the Christian Church:
the three persons of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit
are one substance. Beyond their role in establishing this
basic doctrine, the Cappadocian Fathers also developed
a theology for defending and bringing greater understand-
ing of its truth. St. Basil attempted to provide an explana-
tion for the distinction of persons by presenting actions by
which each person was God: ‘‘paternity,’’ ‘‘ﬁliation,’’ and
‘‘sanctiﬁcation.’’ Gregory of Nazianzen described the three
persons by using the verbal forms: ‘‘being unbegotten,’’
‘‘being begotten,’’ and ‘‘proceeding.’’ St. Augustine, follow-
ing Sts. Hilary and Ambrose in the Latin world, likewise
developed a rich theology of the Trinity, especially in his
work entitled The Trinity. The ﬁrst part of this book pro-
vides the Scriptural bases for the doctrine of the Trinity.
The second part presents the ofﬁcial Christian teaching
and refutes the heresies that oppose this teaching. After
establishing these points, Augustine then attempts to ﬁnd
analogies to foster our understanding of this teaching,
mainly concentrating on the words of Genesis 1:26,
which portrays man as created in the image of God.
If man is an image of God, it must be in his soul that he
can be an image of such a spiritual being. For Augustine,
this image is found in man’s memory, intelligence, and
will, and as he examines them, he arrives at the knowledge
of his unique soul that through memory remembers,
through intelligence knows and through will loves. Augus-
tine thereby comes to a rich knowledge of his multifaceted
self; but at a still deeper level he also comes to realize that
these acts tell us something of the source and foundation
of his soul and its three activities: the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Spirit of whom he is but an image.
St. Thomas Aquinas, in the thirteenth century, at-
tempted to deepen and unite many of Augustine’s insights
that were based on man’s interior life into a more ontolog-
ical synthesis. He brought out the difference between divine
processions and human processions by trying to explain the
difference between a transient procession (where a distinct
substance comes forth) and an immanent procession
(where a different Person, the Son, comes forth, who is yet
identical in substance with the Father). In the humanworld,
when we think of a father as a father and the son as a son, we
know that we are thinking of them not just as men (some-
thing absolute in themselves), but we are also thinking of
them as related to one another. Technically speaking, we
would say that ‘‘father’’ and ‘‘son’’ express relations. Yet,
normally, such relations exist between things that are in
themselves absolute distinct substances. The challenge to
Christian theologians like Aquinas, in their efforts to offer
some limitedunderstanding of how the Father as Father, the
Son as Son, and the Holy Spirit as proceeding from the
Father and the Son or from the Father through the Son are
all the one God, is to explain how relations in the triune God
are not accidental relations between distinct substances but
subsistent relations, that is, relations of such a character that
it is by being the Father that the Father is God and by being
the Son that the Son is the same God, and it is in being the
Holy Spirit that the Holy Spirit is God. These theological
approaches of Augustine and Aquinas, like those of Basil
and Gregory of Nazianzen, were the chief analogical routes
followed by medieval theologians to bring some under-
standing to the teaching of the Church that God is ‘‘three-
in-one.’’
Trinity T
1339
T

See also: ▶Augustine ▶Church Fathers ▶Thomas
Aquinas
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Denzinger Henricus, Scho¨nmetzer Adolfus (eds) (1971) Enchiridion
symbolorum deﬁnitionum et declarationum de rebus ﬁdei et
morum. Herder, Freiburg im Breisgau
St. Aquinas Thomas (1969) Summa theologiae, I. Image Books, Garden
City
St. Augustine (1991) The trinity. New City Press, Brooklyn
Tanner Norman P (ed) (1990) Decrees of the ecumenical councils, vol 1.
Georgetown University Press, Washington
Secondary Sources
Altaner B (1960) Patrology. Herder, New York
Barnes M (2001) The power of God: ‘Dunamis’ in Gregory of
Nyssa’s Trinitarian theology. Catholic University of America Press,
Washington
Coffey D (1999) Deus Trinitas: the doctrine of the Triune God. Oxford
University Press, New York
Emery G (2007) The Trinitarian theology of Saint Thomas Aquinas.
Oxford University Press, New York
Kelly JND (1978) Early Christian doctrines, Rev. edn. Harper, New York
Paissac H (1951) The´ologie du Verbe. Saint Augustin et Saint Thomas.
Cerf, Paris
Sesbou¨e´ B (1998) Saint Basile et la Trinite´. Descle´e, Paris
Truth, Theories of
CATARINA DUTILH NOVAES
ILLC and Department of Philosophy
University of Amsterdam
Amsterdam
The Netherlands
Abstract
This entry surveys ﬁve inﬂuential medieval theories of
truth, paying particular attention to the bearers of truth
within each theory as well as to their emphasis, whether
metaphysical or semantic. (1) Anselm’s notion of truth is
characterized by the concept of rectitude: something is
true if it is/does what it ought to be/do, that is, if it
conforms to God’s design for it (2) Abelard’s theory of
truth revolves around the notion of the dicta of proposi-
tions, i.e., what is said by propositions. Dicta are the actual
truth-bearers for Abelard. (3) Thomas Aquinas defends an
approach to truth based on the notion of adequation of
intellect and object. The ﬁt can occur in both directions:
an object can conform to the concept of it in its creator’s
intellect, and a concept can conform to the object insofar
as it represents it accurately in the knower’s intellect.
(4) Theories of truth based on the concept of supposition
provide recursive deﬁnitions of the truth of propositions
based on the supposition of their terms, and reject any
metaphysical import concerning the notion of truth.
(5) Theories of truth emerging from fourteenth century
treatises on insolubilia start out with a fundamentally
Aristotelian
deﬁnition
of
a
true
proposition
as
a proposition signifying as things are, which is then mod-
iﬁed so as to introduce quantiﬁcation over the signiﬁca-
tion of a proposition.
The notion of truth was of crucial importance for medie-
val philosophers, as could be expected given their keen
interest in logic and semantics, on the one hand, and in
metaphysics and philosophical theology on the other.
(Naturally, there is a strong medieval tradition dealing
with a biblical notion of truth. Here, however, we will
focus on philosophically inclined theories of truth, even
though the line between theology and philosophy is a very
thin one in the medieval context.) But to attain an accu-
rate understanding of medieval theories of truth, it is
important to realize that the class of such theories is
more heterogeneous than the class formed by modern
theories of truth. For example, we philosophers of the
early twenty-ﬁrst century (in particular those working
within the analytic tradition) are accustomed to viewing
truth essentially as an attribute of complex linguistic enti-
ties. Now, when examining medieval theories of truth, the
modern philosopher may be surprised by the wide variety
of entities that can receive the attribute ‘‘true’’ – truth-
bearers for short: propositions (in the Latin sense of
propositio,
i.e.,
roughly
what
is
now
known
as
a declarative sentence, a statement, but which can be
spoken, written, or mental), as to be expected, but also
objects, mental judgments, actions, and even God.
A general characteristic of these theories (in fact, of
medieval logical theories in general) is the inﬂuential
position occupied by the Aristotelian corpus, in particular
discussions from the Categories and De interpretatione (in
ﬁrst instance) and the Metaphysics (which only became
widely read halfway the thirteenth century, see Dod 1982).
Also inﬂuential was the neoplatonic-Augustinian concep-
tion of truth which equated truth to being: ‘‘The true is
that which is’’ (Augustine, Soliloquia II, 5, quoted in
Aertsen 1992:160). These two radically different sources
of inspiration may explain the heterogeneity of medieval
theories of truth, which will be illustrated here by the
analysis of ﬁve representative medieval approaches to
truth.
1340 T
Truth, Theories of

To help us understand the different theories in their
diversity, a few distinctions may come in handy. First,
among the different medieval theories, one encounters
two basic kinds of entities to which truth is attributed –
two kinds of truth-bearers: linguistic and mental entities,
and objects in extra-mental reality. Indeed, the attribution
of truth to objects is one of the distinctive features of some
medieval theories of truth (known as objectual (Ku¨nne
2003:3.1.2) or ontological (Wippel 1989:295) truth in the
literature). But all medieval theories recognize spoken,
written, and mental propositions and judgments as
bearers of truth as well (known as propositional (Ku¨nne
2003:3.1.2) or logical (Wippel 1989:295) truth in the
literature).
Secondly, let us distinguish between metaphysical and
semantic approaches to truth, a distinction pertaining to
emphasis. The metaphysical approach is characterized by
the focus upon the properties and states of things that make
truth-bearers true. By contrast, the semantic approach is
characterized by minimal or no focus on what must obtain
in reality for an entity to be deemed true; rather, semantic
theories of truth concentrate on properties of the linguistic
entity in question, in particular its signiﬁcation or the
supposition of its terms, in order to determine its truth-
value. In other words, what makes a proposition true within
the semantic approach are primarily properties of the prop-
osition itself, and not the state of things in reality.
Notice that one should not conﬂate the metaphysical
approach with correspondence theories of truth, which are
characterized by the idea that truth is a relational property
involving a relation (often of likeness) of a given entity
to some portion of reality. Indeed, there are semantic
theories of truth that are also fundamentally based
on correspondence. To illustrate the difference between
metaphysical and semantic approaches, consider two
correspondentist deﬁnitions of the truth of propositions:
1. A proposition is true iff things are as it signiﬁes them
to be.
2. A proposition is true iff it signiﬁes things to be as
they are.
In (1), the truth of a proposition depends on properties of
things, and its signiﬁcation is, as it were, taken for granted
(it is not under scrutiny); therefore, (1) characterizes
a metaphysical approach to truth. By contrast, in (2) the
truth of a proposition depends on a feature of the propo-
sition itself, its signiﬁcation, and the state of things is in
turn taken for granted; (2) is thus a semantic deﬁnition of
truth.
But, to be sure, not all medieval theories of truth are
based on correspondence; those articulated on the basis of
the notion of supposition, for example, are not. In the
latter case, truth is not a relational property but rather a
monadic property of truth-bearers.
Notice also that, with respect to the ﬁrst distinction,
a semantic theory of truth will only have linguistic entities
as its truth-bearers. A metaphysical theory of truth may
recognize nonlinguistic as well as linguistic entities as its
truth-bearers; but a theory of truth whose truth-bearers
are exclusively propositions, but which focuses on what
must obtain in reality for propositions to be true and not
on their semantic properties is also, according to this
distinction, a metaphysical theory of truth (in what fol-
lows, I do not treat such theories, but one could ﬁnd
examples thereof among fourteenth-century realists such
as Walter Burley and John Wycliff; see Cesalli (2007)). It is
not the nature of truth-bearers that makes a theory seman-
tic or metaphysical, but rather the nature of their causes of
truth, i.e., whether semantic or metaphysical facts.
Anselm of Canterbury
Anselm’s theory of truth, presented chieﬂy in his De
veritate, illustrates remarkably well the heterogeneity of
medieval theories of truth. Anselm analyzes the notion of
truth under several different facets, as applying to different
kinds of entities; but ultimately, only God is the real Truth
for Anselm, and all other truths emanate from Him. As
such, his theory is representative of the neoplatonic-
Augustinian approach, which emphasizes the truth
existing in things but ultimately emanating from God
(see Hopkins (2003:148) for the inﬂuence of Augustine
over Anselm’s notion of truth).
The core of his conception of truth is the notion of
rectitude (see Visser et al 2004); something is true if it does
what it ought to do, that is, if it conforms to God’s design
for it. As such, it can apply to literally all of God’s creation:
a friend is a true friend if she does what a friend is expected
to do (to be supportive, loyal, etc.); an action is a true
action if it fulﬁls its purpose; and so forth. Anselm’s notion
can be schematically formulated as follows: an entity A is
true iff it corresponds to God’s concept of A. Notice that
truth is a relational property for Anselm, but the second
relatum is not a portion of reality as in standard corre-
spondence theories of truth; rather, it is a divine concept,
while the ﬁrst relatum (the truth-bearer) is any object of
God’s creation, linguistic as well as nonlinguistic entities.
In De veritate, which is written in the form of
a dialogue between Teacher and Student, Anselm starts
by examining the truth of propositions, as this is (he
recognizes) the most commonsensical use of the notion
of truth (chap. 2). He presents what we could call
a correspondence notion of truth for propositions: they
Truth, Theories of T
1341
T

are true if they state that what-is is and that what-is-not is
not (a terminology borrowed from Visser et al 2004); but
for Anselm this position is not a primary thesis. It is
derived from the notion of truth as rectitude applied to
a fundamental aspect of propositions: their purpose is to
state that what-is is and that what-is-not is not, and
therefore if they fulﬁll this purpose (if they do their job),
then they are true. The same holds with respect to
thoughts: ‘‘for the power of thinking that something is
or is not was given to us in order that we might think that
what-is is and what-is-not is not.’’ (De ver. 3). Similarly,
truth with respect to will (De ver. 4) and actions (De ver. 5)
is deﬁned as rectitude, as willing and doing what one
ought to.
As for the truth in the being of things (De ver. 7),
Anselm’s conception of truth is clearly teleological. Every
entity in God’s creation has a purpose according to His
design, and if it fulﬁlls this purpose, then it is true. But
given God’s omnipotence, all things are (presumably) as
He intends them to be, and thus ‘‘whatever is, is right’’
(Visser et al. 2004:211). Here it becomes patent that,
according to Anselm (following Augustine), truth equals
to being.
And thus, just as much as God is the cause of all being,
all truth comes from God and He is the supreme Truth.
However, rectitude does not apply to Him in the same way
as it applies to His creation, since He ‘‘owes nothing to
anything.’’ In other words (and this is something of
a paradox, which Anselm deals with in De ver. 13), truth
properly speaking pertains only to God, even though truth
in God does not correspond to rectitude, as it does in His
creation.
One of the upshots of Anselm’s conception of truth is
that he is able to account, in a uniﬁed way, for uses of the
predicate ‘‘true’’ that are often neglected by more restric-
tive theories of truth, such as in ‘‘true friend,’’ ‘‘true
world,’’ etc. This also reveals the essentially metaphysical
character of Anselm’s theory: what makes something true
are properties and states of things (the very things which
are said to be true, insofar as they conform to God’s design
for them), and not semantic properties of linguistic enti-
ties (even when propositions are truth-bearers).
Peter Abelard
Contrasting
with
Anselm’s
patently
metaphysical
approach to truth, Abelard’s is resolutely semantic: he
focuses on a semantic property of propositions, namely
the content they express. (Abelard will of course often use
the term ‘‘truth’’ in his theological writings as well, but we
will not deal with this material here.) His approach is
representative of approaches to truth inspired by the logica
vetus material (on the Logica vetus vs. Logica modernorum
distinction, see entry on Logic in this volume); he develops
it in different parts of his Logica ‘‘ingredientibus,’’ in par-
ticular in the parts corresponding to his commentaries on
Aristotle’s De interpretatione and on Boethius’ De topicis
differentiis (Abelard’s considerations on truth are in fact
scattered throughout his writings and thus not systemat-
ically presented). Abelard’s discussions of the concept of
truth are embedded in his general analysis of the semantics
of propositions. Indeed, one of the most debated but still
mysterious aspects of Abelard’s semantics, the famous
dicta (the contents of propositions), is at the heart of the
issue of truth.
Abelard’s very criterion of what is to count as
a proposition (following Boethius and Aristotle) is based
on the concept(s) of truth (and falsity): a proposition is
what signiﬁes the true or the false (signiﬁcare verum vel
falsum) (LI De in. 3.01.100). Notice that, according to this
deﬁnition, a proposition is not true or false, but it signiﬁes
the true or the false. This implies that, for Abelard, prop-
ositions are not the primary truth-bearers, but rather that
they signify something which in turn is a truth-bearer
properly speaking. What would that be? Abelard states
that truth and falsity can be understood in three ways: as
applying to statements (propositions); as applying to the
understanding provoked by a statement; and as applying
to what is said to be the case by a statement, its dictum (LI
Top. 225, 22–29). He then goes on to argue that under-
standings cannot be truth-bearers properly speaking
because incomplete expressions may have the same under-
standings as complete statements (for example, ‘‘A man
runs’’ and ‘‘A running man’’ share the same understand-
ing), but incomplete expressions cannot signify the true or
the false, since they are not propositions (see Jacobi et al
1996:32).
That this is so also transpires from Abelard’s analysis of
what differentiates propositions from other (complete)
speech-acts such as questions, orders, wishes, etc. These
different expressions can have the same intelligible con-
tent, but only propositions signify the true or the false,
because only they consist in an evaluative judgment
concerning truth and falsity (LI De in. 3.01.100). Indeed,
according to Abelard, a proposition P corresponds to the
assertion that P is true (cf. Jacobi 2004:146); in
other words, he may be seen as maintaining the schema
‘‘P ó It is true that P.’’ In Latin, such impersonal propo-
sitions (the right-hand side of the schema) are usually
formulated with the ‘‘accusative-inﬁnitive’’ nominalized
form of the embedded proposition (for example, Verum
est Socratem currere). The nominalized form asserts pre-
cisely the content of the proposition, that is, its dictum.
1342 T
Truth, Theories of

A dictum is ‘‘that which is said by the proposition’’ (LI De
in. 3.04.26), that is, its content plus the assertion that what
it signiﬁes does obtain in reality. Therefore, for Abelard,
dicta are the ultimate bearers of truth and falsity, since it is
to them that the terms ‘‘true’’ and ‘‘false’’ are related by
means of such propositions of the form ‘‘It is true that P.’’
Propositions are true or false derivatively, insofar as they
state true or false dicta (cf. Nuchelmans 1973:9.4.3).
Abelard’s notion of truth is thus essentially semantic: it is
a semantic property of a proposition, i.e., the dictum/
content that it expresses, that makes it true or false.
Notice that this view implies a deﬂationist notion of
truth: to assert the truth of a proposition is equivalent to
simply asserting the proposition itself. From the truth of
a proposition one cannot draw major metaphysical con-
clusions: if ‘‘a man is white’’ is true, one can merely
conclude that there is a thing which is a man and is also
white (LI Cat. 59–60) (see also King 2004:4). But Abelard
can also be seen as holding a correspondence theory of
truth when he glosses the sentence ‘‘It is true that Socrates
is a man and not a stone’’ as ‘‘It is the case in reality (in re)
that [Socrates] is a man and not a stone’’ (LI De in.
3.04.26) (see also LI De in. 3.01.100).
In short, the distinguishing characteristic of Abelard’s
theory of truth is the crucial role played by dicta. But dicta
are neither linguistic entities nor real things in reality, and
thus Abelard’s truth-bearers seem to ﬁt neither of the two
main kinds of truth-bearers mentioned above. Some (e.g.,
Nuchelmans 1973:9.4.2) view Abelard’s dicta as states of
affairs; others (e.g., King 2004:4) take literally his claim
that dicta are nothing at all. They stand to propositions in
the same relation as things to their names, and yet they are
not actual things. But the fact that their ontological status
is debatable must not overshadow their central role in
Abelard’s theory of truth and his semantics in general.
Thomas Aquinas
Aquinas’ main discussions of the notion of truth are to be
found in his commentary to Peter Lombard’s Sentences, in
his Quaestiones disputatae de veritate and in his Summa
theologiae (ST) Ia, question 16 (for the sake of coherence,
here we shall focus on this latter text; for the different
stages of development of Aquinas’ notion of truth, see
Wippel 1989). His concept of truth can be seen as recon-
ciling two important trends (see Wippel 1989:295 and
Aertsen 1992), the neoplatonic-Augustinian conception
attributing truth to things, and the Aristotelian concep-
tion (stemming from the Metaphysics) that attributes
truth to the intellect and emphasizes truth as likeness.
Aquinas’ notion of truth is based on the concept of
adequatio: truth is adequation of intellect and object. The
etymology of adequation is related to that of equal, and
indeed the idea here is that of quasi-equality between
intellect and object. Adequation in this sense corresponds
to identity of forms: truth occurs when the object and the
concept in question share the same form. Truth is thus
again viewed as a relational property, as in modern corre-
spondence theories of truth, but this time it involves
concepts and objects instead of propositions and facts as
its relata. Aquinas does discuss the truth of propositions as
well (in ST Ia q. 16 a. 8 ad 3), but their truth is derivative
from truth in the intellect.
This relation of adequation is established by an act of
the intellect, and can be established in two directions: an
object is true if it conforms to the relevant concept,
whereas a concept is true if it conforms to the relevant
object (see Ku¨nne 2003:104). (Notice that, for Anselm,
only the direction of adequation from object to (divine)
concept characterizes the notion of truth.) These two
directions are exactly what Aquinas needs to reconcile
the two radically different approaches to truth that he
takes as his starting point, namely truth of the intellect
and truth of a thing; see Aertsen (1992:163/4).
Aquinas maintains that ‘‘truth resides primarily in the
intellect, and secondarily in things according as they are
related to the intellect as their principle’’ (ST Ia q. 16 a. 1
co.), so concepts are in fact the primary bearers of truth for
him. An object can be said to be true by analogy, insofar as
it is related to a true concept (i.e., one that conforms to the
object); but an object is also true if it conforms to the
design of the intellect behind its creation. Natural things
are true insofar as they conform to the forms they have in
the divine intellect. Similarly, artifacts are true if confor-
mity occurs with the form they have (the original concept)
in a human intellect (such as the relation of the plan of
a house made by an architect and the house actually built).
In both directions, properties of things deﬁne the truth of
an entity (be it a concept or an object); Aquinas’ notion of
truth is thus fundamentally metaphysical. Moreover,
Aquinas develops his notion of truth against the back-
ground of his doctrine of transcendentals (see entry in
this on Transcendentals): truth and being are ultimately
convertible (Aertsen 1992: sect. 6).
There are two kinds of truths, the immutable truth of
God and the ﬁnite truth of humans (ST cf. Ia q. 16 a. 8 co.).
In the case of the ﬁnite truth of humans, the truth of
concepts insofar as they represent objects corresponds to
the direction of adequation from concepts to objects. By
means of an act of predication (composition, in case of an
afﬁrmation, or division, in the case of a negation),
a certain property is attributed to an object by the intellect;
if the object is indeed such-and-such, then the concept
Truth, Theories of T
1343
T

representing it can be said to be true: ‘‘the being of the
thing, not its truth, is the cause of truth in the intellect’’
(ST Ia q. 16 a. 1 ad 3). This kind of truth is referred to by
Aquinas as accidental truth (per accidens), which is the
truth pertaining to the knower who knows an object but
upon whom the object does not depend (see Aertsen
1992:162). It is opposed to the essential truth (per se) of
the divine intellect that designs and represents all natural
things (since God is their creator) and of the human
intellect with respect to artifacts (cf. ST Ia q. 16 a. 1 co.).
Obviously, given God’s perfection, adequation of concepts
in the divine intellect to things in an accidental way simply
does not occur. Only essential truth pertains to the divine
intellect, and accidental truth is proper to ﬁnite human
knowers.
Indeed, God is ultimately Truth itself for Aquinas (Ia q.
16 a. 5 co.): truth is adequation of intellect and being, and
in God this adequation occurs ‘‘to the greatest degree.’’ In
God there is total coincidence of intellect and being, as the
forms present in the divine intellect are the very causes of
the forms present in each object of His creation. ‘‘His
being is not only conformed to His intellect, but it is the
very act of His intellect; and His act of understanding is
the measure and cause of every other being and of every
other intellect’’.
Theories of Truth Based on the Notion of
Supposition
Contrasting with Aquinas’ metaphysical approach to truth
and stemming from entirely different sources, the thir-
teenth century witnessed, within the terminist tradition
(represented by Peter of Spain, William of Sherwood, etc.),
the emergence of a new and subsequently very inﬂuential
approach to truth founded on the notion of supposition.
It is perhaps the best example in the history of philosophy
of a theory of truth that is genuinely not based on
correspondence.
The notion of supposition was developed within the
general framework of medieval properties of terms (see
Read (2006) and the entry on Supposition Theory in this
volume). In the thirteenth century, supposition was one
among other equally important properties of terms, but in
the fourteenth century it came to occupy a privileged
position. It particular, it was used for the analysis of the
truth-conditions of the basic types of categorical proposi-
tions (the A, E, I, and O Aristotelian logical forms). This
approach had among its proponents Ockham (in the ﬁrst
chapters of the second part of his Summa logicae) and
Buridan (e.g. in the ﬁrst chapters of his Treatise on Conse-
quences). Its main idea is that an afﬁrmative proposition is
true iff there is identity between the supposita of the
subject and of the predicate, while a negative proposition
is true if this does not occur (the supposita are the entities
which a given term in a proposition supposits or stands
for). But this general principle must be reﬁned by means
of truth-conditional clauses for propositions of different
logical categories:
●
‘‘Every A is B’’ is true iff ‘‘the predicate supposits for all
those things that the subject supposits for, so that it is
truly predicated of them’’ (Ockham 1998:96).
●
‘‘No A is B’’ is true if the predicate supposits for none
of the things that the subject supposits for, or if the
subject does not supposit for anything.
●
‘‘Some A is B’’ is true iff ‘‘the subject and predicate
supposit for some same thing’’ (Ockham 1998:92).
●
‘‘Some A is not B’’ is true if ‘‘the subject supposits for
something that the predicate does not supposit for’’
(Ockham 1998:92), or if the subject does not supposit
for anything.
Notice that negative propositions have two causes of truth,
as Ockham puts it: either if there is no co-supposition of
their terms in the appropriate case (universal or particu-
lar), or if the subject does not supposit for anything at all,
then the proposition is true, since in the latter case the
absence of co-supposition obtains trivially. Moreover, the
same procedure can be applied mutatis mutandis to prop-
ositions whose verb is tensed or accompanied by
a modality (see chaps. 7, 9, and 10 of part II of Ockham’s
Summa logicae).
These deﬁnitions can also be formulated as recursive
deﬁnitions of truth-conditions on the basis of the truth
of more fundamental propositions, namely, singular
propositions whose subject is a demonstrative and whose
predicate is one of the terms of the proposition whose
truth-conditions are being established. This is because for
a term A to supposit for something amounts to the truth
of a singular proposition ‘‘This is A,’’ where ‘‘This’’
supposits for the thing in question, and so does ‘‘A’’.
A problem for Ockham’s account is the threat of cir-
cularity: while the truth of propositions, including singu-
lar propositions with demonstratives as their subjects, is
deﬁned in terms of the supposition of their terms in the
ﬁrst chapters of part II of the Summa logicae, elsewhere the
supposition of terms is in turn deﬁned in terms of the
truth of such singular propositions. It is clear that one of
the two notions, either supposition or the truth of singular
demonstrative propositions, must be taken as primitive if
the theory is to avoid circularity.
Besides the technical aspect of formulating precise
truth-conditions for different logical forms of proposi-
tions, Ockham’s theory of truth is also a rejection of
1344 T
Truth, Theories of

a metaphysical approach in favor of a semantic approach
to truth (see Perler 1992: chaps 1 and 2, Moody 1953:chap.
III and Dutilh Novaes forthcoming). The fundamental
cause of truth of propositions is a semantic property of
their terms, namely their supposition, and not actual
properties of the objects in question. Ockham stresses
this idea in several passages, for example in
"
Thus, for the truth of ‘This is an angel’ it is not required that
the common term ‘angel’ be really identical with what is
posited as the subject, or that it be really in that subject, or
anything of this sort. Rather, it is sufficient and necessary
that the subject and predicate supposit for the same thing
(Ockham 1998:86).
Another signiﬁcant aspect of Ockham’s account of truth is
that truth-bearers are the actually formed propositions of
a language, be they spoken, written, or mental; he (as well
as Buridan) is what we could call an inscriptionalist with
respect to truth-bearers. Truth is a monadic predicate
attributed to them, and this attribution is formulated
with the special dictum construction: a proposition
whose subject is the nominalized form of the proposition
to which truth is attributed (terms in the accusative case
and verb in the inﬁnitive mode) and the predicate is the
term for true, ‘‘verum’’ – for example, Socratem esse
hominem est verum. So truth is nothing more than
a predicate of propositions, namely those that are true,
and this in turn depends solely on the supposition of their
terms.
In sum, theories of truth based on the concept of
supposition, Ockham’s in particular, have the distinctive
trait of rejecting metaphysical foundations for truth; the
burden here is to be borne exclusively by semantic prop-
erties. Moreover, in contrast with Anselm and Aquinas,
truth is attributed exclusively to complex linguistic and,
more importantly, mental entities. Indeed, the primary
bearers of truth-value for Ockham as well as for Buridan
are mental propositions; spoken and written propositions
are only derivatively true, insofar as they are related to true
mental propositions.
Semantic Theories of Truth in the Fourteenth
Century – Insolubilia
Developing parallel to, and sometimes overlapping with,
uses of the notion of supposition in accounts of truth,
there is a very rich tradition of theories of truth in the
fourteenth century to be found in treatises on Insolubilia,
that is, treatises on paradoxes. They are semantic corre-
spondence theories of truth, and thus illustrate that cor-
respondence theories of truth need not be metaphysical
(in the sense presented here).
A watershed is widely recognized to be Thomas
Bradwardine’s treatise, written in the ﬁrst half of the
1320s. Until then, the most popular solutions to such
paradoxes had little to offer as theories of truth: the
restringentes approach, for example, consisted only in
a ban or restriction to self-reference in general, and for
propositions containing the predicate ‘‘true’’ in particular.
By contrast, the apparatus presented by Bradwardine in
his Insolubilia is the germinal state of a full-ﬂedged theory
of truth. Bradwardine’s starting point is the Aristotelian
formula propositio vera est oratio signiﬁcans sicut est, that
is, a correspondence view on truth with a semantic
emphasis on the signiﬁcation of the proposition – the
second relatum of the relation of correspondence is min-
imally referred to as sicut est with no further elaboration
on what must obtain in reality for a proposition to be true.
The truth of a proposition depends primarily on its signi-
ﬁcation, not on how things are.
In order to prove that Liar propositions and other
paradoxical propositions are false, Bradwardine modiﬁes
this formula and posits that ‘‘A true proposition is an
utterance signifying only [tantum] as things are’’ (ﬁrst
deﬁnition in chap. 6, 6.2 in Read’s edition and transla-
tion). He then goes on to prove that a Liar proposition
says (at least) two things, namely, that it is false and that it
is true. Since both things cannot obtain, he concludes that
a Liar proposition does not signify only as things are; it
signiﬁes partially as things are (that it is false), but since it
also signiﬁes something that does not obtain (that it is
true), it is not a true proposition (see Read 2002).
This deﬁnition of truth implies a few important
assumptions: propositions may (in fact typically do) sig-
nify several things, and true propositions are only those
whose total signiﬁcation obtains, that is, if each and every
thing that a proposition signiﬁes is the case. It is thus what
we could call a quantiﬁcational deﬁnition of truth, and
truth is associated with universal quantiﬁcation (see
Dutilh Novaes 2008). Accordingly, a proposition is false
if it fails to comply with the peak of success associated with
a true proposition, that is, if at least one of the things it
says is false. Therefore, while truth is associated with
universal quantiﬁcation, falsity is associated with existen-
tial quantiﬁcation.
A variation of this approach to truth can be found in
Buridan’s treatment of insolubles. While his main theory
of truth is based on the concept of supposition, following
the same lines of Ockham’s theory, Buridan recognizes
that, in the case of Liar propositions, the co-suppositional
criterion is not sufﬁcient to determine their truth-value
(cf. Sophismata ch. 8, 7th sophism). In such cases, not only
the proposition itself must satisfy the co-suppositional
Truth, Theories of T
1345
T

criterion to be true, but also all of its implications. But
since Buridan thinks that all propositions virtually imply
their own truth, Liar propositions imply that they are true
and that they are not true, and thus cannot satisfy the
criterion for truth and are simply false (see Read 2002,
Klima 2004 and Dutilh Novaes forthcoming for details).
In Albert of Saxony, writing shortly after Buridan, one
ﬁnds a hybrid of the quantiﬁcational and the supposition
approaches
to
truth.
Albert’s
ﬁrst
deﬁnition
is
a reformulation of Bradwardine’s deﬁnition of truth: ‘‘A
true
proposition
is
one
which,
in
whatever
way
[qualitercumque] it signiﬁes, so it is’’ (in Pozzi 1978:316).
It replaces the term tantum in Bradwardine’s deﬁnition by
one which is even more explicit with respect to the uni-
versal
quantiﬁcation
implied
in
the
deﬁnition,
qualitercumque (also to be found in Buridan’s treatise on
consequences (TC) to deﬁne the truth and the modality of
propositions; however, he adds that this is just a way of
speaking (TC, 21), a shorthand way to refer to the differ-
ent truth-conditions of propositions on the basis of the
supposition of their terms, which he discusses earlier in
the text.). Albert then goes on to add a few theses equating
the truth or falsity of propositions to the co-supposition
(or lack thereof) of their terms. From these deﬁnitions and
suppositions he then draws the conclusion (third thesis)
that all propositions signify their own truth. So with
Albert
(as
with
Buridan)
we
have
something
of
a forerunner of one of the directions of the Tarskian T-
convention: here the relation between a proposition and
the assertion of its truth is that of signiﬁcation, while with
Buridan it is a relation of (virtual) implication.
Conclusion
At the end of the fourteenth century, Paul of Venice com-
posed a treatise on the truth and falsity of propositions
(Tractatus de veritate et falsitate propositionis) that sum-
marizes (by means of a long list of alternative deﬁnitions
of truth) the two main approaches to truth in the four-
teenth century, the one based on supposition and the one
based on the signiﬁcation of propositions. (Another inter-
esting
fourteenth-century
approach
to
truth,
not
discussed here for reasons of space, can be found in the
tradition of the theories of probationes terminorum, exem-
pliﬁed by Richard Billingham’s Speculum puerorum.) It is
signiﬁcant that, while in the ﬁrst half of the fourteenth
century one does not ﬁnd treatises explicitly on the truth
of propositions (discussions on truth were then to be
found in treatises on the properties of terms and on
insolubles), toward the end of the century such treatises
started to appear. Also signiﬁcant is that in the fourteenth
century one does not encounter the attribution of truth to
nonlinguistic objects, as with Anselm and Aquinas. Truth
is then seen as an attribute exclusively of propositions
(written, spoken, or mental), and the titles of such trea-
tises invariably feature the genitive propositionis applied to
De veritate (while both Anselm and Aquinas wrote trea-
tises entitled ‘‘De veritate’’ tout court).
See also: ▶Albert of Saxony ▶Anselm of Canterbury
▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and
Hebrew Traditions ▶Future contingents ▶Insolubles
▶John Buridan ▶Logic ▶Mental Language ▶Paul of
Venice ▶Peter Abelard ▶Philosophical Theology, Byzan-
tine
▶Philosophical
Theology,
Jewish
▶Richard
Billingham ▶Supposition Theory ▶Terms, Properties of
▶Thomas Aquinas ▶Thomas Bradwardine ▶William of
Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Edited Works in Latin
Abelard Peter, Logica ‘‘Ingredientibus’’:
LI Cat.
Geyer B (ed) (1921) Glossae super Categorias (Commen-
tary on Aristotle’s Categories). Peter Abaelards philosophische
Schriften. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
LI De in.
Jacobi K, Strub C (eds) (2010 ) Glossae super Periermeneias
(Commentary
on
Aristotle’s
De
Interpretatione).
Corpus
Christianorum continuatio medievalis. Brepols, Turnhout
LI Top.
Dal Pra M (ed) (1969) Glossae super De topicis differentiis
(Commentary on Boethius’ De topicis differentiis). In: Abelardo:
Scritti di logica. La Nuova Italia, Florence
Albert of Saxony (1987) Insolubilia. In: Pozzi L (ed) Il Mentitore et il
Medioevo. Zara, Parma, pp 316–333
Anselm of Canterbury (1968) S. Anselmi Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi Opera
Omnia, ed. Schmitt FS. Friedrich Fromann, Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt
Aquinas Thomas (1882–) Quaestiones disputatae de veritate. In: Sancti
Thomae Aquinatis Opera omnia. pp 1–39, 45–. . . Ex Typ. Polygl.
S. C. de Prop. Fide, Romae . . . (Leonine edition), vol 22
Aquinas Thomas (1882–) Summa theologiae. In: Sancti Thomae
Aquinatis Opera omnia. pp 1–39, 45–. . . Ex Typ. Polygl. S. C. de
Prop. Fide, Romae . . . (Leonine edition)
Aquinas Thomas (1964–1973) Summa theologiae (trans: Gilby T et al).
Eyre and Spottiswoode, London/McGraw-Hill, New York (The
‘‘Blackfriars edition’’, Latin and English)
Billingham Richard (1975) Speculum puerorum. In: de Rijk LM (ed)
Another Speculum puerorum attributed to Richard Billingham.
Medioevo 1:203–235
Bradwardine Thomas (1970) Insolubilia. In: Roure ML (ed) La
proble´matique des propositions insolubles au XIIIe sie`cle et au
de´but du XIVe, suivie de l’e´dition des traite´s de W. Shyreswood, W.
Burleigh et Th. Bradwardine. Archives d’histoire doctrinale et
litte´raire du moyen age 37:205–326
Bradwardine Thomas (2008) A book of logical puzzles (Insolubles) (ed
and trans: Read S) (Dallas Medieval Texts and Translations). Peeters,
Leuven (Latin and English)
Buridan John (1976) Iohannis Buridani tractatus de consequentiis, ed.
Hubien H. Se´ries Philosophes Me´dievaux, vol XVI. Universite´ de
Louvain, Louvain
1346 T
Truth, Theories of

Buridan John (1998) Summulae de suppositionibus, ed. van der Lecq R.
Ingenium, Nijmegen
Buridan John (2004) Summulae de practica sophismatum, ed. Pironet F.
Brepols, Turnhout
Paul of Venice (1978) Logica magna part II, fascicule 6: Tractatus de
veritate et falsitate propositionis, ed. del Punta F. (trans: Adams
MM). The British Academy/Oxford University Press, Oxford (Latin
and English)
William of Ockham (1974) Opera philosophica I, ed. Boehner Ph et al.
The Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
Translations
Albert of Saxony (1988) Insolubles. In: Kretzmann N, Stump E (eds) The
Cambridge translation of medieval philosophical texts, vol 1.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 338–368
Anselm of Canterbury (1998) De Veritate. In: Davies B et al (eds) Anselm
of Canterbury: the major works. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Anselm of Canterbury (2000) Complete philosophical and theological
treatises of Anselm of Canterbury (trans: Hopkins J, Richardson H).
Banning Press, Minneapolis
Aquinas Thomas (1912–1936) Summa theologica (trans: Fathers of the
English Dominican Province) 2nd rev. edn., 22 vols. Burns, Oates &
Washbourne, London (repr. in 5 vols, Christian Classics, Westmin-
ster, 1981). http://www.newadvent.org/summa/
Aquinas Thomas (1998) The meanings of truth: disputed question on
truth, 1. In: Selected writings (ed and trans: McInerny R). Penguin,
Harmondsworth, pp 164–238
Buridan John (1985) Treatise on consequences. In: John Buridan’s logic
(trans: King P). Reidel, Dordrecht
Buridan John (2001) Summulae de dialectica (trans: Klima G). Yale
University Press, New Haven
William of Ockham (1998) Summa logicae Part II (trans: Freddoso A). St.
Augustine’s Press, South Bend
Secondary Sources
Aertsen J (1992) Truth as transcendental in Thomas Aquinas. Topoi
11:159–171
Cesalli L (2007) Le Re´alisme Propositionnel. Vrin, Paris
Dod B (1982) Aristoteles latinus. In: Kretzmann N, Kenny A, Pinborg
J (eds) The Cambridge companion to later medieval philosophy.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 45–79
Dutilh Novaes C (2008) Tarski’s hidden theory of meaning. In: Rahman S,
Tulenheimo T, Genot E (eds) Unity, truth and the liar – the modern
relevance of medieval solutions to semantic paradoxes. Springer,
Berlin, pp 41–63
Dutilh Novaes C (forthcoming) Lessons on truth from medieval solutions
to the Liar paradox. Forthcoming in Philosophical Quarterly
Hopkins J (2003) Anselm of Canterbury. In: Gracia JJE, Noone TB (eds)
A companion to philosophy in the middle ages. Blackwell, Malden,
pp 138–151
Jacobi K (2004) Philosophy of language. In: Brower JE, Guilfoy K (eds)
The Cambridge companion to Abelard. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp 126–157
Jacobi K, Strub C, King P (1996) From intellectus verus/falsus to the
dictum propositionis: the semantics of Peter Abelard and his circle.
Vivarium 34:15–40
King P (2004) Peter Abelard. In: Zalta E (ed) Stanford encyclopedia of
philosophy. http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/abelard/
Klima G (2004) Consequences of a closed, token-based semantics: the
case of John Buridan. Hist Philos Logic 25:95–110
Ku¨nne W (2003) Conceptions of truth. Clarendon Press, Oxford
Moody E (1953) Truth and consequence in mediaeval logic. North-
Holland, Amsterdam
Nuchelmans G (1973) Theories of the proposition. North-Holland,
Amsterdam
Perler D (1992) Der propositionale Wahrheitsbegriff im 14. Jahrhundert.
Walter de Gruyter, Berlin/New York
Read S (2002) The liar paradox from John Buridan back to Thomas
Bradwardine. Vivarium 40(2):189–218
Read S (2006) Medieval theories: properties of terms. In: Zalta E (ed)
Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy. http://plato.stanford.edu/
entries/medieval-terms/
Visser S, Williams T (2004) Anselm on truth. In: Davies B, Leftow B (eds)
The Cambridge companion to Anselm. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp 204–221
Wippel JF (1989) Truth in Thomas Aquinas I. Rev Metaphys 43:295–326
al-T˙u¯sı¯
▶Nas˙ı¯r al-Dı¯n al-T˙u¯sı¯
Twelfth Century Schools
▶Schools in the Twelfth Century
Tyranny
CARY J. NEDERMAN
Department of Political Science
Texas A & M University
College Station, TX
USA
Abstract
Tyrannical governments posed an important problem for
political philosophers throughout the Middle Ages. The
concept of tyranny was an invention of ancient Greece, but
the terminology was passed along via Roman sources and
Latin translations to medieval thinkers, who developed an
extensive analysis and critique of tyrannical rule. However,
not all authors wholly condemned the tyrant. Some
argued that tyranny was an appropriate form of govern-
ment in cases where a populace was otherwise incapable of
accepting virtuous rulers. Thus, tyranny proved to be
a somewhat elastic concept.
Tyranny T
1347
T

Discussions of tyranny – the corrupt form of rule by
a single man – and how to respond to it abounded during
the Latin Middle Ages. Isidore of Seville (ﬂ. late sixth–early
seventh centuries), in his Etymologies, drew a sharp dis-
tinction between kingship as the ideal form of government
and tyranny as the worst. Though Isidore shows awareness
that the term derives from the Greeks and that the early
Romans employed it as an equivalent to kingship, he
denies any identiﬁcation of the tyrant with the king.
Isidore juxtaposes the tyrant to the true king, who loves
justice and seeks what is right or best for his people. The
corrupt character of tyranny stems from its incompatibil-
ity with the very goals of social order: to realize the
harmony and common good of the people in a manner
consonant with justice. By privileging his own personal
passions and desires, the tyrant makes his subjects the
servants of his every whim. No rule of law – such as one
observes in kingly regimes – is possible under tyranny,
because the will of the ruler ‘‘is’’ the law.
The wide diffusion of Isidore’s thought in later centuries
meant that subsequent political thinkers engaged tyranny as
the quintessential imperfect regime. In the ninth century,
for instance, Hincmar of Rheims (c. 805–881) built an
entire treatise around the differences between tyranny and
kingship. But perhaps the most extensive discussion of
tyrannical government may be found in the Policraticus of
John of Salisbury (1115/1120–1180), completed in 1159.
Time and again over the course of the treatise’s eight
books, John emphasizes the sources and consequences of
tyranny, and he raises the critical issue of whether and how
a subject population might extract itself from the clutches
of a tyrant. The closing chapters of the ﬁnal book consti-
tute a tract on the foundations and dimensions of, and
appropriate response to, tyranny. John identiﬁes the fol-
lowing characteristics as constitutive of the tyrannical
regime: the tyrant is violently oppressive; he opposes jus-
tice; he cancels the laws and enslaves the people; he is an
image of the devil and of depravity; and, he is to be killed
(if necessary). While most of these features were shared by
medieval authors adopting Isidore’s view, John’s sugges-
tion that the tyrant may properly be slain is more unusual
and has been hailed as one of his most important (if
controversial) contributions to Latin political thought.
John’s work extends the tyrannical temperament to the
entire composition of the community. In the ﬁfth and
sixth books of the Policraticus, John famously described
the well-ordered communal whole by analogy to the var-
ious parts of the human body. John returns to the organic
theme in his discussion of tyranny in Book 8. He labels this
unjust, tyrannical community ‘‘the republic of the impi-
ous.’’ Such a body distinguishes itself by the fact that all its
sections partake of the same tyrannical properties. While
John does not discuss the operation of this tyrannical com-
munity in greater detail, it is clear that he sees a direct
correlation between the goals and values of the leading
ofﬁce and those of the other central parts of the sociopolit-
ical totality. Where the common utility animates the rightly
arranged civil organism, self-interest pervades the de-
formed body. In John’s vision, the tyrannical ruler could
never succeed unless he enjoyed widespread approval and
cooperation from the other parts of the community over
whom he exercises his violent domination.
Isidore’s conception of tyranny was supplemented
during the thirteenth century by the appearance in Latin
translation of the major works of Aristotle’s social thought,
namely,
Robert
Grosseteste’s
translation
of
the
Nicomachean Ethics during the mid-1240s and William of
Moerbeke’s version of the Politics around 1260. Both works
include considerable discussion of tyranny as one, but not
the only, form of corrupt rule (alongside oligarchy and
democracy). Thomas Aquinas (c. 1225–1274) was perhaps
the ﬁrst important medieval thinker to develop an Aristo-
telian approach to tyrannical government alongside the
insights of Isidore. In the chapters of De regimine
principum (sometimes called De regno) that are commonly
(though somewhat controversially) ascribed to him,
Aquinas engages in an interesting fusion of Aristotelian
and Isidorean language. On the one hand, he explains that
tyrannical government is directed not toward the common
good, but instead the private interests of the ruler, and thus
is unjust. This follows Aristotle’s view quite precisely. Yet
when Aquinas explicates the imperfect forms of rule, he
casts them in a fashion that overtly follows Isidore’s doc-
trine while, at the same time, applying Aristotle’s distinc-
tions among rule by the one, the few, and the many.
Oligarchy and democracy are treated as alternate forms of
tyranny, sharing their operative features with the tyrannical
regime as Isidore has conceived it. Aquinas adapts Isidore’s
language of oppression, so that oligarchy and democracy
become simply collective tyrannies, rather than corrupt
systems structured according to their own unique misun-
derstandings about justice as in Aristotle’s analysis.
In a later chapter of De regimine principum, Aquinas
engages in a tyrannology that touches on the other imper-
fect regimes only inasmuch as they are instructive for
the understanding of the evils of the tyrant and the perfec-
tion of the king. Accepting Aristotle’s ranking of the best
and worst systems within both ideal and corrupt constitu-
tions, Aquinas sets out to excoriate the tyrant. The tyrant
appears to constitute such an evil for the community that
one might infer that a society would gladly accept democ-
racy or oligarchy over tyranny. But the force of his case is
1348 T
Tyranny

merely rhetorical. Aquinas points out that there are grada-
tions even within forms of tyranny and that there is less evil
to be found in tyrannical government than in corrupt
government exercised by a group of people. He reasons
that the corruption engendered by oligarchy or democracy
leads to internal dissension within the community, which is
ultimately more harmful than the rule of a single evil man.
Likewise, Aquinas observes, the historical study of tyranni-
cal regimes demonstrates that they are more likely to arise
from societies in which a multitude rules than from those in
which a monarchy has previously existed. In sum, Aquinas
wishes no one to conclude that he has afforded any grounds
to prefer democracy and oligarchy to the government of
kings, even ‘‘moderate’’ tyrants.
Thinkers who followed Aquinas, many of whom were
his students at Paris, often extended the lines of his thought.
For instance, Ptolemy of Lucca’s (c. 1236–1327) continua-
tion of his master’s De regimine principum, which is nearly
three times as long as the portion attributed to Aquinas,
moves the argument away from an examination of kingship
and into a sustained defense of ‘‘political rule’’ or mixed
polity as the best system of government. Ptolemy frames his
support of such republican rule through sustained consid-
eration of tyranny’s relation to well-ordered constitutions.
Ptolemy steps beyond both Isidore and Aristotle, while
extending Aquinas’ forbearance of tyranny in a striking
way. Ptolemy subscribes to a quasi-sociological view of
good government that enjoyed some currency among the
scholastics, according to which different populations are
better suited (by environmental circumstance or tempera-
ment) to speciﬁc types of rule, even, in some cases, tyran-
nical rule. In Book 3, Ptolemy asserts the expediency of
tyranny in cases where a populace is incapable of beneﬁting
from good government. Indeed, such tyrannies are termed
‘‘the instruments of divine justice’’ by him. Certainly, other
Latin Christian authors, at least as far back as Isidore, had
held that tyrants might be divine instruments for the inﬂic-
tion of punishments upon wicked people. But Ptolemy’s
view concentrates on utility rather than God’s judgment. In
a similar passage in Book 4, he appears to posit a distinction
between legitimate and unjustiﬁed exercise of tyranny. The
former occurs in regions where the people are ‘‘servile by
nature’’; he cites the examples of Italian provinces such as
Sicily, Sardinia, and Corsica. By contrast, illegitimate tyr-
anny occurs when territories that are suited to freedom are
compelled to submit to a single unjust ruler; he refers to the
central and northern Italian provinces as illustrations. The
intriguing conclusion is that, depending upon context,
tyranny is not always evil. As a regime, it may in principle
remain corrupt, but as a last-ditch means of imposing peace
and order in an otherwise anarchic situation, it may be the
best, rather than the worst, of constitutions. Certainly,
Isidore would have been unlikely to endorse this position;
Aristotle, although he may have accepted monarchies that
share some characteristics of tyranny in non-European
cases, was careful in the Politics to explain how and why
such resemblances did not lead true kings into tyranny.
Although many later medieval theorists (such as
Marsilius of Padua and William of Ockham) continued to
accept the terms of Isidore’s and Aristotle’s condemnations
of
tyranny,
the
fourteenth
century
also
witnessed
a discernible perpetuation of the more ﬂexible attitude
evinced by Ptolemy (and, to some extent, Aquinas).
Bartolus of Sassoferrato and Coluccio Salutati pioneered
a specialized genre of political treatise de tyrannia, in which
the merits of tyrannical government were debated. Not all
of those who engaged in this conversation were prepared to
condemn tyranny out of hand. Bartolus, for instance,
remarks that tyrannical behavior often occurs even in gov-
ernments that are generally devoted to the common good.
Salutati is even more adamant that tyrannical regimes may
at times be defended. Clearly, then, some authors found the
repetition of conventional ideas about tyranny without
critical reﬂection to be profoundly unsatisfying; others
were perhaps propelled by political circumstances to mod-
ify accepted teachings concerning the tyrant.
See also: ▶John of Salisbury ▶Marsilius of Padua
▶Ptolemy of Lucca ▶Thomas Aquinas, Political Thought
▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Aquinas Thomas (2002) Political writings (trans: Dyson RW). Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
Bartolus of Sassoferrato (1925) Tractatus de tyrannia. In: Humanism and
tyranny (trans: Emerton E). Harvard University Press, Cambridge
Isidore of Seville (2006) Etymologies (trans: Barney SA et al). Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
John of Salisbury (1992) Policraticus (trans: Nederman CJ). Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
Ptolemy of Lucca (1997) On the rule of princes (trans: Blythe J). Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia
Salutati Coluccio (1925) De tyranno. In: Humanism and tyranny (trans:
Emerton E). Harvard University Press, Cambridge
Secondary Sources
Black AJ (1992) Political thought in Europe, 1250–1450. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
Burns JH (ed) (1988) The Cambridge history of medieval political
thought, c. 350–c. 1450. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Nederman CJ (2004) Imperfect regimes in the Christian political thought
of medieval Europe: from the fathers to the fourteenth century.
Me´langes de l’Universite´ Saint-Joseph 57:525–551
Tyranny T
1349
T


