
The Symbolic Species Evolved

BIOSEMIOTICS
VOLUME 6
Series Editors
Marcello Barbieri
Professor of Embryology
University of Ferrara, Italy
President
Italian Association for Theoretical Biology
Editor-in-Chief
Biosemiotics
Jesper Hoffmeyer
Associate Professor in Biochemistry
University of Copenhagen
President
International Society for Biosemiotic Studies
Aims and Scope of the Series
Combining research approaches from biology, philosophy and linguistics, the emerging ﬁeld of biosemi-
otics proposes that animals, plants and single cells all engage insemiosis – the conversion of physical
signals into conventional signs. This has important implications and applications for issues ranging from
natural selection to animal behaviour and human psychology, leaving biosemiotics at the cutting edge of
the research on the fundamentals of life.
The Springer book series Biosemiotics draws together contributions from leading players in international
biosemiotics, producing an unparalleled series that will appeal to all those interested in the origins and
evolution of life, including molecular and evolutionary biologists, ecologists, anthropologists, psychol-
ogists, philosophers and historians of science, linguists, semioticians and researchers in artiﬁcial life,
information theory and communication technology.
For further volumes:
http://www.springer.com/series/7710

Theresa Schilhab · Frederik Stjernfelt ·
Terrence Deacon
Editors
The Symbolic Species
Evolved
123

Editors
Dr. Theresa Schilhab
Danish School of Education
University of Århus
Tuborgvej 164
DK-2400 København
Denmark
tsc@dpu.dk
Prof. Frederik Stjernfelt
University of Århus
Jens Chr. Skous Vej 7
8000 Aarhus C
Denmark
semfelt@hum.au.dk
Prof. Terrence Deacon
Department of Anthropology
University of Berkeley
Kroeber Hall 329
94720-3710 Berkeley California
USA
deacon@berkeley.edu
Additional material to this book can be downloaded from http://extras.springer.com
ISSN 1875-4651
e-ISSN 1875-466X
ISBN 978-94-007-2335-1
e-ISBN 978-94-007-2336-8
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-2336-8
Springer Dordrecht Heidelberg London New York
Library of Congress Control Number: 2011942348
© Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2012
No part of this work may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by
any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, microﬁlming, recording or otherwise, without written
permission from the Publisher, with the exception of any material supplied speciﬁcally for the purpose
of being entered and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work.
Printed on acid-free paper
Springer is part of Springer Science+Business Media (www.springer.com)

Contents
1
Introduction – Searching the Missing Links . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Frederik Stjernfelt, Theresa Schilhab, and Terrence W. Deacon
Part I
The Biosemiotic Connection
2
Beyond the Symbolic Species
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
Terrence W. Deacon
3
The Evolution of Semiotic Self-Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
Frederik Stjernfelt
4
Peirce and Deacon on the Meaning and Evolution of Language
. .
65
Ahti-Veikko J. Pietarinen
5
Semiosis Beyond Signs. On Two or Three Missing Links
on the Way to Human Beings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
Göran Sonesson
Part II
The Prehistoric and Comparative Connection
6
The Natural History of Intentionality.
A Biosemiotic Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
Jesper Hoffmeyer
7
The Evolution of Learning to Communicate: Avian Model
for the Missing Link . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
117
Irene M. Pepperberg
8
From Parsing Actions to Understanding Intentions . . . . . . . . .
131
Richard W. Byrne
9
Hominid Diversity and ‘Ancestor’ Myths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
151
Niels Bonde
10
The Tripod Effect: Co-evolution of Cooperation, Cognition
and Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
193
Peter Gärdenfors, Ingar Brinck, and Mathias Osvath
v

vi
Contents
Part III
The Cognitive and Anthropological Connection
11
Language as a Repository of Tacit Knowledge . . . . . . . . . . . .
225
Harry Collins
12
Levels of Immersion and Embodiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
241
Theresa Schilhab
13
Emerging Symbols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
253
Stefan Leijnen
14
Gender in Innovative Techno Fantasies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
263
Cathrine Hasse
Index
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
283

Contributors
Niels Bonde Institute of Geography & Geology, University of Copenhagen, Øster
Voldgade 10, DK 1350 Copenhagen, Denmark; Fur Museum, DK 7884 Fur,
Denmark, nielsb@geo.ku.dk; niels.bonde@mail.tele.dk
Ingar Brinck Department of Philosophy, Lund University, Lund, Sweden,
Ingar.Brinck@ﬁl.lu.se
Richard W. Byrne School of Psychology, University of St Andrews, St Andrews,
Fife KY16 9JP, Scotland, rwb@st-andrews.ac.uk
Harry Collins SOCSI, Cardiff School of Social Sciences, Cardiff University,
Cardiff, Wales CF10 3WT, UK, CollinsHM@cf.ac.uk
Terrence W. Deacon Department of Anthropology, University of California,
Berkeley, CA 94720-3710, USA, deacon@berkeley.edu
Peter Gärdenfors Department of Philosophy, Lund University, Lund, Sweden,
Peter.Gardenfors@lucs.lu.se
Cathrine Hasse Department of Learning, Institute of Learning, University of
Aarhus, Copenhagen, Denmark, caha@dpu.dk
Jesper Hoffmeyer Biological Institute, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen
DK 2200, Denmark, jhoffmeyer@me.com
Stefan Leijnen Institute for Computing and Information Sciences, Radboud
University Nijmegen, 6525 AJ Nijmegen, Netherlands, stefan@leijnen.org
Mathias Osvath Department of Philosophy, Lund University, Lund, Sweden,
Mathias.Osvath@lucs.lu.se
Irene M. Pepperberg Department of Psychology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA, impepper@media.mit.edu
Ahti-Veikko J. Pietarinen Department of Philosophy, History, Culture and Art
Studies, University of Helsinki, FIN-00014 Helsinki, Finland,
ahti-veikko.pietarinen@helsinki.ﬁ
vii

viii
Contributors
Theresa Schilhab GNOSIS Research Centre, Danish School of Education,
University of Aarhus, 2400 Copenhagen, Denmark, tsc@dpu.dk
Göran Sonesson Centre for Cognitive Semiotics, Lund University, Lund,
Sweden, goran.sonesson@semiotik.lu.se
Frederik Stjernfelt Faculty of Arts, University of Aarhus, 8000 Aarhus,
Denmark, semfelt@hum.au.dk

About the Authors
Niels Bonde is Professor emeritus at Department of Geography & Geology,
University of Copenhagen. Trained as vertebrate-paleobiologist, born 1940, degree
Mag. Scient. Paleobiol, Goldmedal Copenhagen University, lecturer and senior lec-
turer. Professional ﬁelds of interest are evolutionary history of ﬁsh, dinosaur and
birds, humans, cladistics, species problems etc.
Editor and main contributor to a book on the history of evolutionary thoughts.
Bonde, N., Hoffmeyer, J., & Stangerup, H. (eds.) ‘Naturens historiefortaellere’
[Nature’s history-tellers], 2 vols (1984, 1986, Gad, Copenhagen – 2nd ed. 1996,
960 pp; in Danish). Bonde, N., et al. (2008) Danekrae – Danmarks bedste fossiler
[Denmark’s best fossils], 226pp. Gyldendal, Copenhagen (in Danish).
Ingar Brinck is Professor of Theoretical Philosophy at Lund University. She is
the author of numerous articles and a book: The Indexical ‘I’. The First Person in
Thought and Language, Kluwer Academic Publ., 1997. Her main research inter-
ests are philosophy of language, self-consciousness, intentionality, attention and
creativity. She is an Associate Member of Institut Jean Nicod, Paris.
Richard W. Byrne is Professor of Psychology and studies the evolution of cognitive
and social behaviour, particularly the origins of distinctively human characteristics.
Current projects focus on the gestural communication of great apes, and conver-
gences in cognition between primates and distantly related species such as the
African elephant, in collaboration with Dr. Lucy Bates. Previous work has included
tactical deception in primates and its relationship to brain size and intelligence,
welfare-related studies of cognition in the domestic pig, and the analysis of social
learning and imitation. Postgraduates under his supervision have recently worked
on primate gestural and vocal communication, comprehension of mechanical tasks,
manual feeding techniques, including the effect of disability on chimpanzees’ feed-
ing techniques, and cognitive control of navigation within the home ranges of
monkeys and apes. Professor Byrne was awarded the British Psychology Society
Book Award 1997 for his O.U.P. monograph The Thinking Ape.
Harry Collins is Distinguished Research Professor of Sociology and Director of
the Centre for the Study of Knowledge, Expertise and Science (KES) at Cardiff
University. He has held visiting appointments in Brazil, China, California Institute
of Technology, University of California at San Diego, Max Planck Institute for
ix

x
About the Authors
History of Science in Berlin, and many more. He was awarded the 1997 Bernal
prize for social studies of science. His sixteen books include The Golem: What you
should know about science (1993/98, with Trevor Pinch) which won the American
Sociological Association’s Robert K. Merton book prize and was followed by a
volume on technology (1998). Harry Collins is continuing his research on the
sociology of gravitational wave detection, on the nature of expertise and on a new
technique – the ‘Imitation Game’ – for exploring expertise and comparing the extent
to which minority groups are integrated into societies. The Imitation Game research
is supported by a European Research Council Advanced Grant.
Peter Gärdenfors is Professor of Cognitive Science at Lund University. His main
research interests are concept formation, semantics and the evolution of cognition.
He is the author of numerous articles and books, including Knowledge in Flux:
Modeling the Dynamics of Epistemic States, Bradford Books, MIT Press, 1988.
Conceptual Spaces, Bradford Books, MIT Press, 2000, and How Homo Became
Sapiens: On the Evolution of Thinking, Oxford University Press, 2003. He is a
member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Letters, History and Antiquities, The
Royal Swedish Academy of Science, Academia Europaea and Leopoldina Deutsche
Akademie für Naturforscher.
Cathrine Hasse has as a cultural psychologist and anthropologist for more than
ten years studied cultural learning processes in university and other educational
organisations. She did her PhD. On “cultural learning processes” in an institution
where she followed a group of “newcomers”, young male and female physicists’
students, in their ﬁrst year of study. This project developed into a longitudinal study
where she has followed the same group of students more than 6 years. In her next
project “The Cultural Dimensions of Science” she compared physics institutions
in Denmark and Italy and she has co-ordinated an EU project, ﬁnanced by EU 6th
framework programme, UPGEM (Understanding Puzzles in the Gendered European
Map) focusing on comparative aspects of universities as cultural workplaces. She is
professor at the Danish School of Education (DPU), Aarhus University, working on
“transdisciplinary technological literacy” and technological imaginaries in everyday
life. In her work she takes a special interest in the relations between learning, gen-
der, culture and academic institutions as work places. She is an active participant in
the ISCAR – International Society for Cultural and Activity Research, and 4S net-
work of Science and Technology Studies and has a long time relation with Women
in Physics in Denmark.
Jesper Hoffmeyer is Cand. Scient. and Dr. Phil. and Professor emeritus at
Biological Institute, University of Copenhagen. Named fourth Sebeok Fellow of
the Semiotic Society of America 2000; President of the International Society
for Biosemiotic studies. Recent publictions include Signs of Meaning in the
Universe, Indiana University Press 1996; Edited: A Legacy of Living Systems:
Gregory Bateson as Precursor to Biosemiotics, Springer 2008; Biosemiotics. An
Examination into the Signs of Life and the Life of Signs, Scranton University Press
2008.

About the Authors
xi
Stefan Leijnen is a Ph.D Student at Nijmegen University’s Intelligent Systems
department, interested in understanding and building creative systems. Before this,
he worked with soccer-playing robot dogs, emotional multi-agent systems and
symbol-using neural networks. His research interests include the process of cre-
ativity, mechanism and emergence in nature, and the ontology of computation.
Currently, his research revolves around merging mechanisms of abiogenesis with
connectionist models, in order to simulate learning through an artiﬁcial creative
process.
Mathias Osvath Ph.D., is a researcher in Cognitive Science at Lund University.
His main research interest is comparative cognition, and he is working on great apes
and corvids. His publications on planning in primates has received high international
recognition. He is also the scientiﬁc director of Lund University Primate Research
Station.
Irene M. Pepperberg (PhD, Harvard, ’76) is a Research Associate/Lecturer at
Harvard and an Adjunct Associate Professor at Brandeis University. She has been
a visiting Assistant Professor at Northwestern University, a tenured Associate
Professor at the University of Arizona, and a visiting Associate Professor at the
MIT Media Lab. She has received John Simon Guggenheim, Selby, and Radcliffe
Fellowships, is a Fellow of AAAS, the American Psychological Association, the
American Psychological Society, the Animal Behavior Society, and the American
Ornithologists’ Union. She is currently the associate editor of the Journal of
Comparative Psychology.
Ahti-Veikko J. Pietarinen Ph.D, University of Helsinki, 2002 is Professor of
Semiotics at the University of Helsinki and Director of the Helsinki Peirce Research
Centre. His research interests include logic, philosophy of language, philosophy of
science, history of philosophy, Peirce, and Pragmatism. Pietarinen’s recent mono-
graph is Signs of Logic: Peircean Themes on the Philosophy of Language, Games,
and Communication (Springer Synthese Library, 2006) and a collection Game
Theory and Linguistic Meaning (CRiSPI, Elsevier Science, 2007). His latest jour-
nal publications have appeared in the Journal of the History of Ideas, Semiotica,
Perspectives on Science, Linguistics and the Human Sciences, Studia Logica,
Cognitio, History of Philosophy.
Göran Sonesson is Professor of Semiotics at Lund University and the head of the
Centre for cognitive semiotics at that same university. He has written extensively
on visual semiotics, semiotics of gesture, epistemology of semiotics, semiotics of
culture, and, more recently, cognitive semiotics with an experimental bent. His pub-
lications include Pictorial concepts (Lund: LUP 1989) as well as more than 200
papers, many of them is well-established journals such as Semiotica, VISIO, Degrés,
Sign System Studies, Protée, etc., and in numerous anthologies and encyclopaedias.

About the Editors
Terrence W. Deacon holds a Ph.D. in Biological Anthropology and has been a
Professor at Harvard University, Harvard Medical School, Boston University, and
most recently the University of California at Berkeley, where he is currently Chair
of the Department of Anthropology and a member of the Helen Wills Neuroscience
Institute. His bench research has mostly focused on the evolution of human brains
and their unique cognitive capacities, but has also included studies of compara-
tive brain anatomy, neural development, and the transplantation of fetal neurons
and stem cells. His Staley Prize winning 1997 book “The Symbolic Species: The
Coevolution of Language and the Brain” synthesized neurological, evolutionary,
linguistic, and semiotic approaches to understanding human brain and language
evolution. His forthcoming book “Incomplete Nature: How Mind Emerged from
Matter” (W.W. Norton & Co., Fall 2011) outlines a theory of what he describes as
emergent dynamical processes and offers a radical reformulation of the nature of
biological function, information, consciousness, and value.
Theresa Schilhab has a Ph.D in the philosophy of biological sciences from the
Niels Bohr Institute, Copenhagen is Associate Professor at the GNOSIS Research
Centre, University of Aarhus. She is author and co-editor of numerous books includ-
ing the anthology Learning Bodies (2008) as well as scientiﬁc papers in cognitive
ethology, embodied cognition and evolutionary neuroscience. Her research touches
on evolutionary perspectives on tacit and explicit knowledge and their indetermi-
nate interaction, evolutionary epistemology (i.e. the evolution of epistemological
mechanisms), and speciﬁcally the impact of bodily experience on human learning.
Frederik Stjernfelt is Professor Ph.D. at the Center for Semiotics, Aarhus
University, Denmark. Recent books: “Diagrammatology. An Investigation on the
Borderlines of Phenomenology, Ontology, and Semiotics”, Dordrecht: Springer
Verlag 2007; “Semiotics. Critical Concepts” vols. I–IV (ed. with P. Bundgaard,
London: Routledge 2010); “The Democratic Contradictions of Multiculturalism”
(with J.-M. Eriksen, N.Y.: Telos Press, forthcoming). Editor of the journal KRITIK.
xiii

Chapter 1
Introduction – Searching the Missing Links
Frederik Stjernfelt, Theresa Schilhab, and Terrence W. Deacon
Terrence Deacon’s “The Symbolic Species” came out in 1997 and became an impor-
tant participant in the renewed focusing upon the issue of the origin of man. The
basic Darwinian framework agreed upon by all serious research since early 20C had
left the important problem of accounting for the evolution of man’s special intel-
lectual abilities, including human language, as compared to other higher animals
in general and man’s primate relatives speciﬁcally. The many competing theories of
the origins of language along with the lack of empirical evidence to support either of
them had, for many years, made speculations upon language origins obsolete – but
with the increasing amount of knowledge about man’s genetic evolution, historical
linguistics, cognitive science, neuroscience, the archeology of early human migra-
tions etc. created a new platform for taking up this old issue. Deacon’s proposal
was fourfold – based upon the combination of an evolutionary, a semiotic, a neuro-
logical, and an anthropological hypothesis. The evolutionary hypothesis was based
upon so-called “Baldwinian” evolution – after the American psychologist James
Mark Baldwin: the idea that in social species with individuals possessing a certain
degree of ontogenetic learning abilities, new, acquired capabilities may assume a
large degree of selective advantage for those individuals able to learn them. Thus,
seemingly Lamarckian effects of inheritage of acquired characters may occur within
a completely Darwinian framework: the acquired capabilities are not inherited, but
the possession of them in some individuals provide a large selection advantage over
those who have less ability to learn them. The example chosen in Deacon was, of
course, human language: speakers will be strongly favoured at the expense of non-
speakers, and thus the appearance of early, primitive language will speed up the
process of evolution, eventually making the evolution of language and the evolution
of the human brain two aspects of one basic process with intense feed-back between
the two.
Baldwinian evolution was also rediscovered by other thinkers in the same
period – such as Steven Pinker – but on top of this, Deacon added a neurologi-
cal hypothesis based on brain scannings of preserved brains of a variety of species:
F. Stjernfelt (B)
Faculty of Arts, University of Aarhus, 8000 Aarhus, Denmark
e-mail: semfelt@hum.au.dk
1
T. Schilhab et al. (eds.), The Symbolic Species Evolved, Biosemiotics 6,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-2336-8_1, C⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2012

2
F. Stjernfelt et al.
namely that a basic novum in the human brain is its comparatively expanded pre-
frontal cortex and its connections. This hypothesis, to Deacon, contradicted or at
least relativized modularism, pointing to the idea that despite the importance of
Wernicke’s and Broca’s areas for language production and understanding, lexical
semantics and enunciation covered much larger amounts of brain capacities – facil-
itated by the human brain’s connectedness. This idea, of course, placed Deacon
against strong modularists with the central emphasis of linguistic grammar and its
supposed core module – and made him argue that the novelty of human linguistic
capabilities must have a broader semiotic character rather than a narrowly conceived
grammatical character.
This, in turn, made him appropriate some central aspects of Charles Peirce’s
semiotics – an early attempt to integrate semiotic and linguistic capabilities with
logic and cognitive ones. Thus, Deacon hypothesized that Peirce’s distinction
between Icons, Indices, and Symbols – signs referring to their object by means
of similarity, actual connection, or habit – might be a key to the understanding of
the speciﬁcity of human language. Making the hypothesis that although forms of
iconic and indexical communication were present in many species but only humans
built on these to communicate symbolically. Deacon proposed that the ability to pro-
duce and process Symbols in this special sense of the word is a key to the general,
detached intelligence characteristic of human beings. Some intelligent species, like
bonobos and gray parrots, might be able to process Symbols to some degree, but the
systematic use of Symbols was taken to be the deﬁning feature of human semiotic
intelligence – hence the title of the book, The Symbolic Species.
What, then, was the speciﬁc selection pressure pushing early man over the thresh-
old to Symbol processing? Here, Deacon – anthropologist by training and career –
proposed an anthropological narrative to account for a speciﬁc set of selection pres-
sures. The discovery of stone tool technology by an australopithecine ancestor some
2.5 million years ago made it possible to include a larger degree of meat in their diet.
But this required male-male cooperation and the risk of predation made it increas-
ingly difﬁcult for women with children to participate in hunting, resulting in the
classic Stone Age scenario of gathering women and hunting men. This, in turn,
made the connection between the sexes fragile. How could the pregnant mother-to-
be know that the father of her child would, in fact, return with parts of a corpse after
having been away in many days with his gang of hunters? Conversely, how could
the hunting man know that the mother of his child would not be unfaithful to him
during his hunting absence, making it uncertain it was in fact his own genetic off-
spring he was busily catching protein for? Moreover, male cooperation is crucial,
given the dangers of meat scavenges, and so sexual competition must be minimized.
In short, all players in this anthropological dilemma have an interest in securing the
link to one another. So to Deacon, establishing socially-mediated ﬁdelity was what
required symbols’ capacity to represent possible future relationships and commit-
ments the arch-example of speech acts, and which introduced selection pressure to
evolve cognitive functions for aiding the acquisition and use of symbolic reference.
Thus, the overall argument of Deacon’s book united evolutionary, neurologi-
cal, semiotic, and social-anthropological arguments. Many competing accounts for

1
Introduction – Searching the Missing Links
3
the same issue, like Bruner-Tomasello’s emphasis on joint and shared attention,
Turner-Fauconnier’s pointing to double scope blending or the Chomskyans’ focus
on linguistic grammar, would disagree on one or several points in this chain of argu-
ments. Deacon’s theory is unique, however, in its integration of these many critical
threads of causality and also because of its focus on a semiotic cause. This unprece-
dented approach is what prompted his two co-editors of this book to organize a
couple of conferences addressing the critical discussion of Deacon’s chain of argu-
ments. The Symbolic Species Conferences I and II took place in 2006 and 2007
and presented a wide variety of scholars each with a unique view on evolutionary
cognition and the questions raised by Terrence Deacon. This book is not simply a
conference proceeding; rather it is an attempt at concentrating and focusing the con-
ference discussion around the issues highlighted by Deacon’s bundle of arguments.
This is why some of the papers thoroughly discuss aspects of Deacon’s theories,
why others address other, maybe competing approaches to the same issue. In order
to focus these different contributions on Deacon’s argument, we decided to give the
overall structure of the book a Deaconian frame.
1.1 Presentation of the Chapters
The volume is divided into three sections, namely “The biosemiotic connection”:
“The prehistoric and comparative connection” and “The cognitive and anthropolog-
ical connection”.
The main focus of the ﬁrst section is the biosemiotic view on human cogni-
tion with special emphasis on the analysis of the Deaconian perspective. In “The
prehistoric and comparative connection”, human descent, learning abilities and
species-speciﬁc cognition is discussed in an evolutionary as well as comparative per-
spective. The third section; “The cognitive and anthropological connection”, sheds
light on various aspects of symbol use especially as this applies to natural language
use such as linguistic immersion and embeddedness on the on the one hand and, on
the other, the associated emergence of semantic freedom. The individual chapters
will be introduced in the following.
1.1.1 The Biosemiotic Connection (Part I)
The introductory chapter of the book is a newly-written contribution by Deacon
addressing the issue of the status of the Symbol – in some sense the central concept
of the book tying together its biology, neuroscience, semiotics, and anthropology
arguments. In this chapter The Symbolic Species hypothesis is truly revisited in
three ways: 1. by more explicitly and precisely deﬁning his conception of symbolic
reference and its dependency on iconic and indexical processes, 2. by applying this
analysis to a re-thinking of the concept of Universal Grammar as neither nature nor
nurture, and 3. by demonstrating a role for relaxed selection in setting the stage

4
F. Stjernfelt et al.
for the synergistic reorganization of brain functions to support the demands of lan-
guage. In the following chapter, Frederik Stjernfelt critically addresses Deacon’s
analysis of the symbol concept and its hierarchic dependence on iconic and index-
ical forms of reference hypothesis that pure Icons appear early in evolution, only
later to combine to form Indices and eventually Symbols. Although for Deacon the
icon-index-symbol sequence is not historical or evolutionary, it is a reﬂection of the
increasing complexity of the cognitive demands of these modes of referring. Thus
according to the Symbolic Species the symbolic threshold is only crossed when suf-
ﬁcient special interpretive capacities are in place that he identiﬁes with his systemic
conception of symbolic reference. Stjernfelt criticizes this analysis by challenging
both the hierarchic dependency of these sign-forms and their supposed separabil-
ity. His alternative conception does not view symbols as systemically mediated in
the way Deacon describes, but instead locates an analogous semiotic-evolutionary
threshold in a special form of mental abstraction. He thus opposes the view that
Symbols per se are a key to the general, detached intelligence characteristic of
human beings and argues instead that the true demarcation criterion seems to be
what he describes (after Peirce) as our extensive ability to hypostasize.
In his chapter: “Peirce and Deacon on Meaning and the Evolution of Language”,
Ahti-Veikko J. Pietarinen investigates the inﬂuence from Peirce on the work of
Deacon by focussing on the similarities and dissimilarities between Peirce’s and
Deacon’s positions with particular reference to the notions of meaning and the
evolution of language.
The last chapter: “Semiosis beyond Signs. On two or three missing links on the
way to human beings” by Göran Sonesson is concerned with two (nearly) missing
links in the progression from animal to man, that is the (principle of) relevance and
the sign, as well as the act of imitation bridging them. Sonesson aims to distinguish
stages in evolution and development, notably the relationship between imitation and
sign.
1.1.2 The Prehistoric and Comparative Connection (Part II)
The ﬁrst chapter of part two, “The natural history of intentionality: A biosemiotic
approach-2” by Jesper Hoffmeyer, takes the rich occurrence of natural intentionality
as its starting point to demonstrate the wealth of sign action and therefore semiotic
realism pervasive to the living world.
The chapter “The evolution of learning to communicate: Avian model for the
missing link” by Irene Pepperberg offers a comparative perspective on language
that analyses to what extent language might be considered (or reconsidered) to be
constructed from purely primate-speciﬁc qualities.
Similarly, but now based on studies of organized, purposeful actions in great
apes, in the chapter “From parsing actions to understanding intentions” Richard
Byrne aims to demystify the putative missing linguistic link between man and non
human animals is presented. According to Byrne, behaviour parsing might be a
necessary step on the road to seeing the world in an intentional-causal way.

1
Introduction – Searching the Missing Links
5
In the following chapter by Niels Bonde, named “Hominid Diversity and
‘Ancestor’ Myths: Homo, H. sapiens, and Other Taxa from a Phylocladistic
Viewpoint”, we critisize up to date front-line consensus on our human descendence
within contemporary palaeoanthropology and claims of ‘direct fossil ancestors’.
Finally, part two is closed by the chapter “The tripod effect: Co-evolution of
cooperation, cognition and communication” by Peter Gärdenfors, Ingar Brinck and
Mathias Osvath. The chapter simultaneously addresses hominin cognition, coop-
eration, and communication to show how these interdependent factors mutually
reinforce each other over the course of evolution.
1.1.3 The Cognitive and Anthropological Connection (Part III)
“Language as a repository of tacit knowledge” by Harry Collins highlights the
linguistic exclusivity that allows almost unlimited knowledge exchange between
competent language users. In this view language is not conceived of as merely a
tool put to cognitive use but as a form of life.
Theresa Schilhab focuses on the situatedness of language in the chapter “Levels
of immersion and embodiment” to expand on the relation between symbol use as it
applies to the linguistic exchange in professional communities and the lack of ﬁrst
hand experiences of the concepts mastered to perfection.
In “Emerging symbols”, Stefan Leijnen explores the difference between index-
ical and symbolic interpretation on the basis of a neural network simulation of a
series of language training experiments with chimpanzees. Leijnen then discusses
systemic requirements for crossing the symbolic threshold.
Finally, the closing chapter of the book “Gender in innovative techno fantasies”
by Cathrine Hasse explores Deacon’s idea of the evolution of language and the
evolution of the human brain as two aspects of one basic process to argue that human
agents have developed a particular capacity for creating their habitats according to
their fantasies about how they would like to live in the future, especially in the case
of technological tools.

Part I
The Biosemiotic Connection

Chapter 2
Beyond the Symbolic Species
Terrence W. Deacon
Abstract Confusions about the nature of symbolic reference are at the core of two
major challenges to understanding human language. A failure to take into account
the complex iconic and indexical infrastructure of symbolic interpretation pro-
cesses has blocked progress in the study of language structure, language evolution,
neural processing of language, and language acquisition. Simplistic notions of sym-
bolic interpretation are critiqued, the semiotic infrastructure of symbolic interpretive
processes is described, and some implication for understanding the universals of
grammar and syntax are explored. Finally, the evolutionary problem of language
origins is re-examined and an unexpected important role for relaxation of selection
is demonstrated.
2.1 The Problem with ‘Symbol’
In the years since the publication of The Symbolic Species (Deacon, 1997) one con-
sistent source of confusion has persistently been used as a reason to take a critical
view of the symbolic threshold as key to the human difference. This is in one sense
merely a terminological problem with interpretations of the term ‘symbol,’ and yet
it obscures a critical issue that if not resolved will be a roadblock to both the study
of language and the further development of semiotic theory itself. The confusion
superﬁcially has to do with the concept of arbitrarily of reference, but more deeply
it involves a tension between a structural and dynamic conception of the process of
semiosis more generally.
I will ﬁrst address the terminological dispute, which although a source of confu-
sion in the literature, should be resolvable with a bit of care in deﬁning terms and
avoiding the attribution of one deﬁnition to uses where it does not apply. The con-
ceptual dispute is much more subtle, and I think critical to sort out. Failure to do
so will have two serious consequences. First, it will doom semiotic theories to the
status of mere taxonomic exercises where different scholars are free to invent their
Parts of this chapter are reprinted from Deacon (2010a)
T.W. Deacon (B)
Department of Anthropology, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720-3710, USA
e-mail: deacon@berkeley.edu
9
T. Schilhab et al. (eds.), The Symbolic Species Evolved, Biosemiotics 6,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-2336-8_2, C⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2012

10
T.W. Deacon
own categorical principles without careful reﬂection on the underlying generative
processes and constraints that determine the semiotic differences they hope to dis-
tinguish. This often ends up turning semiotic research into a renaming exercise,
where commonly studied phenomena are redescribed in semiotic terms and it often
devolves into battles over competing naming paradigms from the past. Second, and
more serious, it will cut semiotic research off from the sciences of psychology, neu-
rology, and biology due to a failure to come to grips with the process of semiosis;
the dynamic of interpretive activity by which semiotic relationships emerge from
other semiotic relationships and ultimately derive their grounding on the physical
phenomena they thereby bring into consideration. The problem here is the tendency
to imagine signs as things, or as synchronic relationships, whereas they are instead
intrinsically dynamic phases in a generative process, and ultimately something apart
from the artifacts being manipulated in this process.
The term ‘symbol’ has come to be used differently in different traditions, and
so ﬁrst we need to be clear what we are talking about. If all that is meant is a
mark that need not share any speciﬁc quality with its object of reference, then the
term has trivial consequences. This gloss of the concept makes it easy to dismiss its
importance for evolution, and indeed this simpliﬁcation has been the motivation for
many language origins researchers to imagine that it is only syntax that demands
explanation. This assumption about the concept of symbol is also reﬂected in many
critics’ claims that most species are capable of learning arbitrary associations (e.g.
see Chapter 3, this volume) so claiming that the symbolic capacity divides humans
from other species must be trivially false.
This focus on arbitrary correlation as the deﬁning attribute of symbolic reference
is a serious oversimpliﬁcation that collapses critical distinctions between sign vehi-
cle and referential properties. The common usage of a ‘code’ analogy in describing
language reference also reﬂects this simpliﬁcation, and for similar reasons leads to
serious theoretical misunderstandings. A code does indeed involve an arbitrary map-
ping or correspondence relationship, but that is precisely why its reference is opaque
and is the basis for encryption. A code is a mapping of a parallel set of sign tokens
to a language, and typically a token-to-token mapping. So to describe language or
any of its attributes, such as the basis for phonology, syntax, or semantics as a code,
merely begs the question: what is the basis for this mapping relationship?
It is often argued, for example, that arbitrariness is a property of many animal
calls. Consider the case of predator-speciﬁc alarm calls (which have been identi-
ﬁed in species as diverse as vervet monkeys and chickens). The assumption that
these calls ‘mean’ or ‘name’ a particular predator is as, the linguist Derek Bickerton
(2010) has also argued, a ‘back-projection of our own language-saturated view of
the world.’ Alarm calls are indexical, even though they don’t sound like the predator
they indicate and even though they are emitted to many similar types of predators.
Their arbitrariness and generic reference are red herrings in this detective story.
Their reference depends on and evolved from repeated correlations between the
presence of a predator, the production of a call, and an appropriate escape behavior,
and merely distinguished from other experiences, vocalizations, or behaviors.

2
Beyond the Symbolic Species
11
A symbolic sign relationship is, in contrast to an iconic or indexical sign rela-
tionship, a doubly conventional form or reference. It involves a conventional sign
type that is additionally conventionaly-mediated in the way it represents.
Arbitrariness is a negative way of deﬁning symbols. It basically tells us that nei-
ther likeness nor correlation are necessary. But this is inadequate, even though it is
a common shorthand way of characterizing symbolic reference. All sign relation-
ships include some degree of arbitrarity, because those attributes that are taken as
the ground for the sign-object linkage can be chosen from many dimensions. Thus,
anything can be treated as iconic or indexical of almost anything else depending on
the interpretive process.
For example, with a bit of imagination a face can be discerned on the full moon,
or in a cloud formation, and it might even remind you of someone you know. But
iconism can also be highly abstract, as in the complex way that a mathematical equa-
tion refers iconically, once you know how to discern its symbol-mediated isometry
(e.g. between the structure of the equation and a corresponding geometric or dynam-
ical relationship). An equation can be interpreted to be iconic (e.g. of a parabolic
trajectory) only, however, if you know how to discern the way that differences in the
values or operations directly correspond to differences in the geometric object of
reference. So one ﬁrst needs to be able to interpret the symbolic components before
the diagrammatic iconism of the equation can be appreciated.
Indices refer by contiguity in space, time, or substrate. A simple correlation can
therefore be the ground for indexical reference. A lipstick smear on a man’s shirt
collar can be a troublesome indication to his wife, a urine scent on a branch can be a
sexual index to a female lemur, and the mobbing call of a small bird can indicate the
present of a raptor. What gets correlated and how (accidental, cultural, evolutionary)
can be arbitrary, only the fact of correlation is not. Thus, a rat in a Skinner box
pressing a bar in response to a bell in order to get a water reward has learned that
the bell is an arbitrary index of the state of the apparatus (an indexical legisign).
These states are arbitrarily paired in the experimental design, but that doesn’t make
the one a symbol of the other.
So symbolic reference is not merely a function of arbitrariness, conventionality,
and generality, though these features are properties that symbolic reference makes
available. First of all, arbitrariness isn’t required. For example, many symbols used
to designate religious concepts employ obvious iconism and yet this doesn’t under-
mine their potential to symbolize quite complex esoteric abstractions. This also
demonstrates that the sign vehicles used for symbolic reference need not be widely
understood as conventional. When ﬁrst encountering an unfamiliar religious sym-
bol it may only require a brief few comments to understand its symbolic import.
And of course icons, such as the eye-spots on male peacock tail feathers or faces
‘seen’ in the clouds often bring to mind general types of objects, not just spe-
ciﬁc instances. These attributes are not sufﬁcient determinants of symbolic function,
either individually or collectively.
As Charles Peirce (1931) pointed out over a century ago, we must distinguish
properties of the sign vehicle (which he terms a representamen), which can include
being an arbitrarily deﬁned (i.e. conventional) type of sign vehicle, from properties

12
T.W. Deacon
taken to link it to its object of reference. Thus although current vernacular has
habitually termed alphanumeric characters “symbols” this usage ignores any ref-
erential relationship. If not used carefully, in recognition of this shorthand, it can
lead to all manner of theoretical confusions.
Thus when your computer begins randomly spewing alphanumeric characters
onto your screen they are indices of a malfunction, not symbols of anything. And
likewise the typographical character combination ;-) does not refer symbolically,
even though it is composed of conventional tokens designed for symbolic purposes.
Peirce terms conventional sign vehicle types ‘legisigns,’ and argues that symbols
must also employ legisigns. However he notes that legisigns can also serve iconic
and indexical roles as well. Consider, for example, the conventionalized stick ﬁgure
icons on restroom doors, or the use of red for trafﬁc lights and road signs to indicate
the requirement to stop (i.e. it indicates a convention—an injunction to act according
to a rule—but it does not ‘mean’ “stop” in the way that this word does. Because
legisigns are often created (or chosen) with a speciﬁc type of referential relationship
in mind it is the arbitrary choice of the creator which properties are to be used
referentially. This is why legisigns created for typographical use to symbolize the
parsing and punctuation of written text can also be recruited for their iconic features
(as in the case of the smiley face).
Of course communicative intention is also an interpretation, and this also does
not ﬁx the referential function of a sign vehicle. Whether something is interpreted
iconically, indexically, or symbolically depends on what’s going on in the mind of
the beholder.
Recognizing that the same sign vehicle need not always be interpreted as
intended, or as referring always in the same way is the ﬁrst step toward reframing
semiosis in diachronic, not synchronic, terms. A sign vehicle can be interpreted in
multiple ways not because it is in some way a combination of sign types, a fractional
mixture of iconic, indexical, and symbolic features, but because its semiotic signif-
icance is not vested in the sign vehicle at all. Although a given interpretation may
depend on some feature intrinsic to that artifact for motivating its semiotic function,
no semiotic attributes are invested in the sign vehicle itself. They are properties of
it being interpreted (whether in its creation or its consideration). So given that the
same sign vehicle can be interpreted differently by different individuals, or at dif-
ferent phases of considering it, worrying about whether it is a ‘pure’ sign of a given
type or a ‘mixed’ sign commits the fallacy of misplaced concreteness.
As we will discuss below, a given sign relation is created by an interpretive pro-
cess. It is a phase in this process in which the sign vehicle is incorporated in a
particular way, but which may be transitory, leading to a different mode of consid-
ering that same sign vehicle. And at any given phase of this interpretive process
there is no ‘mixture’ of semiotic characteristics. It is only when we attempt to ana-
lytically collapse this process into a single synchronic relation that we run the risk
of confusing sign vehicle properties with semiotic properties and think of signs as
simultaneously exhibiting iconic, indexical, and symbolic features.

2
Beyond the Symbolic Species
13
Although it is far beyond the scope of this chapter to attempt a reframing of
semiotic theory in process terms, carefully dissecting a few examples of interpre-
tive processes can help to illustrate the difference between this and more synchronic
forms of semiotic analysis and clear up confusions created by the ‘compositional’
account of symbolic reference presented in The Symbolic Species (Deacon, 1997).
More importantly, exemplifying the process of hierarchic differentiation of refer-
ential form that constitutes an interpretive process allows us to see how semiotic
analysis is directly relevant to understanding cognition, and by implication the
evolution of symbolic cognition.
As a starting point for exhibiting the hierarchic dependency of the different
modes of referential interpretation consider one of the classic examples of a sym-
bolic form: the impression of a signet ring in wax used to seal a note and verify
the sender’s identity. Tracing the minute cognitive steps necessary to interpret this
simple sign demonstrates that symbolic function depends on more than a simple
arbitrary correspondence. First, the formal similarity between the impression and
the ring is primary. This is iconic. But without the physical action of the ring-bearer
pressing the ring into hot wax to produce this likeness, it would not indicate that
this message, thus sealed, was produced by the bearer of that speciﬁc ring. The
presumed connection between ring and bearer further indicates that a particular
individual actually sealed the note. Finally, possession of such a ring is typically
a mark of authority, royalty, etc. This status is a social convention. To interpret
the wax impression as a symbol of social position, one must also understand these
social conventions, because nothing intrinsic to the form or its physical creation
supplies this information. The symbolic reference is dependent on already knowing
something beyond any features embodied in this sign vehicle.
This dependency on an external system of relations within which the formal sim-
ilarities and correlative aspects of the wax impression are embedded is a critical
property of its symbolic reference. But without familiarity with this entire system
of relationships, these non-symbolic components remain merely icons and indices.
Indeed, if any link in this chain of referential inferences is broken, symbolic ref-
erence fails. So while the features comprising the sign vehicle are not necessarily
similar in form or physically linked to what is symbolized, this superﬁcial indepen-
dence is supported by a less obvious network of other modes of reference, involving
both iconism and indexicality.
Notice that the ﬁrst step in this interpretive analysis involved recognition of an
iconism. Only after this recognition was the implicit indexicality relevant and only
after that was the social convention able to play a role in providing symbolic sig-
niﬁcance to the sign vehicle. This hierarchic dependency of symbols on indices on
icons was the core semiotic argument of The Symbolic Species. But notice that it
is not a simple compositional relationship. Indices are not made of icons and sym-
bols are not made of indices. These are stages in developing and differentiating ever
more complex forms of reference. Throughout the interpretive process described
above there was only one sign vehicle: the wax impression. At ﬁrst it is interpreted
iconically, then indexically, and ﬁnally symbolically. The constructive nature of this
interpretive process was what was critical. These semiotic relationships were not

14
T.W. Deacon
mixed in some fractional sense, they were distinct dependent phases in the process,
and most of the relevant detail was supplied by the interpreting process not the wax
impression.
This account leaves out many subphases of the interpretive process, but it cap-
tures the crucial architectonic that I believe is critical to understanding why there
might be a cognitive threshold separating iconic and indexical forms of communi-
cating, common to most mammals and birds, from symbolic communicating that is
distinctive of humans. Interpreting something symbolically is simply more complex,
and unlike iconic and indexical interpretation there is nothing inherent in the form
or physical relationships of the sign vehicle to provide an interpretive clue. This
must be supplied entirely by the interpretive process itself, and it is of the nature of
a systemic relationship, not some singular object or event.
Before turning to language, it is worth exploring a few other simpler examples of
this interpretive differentiation process in order to appreciate the generality of this
hierarchic semiotic dependency.
Let me begin with a trivial index: a wind sock that indicates the strength and
direction of the wind. What constitutes the interpretive competence to recognize
this indexicality? Imagine that it is being seen for the ﬁrst time through a win-
dow. It is iconic of cloth or clothing, and yet it is clearly not clothing or randomly
ﬂuttering cloth. Its distinctive shape and careful design, in contrast, indicate that
it is likely designed for a purpose. Another iconic feature is its extended ﬂuttering
behavior, again iconic of clothing, but of clothing being blown by the wind ﬂutter-
ing on a clothes line. This iconism now brings to mind something that is not directly
provided by the sign vehicle: wind. By virtue of developing these iconic interpreta-
tions then this sign vehicle is now embedded in a larger context in which something
present points to something that it is not: the wind. And a further juxtaposition of
iconisms that have involved other windblown experiences can eventually (quickly)
lead to interpreting its behavior as an index of both the direction and intensity of
the wind. The indexicality is not ‘composed of icons’ but rather emerges from the
comparisons among iconic interpretations. Failing to recognize these iconisms, e.g.
because of never having experienced the effects of wind, would make the indexical
interpretation impossible to develop.
Next consider the interpretation of the chevron insignia on a military jacket.
Initially, it appears just a colored shape, an iconic sinsign in Peircean terminol-
ogy (a singular instance of something familiar). As similar shapes are seen on other
shoulders, it develops from an iconic sinsign to an iconic legisign (shapes of the
same type). As it is understood to distinguish the individual wearing it, it becomes
interpreted as an indexical legisign (a type of sign vehicle pointing to something
about this person). When its particular conﬁguration is understood to designate that
person’s military rank it becomes interpreted as a symbolic legisign. The same sign
vehicle thus is the locus for a sequence of interpretive phases in which both the rela-
tionship of the sign vehicle to other sign vehicles and the relationship of the sign
vehicle to its reference are progressively developed.
Some of my favorite examples of this hierarchic interpretive dependence are cap-
tured in political cartoons and illustrations that make a general statement about

2
Beyond the Symbolic Species
15
Fig. 2.1 Cartoon from the
cover of New Yorker
Magazine which exempliﬁes
the progressive differentiation
of iconic to indexical to
symbolic interpretive phases
(see text)
things by virtue of the atypical juxtapositions they employ. Consider the cartoon
cover from the New Yorker Magazine in Fig. 2.1.
On ﬁrst glance, as soon as the discordant features of the image are appreciated,
one’s mind jumps to an interpretation that is beyond anything depicted. It is com-
menting on a somewhat paradoxical aspect of motherhood. But how does it induce
us to make this quite abstract interpretation? Seen in isolation an image of a mother
and baby or an image of a child playing with a puppet do not ‘say’ anything, or
even provide new information. But the violation of expectation created by the baby
controlling the mother puppet is not merely interpreted iconically. Its inversion
of expectation is interpreted indexically, pointing to its opposite: mothers control
babies. This, in turn, reciprocally points back to the partial truth of the abstract rela-
tionship of baby controlling mother, and thereby to the paradox that both abstract
relations are true, though the image is absurd. In this example, relationships between
icons, one present another brought to mind by it, initiate an indexical interpreta-
tion of this relationship that ultimately leads the viewer to interpret this as being
about something much more abstract and general. Although this interpretive pro-
cess involves iconic, indexical, and possibly symbolic interpretive phases (the latter

16
T.W. Deacon
to the extent that it comments on the conventional cultural assumptions about moth-
erhood), these are not vested in the sign vehicle and are not mixed or additive. They
are distinct phases of interpretation in which the same complex sign vehicle is given
progressively more differentiated and context embedded interpretations. Failure to
initially interpret the iconisms would make it impossible to interpret any indexical-
ity and failure to interpret the indexical relationships would make it impossible to
ever assign any symbolic meanings to the image.
The import of these simple examples is this: to generate an indexical interpre-
tation of any sign vehicle requires interpreting it iconically and interpreting this
iconicity with respect to other iconic interpretations, and interpreting it symboli-
cally requires interpreting it indexically and interpreting this indexicality in context
with other indexical interpretations. A higher order interpretive process must in this
way be supported by a lower order interpretive process, and so on down to the most
minimal form. Although this analysis only focuses on this representational triad, it
in fact captures an enigmatic aspect of Peirce’s 9-part sign categorization system
(shown in Fig. 2.2).
In this taxonomic scheme there are three levels of sign vehicle relationship three
levels of sign-object relationship and three levels of relationship between a sign and
its immediate interpretive semiotic effect (its interpretant). One of the strictures that
Peirce imposes on the use of this taxonomic triad of triads is that the level of the
sign vehicle must be at least as high as the level of the sign-to-object relationship
and this must be at least as high as the relationship of the sign to its interpretant.
But recognizing that an interpretant is itself, according to Peirce, another sign gen-
eration process (what I have above described as a phase of interpretation) we can
now see that indeed a sign of a higher type depends on being interpreted (and thus
its referential capacity generated) by the generation of lower order signs.
Language competence rests on a quite elaborate system of iconic and indexical
relationships that necessarily come into play in the production and interpretation
Fig. 2.2 Peirce’s 9-part sign taxonomy. Each sign type is deﬁned by the combination of one prop-
erty from each column such that no property from a column to the right is at a higher level that
that to its left. Thus there can be a rhematic indexical sinsign or a dicent symbolic legisign but not
a rhematic symbolic sinsign or a dicent iconic legisign

2
Beyond the Symbolic Species
17
of linguistic communication. What is remarkable about the semiotic infrastructure
supporting the symbolic capacity of language is its incredible size and complexity.
Its indexical character is made evident by the web of pointing relationships exem-
pliﬁed by a thesaurus, with its one-to-many reciprocal mapping relationships, or a
dictionary in which each word or morpheme is mapped to a particular combinatorial
relationship among other words. Indeed, a dictionary suggests that a language is a
bit like an organism in which every molecule is created by combinations of other
molecules interacting. It is this dependence on an underlying semiotic system of
relationships that makes this threshold hard to cross for other species. But not only
does this serve as the foundation for language reference, these underlying semiotic
supports and requirements are unmasked, so to speak, when symbolic relationships
are juxtaposed to form even higher order iconic, indexical, and symbolic complexes.
Thus, like a circuit diagram that can only be seen as iconic of a type of electronic
circuit when its component features are given correct symbolic interpretations, a
sentence or narrative depends on ﬁrst interpreting its symbolic components and
then interpreting the higher order iconic and indexical relationships that their com-
binatorial relationships offer. These hierarchically embedded and emergent semiotic
constraints turn out to be key to understanding the higher order logic of grammar
and syntax.
2.2 The Semiosis of Grammar and Syntax
True symbolic communication and grammar are inextricably intertwined. They are
hierarchically dependent. It is fundamentally impossible to have grammar without
symbolic reference, though grammatical relationships don’t automatically come to
the fore with all forms of symbolic interpretation. Grammar and syntax are, how-
ever, intrinsic symbolic attributes that emerge into relevance as symbols are brought
into various semiotic relationships with one another; e.g. in combinatorial referential
processes. Once we overcome the tendency to treat symbolic reference as mere syn-
chronic arbitrary correlation we can begin to discern the many contributions of the
iconic and indexical supports of symbolic reference that have become incorporated
into the constraints that deﬁne the grammar of language.
Because symbolic reference involves a complex higher-order interpretive devel-
opment in order to emerge from more basic iconic and indexical relationships,
there are implicit constraints that these supportive semiotic relationships impose
on operations involving symbol combinations, such as phrases, sentences, argu-
ments, and narratives. These constraints emerge from below, so to speak, from the
semiotic infrastructure that constitutes symbolic representation rather than need-
ing to be imposed from an extrinsic source of grammatical principles. Although
this infrastructure is largely invisible, hidden in the details of an internalized system
acquired in early experience, using symbol combinations in communicative contexts
unmasks the iconic and indexical constraints that are implicit in this infrastructure.
These semiotic constraints have the most ubiquitous effect on the regularization of

18
T.W. Deacon
language structure, but in addition there are sources of weaker less ubiquitous con-
straints also contributing to cross-linguistic regularities. These include processing
constraints due to neurological limitations, requirements of communication, and
cognitive biases speciﬁc to our primate/ hominid evolutionary heritage. Although
none of these sources of constraint play a direct role in generating speciﬁc linguistic
structures, their persistent inﬂuence over the course of thousands of years of lan-
guage transmission tends to weed out language forms that are less effective at
disambiguating reference, harder to acquire at an early age, demand signiﬁcant cog-
nitive effort and processing time, and are inconsistent with the distinctive ways that
primate brains tend to interpret the world.
The list of sources of constraint on language structure can be broken down
into four main categories as listed below. They each contribute a number of quasi-
universal traits and highly probable language regularities, many of which are listed
for a given category of constraint type. These categories and language consequences
are listed below:
A. Semiotic constraints
1. Recursive structure (only symbols can provide non-destructive [opaque]
recursion across logical types)
2. Predication structure (symbols must be bound to indices in order to refer)
3. Transitivity and embedding constraints (indexicality depends on immediate
correlation and contiguity, and is transitive)
4. Quantiﬁcation (symbolized indices need re-speciﬁcation).
5. Constraints can be discovered pragmatically and ‘guessed’ prior to lan-
guage feedback (because of analogies to non-linguistic iconic and indexical
experiences).
B. Processing constraints
6. Chunking-branching architecture (mnemonic constraint)
7. Algorithmic regularization (procedural automatization)
8. Neural substrates will vary on the basis of processing logic, not linguistic
categories
C. Sensorimotor schemas & phylogenetic bias
9. Standard schema/frame units (via cognitive borrowing)
10. Vocal takeover (an optimal medium for mimicry)
D. Communication constraints
11. Pragmatic constraints (communication roles and discourse functions)
12. Culture-speciﬁc expectations/prohibitions (e.g. distinctive conventions of
indication, ways of marking discourse perspective, prohibitions against
certain kinds of expressions, etc.)

2
Beyond the Symbolic Species
19
2.2.1 Semiotic Constraints
The most important and ubiquitous source of constraints on language organization
arise neither from nature nor from nurture. That is, they are not the result of bio-
logical evolution producing innate predispositions and they are not derived from
the demands of discourse or the accidents of cultural history. Semiotic constraints
are those that most directly reﬂect the grammatical categories, syntactic limitations,
and phrasal organization of language. They are in a real sense a priori constraints,
that precede all others. Consequently they are most often confused with innate
inﬂuences.
In a recent and now well-known theoretical review of the language origins prob-
lem (Hauser, Chomsky, & Fitch, 2002) Noam Chomsky appeared to retreat from a
number of earlier claims about the innate ‘faculty’ for language, but he repeated his
long-term insistence that what makes the human mind unique is an innate capacity to
handle recursive relationships. Like many related claims for an innate grammatical
faculty, this one too derives from a reductionistic conception of symbolic reference.
If we assume, in contrast, that non-human communication is exclusively mediated
by iconic and indexical forms of reference and that only human communication is
symbolic it becomes clear why recursively structured communication is only present
in humans.
Symbolization enables substitutions that cross-logical-type (e.g. part for whole,
member for class, word for phrase) levels in linguistic communications. Neither
icons nor indices can refer across logical types because of the involvement of sign
vehicle properties (e.g. similarity of form, correlation in space or time) in determin-
ing reference. But because of the independence of sign vehicle properties from the
objects of reference, symbols can represent other symbolic relationships including
even combinations of symbols forming higher logical type units (such as phrases,
whole sentences, and even narratives). This is exempliﬁed by pronominal reference
and also includes recursively operating on iconic and indexical relationships.
In summary, recursion is not an operation that must be added to human cognition
over and above symbolic capabilities, it is a combinatorial possibility that comes for
free, so to speak, as soon as symbolic reference is available. But it is not possible
when restricted to only iconic and indexical forms. So the absence of recursion in
animal communication is no more of a mystery than its presence in human commu-
nication. The reason that it is not found in the communication of other species is
simply due to their lack of symbolic abilities.
Though recursion is made available with symbolic communication, it need not be
taken advantage of, and so its paucity in child language and pidgins and it absence in
some languages (e.g. Everett, 2005) is not evidence that it is an unimportant feature
of language. But it is an important means for optimizing communication. Recursion
provides means for condensing symbol strings. By repeated recursive operations it
becomes possible to refer to an extensive corpus of prior discourse. This not only
optimizes communicative effort, it also reduces working memory load because a
large corpus of material can be subsumed into the reference of single symbolic unit

20
T.W. Deacon
(such as a pronoun). However, recursion also creates new ‘housekeeping’ require-
ments that demand specialized forms of symbolized iconic and indexical operations
(see below).
All languages require at least a dyadic sentential structure, i.e. something like a
subject-predicate sentential form or a topic-comment structure. Although holophras-
tic utterances, commands, and expletives, are not uncommon, they typically are
embedded in a pragmatic context in which what they refer to is made salient by
non-linguistic means. Previous suggestions that this fundamental structure reﬂects
an action-object, agent-patient, or what-where dichotomy have been easily refuted
by demonstrating the ease with which these cognitive categories can be interchanged
in their grammatical roles. In any case, this most general feature of language struc-
ture requires an additional explanation if language reference is treated as simple
arbitrary correspondence.
Since Frege, it has been explicitly recognized that isolated terms express a sense
but lack speciﬁc reference unless embedded in a combinatorial construction roughly
corresponding to a proposition. The assignment of a speciﬁc reference to an expres-
sion or formula and thus to make an assertion about something is called predication.
In logic a well-formed (i.e. referring) expression requires both a symbolic function
and an argument (i.e. that to which the function is applied). In addition a complete
‘predication’ requires ‘quantifying’ the argument (unless it is a proper name). This
latter requirement and exception is telling. In English, quantiﬁers include such terms
as “a,” “the,” “some,” “this”, “these,” and “all.” Since a proper name refers to an
individual thing or person, reference in this case is unambiguous as it is in such mass
terms as “water” or abstract properties such as “truth” when speaking generally.
Why is this basic structure necessary and what are the linguistic consequences?
Again, I believe that the answer is to be found in the complex structure of symbolic
interpretation.
Consider propositional form and argument structure in logic. First order pred-
icate logic is often considered the semantic skeleton for propositional structure in
language, though its primary form is seldom explicitly exhibited in natural language.
It is characterized by a “predicate(argument)” structure of the form F(x), where F
is a function and x is a variable or “argument” operated on by that function. Such
an expression is the basic atomic unit of predicate logic. Such an expression may
refer to an event, state, or relationship, and there can be one-, two-, three- and no-
place predicates determined by how many arguments they take. So for example the
function “is green” typically is a one-place predicate, “is next to” is a two place
predicate, and “gives” is a three-place predicate.
This suggests the following hypothesis: Predicate (argument) structure expresses
the dependency of symbolic reference on indexical reference as in Symbol (index).
Once source of evidence for this semiotic dependency is implicit in the way
that deictic procedures (e.g. pointing and other indicative gestures) are used to help
ﬁx the reference of an ambiguous term or description, and can even be substituted
for the subjects and arguments of a sentence. Thus for example, uttering the word
“smooth” in a random context only brings attention to an abstract property, but when

2
Beyond the Symbolic Species
21
uttered while running one’s hand along a table top or pointing to the waveless sur-
face of a lake, reference is thereby established. It can also refer even if uttered
in isolation of any overt index in a social context where the speaker and listener
have their joint attention focused on the same ﬂawless action. In this case, as with
holophrastic utterances in general, the symbolic reference is established by implicit
indication presupposed in the pragmatics of the communicative interaction. Indeed,
where explicit indexing is not provided, it is assumed that the most salient agreeing
aspect to the immediate context is to be indicated. In general, then, any symbolic
expression must be immediately linked to an indexical operation in order to refer.
Without such a link there is sense but no reference.
This is a universal semiotic constraint (though not a universal rule) that is made
explicit in logic and is implicit in the necessary diadic structure of sentences and
propositions. It is a constraint that must be obeyed in order to achieve the establish-
ment of joint reference, which is critical to communication. Where this immediate
link is missing reference is ambiguous and where this constraint is violated (e.g.
by combinations that scramble this contiguity between symbolic and indexical
operations; so-called word-salad) reference typically fails.
This constraint derives from the unmasking of indexical constraints implicit in
the interpretation of symbolic reference. Because symbolic reference is indirect and
“virtual,” by itself it can determine only ungrounded referential possibility. The
subject, topic, or argument (= variable) performs a locative function by symbol-
izing an indexical relationship; a pointing to something else linked to it in some
actual physical capacity (e.g. contiguous pragmatic or textual context). This refer-
ence determination cannot be left only in symbolic form because isolated symbols
(e.g. words and morphemes) only refer reciprocally to their “position” in the system
or network of other symbols.
The importance of immediate contiguity in this relationship reﬂects the princi-
pal deﬁning constraint determining indexical reference. Indexical reference must be
mediated by physical correlation, contiguity, containment, causality etc., with its
object in some way. Indexicality fails without this immediacy. There are, of course,
many ways that this immediacy can be achieved, but without it nothing is indicated.
These constraints on indexicality are inherited by the grammatical categories and
syntactic organization of sentences, propositions, and logical formulae.
To state this hypothesis in semiotic terms: A symbol must be contiguous with the
index that grounds its reference (either to the world or to the immediate agreeing
textual context, which is otherwise grounded), or else its reference fails. Contiguity
thus has a doubly indexical role to play. Its contiguity (textually or pragmatically)
with the symbolizing sign vehicle points to this symbol and their contiguity in turn
point to something else. This is an expression of one further feature of indexicality:
transitivity of reference.
Simply stated, a pointer pointing to another pointer pointing to some object effec-
tively enables the ﬁrst pointer to also point to that object. This property is commonly
exploited outside of language. Thus the uneven wear on automobile tires indicates
that the tires have not been oriented at a precise right angle to the pavement, which
may indicate that they are misaligned, which may in turn indicate that the owner

22
T.W. Deacon
is not particularly attentive to the condition of the vehicle. Similarly the indexical
grounding of content words in a sentence can also be indirect, but only so long as
no new symbolically functioning word is introduced to break this linear contiguity.
Of course, every word or morpheme in a sentence functions symbolically and a
word or phrase may take on a higher order symbolic or indexical role in its com-
binatorial relationships to other language units at the same level. This ﬂexibility
provides a diversity of symbolized indexical relations. So, for example, arguments
can be replaced by pronouns, and pronouns can point to other predicates and argu-
ments, or (via quantiﬁcation) they can point outside the discourse, or if a language
employs gender marking of nouns a gender-speciﬁed pronoun can refer to the next
most contiguous noun with agreeing gender expressed in the prior interaction, even
if separated by many non-agreeing nouns and noun phrases. A sentence that lacks
inferrable indexical grounding of even one component symbolic element will be
judged ungrammatical for this reason. However, the basis for this judgment by non-
linguists is not determined with respect to either explicit rules or constraints. It is
determined by the fact that the sentence doesn’t have an unambiguous reference.
As mentioned above, both natural language and symbolic logic are constrained
by the need to quantify nouns and arguments, respectively. This also exempliﬁes
the need to ground symbolic reference via indices. Quantiﬁers are speciﬁers of vir-
tual indexing. Words like “a” “the” “some” “many” “most” “all” etc., symbolize the
virtual result of various forms of iterated indications or virtual ostentions (point-
ings). All quantiﬁers can be thought of as means for specifying the numerosity of
potentially redundant forms of indexicality. They are effectively virtual pointings
that take advantage of transitive correlation with other indexical relationships, such
as proximity information (“this” “that”) or possession information (“his” “your”)
to differentiate indexicality. One can even imagine a collection that is identiﬁed by
a symbolized property, being pointed to en masse by a contiguous index, and then
carrying out the quantiﬁcational operation by literally pointing to some, or few, or
all members of this collection.
Analogous to the case of implicit presupposed indexicality in holophrastic utter-
ances, there are also contextual conditions where explicit quantiﬁcation in language
may be unnecessary. This is most obvious in cases where the possibility of specify-
ing individuals is inappropriate (as in some mass nouns; e.g. “a water,” “all waters,”
“few waters”). Pronominal reference doesn’t require quantiﬁcation because it is sup-
plied by the text that it indicates (transitivity of indication). But when general terms
are substituted for pronouns or other words serving overt indexical functions (e.g.
“this” or “that”) they inevitably require the addition of quantiﬁcation. There are
also, of course, many other exceptions to the need for quantiﬁcation. Proper names
and numbers do not require quantiﬁcation when they are used to refer to a type as a
singular class because indicating would again be redundant.
The exception that proves the rule, so-to-speak, is exempliﬁed by highly inﬂected
and/or agglutinated languages where indexical marking is incorporated directly
into word morphology. In comparison with English, which maintains the indexical
grounding of most of its symbolic functions by strict word order constraints, these
languages tend to have relatively free word order. This leads to a prediction: the

2
Beyond the Symbolic Species
23
more completely that indexical functions are incorporated into word morphology
the less restrictive the syntax and vice versa.
So approaching this issue semiotically provides a functional account that can
unify a wide range of grammatical and syntactic relationships. It also suggests that
our naïve intuition about these linguistic regularities may be more accurate than
the formal rule-governed approach would suggest. A naïve speaker seldom com-
ments that an ungrammatical sentence breaks a rule, and is generally hard-pressed
to articulate such a rule. Rather the usual comment is that it just sounds wrong or
that it doesn’t make sense said that way. Compare these examples of breaking the
contiguity of symbol and index to knowledge of the rules invoked to explain them:
Implicit subject:
∗“ _ Roundly shining over ﬂowing shimmering.”
“_ Fire!”
“_ Hot!”
Island constraints:
“John found candy and gum in his shoe.”
∗“What did John ﬁnd candy and _ in his shoe?”
Priority in argument structure:
∗“John found surprisingly in his shoe some candy.”
In these cases, and many others, naïve speakers know there is something wrong
even if they can’t articulate it, except to say that the ungrammatical sentences are
awkward or difﬁcult to interpret, and require some guesswork to make sense of
them. Moreover, in everyday conversational speech, the so-called rules of grammar
and syntax are only very loosely adhered to. This is usually because common inter-
ests and joint attention as well as culturally regularized interaction frames provide
much of the indexical grounding, and so adherence to these strictures tends to be
preferentially ignored. Not surprisingly, it was with the widespread increase in lit-
eracy that scholarly attention began to be focused on grammar and syntax, and with
education in reading and writing these “rules” began to get formalized. With the
written word shared immediate context, common pragmatic interests, and implicit
presuppositions are minimally if at all available to provide indexical disambiguation
and so language-internal maintenance of these constraints becomes more critical.
Finally, this semiotic functional analysis also provides an alternative understand-
ing of the so-called poverty of the stimulus problem that is often invoked to argue
that knowledge of grammar must be largely innate. Consistent with the fact that
naïve speakers are generally unable to articulate the “rules” that describe their under-
standing of what is and is not a well-formed sentence, young children learning their
ﬁrst language are seldom corrected for grammatical errors (in contrast to regular
correction of pronunciation). Moreover, children do not explore random combinato-
rial options in their speech testing to ﬁnd the ones that are approved by others. They
make remarkably prescient guesses. It has been assumed, therefore, that they must
have some implicit understanding of these rules already available.

24
T.W. Deacon
But in fact children do have an extensive and ubiquitous source of information
for learning to produce and interpret these basic semiotic constraints on predication.
First of all, discerning indexicality is a capacity that is basic to all cognition, animal
and human. It requires no special training to become adept at the use of correlation,
contiguity, etc., to make predictions and thus to understand indexical relationships.
Second, although there is little if any correction of the grammar and syntax in chil-
dren’s early speech there is extensive pragmatic information about success or failure
to refer or to interpret reference. This is in the form of pragmatic feedback con-
cerning the communication of ambiguous reference. And this source of information
attends almost every use of words. So I would argue that children do not “know”
grammar innately, nor do they learn rules of grammar, and yet they nevertheless
quickly “discover” the semiotic constraints from which grammars derive.
Although it is necessary to learn how a given language implements these con-
straints, the process is not inductive. It is not necessary for a child to derive
general rules from many instances. Young children make good guesses about sen-
tence structure—as though they already know “rules” of grammar—by tapping into
more natural analogies to the nonlinguistic constraints and biases of iconicity and
indexicality, and by getting pragmatic feedback about confused or ambiguous ref-
erence. Evolved predispositions to point or indicate desired objects or engage joint
attention also make sense in this context. This universal human indexical predis-
position provides the ideal scaffold to support what must be negotiated and must
be progressively internalized to language structure. The early experience of com-
municating with the aid of pointing also provides additional background training in
understanding the necessary relationship between symbols and indices.
Semiotic
constraints
should
be
agent-independent,
species-independent,
language-independent, and discourse-independent. They have been mistakenly
assumed to be either innate structures or else derived from cognitive schemas
or determined by sensorimotor biases and/or social communicative pragmatics.
Though they are prior to language experience, and some are prerequisites to
successful symbolic communication, they are neither innate nor socially derived.
They are emergent from constraints that are implicit in the semiotic infrastructure
of symbolic reference and interpretive processes. They are in this way analogous to
mathematical universals (e.g. prime numbers) that are “discovered’ (not invented)
as mathematical representation systems become more powerful. Though each
form of symbol manipulation in mathematics has been an invention and thus a
convention of culture, we are not free to choose just any form if we want to maintain
consistency of quantitative representation.
Assuming that symbolic reference lacks intrinsic structure has tricked linguists
into assuming the need to postulate ad hoc rule systems and algorithms to explain the
structural constraints of language. Failure to pay attention to the iconic and indexical
underpinnings of symbolic reference has additionally exaggerated the complexity of
the language acquisition problem. This myopic avoidance of semiotic analysis has
led to the doctrine of an innate language faculty that includes some modicum of
language-speciﬁc knowledge and this seeming logical necessity has supported an
almost religious adherence to this assumption despite the biological implausibility

2
Beyond the Symbolic Species
25
of its evolution and the lack of neurological support for any corresponding brain
structures or functions. Unfortunately semiotic theory has not been of much assis-
tance, primarily because it has remained a predominantly structural theory tied to
a static taxonomic understanding of semiotic relationships. But when semiosis is
understood as a process of interpretive differentiation in which different modes
of reference are understood as dynamically and hierarchically constituent of one
another these many conundrums dissolve and these once apparently independent
aspects of the language mystery turn out to have a common foundation.
These constraints are the most ubiquitous inﬂuences on language structure, and
indeed they are even more universal than advocates of mentalese could have imag-
ined, because they are not human speciﬁc. They are universal in the sense that
the constraints of mathematics are universal. They would even be relevant to the
evolution of symbolic communication elsewhere in the universe. But they are not
exceptionless rules. Different languages, everyday spoken interactions, and artistic
forms of expression can diverge from these constraints to varying extents, but at the
cost of ambiguity and confusion of reference. In general, these constraints will prob-
ably be the most consistent regularities across the world’s languages because means
to minimize this divergence will be favored by the social evolution-like processes of
language transmission from generation to generation.
However, the universality and non-innateness of these constraints does not mean
that there aren’t human-speciﬁc constraints that contribute to many of the nearly
universal regularities that characterize the World’s languages. These are the result
of constraints of a different sort; some deriving from our biology and some from
social processes. None determine language organization in a generative sense, but
rather along with semiotic constraints they collectively constrain and bias the range
of possible language variations.
2.2.2 Processing Constraints
Probably the most critical factor contributing to the structure of natural languages
in addition to semiotic constraints is the need to communicate symbolically in
real time. Brains are not computers. They are slow and limited in mnemonic and
attentional capacity, and symbolic communication is extremely demanding in both
of these domains of brain function. Basically, the ability to use language in real
time demands the equivalent of computational optimization. The key to Noam
Chomsky’s original insight into the structure of language can probably be char-
acterized as recognizing that natural language syntax can be modeled as a Turing
machine. In abstract form a Turing machine can be understood as a set of rules
for writing erasing and rewriting strings of characters, in which these rules are also
encoded as character strings that can be treated the same way. Rendering an oper-
ation in these terms makes it possible to automate any ﬁnite determinate process
(from robotic behavior to mathematical calculations), which is why it contributed
to the design of modern computers. Because of the power of this methodology, this
insight was not only valuable for developing a formalism for modeling syntax, it
also became a driving force for the development of the cognitive sciences.

26
T.W. Deacon
So in one sense it isn’t surprising that natural language structure can be modeled
by this formalism, however, by using this approach the remarkable systematicity of
languages could also be clearly exempliﬁed. Language structure could have been
far more haphazard than it is, but what formal approaches have demonstrated is that
languages are remarkably internally consistent despite their ﬂexibility. Instead, the
syntax of a highly grammaticalized natural language resembles a formal system or
Turing machine architecture where all operations are systematically inter-deﬁned
and precisely complementary to one another, and where many operations are almost
entirely structure-dependent and content-independent.
This requires an additional explanation, since language structures have evolved
spontaneously without any attention to their design logic or optimality. As noted
above, this regularization is almost certainly the result of a kind of cultural version
of natural selection involving language “traits,” in which the selection pressures that
determine which forms get passed on and which forms go extinct are the various
constraints of referential effectiveness and ease of use. Ease of use is determined by
what can be described as processing constraints. So what are these constraints?
Because human brains have distinct limitations due to the nature of neural signal
processing as well as distinctive cognitive biases that have been inherited from our
primate ancestry, the way they must solve the challenge of online real-time symbolic
communication has both biological and computational idiosyncracies.
Probably the most ubiquitous processing constraints have to do with the amount
of attentional and mnemonic work that must be done to produce and interpret
linguistic communications. Linguistic tricks that enable the various symbolic oper-
ations to be most efﬁciently and thoroughly automated will for this reason be highly
favored over the history of a language’s persistence. Indeed, the demands of making
language functions nearly effortless may even be favored at the expense of easy
interpretability. Thus there will likely be linguistic selection over time for what
might be described as optimal computational design. This is essentially what skill
learning is all about. And in many respects skills are predominantly associated with
motor functions.
Automatization of behavior is acquired by extensive repetition. As a behavior
is repeated again and again in slightly different contexts those features that are
least variable from performance to performance become more streamlined. In this
sense the behavior becomes increasingly algorithmic. The key to automatization is
simpliﬁcation and speciﬁcally a reduction of options.
The challenge to automatization of language is that symbolic relationships are
dependent upon determining relative “position” in a vast web of associations. Taking
the time to sample this vast search space with each new combinatorial relationship
to interpret would result in an impossibly slow rate of communication, likely strain-
ing short-term working memory. This is the source of what might be described as
costs of symbolic search. Because symbols are nodes in complex systems of multi-
dimensional semantic relationships, selecting and interpreting symbol combinations
may involve a very high dimensionality search for appropriate “blend” relationships
between them. The semantic search space grows exponentially with the number
of elements combined, the dimensions to be considered, and the ambiguity of the

2
Beyond the Symbolic Species
27
selection criteria. Contextual-pragmatic constraints (including extralinguistic indi-
cation of salient symbolic relations, and assessment of recipient knowledge/sender
intention) may help to disambiguate the selection criteria and to reduce the search
dimensions, but this cannot keep pace with the combinatorial explosion of the search
space.
Partial automatization of language performance must therefore be achieved by
strictly limiting the amount of symbolic search of memory that is required. So
despite the power and ﬂexibility of symbolic representation, the processes of selec-
tion at work during language transmission will tend to evolve means to reduce
the density of symbolic operations per second in speech. Since the mnemonic and
attentional demands of such a combinatorial search will depend on the numbers of
dimensions of properties being represented, one way this can be reduced is simpliﬁ-
cation of certain common symbolic operations. Thus, improved automatization can
be achieved by spontaneous linguistic evolution for what might be described as de-
symbolization; a spontaneous degeneration of the semantic dimensions of selected
symbolic elements to the point that their reference is reduced to virtual indexicality
(i.e. pointing to a single simple symbolic relation). This aids the efﬁcient formation,
identiﬁcation, and parsing of sentential subassemblies with very shallow symbolic
search.
This trade-off between processing constraints and symbolic combinatorial anal-
ysis is the source of a curious paradox: often languages tend to change (evolve)
away from communicative transparency. The historical process of grammaticaliza-
tion often reduces semantic and functional transparency rather than increasing it.
Lexical speciﬁcity is often degraded (sometimes described as “bleaching”). Highly
grammaticalized language can include phrase fragmentation, multileveled embed-
ding, and non-contiguous syntactic relationships. This structural complexity often
results in reduced learnability by undermining interpretive iconicity, such as direct
mapping of the temporal order of events and relations to word order.
If linguistic selection favored only clarity of communication this would not
make sense. And this is one reason that some (including Noam Chomsky) have
argued that natural language grammar did not evolve for communication but rather
only for cognition. But this ignores the importance of reducing processing load.
Structural relationships are effectively indexical operations and as such they can
become automatized by virtue of having highly regularized unambiguously singular
functions. To the extent that these operations play an indexical role in disambiguat-
ing which semantic dimensions are relevant in a given symbolic combination they
also reduce the cost of symbolic analysis.
Increased automatization appears to lead to a minimal set of mutually exclusive,
fully reﬂexive, indexical operations, whether embodied in morphology or syntax.
Not surprisingly, the lexicon of most languages tends to be segregated into content
words and function words, as well as primary morphemes and afﬁxes, with different
balances between these. Where this is mostly achieved by distinct word classes and
syntactic relations the content words, like nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs,
comprise an open set that can be indeﬁnitely added to, as need requires. They
play the symbolic roles within a sentence. The function words, such as pronouns,

28
T.W. Deacon
determiners, prepositions, conjunctions, and the functional afﬁxes like “-s” and “–
ed” comprise a ﬁnite closed set and serve more-or-less inter-symbolic indexical
functions, determining which semantic dimensions are relevant to consider when
blending or differentiating symbolic relations.
In general we can distinguish between requirements for automatization and
the various linguistic tricks to aid in meeting these requirements. Automatization
requires a small, closed class of operators that are used in a stereotypic way, repeat-
edly (i.e. hundreds of thousands or millions of times each year). This invariant
repetition is essential for developing a nearly unconsciously implemented skill.
Moreover, any optional functions need to be reduced to no more than two or three.
This may be aided by processes such as semantic bleaching, by agglutination or
strict syntactic adjacency, by standardization of common thematic frames, by index-
icalizing highly redundant and phylogenetically salient types (e.g. plurality, tense,
possession, animacy, status, etc.), and so forth.
In semiotic terms, then, the index-symbol relationship also corresponds to a fun-
damental distinction between those aspects of language that can be automated and
those that cannot, respectively. This has clear neurological implications.
In neuropsychological terms, automatization is characteristic of what is often
called procedural memory. Procedural memories are mostly associated with highly
regular activities or skills in which a sequence of component actions and assess-
ments is made highly predictable and easily cued. These are effectively behavioral
algorithms that have been acquired by constant repetition, to the point that they can
be executed with a minimum of conscious monitoring.
Importantly, once a skilled behavior is well-ingrained it can be executed at a
rate that is many times more rapid than if each component operation required mon-
itoring. The result is that automated procedures tend to be automatically initiated
by stereotypic cues, once initiated “run” autonomously to completion, are modu-
lar in the sense that dissecting them back into component actions is difﬁcult if not
impossible, and their structures tend to become inaccessible to introspection. These
same characteristics have often been cited as evidence that grammatical functions
must be innate, modular, and speciﬁc to language. Creating and executing procedu-
ral memory functions involves a distinct set of brain systems, typically associated
with motor control: including particularly frontal cortex, striatal structures, and the
cerebellum. A reciprocal connectivity and functional relationship between cerebral
cortex and striatal structures is critical to both creation and implementation of such
skilled autonomous operations.
In contrast to the procedural memory system that creates memories by constant
repetition, the brain establishes memory traces of singular events or experiences
using a very different set of interconnected systems. Remembering what you did
immediately after breakfast two days ago, the structure of a narrative, or the mean-
ing of a new technical term, cannot rely on extensive repetition to become ingrained.
Recalling such one-off events or experiences or novel associations must there-
fore depend on a very different strategy for consolidation and recall. Instead of
redundancy of performance or rehearsal consolidation of these memories must
rely on redundancy of associations, i.e. linkage with many other related memories

2
Beyond the Symbolic Species
29
by innumerable commonalities and correlations. This is sometimes referred to as
episodic or associative memory and is critically dependent on relationships between
the cerebral cortex and the hippocampus. The associative memory system is thus
ideally suited as a substrate for the storage of open-ended associative information
and the procedural memory system is ideally suited as a substrate for the storage
of a ﬁnite corpus of modular automated procedures. An interesting correlate of this
segregation of automatized versus associative features of language processing is that
brain damage that predominantly involves striatum and spares cerebral cortex has
been found to preferentially impair the ﬁrst language but not the second in some
bilingual patients (Fabbro & Paradis, 1995). This is probably because the second
language was not nearly so well automatized.
This functional segregation explains why indexical syntactic functions are per-
formed with minimal effort, are largely unavailable to introspection, and have
more-or-less modular organization, and why the analysis of more complex com-
binatorial symbolic relationships takes more mental effort and is generally the focus
of attention. But it also suggests a way that language may provide a fundamental
restructuring of cognition compared to other species. Not only are syntactic opera-
tions subject to automatization, but word-sound memory more generally is acquired
in childhood by untold millions of repeated exposures and productions. So, like
the relatively automatic processing of syntax, the production and recognition of
words is also acquired like a deeply ingrained skill. Very little attention is paid
to analyze and minimal effort is required to produce the familiar words of one’s
language. But although they may thus be generated from procedural memory, they
cue associative loci in associative (episodic) memory. In this way language enables
procedural memory traces to cue associative memory traces reciprocally, linking
mnemonic strategies that in other animals are probably only minimally interde-
pendent, and primarily with respect to external cuing. In contrast, in humans this
acquired functional interdependence of memory systems provides an unprecedented
internal reciprocal cuing mechanism for organizing experience. This ability to use a
repertoire of acquired procedures to reliably access and organize life-episodes and
abstract ideas is likely a major factor contributing to the human preoccupation with
narrative.
One beneﬁt of developing a functional account of the nature and origins of these
language structures is that it leads to explicit predictions about how the brain pro-
cesses language. One of the disappointments of the last four to ﬁve decades of
formal linguistic theory is that while it provided unprecedented precision in describ-
ing language structures it has not been particularly useful in providing predictions
about how language is processed in the brain. Instead, predictions about human-
unique brain systems, dedicated language structures, modular isolation of language
capacities from other cognitive functions, and the primacy of linguistic function over
surface implementation of these functions, have not borne fruit. In contrast, reﬂect-
ing on these semiotic and processing constraints a number of predictions spring
immediately to mind.

30
T.W. Deacon
• Hypothesis 1. In general, the way that language functions are neurologically
distributed and localized does not respect “linguistic logic,” but rather the pro-
cessing logic determined by what constitutes a functional unit and how this can
be manipulated.
• Hypothesis 2. The neural distribution of different classes of linguistic oper-
ations develops during language acquisition as different operations become
automatized.
• Hypothesis 3. The linguistic evolution of more thoroughly grammaticalized
forms aids the efﬁcient distribution of language processing in the brain.
• Hypothesis 4. Pidgins are less able to be automated because they lack semi-
otic systematicity. Their functions will be more widely distributed in the brain,
processing will be slower, and functions will be more transparently iconic or
indexical in surface production.
This has implications for brain-language co-evolution. Whereas semiotic con-
straints do not evolve and have been ubiquitously present throughout hominid
evolution, processing constraints have likely been subject to constant change and
variations. Brains have been modiﬁed in evolution in response to both. But we need
to keep them separate in our analysis, and indeed they are functionally and tempo-
rally (in evolutionary terms) asymmetrically related. Adaptations that aid processing
of symbolic interpretive competence and linguistic communication are secondary
to the presence of symbolic communication. The initial evolution of the symbolic
capacity created the context in which both the socially evolved grammatical and bio-
logically evolved neurological adaptations took place, though once this process was
initiated adaptation to all of these constraints co-evolved as a complex to produce
the modern symbolic species.
Finally, before turning to the issue of human evolution itself, we need to con-
sider the last two sources of constraints affecting language structure: phylogenetic
sensorimotor biases and the demands of communicative interaction. I will only very
superﬁcially outline these inﬂuences because they are somewhat more optional and
contingent than semiotic and processing constraints, and therefore have less of a
universal character and more of a context-dependent role to play in determining
similarities shared by most languages.
An inﬂuential alternative approach to formal theories of grammar and syntax
that takes a more functional perspective often travels under the name of cognitive
grammar. Although this term is often used for a restricted programmatic approach
to explaining grammar, I will here use it quite generically to describe all theories
that explain grammatical operations as reﬂecting the structure of sensory, motor,
behavioral, and social operations in their form, and thus arguing that grammatical
and syntactic relationships have been motivated by these systems. This approach is
also often used to explain for example the prevalence of visual metaphors and path-
progress analogies built into vocabulary and syntax. It has even motivated a theory
of the origins of subject and predicate functions of sentences based on the so-called
“what” and “where” visual pathways in the brain. The basic idea is that the logic
that organizes language structure is derived and abstracted from evolved embodied

2
Beyond the Symbolic Species
31
cognitive schemas. I think that it is without question that many aspects of lan-
guage structure, lexical organization, and descriptive schemas have been shaped by
these distinctively human cognitive biases, and also that there may even be culture-
speciﬁc biases of an analogous sort that have served as linguistic selection biases
causing parallel and convergent linguistic evolution in diverse historical contexts.
While more contingent on human species-peculiarities than semiotic and process-
ing constraints, these biases have inevitably also contributed to certain of the near
universal regularities of human languages.
One nearly universal characteristic of language is its oral-vocal medium. The
demonstration that the manual languages which evolved in deaf communities are
indeed full-blown natural languages exhibiting features common to most spoken
languages has undermined the universality of this feature of language. Nevertheless
it is taken as an uncontroversial fact that language evolved as a vocal process, though
it may have initially originated in a more gestural form.
One very telling piece of evidence supporting this scenario is the highly atypical
human facility for skilled vocal behavior that is almost entirely absent in other land
mammals and only modestly developed in cetaceans and certain bird groups. In The
Symbolic Species (Deacon, 1997) I argue that this ability depends upon some quite
unprecedented neurological relationships and that such a radical functional change
must have been driven by signiﬁcant selection advantages. But why this unlikely
medium? I think that the answer is that it afforded an optimal medium for mimicry,
and for a means of communication whose entire repertoire of sign vehicles must be
acquired socially ease of mimicry is critical. It turns out that, despite what gets said
in folk zoology, consciously learned mimicry is quite uncommon among animals.
What monkeys see they seldom do. There is one general exception to this paucity
of learned mimicry: singing in some songbird species, sound mimicry in parrots,
mynahs, and mockingbirds, and song transmission in humpback whales, and there
are probably other examples as well. Why this exception for oral-vocal communi-
cation? I think that the answer is that sounds heard can be behaviorly approximated
without any need for any mental transformation. In contrast, gestural behaviors that
are observed require a mental inversion before being reproduced. One needs to, in
effect, imagine being the other producing this behavior. This shift of perspective is
apparently not a trivial cognitive transformation.
Because of certain highly conserved phylogenetic limitations of nervous sys-
tem organization, it seems reasonable to expect that our non-symbolic ancestors
had as little control over vocal articulation, as is the case for other primates, and
so the early stages of symbolic communication may indeed have involved more of
a gestural embodiment. But once symbolic communication became a critical part
of human social organization there would almost certainly have been a signiﬁcant
advantage to being able to shift manually signed symbolic communication to the
oral-vocal domain. For this reason, I see this particular universal trait to be a rela-
tively late emerging biological adaptation for symbolic communication, but one that
set the stage for many processing adaptations, because of the immense advantages
it created for rapidly expanding the sign vehicle repertoire and its combinatorial
possibilities.

32
T.W. Deacon
Finally, there are what I would describe as signiﬁcant communication constraints
that have also contributed to the convergences of language features worldwide.
These are often not formally considered to be linguistic issues but rather associ-
ated with socio-linguistic and anthropological domains. Nevertheless they do play
constraining roles that have shaped languages and provided a source of evolved
parallelisms. Most signiﬁcant of these are what I would lump into the category of
pragmatic constraints. Language is used to convey information, to affect others’
behaviors, to establish and restructure social relationships, to acquire information,
and so forth. These functions and many more are universal simply by virtue of the
fact of serving ubiquitous human social needs, and so the way they shape the various
modes of organizing and interpreting symbolic communications will also exhibit
shared attributes. And in addition there will be culture-speciﬁc expectations and pro-
hibitions about how communication is to be used and information is to be shared. In
these socio-cultural domains these pragmatic needs and customs are probably more
variable and less tightly constraining than any of the other factors discussed, but
the universe of these possibilities is probably quite limited and so we should expect
these pragmatic constraints to contribute some further degree of constraint as well.
In summary, we should expect that many aspects of language come to exhibit
near universal properties even despite its superﬁcial arbitrarity of referential corre-
lation, but not because of any innate set of rules or algorithms that generate these
features. Language universals are a reﬂection of the many constraints that derive
from the semiotic infrastructure of symbolizing and the processing demands this
entails. The semiotic universals should be reﬂected in the symbolic communication
of any species, should it evolve this competence, whether on Earth or elsewhere in
the universe. However, the processing constraints that have inﬂuenced the structure
of human language are less universal. So, for example, were we ever to ﬁnd a way
to engineer symboling minds in silicon, using electronic instead of chemical and
ionic means of signal processing, we should expect some very different structures
to emerge.
2.3 The Evolutionary Conundrum Posed by Language
In my work I use the phrase, symbolic species, quite literally, to argue that sym-
bols have literally changed the kind of biological organism we are. I believe that we
think and behave in many ways that are quite odd compared to other species because
of the way that language has changed us. In many respects symbolic language has
become a major part of the environment to which we have had to adapt in order to
ﬂourish. In the same way that our ancestors’ bodies evolved in the context of the
demands posed by bipedal foraging with stone tools and incorporating meat into the
diet, their brains evolved in the context of a rich fabric of symbolic cultural com-
munication. As it became increasingly important to be able to enter into the social
web of protolinguistic and other early forms of symbolic social communication in
order to survive and reproduce, the demands imposed by this artiﬁcial niche would
have selectively favored mental capacities that guaranteed successful access to this

2
Beyond the Symbolic Species
33
essential resource. So rather than merely intelligent or wise (sapient) creatures, we
are creatures whose social and mental capacities have been quite literally shaped by
the special demands of communicating with symbols. And this doesn’t just mean
that we are adapted for language use, but also for all the many ancillary mental
biases that support reliable access and use of this social resource.
But this claim depends on language-like communication being a long-time fea-
ture of hominid evolution. Theories suggesting that human language is a very recent
and suddenly evolved phenomenon would not make this prediction. To them lan-
guage is almost epiphenomenal. This is particularly true if the claim is that language
appeared suddenly due to some marvelous accidental mutation that transformed
dumb (but large brained) brutes into articulate speakers. This sort of scenario has
become commonplace in recent years, though the evidence supporting it is mostly
very indirect (e.g. archeological evidence of representational forms and objects for
adornment, appearing in the Upper Paleolithic). I think that it is mostly a reﬂection
of a caricatured view of the human/animal distinction and a sort of hero metaphor
imposed upon the fossil evidence. The way that modern human brains accommodate
language can be used as a clue to how old language is.
If language is a comparatively recent feature of human social interaction, that is
if it is only, say, a hundred thousand years old or so, then we should expect that it
had little effect on human brains. Any structural tweaks of brain architecture that
evolved to support it would have had to be either minimal or else major but depen-
dent on comparatively few genetic changes. A recent origin of language would give
it little opportunity to impose selection pressure on human brains, so language func-
tion would not be supported by any widespread and well-integrated neurological
changes. This would predict that language abilities are essentially an evolutionary
after-thought, inserted unsystematically into an otherwise typical (if enlarged) ape
brain. With little time for the genetic ﬁxation of many supportive traits to occur,
this adaptation would likely depend on only a few key genetic and neurological
changes. As a consequence, language function should be poorly integrated with
other cognitive functions, relatively fragile if faced with impoverished learning con-
texts, susceptible to catastrophic breakdown as a result of certain small but critical
genetic defects, and severely affected by congenital mental impairment.
None of these seems to be the case.
On the other hand, if language has been around for a good deal of our evolution-
ary past, say a million years or so, that amount of time would have been adequate
for the demands of language to have affected brain evolution more broadly. A large
network of subtle gene changes and neurological adjustments would be involved,
and as a result it should be a remarkably well-integrated and robust neurological
function. Indeed, there is ample evidence to suggest that language is well-integrated
into almost every aspect of our cognitive and social lives, that it utilizes a signiﬁcant
fraction of the forebrain, and is acquired robustly under even quite difﬁcult social
circumstances and neurological impairments. It is far from fragile.
The co-evolutionary interaction goes both ways. Languages also have to adapt to
brains. Since the language one learns has to be passed from generation to generation,
the more learnable its structures, and ﬁtted to human limitations, the more effective

34
T.W. Deacon
its reproduction in each generation. Languages and brains will evolve in tandem,
converging towards each other, though not symmetrically. Brain evolution is a pon-
derously slow and unyielding process in comparison to the more facile evolution of
languages. So we should expect that languages are more modiﬁed for brains than
brains are for language. Nevertheless, if we have been evolving in a symbolic niche
for a million years or more, we should expect that human brains will have been
tweaked in many different ways to aid life in this virtual world.
The world of symbols is an artiﬁcial niche. Its ecology is radically different than
the biological niche we also ﬁnd ourselves in (or at least our ancestors found them-
selves in). In the same way that beaver dam building has created an aquatic niche
to which beaver bodies have adapted over their evolutionary history, our cogni-
tive capacities have adapted to our self-constructed niche: a symbolic niche. This
is not a new idea. Indeed the anthropologist Clifford Geertz (1973) suggested some-
thing like this many decades ago. I think that today we may be at a point in our
evolutionary theorizing and our understanding of brains to begin to explore exactly
what this might mean.
The most intense and unusual demands of this niche should be reﬂected in the
ways that human cognition diverges from patterns more typical of other species.
Although it has long been popular to think of the human difference in terms of gen-
eral intelligence, I think this bias may have misled us into ignoring what may be
a more important constellation of more subtle differences. These likely included
differences in social cognition (e.g. joint attention, empathy, the ability to antici-
pate another’s intended actions), differences in how we learn (e.g. superior transfer
learning, a predisposition to assume that associations are bidirectional—known as
stimulus equivalence, a comparative ease at mimicking) or even just unusual motor
capacities (e.g. unprecedented articulatory and vocal control). These are members of
a widely distributed and diverse set of adaptations that fractionally and collectively
contribute to our language abilities.
With respect to the brain, we need to confront another mystery. How could
these many diverse brain traits have become so functionally intertwined and inter-
dependent as to provide such a novel means of communication? This is particularly
challenging to explain because language is in effect an emergent function, not some
prior function just requiring ﬁne-tuning. Our various inherited vocalizations, such as
laughter, shrieks of fright, and cries of anguish, are comparatively localized in their
neurological control (mostly subcortical) as are other modes of communication in
animals. In comparison, language depends on a widely dispersed constellation of
cortical systems, each of which can be found in other primate brains, but evolved
for very different functions. These brain systems have become collectively recruited
for language only because their previously evolved functions overlapped signif-
icantly with some processing demand necessitated by language, though evolved
for quite different functions altogether. Indeed, the neural structures and circuits
involved in the production and comprehension of language are homologous to struc-
tures found ubiquitously in most monkey and ape brains: old structures performing
unprecedented new tricks.

2
Beyond the Symbolic Species
35
A related mystery concerns the extent to which this dominant form of com-
munication depends on information maintained by social transmission. Even for
theories postulating an innate universal grammar, the vast quantity and high ﬁdelity
of the information constituting even a typical vocabulary stands out as exceedingly
anomalous from a biological point of view. How did such a large fraction of our
communicative capacity wind up ofﬂoaded onto social transmission? And what
explains the remarkable reliability of this process?
Perhaps the most difﬁcult neurological feature to explain, however, is the evo-
lution of the diversity of brain structures involved. The higher-order synergy of
systems that contribute to language requires the cooperative functioning of many
diverse brain regions. And it appears to paradoxically require that this synergy
among diverse systems must already be in place in order for selection to have honed
it for language.
The co-evolutionary niche construction scenario sketched above still does not
account for the generation of the novel functional synergy between neural systems
that language processing requires. The discontinuities between call control systems
and speech and language control systems of the brain suggest that a co-evolutionary
logic alone is insufﬁcient to explain the shift in substrate. Recent investigation of
a parallel shift in both complexity and neural substrate in birdsong may be able to
shed some light on this (see also Pepperberg, Chapter 7, this volume).
In a comparative study of a long-domesticated bird, the Bengalese Finch, and its
wild cousin, the White-Rump Munia, it was discovered that the domesticated lin-
eage was a far more facile song-learner with a much more complex and ﬂexible song
than its wild cousin (discussed in detail in Deacon, 2010b). This was despite the
fact that the Bengalese Finch was bred in captivity for coloration, not singing. The
domestic/wild difference of song complexity and song learning in these close ﬁnch
breeds parallels what is found in comparisons between species that are song-learners
and non-learners. This difference also correlates with a much more extensive neural
control of song in birds that learn a complex and variable song.
The fact that this behavioral and neural complexity can arise spontaneously with-
out speciﬁc breeding for singing is a surprising ﬁnding since it is generally assumed
that song complexity evolves under the inﬂuence of intense sexual selection. This
was, however, blocked by domestication. One intriguing interpretation is that the
relaxation of natural and sexual selection on singing paradoxically was responsi-
ble for its elaboration in this species. In brief, with song becoming irrelevant to
species identiﬁcation, territorial defense, mate attraction, predator avoidance, and
so on, degrading mutations and existing deleterious alleles affecting the speciﬁca-
tion of the stereotypic song would not have been weeded out. The result appears to
have been the reduction of innate biases controlling song production. The domestic
song could thus be described as both less constrained and more variable because it
is subject to more kinds of perturbations. But with the speciﬁcation of song struc-
ture no longer strictly controlled by genetically inherited innate auditory and motor
biases, other linked brain systems can begin to play a biasing role. With innate song
biases weakened, auditory experience, social context, learning biases, and atten-
tional factors could all begin to inﬂuence singing. The result is that the domestic

36
T.W. Deacon
song became more variable, more complicated, and more inﬂuenced by social expe-
rience. The usual consequence of relaxed selection is genetic drift—increasing the
genetic and phenotypic variety of a population by allowing random reassortment
of alleles—but neurologically, drift in the genetic control of neural functions should
cause constraints to become less speciﬁc, generating increased behavioral ﬂexibility
and greater conditional sensitivity to other neurological and contextual factors.
This is relevant to the human case, because a number of features of the human
language adaptation also appear to involve a relaxation of innate constraints allow-
ing multiple other inﬂuences besides ﬁxed links to emotion and immediate context
to affect vocalization. Probably the clearest evidence for this is infant babbling.
This unprecedented tendency to freely play with vocal sound production occurs
with minimal innate constraint on what sound can follow what (except for phys-
ical constraints on vocal sound generation). Babbling occurs also in contexts of
comparatively low arousal state, whereas laughter, crying, or shrieking are each
produced in comparatively speciﬁc high arousal states and with speciﬁc contextual
associations. This reduction of innate arousal and contextual constraint on sound
production, opens the door for numerous other inﬂuences to begin to play a role.
Like the domesticated bird, this allows many more brain systems to inﬂuence vocal
behavior, including socially acquired auditory experience. In fact, this freedom from
constraint is an essential precondition for being able to correlate learned vocal
behaviors with the wide diversity of objects, events, properties, and relationships
language is capable of referring to. It is also a plausible answer to the combinatorial
synergy problem (above) because it demonstrates an evolutionary mechanism that
would spontaneously result in the emergence of multi-system coordination of neural
control over vocal behavior.
But although an evolutionary de-differentiation process may be a part of the story
for human language adaptation, it is clearly not the whole story. This increased
ﬂexibility and conditionality likely exposed many previously irrelevant interrela-
tionships between brain systems to selection for the new functional associations that
have emerged. Most of these adaptations remain to be identiﬁed. However, if such
a dedifferentiation effect has been involved in our evolution, then scenarios hypoth-
esizing selection for increased innateness or extrapolation from innate referential
calls to words become less plausible.
There is a much larger biological background behind my approach which of
necessity has had to go unmentioned. It traces to my work on brain development
and evolution, and more broadly it borrows from work that currently runs under the
banner of “evodevo” and which has begun to illuminate once problematic issues in
evolutionary genetics, molecular cellular biology, and epigenesis. My point is not to
discount the contributions of natural selection, which I agree is the ﬁnal arbiter of
functional adaptation, but to bring attention to another unnoticed facet of the evolu-
tionary process. Natural selection is explicitly NOT the generator of the biological
phenomena that it prunes in the process that leads to increased adaptation. Not only
are the variants of existing organismic subsystems generated irrespective of func-
tion (e.g. by genetic “damage”) but the expression of these varieties of structure and
dynamics depends on generative processes whose details we tend to hide in generic

2
Beyond the Symbolic Species
37
concepts like epigenesis and reproduction. New stuff, new structures, and new pro-
cesses need to be generated so that there is raw material fed to the engine of natural
selection. The second law of thermodynamics has to be locally tamed in order for
this to be possible. And natural selection theory is so widely applicable precisely
because it can be agnostic as to how any of this is achieved, so long as it is.
Surprisingly, despite our many disagreements about innateness, I ﬁnd some res-
onance in Noam Chomsky’s periodic suggestion that some of the complexity of
grammar may have emerged from general laws of physics analogous to the way that
the Fibonacci regularities exempliﬁed in the spirals of sunﬂower seed and pine cone
facets emerge. Natural selection has “found a way” to stabilize the conditions that
support the generation of this marvelous regularity of growth because it has impor-
tant functional advantages. But natural selection didn’t generate it in the ﬁrst place,
geometric regularities that can become ampliﬁed due to center-out growth process
are the ultimate source (as has now been demonstrated also in growth-like inorganic
processes).
In closing, I would like to reﬂect on some of the more esoteric features of human-
ness that may be illuminated by the paired processes of symbolic niche construction
effects and relaxed selection.
For example, I think it makes sense to think of ourselves as symbolic savants,
unable to suppress the many predispositions evolved to aid in symbol acquisition,
use, and transmission. In order to be so accomplished at this strange cognitive task,
we almost certainly have evolved a predisposition to see things as symbols, whether
they are or not. This is probably manifest in the make-believe of young children,
the way we ﬁnd meaning in coincidental events, see faces in clouds, are fascinated
by art, charmed by music, and run our lives with respect to dictates presumed to
originate from an invisible spirit world. Like the ﬂight play of birds, the manip-
ulation of objects by monkeys, the attraction of cats to small feathered toys, our
special adaptation is the lens through which we see the world. With it comes an
irrepressible predisposition to seek for a cryptic meaning hiding beneath the surface
of appearances. Almost certainly many of our most distinctive social capacities and
biases—e.g. tendencies to conformity and interest in copying the speech we hear
as infants—are also reﬂections of this adaptation to an ecosystem of symbolic rela-
tionships. And of course there is literature and theater. How effortlessly we project
ourselves into the experiences of someone else, feeling the joys and sorrows almost
as intensely as our own.
Relaxation of selection, on the other hand, may have contributed to another suite
of distinctively human traits. Widely distributed dedifferentiation at the genetic and
epigenetic level would have increased ﬂexibility of a variety of once phylogenet-
ically constrained cognitive and motivational systems. Perhaps the most striking
feature of humans is their ﬂexibility and cultural variety. Consider the incredible
diversity of marital and kinship organizations. Most species have fairly predictable
patterns of sexual association, kin association, and offspring care, and although they
are somewhat ﬂexible, this variety is mediated almost entirely by individual moti-
vational systems. In contrast, despite the evolutionary importance of reproduction,
human mating and reproduction are largely controlled by symbolically mediated

38
T.W. Deacon
social negotiations. This ofﬂoading of one of the most fundamental biological func-
tions onto social-symbolic mechanisms is perhaps the signature feature of being a
symbolic species. Thus, because of symbols and with the aid of symbols, Homo
sapiens has been self-domesticated and adapted to a niche unlike any other that has
ever existed.
We have been made in the image of the word.
References
Bickerton, D. (2010). Commentary on Terrence Deacon (2010) On the human: Rethinking the
natural selection of human language. Retrieved August 24th 2011, from http://onthehuman.
org/2010/02/on-the-human-rethinking-the-natural-selection-of-human-language/
Deacon, T. (1997). The symbolic species: The coevolution of language and the brain. New York:
W. W. Norton & Co.
Deacon (2010a). On the human: Rethinking the natural selection of human language.
Retrieved August 24th 2011, from http://onthehuman.org/2010/02/on-the-human-rethinking-
the-natural-selection-of-human-language/
Deacon (2010b). A role for relaxed selection in the evolution of the language capacity. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 107, 9000–9006.
Everett, D. (2005). Cultural constraints on grammar and cognition in Pirahã: Another look at the
design features of human language. Current Anthropology, 46, 621–646.
Fabbro, F., & Paradis, M. (1995). Differential impairments in four multilingual patients with sub-
cortical lesions. In M. Paradis (Ed.), Aspects of bilingual aphasia (pp. 139–176). Oxford:
Pergamon Press.
Geertz, C. (1973). The interpretation of cultures. New York: Basic Books.
Hauser, M. D., Chomsky, N., & Fitch, W. T. (2002). The faculty of language: What is it, who has
it, and how did it evolve? Science, 29, 1569–1579.
Peirce, C. S. (1931). Collected papers of Charles Sander Pierce. Vol. II elements of logic
(C. Hartshorn & P. Weiss, Eds., CP 2.225). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Chapter 3
The Evolution of Semiotic Self-Control
Sign Evolution as the Ongoing Reﬁnement of the Basic
Argument Structure of Biological Metabolism
Frederik Stjernfelt
Abstract This chapter argues that attempts to characterize semiotic evolution by
phases corresponding to sign types from Peirce’s triads do not hold – so as for
instance the idea of an iconic, an indexical and a symbolic phase of evolution. This
is because these sign types are not compositional so that indices are not compos-
ites of icons and symbols not of indices. Instead, the perspective should be turned
180 degrees. The “highest” Peircean sign types: propositions and their linking into
arguments, are present from tbe beginning of biosemiotics, albeit in a rudimentary
indistinct proto-form, corresponding to Peirce’s idea that propositions are genuine
signs, and the whole machinery of simpler signs are but degenerate signs which
occur within propositions. Selection forces the survival of truth-bearing signs –
propositions (Peirce: “Dicisigns”). Evolution then subdivides, sophisticates and
articulates proto-propositions, gradually achieving growing autonomy of its parts.
So, instead of an ongoing construction from building-blocks, semiotic evolution is
the ongoing subdivision and autonomization of a reasoning process having its ﬁrst
proto-form in metabolism.
Given the oxygen, hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, sulphur,
phosphorus, etc., in sufﬁcient quantities and under proper
radiations, and living protoplasm will be produced, will
develop, will gain power of self-control, and the scientiﬁc
passion is sure to be generated. Such is my guess.
(Peirce, CP 7.50, c. 1900)
Terrence Deacon’s achievement in the Symbolic Species (1997) and the inspiration
stemming from that book is vast. Among its central and challenging ideas is the
idea that the overall change in cognitive abilities from higher animals to man is a
semiotic one and its description should include semiotic concepts. Another is the
idea that hominid semiotic evolution forms an extreme case of Baldwinian evolu-
tion with feedback from the common semiotic capabilities of a hominid group onto
the selection pressure on each group individual. The resulting hypothesis claims that
F. Stjernfelt (B)
Faculty of Arts, University of Aarhus, Aarhus, Denmark
e-mail: semfelt@hum.au.dk
39
T. Schilhab et al. (eds.), The Symbolic Species Evolved, Biosemiotics 6,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-2336-8_3, C⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2012

40
F. Stjernfelt
the co-evolution of human language, cognition, and brain is far more probable than
the idea that language and human semiotic capabilities appeared as an accidental
side product of a general growth in human cognitive abilities. And an ensuing idea
is that human language capability does not form an isolated brain module but is
rather involved in the overall evolution of the human brain, uniting formerly dis-
tinct capabilities. Finally, the important idea that central parts of linguistic structure
are neither innate nor acquired – but rather constitutes a priori structures of any
possible thought and communication – which evolution as well as development are
forced to adapt to. This idea offers an important third possibility as compared to
the ongoing nature-nurture cul-de-sac. Deacon’s later development of concepts like
autogen – the structure of primitive pre-cell proto-metabolism as an important step
towards the earliest life and semiotic process – and his idea of alternating maskings
and unmaskings of selection pressures in evolution add further conceptual tools to
a uniﬁed explanation of the sophistication of semiotics within the framework of
biological evolution.
Still, a conceptual problem remains in the heart of Deacon’s hypothesis and the
whole discussion revolving around it. Famously, he reinterpreted, in The Symbolic
Species, Peirce’s semiotics in order to ﬁnd a conceptual skeleton scaffolding his
overall evolutionary hypothesis – and picked upon Peirce’s well-know triadic dis-
tinction between the sign reference types of Icons, Indices, and Symbols for that
purpose. The icon-index-symbol distinction addresses the difference between signs
which refer to their object by means of similarity (icons), by means of actual con-
nection (indices) or by means of the habitual, conventional reference to a general
idea (symbols), respectively. This distinction – like most of Peirce’s semiotic dis-
tinctions – is not one of three separate classes of signs, like three different biological
species. It is not the case that signs fall in three mutually exclusive classes named
icons, indices and symbols. They rather form aspects of signs and may co-exist in
empirical signs. The relation between these aspects is one of increasing complexity –
so that most Indices contain Icons, and so that most Symbols contain both Indices
and Icons, or, in any case, involves them in realizing its meaning in the ongoing
chain of interpretation and reasoning. Certain scholars, Deacon among them, have
attempted the obvious idea of mapping this increase in semiotic complexity onto the
increase of biological complexity in evolution – so that purely iconic signs could be
taken to precede indexical signs evolutionarily, and, in turn, indexical signs could be
taken to precede the appearance of symbols in the course of evolution. The origin
of symbols, ﬁnally, could then be taken to coincide roughly with the origin of man
and the speciﬁc, plastic and fertile capabilities of human semiotics – so as to form a
virtual semiotic missing link. Hence the very title of Deacon’s “Symbolic Species”
book.
Agreeing with the overall program of that book, this chapter addresses what I
conceive as an important conceptual problem in the particular idea of mapping the
icon-index-symbol scale onto the process of evolution – a problem whose solu-
tion, I shall argue, entails an important inversion in the conception of the place
of semiotics in evolution. First, the symbol concept as deﬁned in Peircean semi-
otics does not appear in human cognition and communication only. This might be

3
The Evolution of Semiotic Self-Control
41
taken to be a strife of words – maybe Deacon’s reinterpretation of Peirce’s sym-
bol concept “gets it right”, so to speak. But the ubiquity of Peircean symbols in
pre-human biology points to a deeper problem in Deacon’s seemingly small but sig-
niﬁcant reinterpretation of the relation between the three sign types: he takes them
to be compositional so that indices are simply a special conﬁguration of icons, and
symbols, in turn, are but a special conﬁguration of indices. But you can not com-
pose the direct object reference of an index out of ever so many iconic likenesses.
The summing up of predicates never results in an object reference. Existence is
not a predicate, as Kant realized. And you can not compose the generality of a
symbol out of ever so many singular indexical here-and-now references. The icon-
index-symbol triad should rather be conceived of as “physiological” in the sense
that icons and indices generally form aspects of symbols. This implies, conversely,
that we should not expect to ﬁnd “pure” icons and indices which will rather be limit
categories. This “physiological” conception of Peirce’s triad implies that the most
complex parts of Peirce’s basic triads should be expected to be realized even in the
simplest biological processes – albeit with a lack of internal differentiation. This
becomes clear from the wide applicability of the central sign in Peirce’s semiotics,
that of propositions or “dicisigns”, in biology. Finally, this paves the way for con-
ceiving of a more precise conceptualization of the semiotic “missing link” in terms
of the ability for explicit control of semiotic processes in human beings. We shall
attempt to ﬂesh out this notion of “explicit control” in terms of its products, “hypo-
static abstractions”; in terms of its structure, sign governing other signs; and in terms
of its process in the shape of turn-taking dialogue, making possible the comparison
and tentative integration of Deacon’s hypothesis with Michael Tomasello’s “joint
attention” hypothesis.
3.1 Peirce’s Symbol Concept Revisited
I have discussed the problems in Deacon’s reinterpretation of Peirce’s icon-index-
symbol triad elsewhere (Stjernfelt, 2007, chapter 11) so I shall restrict myself to
summing up that discussion. Peircean symbols are not restricted to human sign use.
Symbols are described as signs which are general as to their object; they possess
an esse in futuro, referring to a potential continuity of future objects; they refer to
their object by means of a habit, natural or cultural; they comprise icons for their
understanding and indices for their object reference; and they have propositions as
an important subset. Thus, simple Pavlovian conditioning – dogs acquiring the habit
of displaying eating behaviour by the ringing of a bell – will constitute a full-ﬂedged
Peircean symbol, not merely an indexical sign as Deacon would have it. It is not, like
indexical signs, restricted to the here-and-now of actual connectedness between sign
and object. The bell sound is a general type, referring, in turn, to another type, that
of eating, a potential multitude of future eating situtations. The here-and-now of the
particular bell sound token in a particular instant functions as an index incarnating
that general meaning in the actual moment of the ringing. Even a case as simple as
E. Coli swimming upstream in a sugar gradient as the result of its registration of

42
F. Stjernfelt
molecules displaying a speciﬁc active site (Cf. Berg, 1988; Stjernfelt, 2007) must
be described as symbolic in Peirce’s sense: it is a habit (acquired phylogenetically,
to be sure, in contrast to Pavlovian conditioning acquired ontogenetically), the habit
connects a speciﬁc, typical aspect of molecular shape with a speciﬁc, typical action,
that of oriented swimming and consumption. That the molecular conﬁguration of
the “active site” is general may be seen from the fact that it is not unique to a
speciﬁc carbohydrate but covers a long range of different carbohydrates (Cf. Adler,
Hazelbauer, & Dahl, 1973). This generality is facilitated by the chemoreceptors of
the cell being geared to detect sugars by means of the presence of a speciﬁc active
site on the surface of the molecule. And this generality, in turn, is what makes E.
Coli sensitive to be fooled by the same artiﬁcial sweeteners as may human beings.
So, Peircean symbols are not a human prerequisite only. Another related problem
is that even if the icon-index-symbol triad is oriented from the simple towards the
complex, it is not compositional. Deacon’s reconstruction makes indices consist of
a speciﬁc conﬁguration of icons, and the symbol consist of a speciﬁc conﬁguration
of indices. But pure icons form a limit concept in Peirce – they will vaguely signify
any possible object resembling them, because they are not connected to any actual
object (that being the task of an index) – so an index could never result from any
combination of such vague, dream-like signs. The pure index is also a limit category
– like a push in the back or a pointing gesture directing attention to an object. Such
signs are indeed possible, but they remain marginal, because neither the pure icon
nor the pure index is able to communicate anything. In typical usage, indices are
connected with icons in propositions, bearing information about the object which
the index merely indicates without itself giving any information at all. Finally, a
pure symbol without any iconical or indexical qualities are equally impossible – in
order to be understood, a symbol must bear information in the shape of an icon and
relate that information to an object by means of an index.
Thus, the collaboration of icons and indices within symbols is a way of describ-
ing the triad much closer to the actual functioning of signs than the focusing upon
rare, detached specimens of the three aspects of sign use. This forms the basic reason
why the tempting idea of mapping the icon-index-symbol triad onto the process of
evolution is doomed to fail: pure icons, indices, symbols are marginal phenomena.
So, there could never have been an evolutionary period where purely iconic signs
prevailed – they are much too vague to communicate any information of value for
biological processes, because their content is merely possible and does not relate
to the actual world. And there could never have been a purely indexical period –
indices being attention-directing and based on the here-and-now, they are unable to
perform the central task of orienting and guiding biological activity into the future
like the generality of the symbol.
I do agree, however, with Deacon in the conviction that a central part of the
semiotic-missing-link issue is conceptual – and also in the contention that Peirce’s
semiotics may yield some of the conceptual tools needed for approaching that issue.
The whole ediﬁce of Peircean semiotics constructed in the years after the turn
of the century rather forms a physiology of the semiotic reasoning process than
forming a composition of complex signs out of simpler signs. Thus, in one of the

3
The Evolution of Semiotic Self-Control
43
important papers laying out the principles of his semiotics, the Kaina Stoicheia
(New Elements) of 1904, Peirce describes symbols as “genuine” signs, by con-
trast taking simpler signs (like icons and indices) to be “degenerate” signs –
indices degenerate to the ﬁrst degree and icons degenerate to the second degree.1
Degeneracy here means non-generic (and hence rare) at the same time as it means
incomplete, in need of completion. As examples of symbols, single words or con-
cepts are much too often selected; this is to some degree misleading because the
central symbol subtype to Peirce is not the single word but the proposition (or
Dicent, or Dicisign, or Pheme, in the ever-growing wilderness of terminology which
constitutes part of the reason for the ignorance of his doctrine) – the sign that
claims something about something.2 So, the working of icons and indices within
the conﬁnes of Dicisigns is the key to the relation between the sign types in prag-
matic reality. In his essay on symbols in the present volume, Deacon actually
approaches the issue of Dicisigns when he emphasizes the importance of the com-
bination of indices with symbolic predicates in actual sign use (even if he leaves
out of consideration the explicit discussion of Peirce’s third triad – that of Rheme-
Dicisign-Argument (or Term-Proposition-Argument)). By contrast I ﬁnd this triad
and its emphasis on reasoning is a key also to the icon-index-symbol issue.
3.2 The Ubiquity of Dicisigns
The wide applicability of the icon-index-symbol triad in semiotics often seems to
have pushed other important aspects of Peirce’s semiotics into the background –
such as his third trichotomy, forming his version of the classic logical distinction
between term, proposition, and argument. Peirce uses changing terminology about
this triad, the most stable seeming to be Rheme, Dicisign, Argument.3 Rhemes com-
prise predicate terms understood as unsatiated propositions – like “_ is blue” or
“_ gives _ to _” where the ﬁling-in of one or more of the empty slots (indicated
by underscore) by a rhematic subject will give a proposition. Peirce’s analysis of
the proposition, hence, is a version of the traditional subject-predicate distinction –
where each predicate may take several subjects (like 3 in the case of “give”), not
unlike Frege’s analysis of the proposition in terms of function and arguments.
1 Peirce develops the notions of generic and degenerate in relation to his categories in “A Guess at
the Riddle” (1888, CP 1.354), generalizing the terms from their use in geometry and the study of
conic sections. In the “Minute Logic” (1902, only published in pieces, CP 1.203; EPII ch. 9, etc.),
he applies them to signs.
2 As to Peirce’s notion of Dicisign, see especially the “Syllabus” (1903), partly published in EPII
chs. 18-21 and in CP 1.180ff, 2.219ff, 2.233ff. 2.274ff. See also the discussion in Short (2007).
3 I think Rheme-Dicisign-Argument is to be preferred to the traditional Term-Proposition-
Argument in order to underline Peirce’s special conception of the two former notions: Rhemes
are predicate functions rather than isolated terms, and Dicisigns form a much broader notion of
proposition than the received one, involving non-linguistic combinations of subject and predicate
(e.g. a picture with a legend, the combination of a pointing gesture with a predicative gesture, etc.).
I use proposition interchangeably with Dicisign to indicate that Peirce’s notion comprise ordinary
propositions as well. See Stjernfelt (forthcoming a) on Peirce’s concept of Dicisign.

44
F. Stjernfelt
Dicisigns, now, are related to icons and indices by the fact that Dicisigns have two
parts, subject and predicate, with indexical and iconical properties, respectively. The
predicate part of the Dicisign must, directly or indirectly, convey some iconic con-
tent for the description of the propositional subject. It may work directly, by means
of the presentation of a picture or a diagram, or indirectly, by means of a linguistic or
other conventional predicate symbol, in turn referring to schematic iconic content.
The subject part(s) of the Dicisign, on the other hand, must, directly or indirectly,
bind this informational content of the rheme to some object(s) to which the Dicisign
refers.4 Again, this may take place directly, by pointing or by a rigid designator like
a proper name, or more indirectly by means of a symbolic index like a pronoun
or a common noun. The simple Dicisign “Alfred is happy” has a proper name as
linguistic index which ﬁlls in the empty slot of the predicate “_is happy”. A royal
portrait is also a Dicisign, uniting the linguistic index of “Louis XIV” on the picture
frame with the image predicate provided by the painted man on the canvas. This
double architecture of the Dicisign, of course, is basically motivated by it saying
something (predicate) about something (subject). These two aspects of the Dicisign
now point, each in their way, description and reference, respectively, to the same
object. So Peirce may describe the Dicisign as a special sign uniting two different
signs both related to the same object, but in two different ways.5 The possibility of
the Dicisign to possess a truth value comes from the possibility of those two aspects
actually, successfully, ﬁtting the same object. It is this general truth-bearing capabil-
ity of Dicisigns which makes them central to logic and reasoning – and which makes
isolated icons or indices “degenerate” by comparison to full-blown symbols.6
These simple observations, however, make Dicisigns indispensable for biologi-
cal sign use. Signs which may not convey truth are hardly efﬁcient in biology: icons
only indicating vague possibilities have little pragmatic efﬁciency in cognition and
communication, just like isolated indices only able to indicate that something is
happening but not what it is, may be of local use but not much more than that. This
is why Dicisigns are ubiquitous in biology. This has been hard for both biologists
4 Deacon addresses the same issue – without discussing Dicisigns or propositions – when he says
that “every symbolic legisign must be immediately coupled with an indexical sign or else there is
no speciﬁc symbolic reference” (Chapter 2, this volume) – by symbolic legisigns he here refers to
general terms, like general predicates. See also Deacon (forthcoming).
5 Again, Deacon makes the same point when he says that “The ability to replace noun phrases by
pointing or other indicative gestures, or by indexical terms like this or that, demonstrates that noun
phrases serve an indexical role, linking the predicate (as a symbolic core of the sentence) to some
speciﬁc instance of reference.” (Deacon, Chapter 2, this volume).
6 This brief presentation glosses over some difﬁculties. Not all Dicisigns are symbols – there are
certain Indices which may express propositions – but they are either single signs (unﬁt for regulat-
ing the recurring demands of simple biological behaviour) or indexical legisigns without general
meaning. Correlatively, not all symbols are Dicisigns – simple rhemes not claiming anything about
anything, e.g. But all these counterexamples must be deemed degenerate (Peirce mostly uses this
about the lower signs in the icon-index-symbol triad, though), as compared to the full-blown sym-
bolic Dicisign, able to put forward general propositions with truth claim possibilities. For further
discussion of these details, see Stjernfelt (forthcoming b).

3
The Evolution of Semiotic Self-Control
45
and biosemioticians to appreciate, probably because of the widespread idea that
propositions require the judgment of a conscious “propositional stance” found only
in human beings. Here, Peirce’s purely semiotic deﬁnition of the proposition as a
Dicisign combining two signs into one irreducible whole gives us a formal notion
of Dicisign – neither presupposing consciousness nor explicit acts of judging. Thus,
“Dicisign” in this deﬁnition is a much broader concept than explicit, linguistic
“propositions” strictly; rather it corresponds to “proto-propositions” as deﬁned by
Hurford (2007) in a parallel argument for the existence of basic logical structure
in animal cognition. Pragmatically, the existence of Dicisigns will be displayed by
speciﬁc perception-action connections – in an organism’s behavioral possibility of
acting in a typical, categorized way prompted by the categorical perception of some
biologically important, stable feature of its environment. Thus, when the E. Coli
reads the perimeter of the carbohydrate molecule, its subsequent oriented swimming
counts as the proof that a Dicisign combining the abstract shape of the active site
with a here-and-now presence of such a site has been processed by the bacterium. Of
course, the molecular surface conﬁguration of this active site may appear in other
inert macromolecules without any Dicisign to be realized – its “activity” is only
granted by the bacterium. The decisive precondition is that the receptor molecules
of the E.Coli make it change behaviour in a characteristic and typical way, oriented
towards the continuation of its metabolism (and hence its survival).
This simple biological example gives us the important clue to what is semioti-
cally basic in biology: the stable metabolism of an organism. The single phases of
the metabolism, may, of course, be described by purely chemical means, but it is
the fact that these phases form a circular, self-sustaining structure which provides
the basic biological prerequisite for adaptations towards sustaining this process bet-
ter – and to act so as to support metabolism (by swimming in the right direction for
digesting carbohydrates, in this case). This formed the basic insight in von Uexküll’s
early biosemiotic notion of the functional circle of animals, binding together per-
ception signs with action signs to form the fundamental cyclic interweaving of
perceptions with guided action. Thus, the perceptual Dicisign of reading the active
site on a carbohydrate molecule – a primitive version of the proposition “This is
sugar” – is followed by the action Dicisign of swimming in that direction – to form
an argument: “If sugar, swim in its direction. This is sugar. So, swim in its direc-
tion”. That this forms a (very primitive) argument7 – and not merely a cause-effect
7 Calling it an argument is based on the fact that it displays the double structure of dicisigns. More
precisely, as it may err, it must be an inductive argument which is probable only. But it is important
to add that it almost completely lacks the quality which Peirce requires for an inference structure to
count as real reasoning: namely that of self-control (see below). When I say “almost” it is because
we could imagine the argument change due to the process of evolution over the long range of
millions of generations. If the Umwelt of the bacterium were contaminated with a poisonous agent
displaying the same “active site” as carbohydrates, this would form a grave challenge to E. Coli.
If a mutation occurred, however, making some bacteria able to distinguish sugar from this toxic
substance by means of other active sites on the periphery of molecules, of course, a mutated group
of E. Coli might survive. Such adaptability could be interpreted as a sort of (very weak) self-control
at the level of the lineage.

46
F. Stjernfelt
chain – is evident from the fact that the E. Coli may be fooled by artiﬁcial sweetener
whose molecules possess the same molecular surface conﬁguration as the active site
in carbohydrates – but otherwise have a rather different chemistry without the easily
releasable binding energy of carbohydrates.
This is not to say, of course, that this process is not underpinned by causal
relations. The semiotic aspect of the process lies in the fact that the weak, local
interaction makes a whole class of different stimuli give rise to the same, typical
behaviour. Thus, it is the fact that the bacterium does not interact causally with the
whole of the molecule (before consuming it, that is) but merely weakly interacts
with a spot on its perimeter which is a precondition for its turning a semiotic and
not merely causal process.8 This argument structure binding together perception
and action, of course, is close to being as primitive as it may get – and the explicit
analysis of it into two distinct Dicisign phases is possible for the observer, but def-
initely not for the bacterium itself. It has no possibility to make any single aspect
of the argument explicit nor autonomous – there are few chemical agents (besides
carbohydrates, certain toxins) which the bacterium is able to categorize and react
to. The automat-like character of the perception-action link testiﬁes to its holist,
yet undivided character. So the animal is not able to address the logical structure
of its own perception-action chain as such, nor to substitute other perceptions or
conclusions for those of sugar and toxin, or eating and ﬂeeing, respectively. Still
this basic argument structure is what makes it possible, during evolution, for higher
animals to reﬁne and spread perception-action cycles to much larger parts of their
surroundings, therely enlarging their Umwelt, and, what is more, to isolate parts of
the Argument as Dicisigns, and, in turn, parts of those Dicisigns as Subject Indices
and Predicate Icons.
It is the fact than metabolism has an active perception-action phase – marginal in
plants and funghi, central in animals – that introduces semiotics in the simple rea-
soning inherent in searching the environment for nutrients (and, in the E. Coli case,
escaping toxins). The “reading” of carbohydrate and toxin gradients before a sub-
stantial concentration of either is present is what allows the animal the conclusion
of going into the right direction for ﬁnding (resp. escaping) such concentrations.
3.3 Sign Action – A Process Differentiated Through Evolution
This discussion of E. Coli, then, serves to state the basic argument that biologically
simples signs are not isolated icons or indices, only later to be composed into more
complex signs.9 Biologically simple signs, rather, are full-ﬂedged perception-action
8 Thus, the difference between the weak interaction of “reading” the active site on the one hand
and the binding and breaking covalent bonds in chemical reactions is semiotically important. The
former allows for categorizing the molecule without chemically interacting with it, due to the
weak van der Waals bonds made possible by the variation of electric charge on the surface of the
molecule.
9 Please permit an analogy. To trace the origin of human architecture, you will have to turn to sim-
ple shelters and bivouacs and, before them, the nests of our biological cousins the great apes, and

3
The Evolution of Semiotic Self-Control
47
arguments lacking explicit internal articulation – but bearing with them the
possibility of later segmentation, articulation, autonomization, adaptation to fur-
ther purposes, making it ﬂexible, potentially loosening semiotic structure still more
from its causal basis and eventually making the combination of separated Dicisigns,
of predicates and subjects, possible. Parts of the metabolism may become rela-
tively autonomous, forming organs – and parts of the perception part of metabolism
may acquire their own parts, giving rise to cognitive plasticity, association learning,
memory, recursivity and much more, just like the action part of metabolism may dif-
ferentiate into motor limbs and tools able to support complicated action sequences,
co-shaping the environment, depending in turn on this transformation.
The basic argument for this ubiquity of simple proto-propositions linking into
arguments in biology is thus based on the observation that phylogenetically acquired
habits – like bacteria swimming in the direction of sugar – must be both simple, sta-
ble, and true in order to support survival. If not simple, it would be beyond simple
animals to process them. If not stable, they would not be able to address stable fea-
tures of the environment (such as carbohydrate’s combination of easily digestible
binding energy and characteristic active sites). And if not more often true than false,
they would lead to the perishing of the lineage rather than its survival. And Dicisigns
are signs able to express truths. This points to the fact that semiotic evolution should
not be seen as going from the simple to the complex in terms of beginning with
atomic signs which later serve as building blocks for more complex signs. The pro-
cess from simple to complex should be conceived of in a non-compositional way:
the overall semiotic argument process structure is there from the metabolic begin-
ning – and semiotic evolution rather takes the shape of the ongoing subdivision,
articulation, and sophistication of primitive signs, an ongoing reﬁnement of parts
and aspects acquiring still more autonomy. Hence, on this view, semiotic composi-
tionality rather forms an important achievement than it forms the starting principle:
the ongoing autonomization of parts and aspects of Dicisigns and their combinations
may make them more and more compositional – resulting in a growth of combina-
tion possibilities and hence increasing cognitive plasticity. Such segmentation of
the argument process thus constitutes the overall shape of the increase in “semiotic
freedom” during evolution, highlighted by Hoffmeyer (2010). The reason for tak-
ing, once again, the textbook example of E. Coli to illustrate basic sign use, is thus
to insist on the fact that the kernel of semiotic cognition is the extremely simple
piece of reasoning which connects perception and action. The fact that this pro-
cess may err is what proves its character of (simple) reasoning. It also indicates
earlier, various biological hideouts and shells as protection devices, phylogenetically and onto-
genetically built. Thus you begin with phenomena which perform the basic sheltering function
of the whole building in a germlike form, rather than beginning with the development of bricks
and planks which only much later assemble into full buildings. The full-building structure was
there from the beginning, even if in a very primitive, unarticulated shape. Just like bricks, icons
and indices primarily function within the wholes of dicisigns linked up into action arguments –
and they only acquire semi-autonomous status much later, during the ongoing sophistication of
argument structure through evolution.

48
F. Stjernfelt
that cognition begins long before organisms with central nervous systems arise, and
even longer before the appearance of organisms with movable perception organs,
binding of different sensory inputs into cross-modal perceptions and the construc-
tion of environment mappings. This should make us cautious with more or less
automatic assumptions that nervous tissue such as found in the CNS of higher ani-
mals should be the privileged locus of cognitive processes. Such an idea is a sort of
magic, ascribing special abilities of wonder to neurons – overlooking that cognition
is a process connecting the whole of an organism to aspects of its surroundings. And
such an idea is what Clark (2008), pointing to external elements of cognitive pro-
cesses, calls “neurocentrism”. Not only may “anthropocentrism” make us think that
all accidental properties of human cognition are properties of cognition as such – but
“neurocentrism” may repeat the error on a larger scale presuming that properties of
nervous tissues are properties of cognition as such. Rather, cognition exists in the
shape of perception-action cycles long before the evolution of multicellular organ-
isms and the ensuing evolution of central nervous systems. Such evolution processes
should rather be conceived of as adaptations to make the interface between percep-
tion and action more plastic, more versatile and add to the structure of dicisigns
which the organism is able to process before turning to action. So, the specialization
of certain cells to become neurons, interlinked in the CNS in multicellular organ-
isms forms a way of adapting the organism not only to its speciﬁc surroundings
– but to achieve still more complicated logical structures and reasoning capabili-
ties. Neurons and CNS’s are special adaptations to the requirement of complicated
cognitive and logic processes – which is why they have to adapt to necessary struc-
tures of such processes. As Peirce says – bearing in mind his objective notion of
“mind”: “For we must remember that the organism has not made the mind, but is
only adapted to it. It has become adapted to it by an evolutionary process so that
it is not far from correct to say that it is the mind that has made the organism.”
(“Abstract of 8 lectures”, undated, NEM IV, 141). The more varied the problems
posed by the surroundings, including fellow conspeciﬁcs, become, the more compli-
cated the intervening structure between perception and action must develop in order
to adapt plastically – and the more that structure must conform to basic regularities
of semiotics and logic: “ Logic, for me, is the study of the essential conditions to
which signs must conform in order to function as such.” (Peirce, “New Elements”,
1904; Peirce 1976 IV, 235ff) And, what is more, the more variation the environ-
ment presents within the small ontogenetic time-scale window of single organism
life, the more of reasoning must be transported from the slow process of phylo-
genetic Darwinian adaption (teaching, e.g., bacteria, over millions of generations,
the Argument habit of following sugar and avoiding certain toxins) to the compara-
tively extremely quick process of ontogenetic adaptive learning (teaching, e.g., apes,
over a period of days, to acquire the habit of associating a speciﬁc location in the
jungle with the presence of speciﬁc fruits). Here, biosemioticians must learn not
to commit the time-scale error of automatically taking long-term habits for being
non-semiotical while short-term habits are much easier seen as having a semiotical

3
The Evolution of Semiotic Self-Control
49
nature.10 The actual sign-exchange, both in the bacterium and the ape example,
always takes place in the vanishing moments of individual ontogenetic lifetime –
whether the underlying habit is constituted in the faster timescale of phylogenetic
adaptation or in the faster timescale of ontogenetic learning does not make any
principal difference (albeit an enormous difference in behavioural plasticity, it is
true).
Let us sum up then, the character of primitive, metabolic argument. It connects
a perception Dicisign with an action Dicisign to an Argument which, again, forms
part of the overall metabolism of the cell. The reason for calling it an Argument
is its ability to attain truth – and to err, respectively.11 As an Argument, of course,
it lacks a series of important aspects characterizing explicit arguments made by
human beings. The connection between its part has been established over the vast
phylogentic timescale of evolution and could only be changed in the same way.
There is no ontogenetic freedom to exchange the premises for other premises in an
online trial-and-error process. No matter which consciousness deﬁnition you adhere
to, there is no reason to assume any counscious access to the conclusion or to other
parts or aspects of the argument structure. The argument appears as a behavioral
gestalt, whose parts are only accessible as such to the external observer and analyst,
not to the bacterium.
Finally, this overall argument implies that the distinction between man and ani-
mal must be sought elsewhere than in a distinction between icons/indices on the one
hand and symbols on the other – namely in the growing degree of explicit control
and metasemiotics, the ability for an organism to make explicit and control its own
signs.
3.4 Hypostatic Abstraction
With the intensiﬁed research into human prehistory occupying many different
disciplines, a Pandora’s box of old questions has been reopened: the origin of
language, the emergence of culture, the physical anthropology and evolution of
human beings – and, conversely, the issue of communicative and cogntive abili-
ties of other higher animals as compared to those of human beings. What is speciﬁc
to human semiotic and cognitive abilities as compared to those of higher animals?
A series of different answers to this issue of the semiotic or cognitive “missing
link” between higher animals and human beings are already on the market. Symbol
10 Hoffmeyer (1996) makes a similar argument. See also Hoffmeyer (2008).
11 The notion of truth implied here, of course, is weaker than your average truth deﬁnition in
terms of correspondence between an explicit proposition and an aspect of reality. Primitive biolog-
ical truth might be described as adequacy of perception and correlated action – measured on the
perception-action link’s support of metabolism. If that link does not support metabolism, of course,
it will be weeded out in the long run of natural selection. The overall argument here claims that
such primitive adequacy truth forms the root of more developed truth types in higher animals and
human beings.

50
F. Stjernfelt
use (Terrence Deacon), joint attention (Jerome Bruner, Michael Tomasello), lan-
guage syntax (Chomsky), speciﬁc types of “blending” (Fauconnier & Turner, 2002),
etc. The discussion is both electriﬁed and muddled by the fact that these hypothe-
ses range over different ﬁelds such as psychology, linguistics, semiotics, cognitive
science, etc. This implies that the proposals mentioned are not even directly com-
parable – in order to be compared, they should so to speak be translated into each
others’ terminology. What would, e.g., the psychological notion of “joint attention”
amount to if translated into the terminology of linguistics, semiotics, or neuro-
science? The possibility exists that it might turn out to mean approximately or even
exactly the same as one or several of the other proposals – this could only be decided
after such a reconstruction process which is, by no means, a simple translation issue
but a reconstruction which will only be possible after a process of conceptual and
empirical development and which will, in itself, constitute a main part of a solution.
I myself have aired the idea that a good candidate for this semiotic-cognitive
“missing link” might be Peirce’s notion of “hypostatic abstraction” (Stjernfelt, 2007,
chapter 11). Of course, no single semiotic feature may presumably be held respon-
sible for all semiotic and cognitive differences between human beings and higher
animals – still I ﬁnd hypostatic abstraction to be one of the central candidate devices
because permitting the making explicit and controling of various prehuman semi-
otic capacities and hence indispensable for the construction of human thought and
language. I shall begin by presenting Peirce’s discussions of the term12 – even if the
matter may of course not be solved by mere Peirce philology only.
Peirce never wrote a comprehensive treatise on the issue but returns to it over and
over again in his mature work around the turn of the century.
Here, it refers a process as well as a product, to be found in a bundle of related
semio-cognitive events:
Linguistically: the construction of an (abstract) noun from more concrete
expressions, such as a adjective (“hard” →“hardness”), a verb (“give” →
“giver”, “gift”, “given”), or a (more concrete) noun (“object” →“object-
hood”), etc. From the sentence “The sky is blue”, the sentence “The sky
possesses blueness” is constructed.
Logically: the corresponding construction of a subject on the basis of a pred-
icate, thus adding a new 2nd-order individual (“blueness”) to the domain
represented.
Mathematically: the application of a meta-level operation or object regulating
other, more basic operations or objects (e.g., passing from the existence of
different types of connections between entities to forming the concept of
“relation” as a new abstract object. The properties of this object now become
12 As with many of his interesting proposals, the discussions of “hypostatic abstraction” (or “hypo-
statis”, “subjective abstraction”, etc.) are scattered over his work, so a bit of reconstruction work is
necessary.

3
The Evolution of Semiotic Self-Control
51
open to investigation in higher-level hypostatic abstractions (the “symmetry”,
“transitivity”, etc. of relations may now be investigated).13
Cognitively: the process of taking a thought for a thing, so that a new cognitive
object is constructed on the basis of a thought – alternatively described as
the “stiffening” of transient, ﬂeeting cognitive content into a stable shape
facilitating further reasoning pertaining to this new, abstract object.
Perceptually: the spatialization of a temporal perception process, such as
forming the trajectory as an abstraction from the locations covered by the
perceived movement of an object: going from “a point moves” to “the line
traced by the moving point”.14
13 One of Peirce’s own examples of hypostatic abstraction in mathematics concerns the successive
abstractions of sets from elements, powers from sets, cardinal numbers from powers: “In order to
get an inkling – though a very slight one – of the importance of this operation in mathematics, it
will sufﬁce to remember that a collection is an hypostatic abstraction, or ens rationis, that multitude
is the hypostatic abstraction derived from a predicate of a collection, and that a cardinal number is
an abstraction attached to a multitude. So an ordinal number is an abstraction attached to a place,
which in its turn is a hypostatic abstraction from a relative character of a unit of a series, itself an
abstraction again.” (5.534; Peirce writes “collections” and “multitudes” for sets and powers).
14 A Peirce quote giving many different examples of Hypostatic Abstraction is the following: “But
hypostatic abstraction, the abstraction which transforms” it is light “into” there is light here, which
is the sense which I shall commonly attach to the word abstraction (since prescission will do for
precisive abstraction) is a very special mode of thought. It consists in taking a feature of a percept
or percepts (after it has already been prescinded from the other elements of the percept), so as to
take propositional form in a judgment (indeed, it may operate upon any judgment whatsoever), and
in conceiving this fact to consist in the relation between the subject of that judgment and another
subject, which has a mode of being that merely consists in the truth of propositions of which
the corresponding concrete term is the predicate. Thus, we transform the proposition, “honey is
sweet,” into “honey possesses sweetness.” “Sweetness” might be called a ﬁctitious thing, in one
sense. But since the mode of being attributed to it consists in no more than the fact that some
things are sweet, and it is not pretended, or imagined, that it has any other mode of being, there
is, after all, no ﬁction. The only profession made is that we consider the fact of honey being sweet
under the form of a relation; and so we really can. I have selected sweetness as an instance of one
of the least useful of abstractions. Yet even this is convenient. It facilitates such thoughts as that
the sweetness of honey is particularly cloying; that the sweetness of honey is something like the
sweetness of a honeymoon; etc. Abstractions are particularly congenial to mathematics. Everyday
life ﬁrst, for example, found the need of that class of abstractions which we call collections. Instead
of saying that some human beings are males and all the rest females, it was found convenient to
say that mankind consists of the male part and the female part. The same thought makes classes
of collections, such as pairs, leashes, quatrains, hands, weeks, dozens, baker’s dozens, sonnets,
scores, quires, hundreds, long hundreds, gross, reams, thousands, myriads, lacs, millions, milliards,
milliasses, etc. These have suggested a great branch of mathematics. Again, a point moves: it is by
abstraction that the geometer says that it “describes a line.” This line, though an abstraction, itself
moves; and this is regarded as generating a surface; and so on. So likewise, when the analyst treats
operations as themselves subjects of operations, a method whose utility will not be denied, this is
another instance of abstraction. Maxwell’s notion of a tension exercised upon lines of electrical
force, transverse to them, is somewhat similar. These examples exhibit the great rolling billows of
abstraction in the ocean of mathematical thought; but when we come to a minute examination of
it, we shall ﬁnd, in every department, incessant ripples of the same form of thought, of which the
examples I have mentioned give no hint. (CP 4.235, “Minute Logic”, 1902).

52
F. Stjernfelt
Peirce’s ambitious ideas are that these rather different examples constitute
different occurrences of the same basic cognitive-logical structure and process char-
acterized by their result: the occurrence of a new, higher-level cognitive object. Most
often, these aspects of hypostatic abstraction are merely mentioned as examples;
they are not explicitly distinguished and interrelated as subtypes of the concept. The
basic cognitive purposivity of hypostatic abstraction stands out as its raison-d’être:
it facilitates the explicit reasoning and investigation pertainting to general issues
which would otherwise remain implicit, transient or lost in concrete particulars (Of
course, once hypostatic abstraction is possible it need not build on existing partic-
ulars and thus may refer to non-existing or ﬁctive universals). The many different
linguistic devices for hypostatic abstraction are tools which further develop, detail,
and make explicit aspects of the ongoing cognitive process of reasoning. Thus, the
adjective “red” basically refers to particular, concrete, here-and-now occurrences
of that color and allows for their comparison, while the noun “redness” (or “the
color red”, “the red”, etc.) constructs a new, stable, abstract object interconnecting
these different occurrences and makes possible the further reasoning on this color
as such, abstracted from its concrete occurrences, and on its relation to other colors,
other properties etc.
Hypostatic abstraction may be described as a simple deduction from a premise
“This object is red” to a conclusion “Redness exists (in this object)”, so that it makes
sense to say that the hypostatic abstraction is an entity whose being consists in the
(purported) truth of a predicate expression:
For by means of abstraction the transitory elements of thought, the {epea pteroenta},
are made substantive elements, as James terms them, {epea apteroenta}. It thus becomes
possible to study their relations and to apply to these relations discoveries already made
respecting analogous relations. In this way, for example, operations become themselves the
subjects of operations.
To take a most elementary example -- from the idea of a particle moving, we pass to the
idea of a particle describing a line. This line is then thought as moving, and so as generating
a surface; and so the relations of surfaces become the subject of thought. An abstraction is
an ens rationis whose being consists in the truth of an ordinary predication. (“Relatives” in
Baldwin’s Dictionary, 1901; CP 3.642)
This should not be taken to imply that hypostatic abstraction expressions referring
to non-existing objects may not exist. “Unicornicity” is a hypostatic abstraction
from “unicorn” even if no unicorns exist – the implicaiton of Peirce’s deﬁnition
is that, in this case, the hypostatic abstraction does not have any “being”, that is,
it does not refer to any real possibility like in the cases of “redness” or “hardness”
or “trajectory”. The deductive character of hypostatic abstraction is not changed
by this observation – like any deduction, its validity dependes on the soundness of
the premiss invoked: “If and only if x exists, then x-ness has being”. Thus, if no
x exists, x-ness has no being, – but in many cases the validity of this claim may
be investigated both by investigating x’s and investigating x-ness. Thus, the hypo-
static abstractive deduction forms no guarantee that the resulting abstraction has a
fundamentum in re and refers to really existing kinds – the well-known examples of
fallacious hypostatic abstractions in science such as “phlogiston” or “caloric” testify
to that.

3
The Evolution of Semiotic Self-Control
53
The fact that the hypostatic abstraction is a deduction has often been confused
with the possibly abductive character of the reasoning process in which a hypostatic
abstraction may take part. Making a hypostatic abstraction may, in many cases, be
part of a trial-and-error reasoning process where the abstraction made is subject to
further investigation so as to determine its degree of reality. Thus, the deductive
step of hypostatic abstraction forms, in this broader perspecive, part of an abduction
whose valitidy must be investigated by further de- or induction on the basis of the
abstraction made. This is why hypostatic abstraction has sometimes been character-
ized as deduction, sometimes as abduction (cf. Pape and Short in Houser, Roberts, &
van Evra, 1997; cf. Stjernfelt, 2007, p. 458).
It should immediately be added that Peirce takes great care to distinguish this
process from what he calls “distinction”, the attention ability which permits the
focusing on a particular part or aspect of an object at the expense of other parts or
aspects of that object – and which is often confounded with hypostatic abstrac-
tion. These focusing abilities come in three variants, nicknamed “dissociation”,
“prescission”, and “discrimination”, respectively. Dissociation is what permits the
distinction between different independent qualities, such as “red” from “blue”:
prescission is what permits the distinction of a part which may be supposed to exist
independently of another part, such as “space” from “color”, while discrimination
is what permits the distinction of a part which may be only imagined separately,
such as “color” from “space”. These two latter distinction types are important to
the investigation of objects involving features dependent on each other in different
patternings. The kind of attention they pertain to, however, involves imagining the
object endowed with indeterminate parts:
In general, prescission is always accomplished by imagining ourselves in situations in which
certain elements of fact cannot be ascertained. This is a different and more complicated
operation than merely attending to one element and neglecting the rest. (CP 2.428).
According to Peirce, it is of paramount importance to keep the distinctions apart
from hypostatic abstraction – while the former pertain to the degree of particularity
and generality and thus permit chains of increasing generality like “red” – “color” –
“hue”, the latter does not lead to higher generality but to the creation of new, abstract
or ideal objects of thought or discourse.15 The distinction between the two may be
expressed as follows:
But even in the very ﬁrst passage in which abstraction occurs as a term of logic, two dis-
tinct meanings of it are given, the one the contemplation of a form apart from matter, as
when we think of whiteness, and the other the thinking of a nature indifferenter, or without
regard to the differences of its individuals, as when we think of a white thing, generally.
The latter process is called, also, precision (or better, prescission): and it would greatly con-
tribute to perspicuity of thought and expression if we were to return to the usage of the
best scholastic doctors and designate it by that name exclusively, restricting abstraction to
the former process by which we obtain notions corresponding to the “abstract nouns.” (CP
2.427, “Terminology” 1893).
15 As a realist, Peirce holds that some hypostatically abstract concepts refer to aspects of reality
(“gravity”) while others do not (“phlogiston”). See Haack (1992) and Stjernfelt (2007) ch. 2.

54
F. Stjernfelt
In most concrete cases, of course, the two procedures work closely in tandem: before
the hypostatic abstraction of “redness”, a distinction is required to isolate the prop-
erty of “red” in the object (more generally, hypostatic abstraction is impossible
without a preceding distinction) – but still, the working of the two must be kept
analytically distinct. In contrast to many empiricist theories of abstraction, more-
over, it should be added that Peirce does not identify any of the two with induction
as the statistical investigation of properties in a sample of objects. Abstraction does
not presuppose induction and it is perfectly possible to perform a hypostatic abstrac-
tion on the basis of one observed object only (even if it may be wiser to perform it
after an induction summing up knowledge of a wider sample of objects).
An important aspect of hypostatic abstraction is that, in making a second-order
object out of a thought, it gives it concrete form and thus facilitates cognitive and
logic manipulation and investigation of it – as if it were a particular individual
object:
Intuition is the regarding of the abstract in a concrete form, by the realistic hypostatization
of relations; that is the one sole method of valuable thought. Very shallow is the prevalent
notion that this is something to be avoided. You might as well say at once that reasoning is
to be avoided because it has led to so much error; quite in the same philistine line of thought
would that be; and so well in accord with the spirit of nominalism that I wonder some one
does not put it forward. The true precept is not to abstain from hypostatization, but to do it
intelligently. . . . (CP 3.383, “A Guess at the Riddle”, c. 1890).
This implies that the hypostatically abstract object may be seen as if it shared some
of the characteristics of particular individuals: it has properties, it stands in various
relations to other such objects, it may be subsumed by still higher genera – in that
sense hypostatic abstraction is a simplifying device involving cognitive economy
because it permits to use some of the same means for their investigation which we
use interacting with particulars. Peirce also ascribes abstractions a seminal role in
his famous distinction between corollarial and theorematic deductions,16 the former
only relying upon deﬁnition of concepts appearing in the premises, the latter requir-
ing the introduction of additional elements in the shape of postulates to conduct the
proof. Theorematical reasoning, of course, requires creativity and guessing, even if
being deductive – and the most challenging theorematical deductions are taken to
involve the introduction of abstractions:
“Deductions are of two kinds, which I call corollarial and theorematic. The corollarial are
those reasonings by which all corollaries and the majority of what are called theorems are
deduced; the theorematic are those by which the major theorems are deduced. If you take
the thesis of a corollary, – i.e. the proposition to be proved, and carefully analyze its mean-
ing, by substituting for each term its deﬁnition, you will ﬁnd that its truth follows, in a
straightforward manner, from previous propositions similarly analyzed. But when it comes
to proving a major theorem, you will very often ﬁnd you have need of a lemma, which
is a demonstrable proposition about something outside the subject of inquiry; and even if
a lemma does not have to be demonstrated, it is necessary to introduce the deﬁnition of
something which the thesis of the theorem does not contemplate. In the most remarkable
cases, this is some abstraction; that is to say, a subject whose existence consists in some fact
16 See Levy (1997); Stjernfelt (2007, pp. 107–08, 2011).

3
The Evolution of Semiotic Self-Control
55
about other things. Such, for example, are operations considered as in themselves subject to
operation; lines, which are nothing but descriptions of the motion of a particle, considered
as being themselves movable; collections; numbers; and the like. When the reform of math-
ematical reasoning now going on is complete, it will be seen that every such supposition
ought to be supported by a proper postulate. At any rate Kant himself ought to admit, and
would admit if he were alive today, that the conclusion of reasoning of this kind, although
it is strictly deductive, does not ﬂow from deﬁnitions alone, but that postulates are requisite
for it.” (CP 7.204; “On the Logic of drawing History from Ancient Documents especially
from Testimonies”, 1901).
As to the discussion of the semiotic “missing link” it should be mentioned that
many higher animals are able to make prescissions – the ability to isolate features
in an object is the precondition for associative learning, linking up co-occuring such
features – just like they are able to make deductions on the basis of phylogenetically
inherited or ontogenetically acquired habits. Theorematic reasoning and Hypostatic
abstractions, on the other hand, seem to be missing among animal proto-concepts.
3.5 Self-Control by Abstraction in Human Semiotics
In a central argument, Peirce links the special semiotic and cognitive abilities in
human beings to a higher degree of self-control which is, in turn, connected to the
ability to make hypostatic abstractions. Let us ﬁrst scrutinize his notion of “self-
control”. An important idea here is that self-control is crucial for inferences to count
as real reasonings, as he epigrammatically may say: “... reasoning is thought sub-
jected to self-control ...” (CP 5.533 “Pragmaticism, Prag. [4]” c. 1905). This is why
computers (“logical machines”) are not taken to be able to reason – even if their
actions may formally realize inference structures and they are able to produce out-
puts which are interpretable as truths – they do not possess any self-control. The
potentiality of speciﬁc action is sufﬁcient to count as a habit – but belief requires the
self-control of habit: “[Readiness] to act in a certain way under given circumstances
and when actuated by a given motive is a habit; and a deliberate, or self-controlled,
habit is precisely a belief.” (5.480).
Fully realized self-control, on the other hand, may have as its result the forma-
tion of mechanical-like thought habits: “The power of self-control is certainly not
a power over what one is doing at the very instant the operation of self-control is
commenced. It consists (to mention only the leading constituents) ﬁrst, in comparing
one’s past deeds with standards, second, in rational deliberation concerning how one
will act in the future, in itself a highly complicated operation, third, in the formation
of a resolve, fourth, in the creation, on the basis of the resolve, of a strong determi-
nation, or modiﬁcation of habit. This operation of self-control is a process in which
logical sequence is converted into mechanical sequence or something of the sort.
How this happens, we are in my opinion as yet entirely ignorant. There is a class
of signs in which the logical sequence is at the same time a mechanical sequence
and very likely this fact enters into the explanation.” (8.320. letter to F.C.S.Schiller,
undated).

56
F. Stjernfelt
This, however, is only possible as the result of a complex process involving
standards, future acts, and a decision to modiﬁy thought habits. Such self-control is
required for full mastering of reasoning – but is the result of a process with simpler
biological antecedents. Importantly, Peirce sees a decisive aspect of self-control in
the psychological ability to isolate a thought from other intrusions – a psychological
equivalent to the logical notion of “distinction” discussed above:
Contemplation consists in using our self-control to remove us from the forcible intrusion
of other thoughts, and in considering the interesting bearings of what may lie hidden in the
icon, so as to cause the subjective intensity of it to increase. (7.555)
The isolation of the iconic sign may count as a ﬁrst step in human self-control – to be
followed by the hypostatic taking of that sign to be a thing in itself. Hypostatization,
now, is crucially connected to the particularity of human reasoning. Peirce himself
only rarely discusses hypostatic abstraction in connection to the man-animal issue.
The most important locus is the following quote:
To return to self-control, which I can but slightly sketch, at this time, of course there are inhi-
bitions and coördinations that entirely escape consciousness. There are, in the next place,
modes of self-control which seem quite instinctive. Next, there is a kind of self-control
which results from training. Next, a man can be his own training-master and thus control
his self-control. When this point is reached much or all the training may be conducted in
imagination. When a man trains himself, thus controlling control, he must have some moral
rule in view, however special and irrational it may be. But next he may undertake to improve
this rule; that is, to exercise a control over his control of control. To do this he must have
in view something higher than an irrational rule. He must have some sort of moral princi-
ple. This, in turn, may be controlled by reference to an esthetic ideal of what is ﬁne. There
are certainly more grades than I have enumerated. Perhaps their number is indeﬁnite. The
brutes are certainly capable of more than one grade of control; but it seems to me that our
superiority to them is more due to our greater number of grades of self-control than it is to
our versatility.
Doctor Y. Is it not due to our faculty of language?
Pragmaticist. To my thinking that faculty is itself a phenomenon of self-control. For
thinking is a kind of conduct, and is itself controllable, as everybody knows. Now the intel-
lectual control of thinking takes place by thinking about thought. All thinking is by signs;
and the brutes use signs. But they perhaps rarely think of them as signs. To do so is mani-
festly a second step in the use of language. Brutes use language, and seem to exercise some
little control over it. But they certainly do not carry this control to anything like the same
grade that we do. They do not criticize their thought logically. One extremely important
grade of thinking about thought, which my logical analyses have shown to be one of chief,
if not the chief, explanation of the power of mathematical reasoning, is a stock topic of
ridicule among the wits. This operation is performed when something, that one has thought
about any subject, is itself made a subject of thought. (...)17 (“Pragmaticism, Prag. [4]”
c. 1905, CP 5.533).
17 In the left-out part of the quote given, Peirce goes into his recurring example of hypostatic
abstraction, Molière’s joke from Le malade imaginaire about the idle inference from “opium puts
people to sleep” and to “opium possesses a virtus dormativa” where Peirce agues that this ridiculed
inference does in fact represent a step (albeit very small) forward in reasoning, because it opens
the issue of what this dormitive powers more exactly consist in, how strong it is as compared
to that of other substances, etc., and thus facilitates further investigations. Without such further
investigations, of course, the hypostatic abstraction remains idle.

3
The Evolution of Semiotic Self-Control
57
The quote gives two important arguments. The ﬁrst is that self-control comes
in many grades and increase during evolution. Our hypothesis here will be that
this increase corresponds to the increase of articulation and segmentation of the
perception-action chain into detailed argument structures. Any autonomization of
a part of that chain corresponds to an increase in self-control. On top of such
grades of self-control which is already present in higher animals, Peirce presents an
architecture of additional human self-control grades: (1) training (2) self-training,
controlling one’s own self-control, involving imagination (3) adoption of a rule
guiding this meta-control, (4) improvement of that rule after some higher ethical
standard, thus controlling the control over one’s control (5) controlling, in turn,
that rule after some aesthetic standard (Peirce’s notion of aesthetics pertaining to
all goals which are worth pursuing18). Every such step, of course, takes the former
step as its object, thus creating a newhypostatic abstraction subject to variation and
evaluation.19 Many higher animals, it is well-known, may be subject to training, but
the next, decisive step of self-training seems only rudimentarily accessible to higher
animals.
The other crucial argument here is that such self-control is seminal to human
thought and language – and that this self-control is facilitated by thinking of our
signs as signs, by thinking about thought and thereby becoming able to criticize
our own thought logically. Self-control involves the taking one’s own thought as the
object of a meta-level thought. But this is only possible by making the ﬁrst thought
an object – stiffening in the shape of a hypostatic abstraction. Such self-control even
makes possible language. How should this be interpreted? – it is well known that
natural language learning does not take place by the explicit memorizing of lin-
guistic rules and that practicing knowledge of grammar does not entail any explicit
insight in grammatical principles (much like Peirce’s logical distinction between
implicit logica utens and explicit logica docens which differ in that the former is
interested in the result of reasoning, not the process, the latter vice versa). The work
performed by self-control here is more basic – it is the ability to wonder and check
whether a particular sign is suitably used, focusing upon the relation between sign,
18 The special concept of aesthetics referred to here is discussed later in the quote: “And you,
Doctor W., will see that since pragmaticism makes the purport to consist in a conditional proposi-
tion concerning conduct, a sufﬁciently deliberate consideration of that purport will reﬂect that the
conditional conduct ought to be regulated by an ethical principle, which by further self-criticism
may be made to accord with an esthetical ideal. For I cannot admit that any ideal can be too high
for a duly transﬁgured esthetics. So, although I do not think that an esthetic valuation is essentially
involved, actualiter (so to speak) in every intellectual purport, I do think that it is a virtual factor of
a duly rationalized purport. That is to say, it really does belong to the purport, since conduct may
depend upon its being appealed to. Yet in ordinary cases, it will not be needful that this should
be done.” (CP. 5.535) That “duly transﬁgured” aesthetics is the generalized doctrine of all ideals
possible to pursue; the idea is that such ideals may play a role in thought even if not explicitly
addressed at all.
19 We remark in the passing that Peirce, in this nesting of control acts into higher-level control
acts, seems to subscribe to an Enlightenment ideal of the moral autonomy of human reasoning.

58
F. Stjernfelt
object, and interpretant, upon its relation to other signs and their objects and inter-
pretants. Such ability is taken to be the prerequisite to the establishment of grammar,
ﬁne-grained taxonomies, tuning of schematic content, expression-content couplings,
etc. in the development of languages.20
It is important to Peirce’s notion of self-control, now, that such self-control is a
merely restrictive measure, selecting valuable inferences among less valuable infer-
ences – thus, it presupposes the existence of inferences which it then, subsequently,
turns into reasoning by controlling them:
But self-control is the character which distinguishes reasonings from the processes by
which perceptual judgments are formed, and self-control of any kind is purely inhibitory.
It originates nothing. Therefore it cannot be in the act of adoption of an inference, in the
pronouncing of it to be reasonable,
that the formal conceptions in question can ﬁrst emerge. It must be in the ﬁrst perceiving
that so one might conceivably reason. And what is the nature of that? I see that I have
instinctively described the phenomenon as a “perceiving.” I do not wish to argue from
words; but a word may furnish a valuable suggestion. What can our ﬁrst acquaintance with
an inference, when it is not yet adopted, be but a perception of the world of ideas? (5.194
Lectures on Pragmatism 1903).
The question of the roots of inference is here answered phenomenologically – inves-
tigating the origin of inference structures as seen from the perspective of human
mind. Before subjecting an inference to control and evaluating it, we must be able
to perceive it in “the world of ideas”. This idealist wording of course leaves out
the fact that we access that world not by any direct, mystic, purely intuitive route,
but only by the intermediary of diagrams, facilitated by imagination. The inhibitory
work performed by the different levels of self-control, then, presupposes a wealth of
possible inferences and abstract objects to chose between. The imaginative creation,
variation and combination of such inferences and objects – at each of the control
levels – is thus the prerequisite for inhibitory self-control to perform its function.
And posed as an evolutionary question, the basic pool of such inference structures
is found in the perception-action habits reﬁned through the evolution of animals –
habits which have been subjected to increasing degrees of control already over the
course of evolution, before they are made, in turn, the object of the vastly increasing
human processes of self-control by means of hypostatic abstraction and diagram
experimentation.21
20 Reasoning as opposed to mechanical compuation is characterized by self-control. Given the
tower of control of control discussed here, however, self-control appears as a matter of degree.
Even if perfect self-control may be achievable on one level, this hardly involves all levels at the
same time. Conversely, cases of intermediary control are possible, Peirce muses in a psychological
argument: “If, however, as the English suppose, the feeling of rationality is the product of a sort
of subconscious reasoning--by which I mean an operation which would be a reasoning if it were
fully conscious and deliberate--the accompanying feeling of evidence may well be due to a dim
recollection of the experimentation with diagrams.” (2.172) Subconscious diagram experiment –
controlled only to some degree – might lie behind non-substantiated evidence-feelings.
21 It goes without saying that this overall evolutionary increase in self-control recruits further capa-
bilities to create higher level, more efﬁcient cognition and action – such as conscousness, emotions,
episodic memory, human language etc.

3
The Evolution of Semiotic Self-Control
59
It is an important corollary of self-control, as described here, that it always
involves (at least) two levels, that of inhibitory controlling, and that of imaginary
creativity (being controlled). This implies that the focus of control must alternate
between the levels, evolving inferences on the lower level and pruning them on the
higher level. This makes self-control a special case of Peirce’s important idea of the
dialogicity of logic. This, I think, makes it possible to compare the Peircean notion
of self-control by hypostatic abstraction with Tomasello’s well-known ideas of joint
attention (Tomasello, 1999, 2008).
3.6 Hypostatic Abstraction and Joint Attention
For how does Peirce’s idea of hypostatic abstraction ﬁt the Tomasellian idea of joint
attention? For a ﬁrst glance, the two ideas may seem wide apart, but for a closer
glance important similarities appear. Joint attention can not, of course, be reduced
to two parties both of them intending the same object. It also involves the knowl-
edge in each part of the other part’s attention. But even that is not sufﬁcient. As
Kaplan and Hafner insist from the point of view of implementing joint attention in
robot research, joint attention is not achieved even by robots tracking other robots’
attention and coordinating that with their own attention (which is robotologically
possible but does not entail joint attention). Rather, joint attention is a collaborative
process, in which
. . . the agent must understand, monitor and direct the attentional behavior of the other
agent. Joint attention can only be reached if both agents are aware of this coordination
of “perspectives” towards the world. (Kaplan and Hafner 2006).
Joint attention thus requires for each agent to assume the famous “intentional
stance” towards the other: the attention direction detected in the other agent is inter-
preted as a sign that an intention is directing that attention to some goal. But even
that is not sufﬁcient: each agent must be able to inﬂuence upon the other’s atten-
tion, for instance by directing it by means of gesture, eye movements, linguistic
cues, etc. And such inﬂuence is only possible based on a skill of social interac-
tion: the agents must be able to master turn-taking, role-switching and ritualized
games, as Kaplan underlines. If no turn-taking schema is active, the agents will
not know who is directing whose attention at any given moment. Thus, the appar-
ently simple phenomenon of “joint attention” entails a whole series of interrelated
concepts – a molecule of social interaction. But something similar is the case with
Peircean hypostatic abstraction. It forms, of course, one of the major techniques of
letting “symbols grow”, Peirce’s brief version of the Enlightenment ideal of com-
mon, increasing knowledge construction. It does that by means of its ability to take
other signs as its object, thereby making their content and role explicit, and hence the
possible object of scrutinizing, comparing and controlling. And this whole process
of thought, according to Peirce, has an irreducible dialogic structure:
Accordingly, it is not merely a fact of human Psychology, but a necessity of Logic, that
every logical evolution of thought should be dialogic. (“Prolegomena”, 1906, CP 4.551).

60
F. Stjernfelt
This necessity lies in the articulation of logic in signs as the means for com-
municating them from a person in one moment to the same person in the next
moment:
All thinking is dialogic in form. Your self of one instant appeals to your deeper self for
his assent. Consequently, all thinking is conducted in signs that are mainly of the same
general structure as words; those which are not so, being of the nature of those signs of
which we have need now and then in our converse with one another to eke out the defects
of words, or symbols. These non-symbolic thought-signs are of two classes: ﬁrst, pictures
or diagrams or other images (I call them Icons) such as have to be used to explain the
signiﬁcations of words; and secondly, signs more or less analogous to symptoms (I call
them Indices) of which the collateral observations, by which we know what a man is talking
about, are examples. The Icons chieﬂy illustrate the signiﬁcations of predicate-thoughts,
the Indices the denotations of subject-thoughts. The substance of thoughts consists of these
three species of ingredients. (6.338, Amazing Mazes 4, 1909).
And this gives rise to the possibility of performing logical arguments and proofs,
the same person occupying alternately pro- and con-positions in an ongoing dia-
logic process. These important ideas have often been overlooked because Peirce’s
ideas on this are only scarcely represented in his published work and have not
been much discussed in the Peirce literature, but it has been highlighted in the
wake of the tradition of Hintikkan game-theoretical semantics (Jaakko Hintikka,
Risto Hilpinen; most recently, Pietarinen 2006 has furthered the investigation of
this issue).22 This idea occurs in the context of Peirce’s logic representation systems
known as Existential Graphs whose Alpha and Beta parts are isomorphic to proposi-
tional logic and ﬁrst order predicate logic with identity, respectively. Peirce’s idea is
that these representations reveal a dialogic structure inherent in logical arguments.
One agent, the so-called Grapheus, is responsible for the construction of the discur-
sive world, while the other, the so-called Graphist, is responsible for counter-arguing
the single steps of its construction. The two agents thus collaborate in critically
investigating a logical issue and take it to conclusion, and they may, of course, often
be instantiated in one and the same mind during soliloquious thought processes. In
Pietarinen’s Hintikkan interpretation, they may be seen as playing a semantic game
against each other, and the existence of a winning strategy on the part of one of
them is the game-theoretical equivalent to the truth of that part’s argument. We shall
not here go deeply into the speciﬁc means the two agents use when interacting in
Peirce’s elaboration of the existential graphs, but in our context, Peirce has some
important general developments of what is involved:
Now nothing can be controlled that cannot be observed while it is in action. It is therefore
requisite that both minds but especially the Graphist-mind should have a power of self-
observation. Moreover, control supposes a capacity in that which is to be controlled of
acting in accordance with deﬁnite general tendencies of a tolerable stable nature, which
implies a reality in this governing principle. But these habits, so to call them, must be
capable of being modiﬁed according to some ideal in the mind of the controlling agent; and
this controlling agent is to be the very same as the agent controlled; the control extending
even to the modes of control themselves, since we suppose that the interpreter-mind under
22 See also the Hintikka and Hilpinen refs. in the References.

3
The Evolution of Semiotic Self-Control
61
the guidance of the Graphist-mind discusses the rationale of logic itself. (MS 280: 30–32,
quoted from Pietarinen 2006).
The dialogic structure facilitates control of the thought process, because one part’s
utterance in the game takes the other part’s utterance as its object in a hypostatic
abstraction.23 What is visible, of course, is only the other part’s manifest utterance,
but that utterance is the response to the whole preceding game and, in that respect,
indirectly refers to it – much like a move in a chess game implicitly refers to the
whole preceding game and one player’s interpretation of the other’s intention as
perceived from his move sequence. Of course, hypostatic abstractions are not pos-
sible within the representation systems offered in the Alpha and Beta parts of the
Existential Graphs (hypostatic abstractions quantify over other signs such as pre-
cidates and thus belong to second-order logic). Peirce envisaged this second order
part in his Gamma graphs which were to comprise a part aimed at the explicit repre-
sentation of hypostatic abstractions. But naturally, this representation of them takes
place in a hypostatic abstraction of second order.
If logical thinking necessarily possesses a dialogic structure, it forces the
individual engaging in such thinking to divide so as to accomodate to it:
There is no reason why “thought,” in what has just been said, should be taken in that narrow
sense in which silence and darkness are favorable to thought. It should rather be understood
as covering all rational life, so that an experiment shall be an operation of thought. Of
course, that ultimate state of habit to which the action of self-control ultimately tends, where
no room is left for further self-control, is, in the case of thought, the state of ﬁxed belief, or
perfect knowledge.
Two things here are all-important to assure oneself of and to remember. The ﬁrst is that
a person is not absolutely an individual. His thoughts are what he is “saying to himself,”
that is, is saying to that other self that is just coming into life in the ﬂow of time. When one
reasons, it is that critical self that one is trying to persuade; and all thought whatsoever is
a sign, and is mostly of the nature of language. The second thing to remember is that the
man’s circle of society (however widely or narrowly this phrase may be understood), is a
sort of loosely compacted person, in some respects of higher rank than the person of an
individual organism. It is these two things alone that render it possible for you – but only
in the abstract, and in a Pickwickian sense – to distinguish between absolute truth and what
you do not doubt. (5.420–421, “What Pragmatism Is”, 1905).
If this is the case, there seems to be a deep connection between the dialogic structure
of reasoning and self-control on the level of semiotics and logic – and the central
place enjoyed by joint attention on the level of human psychology according to
Tomasello’s hypothesis. The parent-child dyad interaction trains the child in the
ﬁrst human level of self-control with he parent as the teacher, of course, but with the
continuous exchange of positions making it possible for the child to experience the
23 Might such dialogue structures take place in evolutionary time? El-Hani, Queiroz, and Stjernfelt
(2010) takes ﬁreﬂy signaling as an example of deception where one species may mimic that of
another for predatory purposes – creating a virtual arms race between ﬁreﬂy species. In some sense,
the changing of the signal of one species forms an inference stated in the slow progress of phylo-
genetic time, and the other species may be able to answering the inference by some countermove
(if not going extinct in the meantime).

62
F. Stjernfelt
dialogue structure and internalize it for the beneﬁt of its critical self-control abilities
(and for later social interactions as well, of course).
Thus, a hypothesis can be stated that there is a connection between the human
ability to use signs about signs and thereby exercize semiotic self-control, on the
one hand, and the ability of human beings to engage in joint attentions with other
subjects shaping a shared world informed by shared thoughts in the shape of shared
diagram experiments.
The overall argument of this chapter, then, is that a the gradual appearance of
logic and semiotic capabilities during evolution forms the backbone of the increase
of cognitive competences from simple biology to higher animals and human beings.
This appearance takes the shape of the ongoing articulation, subdivision and mak-
ing explicit of a basic argument structure inherent in perception-action loops. The
basic reason is that biological semiosis must be oriented toward adequacy truths for
survival reasons, making biological cognition acutely dependent upon the ability to
perceive and act in a way which is adequate to the environment, thus expressing
the linking of proto-propositions. This is not to say that issues like the emergence
of communication, awareness, consciousness, emotions, episodic memory, human
language and much else are not important. Quite on the contrary, in this framework,
such capabilities arise during evolution in order to enhance, speed up, widen, and
control the basic, biological process of argumentative cognition.
Acknowledgement Thanks to Peter Harder, Jesper Hoffmeyer, and Theresa Schilhab for com-
ments.
References
Adler, J., Hazelbauer, G. L., & Dahl, M. M. (1973). Chemotaxis toward sugars in escherichia coli.
Journal of Bacteriology, 115(3), 824–847.
Berg, H. C. (1988). A physicist looks at bacterial chemotaxis. Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on
Quantitative Biology, 53, 1–9.
Clark, A. (2008). Supersizing the mind: Embodiment, action, and cognitive extension. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Deacon, T. (1997). The symbolic species. New York: W.W. Norton.
Deacon, T. (forthcoming) Incomplete nature. New York: W.W. Norton.
El-Hani, C., Queiroz, J., & Stjernfelt, F. (2010). Fireﬂy femmes fatales. A Case Study in the
Semiotics of Deception. Journal of Biosemiotics, 3.1, 33–55.
Fauconnier, G., & Turner, M. (2002). The way we think. Conceptual blending and the mind’s
hidden complexities. New York: Basic Books.
Haack, S. (1992). Extreme scholastic realism: Its relevance to philosophy of science today.
Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society, XXVIII(1), 19–50.
Hilpinen, R. (1982). On C. S. Peirce’s theory of the proposition: Peirce as a precursor of game-
theoretical semantics. The Monist 65, 182–188.
Hintikka, J. (1983). C.S. Peirce’s “ﬁrst real discovery” and its contemporary relevance. In
E. Freeman (Ed.), The relevance of Charles Peirce (pp. 107–118). La Salle, IL: The Hegeler
Institute.
Hintikka, J. (1997a). The place of C.S. Peirce in the history of logical theory. In J. Brunning &
P. Forster (Eds.), The rule of reason (pp. 13–33). Toronto: University of Toronto Press, (also in
Hintikka 1997, 140–61).

3
The Evolution of Semiotic Self-Control
63
Hintikka, J. (1997b). Lingua Universalis vs. calculus ratiocinator. An ultimate presupposition of
twentieth-century philosophy. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1996). Evolutionary intentionality. In E. Pessa, A. Montesanto, & M. P. Penna
(Eds.), Proceedings from the third European conference on systems science, Rome 1–4. Oct.
1996 (pp. 699–703). Rome: Edzioni Kappa.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2008). Biosemiotics. An examination into the signs of life and the life of signs.
Scranton, PA: University of Scranton Press.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2010). Semiotic freedom: An emerging force. In P. Davies & N. H. Gregersen
(Eds.), Information and the nature of reality from physics to metaphysics (pp. 185–204).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Houser, N., Roberts, D. D., & van Evra J. (Eds.). (1997). Studies in the logic of Charles Sanders
Peirce. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press
Hurford, J. (2007). The origin of meaning. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kaplan, F., & Hafner, V. V. (2006). The challenges of joint attention. Interaction Studies, 7(2),
135–169.
Levy, S. H. (1997). Peirce’s theoremic/corollarial distinction and the interconnections between
mathematics and logic. In N. Houser, D. D. Roberts, & J. van Evra (Eds.), Studies in the logic
of Charles Sanders Peirce (pp. 85–110). Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Peirce, C. (1976). C. Eisele (Ed.), New elements of mathematics I–IV. The Hague: Mouton.
Peirce, C. (1998a) (1931–58) C. Hartshorne, P. Weiss, & A. W. Burks (Eds.), Collected papers
[CP, references given by “CP” followed by volume number and paragraph], I–VIII. London:
Thoemmes Press.
Peirce, C. (1998b). N. Houser & C. Kloesel (Eds.), The essential Peirce, Vol. II (1893–1913) [EPII,
references given by “EPII” followed by page or chapter]. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press.
Short, T. L. (2007). Peirce’s theory of signs. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stjernfelt, F. (2006). Two iconicity notions in Peirce’s diagrammatology. In H. Scharfe, P. Hitzler,
& P. Øhrstrøm (Eds.), Conceptual structures: Inspiration and application. Lecture notes in
artiﬁcial intelligence 4068 (pp. 70–86), Berlin: Springer.
Stjernfelt, F. (2007). Diagrammatology. An investigation on the borderlines of phenomenology,
ontology, and semiotics. Dordrecht: Springer.
Stjernfelt, F. (2011). Peirce’s notion of diagram experiment. Corollarial and theorematical experi-
ments with diagrams. In R. Heinrich, E. Nemeth, W. Pichler, & D. Wagner (Eds.), Image and
Imaging in Philosophy, Science, and the Arts (Vol. 2, pp. 305–340). Frankfurt: Ontos Verlag.
Stjernfelt, F. (forthcoming a). Signs conveying information. On the range of Peirce’s notion of
propositions: Dicisigns. Signs and Semiotic Systems.
Stjernfelt, F. (forthcoming b). The generality of signs. Anti-psychologism in the foundations of
semiotics – and its actual relevance.Semiotica.
Tomasello, M. (1999). The cultural origins of human cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Tomasello, M. (2008). Origins of human communication. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Chapter 4
Peirce and Deacon on the Meaning
and Evolution of Language
Ahti-Veikko J. Pietarinen
Abstract According to Charles Peirce’s theory of meaning, known as pragmati-
cism, the meaning of signs is in the habitual practices and activities according to
which we acquire information that connect signs with other signs and their objects.
In The Symbolic Species: The Co-Evolution of Language and the Brain (henceforth
SS, Deacon, 1997), Terrence Deacon takes meaning to be explicated by the uniquely
human capacity for symbolic reference. The evolution of language is couched in
adaptive co-evolution that overcomes the symbolic threshold by increased social
selection pressures. Peirce, on the other hand, understood evolution “agapastically”:
it is not the selective mechanisms that direct the adaptation, say, of neural struc-
tures, but the growth of habits of action that are in continuous interaction with one
another. I argue that Deacon’s and Peirce’s positions on the meaning of signs and
the evolution of linguistic meaning share some similarities but also differ in a couple
of fundamental respects.
This chapter charts the similarities as well as the dissimilarities between Peirce’s and
Deacon’s positions. What do they take meaning to ultimately consist of? What are
their views on the evolution of language? These questions stem from the suggestions
in the earlier literature, including that of Deacon’s book, that he is following the
footpaths of Peirce on these issues.1 My chapter points out in which senses this
is and is not the case, with particular reference to the notions of meaning and the
evolution of language.
1 See Cowley (2002) and Lumsden (2002), among others. After the ﬁrst version of the present
paper was written in 2006, de Villiers (2007) published a rejoinder in which Peirce’s and Deacon’s
uses of the term ‘symbol’ was greatly clariﬁed and defended against the misinterpretations of
Cowley (2002).
A.-V.J. Pietarinen (B)
Department of Philosophy, History, Culture and Art Studies, University of Helsinki,
FIN-00014 Helsinki, Finland
e-mail: ahti-veikko.pietarinen@helsinki.ﬁ
65
T. Schilhab et al. (eds.), The Symbolic Species Evolved, Biosemiotics 6,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-2336-8_4, C⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2012

66
A.-V.J. Pietarinen
4.1 Peirce on Meaning
Peirce and Deacon are close intellectual colleagues in a fundamental sense: both
are practicing scientists who have learned their methods and ways of thinking in
laboratories and in the ﬁelds rather than in an armchair. By training as well as by
ediﬁcation, both are thus in a good position to comment on such multidisciplinary
topics as the meaning of signs and the evolution of language. Peirce’s scientiﬁc
interests ranged from astronomy to geodesy, from linguistics to experimental psy-
chology, and from neuroscience to engineering. Virtually no nook of scientiﬁc
inquiry of his era was foreign to him. Deacon’s Symbolic Species follows suit
and combines semiotics, linguistics, anthropology, neurosciences and cognitive sci-
ences to formulate an intriguing novel account of meaning and the origins and the
evolution of language.
No wonder, then, that not only is there a considerable interest from ﬁrst-rate
scientists in Peircean topics such as the logic of inquiry, scientiﬁc methodology
and the theory of signs. Also the emerging philosophical positions are likely to
converge. In Peirce’s view, philosophy is science. Yet it is science in a uniquely
methodological way that does not turn it a mere ﬂat naturalistic endeavor. It ought
to be pursued by analogous methods and analogous processes of reasoning to those
by which hands-on scientists pursue their experiments in a laboratory, but without
any claim to explain the philosophical concepts solely in specialised scientiﬁc terms.
Yet we may reasonably enquire into the extent to which such wide-ranging
philosophical concepts such as meaning could converge with what scientiﬁc inves-
tigations have to tell about it. Peirce’s answer is that yes, that extent is in fact very
signiﬁcant. The meaning of all expressions is grounded in the very experimental
results they produce, as these expressions are used across situations of various kinds.
This requires only that the proper investigative conduct and reasoning in setting up
the experiments have been followed. This is what his Maxim of Pragmatism is, in
effect, calculated to articulate. Here is a quotation from his late, 1905 formulation
of that Maxim, which was renamed as the Maxim of Pragmaticism2:
Consider what effects that might conceivably have practical bearings – especially in modi-
fying habits or as implying capacities – you conceive the object of your conception to have.
Then your (interpretational) conception of these effects is the whole (meaning of) your
conception of the object. (MS 290: 33, 1905, Issues of Pragmaticism).
The only shift that takes place when we move from the realm of a laboratory to
that of human thought is the shift from observable objects given by controlled
experiments to conceivably observable objects given by those human practices and
activities that seek answers to questions by making experiments in thought. Now in
seeking answers to questions we put questions to some source of information. In the
2 This account concerns Peirce’s mature theory of meaning, which differs in some crucial respects
from his early 1878 theory. On these points as well as on the general proposal for a reconstruction
of Peirce’s late proof of pragmatism, see Pietarinen and Snellman (2006).

4
Peirce and Deacon on the Meaning and Evolution of Language
67
laboratory science that source will be Nature and in the pragmatic theory of mean-
ing it will be the utterer of the sign. To put a question to the source of information
is a reasoning activity that uses abduction. Abduction is the capacity of generating
scientiﬁc hypotheses as well as selecting among them. Abduction is closely linked
to the reasoning processes of the inquirers, which essentially derive from their skills
in setting up new prospects and perspectives as well as hitting on the right kinds of
new goals to be pursued further.3
One essential feat when moving from laboratories to philosophy and from scien-
tiﬁc experiments to thought experiments is that the shift is continuous rather than
discrete. This follows from Peirce’s ontological synechist view according to which
matter is “effete mind” and is “hidebound with habits” (CP 6.158, 1892, The Law
of Mind).4
In summary, then, according to Peirce meaning is what transpires in certain
habitual practices and activities connected with experiments with signs, including
linguistic signs. Just as evolution inﬂuences and modiﬁes the habits of nature and
of the physical world, it affects and impinges on the habits of human beings by
which we act in certain ways in certain kinds of circumstances. Habits, undergoing
constant changes, in turn affect and shape the contexts within which human beings,
guided by them, must operate. Therefore, habits inﬂuence the experiences which we
may have through signs. For Peirce, meanings evolve and grow contemporaneously
with biological aspects of evolution. In the Sections 4.3 and 4.4 of this chapter, I
will return to the important point of Peirce’s evolutionary theory of meaning and its
allied notions which I preliminarily investigated in Pietarinen (2005).5
4.2 Deacon on Meaning
Deacon takes meaning to be explicated by the uniquely human mode for symbolic
reference (SS: 43). One of the key questions Deacon poses is the time-honoured one:
How do words and thought manage to correspond to, or refer to, reality, the world?
With reference to neuroscientiﬁc nomenclature, Deacon calls this the Grounding
Problem (SS: 439).6
3 Pietarinen (2007c) is concerned with aspects of abduction in Peirce’s 1907 proof of pragma-
tism. Some steps in the reconstructed proof assume abductive reasoning and are closely related to
question-answering structures in cognition (Pietarinen, 2010a).
4 A very similar ‘Law of Mind’ was suggested before Peirce by John J. Murphy in his Habit and
Intelligence (1869; see Pietarinen, 2009b), a work which Peirce applauded in unpublished draft
versions of his 1887 article “Guess at the Riddle”.
5 Pietarinen (2005) is a study of Peirce’s theory of meaning, which was presented in a conference
on evolutionary epistemology. It is surprising how little of Peirce, let alone Baldwin, have been
acknowledged in the works of those propounding that evolutionary approach to epistemological
issues.
6 I should mention that Peirce did keep an eye on the neurosciences of the day. At one point, he
learned about Broca’s groundbreaking discovery of 1860 – that Broca’s and Wernice’s areas are
connected with the abilities to speak – and mentions it in relation to religious questions concerning

68
A.-V.J. Pietarinen
The same issue has been long-standing in the tradition of philosophy of language.
I suggest that we may look at it anew through the Deaconian interpretation of
Peirce’s semiotics. Begin with Peirce’s notion of symbolic signs. Symbols are the
most highly evolved and developed kinds of signs, which typically incorporate
indexical and iconic features. Deacon naturally observes these Peircean rudiments
very well. Deacon asks: how come humans have acquired linguistic communica-
tion whereas animals have not? This is the puzzle from which Deacon begins to
build his story in his book. My question is: what is the service we hope to get from
Peirce’s theory concerning Deacon’s fundamental question? Does it answer what
the uniquely human forms of communication are in the ﬁrst place?
We must note that Peirce did not approve of any sharp distinction between human
and other forms of communication. For him, communication of humans is contin-
uous with the communication of any other sign user, including other species and
even inanimate entities. A sign is a “species of medium of communication” (EP
2:390, 1906; see Pietarinen, 2006b). A sign user is anyone or anything that fulﬁls
the function of the utterer or the interpreter of the sign. Language is one species of a
medium among many others. According to Peirce’s often quoted – and equally often
misunderstood – statement, every thought is a sign, and thought is not necessarily
connected with brains but “appears in the work of bees, of crystals, and throughout
the purely physical world” just as it appears in the works of men (CP 4.551, 1906,
Prolegomena to an Apology for Pragmaticism).
Nevertheless, Deacon’s original insight is that symbolic signs – where the notion
of a symbol is intended to be understood in the sense of Peirce’s sign theory –
pertain, predominantly if not exclusively, to the human realm of communication.
Animals do not have symbols. Animals do not use symbols. Vervet monkey alarm
calls are at best indexical, not symbolic, according to Deacon. This was Thomas
Sebeok’s conclusion in his life-long study of animal communication from the semi-
otic points of view as well. There is a generality in the nature of symbols that is not
and cannot be found in the realm of signs that animals can use.
Peirce notices that symbols owe their “origin (on one side) to human conven-
tions” (CP 5.532, c.1905, Consequences of Critical Common-Sensism). I believe
what Peirce means is the common fact that the other side of their origin comes
from indices and icons, which are forms of signs distinct from symbols, yet signs
which symbols are capable of accommodating. That Peirce would have agreed with
Deacon’s point about symbols to be “uniquely human” is nevertheless contentious,
for the two reasons implicit in what was said above: that communication continu-
ously involves anyone or anything capable of uttering and interpreting signs, and
immortality in Answers to Questions Concerning My Belief in God (MS 845, c.1906; CP 6.520).
He believed that the dependence of mental action upon the brain had been demonstrated by Broca’s
ﬁnding, and noted how lesions in Broca’s area greatly affect the use of language: “when Broca’s
convolution is much diseased we always ﬁnd the use of language is greatly affected” (MS 845:
5–6). In the same context, he remarked on the brain’s plasticity: “When a part of the brain is
extirpated we ﬁnd the result is that certain faculties are lost. But after a time they are recovered.
How can this be? The answer given is that other parts of the brain learn to perform those functions”
(MS 845: 6).

4
Peirce and Deacon on the Meaning and Evolution of Language
69
that signs are continuous media of communication that on average involve iconic
and indexical features.
Deacon adds to the nature of the symbolic sign the further requirement that
the symbolic meaning is inherently and uniquely social. He takes language to be
a social phenomenon, but he does not qualify whether this is a claim about the
social character of grammar, semantic meaning, use, or understanding of language
(SS: 115, 400). According to Peirce, however, symbols emerge as soon as habits of
action are found that grow and evolve as signs are interpreted in the triadic frame-
work of interpretation. Such signs need to be public or publicly available, to be
sure, and this is certainly necessitated by their nature of being media of communi-
cation, but yet the public character of language does not imply that language could
necessarily exist in social contexts only.7 We do not get much support from Peirce
for Deacon’s additional qualiﬁcation of the inherently social nature of language.
Thinking and reasoning is for Peirce a form of dialogue, to be sure, and an inter-
active and collaborative kind of a dialogue as that, too, but to claim that these are
inherently and necessarily social kinds of activities is to make some strong addi-
tional assumptions about the nature of language use and logical reasoning. It is true
that Peirce at one point states that “logic is rooted in the social principle” (CP 2.654,
1893, The Doctrine of Chances), but we at the same time must notice that accord-
ing to him, “to be social is one thing, to be gregarious is another: I decline to serve
as bellwether” (CP 1.10, c.1897, The Principles of Philosophy). To claim sociali-
sation was for Peirce just to oppose the notion of “selﬁsh” logicians, and the idea
of “the German logicians” of the day that the general psychological notions such as
hopes, wishes and desired could have something to do with logical validity or fun-
damentally pragmatistic nature of linguistic meaning. In a late manuscript, Peirce
even remarks that “one can establish conventions with oneself, which enable one
to express the essence of what [one] has to communicate free from signs that are
not essential” (MS 846: 5–6, 1910, Notes for my Logical Criticism of Articles of the
Christian Creed).
My additional remark is that in SS Deacon does not address the conventional
nature of symbols, let alone the origins of conventions, which is a bit surprising
given the extent to which not only Peirce but so many later philosophers, linguists,
and logicians have taken conventions to be constitutive of the meaning systems of
human languages.8 I have further comments on this in the last section.
7 This point turns on the Wittgensteinian question of whether Robinson Crusoe can have a lan-
guage. Peirce inevitably thinks he can. On this point, see the appended dialogue in Pietarinen
2006b, chapter 9: “Dialogue Foundations and Informal Logic”.
8 Lewis (1969) was an inﬂuential treatise on the origins of conventions, with its own origins in
Erik Stenius’s work on ‘gardening games’ (Stenius, 1968). Guldborg Hansen (2007)’s paper in
the collection Game Theory and Linguistic Meaning (Pietarinen, 2007b) is a convenient survey of
the status of Lewis-type signalling games throughout the contemporary scene. Lewis’s theory is
nevertheless nominalistic in ways interestingly similar to those accounts for symbols criticised by
Peirce in his theory of signs for missing their general, habitual character.

70
A.-V.J. Pietarinen
Peirce took communication to be a phenomenon which is continuous from one
media to another. What is predominantly human is the conventional mode of sym-
bolic communication but not the use of symbols per se. Deacon, on the other hand, is
prone to make the global symbolic realm the perimeter distinguishing human from
non-human. It is doubtful whether Peirce, a synechist thinker as he was, would have
accepted such a border phenomenon as a feature actually existing in the common
and shared world.
My supplementary observation on human symbolic communication has to do
with one more “major transition” that appears to await us in the future – namely
iconic communication. Now that we have learned to think and express ourselves
using the symbolic media, we are rapidly moving towards a visual and multimodal
communication age. While such non-symbolic means of communication may seem
harder for humans to use than linguistic symbols, is it not just because we have
not yet mastered the economy of pictorial and other iconic means of communi-
cation? Before early hominids learned to speak, they used gestures. Sign languages
are mostly symbolic, but there are other, essentially iconic means of communication
and information sharing, such as diagrams, charts and maps of a massive variety of
different kinds.9
Deacon takes icons to be situated on the lower level of “referential competence”
than indices or symbols, evoked by the “interpretive process of re-cognition”. By
re-cognition, he means a duplication or reproduction of some observed relational
structure in the relational structure of our cognition. However, icons are typically
quite subtle and abstract, as logical diagrams (which I argue to be the “logics of
our cognition” in Pietarinen, 2011) and creative uses of metaphors readily testify
(Pietarinen, 2006a, 2010b). Therefore, iconicity should not simply be seen as a
straightforward duplication in another representational media. Moreover, not all
icons have image-like qualities attached to them (Pietarinen, 2007d).
Moving from the comparison between the notion of symbols in Peirce and
Deacon to my second major point, Deacon’s use of the notion of reference in the
exposition of his “Grounding Problem” and his assertion that “meaning is uniquely
human mode for symbolic reference” deserves a further comment. “Reference”,
as we have come to understand it in contemporary philosophy of language, is
a very un-Peircean term. Especially in his later philosophy, reference is never
used as an unarticulated simple term. Instead, there must always be something or
9 Stjernfelt (2007) is a multi-disciplinary treatise accentuating the ubiquity of diagrammatic forms
of representation in human culture, and comments on Deacon’s theory in at length. Pietarinen
(2009a) studies Otto Neurath’s vision of the Isotype system as an anticipation of the ‘visual rev-
olution’ which is currently changing the very foundations of human communication.Think of the
use of emoticons in online chats, for example: they are certainly vaguer, milder, and much more
roundabout forms of putting forth assertions than what is achieved with the symbolic, written or
spoken, means of expression. Such kinds of pictures certainly do not communicate the exactly
same propositional content and speaker’s meaning as the linguistic expressions, such as “I love
you!”, “I am happy because of what you said”, or “I am crying now. . .”.

4
Peirce and Deacon on the Meaning and Evolution of Language
71
someone who mediates the reference.10 Deacon seems to take reference in two
senses: that which connects symbols to things and that which connects symbols
with one another. Moreover, we ﬁnd inclination to use the phrase “indirect” rather
than “direct” reference. In philosophy of language, direct reference means purely
denotative names, “labels attached to things”. This is not what Deacon means, and
indirect reference does not imply a belief in the existence of non-denotative names.
Rather, in Deacon’s parlance it means belief in the existence of some intra-linguistic
referential relationships among symbolic signs.
In terms of Peirce’s theory, this means that indirect reference pertains to
Peirce’s Speculative Grammar in his three-part division of the normative science
of logic: Speculative Grammar, Logic Proper and Speculative Rhetoric. Speculative
Grammar studies the relationships between signs not yet interpreted. It does not con-
cern the study of the relationships between signs and objects as does Logic Proper,
nor does it concern the study of the relationships between signs and interpretants as
does Speculative Rhetoric.11
Next, Deacon discusses various kinds of interpretative processes and responses
that account for the multiplicity of reference. He borrows from Peirce the glorious
notion of “interpretant” to refer to such interpretive responses. Deacon writes that
“an interpretant is whatever enables one to infer the reference from some sign or
signs and their context” (SS: 63).12 A considerable task that Deacon undertakes
is to chart the mechanisms of one-to-many mappings from interpretants to their
“reference”.
It seems to me, however, that Peirce’s puzzle was not so much to explain how
it is possible that signs may correspond or refer to reality in such diversiform ways
but to articulate what it is that mediates those relationships. His answer was that
they are mediated by the very activities and practices that the utterers and the inter-
preters carry out when they encounter signs. Wittgenstein called these activities
“language games” and “life forms”. Peirce himself came pretty close to using the
idea of games in the notion of our habits of acting in certain ways in certain kinds of
situations and circumstances. Such habits are strategies for interpreting “intellectual
signs”, in other words signs that contribute to the validity of arguments (Pietarinen &
Snellman, 2006).
Summing up, Peirce had little real use for the concept of reference or referent
in order to explain symbolic meaning. While Deacon rightly embarks on his theory
from largely Peircean terrains, he gradually slides closer to standard theories of
reference in the application of his notions.
10 And the idea of a Universal Grammar which Deacon attacks is, of course, equally un-Peircean.
11 A great deal of overlap and continuity naturally exists between the three parts, and Peirce cer-
tainly did not embrace the trichotomy of syntax-semantics-pragmatics – unlike Morris and others
later incorrectly supposed (see Pietarinen, 2006b).
12 My quibble is that Deacon presumably here means to write “referent” instead of “reference”.

72
A.-V.J. Pietarinen
Peirce and Deacon both emphasise the important role of mental images and
imagery in language interpretation. This is true in the more general realm of inter-
preting non-linguistic signs, too, though Deacon is primarily interested in lexical
meaning whereas Peirce wants to accommodate the meaning of all kinds of asser-
tions. However, the two of them differ on the role which such images have in their
overall theory. Deacon states that a mental image is that which is generated when
an interpretation of a word makes it to “refer to” the image (SS: 63). I believe this is
precisely what Peirce wanted to avoid in his pragmaticism, in other words the idea
that the image would function as some stationary or inert “referent” or an “object”
of something. Rather, in Peirce’s theory, mental images are useful instructions or
recipes for action. Their purpose is to show or guide those processes of how we
should go about in interpreting our intellectual signs. They do this in terms of sug-
gesting a variety of alternative ways of experimenting upon them. Imagery is needed
to constitute the mental correlates to those possible sequences of actions or events
that the mind entertains in interpreting signs.
The key role of mental imagery in the interpretation of signs does not, in itself,
imply a lapse into psychologism or cognitive psychology. It would do so only if laws
of psychology were argued to govern the formation of such images. In the Peircean
spirit if not the letter, Deacon appears to agree that it is laws of logic rather than
laws of psychology that are the leading ingredients in the formation of our ability to
create and interpret language.
4.3 Peirce on the Evolution of Language
Peirce’s speculative – or to some even outlandish – views on evolutionary meta-
physics have been subject to some revived scrutiny (Hausman, 1993). However,
we have yet to pay attention to whether he might have had something comparable
to offer regarding the evolution of language. The following quote, which is from
Peirce’s manuscript A Detailed Classiﬁcation of the Sciences (1902) is our lead:
In linguistics, there is the question of the origin of language, which must be settled
before linguistics takes its ﬁnal form. The whole business of deriving ancient history from
documents that are always insufﬁcient and, even when not conﬂicting, frequently pretty
obviously false, must be carried on under the supervision of logic, or else be badly done.
(CP 1.250, c.1902, A Detailed Classiﬁcation of the Sciences).
This is one of the only references Peirce makes to the puzzle of the origin of lan-
guage, which he sees as one of the most difﬁcult problems facing the “psychical
sciences”. But what about the evolution of language? Is it an offshoot of histori-
cal linguistics? Peirce’s point seems to be that the proper methodology and logic
needs to be discovered before the puzzle of the origin and, consequently, the puzzle
of the evolution of language, may be tackled at all. “Deriving ancient history from
documents” is certainly a concern of historical linguistics, but even in our times its
methodology seems to be in considerable disarray (Pietarinen, 2007a).
So what is that methodology and logic? Peirce outlined the methodology of “psy-
chical sciences” in terms of purpose. In the Classiﬁcation of the Sciences paper

4
Peirce and Deacon on the Meaning and Evolution of Language
73
quoted above he took evolution to be “nothing more nor less than the working out
of a deﬁnite end” (CP 1.204). It is quite widespread nowadays to refer to the pur-
poses that language users have as entailing the need for teleological explanations,
and with respect to language itself as entailing the need for teleonomic explanations.
Likewise, a commonplace teleological explanation of the human purpose of having
and using language is the increased communicative effectiveness or communicative
ﬁtness. This is the “survival of the clearest” paradigm. The measure of ﬁtness could
be, for instance, the linguistic functionality within some speciﬁed contexts of use,
such as oral, written, formal and informal contexts. Teleonomic explanations, on
the other hand, refer to the language as a goal-directed and ﬁnalistic system that is
independent of language users. Unlike agent-driven systems of language use, the
functions of a system that is isolated from its users are given teleonomic explana-
tions for the reason that such an inanimate system must be unconscious of the goals
and purposes it may have.
It is nonetheless doubtful whether such a dichotomy of two kinds of ﬁnalistic
explanations is ultimately defensible. Certainly, Peirce would have been very reluc-
tant to subscribe to it. First, he did not think that semantics and pragmatics are
separable units of language. Second, as far as sign meaning is concerned, signs can-
not be separated from their utterers and interpreters. Third, as matter is “effete” mind
and thought is not restricted to brains, what is conscious and what is not does not fol-
low the borderlines between animate/inanimate. Final causes need not be conscious
goals.
Peirce does not discuss this question with respect to language, but what he had
in mind regarding the purpose of evolution at large is that it results in the increase
of the summum bonum, the common idea-potential of humankind. It is part of his
overall view of scientiﬁc methodology that contributions of all rational inquirers are
destined to gravitate to some common idea-potential. If linguistics is to be a bona
ﬁde science, then the increase of that potential is the purpose of linguistics, too.
How ideas are made clear happens, according to Peirce, through the application
of the Maxim of Pragmaticism. All ideas require experience, without which they
could not be represented. There can be no ideas without representing them in signs.
As soon as ideas are represented in symbols, they become intellectual and assertive.
They acquire propositional content. And their meaning gets increasingly more clari-
ﬁed through changes in the self-controlled habits by which we go about interpreting
the symbols.13
According to Peirce, for ideas to be represented according to our experiences,
they will be “suspended in the medium of consciousness” (CP 7.554). Depending
on a mind that is conscious of its ideas, these representations may reach the level
of symbolic signs. Deacon, on the other hand, takes symbolic representation to
have “produced an unprecedented medium for consciousness” (SS: 449) itself. The
13 Deacon brieﬂy mentions the important meta-theoretical aspect of self-control in the context
of self-awareness or self-consciousness (SS: 451), but he does not link that with Peirce’s self-
controlled habits of action, which are needed for most interpretations of symbols.

74
A.-V.J. Pietarinen
emphasis is clearly different. Deacon presumes that all living neural systems to be
conscious with respect to iconic and indexical representations, and that symbols
require an additional threshold in the complexity. Like Peirce, Deacon advances
the creditable view that there is no real problem of consciousness to be explained.
Rather, the existence of consciousness is irreducibly linked to the different though
continuous classes and levels of sign representation. On the other hand, Deacon
takes symbolic representation to create an altogether new kind of medium of
consciousness, whereas Peirce sees consciousness as the medium in which ideas
to be represented are seized at different depths and voluminosities.
Others have argued that the summum bonum might merely be an unintentional
by-product of what human communication has produced. According to that view,
the course of the evolution of language is not destined towards such common idea-
potential. This is the lesson of the “Invisible Hand” argument for the evolution of
language proposed by Keller (1994). However, in Peirce’s theory is there no need
for such excess hypotheses. They are unconﬁrmed by experience and liable to ﬂunk
the test of the pragmatist maxim. Moreover, such explanations may work only in the
behaviourist contexts that take into account only the singular intentions of human
language users or communities of users. They also impose stringent conditions of
causality on all steps of linguistic evolution. Therefore, the Invisible Hand argu-
ment would work with the assumption of “anancastic” evolution only (CP 6.302,
1893, Evolutionary Love). Anancastic evolution is a degenerate form of evolution
that adopts new ideas “without foreseeing whither they tend”; a blind evolution
“determined by causes either external to the mind, such as changed circumstances
of life, or internal to the mind as logical developments of ideas already accepted,
such as generalizations” (CP 6.307). Habits, in contrast, are real generals out there
in the wild reality, according to Peirce. They wield counterfactual force and should
be interpreted neither naturalistically nor anacastically. Peirce would have held
invisible-hand types of explanations as indications of nominalist error.
Such extraneous hypotheses are not needed in Deacon’s theory, either. The pos-
tulation of an Invisible Hand would be as mistaken as the postulation of some
Grammar Module in the mind to account for complex linguistic competences of
human primates.
One more point that Peirce makes in the opening quotation of this subsection
warns us of another kind of fallacy that may tempt a historical philologist: “The
whole business of deriving ancient history from documents that are always insuf-
ﬁcient and, even when not conﬂicting, frequently pretty obviously false, must be
carried on under the supervision of logic, or else be badly done”. Peirce advices us
not to assign implausible weights of credibility to evidence that may appear to be of
great importance, and which we might wish to use as a basis of a conﬁrmation of
hypotheses upon which our theories are built, but which, being scarce, easily mis-
lead the investigators. Historical linguistics and arguments concerning the origins of
language are particularly vulnerable to that fallacy. The fallacy can be avoided, how-
ever, by the careful use of appropriate probabilistic methods concerning the ways in
which we select among competing hypotheses in science.

4
Peirce and Deacon on the Meaning and Evolution of Language
75
4.4 Deacon on the Evolution of Language
Like Peirce, Deacon sees language evolution through ends and purposes. Like
Peirce, Deacon sees a world that is meaningful and consequential. Now for Deacon
“symbolic abilities do not necessarily represent more efﬁcient communication”
(SS: 379). He thus discounts “communicative ﬁtness” as the ideal in language
evolution. Instead, he remarks, these symbolic abilities “represent a radical shift
in communicative strategy” (SS: 379; see also Deacon, 2003).
This is a very acute observation. However, Deacon’s own story about the needs
for the early humans to change their communicative strategies is anthropological.
What started the evolution that catalysed the cycles of symbolic capacities of the
brain had, according to Deacon, to do with social and communal relationships
between the opposite sexes. Deacon explains co-evolution in terms of changes in
those contexts and circumstances that embody selection pressures (social, ritual,
institutional and reproductive pressures). These pressures either exhibit or inhibit
the needed changes in the communicative strategies of early humans.
I would like to propose an alternative explanation. What “a radical shift in com-
municative strategy” means comes close to the Peircean idea of the habit-change
potential. However, it is not any habit-change, but the self-controlled changes in
the general ways of how to act. New signs acquire their meaning according to such
actions and therefore new, symbolic communication emerges. And self-controlled
habit changes are those that are conspicuously lacking in the organic habits of
animals. Now the lack of self-control does not as such imply the complete lack
of some anticipatory behaviour or planning, which some primates may well pos-
sess, though it is certainly contestable whether such behaviour requires genuinely
counterfactual reasoning based on the idea of synchronic possibilities. The lack of
self-control only means the lack of metasystematic or self-critical stance to one’s
actions. Consequently, communication with signs that are interpreted with the asso-
ciated self-controlled habits of action would almost inevitably lead to reasoning
which, in turn, would lead to the possibility of communicating with symbolic signs.
According to Peirce, the theory of self-controlled thought is logic. And if so, it is
from logic, and logic alone, that we might hope to garner an answer to what caused
the mind to exercise such self-controlled thought that gave rise to strategic thinking
and action and, consequently, to the emergence of symbolic thought.
Let us also keep in mind that the entire machinery of evolutionary game the-
ory has been developed to explain strategic behaviour which dispenses with the
strong assumptions of rationality and common knowledge of rationality afﬂicting
ordinary game theory. As soon as the logical underpinnings of evolutionary game
theory become better understood, we may be equipped to answer Deacon’s question
concerning the origins of symbolic expressions of thought in an exact manner.
An alternative angle to the key question can be taken as follows. Peirce attributes
changes not to pressures but to love. He borrows the Greek term agape from Plato
and suggests an agapastic theory of evolution as the alternative to the prevailing
Darwinian version. In a sense, it is a non-Darwinian theory, since it denies the “for-
tuitous variation” which in natural selection terminology means “the crowding out

76
A.-V.J. Pietarinen
the weak” (CP 6.296). Instead, it boasts “evolution by the force of habit” (CP 6.300).
The force of habit accepts, with certain notable qualiﬁcations, the “transmission of
acquired characters”, which Peirce takes to be “of the general nature of habit-taking”
(CP 6.299). Habits coerce new forms and structures to take such “practical shapes”
that are “compatible with the structures they affect” (CP 6.300).
At one juncture, Peirce associates “evolution by creative love” with Lamarckian
evolution, but I wonder whether it may be close to Baldwinian evolution and what
later became known as the Baldwin Effect (see e.g. Weber & Depew, 2003).14 Peirce
indeed notes that Lamarckian evolution is a misleading, nonsensical term. Habit-
changes are generalising tendencies that enable individuals to modify the contexts
in which they operate, and Peirce is not requiring these changes to be passed directly
on to offspring but to be “energetically projaculated”. By this, he means that new
features ﬁrst are established by habits and then these features are brought “into
harmony with the general morphology and function of the animals and plants to
which they belong” (CP 6.300). Learning and habit change are closely comparable
notions.
Baldwinian selection would become Darwinian selection only if it is assumed
that the general context and morphology in question is that of natural selection,
which neither Peirce nor James Mark Baldwin to whom the idea is customarily
credited of course do not assume. It is in fact plausible that Baldwin, who was
a close and long-term colleague with Peirce, got the impetus to change his inter-
pretation of his earlier ideas on the “organic selection” for his 1896 article “A New
Factor in Evolution”, in which what was later of termed the Baldwin Effect was sug-
gested, from reading Peirce’s 1893 Monist article Evolutionary Love.15 According
14 Similar ideas on how to accommodate learning and creative effects into Darwin’s evolution-
ary theory were suggested those times by several others besides Baldwin. Conwy Lloyd Morgan
(1896) applied a similar principle of “organic selection”. They both regarded the Darwinian way
of explaining the creative force of evolution in terms of natural selection as an unacceptably neg-
ative and mechanistic type of a force. A middle course that sought for a mode of evolution that
would require neither natural selection nor inheritance of acquired characters was proposed by
Henry Fairﬁeld Osborn (1896) in his “coincidence selection” model. The term originates from
John Thomas Gulick’s work on ontogenetic selection processes (Hall, 2006) which Baldwin later
acknowledges. Morgan’s and Osborn’s works built and commented on August Weismann’s (1893)
“germinal selection” model, which likewise calls for a new kind of positive and creative force as
the one directing the adaptations. Much of these improvements and modiﬁcations on Darwin’s
theory of natural selection were at the same time rejoinders to Herbert Spencer’s theory, which
these men saw as an utterly mechanistic and Lamarckian stripe of evolution that no longer would
ﬁt in with the prevailing scientiﬁc conceptions. Peirce accompanies Osborn’s public criticism of
Spencerianism in an anonymous piece in the New York Times in 1890 entitled “‘Outsider’ Wants
More Light” (W6: 402).
15 More research is needed to establish the exact inﬂuences between Baldwin and Peirce which no
one seems to have carried out so far; let us recall the multiple articles authored and co-authored,
some of them with Baldwin himself, in Baldwin’s Dictionary of Philosophy and Psychology by
Peirce in 1901–1902; as well as a number of critical reviews of Baldwin’s articles and books
which Peirce published in the Nation in 1895–1908. Peirce did not review or comment much
upon Baldwin’s article “A New Factor in Evolution” but he wrote a commentary on his book
Mental Development in the Child and the Race (1895). It is in that book what Baldwin in the

4
Peirce and Deacon on the Meaning and Evolution of Language
77
to Baldwin (1896, p. 451, emphasis omitted), “The ontogenetic adaptations are
really new, not performed; and they are really reproduced in succeeding generations,
although not physically inherited.”
Deacon discusses Baldwinian evolution at length in the Symbolic Species, though
not invoking Peirce in that context. He writes that “Baldwin proposed that by
temporarily adjusting behaviours or psychological responses during its lifespan in
response to novel conditions, an animal could produce irreversible changes in the
adaptive context of future generations” (SS: 322–323). Deacon does not bring up
Peirce’s agapastic theory of evolution, but even so, my point is that “producing irre-
versible changes in contexts” is not very far at all from the continuous interaction of
habits with their environment and the fact that such interaction changes the context
in which the offspring lives on. If the epigenetic, inherited changes in phenotype or
gene expression are really reproduced in future generations, then Peirce’s agapastic
evolution is capable of accommodating the Baldwinian notion of evolution.
It is of note here how the Baldwin Effect has recently spurred a mini-industry
in the context of the evolution of language and communication (see e.g. Watanabe,
Suzuki, & Arita, 2008). Equally interesting are the studies that attempt to explain
the effect in such contexts by using the evolutionary theory of games (Zollman &
Smead, 2010).
Let me remark in closing that a more neutral and ﬁtting term to that of “love”
to describe what is going on in Peirce’s evolutionary agapasticism seems to me to
be that of cooperation. Though I do not quite like John Dewey’s overly naturalistic
version that sees habits as acquired dispositions of a kind by which organisms and
environments cooperate, cooperation is what David Lewis and many others in the
philosophical tradition studying the origins of linguistic meaning and communica-
tion have argued to be the prime mover for the emergence of conventions. And ditto
for Peircean symbols in simple situations of signal exchange, I might add. Moreover,
cooperation need not rule out competition which, as has been well established by
the many works in game theory can, and often is quite beneﬁcial for it to, co-exist
with cooperative action and behaviour.16
much better known article of Baldwin (1896: 451) called the “new factor” and the “inﬂuence of
organic selection” ﬁrst appeared, though they did not mean quite the same as in his follow-up
work. As we can observe, all of Baldwin’s writings on this matter nevertheless appeared right after
the publication of Peirce’s Evolutionary Love. On the other hand, these topics were discussed by
several other authors around the same time as well, and some of the discussions took place even
before 1893 (see the previous note).
16 A brief justiﬁcation for thinking of Agape as cooperation comes from the ancient history of
ideas: In Homer’s Odyssey some derivations of the word ‘agape’ mean that which creates content-
ment or affection with the speaker. We may take this meaning coming close to modern principles
that aim at accounting for conversations as rational activities, such as Paul Grice’s principle of
cooperation in his theory of communication or Donald Davidson’s principle of charity in his theory
of interpretation.

78
A.-V.J. Pietarinen
4.5 Conclusions
To conclude, the conceptions of evolution advanced by Peirce, Baldwin, and Deacon
provide rich sources of further study not only for a committed historian of intel-
lectual ideas but also for evolutionary biologists, philosophers, developmental
psychologists, cognitive scientists and anthropologists who wish to examine evo-
lutionary phenomena from a wide enough perspective. Yet there is a great deal of
continuity in these ideas, over and above some apparent gaps in the “great chain
of meaning”, inescapable as they are when history tells its tale. My aim has been
to call attention to the interesting and manifold similarities between Peirce’s and
Deacon’s views on the meaning and evolution of language, together with some
noteworthy differences and some still-prevailing missing links. Deacon writes that
“learned associations, arbitrarity, reference, and transmission of information from
one individual to another – are not sufﬁcient to deﬁne symbolic reference” (SS: 66).
Peirce would agree wholeheartedly: for a symbol to emerge a three-way association
between signs, objects and interpretants is required. But symbolic meaning depends
on self-controlled habit-taking tendencies. Habits, both natural and conventional,
are real and general strategic rules and regularities for action and learning which
mediate the relationships between sign vehicles and their objects and interpretants.
Those relationships occur in nature just as they occur in the human cortex. Deacon
has likewise had much to say about those relationships in both realms – without
invoking Peirce’s or other 19th century pragmatists’ and evolutionary biologists’
concept of habits.17
Acknowledgments Supported by the University of Helsinki “Excellence in Research” Grant
(2023031: Peirce’s Pragmatistic Philosophy and Its Applications, 2006–2008, Principal
Investigator A.-V. Pietarinen). I wish to thank the organisers and participants of the First Symbolic
Species Conference in Copenhagen in 2006 as well as the reviewers of the earlier version of the
present paper for comments.
References
Baldwin, M. J. (1895). Mental development in the child and the race. New York: Macmillan.
Baldwin, M. J. (1896). A new factor in evolution. American Naturalist, 30(441–451), 536–553.
Cowley, S. (2002). Why brains matter, An integrational perspective on “The Symbolic Species”.
Language Sciences, 24, 73–95.
Deacon, T. W. (1997). The symbolic species: The co-evolution of language and the brain.
New York: W.W. Norton.
17 The last point is equally true of those who have recently taken up the topic of Baldwinian evo-
lution under revived scrutiny. One concept has disappeared from the discussion, the generalizing
tendency to act according to habits, though we might see it as being reinstated through the back-
door of evolutionary theory of games in its use of stable strategies as the solution concept. For the
connections between Peirce’s theory and the stable strategies of EGT, see Pietarinen (2006c).

4
Peirce and Deacon on the Meaning and Evolution of Language
79
Deacon, T.W. (2003). Multilevel selection in a complex adaptive system: The problem of language
origins. In B. W. Weber & D. J. Depew (Eds.), Evolution and learning: The Baldwin Effect
reconsidered (pp. 81–106). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
de Villiers, T. (2007). Why Peirce matters: The symbol in Deacon’s symbolic species. Language
Sciences, 29, 88–108.
Hall, B. K. (2006). Evolutionist and missionary’: The Reverend John Thomas Gulick (1832–1923).
Part 1: Cumulative segregation-geographical isolation. Journal of Experimental Zoology, 306B,
407–418.
Hansen, P. G. (2007). Evolutionary games and social conventions. In A.-V. Pietarinen (Ed.), Game
theory and linguistic meaning (Current Research in the Semantics/Pragmatics Interface 18,
pp. 61–88). Oxford: Elsevier.
Hausman, C. (1993). Charles Peirce’s evolutionary metaphysics. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Keller, R. (1994). On language change: the invisible hand in language. London: Routledge.
Lewis, D. (1969). Convention: A philosophical study. Harvard: Harvard University Press.
Lumsden, D. (2002). Crossing the symbolic threshold: A critical review of Terrence Deacon’s The
Symbolic Species. Philosophical Psychology, 15, 155–171.
Morgan, C. L. (1896). Habit and instinct. London: Edward Arnold.
Murphy, J. J. (1869). Habit and intelligence (2nd ed. 1879), London: Macmillan.
Osborn, H. F. (1896). A mode of evolution requiring neither natural selection nor the inheritance
of acquired characteristics. Transactions of the New York Academy of Science, 15, 141–148.
Peirce, C. S. (1931–1958). (CP) Collected papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, 8 volumes, vols. 1–6,
eds. C Hartshorne & P. Weiss, vols. 7–8, ed. A. W. Burks. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1967). (MS) Manuscripts in the Houghton Library of Harvard University, as iden-
tiﬁed by Richard Robin, Annotated Catalogue of the Papers of Charles S. Peirce (Amherst:
University of Massachusetts Press, 1967), and in “The Peirce papers: A supplementary
catalogue”. Transactions of the C. S. Peirce Society, 7(1971), 37–57.
Peirce, C. S. (1998). (EP) The essential Peirce: Selected philosophical writings, Volume 2, The
Peirce Edition Project. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (2000). (W) The writings of Charles S. Peirce. Volume 6, The Peirce Edition Project,
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Pietarinen, A.-V. (2005). Evolutionary game-theoretic semantics and its foundational status. In
N. Gontier, J. P. Van Bendegem, & D. Aerts (Eds.), Evolutionary epistemology, language and
culture: A nonadaptationist systems-theoretical approach (Theory and Decision Library B,
pp. 429–452), Dordrecht: Springer.
Pietarinen, A.-V. (2006a). Peirce and the logic of image. Semiotica. In press.
Pietarinen, A.-V. (2006b). Signs of logic: Peircean themes on the philosophy of language, games,
and communication (Synthese Library 329). Dordrecht: Springer.
Pietarinen, A.-V. (2006c). The evolution of semantics and language games for meaning. Interaction
Studies: Social Behaviour and Communication in Biological and Artiﬁcial Systems, 7, 79–104.
Pietarinen, A.-V. (2007a). On historical pragmatics and Peircean pragmatism. Linguistics and the
Human Sciences, 2(1), 123–143.
Pietarinen, A.–V. (Ed.). (2007b). Game theory and linguistic meaning (Current Research in the
Semantics/Pragmatics Interface 18). Oxford: Elsevier.
Pietarinen, A.-V. (2007c). Abductive issues in Peirce’s proof of pragmaticism. In O. Pombo &
A. Gerner (Eds.), Abduction and the process of scientiﬁc discovery (pp. 303–320). Lisboa:
Centro de Filosoﬁa das Ciências da Universidade de Lisboa.
Pietarinen, A.-V. (2007d). “Getting closer to iconic logic”. In G. Dodig-Crnkovic & S. Stuart
(Eds.), Computing, information and cognition: the nexus and the liminal (pp. 53–74).
Cambridge: Cambridge Scholars Press.

80
A.-V.J. Pietarinen
Pietarinen, A.-V. (2009a). Principles and practices of neurath’s picture language. In O. Pombo,
S. Rahman, & J. M. Torres (Eds.), Essays in honour of Otto Neurath (Logic, Epistemology,
and the Unity of Science) (pp. 71–82). Dordrecht: Springer, in press.
Pietarinen, A.-V. (2009b). Murphy’s law of mind. To appear.
Pietarinen, A.-V. (2010a). Question-answer structures in cognition. Proceedings of the 10th World
Congress of Semiotics. La Coruña. To appear.
Pietarinen, A.-V. (2010b). An iconic logic of metaphors. Journal of Cognitive Science, To appear.
Pietarinen, A.-V. (2011). Existential graphs: What the diagrammatic logic of cognition might look
like? History and Philosophy of Logic, 32, 265–281.
Pietarinen, A.-V., & Snellman, L. (2006). On Peirce’s late proof of pragmaticism. In T. Aho &
A.-V. Pietarinen (Eds.), Truth and games (pp. 275–288). Acta Philosophica Fennica, Helsinki:
Societas Philosophica Fennica.
Stenius, E. (1968). Mood and language game. Synthese, 17, 254–274.
Stjernfelt, F. (2007). Diagrammatology: An investigation on the borderlines of phenomenology,
ontology, and semiotics (Synthese Library 336). Dordrecht: Springer.
Watanabe, Y., Suzuki, R., & Arita, T. (2008). Language evolution and the Baldwin effect. Artiﬁcial
Life and Robotics, 12, 65–69.
Weber, B. H., & Depew, D. J. (2003). Evolution and learning: The Baldwin effect reconsidered.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Weismann, A. (1893). The germ-plasm: A theory of heredity (W. Newton Parker and H. R.
Ronnfeldt, Trans.). London: Walter Scott and Scribner’s.
Zollman, K. J. S., & Smeads, R. (2010). Plasticity and language: An example of the Baldwin
effect? Philosophical Studies, 147, 7–21.

Chapter 5
Semiosis Beyond Signs. On Two or Three
Missing Links on the Way to Human Beings
Göran Sonesson
Abstract Human beings are special in mastering, apart from signs, a number of
semiotic resources embedded already in perception, which is not differentiated, but
which may still be iconic, indexical, or symbolic. The sign is no doubt one of the
missing links between human beings and other animals. An even earlier breaking
point between (some) animals and human beings may be the ability to distinguish
type and token, that is, to have access to a principle of relevance. Somewhere on the
border between relevance and the sign is found the act of imitation. The Peircean
sign, which is so much more (and less) than a sign, may be able to account for the
emergence of imitation and its accomplishment in the sign function, in the restricted
sense.
Contemporary studies of evolution suggest that not only human language, but also
the capacity for using pictures, as well as many kinds of mimetic acts and indices,
are (at least in their full, spontaneously developed form) uniquely human. It is clear
that semiosis itself must be manifold and hierarchically structured, in ways not yet
dreamt of in our philosophy. In order to grasp some of the discontinuities between
human beings and other animals, it is useful to start out from the conception of
phylogeny suggested by Merlin Donald (1991, 2001), which may be supposed to
have a least some rough parallels in ontogeny.
In Donald’s evolutionary scale, stages of episodic, mimetic, mythic and theoretic
culture correspond to types of memory (Fig. 5.1). According to this conception,
many mammals, which otherwise live in the immediate present, are already capable
of episodic memory, which amounts to the representation of events in terms of their
moment and place of occurrence. The ﬁrst transition, which antedates language and
remains intact in language impairment (and which Donald identiﬁes with Homo
erectus and wants to reserve for human beings alone) brings about mimetic memory,
which corresponds to such abilities as tool use, miming, imitation, co-ordinated
hunting, a complex social structure and simple rituals. Without even taking into
account intricate phenomena such as social structure, ritual, and hunting, one cannot
avoid observing the heterogeneity of this list: in some cases, such as most clearly
tool use and some instances of imitation, no sign structure, with a clear distinction
G. Sonesson (B)
Centre for Cognitive Semiotics, Lund University, Lund, Sweden
e-mail: goran.sonesson@semiotik.lu.se
81
T. Schilhab et al. (eds.), The Symbolic Species Evolved, Biosemiotics 6,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-2336-8_5, C⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2012

82
G. Sonesson
Fig. 5.1 Donald’s model of evolution related to some further discontinuities: type/token, the sign,
system character, and organism- independent artifacts
of expression and content, is required, but simply the conformity of tokens to a
perceived or remembered type, but in other cases, exempliﬁed by other instances
of imitation, and by miming and other gestures, the sign function would seem an
absolute prerequisite. If early mimesis may give rise to the organization of tokens
into types, the sign would seem to emerge at the later mimetic stage.
Only the second transition brings about language (which, Donald muses, may at
ﬁrst have been gestural) with its semantic memory, that is, a repertory of units which
may be combined. This kind of memory permits the creation of narratives, that
is, mythologies, and thus a completely new way of representing reality. Although
Donald is not very clear about it, his description of semantic memory could be
taken to imply the presence of system character, that is, an organization in which
signs mutually deﬁne each other. It is quite conceivable for language (but perhaps
in an earlier gestural form) to be the ﬁrst extant sign system.
Interestingly, Donald does not think development stops there, even though there
are no further biological differences between human beings and other animals to
take account of (however, the third transition obviously would not have been possi-
ble without the attainment of the three earlier stages). What Donald calls theoretical
culture supposes the existence of external memory, that is, devices permitting the
conservation and communication of knowledge independently of human beings.
The ﬁrst apparition of theoretical culture coincides with the invention of drawing.
For the ﬁrst time, knowledge may be stored externally to the organism. The bias
having been shifted to visual perception, language is next transferred to writing.
It is this possibility of conserving information externally to the organism that later
gives rise to science. This, again, would seem to be a breaking point on the way
to human beings: the possibility of memory as an external record, which perdures
independently of the human organism.
Elsewhere, I have used Donald’s conception of evolution, as rendered in the
model above (Fig. 5.1), to discuss the curious fact that iconicity (and indexicality)
are present already at the second stage, as mimetic gesture, but then makes an

5
Semiosis Beyond Signs. On Two or Three Missing Links on the Way . . .
83
renewed appearance at the fourth stage, in the shape of pictures (Sonesson, 2006,
2007a, in press). I have also discussed, within the same framework, the ﬁnal
“missing link” in the progression from animal to man, the emergence of organism-
independent artefacts (Sonesson, 2007a, 2007b, 2010a, 2010b, in press). In the
following, however, I will be concerned with two other, (nearly) missing links, the
(principle of) relevance and the sign, as well as the act of imitation bridging them.
5.1 A Sign Concept for Integral Semiotics
The most serious problem of semiotics is that both the Saussurean and the Peircean
brands of received semiotic theory do not explain what a sign is; they simply take
it for granted. It is not enough to say there are signiﬁers and signiﬁeds, or represen-
tamen, object, and interpretants, without specifying the requirement for something
to fall under one of these categories. A useful concept of sign designates a kind of
meaning, but it does not cover all meanings. Perception is clearly meaningful to ani-
mals and infants alike, but it seems reasonable to suppose that the capacity for sign
use is a much more exclusive property. Conceptualizing the capacity of sign use in
this way may help us to distinguish stages in evolution and development, notably
the relationship between imitation and sign.
We will say that the sign is a meaning which is made up of two parts, tradition-
ally known as expression and content. That the sign consists of two parts implies
that the parts are separated. In Piaget’s (1945, 1967, 1970) terms, they are “differen-
tiated from the point of view of the subject”. This it not to say that the differentiation
is “subjective”, in the ordinary language sense – in most cases, the differentiation
is part of what is learnt by the child growing into his particular culture. However,
what is differentiated within the sign may or may not consist of several objects
in the “objective” common sense world (where “objective” is that which is taken
for granted in the dealings of ordinary life). Contrary to what Piaget suggests, we
will therefore conclude that a thing which is immediately continuous to another or
which is a part of another in the common sense world may very well be differen-
tiated within the sign (cf. Sonesson, 1989, 1992a, 1992b, 2010b, in press). We can
imagine the same child that in Piaget’s example uses a pebble to stand for a piece
of candy having recourse instead to a feather in order to represent a bird, or employ
a pebble to stand for a rock, without therefore confusing the part and the whole:
then the child would be employing a feature, which is objectively a part of the bird,
or the rock, while differentiating the former from the latter from his point of view.
Only then would he be using a true sign. In terms of socially better-established
signs, a similar example would be the bull’s head used to indicate, above a market
stand, that beef is sold there. Although in France, for example, cast heads of bulls
or horses are employed outside the relevant shops, it is still possible to ﬁnd real
heads used in traditional markets in some countries. In a parallel fashion, things
that are similar to each other can be differentiated within the sign. Thus, there can
be indexical (contiguity-based) and iconic (similarity-based), as well as symbolic
(rule-based) signs. If I see a branch sticking up over the house and conclude that

84
G. Sonesson
there is a tree behind the house, this is a mere indexicality; but the marks on the
ground left by the animal are indexical signs, clearly separated from the (part of)
the animals having produced them. And the photographic print of a person I know
is clearly differentiated from the person seen in the picture.
Indeed, a further differentiation may have to be made for certain purposes. The
marks on the ground tell me “an elk was here before”, and this is something distinct
from the marks, as well from the elk, which is now somewhere else. Similarly, the
colour conﬁguration on the photograph is distinct from the perceptual impression of
my wife, and the photograph is here with me now, while my wife is at her working-
place. This is why we really have to separate three parts of the sign, expression,
content, and referent, where content is the standpoint taken on the referent by the
sign user, as codiﬁed in some semiotic resource.1 To the hunter, it is important to
identify the marks on the ground (expression) as being those of an elk (indexical
content), but, being a hunter, he cannot be satisﬁed with this; he will follow the traces
left by the animal until he ﬁnds the real elk (referent). Looking at the photography,
I have no trouble (unlike small children and animals) to distinguish the colour spots
on the paper (the expression) from the vicarious perception it suggests, e.g. of my
wife ﬁfteen years ago dancing Jalisco in a ample, pink skirt (content), nor from
the real person I have known for twenty-six years and with whom I share so many
memories (the referent, the real, continuous person in my personal Lifeworld).
But differentiation is not a sufﬁcient criterion. Each time we actively and con-
sciously put together a set of items that we have perceived, we must ﬁrst differentiate
the items to be joined – as opposed to the obliteration of their difference in categor-
ical perception. But categorization is not as such a kind of sign use. Contiguity and
factoriality are present everywhere in the perceptual world without as yet forming
signs: we will say, in that case, that they are mere indexicalities. An index, then,
must be understood as indexicality (an indexical relation or ground) plus the sign
function. Analogously, the perception of similarities (which is an iconic ground)
will give rise to an icon only when it is combined with the sign function. As always,
there are passages in Peirce’s work, which may be taken in different ways, but it
makes more systematic and evolutionary sense to look upon iconicity and indexi-
cality as being only potentials for something being a sign.2 Iconicity, indexicality,
and symbolicity only describe that which connects two objects; they do not tell
us whether the result is a sign or not (Fig. 5.2). These considerations allow us
to separate the study of the phylogenetic and ontogenetic emergence of iconicity,
indexicality and symbolicity from that of the corresponding signs (cf. Sonesson,
1998, 2001, in press).
1 This is of course not the Peircean triad, but rather corresponds to the representamen, and to the
immediate and dynamical objects, respectively (as well as to the corresponding interpretants).
2 In relation to the standpoint of many other semioticians, I have to spell out here (as in many of
my earlier publications, but perhaps most explictly in Sonesson, 2009), that I am not interested in
ﬁnding out what Perice “really said”. To give an all to simple expression to a complicated issue, I
will just say that I use Peirce as a source of inspiration, just as I do with many other writers on the
theme.

5
Semiosis Beyond Signs. On Two or Three Missing Links on the Way . . .
85
Firstness
Secondness
Thirdness
Principle
(Firstness)
Iconicity
—
—
Ground
(Secondness)
Iconic ground
Indexicality = indexical 
ground
—
Sign
(Thirdness)
Iconic sign (icon)
Indexical sign (index)
Symbolicity = symbolic 
ground = symbolic sign 
(symbol)
Fig. 5.2 The relationship between principles, grounds, and signs, from a point of view inspired by
Peirce as spelled-out in Sonesson (1996, 2007a, 2007b)
The sign as such is thus a whole made up of two parts, expression and content,
and there is a double asymmetric relationship between them. First, from the point
of view of immediacy, expression is more accessible to consciousness than content.
In the second place, content is more in focus (more prominent, more important)
than expression. When I look at the photograph, I am normally interested in the
person depicted (my wife, either at the exact moment she was dancing Jalisco, or
as an enduring person of my personal Lifeworld). My wife does not represent the
photograph.3 The phenomenologist Edmund Husserl (1939) formulated the deﬁni-
tion of the sign (more precisely, “appresentation”) more or less in these terms, but a
similar view is implicit already in Augustine’s conception of the sign (in our terms,
the expression) as something which, by becoming conscious, makes us aware of
something else (the content; cf. Deely, 2001).4
However, Bates (1979, p. 43) has hinted at the idea that the sign (our expression)
and its referent (which would seem to correspond to both what I have called con-
tent and referent) must be conceived as being both similar and separate for a sign
relationship to obtain. Bates’ somewhat convoluted deﬁnition is later unpacked by
Daddesio (1995, p. 117):
Given a physical mark (sound, movement, shape, etc.), a, and a particular class of things,
b, that a is thought to stand for, let us consider three possible ways which an organism
can relate a and b. In the ﬁrst instance, the organism fails to grasp any relation whatsoever
between the two. /---/ In the ﬁrst case, semiosis is thus absent. In the second case, the organ-
ism would be capable of relating the two, but instead of apprehending a relation between
two distinct entities, it would simply react in the same fashion if presented a and if presented
b. /---/ In the third case, the organism would recognize a and b as distinct but related.
3 Seeing her now, I may of course be reminded of when I took that photograph, or when she made
that dance, but this does not change the asymmetric structure of the sign, only my mental use of it.
4 This does not preclude other relations between expression and content being symmetric. It is
common to suppose a substitutive relationship, which is a symmetric relation, between expression
and content, but this may be misleading, since expressions are rarely used for the same purpose
and in the same context as their contents.

86
G. Sonesson
Nevertheless, it is in fact impossible to conclude from an individual treating a and b
as being distinct, that the particular relationship between a and b is necessarily one
of appresentation (sign function). Daddesio’s second case is that of categorization,
which is important to perception. Given a prototype conception of categories, a and
b may be treated as different just because they are differently central to the category
of which they are perceived to be a part. Or they may be attended to differently,
merely because one contains more, and more interesting, perceptual properties than
the other (and, indeed, sign vehicles would tend to be “degraded stimuli”, when
compared to what they are signs of). The problem of separating the expression and
the content of a sign becomes particularly acute in the case of an iconical sign, in
which, by deﬁnition, expression and content must share at least some properties (Cf.
Sonesson & Zlatev, in press).
The sign, then, consists of two intrinsic parts, expression and content, which
are related to a third, the referent. The relation between these parts may be iconic,
indexical, or symbolic, but it always supposes a differentiation of the parts, from the
point of view of the sign user. The sign relation is asymmetric in a double sense:
what we call expression is always more directly perceived than the content, and the
content is more accessible than the referent. On the other hand, it is the referent
and/or the content that is in focus, at least more so than the expression.
5.2 Imitation as Token and as Sign
The characterization of the sign above is partly inspired in Piaget’s notion of the
“symbolic” (later the “semiotic”) function, which is a capacity acquired by the child
at an age of around eighteen to twenty-four months, which enables him or her to
imitate something or somebody outside the direct presence of the model, to use
language, make drawings, play “symbolically”, and have access to mental imagery
and memory. The common factor underlying all these phenomena, according to
Piaget, is the ability to represent reality by means of a signiﬁer, which is distinct
from the signiﬁed. The sign function thus characterizes a stage of child development,
though Piaget himself chooses to describe this stage only negatively, that is, a being
pre-operational. Imitation, or, more exactly, “representative imitation”, is claimed
by Piaget (1945) to be at the origin of the semiotic function. When more closely
scrutinized, some instances of imitation actually turn out to be signs already, while
others clearly are not.
Donald places imitation within the second stage of human development, mime-
sis. In his view, mimetic culture starts out with the emergence of “conscious,
self-initiated, representational acts, which are intentional [i.e. voluntary] but not
linguistic” (1991, p. 168). The examples given by Donald are such things as ges-
ture, dance, ritual, mime, play-acting, and (precise) imitation, but also tool use (or
perhaps rather the social generalization of tool use) and skill. Somewhere in between
mimesis and language the semiotic function arises, though Donald addresses this
only obliquely, mentioning the use of intentional systems of communication and the
distinction of the referent. In fact, this certainly happens between animal camouﬂage

5
Semiosis Beyond Signs. On Two or Three Missing Links on the Way . . .
87
and pictures. According to Deacon (1997, pp. 74ff), however, iconicity as found in
“a portrait” is “not basically different” from the fact of there being no distinction
at all, that is, it would seem, from mere identity. On the following pages, Deacon
then goes on to maintain that a number of phenomena which could otherwise appear
to be completely different are in fact equivalent: the perception of the same “stuff”
over and over again (seeing something that does not change into something else),
camouﬂage as exempliﬁed by the case of the moth’s wings being seen by the bird as
“just more tree”, “stimulus generalisation”, and even recognition, that is, the iden-
tiﬁcation of something as pertaining to the same category. Although all or most
abilities subsumed under the mimetic stage depend on iconic relations, only some
of them are signs, because they do not all involve some asymmetric relation between
an expression and the content for which it stands.
In fact, in his early book, Donald (1991, pp. 168f) opposes mimesis to mimicry
and imitation, both of which are said to be quite common in animals but lacking “a
representational dimension”. Though the import of this claim is not clear, it could
be taken to mean that mimicry and imitation, in this sense, lack differentiation. In
Donald’s (2001, pp. 260f) later book, however, “(precise) imitation” is an instance of
mimesis. This would no doubt exclude the kind of automatic imitation in the infant
(“neonatal mirroring”), discovered by Meltzoff, such as sticking out the tongue to
one who does just that (Cf. Gallagher, 2005; also see Donald, 2001, pp. 264ff). It is
less clear whether Donald would follow Tomasello (1999) in making a distinction
between the imitation of goals (called “emulation”), of which he believes apes to
be capable, and the imitation of means, which is a capacity Tomasello would like
to restrict to human beings, although he later on (in Tomasello, 2008) recognizes its
presence in at least some apes.5 At ﬁrst it may seem strange that imitating the goal
is presented as being easier than imitating the means by which the goal is achieved.
But no doubt it is less demanding to recognize the interest of the aim (getting the
banana) than the interest of the requisite steps for realising the goal. At another
level, it is like attending to the content, not the expression, of a sign. Indeed, it is an
instance of quite ordinary Lifeworld behaviour.
One may wonder why tool use and skill are thought to be part of mimetic cul-
ture and not just “routine locomotor acts” or “procedural memory” which Donald
(1991, p. 168) elsewhere takes pains to separate from mimesis. No doubt Donald
(1991, pp. 171ff) would answer that they are different because they comply with
his criteria for mimetic acts: they are “intentional” (that is, voluntary), “generative”
(that is, analysable into components which may be recombined into new wholes),
and “communicative” (or at least, as we shall see “public”). Moreover, they have
reference (“in mimesis the referential act must be distinguished from its referent”,
that is, in our terms, there must be differentiation), stand for an unlimited number
of objects, and are auto-cued (produced without an external stimulus). Generativity
5 A study of imitation of actions from static pictures, reported in Hribar, Call, and Sonesson (in
press) would certainly seem to suggest that apes may be capable of imitating means as well as
goals, at least in one sense of these terms. In his most recent book, however, Tomasello (2008)
seems to downplay even more the capacity for imitation in apes.

88
G. Sonesson
is a property of many kinds of meaning, which are not signs. However, it is not
clear in what sense tool use and many other kinds of skill are “communicative”, and
therefore, in which way they have reference and stand for an unlimited number of
objects.
After introducing “communicativity” as a criterion of mimesis, Donald (1991,
p. 172) goes on to say that “although mimesis may not have originated as a means
of communication, and might have originated in a different means of reproductive
memory, such as tool-making, mimetic acts are, by their nature, usually public and
inherently possess the potential to communicate.” This, though, is very different
from imitation as a sign, which is what is realised by the actor, who presents his acts
to a speciﬁc public; it is even different from the child’s symbolic play, which must be
available to and shared with other children. What we have here is, ﬁrst, the extraction
of a token from a type, which supposes treating the other as a spectacle; and second,
the realisation of the tool act, which is not public-directed, but can be made available
to the public (Fig. 5.3). The use of the tool does require the separation of the typical
properties from the single act occurring in the here and now, i.e. relevance. In order
to learn the use of a tool, you must at least be able to isolate the properties that
should be imitated from those which are of no avail. However, even though this act
of imitation may be observed, it is not part of its purpose to be observed. When the
actor who has the part of Hamlet lifts up the skull of “Poor Yorick”, then his act
does not only consist in imitating what a man having that name supposedly did in
Renaissance Denmark, but also in presenting this act as something to be seen, as a
spectacular act (cf. Sonesson, 2000a). The symbolic play of children may perhaps be
considered to be some kind of intermediary case, because its spectacular character
is not its ultimate goal, but is only instrumental in making the play function as play;
indeed, it is not intentionally offered as a spectacle for individuals not participating
in the play.
Imitation 
(Token/Type) 
Imitation as 
Learning
from Token) 
Symbolic play 
(Expression/
Content)
Play-acting
(Expression/
Content)
Instantiates a type of act 
Extracts a type from 
one or several (novel) 
token acts 
Represents a type of 
(habitual) act - or 
perhaps token outside 
of time and space 
Represents an individual 
act in time and space 
vehicle
Observing the 
hammering (first 
token) extracting the 
type for doing 
hammering (second 
token)
Realising the typical 
acts of the mother part
Creating the appearance 
here and now of being 
Hamlet doing Hamlet 
things
tenor
Extracting the type of 
hammering a nail
Doing what mothers 
usually do to their 
babies
Doing as Hamlet did in 
Helsinoer during the 
Renaissance
Doing the type of act
having as goal to hammer
a nail
Using the typical means
for realising the type
hammering the nail
(Extracting Type
Fig. 5.3 From imitation as token for a type to imitation a sign

5
Semiosis Beyond Signs. On Two or Three Missing Links on the Way . . .
89
Thus, tool use and other kinds of skill as such are not mimesis, because they
are not communicative, but they are “public”, and they lend themselves to imita-
tion – which leads to generalization of tool use and skill in society. This is where
they become different from routine acts and procedural memory. They are socially
shared. But this is only possible if the act can be separated from the unique tool user
and transferred to another user. That is, the act as token must be abstracted to a type
in order to be realised in another token. What is shared is the type, in other words
the scheme of interpretation, which deﬁnes the principle of relevance (in the sense
of a rule that picks out the properties of one object being mapped onto another). In
this sense (not in the sense of reference), a single mimetic act may correspond to
various events.
It is therefore by means of imitation that the “extension of conscious control
into the domain of action” (Donald, 2001, p. 261) may be obtained. But the act of
imitation, in this instance, is in no way a sign. If I see somebody use a stone as a tool
to crack open the shell of a nut, I may do the same thing, not to bring into mind the
act of the other person I have observed, but to obtain the same effect. I attempt to
realise the same act as he did, that is, to open the shell up, so that I can take out the
nut and eat it. Instead of producing an expression that is non-thematic but directly
given which refers to a content that is thematic but indirectly given, I am realising
a new instance of the category of acts consisting in cracking open a nutshell. Like
Tomasello’s apes, I may of course try to obtain the same effect without attending
to the adequate means, which would produce a failed act of imitation. Or, I may
merely simulate the outer actions of cracking the shell open, without letting them
have a sufﬁcient impact on the physical environment, in which case I may either be
engaged in symbolic play, play-acting, or simply practicing the movements.
Imitation, in this sense, may thus be said to be differentiated, in the sense of
separating the mediator and that which is mediated, but it is not asymmetric, neither
in the sense of focus, nor in that of directness. Indeed, it is really the type that is
mediated by the token. This also means that the purpose of the act of imitation is
not to present the original act to another subject (or even to oneself). Bentele (1984)
in fact argued against Piaget that imitation does not manifest the semiotic function,
but is a prerequisite for it: indeed, it will function as a sign only to the extent that
it is taken to refer back to the imitated act, instead of just being another instance of
the same kind.
Acts of imitation in this sense have two interesting properties: they are “public”,
in the very broad sense characterized by Donald, i.e. they may be perceptually, often
visually, inspected; and they can be copied by means of the observer’s own body,
with or without some additional implement such as a stone. In both these ways,
imitation is different from episodic memory; and it is different from procedural
memory in being a public record. Like in procedural memory, the record is located in
one’s own body, but it can only function as memory to the extent that it is somehow
separable from the body as such. In fact, this can only be so, to the extent that
memory traces are instantiated in other bodies as well as in one’s own body. This
supposes a distinction between token and type (that is, relevance) preceding that of
the semiotic function.

90
G. Sonesson
5.3 The Peircean Sign or the Observer Observed
The Peircean sign is a sign only in a very Pickwickean sense of the term. It is one
of three speciﬁcations of Firstness, Secondness, and Thirdness. It might be said to
be concerned with interpretation in a more generic sense than the sign: “semiosis”.
Perhaps this is what Peirce was thinking about when, at a later stage, he complained
that his notions were too narrow, and that, instead of referring to signs, he should
be talking about mediation or “branching” (CP 4.3. and MS 339 quoted in Mertz &
Parmentier, 1985).
Conceived in this way, Peirce’s theory appears to be about the situation of com-
munication, but much closer to what we now would describe as a hermeneutical
model than to the model known from the theory of information. In this sense, “a sign
[or rather semiosis] is whatever there may be whose intent is to mediate between an
utterer of it and interpreter of it, both being repositories of thought, or quasi-minds,
by conveying a meaning from the former to the latter” (MS 318, quoted by Jappy,
2000). In many passages, the object is not described as that which the sign is about,
that is, to which it refers, in the sense in which this term is used in linguistic phi-
losophy: instead, it is that which incites somebody to produce a sign (which may or
may not coincide with the referent). It is in this sense that the object is Secondness:
it concerns the relation between the reality perceived and the expression produced.
Similarly, the interpretant must be seen as the result of the receiver taking in the
whole event of the utterer creating an expression starting out from some feature of
his experience. Because it refers to the relation between the utterer and that which
he reacts to, it is not only an elementary relation, it is Thirdness. Indeed, this idea is
very well illustrated by the notion of “branching”, which Peirce used to characterise
his later concept of mediation.
Even describing that which Peirce is concerned about as an act of communication
may amount to being too speciﬁc. Instead, it could be characterized as an observa-
tion being observed. Summarizing all of Peirce’s different attempts at pinning down
the nature of Firstness, we could probably say that it is something that appears or
may appear (without connection to anything else). It is thus prior to all relationship.
Secondness is not only the second term that comes into play, but also it is made up
of two parts, one of which is a property, and the other a relation. It is something
the function of which it is to hook up with something already given as a possibility.
In this sense, it is a reaction, in the most general sense, to Firstness, where the ﬁrst
part is the connection to the property independently appearing and the second part
describes the nature of this relationship. Thirdness is not only the third term which
is ushered in, but it consists of three parts, two of which are relational: one which
is hooked up to the term of Firstness and another which is connected to the relation
of Secondness, together with which we ﬁnd a third term describing the relationship
between these two terms. It is thus an observation of the reaction. Appearance is
monadic, reaction is dyadic, and observation is triadic (Cf. Fig. 5.4).
In social psychology, in particular developmental psychology, there is also much
talk about dyads and triads, and about some things being dyadic and other triadic
(cf. Tomasello, 1999). Thus, interactions, engagements, eye gaze, and so on, are said

5
Semiosis Beyond Signs. On Two or Three Missing Links on the Way . . .
91
Fig. 5.4 The basic meaning
of the Peircean triad
to by either dyadic or triadic. This terminology would seem to have originated in
the sociology of Georg Simmel (Cf. Simmel, 1971). Dyads and triads are to Simmel
groups of two or three individuals, respectively. Units, not relationships are counted.
Between two individuals there may be any number of relationships, just as there
may be between three individuals. When, in contemporary articles, we read about
a “mother-child dyad”, etc., this is clearly what is meant. In general, translated into
the terminology of Sonesson (2000b), a dyadic situation seems to be taken to consist
of Ego and Alter (another person) or Ego and Alius (a thing or a person treated as
a thing), whereas a triad includes all three types. Even more speciﬁcally, the triad
tends to involve child, caretaker and a referent.
Other uses are more explicitly relational: dyadic is opposed to triadic as the rela-
tion of a subject to an object, or another subject is opposed to the relation of a subject
both to another subject and another object. Thus, on one hand, there is “dyadic eye
gaze: looking at object or person”, and on the other hand there is “triadic eye gaze:
looking back and forth between object and person” (Cf. Bates, 1979). A more com-
plex interpretation would suppose that a dyadic relation is a relation between two
individuals, while a triadic relation is a relation to the relation between two individ-
uals. This is similar to what Peirce seems to mean, according to the interpretation
given above. It should be noted that such a relation to the relation between Alter and
Alius is not the same thing as two relations, to Alter on the one hand, and to Alius on
the other. However, in practice, the only way to know that somebody is attending to
the relationship between two individuals may be to observe him or her looking ﬁrst
at one individual and than at the other. Perhaps we would even need to go further,
introducing relations between relations as well as relation between such relations.
Clearly social psychology, in spite (or because) of being a much more practi-
cal concern that Peircean philosophy, is as unclear about what is dyadic and triadic
as Peirce. Basically, however, it seems that what is involved in dyadic relations, in
both cases, is a subject taking cognizance of the world, and in the triadic relations,

92
G. Sonesson
somebody being aware of what the ﬁrst subject is doing.6 Typically, in social psy-
chology, this is the caretaker observing the child’s perceptual interchange with the
world. In other words, it involves Ego and Alter interacting with reference to Alius.
Understood in this way, Peircean semiosis (which we should no longer restrict
to being a sign) is not properly speaking “communicative”, in Donald’s sense, but
certainly “public” or, perhaps better “spectacular”. It is available to others. Yet, for
it to be available, it is not enough for it to be present, but it must be accessible to
attention. What is needed is a community (not only a single caretaker) for which this
information is available – and the capacity for attending, without which the infor-
mation is lost, as it is on so many other animals than man, as soon as it goes beyond
the properties deﬁned by its ecological niche (Cf. Gurwitsch, 1957; Sonesson, 1989,
1996, 2007a, 2007b; Arvidson, 2006). Thus the capacity for attending freely to the
outside world – going beyond the Umwelt to the Lebenswelt –, may well be the ﬁrst
missing link on the way from animals to human beings.
References
Arvidson, S. (2006). The sphere of attention: Context and margin. London: Kluwer.
Bates, E. (1979). The emergence of symbols. New York: Academic.
Bentele, G. (1984). Zeichen und Entwicklung. Vorüberlegungen zu einer genetischen Semiotik.
Tübingen: Narr.
Daddesio, T. C. (1995). Of minds and symbols. Berlin and New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Deacon, T. (1997). The symbolic species. New York: Norton.
Deely, J. (2001). Four ages of understanding. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Donald, M. (1991). Origins of the modern mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Donald, M. (2001). A mind so rare. New York: Norton.
Gallagher, S. (2005). How the body shapes the mind. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Gurwitsch, A. (1957). Théorie du champ de la conscience. Bruges: Desclée de Brouver.
Hribar, A., Call, J., & Sonesson, G. (in press). From sign to action. Studies in chimpanzee pictorial
competence. Semiotica.
Husserl, E. (1939). Erfahrung und Urteil. Prag: Academia Verlagsbuchhandlung.
Jappy, T. (2000). Iconicity, hypoiconicity. In J. Quiroz & R. Gudwin (Eds.), The digital ency-
clopaedia of Charles S. Peirce. Retrieved September 2, 2011, from http://www.digitalpeirce.
fee.unicamp.br/jappy/hypjap.htm
Mertz, E., & Parmentier, R. J. (Eds.). (1985). Semiotic mediation: Sociocultural and psychological
perspectives. Orlando, FL: Academic.
Piaget, J. (1945). La formation du symbole chez l’enfant. Neuchatel: Delachaux & Niestlé.
Piaget, J. (1967). La psychologie de l’intelligence. Paris: Armand Colin.
Piaget, J. (1970). Epistémologie des sciences de l’homme. Paris: Gallimard.
Peirce, C. (1931–58). Collected Papers I–VIII. C. Hartshorn, P. Weiss, & A. Burks (Eds.).
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press (Quoted in the text as CP).
Simmel, G. (1971). In D. Levine (Ed.), On individuality and social forms: Selected writings.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Sonesson, G. (1989). Pictorial concepts. Lund: Aris/Lund University Press.
Sonesson, G. (1992a). Bildbetydelser. Lund: Studentlitteratur.
6 Or something: The mind is not necessarily a subject to Peirce, but he does admit that there is no
way of explaining it, at least at present, than by reference to a subject.

5
Semiosis Beyond Signs. On Two or Three Missing Links on the Way . . .
93
Sonesson, G. (1992b). The semiotic function and the genesis of pictorial meaning. In E. Tarasti
(Ed.), Center/periphery in representations and institutions. Imatra, Finland (July 16–21, 1990,
pp. 211–156). Imatra: Acta Semiotica Fennica.
Sonesson, G. (1996). An essay concerning images. From rhetoric to semiotics by way of ecological
physics. Semiotica, 109(1/2), 41–140.
Sonesson, G. (1998). Icon — Iconicity — Index — Indexicality, entries. In P. Bouissac in col-
laboration with G. Sonesson, P. Thibault, & T. Threadgold (Eds.), Encyclopedia of semiotics
(pp. 293–297, 206–311). New York: Oxford University Press.
Sonesson, G. (2000a). Action becomes Art. “Performance” in the Context of Theatre, Play, Ritual –
and life. VISIO, 5(2), 105–122.
Sonesson, G. (2000b). Ego meets Alter: The meaning of otherness in cultural semiotics. Semiotica,
128–3/4, 537–559.
Sonesson, G. (2001). From semiosis to ecology. VISIO, 6(2–3), 85–110.
Sonesson, G. (2006). The meaning of meaning in biology and cognitive science. A semiotic
reconstruction. Semiotiké. Trudy po znakovym sistemam/Sign system studies, 34, 135–213.
Sonesson, G. (2007a). From the meaning of embodiment to the embodiment of meaning. In
T. Ziemke, J. Zlatev, & R. Frank (Eds.), Body, language, and mind (pp. 85–28). Berlin and
New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Sonesson. G. (2007b). The extensions of man revisited. From primary to tertiary embodiment. In
J. Krois, M. Rosengren, A. Steidle & D. Westerkamp (Eds.), Embodiment in cognition and
culture (pp. 27–56). Amsterdam and Philadelphia, PA: Benjamins.
Sonesson, G. (2009). The view from Husserl’s Lectern: Considerations on the role of phenomenol-
ogy in cognitive semiotics. Cybernetics and Human Knowing, 16(3–4), 107–148.
Sonesson, G. (2010a). Here comes the semiotic species: Reﬂections on the semiotic turn in
the cognitive sciences. In B. Wagoner (Ed.), Symbolic transformations (pp. 38–58). London:
Routledge.
Sonesson, G. (2010b). Semiosis and the elusive ﬁnal interpretant of understanding. Semiotica,
178–1/2, 511–624.
Sonesson, G. (in press). From iconicity to pictorality. Iconicity revisited/L’iconicité révisité. Paris:
L’Harmattan.
Sonesson, G., & Zlatev, J. (in press). Overall theoretical summary of the SEDSU project. In C.
Sinha, G. Sonesson, & J. Zlatev (Eds.), Signing up to be human.
Tomasello, M. (1999). The cultural origins of human cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Tomasello, M. (2008). Origins of human communication. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Part II
The Prehistoric and Comparative
Connection

Chapter 6
The Natural History of Intentionality.
A Biosemiotic Approach
Jesper Hoffmeyer
Abstract Our lives cannot but implant the knowledge in our souls that the mind is
one thing and the world is another. Out of this separation arises the problem of inten-
tionality, that our minds necesarily occupy themselves with things in the world, or
that mind processes are always “about” something. In the scholastic tradition from
Thomas Aquinas this “aboutness” is still seen as an immaterial or intentional direct
union between the knower and the known. To know about things, e.g. a storm or
a ﬂower, implies that these things exist in the mind of the knower as intentional
beings, and the nature of this kind of being is that of a relation or interface. This
understanding is radically different from the cognitive theories that came to domi-
nate in the course of the scientiﬁc revolution. According to Descartes the exterior
world is grasped through the mechanical work of the senses, which then required
some intermediate entity, a concept or an idea, to stand between the outside world
(reality) and the mind. Henceforward the mind lost its direct access to the world,
and logically enough this line of thought ended up in the conception that we can
never understand the world as it is in itself. The idea of intentional being was taken
up once again by Franz Brentano in 1874, who claimed that “Mental phenomena . . .
are those phenomena which contain an object intentionally within themselves”. To
Brentano – and the phenomenological tradition he thus initiated – mind should be
seen as real, irreducibly intentional, and inexplicable naturalistically. Philosphers
of the analytic tradition rejected this whole notion claiming that whatever is real is
nonintentional and explicable naturalistically. Unnoticed by most thinkers a third
position was suggested by Charles Peirce, who agreed with Brentano that mind is
real and irreducibly intentional but in the same time maintained, contra Brentano,
that mind is explicable naturalistically. This chapter takes the semiotic realism of
Charles Peirce as a starting point and discusses a biosemiotic approach to the prob-
lem of intentionality. Intentionality is seen as implicit to semiosis (sign processes)
and semiosis and life is seen as co-existant. The needs of all living beings for
expressing a degree of anticipatory capacity is seen as an evolutionary lever for
the development of species with increased semiotic freedom. Human intentionlity
is not therefore unique in the world but must be understood as a peculiar and highly
J. Hoffmeyer (B)
Biological Institute, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen DK 2200, Denmark
e-mail: jhoffmeyer@me.com
97
T. Schilhab et al. (eds.), The Symbolic Species Evolved, Biosemiotics 6,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-2336-8_6, C⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2012

98
J. Hoffmeyer
sophisticated instantiation of a general semiotics of nature. Biosemiotics offers a
way to explicate intentionality naturalistically.
6.1 Anthropomorphism
In the 1890s the Russian physiologist Ivan Pavlov studied gastric function in dogs
when he made the striking observation that his experimental animals began to
salivate whenever an assistant entered the doors. Pavlov realized that the salivary
response was not due to an automatic physiological process, and started his now
famous series of experiments to study this “psychic excretion” as he called it.
Pavlov’s experiments probably more than any other observations served to corrobo-
rate the ﬁrm belief held by the scientiﬁc society that living beings were in fact “mere
machines”. Nearly a century of behaviorist psychology has helped cementing this
conception.
The machine metaphor for organismic life dates back of course to René
Descartes’ mechanical biology from the 17. century. Descartes’ own image of the
organism was the clockwork, but as technology developed other machines took its
place. In the 19th century the steam engine became the preferred metaphor, and
in modern times the computer is the unchallenged candidate. There is indeed a
striking likeness between machines and living creatures in that both exhibit goal-
directed activity. But as Terrence Deacon has observed, “whereas machines . . .
exhibit derived functionality and intention by virtue of a kind of teleological par-
asitism on human teleology, living functions of the body and mind are intrinsically
teleological” (Deacon, 2007, 2008). Thus the functionality of organisms may well
be said to depend on delicate machinery, but this machinery has not been cre-
ated by human minds and it therefore requires explanation of another sort than the
explanation needed for the existence of real machines. In fact, the very popularity
among scientists of the machine metaphor paradoxically discloses a strong scien-
tiﬁc intuition, that organismic life does indeed exhibit intentionality, even though
the machine metaphor was obviously meant to do away with exactly this presumed
antiscientiﬁc idea.
The opposition among scientists and (most) philosophers to the idea of inten-
tionality in animals – or worse plants, fungi, and bacteria – is probably due to the
general taboo against anthropomorphisms in science. The automatic rejection by
modern science of all theories carrying even the faintest trace of anthropomorphism
(a rejection reminding one of the horror vacui of an earlier epoch) is however itself
deserving of critical study (see Favareau, 2007). As Karl Popper once remarked, if
we are talking about the nose of a dog, we are also anthropomorphizing the dog, but
we are doing so for good reasons, because the nose of the dog and the nose of the
human individual are homologous organs, i.e., their structural and functional simi-
larities are accounted for by the well-established fact of common ancestry. Likewise,
claimed Popper, we are well-justiﬁed in speaking about knowledge in animals to the
extent that homology implies that animal brains and human brains are evolutionarily

6
The Natural History of Intentionality. A Biosemiotic Approach
99
related organs performing related functions (Popper, 1990, p. 30). In fact, any claim
to the effect that human beings are the only animals to possess intentionality would
require additional theories to explain why other mammals should be so fundamen-
tally different from us. No satisfactory theories pertaining to such an effect is known
to this author.1
Needless to say, the widespread belief – not least among pet owners – in the
presence of sophisticated human-like psychological intelligence in animals (and
sometimes even in plants) hardly satisﬁes the slightest critical scrutiny, and anthro-
pomorphism clearly poses a challenge that must be confronted and dealt with in any
concrete case. But so does the opposite danger, the danger of anthropocentrism: “the
reading humanness out of nature”, as the American philosopher Maxine Sheets-
Johnstone has put it: “By such an act, nonhuman creaturely life is interpreted in ways
that consistently exalt the measure of humans: humans become special creations”
(Sheets-Johnstone, 2009, p. 125). The religious overtones are hardly accidental in
this derogative characterization: considering the rationalist commitments underly-
ing the taboo against anthropomorphism it is indeed remarkable that the godlike
status hereby implicitly ascribed to the human being goes unnoticed. Like every
other species in the world the human species is a product of evolution, and it is not
reasonable to think that a world that has managed to create a human species would
be deprived of all and every trace of human faculties. We therefore refuse to let
the fear for anthropomorphisms deter us from considering the occurrence of natural
intentionality.
6.2 Semiotic Realism
Gregory Bateson in the book “Angels fear” (posthumously edited by his daugh-
ter Mary Catherine Bateson) observed that “if we had continual awareness of our
image-making process, our images would cease being credible,” and he goes on
to assert that “The links between sense and motion are indispensable to living, but
the links depend always on presuppositions that are commonly either absolutely
inaccessible to consciousness, or momentarily left unexamined in the immediacy
of action” (Bateson & Bateson, 1987, pp. 96–97). Accordingly one might say that
1 There is a third possibility of course, a possibility that has been adopted by philosophers such as
Daniel Dennett, who recommended our taking of “the intentional stance” (Dennett, 1987). Brieﬂy
stated, this view holds that we cannot understand the life of other humans (or of animals) with-
out describing those lives as guided by, or woven into, intentionality. This does not mean that
these creatures possess intentionality as a real property – rather, the thesis states only that we can-
not understand these creatures unless we pretend that they do. I must confess that this position
reminds me of the evermore complex (and increasingly less likely) sets of epicycles that Ptolemaic
astronomers had to introduce into their explanations of the planetary orbits in order to uphold the
belief in the geocentric system. Rather than seeking shelter in such powerless conceptions about
what, for all of us without exception, is the deepest and most real content of our lives – i.e., the
fact that such life is being experienced – we shall suggest that it is instead the ingrained belief in
animals as machine-like robots that ought to be given up.

100
J. Hoffmeyer
living in a very deep sense depends on faith, faith in what our senses tell us – even
though we have no idea of how the senses actually managed to tell us this or that;
and even though we know quite well, that our senses may be telling us a wrong
story. The inaccessibility to consciousness of the brain activities that leads us to
perception is obvious alone from the fact that most nerve cells in the brain do not
connect to the outside world or even to sense organs. They only “know” the local
surround of other brain cells and body ﬂuids. And yet these cells are our only means
for grasping the outside world (Roepstorff, 2004, p. 149).
The kind of faith we are talking about here might perhaps be called animal faith,
it is a faith that comes to us unconsciously and is hard to escape. The human species
nevertheless is the only species in this world that may – to some degree at least –
manage to escape it. We – or most of us – know that we may err; immersed as we
are in a linguistic lebenswelt we are forced to distinguish between the reality of
self-subsisting things and the more immediately known and equally real objects of
our experience (Deely, 2001, p. 8). Our lives cannot but implant the knowledge in
our souls that the mind is one thing and the world is another. Language gives us the
capacity to reorganize our interior cognitive and affective states in ways that are not
tied to the biological constitution of the human organism.
This partial loss, or transcending, of brute “animal faith” is the source for a deep-
rooted existential skepticism that clings to the human condition and which makes
faith itself, human faith, a turning point for much of social life. In the philosophy of
science it has caused persistent warnings against naïve realism. As Francis Bacon
famously said in 1620: “The human understanding is like a false mirror, which,
receiving rays irregularly, distorts and discolors the nature of things by mingling its
own nature with it” (Novum Organum).
Yet, if human knowledge did not actually help us – as it helped our remote ances-
tors – in the everyday dealings with the natural and social conditions of our lives,
why would we have evolved brains and language in the ﬁrst place, and why would
we have prospered as a species? The rejection of scientiﬁc realism may seem tempt-
ing from an intellectual point of view, but it doesn’t accord well with empirical
evidence, i.e., the success story (at least as seen from an evolutionary point of view)
of human civilization on our planet.
Nominalism nevertheless has dominated philosophy of science for centuries, not
the least due to the broad acceptance of the Kantian claim that we can never reach an
understanding of the Ding-an-sich (the thing in itself) but will always only grasp the
“Ding-für-mich” (the thing for me). Scientists, accordingly, generally feel justiﬁed
to understand their work as dealing with “data”, not with reality, a concept that is
relegated to “metaphysical speculation.” The nominalist doctrine implies that the
relation between existing things is not itself part of what exists, but should instead
be regarded as a mere construction in the mind of the observer. That a mammalian
upper arm bone ﬁts into the shoulder joint of the same animal is, according to this
view, not part of reality, for ﬁts into is a purely relational concept, and relations
are not real things in themselves, only things like arm and shoulder bones are. The
ﬁtting-in relation, correspondingly, does not – to a strict nominalist – refer to any
independently existing reality (Deely, 1994; Hoffmeyer, 2008). The claim in other

6
The Natural History of Intentionality. A Biosemiotic Approach
101
words is, that our all too human habit of connecting things into relational systems
misrepresents a reality that does not contain any such relations.
But again, why, one must ask, has the human species evolved this habit of placing
things in relationships? Do we really have to believe in the Kantian dictum on the
Ding-an-sich and the nominalist skepticism it logically entails? After all, modern
philosophy might have led us astray. Perhaps relational order is indeed part of a
mind-independent reality that humans do right in emphasizing in their descriptions
of the natural order.
This was the position taken by the American scientist and philosopher Charles
Sanders Peirce (1839–1914). Peirce developed a semiotic realism where knowledge
was seen quite generally as based upon sign action, semiosis. The way the outside
world of an organism and its inside world are connected is not, in this view, by
way of something from the outside entering into the inside, but by the formation
in the organism of a sign relation connecting it to the outside world through an
interpretative act. We shall return to this philosophy, but we must ﬁrst recreate the
historical context for Peircean semiotics2 which unfortunately predates the scientiﬁc
revolution and has therefore by and large become extinguished from the curricula of
the educational system.3 We must, in other words, look back to the Latin thinkers of
medieval times, the period of scholasticism characterized by an attempt to reconcile
ancient classical philosophy (notably Plato and later Aristotle) with Christianity.
From the point of view of science the most inﬂuential ﬁgure in this period was the
Italian Dominican priest Thomas Aquinas (1225–1275) who held that the study of
“the Book of Nature” was a necessary way to understanding “the Book of God”, the
Bible, and vice versa. The metaphor of the book of nature dates back to the church
father Augustin (354–430) who saw the created world as a message to us from the
Creator. Augustin was also the originator of the general category of a sign (signum)
to be understood as something awakening us to infer something else (Deely, 2001),4
and for Augustin this meant that God gave us signs to show us his intentions. A
storm or a ﬂower was not just a storm or a ﬂower since God would have had a
purpose by creating storms and ﬂowers – or idiots for that matter. Our linguistic
categories were not then – as the nominalists claimed – just inventions of the human
mind, for they served as necessary tools to disclose God’s purposes with his cre-
ation. Thomas Aquinas’ teachings were very inﬂuential in the scholastic period and
2 Semiotics unfortunately is still best known as a branch of linguistics due to the inﬂuential work of
the Swiss linguist Ferdinand de Saussure (1916). In the Saussurean tradition, which should better
be termed semiology (Saussure’s own original term) to avoid confusing it with Peircean semiotics,
human language is taken as the primary model for semiosic activity and if semiosis is admitted to
take place in the animal world at all, it is seen as a degenerate version of human semiosis. Modern
semiotics, however, following the semiotic understanding of Peirce, considers human language as
just one peculiar instantiation of a much broader semiotics pertaining to evolution at large.
3 History is written by winners.
4 Augustine deﬁned the sign as “something, that besides the impressions it conveys to the sense,
make something else come into cognition” (Bains, 2006, p. 40).

102
J. Hoffmeyer
his position on the necessity of studying the Book of Nature was one important step-
ping stone on the route to the scientiﬁc revolutions of the 16th and 17th centuries.
Particularly important in this context was also his insistence on God’s reliability,
that God, in his benevolence, would not have created nature as an unruly and law-
less place. Among the nominalists many protested against this theses that might be
seen as an undue limitation of God’s freedom: God must be free to create whatever
kind of world he might want, they claimed. But in the end the Thomist understand-
ing prevailed – not the least, one may suspect, because the conception of a capricious
and unpredictable God would imply, as Luther and Calvin both saw, that God might
choose to punish the pious and reward evildoers. The belief in an orderly nature
was of course a necessary precondition for the birth of the natural sciences, for had
nature not to some extent been conceived as predictable there would have been no
natural laws to study in the ﬁrst place and the attempt to seek systematic knowledge
about nature could hardly be expected to pay off.
For Thomas Aquinas himself and the Thomist tradition there is an emphasis
on realism in which there is an immaterial or intentional direct union between the
knower and the known (Bains, 2006). To know about things, e.g. a storm or a ﬂower,
implies that these things exist in the mind of the knower as intentional beings, and
the nature of this kind of being is that of a relation or interface. This understanding is
radically different from the cognitive theories that came to dominate in the course of
the scientiﬁc revolution, where “intentional being” was seen rather as an intermedi-
ary “obstacle posited between the knower and the known”, an obstacle “that would
ﬁrst be known reﬂexively before the thing was known” (ibid, 43, my emphasis). In
Aristotle form and matter were seen as different aspects of things, and in cognition
the soul or mind would take on the form of the thing perceived without receiving its
matter. So, according to Aristotle, when I think about or perceive a ﬂower, my mind
receives the form of the ﬂower. Aquinas instead argues that the ﬂower has a different
existence in nature (esse naturale) and in thought (esse intentionale) (Bains, 2006,
p. 44).
The crux of the matter is the direct union between knower and known; the con-
cept of intentionality is descriptive of this relation between the mind and the things
cognized. We are aware not of the idea or concept but rather of that which it rep-
resents – its object. The idea or concept does not stand in between the cognizing
organism and the thing (physical or mental), rather the idea or the concept is a for-
mal sign, (an interpretant in the later terminology of Peirce), i.e. “that by which –
or rather that on the basis of which – we know, . . . not that which we know . . .”
(ibid, 50).
The nature of this relation would be the theme of the next several centuries of
scholastic thought culminating in the semiotic philosophy of John (João) Poinsot
from Coimbra (1589–1644) that has only recently been dug out of near oblivion
thanks to the efforts of John Deely (2007). There is not space to delve upon the sub-
tleties of Poinsot’s thinking. Let me here just with Paul Bains summarize: “Poinsot
sought to conserve the possibility of an adequate “correspondence” or coherence
between thought and thing, but he also laid the semiotic foundation for an image of
thought that could not be reduced to that perspective. Relations are truly between

6
The Natural History of Intentionality. A Biosemiotic Approach
103
things: rhizomes or interbeings, to use Deleuze and Guattari’s terms, or the “Being
of the between” to use Heidegger’s characterization of Dasein.” (ibid, p. 51).
Poinsot was a contemporary of Galileo and at this point of history scholasticism
was more or less swept away from center stage by the aggressive new philosophy of
the scientiﬁc revolution. As Bains remorsefully observes: “modern western philoso-
phy (particularly from Descartes and onwards) chooses to dispense with the doctrine
[of intentional being] and embrace the aporias of a “classical” metaphysics of rep-
resentation in which what the mind knows directly is its own products, positing a
beneﬁcent God to make our “objective” ideas conform to the world” (ibid, p. 45).
Several hundred years had to pass before Charles Peirce in the late 19th Century
took up again the line of thought from the Latin thinkers and developed it to a full
blown theory of semiotic realism.
“Modern philosophy”, writes Bains “began once the idea came to be considered
the immediate object of knowledge rather than an interface, or relation” (ibid, p. 51).
According to Descartes the exterior world is grasped through the mechanical work
of the senses, which then required some intermediate entity, a concept or an idea,
to stand between the outside world (reality) and the mind. Henceforward the mind
lost its direct access to the world. Humans do not usually react automatically upon
sense stimuli but “translate” them to a conceptual world, which then serves as the
substrate for thoughts and action. What is at stake is the nature of this “translation”:
How can a material process be converted into a concept through a purely mechanical
processes? It cannot of course, and therefore there is no escape from Descartes’
res cogitans in post-Cartesian philosophy, with the implication, that realism was
essentially impossible from the very beginning of modern philosophy. For as long
as thought is imprisoned in its own solipsistic res cogitans there is no way to measure
it against the world. The only way to transcend this dualism, we shall claim, is to see
organisms as connected to their world in a relational semiotic network rather than
through the mechanics of their sensory organs.
6.3 Intentionality
The modern concept of intentionality in philosophy goes back to the German
philosopher Franz Brentano (1838–1917) who in 1874 proposed intentionality as
the one “positive attribute” that holds true of all mental phenomena: “Mental phe-
nomena . . . are those phenomena which contains an object intentionally within
themselves” (Brentano, 1874/1973, pp. 88–89, cit. from Short, 2007, p. 6). Brentano
was himself, as Deely notes, a Dominican priest and was well read in the literature
of scholasticism to which he explicitly refers. (Deely, 2007, p. 4). The problem we
are concerned with here is how it can be that some things in this world are “about”
some other things. Thoughts, hopes, desires etc. are always about something else,
and we distinguish them according to what they are about. Lifeless things, on the
other hand, such as stones or clouds are not – to the best of our knowledge – about
anything else. The term intentionality was meant to catch this strange property of
aboutness.

104
J. Hoffmeyer
We can summarize the Brentano thesis in three points: 1) Only mental phe-
nomena exhibits intentionality, 2) Intentionality is an irreducible feature of mental
phenomena, 3) Since no physical phenomena could exhibit it, mental phenom-
ena could not be a species of physical phenomena. Brentano’s pupil Edmund
Husserl (1859–1938) saw the identiﬁcation of intentionality with the mental as
a fundamental principle whereupon he founded a new science: phenomenology.
Phenomenology was the science of the mental and naturalistic explanation was
excluded in principle.
From the point of view of analytical philosophy a major problem with Brentano’s
concept of intentionality is the claim that mental phenomena contains an object
inside themselves even when that object does not exist. If for instance we think
of a unicorn or of Santa Claus, then in both cases Brentano’s thesis implies that
our thoughts contains a non-existent object. As Short says: “one fears the unreal
and desires the impossible” (Short, 2007, p. 7). But how can something be an object
without existing? W. V. O. Quine (1908–2000), for instance, would admit that inten-
tional idioms are irreducible but would claim that they do not denote anything real,
and like most contemporary philosophers of mind he held a) that reality is physical,
b) that physicalist language is wholly free of intentional idioms (ibid, p. 13).
So, confronting the Brentano/Husserl position, that mind is real, irreducibly
intentional, and inexplicable naturalistically we have the predominant position of
analytical philosohy, that whatever is real is nonintentional and explicable natural-
istically. A fruitful discussions between two so fundamentally different positions is
hardly possible and yet for decades these are the two positions between which we
have had to choose. Unknown to the great majority of contemporary thinkers, how-
ever, a third position was suggested more than hundred years ago by Peirce: that
mind is real, irreducibly intentional, and yet explicable naturalistically.
As the reader will expect by now, this is the position we will take here and
explore in the rest of this chapter. Peirce was against dualisms of any kind, an
option he saw as closing the door for deeper understanding, and he would not accept
that mental life should evade naturalistic explanation. But neither could he accept
the physicalism of his own time which he saw as constrained by a much too nar-
row understanding of what is meant by “the physical”. Instead the way he crossed
the mind-body dualism was by extending the concept of intentionality beyond the
conﬁnes of human cognition, and he did so by grounding intentionality in a very
generalized understanding of sign action, semiosis, which he explained thus: “by
“semiosis” I mean . . . an action, or inﬂuence, which is, or involves, a cooperation of
three subjects, such as a sign, its object, and its interpretant, this tri-relative inﬂuence
not being in any way resolvable into actions between pairs” (Peirce, 1931–1958,
p. 5.484). On the one hand this triadic notion of semiosis, which we shall dis-
cuss below in more detail, entails intentionality since to the interpreter (the system
in which the interpretant is formed) the sign obviously is “about” something, and
on the other hand Peirce did not conceive of the interpreter as being necessarily a
human person. Peirce explicitly referred to this point in the following passage, from
a letter to Lady Welby, written in 1908: “It is clearly indispensable to start with an
accurate and broad analysis of the nature of a Sign. I deﬁne a sign as a thing which is

6
The Natural History of Intentionality. A Biosemiotic Approach
105
so determined by something else, called its Object, and so determines an effect upon
a person, which effect I call its interpretant, that the latter is thereby mediately deter-
mined by the former. My insertion of “upon a person” is a sop to Cerberus, because
I despair of making my own broader conception understood.5” (Peirce, 1908,
pp. 80–81).
6.4 Biosemiotics
Biosemiotics is an approach to the understanding of living systems that takes sign
processes or semiosis to be constitutive for life. Customarily the ﬁeld has been
divided into two main areas, 1) endosemiosis, meaning semiotic processes taking
place inside an organism, as for instance in signal transduction (mediating extra-
cellular signals to intracellular activity) or secretion of hormones; 2) exosemiosis
meaning semiotic processes taking place between organisms, as for instance the
dance of cranes or mating rituals of water mites. From a theoretical point of view
however such a division is less satisfying since many, if not most, processes in
nature connect semiotic processes of both kinds. In sexual reproduction for instance
hundreds of endosemiotic processes (e.g. complex schemes of recognition pro-
cesses between egg and sperm cells, hormonal regulations etc.) are mixed up in
the sophisticated exosemiotics of mating behavior.
By making the sign fundamental to living systems biosemiotics undoubtedly will
arouse fear of vitalism in the minds of many biologists. Signs do not belong to the
habitual tool set of scientiﬁc theory and may be felt to allude to uncontrollable sub-
jectivist aspects of life. In biology, vitalism refers to the belief that the functions
of living organisms must be explained through the action of peculiar vital forces,
that do not in any way inﬂuence inanimate nature. Biosemiotics rejects appeal to
such forces. Sign processes are neither forces nor things; rather, they are proces-
sual relations that, as shown below, organize many activities. The causality of signs
thus differs from the causality of forces. Indeed, while signs are frequently mis-
understood or ignored, forces always exert their power with merciless efﬁciency.
Biosemiotics is not a new version of vitalism (Hoffmeyer, 2010).
But the concept of semiosis indeed brings a novel element to the scientiﬁc tool set
for, by deﬁnition, a sign-process requires an interpretative agency. This new element,
moreover, may be felt to jar with the hegemonic ontology of mainstream science.
From a biologist’s perspective, however, it can hardly be controversial to attribute
agency to living systems. Indeed, the mechanism of natural selection can only work
as, in Darwin’s terms, organisms “strive” (Darwin, 1971 [1859], p.71: cf. Swenson,
1989; Hoffmeyer, 2009a) for resources such as those provided by food, water, shel-
ter, mating partners and escape from predators. Without such strife there could be no
5 Peirce had no illusions that his contemporaries would accept his own broader conception whereby
nature teemed with beings, for example, bees, that could stand in the place of persons as sites for
the establishment of interpretants.

106
J. Hoffmeyer
competition, and without competition there could be no selection. Although rarely
stated, natural selection does not magically provide a mechanistic explanation the
agency of living beings. At a deep level, mainstream biology needs a theory of living
agency as much as does biosemiotics.
A promising avenue towards such a theory comes from studying the thermody-
namics of irreversible systems and complex system dynamics. These approaches
open up a non-deterministic world in which bottom-up processes engage in intricate
interactions with their top-down counterparts (Laughlin, 2005; Kauffman, 2008).
The evolutionary roots of agency, function and semiosis may well extend back to
the extinct prebiotic systems that, about 4 billion years ago, gave rise to the ﬁrst
life forms. While realistic modeling of such systems may indicate how such a pro-
cess arose, for our purposes we push back the origin question to a “threshold zone.”
Under the threshold we ﬁnd neither semiosis, function or agency and above these
properties are indeed exhibited by the system. Important work is presently done in
this area by several groups (Kauffman & Clayton, 2005; Deacon, 2006).
The ﬁrst important thing to say about the sign, as understood by modern semi-
otics, is that the sign is a process: the sign does not exist apart from the process
through which it exerts its effect. When we say e.g. that smoke is a sign of ﬁre we
think of the sign simply as identical to the smoke itself, but obviously for the sign
to have any effect in the world qua sign it must be understood (or misunderstood).
A baby sensing smoke would not turn its head to search for something burning,
but even the baby might make an icon6 of the smoke to the extent that the smoke
reminds her of something like it that she had previously experienced. To adult peo-
ple the smoke normally acts as an index, it indicates the eventual occurrence of a ﬁre
even when such a ﬁre cannot be seen. This interpretation may of course be false, as
would usually – but not always – be the case in a theater room. Signs, in other words,
refer to something else by eliciting an interpretative process in an organism.
There is no need in this context to go into the complicated questions of the taxon-
omy of signs; sufﬁce it to be aware that human language constitutes a very peculiar
sign system based on the advanced category of signs called symbols. A few mam-
malian species may in exceptional cases access the world of symbolicity, but the
systematic symbolicity of human language is unique to our species (Deacon, 1997).
Considering the uniqueness of human language it is perhaps not so strange that
semiotics has traditionally been conceived as a branch of linguistics. But the belief
in a sharp demarcation line between human and prehuman nature, corresponding to
the realm of necessity and the realm of free choice respectively, makes no sense in
the light of evolutionary theory and our growing understanding of animal cognitive
skills (see e.g. Bekoff & Pierce, 2009)7. And worse yet, it makes us misunderstand
6 In Peirce’s icon, index, symbol trichotomy the icon is a sign that refers to an object because of
a supposed “likeness”; an index refers to an object because of a causal or correlative relation; the
symbol refers to the object via a convention (often historically based as when the word “cheval”
refers to an animal that in the English-speaking world may be referred to by the word “horse”).
7 According to Peirce “All thinking is by signs, and the brutes use signs. But they perhaps rarely
think of them as signs. To do so is manifestly a second step in the use of language. Brutes use

6
The Natural History of Intentionality. A Biosemiotic Approach
107
what is truly unique about the human being. For we are certainly not alone in the
world in being sign users, all organisms must to some limited extent be capable of
reading cues in their surroundings in order to survive. In fact, semiosis is exactly
what distinguishes life from non-life (Hoffmeyer, 2009a). What is unique about
human beings is the kind of semiosis we engage in: While we share the capacity for
interpreting iconic and indexical signs with all living creatures, we alone are bound
to live our lives embedded in a symbolic world, a world of language (Deacon, 1997).
Charles Peirce deﬁned the sign as a triadic relation connecting the sign vehicle
(the smoke in our example above) with an object (the ﬁre) through the mediation of
an interpretant (conscious – or instinctive – sensomotoric activity) (Fig. 6.1):
Sign
Object
Interpretant
Smoke
Fire
Fear
Fig. 6.1 The Peircean concept of a sign as a triadic relation connecting a sign vehicle with an
object through the formation of an interpretant in a receptive system.8 In the right part is shown
how smoke may act as a sign that evoke a sense of fear by making us aware of the risk of burning
Thus, when a deer senses smoke it is immediately “seized by alarm” (the inter-
pretant) and ﬂees away. The deer may or may not understand that smoke signiﬁes
ﬁre but it certainly knows that smoke signiﬁes danger (the object). Likewise, when
a macrophage (a cell from the immune system) lets HIV virus into its interior, this
is caused by the cell falsely interpreting the virus as belonging to the body itself.
In achieving this the virus has acted as an icon for one of the normal components
involved in the immunoresponse reaction chain. Semiotics cannot restrict itself to
deal with human language, but must encompass all kinds of sign systems as they
unfold in time and space throughout organismic life on our planet.
A sign is not necessarily linked to a communicative context. Most sign pro-
cesses in this world are not only unconscious but also unintended in the sense that
the sign was not produced for the sake of interpretation. Most people for instance
don’t want to blush when embarrassed but cannot help doing so, and much to our
language, and seem to exercise some little control over it. But they certainly do not carry this
control to anything like the same grade that we do. They do not criticize their thought logically.”
(“Consequences of Critical Common-Sensism”, c. 1905, (Peirce, 1931–1958, p. 5.534)).
8 It may seem contradictory that “sign” is put in as one element in the sign-relation. As explained
in the text the sign always presupposes the whole triadic relation and technically speaking the term
“representamen” or at least “sign vehicle” should have been used instead of sign. However, since
everyday language uses the term “sign” as equivalent to the representamen as such, I have chosen
to stick with it.

108
J. Hoffmeyer
annoyance observers readily interpret the result. All mammalian animals unwit-
tingly emit butyric acid with the sweat, but for the tick the butyric acid acts as a
signal that causes her to abandon her post (on top of the blade of grass/bush) and
fall blindly downward toward her prey. Or, at another level, an antelope has been
hurt and thereby draws the attention of hunting lions that selects it out for its slightly
awkward movements.
I have suggested the term semethic interaction for this kind of co-evolution
whereby “habits become signs” in the sense that individuals of one species have
acquired the capacity to interpret certain regular activity patterns (habits) charac-
teristic for individuals of another species, which then eventually may release new
kinds of regular behavioral patterns in the ﬁrst species etc. As an example we can
take the case of the large blue butterﬂy Maculinea arion where the female lays her
eggs in thyme plants. The larvae spend their ﬁrst three weeks on thyme ﬂowers on
which they feed until they have reached the last larval instar. They then drop to the
ground, where they produce a mixture of volatile chemicals that mimics the smell of
larvae of the red ant species Myrmica sabuleti. The patrolling worker ants mistake
the larvae for their own and carry the caterpillars into the ant nests. Once there, the
caterpillars change their diet and start feeding on eggs and larvae of the ants until
they pupate. They undergo metamorphosis in the ant colony, surfacing as butterﬂies
(Gilbert & Epel, 2009, p. 86). Here the female butterﬂy proﬁts from the ants’ habit
of locating their nests on well grazed grassland with plenty of thyme plants so that
she will “know” where to put her eggs (presumably a parameter connected to the
thyme plant is interpreted as a sign for oviposition). The caterpillars furthermore are
capable of fooling the ants by interfering with the ants’ own signaling system. That
this is indeed the case is proven by the fact that if the height of the grass exceeds
4 cm M. sabuleti will disappear and another ant species, M. scabrinodis, will replace
it with fatal consequences for the caterpillar, since this ant species will not misinter-
pret the volatile chemicals produced by the caterpillar as a message of belonging in
the colony.
Now, even if successful the semethic interaction between butterﬂy and ant may
still fall victim to a new kind of dangerous parasitism. As Gilbert and Epel explains:
“It seems these caterpillars are the sole food source for the larvae of several species
of wasps of the genus ichneumon. A female wasp can detect not only the ant colonies
but also the presence of butterﬂy larvae within them. She enters only colonies where
caterpillars are present; once there, the wasp emits pheromones that cause the ants
to ﬁght among themselves while she goes about laying a single egg in each butterﬂy
larva. Each wasp egg hatches into a larva that eats the caterpillar as it begins pupa-
tion. Eleven months later, the pupal case is shed and there emerges not a butterﬂy
but an adult wasp” (ibid).
Many more examples on these webs of habits-signs-habits. . . are given in my
book Biosemiotics. An Examination into the signs of life and the life of signs
(Hoffmeyer, 2008). Among biochemists, there is a rule of thumb saying that when-
ever nature keeps a store of energy (e.g., food) there will also always be a species
that makes its living by consuming it. I shall suggest a quite similar rule of thumb
by saying that there never occurs a regularity or a habit in nature that has not

6
The Natural History of Intentionality. A Biosemiotic Approach
109
become a sign for some other organism or species. Admittedly, this rule may be less
well investigated (so far!) than the biochemical rule, but it does catch an important
semiotic aspect of the evolutionary process, for due to the mechanism of semethic
interactions, the species of this world have become woven into a ﬁne-meshed global
web of semiotic relations. These semiotic relations, more than anything else, are
responsible for the ongoing stability of Earth’s ecological and biogeographical pat-
terns. At the individual level as well as at the level of ecosystems all interaction
patterns are controlled through semiotic relations – more or less in the same way the
trafﬁc in a city is controlled through signals. This relational network can be looked
upon as an internal semiotic scaffold.
Biosemiotics then is not so much about communication as it is about signiﬁca-
tion, the many processes whereby organisms ontogenetically or phylogenetically
have learned to ascribe meaning to whatever regularities around them that may be
useful as trigger mechanisms. Biosemiosis therefore does not ﬁt into the traditional
scheme from communication science of a sender and a receiver connected through
a channel, for to the extent there are clear-cut senders and receivers at all (hardly
the normal situation) the channel is itself part of the message as interpreted by the
receiving system. Semiotic causation is based on a “trigger-mechanism” whereby
the interpreting system creates the interpretive response by its own means, not by
any external intervention – apart form whatever “trigger-event” it has learned to
select. For this reason there is no need for physical compatibility between the sign
and the activity it releases, the sound of a bell may get children running, a few
molecules hitting the antenna of a wasp may release ﬂying behavior, and the absence
of light stimulation of the right eye retina of a kitten during a critical period may
cause the cat to be functionally blind on the right eye for the rest of its life. The
evolution of a semiotically based regulation of organismic activity opens for a versa-
tility of means and a complexity of interactive entities that had been impossible if the
controlling agency relied exclusively on efﬁcient causality, good old biochemistry.
6.5 Relative Being and Semiotic Freedom
A sign is a triadic relation that organizes a process whereby an event or entity inside
or outside of an organism (or a lineage seen as a supraindividual historical organ-
ism) is reacted upon. A bird sees an unexpected shape on the stem of a birch tree,
interpret the shape as “food” and changes its ﬂight for the catch. This process is
totally different from the case where the moth is smashed into pieces by a falling
heavy object. The moth will die in both cases, and also in the last case do we have a
causative relation, gravity causing the heavy object and the Earth to approach. But
this is a dyadic (cause-and-effect) relation in no need of semiotic explanation; the
bird on the other hand is led by an interpretative act, that could not be described
or explained in the absence of the particular triadic relation involved. A hardliner
reductionist may object that the feeding behavior of the bird is indeed explainable
through an “inﬁnite” web of efﬁcient causative events. Rather than argue about
such speculations, I shall point out that for all practical purposes the explanation

110
J. Hoffmeyer
for the bird’s behavior is a triadic relation, and to insist upon explaining it through
an inﬁnitely long series of dyadic relations will bring us nowhere.
The point is this: There is no reason to assume that interpretative events are
not perfectly physically caused processes. But interpretative processes are special
because they are organized according to semiotic dynamics. If we try to separate
them out of this context we will just end up having myriads of dyadic (cause-
effect) processes without any discernable pattern, and we would not have a chance to
elucidate the real dynamics at work in the situation. In reality, though, it may seem
as if we manage quite well by describing everything in terms of dyadic processes,
but this is because we instinctively understand the intentionality of the organisms
we are studying. We are therefore capable, to some extent at least, to “guess” on
what is the real dynamics at play. The success of this strategy may persuade us
to think that dyadic relations are all we need, when in reality this need has been
“falsely” satisﬁed through a loan from our own intentionality. Biosemiotics is pre-
cisely needed in order “to make explicit those assumptions imported into biology by
such unanalyzed teleological concepts as function, adaptation, information, code,
signal, cue, etc., and to provide a theoretical grounding for these concepts” (Kull,
Deacon, Emmeche, Hoffmeyer, & Stjernfelt, 2009, p. 170).
Most relations in this world are of course quite uninteresting, as for instance
the relation one might hypothetically draw between my big toe and any of planet
Jupiter’s 63 moons. We have no reason to believe that any of these particular rela-
tions will ever get to have any causative inﬂuence upon events on Earth or elsewhere
in the universe and have no reason to ascribe any reality to them. Other relations are
important enough, as for instance the relation between prolonged day length and
approaching summer solstice. This is a purely dyadic relation that may be precisely
predicted at any given latitude thousands of years forward in time. The relation is
important because – among other things – it assures that trees may “know” approxi-
mately when to burst into leaves. Still, since this biological use of the relation is not
intrinsic to the relation it does not count as an ontological relation. The term “know”
here is put inside quotation marks to indicate that this is not knowledge in the human
sense of this word, but it is knowledge in the sense that trees have “learned” to use
this relation as a sign (actually, degree-days rather than day length is the releasing
factor here, but the two are of course closely connected). Each single beech tree
that bursts into leaves does not “know” why it does so, but as a species the beech
trees have learned through evolution to size up on the time when this parameter has
reached a threshold level.
Knowledge in the biological sense of the term, as we have used it here, nec-
essarily depends on predictability, and the mechanism behind all learning is the
creation of a triadic relations on the basis of stable dyadic relations. The predator,
for instance, goes for any prey animal that moves awkwardly because it “knows”
that clumsy behavior signiﬁes easy catch. In other words, the predator converts the
dyadic relation between slow-rate ﬂight and clumsiness into a triadic relation in
which an interpretant is produced on the top of the simple dyadic relation, and this
interpretant makes it hunt the prey animal that moves clumsily. A bird, on the other
hand, may predict that if it moves clumsily, e.g. by pretending to have a broken

6
The Natural History of Intentionality. A Biosemiotic Approach
111
wing, the fox will try to catch it instead of it’s youngs. This way the bird may often
manage to lure the fox away from the nest only to ﬂy away when the fox has lost
trace of the nest itself.
The moment we turn from the physical world to the organic world relations tend
to take on a reality of their own. Returning to the already mentioned relation between
the shoulder of an animal and the upper arm bone we are dealing with a highly
sophisticated version of an ordinary ball and socket relation. But when we follow
the evolution of this particular relation in animals since it ﬁrst occurred hundreds
of millions of years ago as ﬁns of ﬁshes, it is obvious that the relation as such has
been the focus of natural selection, and not only the bones. Whatever change selec-
tion may have favored in the evolution of these two bones, the relation between
them would have to remain ﬁt, for if one of the two bones changed without a corre-
sponding change in the other bone the individual would be crippled and could not
be expected to leave offspring. The adaptive function of the arm-shoulder joint is
an intrinsic property of the relation as such and it would be stretching to claim, as
the nominalists do, that this relation is not part of reality but only of our own minds.
This type of relation has been termed categorial relations.
Sign relations, or ontological relations, are different since they do not depend
upon the (mind-independent) existence of that which they relate. Thus most people
in the western hemisphere will think of Santa Claus if they are shown an image of
a white-bearded man dressed in red clothes walking in a snow covered landscape,
but this does not mean that these people believe in Santa Claus. As we said above,
the sign is a pure relation: it is neither material nor mental, it simply consists in the
process of producing a connection between events or entities in such a way that one
event or entity becomes related to another event or entity according to the needs of
an organism. The sign relation is both established and goes extinct in the very action
of the sign. Eventually it may endure for some time of course, but this persistence
depends on the perpetual repetition of the same – or a similar – sign process.
Anticipation – in the broadest sense of the term – is what living systems do for a
living. Contrary to lifeless systems organisms do not passively sit (or ﬂow) and wait
for things to happen, they actively search for the resources they need and actively
protect themselves against a range of possible dangers.9 All of this presupposes
some kind of anticipation where present cues are used to tell about future conditions
in some sense or other.
There are of course many strategies a species can “choose” for coping with the
challenge of change and the evolution of increased anticipatory talent is only one
among them. It is however a very decisive strategy that may even have changed
the dynamics of the later stages of evolution on our planet. This is because such a
strategy possess an intrinsic potential to drive forward a growth in the capacity I
have called semiotic freedom, or interpretance. Semiotic freedom may be deﬁned
9 Plant movements may not seem of much, but if you increase the time scale it may actually look
quite impressive when played at video. Plants move by growth (beneath and above the earth), by
off-shoots and runners, and by spreading their seeds.

112
J. Hoffmeyer
as the capacity of a system (a cell, organism, species etc.) to distinguish relevant
sensible parameters in its surroundings or its own interior states and use them
to produce signiﬁcation and meaning.10 An increase in semiotic freedom implies
an increased capacity for responding to a variety of signs through the formation
of (locally) “meaningful” interpretants (Hoffmeyer, 2008; Hoffmeyer, 2009a). The
term freedom in this context should be taken to mean: underdetermined by natural
lawfulness.
The appearance on our planet of biosemiosis opened a new agenda for the
evolutionary process by providing entities with the agential property presupposed
for Darwinian “striving” and thus for natural selection. For billions of years the
semiotic freedom of agents remained low, and a bacterium, for instance, cannot
itself chose to not swim upstream in a nutrient gradient. Therefore, at this stage
of evolution semiotic freedom is primarily exhibited at the level of the lineage
(the species as an evolving unit).11 I suggested the term evolutionary intentional-
ity for this kind of intentionality (Hoffmeyer, 1996b). Only gradually would emerge
a more advanced stage of biosemiosis, in which semiosic activity was no longer
a property of the lineage but also, and importantly so, a property of individual
organisms.
This “individualization” of semiotic freedom, i.e., its displacement from the level
of the species to the level of the individual, would have initiated a change in the
dynamics of the evolutionary process. Patterns of interactive behavior now became
increasingly regulated or released by semiotic means, and this would have induced
a new kind of ﬂexibility upon inter- and intraspeciﬁc interactions. Innovations more
and more came to depend on semiotically organized cooperative patterns at all lev-
els from single organisms and species to whole ecological settings. In fact, as I
have suggested elsewhere, natural selection from now on would more and more
follow directions given by the ecosemiotic interaction patterns (called ecosemi-
otic motif’s in (Hoffmeyer, 1997)). The more natural systems become scaffolded
through semiotic interaction patterns (semiotic scaffolding) the less will be the
role played by genetic scaffolding, and the more derivative will the role of nat-
ural selection become. Natural selection will now favor such genetic adjustments
that might support already established semiotic interaction patterns, but will not
itself to the same extent mark out the direction of change. As a consequence
the individual rather than its genes become the main evolutionary agent, and the
concrete life history of individuals will increasingly determine their behavior. By
implication learning, interpretance and semiotic freedom will be more and more
10 Originally I deﬁned semiotic freedom as “the depth of meaning that an individual or species
is capable of communicating” (Hoffmeyer, 1993, p. 109, 1996a, p. 61), but the essence of this
ability is interpretation rather than communication, although the two aspects are of course closely
connected.
11 Even at this level one cannot rule out individual semiotic freedom right away though. A bac-
terium is a hugely complex and well tuned system of proteins and other components and although
learning processes do probably not directly play a role at this level the bacterium is capable of
changing its behavior by the active uptake of foreign DNA from bacteriohages.

6
The Natural History of Intentionality. A Biosemiotic Approach
113
important parameters in the games played out in the evolutionary theater. Or, in other
words, a self-sustaining dynamics leading to increased semiotic freedom is set in
motion.
6.6 Human Intentionality
Very late in organic evolution a further potentiation of semiosic capacity took place
through the appearance of human beings that from the ﬁrst beginnings were embed-
ded in a linguistic Lebenswelt, based on the particular ability of this species to
understand symbolic linguistic referencing (Deacon, 1997). Due, not the least, to
the indefatigable efforts of the late Thomas Sebeok it has now gradually become
accepted that human semiotic capacity is only one – although radical – further
reﬁnement of a biosemiotic capacity that has unfolded itself on Earth through nearly
4 billion years (Sebeok, 1979; Sebeok & Umiker-Sebeok, 1992). The semiosic dif-
ference between the human animal and other living systems is staggering indeed,
but, as John Deely has repeatedly pointed out, by far the most important dimen-
sion of this difference is that humans know the difference between signs and things,
while animals don’t (Deely, 2001). In our attempts to cope with this discomforting
knowledge the winning strategy in modern time has been the de facto institution
of a dualism between mind and body,12 a dualism that left biology and medicine
with only half of the human person, the so-called body, and which therefore has not
managed to understand what a human being is, or what health is (Hoffmeyer, 2010).
Human beings are persons and persons cannot be divided into one part, the body,
that must be treated somatically, and another part, the mind, that must be treated
psychologically. This is where the biosemiotic approach may help out, because
biosemiotics sees meaning and signiﬁcation (sema) as inherent to the body proper
(soma) and not as something separated out to non-descript locations in the brain
or mind. Whatever the mind is it is also body, not body in the physical sense this
word has got in present day biology or medical science, but body in a semiotic
sense of the word, a body that is inherently engaged in communicative processes
that serve to coordinate the activities of the cells, tissues and organs inside the body
as well as to exchange integrating messages across hierarchically distinct levels.
Seen in this light the mental system or mind is simply the interface through which
a human organism manages its coupling up to the surrounding web of things, nat-
ural or social. The mind, thus, is not a thing and has no more distinct location (in
the brain?) than has the electronically mediated processes whereby a changing pat-
tern of pixels is at each moment shaped on the TV-screen. The outsourcing of the
body-world interface into a distinct disembodied ﬁeld, the mind, to be studied by a
separate science, psychology, was of course a necessary step as a compensation for
the imprisonment by natural science of the diseased person into a body that could
12 Often unwittingly disguised as materialistic monism which, however, in a deeper analysis can
be shown to presuppose dualism (Searle,1992).

114
J. Hoffmeyer
no longer – qua body – integrate itself into the world in a meaningful way. But not
only was this outsourcing based on unequal balance in which the medical expertise
was the unquestioned highest authority in matters of therapy. It also forced psychol-
ogy into an impossible role as caretaker of functions that were neither corporeal
nor social but mysteriously suspended in a no-mans-land produced by lack of any
substance apart from the unbearable idea of Cartesian res cogitans.
I must emphasize that this criticism is not directed towards the many excel-
lent practitioners inside the respective areas of medicine and psychology. Ingenious
ways have been invented to overcome the absence of a uniﬁed theory of the human
person, and present day psychological and medical approaches to health are invalu-
able and absolutely necessary stepping stones for a further development of a healthy
health strategy. Nevertheless biology and medicine must reintegrate the body’s inter-
face with its external world, the mind, into its core theory of a human organism. And
the way to do this is by admitting semiotics into its basic tool set. “A sign is not just
something for the mind to interpret, but something for the body to interpret, and the
body is itself of the same stuff as dreams are made of, signiﬁcative biomolecular
processes – our dreams are constantly nourished by the semiotic processes going on
in the bodymind” (Hoffmeyer, 2010).13
With the birth of this animal, the human being, the natural history of inten-
tionality seems to have reached a threshold level, where the social and cultural
environment attained an autonomous kind of creativity that irreducibly interacts
with, and largely – but never completely – determines the horizon inside which
the personal intentionality of human beings exhibits itself. And unlike biological
creativity (organic evolution) the history of cultural creativity is deeply dependent
on semiotic scaffolding right from the beginning. Language itself is of course a
powerful semiotic scaffolding tool, allowing for oral transmission of cultural expe-
riences in time (from generation to generation) and space (from group to group).
But a range of additional and increasingly sophisticated scaffolding devices follows
the development of human civilizations, primarily in the form of technical practices
and art. Sculptures, paintings and, in time, written texts support the transmission of
social skills and the myths that makes the world meaningful to people and serves
as a much needed memory store, necessary because most people through most of
human history were illiterate and had no access to other kinds of external memory
stores.
The cathedrals of the middle ages, the invention of the printing press, the radio,
ﬁlms, TV, computer networks and the internet are some of the major semiotic scaf-
folding tools that supported the route to the modern world. No need to go in more
detail. Let me rather end this little sketch by observing that for each new step in the
development of this endless series of still more powerful semiotic scaffolding tools,
the semiotic freedom of individuals took on new dimensions, because each of these
steps trivialized insights that earlier generations had had to spend their cognitive
13 The term bodymind was introducced by immunologist Candace Pert and co-workers, (Pert, Ruff,
Weber, & Herkenham, 1985), and discussed in a semiotic context in Hoffmeyer (1996a).

6
The Natural History of Intentionality. A Biosemiotic Approach
115
resources to acquire or learn, where now in the new generation semiotic scaffolding
made the insight more or less part of an “inherited” skill (Hoffmeyer, 2009b). Air
pictures, to take just one example, now instantly show us the geography that earlier
generations had spent so much energy in calculating through laboriously acquired
techniques. As a result each new generations tend to possess more powerful semi-
otic scaffolding systems on which to base their own contribution to the changing
world, the semiotic freedom get ever greater horizons to work on.
Finally, one may suppose that already from the earliest modest steps on the route
to speech its function as a means for semiotic scaffolding would feed back into
the development of the human brain itself. The gradual appearance in our remote
ancestor’s cognitive system of a referencing system based upon sound signs, speech,
would have opened a new kind of social intelligence, an intelligence derived from
the capacity of the social group as a whole to learn through the exchange of experi-
ences, skills, empathy, sensitivities, fantasy and inventiveness in a public or shared
process. In the framework of this new communal functionality it must increasingly
have become a criterion for individual success that one could contribute in talented
ways to this emerging social intelligence. The establishment of a communal or social
intelligence might have further inﬂuenced selection of individual intelligence for
instance by favoring the development of brains talented for social and linguistic
competences. Therefore one might suggest that the very special way the human
brain has been organized is as much a result of the social life made possible by
speech, as the social life is a result of highly the developed intelligence of humans
(cf. Deacon, 1997). But most probably the input went both ways: from the social-
semiotic level to the genetic level, and from the genetic level to the social-semiotic
level.
References
Bains, P. (2006). The primacy of semiosis. An ontology of relations. Toronto, ON: Toronto
University Press.
Bateson, G. & Bateson, M. C. (1987). Angels fear. Towards an epistemology of the sacred. New
York: Macmillan.
Bekoff, M., & Pierce, J. (2009). Wild justice. The moral lives of animals. Chicago and London:
University of Chicago Press.
Brentano, F. (1874/1973). Psychology from an empirical standpoint. New York: Humanities Press.
Darwin, C. (1971 [1859]). On the origin of species by means of natural selection or the
preservation of favored races in the struggle for life. London: J.M. Dent & Sons.
Deacon, T. (1997). The symbolic species. New York: Norton.
Deacon, T. (2006). Reciprocal linkage between self-organizing processes is sufﬁcient for self-
reproduction and evolvability. Theoretical Biology, 1, 136–149.
Deacon, T. (2007). Shannon-Boltzmann-Darwin: Redeﬁning information. Part 1. Cognitive
Semiotics, 1, 123–148.
Deacon, T. (2008). Shannon-Boltzmann-Darwin: Redeﬁning information. Part 2. Cognitive semi-
otics, 2, 167–194.
Deely, J. (1994). How does semiosis effect Renvoi? The American Journal of Semiotics, 11, 11–61.
Deely, J. (2001). Four ages of understanding. The ﬁrst postmodern survey of philosophy from
ancient times to the turn of the twenty-ﬁrst century. Toronto, ON: Toronto University Press.

116
J. Hoffmeyer
Deely, J. (2007). Intentionality and semiotics. Scranton, PA: Scranton University Press.
Dennett, D. C. (1987). The intentional stance. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press/Bradford Books.
Favareau, D. (2007). The evolutionary history of biosemiotics. In M. Barbieri (Ed.), Introduction
to biosemiotics (pp. 1–67). Dordrecht: Springer.
Gilbert, S. F., & Epel, D. (2009). Ecological developmental biology. Integrating epigenetics,
medicine, and evolution. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1993). En Snegl på Vejen. Om Betydningens Naturhistorie. København: Rosinante/
Munksgaard.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1996a). Signs of meaning in the universe. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1996b). Evolutionary intentionality. In E. Pessa, A. Montesanto, & E. P. Penna
(Eds.), Third European conference on systems science (pp. 699–703). Edzioni Kappa.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1997). Biosemiotics: Towards a new synthesis in biology. European Journal for
Semiotic Studies, 9, 355–376.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2008). Biosemiotics. An examination into the signs of life and the life of signs.
Scranton and London: University of Scranton Press.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2009a). Semiotics of nature. In P. Cobley (Ed.), The routledge companion to
semiotics (pp. 29–42). London and New York: Routledge.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2009b). Tro på tvivl. Kritik af religiøs og videnskabelig ufornuft. København: Ries
Forlag.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2010). A biosemiotic approach to health. In S. Cowley, et al. (Eds.), Signifying bod-
ies. Biosemiosis, interaction and health. Braga: The Faculty of Philosophy of Braga, Portuguese
Catholic University.
Kauffman, S. (2008). Reinventing the sacred. A new view of science, reason, and religion. New
York: Basic Books.
Kauffman, S., & Clayton, P. (2005). On emergence, agency, and organization. Biology and
Philosophy, 21, 501–521.
Kull, K., Deacon, T., Emmeche, C., Hoffmeyer, J., & Stjernfelt, F. (2009). Theses on biosemiotics:
The Saka convention. Biological Theory, 4, 167–173.
Laughlin, R. (2005). A different universe. Reinventing physics from the bottom down. New York:
Basic Books.
Peirce, C. S. (1908). A letter to Lady Welby dated Dec. 23. In C. S. Hardwick & J. Cook (Eds.),
Semiotics and signiﬁcs: The correspondence between Charles S. Peirce and Victoria Lady
Welby 1977. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1931–1958). Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce. Vols. 1–4, C. Hartstone &
P. Weiss (Eds.), Vols. 7–8 A. W. Burks (Ed.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Pert, C. B., Ruff, M. R., Weber, R. J., & Herkenham, M. (1985). Neuropeptides and their receptors:
A psychosomatic network. The Journal of Immunology, 135, 820s–826s.
Popper, K. (1990). A world of propensities. Bristol: Thoemmes Antiquarian Books.
Roepstorff, A. (2004). Cellular neurosemiotics: Outline of an interpretive framework. Theorie der
Biologie, 6, 133–154.
Saussure, F. de (1916). Cours de linguistique générale. Paris: Payot.
Searle, J. R. (1992). The rediscovery of mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sebeok, T. A. (1979). The sign & its masters. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
Sebeok, T. A., & Umiker-Sebeok, J. (1992). Biosemiotics: The semiotic web 1991. Berlin: Mouton
de Gruyter.
Sheets-Johnstone, M. (2009). The corporeal turn. An interdisciplinary reader. Charlottesville, VA:
Imprint Academic.
Short, T. L. (2007). Peirce’s theory of signs. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press
Swenson, R. (1989). Emergent attractors and the law of maximum entropy production. Systems
Research, 6, 187–197.

Chapter 7
The Evolution of Learning to Communicate:
Avian Model for the Missing Link
Irene M. Pepperberg
Abstract Exclusively primate-centric models for the study of the evolution of com-
munication, although reasonable considering the close phylogenetic relationships
between present day human and nonhuman primates, overlook parallel or conver-
gent evolution and the possibility that birds—with their advanced cognitive and
communicative abilities—can provide models for the evolution of communication,
particularly for vocal learning. Through similar evolutionary pressures and paral-
lel exploitation of ecological niches, similar communicative abilities likely evolved,
and birds are among the few nonhuman species to learn their vocal communication
system. Even the neuroanatomical structures subserving vocal behavior in birds and
humans are now evaluated for similarity. Thus, I suggest that examining avian sub-
jects, particularly their learning and use of various vocal systems, will shed light on
the evolution of learned vocal communication.
7.1 Introduction
Given the close phylogenetic relationships among present-day humans and apes,
models for communication and language evolution not surprisingly focus on the
primate lineage (e.g., Deacon, 1997) with a prominent role reserved for common
ancestors or “missing links”. A plethora of books and articles suggest possible evo-
lutionary pathways (recently, Smith, Smith, & Ferrer i Cancho, 2008; Bickerton,
2010; Slocombe, Waller, & Liebal, 2011), including those involving mirror neu-
rons (MNs; Arbib, 2005, 2008; Fogassi & Gallese, 2002; Gallese & Lakoff, 2005).
Clearly, human language evolved from something simpler, but primate-centric mod-
els overlook parallel or convergent evolution, the likelihood that similar (albeit
non-identical) communicative abilities evolved in different species, and that birds,
because of their advanced cognitive, social, and communicative abilities (e.g.,
Emery & Clayton, 2004; Pepperberg, 2007), might be superior models for the evo-
lution of communication, particularly for vocal learning, possibly even language
(Pepperberg, 2011, in press). Parallels between birdsong and human language (e.g.,
I.M. Pepperberg (B)
Department of Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
e-mail: impepper@media.mit.edu
117
T. Schilhab et al. (eds.), The Symbolic Species Evolved, Biosemiotics 6,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-2336-8_7, C⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2012

118
I.M. Pepperberg
issues of adequate input, presence of babbling or practice periods, learning appro-
priate context for speciﬁc vocalizations; Marler, 1970, 1973; Nottebohm, 1970;
Byers & Kroodsma, 1992), once commonly cited but often ignored at present,
are still valid; neuroanatomical structures subserving vocal behavior in birds and
humans are now evaluated for possible homologies (Jarvis et al., 2005; Fitch &
Mietchen, in press; cf. Person, Gale, Farries, & Perkel, 2008). Thus, I suggest that
birds—their vocal learning, use of various communication systems, and possible
“missing link” species between those that do and do not learn song—will shed light
on the evolution of vocal communication (Pepperberg, 2007, in press).
7.2 Nonhuman Primate Models for Language Evolution
Some precursors of what was likely early human vocal communication exist
in present-day nonhuman primates—e.g., alarm calls (vervets: Strusaker, 1967;
Seyfarth, Cheney, & Marler, 1980; Diana and putty-nosed monkeys: Arnold &
Zuberbühler, 2006); differential food calling (tamarins: Roush & Snowdon, 2001)—
suggesting some form of reference and even combinatorial ability (albeit far simpler
than for humans). But vocal learning is all but absent in nonhuman primates.1 So
how did learned vocal human language evolve?
One proposal was Hewes’ (1973) motor theory,2 in which voluntary use of
manual signals as a means of communication (albeit gestural) arose fairly early
in the hominid line—a sensible hypothesis, given modern apes’ communicative
use of gestures in highly nuanced, contextually-related, culturally-distinct ways
(Pollick & de Waal, 2007) and their acquisition of some intentional, referential
ASL signs (e.g., Gardner & Gardner, 1969). Initial associations of these manual
gestures with innate cries, calls or other movements (e.g., sucking, feeding) could
have arisen and become more tightly connected if the combinations enhanced com-
munication; eventually these precursor non-speech movements could then become
articulatory gestures adapted for communicative intent (e.g., Fogassi & Ferrari,
2004; Studdert-Kennedy, 2005)—the hidden constrictions and releases later sub-
sumed by the human vocal tract. But for vocal communication to have evolved as
we know it, the brain also had to have transferred voluntary control from manual
to vocal gestures and been able to represent someone else’s speech as hidden motor
articulatory behavior (Liberman & Mattingly, 1985; Vihman, 1993).
That is, two additional steps were necessary. Corballis (1989, 1991, 2003, 2008)
suggested that the left hemisphere took control of voluntary manual communicative
gestures—which are often lateralized in modern apes (see Hopkins & Cantalupo,
2008)—and that this laterality and voluntary behavior were preserved when manual
1 Critical rearing experiments have yet to test claims for some form of vocal dialect learning in
apes (Crockford, Herbinger, Vigilant, & Boesch, 2004) and marmosets (de la Torre & Snowdon
2009).
2 A similar proposal exists for birds (Williams & Nottebohm, 1985), but more on that later.

7
The Evolution of Learning to Communicate: Avian Model for the Missing Link
119
gestures became associated with facial motions. Next, representation of others’
speech as motor articulatory behavior would be assisted if, for example, your artic-
ulatory system responded to my voice as if you were talking; enter the fortuitous
discovery of mirror neurons (MNs), which involve exactly that kind of parity (e.g.,
Arbib, 2005). MNs also have an inhibitory component, allowing you to choose
whether or not to repeat my utterance (Baldissera, Cavallari, Craighero, & Fadiga,
2001). Too, MNs are found in both the language-related Broca’s area in humans
and a Broca’s homologue, F5, in monkeys. The monkey MN system reacts to grasp-
ing, mouthing, and related actions (e.g., Fadiga, Fogassi, Pavesi, & Rizzolatti, 1995;
Fogassi & Gallese, 2002), being activated during both production and perception of
gestures but, interestingly, not vocalizations (Jürgens, 1998). What if, instead of a
major brain reorganization to shift from voluntary control of manual to vocal com-
municative gestures in the hominid line, all that actually happened was the evolution
of Broca’s area from the monkey-like F5 MN system (Arbib, 2005; Rizzolatti &
Arbib, 1998), resulting in an early hominid mirror system as a neural “missing link”
between our nonhuman ancestors’ communication abilities and modern human lan-
guage? Arbib (2008), for example, argues for expansion of the projection from F5
that controls vocal folds to one that could control the tongue and lips.3
Recently, an additional intriguing correlation between gesture and vocal commu-
nication has been observed. Several scientists (e.g., Wilson, Braida, & Reed, 2010;
Ro, 2011) have presented data suggesting strong connections between areas of the
brain that process hearing and touch. Possibly areas sensitive both to tactile gesture
and concomitant calls or cries might early on have processed how one experiences
one’s own utterances/movements; such areas might later have been rewired so as
to additionally process aspects of both types of gestures in others in an MN-like
manner.
But these theories do not explain evolution of vocal learning, which is basic to
language (Pepperberg, 2007, in press). Vocal behavior can be under voluntary con-
trol, but be unlearned and quite distinct from language, even if mediated by an MN
system—e.g., monkeys choose which alarm call to use and learn when to use it, but
the sounds are innately speciﬁed. Understanding connections among learning, vol-
untary control, and MNs requires discussing a form of learning implicated in many
aspects of vocal communication—imitation. Initially, MNs were thought to underlie
imitation, because when individuals see an action, their MN system enables them to
recognize it (through a form of resonance) and to conﬁgure their own body parts so
as to replicate (imitate) the action if they so choose (even if initially only roughly;
Fogassi & Ferrari, 2004; Vauclair, 2004). But monkeys, despite having an MN sys-
tem, don’t precisely imitate (Visalberghi & Fragaszy, 1990, 2002). In fact, monkey
MNs cannot respond to or replicate novel actions, only to those already in their
repertoire (Chaminade, Meary, Orliaguet, & Decety, 2001; Rizzolatti, Fogassi, &
3 Recent studies show that various language-related functions (e.g., mapping of auditory sound
representations onto motor representations for producing speech; mapping speech sounds onto
word concepts) may require parallel processing of widely distributed brain areas (e.g., Holt &
Lotto, 2008, Poeppel & Monahan, 2008), but these may also be tied to gesture recognition.

120
I.M. Pepperberg
Gallese, 2001). Human MNs, in contrast, seem able to parse a novel behavior into
a set of actions that can be approximated by variants of actions or collections of
actions already in the repertoire (see Arbib, 2005, cf. Dinstein, Hasson, Rubin, &
Heeger, 2007; Dinstein, Thomas, Behmann, & Heeger, 2008), thus assisting in imi-
tation of the behavior. Might evolution of MN systems be implicated in the evolution
of vocal as well as physical imitation?
The answer is yes, but only if we propose the existence of various levels of imita-
tion and, likely, various types of MNs related to these levels of imitation and learning
(Fogassi & Ferrari, 2004), for different species and along evolutionary and devel-
opmental pathways (Pepperberg, 2005a, 2005b, 2007, in press). Ideas about these
possible intermediate forms are presented elsewhere (Pepperberg, 2005a, 2005b,
2007); the implication (e.g., Arbib, 2005, 2008) is that an ancestral MN system,
intermediate between that of present humans and nonhuman primates, enabled
a simple vocal communication system via imitative learning. This hypothesis is
untestable, however, as we lack fossil evidence4 for appropriate language-ready
or proto-linguistic brain structures in this so-called “missing link” (discussion in
Pepperberg, in press).
7.3 Avian Models for Language Evolution
But what if we look instead at other creatures that engage in vocal learning,
for whom a gestural theory of communicative evolution has also been proposed
(Williams & Nottebohm, 1985), and with likely present-day “missing links”—that
is, birds? An avian model makes neurobiological sense: Researchers (e.g., Jarvis
et al., 2005) argue that avian and mammalian brain areas have a common pal-
lial precursor and that many birds have large cortical-like structures, likely with
an MN system for vocal learners that functions in ways similar to that of humans
(Bauer et al., 2008; Prather, Peters, Nowicki, & Mooney, 2008). Thus birdsong evo-
lution also likely involved an intermediate MN system, and, unlike the primate line,
an intermediate “missing link” species, in terms of vocal learning, may still exist.
Speciﬁcally, the many parallels between avian and primate species, from those with
little in the way of learned vocal communication to those having many traits in
common with humans, might extend to those possible missing links, providing an
intriguing avian model (Pepperberg, 2011, in press).
7.3.1 Avian Vocal Nonlearners
These birds’ communicative behavior is primarily genetically determined (note De
Kort & ten Cate, 2001), generally consisting of only a few distinct sounds that can be
4 We can, of course, draw inferences about brain morphology of early hominins and their descen-
dents from endocasts (note Holloway, Sherwood, Hof, & Rilling, 2009), but such data cannot
provide conclusive information concerning brain structures and their speciﬁc interconnections.

7
The Evolution of Learning to Communicate: Avian Model for the Missing Link
121
repeated but are rarely combined. Chickens’ unlearned alarm calls (Evans, Evans, &
Marler, 1993) provide an avian parallel to those of vervets (Cheney & Seyfarth,
1990), in that both species learn appropriate contexts for use of their different calls.
Passerine birds such as ﬂycatchers have more complex, but still unlearned, vocal
communication systems (e.g., more ﬂexibility in the context of use and meaning)
that parallel those of apes: In addition to calls, ﬂycatchers have relatively simple
innate songs, consisting of just a few notes, but learn from social interactions how
meaning is altered by context; they also combine actions and vocalizations to extend
meaning (Smith & Smith, 1992, 1996; Leger, 2005), much like apes (Pollick & de
Waal, 2007). Thus, ﬂycatchers who signal different aggression levels by altering the
number of repetitions of their single song or vary ﬂight patterns or body postures
while singing (i.e., engage in a form of rule-governed behavior that could be inter-
preted as a very simple combinatory syntax; Smith & Smith, 1992, 1996) could be
viewed as living models of an early hominin who might have mixed grunts and ges-
tures to serve a similar purpose (Pepperberg, 2007, 2011, in press; cf. Bickerton,
2003, 2010).
What about parallels in brain structures? In avian and primate species discussed
above, brain nuclei obviously must exist to control the physical production of
vocalizations; brain centers for vocal learning are, however, lacking (Kroodsma &
Konishi, 1991; Jürgens cited in Arbib, 2008). Because communication must involve
parity for both sender and receiver (Smith, 1997), and an MN system purportedly
facilitates this parity (e.g., Arbib, 2005), all these species likely have a simple MN
system that codes relationships among another agent’s action (e.g., adults’ calling),
the context of the action (e.g., presence of a particular predator or competitor), and
the ability to replicate the action—that is, allowing for choice in whether to execute
the action (i.e., control over inhibitory neurons so that calls are not emitted in the
absence of a receiver) but with strong limitations as to exactly what vocal action is
possible (Pepperberg, in press).
7.3.2 Avian Vocal Learners
For many avian species, “song” may mean from one to hundreds of songs, songs
of a few notes to those of considerable length and complexity, but vocalizations
that are not innately speciﬁed and that must be learned. Birdsong is a simpler
communication system than human language, but important parallels exist between
vocal learning in songbirds and humans (e.g., Marler, 1970; Baptista, 1983, 1988;
Kroodsma, 1988; Jarvis et al., 2005; Gentner, Fenn, Margoliash, & Nusbaum, 2006).
Both birds and humans have (a) a sensitive period during which exposure to the
adult system allows development to proceed most rapidly, although acquisition is
indeed possible beyond this period, particularly if social interaction is involved5;
5 For example: Studies by Baptista (1983, 1988) and his colleagues on white-crowned sparrows
showed that the song-learning period described by Marler (1970) for birds that were tape-tutored
in social isolation could be doubled if the birds were exposed to live interacting tutors.

122
I.M. Pepperberg
(b) a babbling or practice stage wherein juveniles experiment with sounds that
will ultimately become part of their repertoire; (c) a need to learn not just what
to produce but to understand the appropriate context in which to produce speciﬁc
vocalizations; (d) the ability to process hierarchically structured vocal sequences,
a precursor to grammatical syntax; and (e) lateralized brain structures devoted to
acquisition, storage, and production of vocalizations.
The behavioral correlates are obviously of considerable import, but the last
point—avian and mammalian brain structures, responsible for vocal learning, now
thought to be derived from the same pallial structures (Jarvis et al., 2005)—is central
to the use of birds as models for vocal learning (Pepperberg, in press). Of course, the
direct correlations between human Broca’s area and monkey F5 are unlikely to exist
for avian brains—possibly the bits of brain corresponding to speciﬁc mammalian
language/articulatory gesture centers are apportioned across several song centers in
the avian brain (Reiner, pers. comm., April 19, 2005; see Jarvis, 2004). Nevertheless,
recent studies strengthen the avian-human correlations, particularly with respect to
a possible MN system (Prather et al., 2008; cf. Person et al., 2008).
Some form of avian MN system corresponding to that in humans seems likely.
Interestingly, for the song sparrow, Prather et al. (2008) found HVCx neurons (a
population of neurons in the songbird HVC, the higher vocal center, that innervates
Area X, important to song learning and perception) that display nearly identical
patterns of activity when a bird sings and hears the same sequence of notes. The
authors refrain from claiming that these are indeed MNs, but the involved brain areas
correlate with those involved in human vocal behavior and MNs. Other possible
MNs, found in an area (CLM, the caudolateral mesopallium) that links into HVC
(Bauer et al., 2008; Keller & Hahnlose, 2009), may provide some additional insights
into how articulatory motions are reﬁned in the course of vocal learning for both
birds and humans.
7.3.3 The “Missing Link”: Evolutionary Pathways, Avian Species
But how do parallels between avian nonlearners, monkeys and apes, and avian
vocal learners and humans, provide a model for the evolution of vocal learn-
ing (Pepperberg, in press)? Because the different forms of avian and primate
communication described above not only are reﬂected in different but parallel neu-
roanatomical systems (Nottebohm, 1980; Kroodsma & Konishi, 1991; Jarvis &
Mello, 2000; Jarvis et al., 2005), but the avian system also provides a model for
how a fully-developed vocal learning system could have evolved from pre-existing
(nonlearning) motor pathways (e.g., Farries, 2001; Perkel, 2004), via addition and
subtraction of certain projections between brain nuclei (e.g., Farries, 2004; Feenders
et al., 2008). Too, beaks are often used in ways similar to primate forelimbs;
motor control of the beak resides in areas separate from, but near to, the neu-
ral song system (Wild, Arends, & Zeigler, 1985); and these areas relate to those
controlling human jaw movements (Wild, 1997). By examining avian brain areas co-
opted for the evolution of song learning and song decoding, we might ﬁnd parallel

7
The Evolution of Learning to Communicate: Avian Model for the Missing Link
123
areas co-opted in mammals for the evolution of language (Pepperberg, in press).
Lieberman (2000) argues that human communication structures evolved from the
reptilian brain; certainly so did those of birds (Medina & Reiner, 2000).
Notably, both songbirds and humans have physiological and anatomical fea-
tures that evolved to produce and process rapid sound sequences (Stevens, 1998;
Williams, 1989; Lieberman, 1991; Carr & Soares, 2002; Margoliash, 2003), repre-
sentations that relate to stored templates of vocalizations (Kuhl, Tsao, & Liu, 2003;
Phan, Pytte, & Vicario, 2006), and some form of rule-governed, syntax-like behav-
ior (see Gentner et al., 2006). Parrots, quail, nonhuman mammals and humans parse
phonological space similarly, adjusting for auditory context effects (Kuhl, 1981;
Kluender, Diehl, & Killeen, 1987; Patterson & Pepperberg, 1994, 1998; Lotto,
Kluender, & Holt, 1997; Pepperberg, 2007, in press). Such data suggest phonol-
ogy evolved to use existent auditory sensitivities basic not just to humans or even
mammals, but at least to vertebrates (e.g., Dent, Brittan-Powell, Dooling, & Pierce,
1997; cf. Locke, 1997).
Birds also may be models for mechanisms of primate co-development of gestural
and vocal combinations (Pepperberg, 2011). Young children almost simultane-
ously acquire the ability to combine objects (e.g., spoon-into-cup) and phono-
logical/grammatical units (e.g., “more+X” type of emergent syntax; Greenﬁeld,
Nelson, & Salzman, 1972). Greenﬁeld (1991) posited that control of such parallel
development initially resides in a single neural structure (roughly Broca’s area) that
differentiates as a child’s brain matures into specialized areas for, respectively, phys-
ical combinations versus language and that such competence was a critical aspect of
language (i.e., human) development. Subsequent research on both physical combi-
natorial behavior in nonhuman primates (Johnson-Pynn, Fragaszy, Hirsh, Brakke, &
Greenﬁeld, 1999) and combinatorial communicative acts by apes (Pan paniscus,
P. troglodytes) trained in a human-based code (Greenﬁeld & Savage-Rumbaugh,
1990, 1991) showed that apes’ combination of physical objects and also labels
(e.g., “more tickle”) are similar to, if simpler than, those of young children, but
in monkeys such behavior develops only with intensive training and to a much more
limited extent. Greenﬁeld (1991) then proposed that nonhuman primate behavior
derives from a homologous structure just predating the evolutionary divergence of
apes and hominids (see Deacon, 1992). Such arguments support Hewes’ (1973) the-
sis. Notably, however, some bird species also show co-occurrences of hierarchical
vocal and physical combinations. Grey parrots trained to communicate with humans
using English speech have the same spontaneously co-occurring vocal and physi-
cal combinatory behavior as children and apes (Pepperberg & Shive, 2001). Male
marsh wrens (Cistothorus palustris) form complicated woven nests (Leonard &
Picman, 1987) as they construct/memorize hierarchies of neighbors’ song reper-
toires to order their own responses serially (i.e., reorder or recombine their songs in
new ways) to best defend their territories; Kroodsma, 1979). Whatever neural struc-
tures are involved, parallel physical and vocal combinatory behavior is not limited
to primates.

124
I.M. Pepperberg
But the real use of birds as evolutionary models hinges on possible present-day
“missing links”: two avian species that apparently straddle the vocal learning-
nonlearning divide and might be models for missing hominin ancestors that did
the same (Pepperberg, 2011, in press). One of these avian species, the three-wattled
bellbird (Procnias tricarunculata), a close relative of ﬂycatchers, is supposedly a
suboscine (at least it has, until now, been classiﬁed as such)—the technical term for
birds with innate song—but seems to learn its songs (Snow, 1973); the evidence is
that males have dialects, can be bilingual with respect to these dialects (at least for
several years), and that a close relative, the bare-throated bellbird (P. nudicollis),
learns allospeciﬁc song (that of another species; Kroodsma, 2005). DNA samples of
the three-wattled bellbird prove that the different dialects are from one, not different
closely-related, species (Saranathan, Hamilton, Powell, Kroodsma, & Prum, 2007).
Adding these facts to the knowledge that some bellbirds don’t begin to sound like
(or even look like) adults until they are four or ﬁve years old (Kroodsma, 2005), we
ﬁnd a pattern that is highly unusual, both for suboscines and “normal” song-learning
species—known as oscines. Even oscines that continue learning songs over their
lifetimes usually have a recognizable, characteristic song their ﬁrst year as an adult.
And, when bellbirds alter their songs in adulthood, they don’t seem to change their
overall dialect but rather shift frequency (pitch) over the years6; apparently older
males shift, forcing younger ones to shift as well or lose status (and possibly mat-
ing chances) within the group (Kroodsma, 2005). The bellbirds’ learning abilities
thus seem similar to oscines, except for the extraordinarily long juvenile stage and
the fact that, as noted above they are technically classiﬁed as suboscines. We might
expect that they, like oscines, have speciﬁc brain areas devoted to song learning,
but no studies have yet been performed. Given their unusually prolonged babbling
stage, we might also expect a brain that is “differently” equipped for learning, but,
again, no experiments have yet been done. Might bellbirds’ behavior be explained
by a vocal MN system that is primitive compared to that of the ocsines? An MN
system that, as a consequence, is slow to mature, slow to take the bellbird beyond
the babbling stage (Pepperberg, 2007, 2011, in press)?
Such hypotheses support the use of bellbirds as models for vocal learning in a
“missing-link” hominin species (or multiple species) that bridged the gap between
Homo sapiens’ and our nonhuman primate ancestors’ communication, that is, as a
model for an intermediary MN system mediating the ﬁrst elements of vocal learn-
ing (Pepperberg, 2011, in press).7 Such a model could help us to determine what
is innate and what is learned. Most likely a continuum, rather than a sharp break,
existed between innate and learned, with certain communicative elements shifting
as ﬂexibility provided evolutionary advantages. Conceivably, the same evolutionary
pressures that led from the innate, relatively simple song of true suboscines to the
6 Other features of the song have also changed over the years (Kroodsma, pers. comm., September
2005), but the change in frequency is the most obvious (Kroodsma, 2005).
7 The bellbird is endangered, but conceivably data might be obtained in the future from captive
birds in a noninvasive manner.

7
The Evolution of Learning to Communicate: Avian Model for the Missing Link
125
fairly simple but slowly learned song of the bellbird to the amazing complexity of,
for example, the brown thrasher’s hundreds of songs were exerted on the nonhuman-
to-hominid line (Pepperberg, in press). If so, these evolutionary pressures were
likely exerted on a MN system, such that the complexity of the MN system and
the complexity of the behavior involved evolved in parallel, synergistically support-
ing the next evolutionary stage (Pepperberg, 2007, in press). Articulatory gestures
grounded in feeding behavior and contact calls/cries that can be co-opted for other
uses were as likely in birds (see Homberger, 1986) as primates; possibly MN
systems shifted in the same manner (Pepperberg, in press).
7.4 Conclusions
In sum, although the above arguments are strongest if avian and human com-
municative abilities did indeed evolve convergently—adapting independently in
association with similar environmental pressures—a common core of skills nonethe-
less likely underlies complex cognitive and communicative behavior across species,
even if their speciﬁc skills manifest somewhat differently (Pepperberg, in press).
The main point, in any case, is that because birds—like humans (but few other
mammals)—learn their vocal communication systems, they can provide models for
both acquisition and use of vocal behavior. Marler (1973) suggested this possibility
decades ago, albeit in a more limited construct; later studies on the effects of social
interaction on vocal learning served to strengthen the potential use of avian models
(review in Pepperberg, 2004). Speciﬁcally, few theses concerning language origins
focus on the evolution of vocal learning as the basis for sophisticated communica-
tive skills, yet vocal learning (and its interconnections with social interaction) is a
central issue—not only because humans must learn to communicate in the vocal
mode, but also because it is one of the most transparent of modes for study (i.e.,
what is learned is obvious; Pepperberg, 1999, 2004) and allows for cultural evo-
lution and adaptation to novel circumstances. Although we no longer have access
to the precursor neuroanatomy that gave rise to current human language abilities,
parallels between the acquisition, development, and use of current human and some
avian communication systems suggest that parallels likely existed in their evolution-
ary histories. As a consequence, species such as the bellbird could be a model for
the missing human precursor (Pepperberg, in press).
This chapter (along with other, more detailed presentations; e.g., Pepperberg,
in press) is meant to suggest lines of research, not deﬁnitively answer the dif-
ﬁcult questions about origins of communicative abilities and language. Present-
day humans can only guess at the concatenation of the many cultural, social,
and neuroanatomical changes likely responsible. But maybe the bare-bones
model presented here (given space limitations) will stimulate studies using avian
models.
Acknowledgments Manuscript preparation was supported by donors to The Alex Foundation.
Ideas described herein were developed partly during a Bunting Fellowship at the Radcliffe Institute.
Signiﬁcant portions of this manuscript have been adapted from Pepperberg (2011, in press).

126
I.M. Pepperberg
References
Arbib, M. A. (2005). From monkey-like action recognition to human language: An evolutionary
framework for neurolinguistics. Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 28, 105–167.
Arbib, M. A. (2008). From grasp to language: Embodied concepts and the challenge of abstraction.
Journal of Physiology-Paris, 102, 4–20.
Arnold, K., & Zuberbühler, K. (2006). Semantic combinations of primate calls. Nature, 441, 303.
Baldissera, F., Cavallari, P., Craighero, L., & Fadiga, L. (2001). Modulation of spinal excitability
during observation of hand actions in humans. European Journal of Neuroscience, 13, 190–194.
Baptista, L. F. (1983). Song learning. In A. H. Brush & G. A. Clark, Jr. (Eds.), Perspectives in
ornithology (pp. 500–506). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Baptista, L. F. (1988). Song learning in white-crowned sparrows (Zonotrichia leucophrys):
Sensitive phases and stimulus ﬁltering revisited. Proceedings of the 100th Deutsche
Ornithologische Gesellschaft: Current topics in avian biology, Bonn.
Bauer, E. E., Coleman, J. J., Roberts, T. F., Roy, A., Prather, J. F., & Mooney, R. (2008). A synaptic
basis for auditory-vocal integration in the songbird. Journal of Neuroscience, 28, 1509–1522.
Bickerton, D. (2003). Symbol and structure: A comprehensive framework for language evolution.
In M. H. Christiansen & S. Kirby (Eds.), Language evolution (pp. 77–93). Oxford: Oxford.
Bickerton, D. (2010). Adam’s tongue. New York: Hill and Wang.
Byers B. E., & Kroodsma, D. E. (1992), Development of two song categories by chestnut-sided
warblers. Animal Behaviour, 44, 799–810.
Carr, C. E., & Soares, D. (2002). Evolutionary convergence and shared computational principles
in the auditory system. Brain, Behavior & Evolution, 59, 294–311.
Chaminade, T., Meary, D., Orliaguet, J.-P., & Decety, J. (2001). Is perceptual anticipation a motor
simulation? A PET study. Brain Imaging, 12, 3669–3674.
Cheney, D. L., & Seyfarth, R. M. (1990). How monkeys see the world. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Corballis, M. C. (1989). Laterality and human evolution. Psychological Review, 96, 492–505.
Corballis, M. C. (1991). The lopsided ape: evolution of the generative mind. Oxford: Oxford.
Corballis, M. C. (2003). From mouth to hand: Gesture, speech, and the evolution of right-
handedness. Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 26, 199–260.
Corballis, M. C. (2008). Of mice and men—and lopsided birds. Cortex, 44, 3–7.
Crockford, C., Herbinger, I., Vigilant, L., & Boesch, C. (2004). Wild chimpanzees produce group-
speciﬁc calls: A case for vocal learning? Ethology, 110, 221–243.
Deacon, T. W. (1992), Brain-language coevolution. In J. A. Hawkins & M. Gel-Man (Eds.), The
evolution of human languages (Vol. 10, pp. 49–83). Redwood City, CA: Addison-Wesley.
Deacon, T. W. (1997). The symbolic species: The co-evolution of language and the brain. New
York: Norton.
De Kort, S. R., & ten Cate, C. (2001). Response to interspeciﬁc vocalizations is affected by degree
of phylogenetic relatedness in Streptopelia doves. Animal Behaviour, 61, 239–247.
de la Torre, S., & Snowdon, C. T. (2009). Dialects in pygmy marmosets? Population variation in
call structure. American Journal of Primatology, 71, 1–10.
Dent, M. L., Brittan-Powell, E. F., Dooling, R. J., & Pierce, A. (1997). Perception of synthetic /ba/-
/wa/ speech continuum by budgerigars (Melopsittacus undulatus). Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 102, 1891–1897.
Dinstein, I., Hasson, U., Rubin, N., & Heeger, D. J. (2007). Brain areas selective for both observed
and executed movements. Journal of Neurophysiology, 98, 1415–1427.
Dinstein, I., Thomas, M., Behmann, M., & Heeger, D. J. (2008). A mirror up to nature. Current
Biology, 18, R13–R18.
Emery, N. J., & Clayton, N. S. (2004). The mentality of crows: convergent evolution of intelligence
in corvids and apes. Science, 306, 1903–1907.
Evans, C. S., Evans, L., & Marler, P. (1993). On the meaning of alarm calls: Functional reference
in an avian vocal system. Animal Behaviour, 46, 23–38.

7
The Evolution of Learning to Communicate: Avian Model for the Missing Link
127
Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., Pavesi, G., Rizzolatti, G. (1995). Motor facilitation during action
observation: A magnetic simulation study. Journal of Neurophysiology, 73, 2608–2611.
Farries, M. A. (2001). The oscine song system considered in the context of the avian brain: Lessons
learned from comparative neurobiology. Brain, Behavior, & Evolution, 58, 80–100.
Farries, M. A. (2004). The avian song system in comparative perspective. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences, 1016, 61–76.
Feenders, G., Liedvogel, M., Rivas, J., Zapka, M., Horita, H., Hara, E., et al. (2008). Molecular
mapping of movement-associated areas in the avian brain: A motor theory for vocal learning.
PLoS One, 3(3): e1768. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0001768
Fitch, W. T., & Mietchen, D. (in press) Convergence and deep homology in the evolution of spoken
language. In J. J. Bolhuis & M. Everaet (Eds.), Birdsong, speech, and language: Converging
mechanisms. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fogassi, L., & Ferrari, P. F. (2004). Mirror neurons, gestures, and language evolution. Interaction
Studies, 5, 345–363.
Fogassi, L., & Gallese, V. (2002). The neural correlates of action understanding in non-human
primates. In M. I. Stamenov (Ed.), Mirror neurons and the evolution of brain and language
(pp. 21–43). Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
Gallese, V., & Lakoff, G. (2005). The brain’s concepts: The role of the sensory-motor system in
reason and language. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 22, 455–479.
Gardner, R. A., & Gardner, B. T. (1969). Teaching sign language to a chimpanzee. Science, 165,
664–672.
Gentner, T. Q., Fenn, K. J., Margoliash, D., & Nusbaum, H. C. (2006). Recursive syntactic pattern
learning by songbirds. Nature, 440, 1204–1207.
Greenﬁeld, P. M. (1991). Language, tools and brain: The ontogeny and phylogeny of hierarchically
organized sequential behavior. Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 14, 531–595.
Greenﬁeld, P. M., & Savage-Rumbaugh, E. S. (1990). Grammatical combination in Pan panis-
cus: Processes of learning and invention in the evolution and development of language. In
S. T. Parker & K. R. Gibson (Eds.), ‘Language’ and intelligence in monkeys and apes:
Comparative developmental perspectives (pp. 540–578). New York: Cambridge.
Greenﬁeld, P. M., & Savage-Rumbaugh, E. S. (1991). Imitation, grammatical development,
and the invention of protogrammar by an ape. In N. A. Krasnegor, D. M. Rumbaugh, R.
L. Schiefelbusch, & M. Studdert-Kennedy (Eds.), Biological and behavioral determinants of
language development (pp. 235–258). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Greenﬁeld, P. M., Nelson, K., & Salzman, E. (1972). The development of rulebound strategies
for manipulating seriated nesting cups: A parallel between action and grammar. Cognitive
Psychology, 3, 291–310.
Hewes, G. W. (1973). Primate communication and the gestural origin of language. Current
Anthropology, 33, 65–84.
Holloway, R. L., Sherwood, C. C., Hof, P. R., & Rilling, J. K. (2009). Evolution of the brain in
humans—paleoneurology. In M. D. Binder, N. Hirokawa, U. Windhorst, & M. C. Hirsch (Eds.),
Encyclopedia of neuroscience, Part 5 (pp. 1326–1334). New York: Springer.
Holt, L. L., & Lotto, A. J. (2008). Speech perception withini an auditory cognitive science
framework. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 17, 42–46.
Homberger, D. G. (1986). The lingual apparatus of the African grey parrot, Psittacus eritha-
cus Linne (Aves: Psittacidae) Description and theoretical mechanical analysis. Ornithological
Monographs, No. 39. Washington, DC: The American Ornithologists’ Union.
Hopkins, W. D., & Cantalupo, C. (2008). Theoretical speculations on the evolutionary origins of
hemispheric specialization. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 17, 233–237.
Jarvis, E. (2004). Learned birdsong and the neurobiology of human language. Annals of the New
York Academy of Sciences, 1016, 749–777.
Jarvis, J. D., Güntürkün, O., Bruce, L., Csillag, A., Karten, H., Kuenzel, W., et al. (2005). Avian
brains and a new understanding of vertebrate evolution. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 6,
151–159.

128
I.M. Pepperberg
Jarvis, J. D., & Mello, C. V. (2000). Molecular mapping of brain areas involved in parrot vocal
communication. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 419, 1–31.
Johnson Pynn, J., Fragaszy, D. M., Hirsh, E. M., Brakke, K. E., & Greenﬁeld, P. M. (1999).
Strategies used to combine seriated cups by chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes), bonobos (Pan
paniscus), and capuchins (Cebus apella). Journal of Comparative Psychology, 113, 137–48.
Jürgens, U. (1998). Neuronal control of mammalian vocalization, with special reference to the
squirrel monkey. Naturwissenschaften, 85, 376–388.
Keller, G. B., & Hahnlose, R. H. R. (2009). Neural processing of auditory feedback during vocal
practice in a songbird. Nature, 457, 187–190.
Kluender, K. R., Diehl, R. L., & Killeen, P. R. (1987). Japanese quail can learn phonetic categories.
Science, 237, 1195–1197.
Kroodsma, D. E. (1979). Vocal dueling among male marsh wrens: Evidence for ritualized
expressions of dominance/subordinance. Auk, 96, 506–515.
Kroodsma, D. E. (1988). Song types and their use: Developmental ﬂexibility of the male blue-
winged warbler. Ethology, 79, 235–247.
Kroodsma, D. E. (2005). The singing life of birds (pp. 96–101). New York: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Kroodsma, D. E., & Konishi, M. (1991). A suboscine bird (Eastern phoebe, Sayornis phoebe)
develops normal song without auditory feedback. Animal Behaviour, 42, 477–487.
Kuhl, P. K. (1981). Discrimination of speech by nonhuman animals: Basic auditory sensitivities
conducive to the perception of speech-sound categories. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 70, 340–349.
Kuhl, P., Tsao, F. M., & Liu, H. M. (2003). Foreign-language experience in infancy: Effects of
short-term exposure and social interaction on phonetic learning. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, USA, 100, 9096–9101.
Leger, D. W. (2005). First documentation of combinatorial song syntax in a suboscine passerine
species. Condor, 107, 765–774.
Leonard, M. L., & Picman, J. (1987). The adaptive signiﬁcance of multiple nest building by male
marsh wrens. Animal Behaviour, 35, 271–77.
Liberman, A. M., & Mattingly, I. G. (1985). The motor theory of speech perception revised.
Cognition, 21, 1–36.
Lieberman, P. (1991). Preadaptation, natural selection, and function. Language & Communication,
11, 63–65.
Lieberman, P. (2000). Human language and our reptilian brain. Cambridge, MA: Harvard.
Locke, J. L. (1997). A theory of neurolinguistic development. Brain and Language, 58, 265–326.
Lotto, A. J., Kluender, K. R., & Holt, L. L. (1997). Perceptual compensation for coarticulation by
Japanese quail (Coturnix coturnix japonica). Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 102,
1134–1140.
Margoliash, D. (2003). Ofﬂine learning and the role of autogenous speech: New suggestions from
birdsong research. Speech Communication, 41, 165–178.
Marler, P. (1970). A comparative approach to vocal learning: Song development in white crowned
sparrows. Journal of Comparative & Physiological Psychology, 71, 1–25.
Marler, P. (1973). Speech development and bird song: Are there any parallels? In G. A. Miller
(Ed.), Communication, language, and meaning. (pp. 73–83). New York: Basic Books.
Medina, L., & Reiner, A. (2000). Do birds possess homologues of mammalian primary visual,
somatosensory and motor cortices? Trends in Neurosciences, 23, 1–12.
Nottebohm, F. (1970). Ontogeny of bird song. Science, 167, 950–956.
Nottebohm, F. (1980). Brain pathways for vocal learning in birds: A review of the ﬁrst ten years.
Progress in Psychobiology and Physiological Psychology, 9, 85–124.
Patterson, D. K., & Pepperberg, I. M. (1994). A comparative study of human and parrot phonation:
Acoustic and articulatory correlates of vowels. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
96, 634–648.

7
The Evolution of Learning to Communicate: Avian Model for the Missing Link
129
Patterson, D. K., & Pepperberg, I. M. (1998). A comparative study of human and Grey parrot
phonation: Acoustic and articulatory correlates of stop consonants. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 103, 2197–2213.
Pepperberg, I. M. (1999). The Alex studies. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press
Pepperberg, I. M. (2004). The evolution of communication from an avian perspective. In
D. K. Oller & U. Griebel (Eds.), Evolution of communication systems: A comparative approach
(pp. 171–192). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pepperberg, I. M. (2005a). Evolution of language from an avian perspective. In M. Tallerman (Ed.),
Language origins: Perspectives on evolution (pp. 239–261). Oxford: Oxford.
Pepperberg, I. M. (2005b). Insights into vocal imitation in Grey parrots (Psittacus erithacus). In S.
Hurley & N. Chader (Eds.), Perspectives on imitation: From mirror neurons to memes (Vol. 1,
pp. 243–262). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pepperberg, I. M. (2007). Emergence of linguistic communication: Studies on Grey parrots. In
C. Lyon, C. L. Nehaniv, & A. Cangelosi (Eds.), Emergence of communication and language
(pp. 355–386). London: Springer.
Pepperberg, I. M. (2011). Evolution of communication and language: Insights from parrots and
songbirds. In M. Tallerman & K. Gibson (Eds.), Oxford handbook of language evolution
(pp. 109–119). London: Oxford.
Pepperberg, I. M. (in press). Evolution of vocal communication: an avian model. In J. J. Bolhuis &
M. Everaet (Eds.), Birdsong, speech, and language: Converging mechanisms. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Pepperberg, I. M., & Shive, H. (2001). Simultaneous development of vocal and physical object
combinations by a Grey Parrot (Psittacus erithacus): Bottle caps, lids, and labels. Journal of
Comparative Psychology, 115, 376–384.
Perkel, D. J. (2004). Origin of the anterior forebrain pathway. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 1016, 736–748.
Person, A. L., Gale, S. D., Farries, M. A., & Perkel, D. J. (2008). Organization of the songbird
basal ganglia, including Area X. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 508, 840–866.
Phan, M. L., Pytte, C. L., & Vicario, D. S. (2006). Early auditory experience generates long lasting
memories that may subserve vocal learning in songbirds. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences USA, 103, 1088–1093.
Poeppel, D., & Monahan, P. J. (2008). Speech perception: Cognitive foundations and cortical
implementation. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 17, 80–85.
Pollick, A. S., & de Waal, F. (2007). Ape gestures and language evolution. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA, 104, 8184–8189.
Prather, J. F., Peters, S., Nowicki, S., Mooney, R. (2008). Precise auditory–vocal mirroring in
neurons for learned vocal communication. Nature, 451, 305–310.
Rizzolatti, G., & Arbib, M. (1998). Language within our grasp. Trends in Neuroscience, 21,
188–194.
Rizzolatti, G., Fogassi, L., Gallese, V. (2001). Neurophysiological mechanisms underlying the
understanding and imitation of actions. Nature Review Neurology, 2, 661–670.
Ro, T. (May, 2011). Feeling sounds: Auditory inﬂuences on touch perception. Paper presented at
the 161st meeting of the Acoustical Society of America, Seattle, WA.
Roush, R. S., & Snowdon, C. T. (2001). Food transfer and development of feeding behavior and
food-associated vocalizations in cotton-top tamarins. Ethology, 107, 415–429.
Saranathan, V., Hamilton, D., Powell, G. V. N., Kroodsma, D. E., & Prum, R. O. (2007).
Genetic evidence supports song-learning in the three-wattled bellbird Procnias trucarunculata
(Cotingidae). Molecular Ecology, 16, 3689–3702.
Seyfarth, R., Cheney, D., & Marler, P. (1980). Monkey responses to three different alarm calls:
Evidence for predator classiﬁcation and semantic communication. Science, 210, 801–803.
Slocombe, K., Waller, B. M., & Liebal, K. (2011). The language void: the need for multimodality
in primate communication research. Animal Behaviour, 81, 919–924.

130
I.M. Pepperberg
Smith, W. J. (1997). The behavior of communicating, after twenty years. In D. H. Owings, M. D.
Beecher, & N. S. Thompson (Eds.), Perspectives in ethology (Vol. 12, pp. 7–53). New York:
Plenum.
Smith, W. J., & Smith, A. M. (1992). Behavioral information provided by two song forms of the
Eastern kingbird, T. tyrannus. Behaviour, 120, 90–102.
Smith, W. J., & Smith, A. M. (1996). Information about behavior provided by Louisiana
waterthrush, Seurus motacilla (Parulinae), songs. Animal Behaviour, 51, 785–799.
Smith, A. D. M., Smith, K., & Ferrer i Cancho, R. (Eds.). (2008). The Evolution of lan-
guage: Proceedings of the 7th international conference. London: World Scientiﬁc Publishing
Company.
Snow, D. W. (1973). Distribution, ecology, and evolution of the bellbirds (Procnias, Cotingidae).
Bulletin of the British Museum of Natural History, 25, 369–391.
Stevens, K. N. (1998). Acoustic phonetics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Studdert-Kennedy, M. (2005). How did language go discrete? In M. Tallerman (Ed.), Language
origins: Perspectives on evolution (pp. 48–67). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Strusaker, T. (1967). Auditory communication among vervet monkeys (Ceropithecus aethiops).
In S. Altmann & K. Gibson (Eds.), Social communication among primates (pp. 281–324).
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Vauclair, J. (2004). Lateralization of communicative signals in nonhuman primates and the
hypothesis of the gestural origin of language. Interaction Studies, 5, 365–386.
Vihman, M. H. (1993). Variable paths to early word production. Journal of Phonetics, 21, 61–82.
Visalberghi, E., & Fragaszy, D. M. (1990). Do monkeys ape? In S. T. Parker & K. R. Gibson (Eds.),
‘Language’ and intelligence in monkeys and apes (pp. 247– 273). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Visalberghi, E., & Fragaszy, D. M. (2002). “Do monkeys ape?” Ten years after. In K. Dautenhahn &
C. L. Nehaniv (Eds.), Imitation in animals and artifacts (pp. 471–499). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Wild, M. (1997). Neural pathways for the control of birdsong production. Journal of Neurobiology,
33, 653–670.
Wild, M., Arends, J. J. A., & Zeigler, H. P. (1985) Telencephalic connections of the trigeminal sys-
tem in the pigeon (Columba livia): a trigeminal sensorimotor circuit. Journal of Comparative
Neurology, 234, 441–464.
Williams, H. (1989). Multiple representations and auditory-motor interactions in the avian song
system. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 563, 148–164.
Williams, H., & Nottebohm, F. (1985). Auditory responses in avian vocal motor neurons: A motor
theory for song perception in birds. Science, 229, 279–282.
Wilson, E. C., Braida, L. D., & Reed, C. M. (2010). Perceptual interactions in the loudness of
combined auditory and vibrotactile stimuli. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 127,
3038–3043.

Chapter 8
From Parsing Actions to Understanding
Intentions
Richard W. Byrne
Abstract “Having a theory of mind” is often invoked to explain remarkable abili-
ties in social cognition, but in reality this is little more than a re-description of the
data, a challenge for theorists to understand what it really means, and how we—and
perhaps some other species—evolved those abilities. I argue that these abilities most
likely grew out of an understanding of action, and in particular that the key ﬁrst step
was the evolution, by shared ancestors of modern humans and the living great apes,
of an ability to parse the skilled actions of others. Parsing organized, goal-directed
behaviour allows the intention of the model to be “seen” (as the typical result which
terminates action), and the cause-effect relations in the steps of the process to be
“seen” (as the sequence and coordination of actions necessary for that result to be
achieved). In contrast, reasoning about true intentionality and true causality may
depend on possession of language, and be of relatively minor usefulness in everyday
interactions.
When we notice someone engaged in activity, we see not only how their body moves
and what effects those movements are having on other things, but we also see what
it means. The meaning of action includes what is likely to happen next, as a conse-
quence of what has been done already; and what overall result is to be expected from
the activity, in short, why it is being done. This description applies to the simplest
of organized, purposeful actions but also to what is arguably our most sophisticated
cognitive ability, the ability to talk. When we hear someone talking our language, we
don’t merely register a series of sounds, phonemes, words, phrases, and meanings;
we immediately have some understanding of what thoughts have led to their speak-
ing, whereabouts (metaphorically) their speech is going, and what pragmatic effects
the speaker might be trying to achieve by it. These observations are so familiar
and commonplace that normally we pay them no heed: rather, we only notice when
people do things that make no sense to us or say things that seem irrational. Yet
our ability to perceive the everyday world of social action as a world of meanings,
purposes, intentions and reasons is an extraordinary one.
At the heart of the ability to read meaning in perceived action is parsing. A
characteristic of skilled action is that, in physical terms, no structure is overt. The
R.W. Byrne (B)
School of Psychology, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, Fife KY16 9JP, Scotland
e-mail: rwb@st-andrews.ac.uk
131
T. Schilhab et al. (eds.), The Symbolic Species Evolved, Biosemiotics 6,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-2336-8_8, C⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2012

132
R.W. Byrne
sequence of components is linear—although with action that involves both hands
or extends to mouth or feet, there may be several partly-linked streams running in
parallel, each linear in sequence. But whether driving a car, uttering a sentence, or
baking a cake, all that is physically present to be perceived is smooth, ﬂuid move-
ment. The absence of “real gaps” between many of the separate words in a spoken
sentence is part of every entry-level linguistics course; and just the same is true of
manual actions. Once a skilled sequence of actions has been assembled, practising
will result in smoother and smoother performance, to the point when underlying
structure is not signalled by any detectable interruptions in the sequence. That is the
ﬁrst part of the parsing problem: seeing a linear sequence of ﬂuid behaviour, but
perceiving it as segmented into discrete units that correspond to real entities for the
actor who is observed.
The second parsing problem concerns the fact that organized, complex behaviour
is hierarchical in structure. This means that elements lying together in sequence
may be closely related logically, because they form part of a module or subroutine
or phrase (depending on what sort of behaviour is under discussion); or much less
closely related, only lying together by virtue of the organization of some higher
order unit of organization. To understand action, and thereby detect the meaning
in it, it is crucial to parse its hierarchical structure accurately. The output of the
parsing process must go beyond a sequence of discrete units, to get at the underlying
relationships that we conventionally represent in terms of a bracketed string, a tree-
diagram or a phrase-structure grammar. Without that, there would be no systematic
way to connect observed behaviour to the purposes that underlie it in the mind of
the actor—and thus, to go on to understand the actor’s intentions and the cause-and-
effect of how that particular behaviour is efﬁcient for achieving their purposes.
It is the thesis of this chapter that parsing has its evolutionary origins in an unex-
pected place. Rather than deriving from a selective pressure for more sophisticated
vocal communication, a function in which we see the full ﬂowering of parsing ability
in modern humans, I argue that parsing was originally part of a feeding adapta-
tion; and that these abilities, evolved for efﬁcient feeding, were themselves based
on earlier evolution of abilities in social behaviour reading.
After brieﬂy considering primate vocal communication, I will ﬁrst sketch the
evidence that a segmentation system, one that can parse a smooth behavioural per-
formance into separate but meaningful units of action, is present in monkeys—and
probably in many other species even more distant from us on an evolutionary time-
scale. The main biological function of action segmentation in those species is most
likely the estimation of current behavioural dispositions in conspeciﬁcs and the pre-
diction of their likely actions in the immediate future. Among the primates, it seems,
only in great apes did rather special abilities of hierarchical parsing and anticipatory
planning develop, and I will suggest that these special capacities may be parasitic
on that earlier segmentation system—but are not dependent on any prior ability
to understand intentions or causality. In non-human great apes hierarchical parsing
seems only to be only found within the manual skill domain, where it functions
in the wild by allowing more efﬁcient feeding; and there are plausible ecologi-
cal reasons why enhanced feeding abilities should have evolved speciﬁcally in the

8
From Parsing Actions to Understanding Intentions
133
great apes. Under the artiﬁcial conditions of human rearing, hierarchical parsing and
anticipatory planning give rise to a wide range of richly complex behaviours, and
can be deliberately co-opted into human-derived communication systems such as
American Sign Language.
Given such abilities in living apes, in the manual-spatial domain, it is only a
small step to speculate that in one of our own early ancestors these hierarchical
parsing skills became available also in the vocal-auditory domain. Linguistic syn-
tax is thereby seen as evolutionarily derived from hierarchical behaviour parsing.
Further implications may be drawn out. As emphasized, behaviour parsing is not
dependent on prior causal-intentional understanding; however, it could have been
a crucial step on the way to achieving this level of mental representation—an
essential precursor to human cognition, and still a necessary part of the process
of representing phenomena as causal-intentional structures. Moreover, the fact
that so much can in principle be achieved without involving that level of mental
representation—parsing of behavioural structure, social learning of complex skills
by program-level imitation, and so on—opens the door to a heretical thought. Could
it be that the prevalence of causal-intentional interpretation of our social world is
illusory, a consequence of retrospective contemplation? Certainly, when we choose
to ponder causation and attribution, or when we are asked to justify our actions
by others, as adult humans we are well able to construct causal-intentional the-
ories that make sense. But perhaps the cut-and-thrust of everyday social action
and interaction does not need this mentalizing, or would indeed be slowed or
disrupted by it (Apperly & Butterﬁll, 2009; Bargh & Chartrand, 1999), and we
should look elsewhere for the evolutionary functions of theory of mind and causal
reasoning.
8.1 Primate Vocal Communication—Primitive Speech?
Extensive study for many years has focused on primate vocalizations, driven partly
by theoretical interest in language origins and partly by the availability of sound-
manipulation technology. We now know that the potential for ﬂexibility in the
production of calls by primates is very limited.
No primate can copy another’s sounds, in the way that many birds and some
cetaceans can do (Janik & Slater, 1997). Even vocal dialects are nearly unknown
in primates, except in cases where human inﬂuence may have unintentionally con-
ditioned a local variation (Green, 1975; Mitani, Hasegawa, Gros-Louis, Marler, &
Byrne, 1992). “Nearly”, because there is recent evidence that zoo communities of
chimpanzees develop characteristic group dialects (Auser & Wrangham, 1987), and
adjacent communities in the wild have been found to differ more in their vocal-
izations than do more distant ones—just as a dialect in human communities can
serve to identify group membership and label an out-group (Crockford, Herbinger,
Vigilant, & Boesch, 2004). Even in these cases, the modiﬁcations are small ones,
to calls which are biologically ﬁxed in form. Young primates of many species have
often been reared out of any auditory contact with conspeciﬁcs: nevertheless, they

134
R.W. Byrne
all develop a normal repertoire of vocalizations. Learning does play a role in the
normal development of calling, but this is contextual learning not production learn-
ing (Janik & Slater, 1997): primates learn the appropriate circumstances in which to
call, rather than learning the calls themselves. The famous case of predator-speciﬁc
alarm calls in vervet monkeys shows this process in action (Seyfarth & Cheney,
1986). The referential speciﬁcity of these calls is to a limited extent innate, but
whereas a young vervet will initially make an “eagle alarm” to a wide range of ﬂying
things (even a large, falling leaf on one occasion), as it matures calling is restricted to
large broad-winged birds, then speciﬁcally to raptorial species, and ﬁnally the call is
given almost exclusively to the martial eagle Polemaetus bellicosus, a vervet’s main
aerial predator.
Most non-human primates have a vocal repertoire of more-or-less discrete calls,
but also show some graded variation, most extensively in the chimpanzee and
gorilla (Marler & Tenaza, 1977). Animals have been found to perceive human
speech categorically (Kuhl, 1982), and primate calls which sound like a smoothly
varying continuum to the human ear have been shown to be composed of several
circumstance-speciﬁc and function-speciﬁc calls (Gouzoules, Gouzoules, & Marler,
1984). However, nothing remotely like the multiple levels of patterning and syn-
tactic structuring found in human speech has been detected in any primate vocal
system. The closest to hierarchical organization is the recent discovery that one call
can modify another and so qualify its degree of deﬁniteness, as if adding “maybe”
to its meaning (Zuberbuhler, 2002). This is a far cry from the generative, productive
nature of everyday human speech, and theories that try to make direct connection
between primate vocal communication and language have a large gap to ﬁll—with
pure speculation. For these reasons, I now turn instead to the manual skills of human
and non-human primates.
8.2 Segmentation of the Action Stream
When we approach a range of problems, from car maintenance to public speaking,
we do so with a pre-existing repertoire of motor actions ready to deploy. Some of
these “elements” of action are no doubt innate; and many others are constructed
by trial-and-error exploration of previous similar situations; and a signiﬁcant part
of our repertoire of actions is learned by noticing other people’s behaviour (and
listening to their speech). By all three routes of acquisition, we meet the many novel
problems in adulthood prepared with a rich vocabulary of elements of action which
we can permute and organize into creative solutions, as well as deploy effortlessly
in response to more familiar demands.
The stream of action that we observe, however, does not come with ready-made
gaps that correspond to logically distinct elements. This has been classically noted to
apply to speech, where a sound-gap is more likely to be part of a plosive consonant
than to signal a new word, but in fact the point applies to all skilled behaviour. Thus,
with motor action, the physical stimulus that confronts us is smooth and ﬂuid, not

8
From Parsing Actions to Understanding Intentions
135
segmented. How are we nevertheless able to pick out functional elements in the
smooth and apparently unbroken ﬂow of action?
To be used as building blocks in effective motor planning, elements of action dis-
cerned in another’s behaviour must meet one simple principle: each element should
already be within the repertoire of the observer (Byrne, 2003). In contrast, the “size”
of an element is irrelevant: I propose that people are able to “see” (pick out) within
a stream of action any element which is already present as a pattern in their per-
sonal repertoire. For different observers, or at different times in the life of a single
observer, one particular movement of a single ﬁnger or an elaborate sequence of
bimanual movements might both properly be seen as single elements. When we
watch a relatively unfamiliar process being performed, the level at which we notice
elements will be low, perhaps that of ﬁnger movements; whereas when we watch a
slight variant of an already familiar activity, the basic elements that we notice might
themselves be high-level, complex processes. Most commonly perhaps, the level at
which observed behaviour matches parts of our existing repertoire would be neither
of these, but rather consist of simple and highly-practised movements that produce
visible effects on environmental objects: that is, simple, goal-directed movements.
Such elements may be particularly easy to delimit because they are marked by a
characteristic pattern of acceleration and deceleration, just like the cadence of syl-
lables in a sentence. Consistent with this idea, people are able to pick out the basic
elements of action, even when the stimulus is experimentally reduced to ﬂuores-
cent spots on the joints (Baldwin, Andersson, Saffran, & Meyer, 2008; Loucks &
Baldwin, 2009). Is it plausible that this means of segmentation is a primitive part of
the human cognitive system? A digression into recent neuropsychological studies of
monkeys suggests that it is.
Non-human primates have been shown able to pick out, in the behaviour of
others they observe, actions that are already in their own repertoire. A system of
single neurons has been identiﬁed in the premotor cortex of rhesus monkeys Macaca
mulatta (Gallese, Fadiga, Fogassi, & Rizzolatti, 1996; Rizzolatti, Fadiga, Fogassi,
& Gallese, 1996, 2002), each of which responds to a simple manual action, and
responds equally whether the monkey makes the action or sees another do it. The
cardinal properties of these mirror neurons are (1) they detect goal-directed move-
ments that are in the observing monkey’s own repertoire, and (2) they generalize
over whether the movement is performed by the monkey itself or by another agent.
It is unlikely that mirror neurons have any role in imitation for monkeys, simply
because monkeys have repeatedly failed to show evidence of imitative capacity
(Visalberghi & Fragaszy, 1990). Rather, Rizzolatti and his collaborators relate the
evolutionary origin of mirror neurons to monkey social sophistication: i.e. they
suggest that the system functions in revealing the demeanour and likely next actions
of conspeciﬁcs, by reference to those actions the observing monkey might itself
have done (Rizzolatti et al., 2002).
These units have sometimes been described as “monkey see, monkey do” cells,
and in a very restricted sense this is accurate. Much of what is described as imi-
tation in experimental studies of non-human primates involves provoking a subject
to repeat an action that is in its repertoire, upon seeing another perform the same

136
R.W. Byrne
action (e.g. Whiten, Custance, Gomez, Teixidor, & Bard, 1996; Custance, Whiten,
& Fredman, 1999; Bugnyar & Huber, 1997; see Byrne, 2002a for discussion).
However, in these studies nothing new is being learned: this sort of imitation has
been argued to be better described as response facilitation (Byrne, 2002a, 2002b;
Rizzolatti et al., 2002). In response facilitation, as opposed to any more general
sense of imitation, a pre-existing response is facilitated (i.e. made more available)
by seeing it done, and this causes a higher probability of the response occur-
ring subsequently (Byrne, 1994; Byrne & Russon, 1998). Response facilitation is
closely related to stimulus enhancement (Galef, 1988; Spence, 1937), and they may
indeed be two manifestations of the same phenomenon: priming of neural corre-
lates (Byrne, 1994, 1998b, 2005a). On this view, priming neural correlates of some
aspect of the social situation or the environment results in stimulus enhancement;
whereas priming neural correlates of an action pattern within the current repertoire
results in response facilitation. The mirror neuron system provides a possible neural
instantiation for imitation in this restricted sense of response facilitation, but not for
imitative learning of new skills. (This does not mean the mirror system is innate
and ﬁxed; indeed, at least for the human equivalent, there is evidence that it can be
affected by learning: Catmur, Walsh, & Heyes, 2007.)
Despite these reservations, a segmentation system, based on elements of action
that the observer can already perform, would be a very useful starting point for more
elaborate forms of imitation—and that is what I have proposed underlies great ape
imitation (Byrne, 2003). By responding to precisely those movement patterns that
correspond to potential actions in the viewer’s repertoire, segmentation by response
facilitation, operating by means of mirror neurons, has the power in principle to
convert automatically a continuous ﬂow of observed movements into a string of
recognized, familiar actions. If seeing a string of familiar actions also allows con-
struction of links between them, then “action-level” imitation occurs (Byrne, 2002a,
Byrne & Russon, 1998). In action-level imitation, a linear sequence of actions is
copied without recognition of any higher-order organization that may be present: the
organization is “ﬂat”. Chimpanzees have been reported to copy the order of actions,
even though the sequence was entirely arbitrary and unrelated to success (Whiten,
1998), and a detailed learning model has been developed to describe action-level
imitation in animals (Heyes & Ray, 2000).
If it were beneﬁcial to copy arbitrary, random actions or behaviour that is
genuinely linear in structure (e.g. the “ﬁxed action patterns” described by early
ethologists), action-level imitation might be useful. However, most human action,
and arguably also much of the behaviour of non-human great apes, is planned: with a
hierarchical, not linear organization. The question is, can this planning be “seen” by
an ape, in the behaviour of another? More generally, can a bottom-up, mechanistic
analysis go beyond action-level imitation to explain how behavioural organiza-
tion can also be parsed and thereby copied, i.e. program-level imitation (Byrne &
Russon, 1998)? If so, then the evolution of behavioural parsing has implications far
beyond imitation itself.

8
From Parsing Actions to Understanding Intentions
137
8.3 Parsing Hierarchical Structures of Behaviour
It is no coincidence that a theory of how program-level imitation might be achieved
should have been developed to explain manual behaviour, speciﬁcally in great
apes (Byrne, 2003). Most animals simply do not learn sufﬁciently complex pat-
terns of behaviour for imitative learning to be detectable in observational data
from them, nor would they have much need for the ability to learn by imitation
(Byrne, 2002a). The primitive 5-ﬁngered primate hand (Napier, 1961) is highly
effective as a manipulator and in many species shows some opposability. In great
apes, however, the hand shows a considerably augmented range of aptitudes com-
pared even to those of monkeys. For example, in the mountain gorilla (Byrne,
Corp, & Byrne, 2001b), everyday food preparation typically involves using the
two hands in different but complementary roles (i.e. manual role differentiation:
Elliott & Connolly, 1984). The resulting “asymmetric bimanual co-ordination” is
augmented by the gorilla’s ability to control individual digits of the hand inde-
pendently (i.e. digit role differentiation: Byrne et al., 2001b). This allows items
to be held in part of the hand while other digits can carry out other activities;
for instance, part-processed food can be accumulated in the hand, while part of
the food-processing routine is iteratively repeated to build up a larger handful of
food. This remarkable dexterity allows mountain gorillas to deal with plants that
are physically defended by an array of spines, stings and hard casings (Byrne,
2001). In the process, they display a huge repertoire of functionally distinct
elements of action (i.e. single actions that produce clear changes to the plant sub-
strate; for instance, thistle-processing alone requires 72 such elements). Although
attention has been drawn away from the chimpanzee’s general manual skills
by the anthropological emphasis on tool use, when chimpanzee plant-processing
has been studied qualitatively, similar abilities are found to those of gorillas
(Corp & Byrne, 2002a, 2002b). (Note that the sophisticated tool-making of early
hominins also relied on manual dexterity: Byrne, 2004, 2005b). With animals of
such dexterity, manual behaviour is sufﬁciently rich for complex organizations of
learnt behaviour to be detectable by researchers. Moreover, the manual tasks con-
fronted by great apes are challenging, so it would certainly pay the apes to be able
to learn new skills by imitation of others.
The evidence that great apes do indeed learn skills by imitation comes from
observational data rather than experiment, since no useful experimental test of
program-level imitation in animals has yet been devised. Although the evidence
is therefore oblique, cumulatively it is fairly impressive (Byrne, 2002a, 2005a).
First, there is the very fact that young great apes learn complex, hierarchically
structured routines of manual behaviour (some of them essential to survival in
adulthood) in just a few years before their weaning, in contrast to monkeys where
there is no evidence of anything comparable. Evidence of complexity is strongest
for the mountain gorilla, where 5-stage sequential processes have been described
(Byrne, 1999c, Byrne & Byrne, 1993; Byrne, Corp, & Byrne, 2001a), but also clear
in chimpanzees, both in tool-using tasks (Boesch & Boesch, 1990; Goodall, 1986;
Matsuzawa, 2001; Matsuzawa & Yamakoshi, 1996) and in dealing with complicated

138
R.W. Byrne
plant foods (Corp & Byrne, 2002a; Stokes & Byrne, 2001). The fact that orangutans
sometimes also use tools to deal with complex plant defences (Fox, Sitompul, & Van
Schaik, 1999) suggests that they have similar abilities, and this is conﬁrmed by stud-
ies of young orangutans’ efforts to deal with the vicious spines of certain palm trees
(Russon, 1998). Far more studies have been carried out on the foraging behaviour of
monkeys than that of apes; yet no comparable evidence has come to light. Second, in
a detailed analysis of variation in the skills of adult mountain gorillas, it was striking
that minor details (grip type, exact ﬁngers employed, hand preference, extent of
movement) varied idiosyncratically between individuals, even between mother and
offspring, whereas the overall “program-level” organization of each technique was
remarkably standardized in the local population (Byrne & Byrne, 1993). If idiosyn-
crasy is characteristic of trial and error learning, such standardization of techniques
needs explaining. There are two possibilities: either the affordances of the gorilla’s
hands, combined with the physical form of the plant defences, deﬁne a clear gradi-
ent of optimization and thus with practice every gorilla will inevitably acquire the
same method; or, observational learning is involved, and some aspects of the skills
are passed on culturally. The third line of evidence is speciﬁcally relevant to this
issue, as it involves the study of animals disabled by crippling snare wounds. Snares
are not set to catch gorillas, but young individuals may suffer injury because of their
explorative behaviour (Stokes, Quiatt, & Reynolds, 1999). If the standardized pat-
tern of an adult technique is a product of affordances, then in an animal with severely
maimed hands a quite different technique should result from the same trial and error
experience. Yet in both chimpanzees and gorillas, disabled individuals acquire the
same organization of behaviour as the able-bodied, and instead work around their
difﬁculties by modifying the low-level details of implementation (Byrne & Stokes,
2002; Stokes & Byrne, 2001). This favours the hypothesis that the standard tech-
nique is a culturally transmitted pattern. Finally, one anecdotal observation supports
the case that great apes can only learn certain aspects of their complex feeding skills
by observation. When processing stinging nettles, one single adult in the study pop-
ulation differed in technique: the female Picasso did not fold bundles of leaves,
so was presumably often stung on her lips (Byrne, 1999a). Picasso had transferred
into the study area from lower altitude, where nettles do not grow. Because adult
gorillas feed alone and out of sight of others in dense herbage, mountain gorillas’
only opportunity for observational learning of plant processing comes in infancy.
It seems most likely that a lack of opportunity to observe accounts for Picasso’s
incomplete technique, and intriguingly her juvenile was the only other gorilla in the
study population to lack that particular element of the skill.
8.4 Imitation Without Intentionality
In the face of this evidence, I therefore developed a theory of how great apes could
learn the program-level structure of behaviour by imitation, aiming to avoid any
assumption that the animals had prior understanding of purpose or intention (Byrne,
1999b, 2003). This “behaviour parsing” model is based instead on the statistical

8
From Parsing Actions to Understanding Intentions
139
regularities present within the variability of multiple performances of the same
skilled sequence of action.
Every execution of a motor act, however familiar and well-practised it is, will
differ slightly from others. Nevertheless, this variation is constrained—because if
certain characteristics are missing or stray too far from their canonical form the act
will fail to achieve its purpose. Watching a single performance will not betray these
underlying constraints, but the statistical regularities of a repeated, goal-directed
action can serve to reveal the organizational structure that lies behind it. Unweaned
great apes spend most of each day within a few feet of their mothers, and (since their
main nutrition still comes from milk) they have almost full-time leisure to watch
any nearby activities, as well as learn about the structure of the local environment
by their own exploration. For instance, by the time a young gorilla ﬁrst begins to
handle a plant like a nettle, at the rather late age of about two years because the
stinging hairs discourage earlier attempts, it will have watched many hundreds of
nettle plants being expertly processed by its mother.
Consider how a young gorilla might learn from statistical regularities of observed
behaviour how to process stinging nettles (Fig. 8.1).
Its mother’s behaviour will be perceived as a string of discrete elements, where
each of these actions is a familiar one that it can already perform. At this time, the
young ape’s repertoire of familiar elements of action derives from: (i) its innate
manual capacities; (ii) from many hours of playing with environmental objects,
such as plants and discarded debris of the mother’s feeding; and (iii) from its own
experience of feeding on other plants, perhaps ones simpler to process than net-
tles. Suppose that it also has some way of focusing on those particular sequences
of its mother’s action that are relevant to eating nettles; perhaps it has explored
nettle plants and found that they are painful, yet puzzlingly the mother seems to
enjoy interacting with them, making her nettle-interactions intrinsically interesting.
(Some such mechanism to focus learning on relevant action sequences seems to be
essential for any “bottom up” model of motor learning.) Because motor behaviour is
intrinsically variable, and plants also vary from individual to individual, the string of
elements that the young gorilla sees when watching its mother eat nettles will differ
each time. However, her starting point will always be a growing, intact nettle stem,
and—because she is expert at this task—her ﬁnal stage will always be the same,
popping a neatly folded package of nettle leaves into the mouth. In between these
points, variation will be particularly associated with non-critical parts of the perfor-
mance, and certain aspects must necessarily be the same—or else, the result simply
will not be success. With repeated watching, and a mind that tends automatically to
extract regularities in behaviour that varies over time, a pattern will gradually begin
to become apparent. The mother always makes a sweeping movement of one hand,
held around a nettle stem which is sometimes held in the other hand even though the
plant is still attached to the ground, and this leaves a leaﬂess stem protruding from
the ground; she always makes a twisting movement of the hands against each other,
and immediately drops a number of leaf-petioles (which she does not eat) onto the
ground; she always uses one hand to fold a bundle of leaf-blades protruding from

140
R.W. Byrne
(pick growing stem)
grip loosely
and strip-up
hold stem
base
(repeat)
bundle of leaves
grip leaf blades
twist / lever/ pull
hold
grip petioles
twist / lever / pull
drop
(repeat)
bundle of leaf-blades
pull blades out
&
fold over thumb
hold loosely
hold down
withdraw thumb
&
regrasp
pop in
folded leaf-blade package
"fold"
}
Fig. 8.1 Flow-chart for a typical adult gorilla processing nettle Laportea alatipes leaves. The
action starts at the top, with selection of a growing nettle to eat, and works downwards. Processes
are shown in rectangles; those which are optional, depending on the state of the plant itself, are
shown in brackets. As with conventional ﬂow-charts, diamonds represent choice points, with the
alternative options shown by the directed links leading from each diamond. Unlike the single linear
process of most ﬂow-charts, the diagram represents the actions of both left and right hand: actions
which are signiﬁcantly lateralized to the left hand are shown on the left of the ﬁgure, and vice
versa for the right hand. Some of these actions are nevertheless co-ordinated together, though the
two actions are different: these cases of asymmetric bimanual co-ordination are shown with dotted
lines connecting the separate processes

8
From Parsing Actions to Understanding Intentions
141
the other hand, and holds down this folded bundle with her thumb. Moreover, these
stages always occur in exactly the same order each time.
Statistical regularities, in behaviour that is repeatedly observed, thereby mark
out the minimal set of essential actions from the many others that occur during
nettle eating but which are not crucial to success, and reveal the correct order
in which they must be arranged. (The ability of human babies as young as eight
months to detect statistical regularities in spoken strings of nonsense words shows
that just such sensitivity to repeated orderings is active early in human development:
Saffran, Aslin, & Newport, 1996.). The usefulness of detecting regularities applies
not only to the linear sequence of movements of each hand, but also the hands’
operation together: stages that crucially depend on the hands’ close temporal and
spatial co-ordination while doing different jobs will recur in every string, while
other coincidental conjunctions will not.
Other statistical regularities derive from modular organization and hierarchical
organization. Whenever the operation of removing debris is performed (by open-
ing the hand that holds nettle leaf-blades, and delicately picking out debris with the
other hand), it occurs at the same place in the sequence. Also, on some occasions
but not others, a section of the program sequence may be repeated twice or sev-
eral times. For instance, the process of <pull a nettle plant into range, strip leaves
from its stem in a bimanually co-ordinated movement, then detach and drop the
leaf-petioles> may be repeated several times before the mother continues to remove
debris and fold the leaf-blades before eating. Subsections of the string of actions
that are marked out in this way may be single elements, or as in this example a
string of several elements. Both omission and repetition signal that some parts of
the string are more tightly bound together than others, i.e. that they function as mod-
ules. Optional stages, like cleaning debris, occur between but not within modules.
Moreover, repetition of a sub-string gives evidence of a module used hierarchically
as a subroutine, for example, iteration to accumulate a larger handful.
Further clues to modular structure are likely to be given by the distribution of
pauses (occurring between but not within modules), and the possibility of smooth
recovery from interruptions that occur between modules. Gorillas often pause for
several seconds during the processing of a handful of plant material, in order to
monitor the movements and actions of other individuals. Finally, a different module
entirely may be substituted for part of the usual sequence (e.g. if one hand is required
for postural support, then a normally bimanual process may need to be performed
unimanually), and if this module is recognized as an already-familiar sequence
its substitution again reveals structure; eventually, it may be that a taxonomy of
substitutable methods is built up.
All these statistical regularities are precisely what enabled us, the researchers,
to discover the hierarchical nature of nettle processing by adult gorillas (Byrne &
Byrne, 1993). The behaviour parsing model proposes that the same information
can be extracted and used by the apes themselves, and that this ability is what
enables a young ape to perceive and copy the sequential, bimanually co-ordinated,
hierarchical organization of complex skills from repeated watching of another.

142
R.W. Byrne
Behaviour parsing enables the underlying hierarchical organization of planned
behaviour to be picked out—under certain circumstances. The ﬁrst caveat, from
what we know of living apes in the wild, is that it is entirely possible that
non-human apes’ capacity to parse behaviour is limited to the visible domain of
manual and bodily actions, and thus not available in the auditory domain. The
bonobo Kanzi’s apparent ability to parse human speech, when he responds cor-
rectly to words whose referent depends on the syntactical organization of a relative
clause within a sentence (Savage-Rumbaugh et al., 1993), may cause this qualiﬁ-
cation to be relaxed, at least for extensively human-reared apes. For the moment,
however, I will assume that living apes under natural conditions, and our own ear-
liest ancestors, had no such ability. The great ape forte is evidently the manual
domain, as convincingly demonstrated in the hundreds of ASL signs acquired by
participants in “ape language” experiments (see chapters in Gardner, Gardner, &
Van Cantfort, 1989). In contrast, modern humans are routinely able to parse vocal
material.
The second limitation, from the way the model works, is that “multiple inde-
pendent looks” are necessary. A single view of skilled behaviour that is unfamiliar
in its organization will not result in a useful parsing, so seeing multiple samples
of efﬁcient behaviour is required. The samples must be independent, so that there
is information about the variance within the strings of perceived elements; that
is because only by having sensitivity to the relative variability of elements can
behaviour parsing locate the key (unvarying) elements. Thus, viewing a ﬁlm-clip
of the same segment of skilled behaviour would not serve to allow unfamiliar
behaviour to be parsed. Note that, although we may well substantially overrate
our everyday abilities (Bargh & Chartrand, 1999), modern humans do not seem
to be subject to this limitation. Gergely, Bekkering, and Kiraly (2002) show that
babies over sixteen months old are able to pick out for imitation the key ele-
ments of behaviour demonstrated only once, according to simple rationality criteria;
behaviour parsing alone could not explain these data. Before the critical age, I pre-
dict that babies are still able to show program-level imitation, but will not at that
point be able to select out speciﬁcally rational features of the process to copy. In
circumstances not requiring acquisition of new behavioural organization, there is
also some evidence for similar selectivity in imitation without multiple views of the
behaviour in both chimpanzees and domestic dogs (Buttleman, Carpenter, Call, &
Tomasello, 2007; Horner & Whiten, 2005; Range, Viranyi, & Huber, 2007). Thus,
the behaviour parsing model can only be part of the eventual answer of how human
imitative abilities evolved.
8.5 Why Great Apes?
To be precise, why should it have been only this one taxon of primate that
developed the rather special ability to parse a segmented stream of action into
a hierarchically-organized structure—and thereby acquire novel, complex skills
by imitative learning? At present, the social brain or Machiavellian intelligence

8
From Parsing Actions to Understanding Intentions
143
hypothesis is widely accepted as the most plausible explanation for the origin
of primate intelligence (Brothers, 1990; Byrne & Whiten, 1988; Dunbar, 1998;
Humphrey, 1976; Jolly, 1966; Whiten & Byrne, 1997). However, when it comes
to accounting for cognitive differences between monkeys and apes, it will not do.
According to the social brain hypothesis, the root cause of intellectual advance is
social complexity. Because the ancestors of modern haplorhine primates (monkeys
and apes) needed to live in increasingly large social groups, yet individuals of each
species were thereby put in direct competition for resources with other group mem-
bers, a selection pressure resulted that favoured increased social intelligence and a
concomitant enlargement in neocortex volume (Byrne, 1996). Thus, today, we ﬁnd
that primates living in larger groups have larger brains (Barton & Dunbar, 1997;
Dunbar, 1992), and are more likely to employ subtle means of social manipulation
such as deception (Byrne & Corp, 2004). While this ﬁts nicely with the differences
among living species of varied brain sizes, and gives a good account of the evo-
lutionary origins of the large-brained haplorhines, it does not distinguish between
monkeys and apes. There is no systematic difference in the causal variable: the
great apes simply do not live in larger social groups than do many monkey species,
which have much smaller brains and show little sign of the sophisticated cognition
of apes.
This means that serious attention must be paid to alternative, ecological selection
pressures that might have promoted intelligence, at least for this special case (Byrne,
1997): for instance, is there an ecological challenge that affects great apes more
than monkeys? Because of the anatomical differences between monkeys and apes,
the answer is yes. Great apes are systematically larger than monkeys, and since
they are adapted to brachiation (hanging below branches on long, powerful arms)
costs of long-distance travel are much greater for them than for monkeys. However,
apes are all specialists in easy-to-digest plant material (fruit or soft leaves) which
is ephemerally available and patchily distributed, so apes they must regularly travel
to ﬁnd their food. Almost everywhere they live, great apes share the forest with
Old World monkeys—which are not only smaller and more efﬁcient in long-range
travel, but happen to have gut adaptations enabling them to eat fruit when slightly
less ripe, or leaves when slightly tougher, than can apes. Monkeys, in short, are in
direct niche competition with great apes and possess all the aces: how have living
apes survived at all? The explanation becomes clear when the details of their diet
are examined: chimpanzees make tools to extract social insects from their nests, and
to break open hard nuts; gorillas, and to a lesser extent chimpanzees, use elaborate,
multi-stage routines to deal with plant defences; orangutans use complex, indirect
routes to reach defended arboreal food, and sometimes make tools to gain access to
bees’ nests or defended plant food. In each case, “clever” methods of food extraction
are used to gain access to foods which monkeys would be unable to reach. Thus, it
becomes plausible that the Miocene ancestors of the living great apes (whom we
share) may have adapted cognitively, in ways that would enable a broader range
of food types to be exploited: and I propose that learning new skills by behaviour
parsing was just this adaptation.

144
R.W. Byrne
8.6 Parsing to “See” Intentions: The Origin of Mime
and Gestural Language?
If this behaviour parsing model is correct, human language and speech evolved
in a species that was already able to parse hierarchically organized behaviour—
which might be no coincidence. Moreover, this ability to “see below the surface” of
behaviour, and detect the logical organization that produced it, has implications for
other cognitive activities. Indeed, the ability to learn new skills by imitation may be
seen as just part of a fundamental process of interpreting or understanding complex
behaviour.
It was important in the development of the behaviour parsing model that pro-
cessing should start from observed behaviour and require no prior understanding
of the physical cause-and-effect of the actions upon objects in the world, nor the
intentions or other mental states of the demonstrator. However, we know from com-
mon experience that these more abstract representations form regular parts of how
adult humans understand and discuss the world: so their evolutionary origin must
be explained. Behaviour parsing might be a necessary step on the road to seeing the
world in an intentional-causal way.
Consider causation. Since a perceptual parsing of complex action will (in many
cases) be applied to actions-upon-objects in the world, changes in the physical world
will become linked to the sequence of action—statistically. Of course, there is more
to cause than correlation, but it can be questioned whether that matters for everyday
purposes, or for evolution. Reliable correlation might be described as a “Pretty Good
Cause”, and only physicists dealing with the fundamentals of matter may need to
go much beyond it. The fact is that most things are seen as likely to happen to
the extent that they, or things very like them, have happened before under the same
circumstances. The sun will rise tomorrow morning because it has been doing so for
a long time at rather regular and statistically predictable intervals; not ﬂawless logic,
but good enough. Any parent who has tried to answer a series of “Why?” questions
from a young child will know how soon one gets out of one’s depth with causation:
ok, so day and night are caused by the Earth going round the Sun, but why does it
do that? In fact, probing deeper into the physics of most everyday situations helps
little with everyday living, and does not provide a very satisfying advance on cause-
as-correlation. In contrast, behaviour parsing picks out the correlational structure of
a changing environment quite well.
How could behaviour parsing help us with intentionality? The perceived orga-
nization of behaviour that results from the parsing process will inevitably be set in
a real-world context of achievement of valuable ends, just because the individuals
observed engaged in skilful action will only be doing so for biologically sufﬁcient
reasons. Often, demonstrators will be close associates or relatives of the observers,
confronting much the same problems as them. Thus, associating a particular orga-
nizational structure with the typical result of its performance is in many cases a
relatively trivial task: the point of achieving that particular result is something the
observer probably already understands. Intended purpose is indicated by the usual

8
From Parsing Actions to Understanding Intentions
145
result of successful performance. (“Unsuccessful” is of course also identiﬁed sta-
tistically, here, on the basis of visible behaviour. It corresponds to those occasions
when the action needs to be re-done, rather than moving on to another action.) This
means that, in principle, behaviour parsing makes it possible to compute the prior
intention of the other individual: by recognizing a behaviour pattern that would, if
the observing self performed it, achieve a comprehensible goal for the self. Any
animal capable of program-level imitation should therefore also be able to detect
at least some intentions of others from their behaviour, in cases where they have
been able to gain the necessary prior experience of that behaviour. And indeed, the
living great apes do show some aspects of theory of mind (Byrne, 1995, 1998a,
2000; Cartmill & Byrne, 2007; Tomasello, Call, & Hare, 2003), although it seems
likely that these fall short of the full mentalizing abilities of ﬁve year old children
(Astington, Harris, & Olson, 1988; Perner & Wimmer, 1985; Wellman, 1990). As
in the case of causation, the intentions extracted by behaviour parsing are intentions
in a weak sense of the term: rather than an imagined mental state, intentions of
these kinds need be no more than proper results of the normal behaviour sequence.
But similarly, this sense of intention may be good enough for most everyday pur-
poses: animals sensitive to intentions-as-results will not be able to conceive of false
belief and deliberate trickery, but they will be able to pick out the purposes of many
everyday social actions.
Animals with behaviour parsing abilities, as indexed by their ability to imitate
at program-level, might still be rather limited in understanding—with causation
reduced to correlation, and intentions reduced to expected results. However, com-
bined with the delicate and sophisticated manual control of action that we ﬁnd
in all the living apes, even this limited kind of understanding should be sufﬁ-
cient for communication by means of gesture. Natural gestural communication
in non-human apes is a rather neglected topic, but current evidence shows that
in captivity both chimpanzees and gorillas develop gestures not seen in the wild,
and use them intentionally in dyadic communication (Genty & Byrne, 2010;
Genty, Breuer, Hobaiter, & Byrne, 2009; Hobaiter & Byrne, 2010, 2011; Pika,
Liebal, & Tomasello, 2003; Tanner, 1998; Tanner & Byrne, 1996, 1999; Tomasello,
George, Kruger, Farrar, & Evans, 1985; Tomasello, Gust, & Frost, 1989). Moreover,
the ability of living great apes to extend their gestural repertoires when helped
by humans has been amply demonstrated in the various “ape sign language”
projects: whatever is believed of their linguistic sophistication, there is no doubt
that those chimpanzees, gorillas and orangutans have learned many new manual
gestures.
8.7 Tailpiece: A Heretical Thought
Those who conduct behavioural experiments or analyse observational data from
the ﬁeld, in order to discover whether any animal has the ability to represent the
mental states of others, become acutely aware that their task is a difﬁcult one

146
R.W. Byrne
because simpler mechanisms can generate richly complex behaviour. In particu-
lar, this chapter has argued that an understanding of planned behaviour, in terms of
hierarchically organized structure that can be copied, with causality approximated
by correlation and purpose by normal results, can result from a mechanistic process
of behavioural analysis that need not involve any “mentalizing” about the actual
mental states of the observed party. Thus, great apes show program-level imitation,
but might still not possess theory of mind and causal understanding. But what about
humans?
Of course, humans can and do represent causes and intentions: we explain (away)
our actions, on grounds of our beliefs, false or otherwise; we teach our children by
explaining that one thing causes another or that some people have different beliefs to
ourselves, and so on. But do these retrospective, verbal accounts actually correspond
to causal mental states that generate our behaviour when we are not explaining any-
thing? We are always reluctant to accept how much of our behaviour is an automatic
and fast product of mental processes of which we are unaware (Bargh & Chartrand,
1999), but I think this should be seriously considered for the case of theory of mind.
There are two possibilities. On the one hand, it may be that calculations about
others’ mental states are causal, and that the normal process of automatization
with practice simply renders them faster and more efﬁcient, to the point when they
can only be made conscious by “off-line” deliberation. But the heretical alterna-
tive is that rather different, mechanistic but unconscious processes—analogous to
those that allow us to parse behaviour—actually cause most of our everyday social
behaviour and interactions with the world of objects, and mentalizing is a secondary
process (and see Apperly & Butterﬁll, 2009 for a related discussion). On this view,
mentalizing has different functions: these include teaching, when we explain pro-
cesses or people to a child, and prevaricating, when we retrospectively construe our
behaviour in a way very different to what we know to be accurate. Any such pro-
cess of verbal (mis)construal is certainly a function of language ability, and so must
be recent in human evolution; but it may be that the behavioural capacities that we
attribute to “theory of mind” were all present at an earlier stage in human evolution,
and are perhaps even shared with non-human great apes, though they cannot explain
and discuss their actions as we can.
References
Apperly, I., & Butterﬁll, S. A. (2009). Do humans have two systems to track beliefs and belief-like
states? Psychological Review, 116, 953–970.
Astington, J. W., Harris, P., & Olson, D. R. (1988). Developing theories of mind. Cambridge:
University Press.
Auser, M. D., & Wrangham, R. W. (1987). Manipulation of food calls in captive chimpanzees.
Folia Primatologia, 48, 207–210.
Baldwin, D., Andersson, A., Saffran, J., & Meyer, M. (2008). Segmenting dynamic human action
via statistical structure. Cognition, 106, 1382–1407.
Bargh, J. A., & Chartrand, T. L. (1999). The unbearable automaticity of being. American
Psychologist, 54, 462–479.

8
From Parsing Actions to Understanding Intentions
147
Barton, R. A., & Dunbar, R. I. M. (1997). Evolution of the social brain. In A. Whiten & R. W. Byrne
(Eds.), Machiavellian intelligence II: Extensions and evaluations (pp. 240–263). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Boesch, C., & Boesch, H. (1990). Tool use and tool making in wild chimpanzees. Folia
Primatologica, 54, 86–99.
Brothers, L. (1990). The social brain: A project for integrating primate behavior and neurophysi-
ology in a new domain. Concepts in Neuroscience, 1, 27–51.
Bugnyar, T., & Huber, L. (1997). Push or pull: An experimental study of imitation in marmosets.
Animal Behaviour, 54, 817–831.
Buttleman, D., Carpenter, M., Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2007). Enculturated chimpanzees imitate
rationally. Developmental Science, 10, F31–F38.
Byrne, R. W. (1994). The evolution of intelligence. In P. J. B. Slater & T. R. Halliday (Eds.),
Behaviour and evolution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Byrne, R. W. (1995). The thinking ape: Evolutionary origins of intelligence. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Byrne, R. W. (1996). Machiavellian intelligence. Evolutionary Anthropology, 5, 172–180.
Byrne, R. W. (1997). The technical intelligence hypothesis: an additional evolutionary stimulus to
intelligence? In A. Whiten & R. W. Byrne (Eds.), Machiavellian intelligence II: extensions and
evaluations (pp. 289–311). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Byrne, R. W. (1998a). Cognition in great apes. In A. D. Milner (Ed.), Brain and cognition in
monkeys, apes and man (pp. 228–244). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Byrne, R. W. (1998b). Imitation: The contributions of priming and program-level copying. In S.
Braten (Ed.), Intersubjective communication and emotion in early ontogeny (pp. 228–244).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Byrne, R. W. (1999a). Cognition in great ape ecology. Skill-learning ability opens up foraging
opportunities. Symposia of the Zoological Society of London, 72, 333–350.
Byrne, R. W. (1999b). Imitation without intentionality. Using string parsing to copy the organiza-
tion of behaviour. Animal Cognition, 2, 63–72.
Byrne, R. W. (1999c). Object manipulation and skill organization in the complex food preparation
of mountain gorillas. In S. T. Parker, R. W. Mitchell, & H. L. Miles (Eds.), The mentality of
gorillas and orangutans (pp. 147–159). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Byrne, R. W. (2000). The evolution of primate cognition. Cognitive Science, 24, 543–570.
Byrne, R. W. (2001). Clever hands: The food processing skills of mountain gorillas. In
M. M. Robbins, P. Sicotte, & K. J. Stewart,(Eds.), Mountain gorillas. Three decades of research
at Karisoke (pp. 293–313). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Byrne, R. W. (2002a). Imitation of complex novel actions: What does the evidence from animals
mean? Advances in the Study of Behavior, 31, 77–105.
Byrne, R. W. (2002b). Seeing actions as hierarchically organized structures. Great ape manual
skills. In A. Meltzoff & W. Prinz (Eds.), The imitative mind: Development, evolution, and
brain bases (pp. 122–140). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Byrne, R. W. (2003). Imitation as behaviour parsing. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London (B), 358, 529–536.
Byrne, R. W. (2004). The manual skills and cognition that lie behind hominid tool use. In
A. E. Russon & D. R. Begun (Eds.), Evolutionary origins of great ape intelligence (pp. 31–44).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Byrne, R. W. (2005a). Detecting, understanding, and explaining animal imitation. In S. Hurley
& N. Chater (Eds.), Perspectives on imitation: from mirror neurons to memes (pp. 255–282).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Byrne, R. W. (2005b). The maker not the tool: The cognitive signiﬁcance of great ape manual skills.
In V. Roux & B. Bril (Eds.), Knapping stone. A uniquely hominid behaviour? (pp. 159–169).
Macdonald Institute Monographs.
Byrne, R. W., & Byrne, J. M. E. (1993). Complex leaf-gathering skills of mountain gorillas (Gorilla
g. beringei): Variability and standardization. American Journal of Primatology, 31, 241–261.

148
R.W. Byrne
Byrne, R. W., & Corp, N. (2004). Neocortex size predicts deception rate in primates. Proceedings
of the Royal Society of London: Biology, 271, 1693–1699.
Byrne, R. W., Corp, N., & Byrne, J. M. E. (2001a). Estimating the complexity of animal behaviour:
How mountain gorillas eat thistles. Behaviour, 138, 525–557.
Byrne, R. W., Corp, N., & Byrne, J. M. E. (2001b). Manual dexterity in the gorilla: Bimanual and
digit role differentiation in a natural task. Animal Cognition, 4, 347–361.
Byrne, R. W., & Russon, A. E. (1998). Learning by imitation: A hierarchical approach. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 21, 667–721.
Byrne, R. W., & Stokes, E. J. (2002). Effects of manual disability on feeding skills in gorillas and
chimpanzees: A cognitive analysis. International Journal of Primatology, 23, 539–554.
Byrne, R. W., & Whiten, A. (1988). Machiavellian Intelligence: Social expertise and the evolution
of intellect in monkeys, apes and humans. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Cartmill, E. A., & Byrne, R. W. (2007). Orangutans modify their gestural signalling according to
their audience’s comprehension. Current Biology, 17, 1345–1348.
Catmur, C., Walsh, V., & Heyes, C. (2007). Sensorimotor learning conﬁgures the human mirror
system. Current Biology, 17, 1527–1531.
Corp, N., & Byrne, R. W. (2002a) Leaf processing of wild chimpanzees: Physically defended
leaves reveal complex manual skills. Ethology, 108, 1–24.
Corp, N., & Byrne, R. W. (2002b) The ontogeny of manual skill in wild chimpanzees: Evidence
from feeding on the fruit of Saba ﬂorida. Behaviour, 139, 137–168.
Crockford, C., Herbinger, I., Vigilant, L., & Boesch, C. (2004). Wild chimpanzees produce group-
speciﬁc calls: A case for vocal learning? Ethology, 110, 221–243.
Custance, D., Whiten, A., & Fredman, T. (1999). Social learning of an artiﬁcial fruit task in
capuchin monkeys (Cebus apella). Journal of Comparative Psychology, 113(1), 13–23.
Dunbar, R. I. M. (1992). Neocortex size as a constraint on group size in primates. Journal of Human
Evolution, 20, 469–493.
Dunbar, R. I. M. (1998). The social brain hypothesis. Evolutionary Anthropology, 6, 178–190.
Elliott, J. M., & Connolly, K. J. (1984). A classiﬁcation of manipulative hand movements.
Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology, 26, 283–296.
Fox, E., Sitompul, A., & Van Schaik, C. P. (1999). Intelligent tool use in wild Sumatran orangutans.
In S. T. Parker, H. L. Miles, & R. W. Mitchell (Eds.), The mentality of gorillas and orangutans
(pp. 99–116). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Galef, B. G. (1988). Imitation in animals: History, deﬁnitions, and interpretation of data from
the psychological laboratory. In T. Zentall & B. G. Galef, Jnr. (Eds.), Social learning:
Psychological and biological perspectives (pp. 3–28). New York: Erlbaum.
Gallese, V., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., & Rizzolatti, G. (1996). Action recognition in the premotor
cortex. Brain, 119, 593–609.
Gardner, R. A., Gardner, B. T., & Van Cantfort, T. E. (1989). Teaching sign language to
chimpanzees. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Genty, E., Breuer, T., Hobaiter, C., & Byrne, R. W. (2009). Gestural communication of the
gorilla (Gorilla gorilla): Repertoire, intentionality and possible origins. Animal Cognition, 12,
527–546.
Genty, E., & Byrne, R. W. (2010). Why do gorillas make sequences of gestures? Animal Cognition,
13, 287–301.
Gergely, G., Bekkering, H., & Kiraly, I. (2002). Rational imitation in preverbal infants. Nature,
415, 755.
Goodall, J. (1986) The chimpanzees of Gombe: Patterns of behaviour. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Gouzoules, S., Gouzoules, H., & Marler, P. (1984). Rhesus monkey (Macaca mulatta) screams:
representational signalling in the recruitment of agonistic aid. Animal Behaviour, 32(1), 182.
Green, S. (1975). Dialects in Japanese monkeys: Vocal learning and cultural transmission of locale-
speciﬁc vocal behaviour? Zeitschrift fur Tierpschologie, 38, 304–314.

8
From Parsing Actions to Understanding Intentions
149
Heyes, C. M., & Ray, E. D. (2000). What is the signiﬁcance of imitation in animals? Advances in
the Study of Behavior, 29, 215–245.
Hobaiter, C., & Byrne, R. W. (2010). The gestural repertoire of the wild chimpanzee. Animal
Cognition. DOI 10.1007/s10071-011-0409-2.
Hobaiter, C., & Byrne, R. W. (2011). Serial gesturing by wild chimpanzees: its nature and function
for communication. Animal Cognition. DOI 10.1007/s10071-011-0416-3.
Horner, V., & Whiten, A. (2005). Causal knowledge and imitation/emulation switching in
chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and children (Homo sapiens). Animal Cognition, 8, 164–181.
Humphrey, N. K. (1976) The social function of intellect. In P. P. G. Bateson & R. A. Hinde (Eds.),
Growing points in ethology (pp. 303–317). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Janik, V. M., & Slater, P. J. B. (1997). Vocal learning in mammals. Advances in the Study of
Behavior, 26, 59–99.
Jolly, A. (1966). Lemur social behaviour and primate intelligence. Science, 153, 501–506.
Kuhl, P. K. (1982). Discrimination of speech by non-human animals – basic auditory sensitivities
conducive to the perception of speech-sound categories. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 70, 340–349.
Loucks, J., & Baldwin, D. (2009). Sources of information for discriminating dynamic human
actions. Cognition, 111, 84–97.
Marler, P., & Tenaza, R. (1977). Signalling behaviour of apes with special reference to vocaliza-
tion. In T. Sebeok (Ed.), How animals communicate (pp. 965–1033). Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University Press.
Matsuzawa, T. (2001). Primate foundations of human intelligence: A view of tool use in nonhuman
primates and fossil hominids. In T. Matsuzawa (Ed.), Primate origins of human cognition and
behaviour. New York: Springer.
Matsuzawa, T., & Yamakoshi, G. (Eds.). (1996). Comparisons of chimpanzee material culture
between Bossou and Nimba, West Africa. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mitani, J. C., Hasegawa, T., Gros-Louis, J., Marler, P., & Byrne, R. (1992). Dialects in wild
chimpanzees? American Journal of Primatology, 27, 233–243.
Napier, J. R. (1961). Prehensility and opposability in the hands of primates. Symposia of the
zoological society of London, 5, 115–132.
Perner, J., & Wimmer, H. (1985). ‘John thinks that Mary thinks that’: Attribution of second-order
beliefs by 5- to 10-year old children. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 39, 437–471.
Pika, S., Liebal, K., & Tomasello, M. (2003). Gestural communication in young gorillas (Gorilla
gorilla): Gestural repertoire, learning, and use. American Journal of Primatology, 60, 95–111.
Range, F., Viranyi, Z., & Huber, L. (2007). Selective imitation in domestic dogs. Current Biology,
17, 868–872.
Rizzolatti, G., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., & Gallese, V. (1996). Premotor cortex and the recognition
of motor actions. Brain Research, 3, 131–141.
Rizzolatti, G., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., & Gallese, V. (2002). From mirror neurons to imitation:
facts and speculations. In A. Meltzoff & W. Prinz (Eds.), The imitative mind: Development,
evolution, and brain bases (pp. 247–266). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Russon, A. E. (1998). The nature and evolution of intelligence in orangutans (Pongo pygmaeus).
Primates, 39(4), 485–503.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996). Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants.
Science, 274, 1926–1928.
Savage-Rumbaugh, E. S., Murphy, J., Sevcik, R. A., Brakke, K. E., Williams, S. L., & Rumbaugh,
D. M. (1993). Language comprehension in ape and child. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development, 58, 1–252.
Seyfarth, R. M., & Cheney, D. L. (1986). Vocal development in vervet monkeys. Animal Behaviour,
34, 1640–1658.
Spence, K. W. (1937). Experimental studies of learning and higher mental processes in infra-human
primates. Psychological Bulletin, 34, 806–850.

150
R.W. Byrne
Stokes, E. J., & Byrne, R. W. (2001). Cognitive capacities for behavioural ﬂexibility in wild chim-
panzees (Pan troglodytes): The effect of snare injury on complex manual food processing.
Animal Cognition, 4, 11–28.
Stokes, E. J., Quiatt, D., & Reynolds, V. (1999). Snare injuries to chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes)
at 10 study sites in East and West Africa. American Journal of Primatology, 49, 104–105.
Tanner, J. E. (1998). Gestural communication in a group of zoo-living lowland gorillas.
Unpublished PhD thesis, University of St Andrews, St Andrews.
Tanner, J. E., & Byrne, R. W. (1996). Representation of action through iconic gesture in a captive
lowland gorilla. Current Anthropology, 37, 162–173.
Tanner, J. E., & Byrne, R. W. (1999) The development of spontaneous gestural communication in a
group of zoo-living lowland gorillas. In S. T. Parker, R. W. Mitchell, & H. L. Miles (Eds.), The
mentalities of gorillas and orangutans. Comparative perspectives (pp. 211–239). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Tomasello, M., Call, J., & Hare, B. (2003). Chimpanzees understand psychological states – the
question is which ones and to what extent. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7, 153–156.
Tomasello, M., George, B., Kruger, A., Farrar, J., & Evans, E. (1985). The development of gestural
communication in young chimpanzees. Journal of Human Evolution, 14, 175–186.
Tomasello, M., Gust, D., & Frost, T. A. (1989). A longitudinal investigation of gestural communi-
cation in young chimpanzees. Primates, 30, 35–50.
Visalberghi, E., & Fragaszy, D. M. (1990). Do monkeys ape? In S. T. Parker & K. R. Gibson
(Eds.), Language and intelligence in monkeys and apes (pp. 247–273). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Wellman, H. M. (1990). Children’s theories of mind. Bradford: MIT Press.
Whiten, A. (1998). Imitation of the sequential structure of actions by chimpanzees (Pan
troglodytes). Journal of Comparative Psychology, 112, 270–281.
Whiten, A., & Byrne, R. W. (Eds.). (1997). Machiavellian intelligence II: Extensions and
evaluations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Whiten, A., Custance, D. M., Gomez, J.-C., Teixidor, P., & Bard, K. A. (1996). Imitative learning
of artiﬁcial fruit processing in children (Homo sapiens) and chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes).
Journal of Comparative Psychology, 110, 3–14.
Zuberbuhler, K. (2002). A syntactic rule in forest monkey communication. Animal Behaviour, 63,
293–299.

Chapter 9
Hominid Diversity and ‘Ancestor’ Myths
Homo, H. sapiens, and Other Taxa from
a Phylocladistic Viewpoint
Niels Bonde
Abstract Many of the ‘myths’ of direct ancestors of ‘all hominids’ or of Homo or
of H. sapiens and age of these ‘ancestors’ are shown to be ‘false’ or based on poor
character analyses and/or suboptimal classiﬁcations and/or inconsequent choices
of names of taxa. Ernst Mayr’s devastating inﬂuence since 1950 on naming fossil
hominids and therefore on comprehending their diversity is obvious. Recently, that
is since mid 1990s, many more new taxa of fossil hominids have been found and
named, and this has produced a much better appreciation of the prehistoric diver-
sity, and has questioned and put into doubt, if not outright refuted, many of the
traditional, often too simpliﬁed and adaptationistic scenarios (or ‘just-so stories’)
about human evolution as evidenced by ‘direct fossil ancestors’. The most famous
of these, ‘Lucy’, is here named Afaranthropus (n. gen.) antiquus (Ferguson, 1984).
The diversity, classiﬁcation, and age of fossils and the delimitation of taxa are
obviously relevant also when speculating about the origin of such non-fossiliseable
features of modern humans as (self)-consciousness, cognitive abilities, spoken lan-
guage, early and simple tool making, wearing of clothes etc. As with the origin of
such features as ‘nakedness’, large penis, certain immune systems and blood types,
large female breasts, subcutaneous fat, and in fact also upright stance and walking,
we can only be completely sure that these features originated somewhere before the
last common stem-mother of living humans and after the split from chimpanzees –
not a very precise indication: between 7 and 0.1 m.y.
When discussing the more precise level or stage in the phylogenetic tree, it
becomes of utmost importance that we talk about the same taxa, and refer to the
same groups designated by taxon names like Homo and H. sapiens. Here, it becomes
clear that these names are not at all used in a consistent way, and also that most
anthropologists and palaeontologists are not aware that both groups are completely
arbitrarily delimited in the time dimension, as demonstrated by our analysis and
N. Bonde (B)
Institute of Geography & Geology, University of Copenhagen, Øster Voldgade 10,
DK 1350 Copenhagen, Denmark
Fur Museum, DK 7884 Fur, Denmark
e-mail: nielsb@geo.ku.dk; niels.bonde@mail.tele.dk
151
T. Schilhab et al. (eds.), The Symbolic Species Evolved, Biosemiotics 6,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-2336-8_9, C⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2012

152
N. Bonde
conventions of non-Linnaean nomenclature (see the subtext to the classiﬁcations
on the homepage [see p. 189]). To discuss a concept even as simple as the ‘ori-
gin’ or age of a taxon, one must make the cladistic distinctions between crown
groups, stem groups and total groups, and taxon names attached to ‘nodes’, ‘stems’
or somewhere in between, namely to certain synapomorphic features (‘key features’
or ‘adaptations’). Language and its origin will be discussed, and the relationship
between early and primitive African languages compared with the tree of recent
hominids based on MtDNA:
The complicated phylogenetic tree and the consequential (non-Linnaean) classi-
ﬁcation of hominids will be demonstrated, so that the diversity of hominids through
time can easily be seen.
9.1 Introduction
Historically, the classiﬁcation and evolutionary history of humans has been as ‘min-
imalistic’ as possible, presumably to reﬂect the uniqueness and unity of humans
in a ‘politically correct’ way, also in respect of religious considerations. So apart
from a period during early 20th century, when ‘racial distinctions’ were almost
universally recognized and named, both living and fossil species and subspecies
names have been kept at a minimum, grossly underestimating the ‘true diversity’.
Especially Ernst Mayr’s renowned 1950 paper has had a devastating inﬂuence
as a prohibition on recognizing new fossil hominid species. It is known that it
took about four years between 1960 and ’64 for L.S.B. Leakey and Ph. Tobias
to agree on a new species name for Homo habilis due to the unwillingness to
create new hominid species – Australopithecus africanus (not even necessarily
A. robustus), Homo erectus, Homo sapiens and H. neanderthalensis (perhaps only
as a subspecies of sapiens) then seemed to be a sufﬁcient number of taxa to
describe ‘human diversity’ through time. Later on (1963), Mayr did admit that
recognizing the ‘robust australopithecines’ as a separate species A. robustus, was
probably justiﬁed. He never understood or accepted that in that way both the
genus Australopithecus and the subfamily Australopithecinae were un-natural (para-
phyletic) groups. It is also known from Don Johanson (1990) that it took Tim White
and him many discussions and consultations with Mayr before they decided to
name Australopithecus afarensis in 1978 after the ﬁnd of ‘Lucy’ in 1975. (Mary
Leakey refused to be part of that paper, despite the fact that the type material from
Laetoli, Tanzania, was primarily her ﬁndings, and White had worked for her – so
Yves Coppens ‘forced his way’ into the paper very late, not to let the Americans
run off with all the glory, as the original ﬁnds in the Afar region – and Ethiopia –
were French [see Coppens, 1975] – see part of that story also in Tattersal [1995,
p. 152]).
Admittedly, the four decades before Mayr’s ‘warning’ had seen taxonomic names
of fossil hominids being used almost like museum or ﬁeld numbers with a pletora
of generic and speciﬁc names. But only fairly recently, in the wake of many spec-
tacular new ﬁnds, has it been more generally accepted that there are, in fact, quite

9
Hominid Diversity and ‘Ancestor’ Myths
153
a few recognizable human taxa, beginning perhaps with Michael Day’s Guides to
Fossil Man conservative, but gradually more diverse over the four editions from
1965 to 1986.
The aim of the present review is not only to expose the substantial diversity
of fossil hominids, but also to disclose the many myths of ‘hominid ancestors’,
especially of Homo sapiens, which have been published earlier – and which still
occur at high frequency. Most of these postulates are poorly founded from a cladistic
viewpoint – difﬁcult as they must be, also from a general methodological viewpoint.
Further, the inﬂuence this has on certain traditional ideas about the evolutionary
history of ‘soft’ (non-fossiliseable) human features will be traced. Extremely good
photos of most of the fossil specimens mentioned below have been published in
natural size by Johanson and Edgar (1996), and likewise, continent by continent, by
Schwartz and Tattersal (2002, 2003).
9.2 Classiﬁcatory Methods of Phylocladistics
Co-working with Bjarne Westergaard (who died 2008), I have developed a mod-
ern, non-Linnaean, ‘phylocladistic’ classiﬁcation of all fossil and living ‘hominids’
(2004), taking into account all possible needs of a complete and precise system
including taxonomic conventions for clades (monophyletic groups), paraphyletic
groups, ‘ancestors’, metaphyly, uncertainties, doubts, lack of precise knowledge,
fragmentary fossils, sequencing, subordination, and age. This is based on a rank-
free, ‘neutral’ unit called LITU (Least Inclusive Taxonomic Unit) as the terminal
taxon instead of the species, subspecies etc. of the traditional system (so it
is the smallest recognizable group of individuals with some characteristic fea-
tures – to be named as basal unit in the classiﬁcation, and (usually) placed
at the endpoints of the branches of the phylogenetic tree (‘stem tree’ – or at
endpoints in the cladogram). A LITU is the smallest unit that can be given a
differential diagnosis (characterization) and which is of historical (phylogenetic)
relevance to be defended by the systematist. A taxon is a named group in the
classiﬁcation.
Hybridisation and other complications in terms of reticulate structures of rela-
tionships can be included if necessary. Naming of the taxa employs a single name
for each taxon in lower case letters for LITUs and Capitalized for groups of LITUs
(double names for hybrids). This is in contrast to the traditional Linnaean system
and nomenclature where the basal unit is a species written in small case letters after
a name of some genus (Capitalized – perhaps abreviated to just the ﬁrst upper case
letter), into which category any species has to be placed. F.ex. Homo sapiens or
H. sapiens (usually written in italics). In the non-Linnaean system, there are no
(absolute, Linnaean) ranks or categories (like genera, families etc.), because age of
origin (or age span from ‘origin’ to extinction for fossil groups); can act as both
relative and absolute ‘rank’ at the same time in a precise and relevant way, seen
from a phylogenetic viewpoint. This classiﬁcation is based on the simplest possible
phylogeny (parsimony) which maximises, in a cladistic framework, the number of

154
N. Bonde
synapomorphies for all taxa (constituting their diagnoses) and optimises the number
of characters used as synapomorphies (the mutual, derived features characterizing
a taxon/group (Patterson, 1980)). It therefore seems difﬁcult, if not impossible, to
ﬁnd a ‘better’ system in terms of the informations at hand which are the features
analysed cladistically for the relevant (or known) groups of organisms.
The diversity of fossil ‘hominids’ (here Hominina) of our branch as separated
from that of the chimps about 7 m.y. ago, is often grossly underestimated by
palaeontologists and anthropologists. Here, we demonstrate that there are at least
about 35–40 LITUs that can be distinguished among the known fossils (and sev-
eral more are likely to be found in the future). And, as shown by DNA research
and other molecular or physical anthropological analyses, there is also a historical
structure among living humans (the LITU of crown group ‘modern’ Sapiens can
apparently be subdivided into historically relevant groups, which in this case will be
LITU-s incl. in the ‘higher’ taxon Sapiens).
This is certainly of signiﬁcance for the analysis of language history which,
already for decades, has been done by methodologies very similar, if not identical,
to those of cladistics (and further similar to the much older techniques of ‘textual
critics’ analysing the history of old manuscripts (Platnick & Cameron, 1977)). It
is probably not just a coincidence that some of these ideas on historical analy-
ses of languages and evolutionary history and the way to illustrate them by ‘trees’
can be traced back to the two colleagues and friends August Schleicher and Ernst
Haeckel in the 1860s (1861 resp. 1866; the former sometimes considered father of
historical linguistics, the latter inventor of numerous biological terms, among them
‘phylogeny’), both directly inspired by Darwin’s Origin, which has only one ﬁgure,
a ‘tree-like’ diagram (1859).
Concerning nomenclature, the naming of the taxa, we have the cladistic problem
of distinguishing so-called ‘node-based’ crown group taxa and apomorphy based
ones from ‘stem-based’ taxa in a consistent way in the nomenclature for the clas-
siﬁcations. I believe the only consequent and ‘minimalistic’ way of doing this is
by naming only terminal taxa/LITUs, clades and crown-groups as far as possible.
But what we tried to demonstrate in 2004 (Bonde & Westergaard – check home-
page [see p. 189]) was that in practice you need rules also for naming other sorts of
groups if you want to cover all known diversity of life. Namely, e.g. paraphyletic,
metaphyletic and hybrid groups and ‘ancestral’ species/LITUs (see also Bonde,
2001). But we were not really consequential (2004) as we named some ‘stem-based’
groups (Queiroz & Gauthier, 1992), also recommended by the PhyloCode (Cantino
& Queiroz, 2004 or newer edition), which is, in fact, unnecessary if not outright
impossible.
Such stem-based groups originating at the very split from their living sister
groups and comprising the very earliest parts of the said lineages – although they
must have existed in the past – can never be satisfactorily and precisely indicated
in the practical classiﬁcation and nomenclature of known organisms. With a group
which has fossils as well as recent forms present there will always be a certain
‘total group’ (a living crown group clade [Jefferies’ term] combined with its fossil
‘stem-group’ [paraphyletic] of Hennig (1966) and together forming a clade – see

9
Hominid Diversity and ‘Ancestor’ Myths
155
Queiroz and Gauthier (1992, 1994)). A total group contains a certain clade and the
fossil(s) indicated by at least one synapomorphy to represent the ﬁrst branch to split
off from that clade. This, then, in practice constitutes the closest approximation to
a truly ‘stem-based’ group. But this total group does not include the very earliest
parts of the stem-lineage, because if such specimens were really found as fossils
they would not show the relevant synapomorphy, or at least not in sufﬁciently high
frequency. Those very earliest ‘ancestral’ fossils can only be classiﬁed as incerta
sedis within the relevant higher crown group because one cannot show whether
they belong just above or just below the relevant split (or ‘speciation’), as I have
repeatedly argued (1977, 1981, 2001 – see also Bonde & Westergaard, 2004). These
supposed and very ideal ‘ancestors’ (morphotypes in Nelson’s (1970) terminology),
should they ever be found, which is entirely unlikely, they would form a paraphyletic
or metaphyletic group anyway and can by no means be precisely classiﬁed (a general
feature of organisms with only relatively ‘primitive’ or plesiomorphic characters).
So no groups are in pratice really ‘stem-based’ (contra Queiroz & Gauthier and
the PhyloCode); all groups/clades must be based on the earliest node (‘speciation’)
within the group, unless in rare cases the earliest fossil can be assumed to be tru-
ely ‘ancestral’ and lie on the stem-branch itself. Concerning the positive possibility,
in rare cases, of being able to indicate such ‘actual ancestors’, we disagree with
most cladists, while many palaeontologists, especially micro-palaeontologists (who
may believe they can dig the phylogeny right out of the ground or rather a drill
hole) are willing to consider such possibilities – or even (far too) eager to do so.
But surely, if somebody think they can identify ‘real ancestors’ they must have a
possibility to precisely indicate that in a classiﬁcation by certain conventions. And
biologists should not believe that this is a problem only concerning fossils, because
neontologists also need sometimes to classify taxa which look exactly like ‘prim-
itive ancestors’ of other groups (usually their derived sister species) and therefore
are, in fact, paraphyletic ‘species’ with no autapomorphy (e.g. diploid plants giving
rise to tetraploids).
9.3 Diversity
The taxonomic diversity of fossil hominids in the restricted sense of being those fos-
sils more closely related phylogenetically to living humans than to chimpanzees, is
today realized to be much greater than believed ﬁfty years ago. Many recent fossil
discoveries surely contribute to that understanding but still there is, in many text-
books and semi-professional accounts (and a few professional ones), a reluctance
to accept this diversity (e.g. Napier, 1975; Leakey, 1981; Winkler & Schweikhardt,
1982; Jones et al., 1992; Stringer & Gamble, 1993; Stringer & McKie, 1996; Lewin,
1999; Benton, 2005). And despite lots of beautiful photos of fossil hominids, the
entire diversity is not really mapped by Johanson and Edgar (1996), and books
like Lucy by Johanson and Edey (1990), and Leakey’s Homo (1994) are not meant
to cover everything. The others mentioned above comprise something like 15–20
taxa of hominids, while Bonde and Westergaard (2004) have 35–40 taxa (LITUs,

156
N. Bonde
‘species’ or ‘subspecies’ – some 10 of them traditional chrono-species subdivid-
ing branches) as a minimum. But some of the simpliﬁcations in the most popular
reviews (Tattersal, 1993 for the American Museum exhibit, Gore, 1997; Anon,
2004), and especially in those for kids, (e.g. Thomas, 1994; Ebbesen, 1990), are
quite misleading.
But see also Schwartz (2004) about the recent trend of recognizing and naming
many more fossil hominid taxa after this had been hampered for 30–40 years by
Mayr’s 1950 paper. The ‘taxonomic activity’ slowly increased by the descriptions
of H. habilis (1964) and H. ergaster and ‘Lucy’ (1975, resp. 1978 – but these new
species were discussed as very problematic, or were even neglected), and then it
accellerated by the 1990s. Tattersal has rightly warned (1986) that if fossil diversity
is not formally named then it will not be discussed – he even claims that subspeciﬁc
names will be completely forgotten and that we underestimate the ‘true’ diversity
anyway by only having hard parts. One reason is the tradition in palaeontology most
often to discuss and to register at the generic level, and only rarely at the speciﬁc
level (Treatise on Invertebrate Paleontology, Romer’s 1966 Vertebrate Paleontology
and younger followers; Cooper, 1970; Forey et al., 2004).
Admittedly, the trend in the decades before the mentioned period had been using
the taxonomic names rather like museum collection numbers, which had created a
plethora of names for what was just variations within the natural taxonomic units or
species. Understandably, a certain reduction of the names of ‘units’ and of small and
‘blind’ collateral branches on the family tree has to be made for pedagogical reasons
in the more popular accounts, but it is much less acceptable in professional reviews
of our evolutionary history. It has, in the past, created a totally misleading picture
of human phylogeny with profound consequences for ideas about the evolution of
speciﬁc features both in the skulls and the post-cranium with implications for ‘soft
parts’, functional anatomy, behaviour, and palaeoecology.
The most ‘simple’ and extreme idea, the so-called ‘single species hypothesis’
(e.g. Brace & Ashley Montagu, 1965; Wolpoff, 1968, 1980 – ‘dogmatic’ according
to Tattersal, 1995 – later called ‘ludicrous’), was upheld in certain anthropological
‘schools’ even until about thirty-ﬁve years ago (see Tattersal, 1995, pp. 127ff). Only
the ﬁnds of robust australopithecines in the same deposits in Kenya as much more
Homo-like fossils (Leakey, 1976; Leakey & Walker, 1976) put a ﬁnal stop to this
idea (or nearly so). It visualised the entire evolution of humans since the split from
chimps as just one (‘biological’) species lineage ascending through time – albeit
divided into successive ‘species’ (or chronospecies) for ‘practical’ or stratigraphic
reasons, or because of intuitive ideas of important ‘adaptive shifts’ (Simpson, 1959,
1961). Similar adaptationistic arguments repeated as late as 1999 by B. Wood &
Collard – but after the jubilee year of Darwin we should rather recall his remarks
in a letter to T.H. Huxley ‘In regard to classiﬁcation . . . .I believe it ought . . . to
be simply genealogical . . . I think it ultimately will, . . . for it will clear away an
immense amount of rubbish about the value of characters, . . . . The time will come,
I believe, . . . . when we shall have very fairly true genealogical trees . . .’ [quoted by
Goodman, 1975, here much abbrieviated with my emphasis]). Perhaps the ‘time has
come’ to stop adaptationistic story telling about ‘key characters’?

9
Hominid Diversity and ‘Ancestor’ Myths
157
So ﬁnally, in 1975–76, it had been ‘proved’ that there were at least two human
lineages, one a ‘robust australopithecine’ (Paranthropus spp.) and another much
more Homo-like. The latter much later caller H. (Pithecanthropus) rudolfensis,
and the age of these at Koobi Fora/‘East Rudolph’ is between 11/2 and 2 m.y. (at
the time mistakenly dated to be about 1 m.y. older). The relative ages between
the South African cave localities themselves, Sterkfontein, Swartkrans, Kromdrai
and Makapansgat was not well known at that time, and neither was their ages
as compared to those of East Africa, and the age of the Taung locality for
the type Australopithecus africanus was entirely uncertain. So phylogenetic (or
possible ancestor-descendant relations) were very uncertain, although it was gen-
erally assumed that the ‘gracile’ A. africanus (comprising also Plesianthropus)
was older than the ‘robust’ forms (Paranthropus), but many only recognized one
genus, Australopithecus, for them all (also classiﬁed as a separate subfamily,
Australopithecinae, which Simpson [1945] in his famous classiﬁcation of mammals
included in his family Pongidae for the apes !). Robinson (1956, 1972, and with
Broom, 1952) always stressed the latter’s name for the ‘robust’ forms, Paranthropus,
as a very distinct taxon, but despite the supposed age-relations he preferred some
unknown ‘robust’ australopithecine as ancestral to both Australopithecus and Homo
(1972), in the same spirit as Weidenreich (1946) deriving later humans from ‘giants’.
The few branches of the phylogenetic tree I showed in 1989 (from a 1987 meeting)
was even beyond the tradition at that time (but Groves excellent 1989 book appeared
just after that with many more taxa). Figure 9.1 shows the diversity presented in a
recent Danish Encyclopedia.
9.4 Australopithecus – An Old Homo
The rather old Australopithecus africanus (between 2 and 3 m.y. (Delson, 1988) in
S-Africa) was a problem: To some, it was a variant of (or a more primitive species
grading into) the ‘robust’ australopithecines (e.g. Johanson & White, 1979 – an
older idea that it was just the females (Brace, 1967) had been abandoned (Birdsel,
1975, pp. 263ff, Tattersal, 1995, pp. 128ff)). To others, it was only a very primi-
tive Homo (Robinson, 1956, 1972; Bonde, 1976, 1977, pp. 790–791) based mainly
on the postcranial skeleton, but also on some skull features which was repeated by
many analyses (Groves, 1991; Tattersal, 1995). This problem remained later because
to some, A. africanus was clearly related to Paranthropus (Rak, 1983; Wood, 1992
wavering), while to Groves (1989, 2001; Olson, 1985; Lockwood & Tobias, 1999;
Robinson, 1972) and to myself (1976, 1989, 2001; Bonde & Westergaard, 2004)
africanus is clearly a Homo, based on several synapomorphies, but very primi-
tive. Remember though, that before much was known about the chronology of the
South African caves (Taung, Sterkfontein, Makapansgat), and under inﬂuence of
Weidenreich’s Apes, Giants and Man (1946), Robinson (1972) also thought that
we were derived from ‘giants’/large apes in a transformation series over robust
Paranthropus via Australopithecus (= primitive Homo) to more advanced and
smaller Homo (today we know that the trend in size is the opposite).

158
N. Bonde
Fig. 9.1 Phylogenetic tree of chimps and hominids used by B. Westergaard in his revision (2002)
of ‘Human evolution’ in ‘Den Store Danske Encyclopedi’ (Large Danish Encyclopedia) suppl.
vol., and here with his further revisions and remarks added by hand. Used also by Bonde and Hoeg
(2008) in their obituary on Bjarne W. in Yearbook of Danish Natural History Society after he had
been murdered in Jan. 2008

9
Hominid Diversity and ‘Ancestor’ Myths
159
Some have suggested that africanus could be common ancestor of both the robust
and the Homo lineages (Day, 1965). The latter is refuted by ﬁnds of Paranthropus
such as the ‘Black skull’ (WT 17000 (= West Turkana – Walker et al., 1986) –
which should probably not be referred to the species aethiopicus, as the holotype jaw
of this taxon, Paraustralopithecus aethiopicus, from Omo region, South Ethiopia
(Arambourg & Coppens, 1968) has too small molar teeth (Groves, 1991); he refers
it to an old Homo as H. aethiopicus). Its age is 2.5 m.y., that is, older than the
youngest africanus (Thackeray et al., 2000) inclusive the holotype, ‘Dart’s baby’
(Dart, 1925; Delson, 1988). The proper name for the ‘black Skull’ is P. walkeri by
Ferguson (1989 – and see Groves (1991, pp. 254)).
This immediately makes a great difference for the age of Homo. In the ﬁrst
model, the oldest Homo is almost 2.5 m.y. (the so-called H. habilis and/or H.
rudolfensis – see Leakey, 1994; Kimbel et al., 1996). In the second model, Homo
must be much older, as some africanus from Makapansgat are probably a little over
3 m.y. old (Delson, 1988; Clarke. 1988).
9.5 The ‘Robust’ Paranthropus
This again implies that the sister group, Paranthropus (see Tobias, 1967; Grine,
1988; Groves, 1991), must have the same age within the clade Parhomo, named
(by Bonde & Westergaard, 2004) for this combined Homo-Paranthropus group.
But have ‘robust’ fossils that old ever been found? Usually, Paranthropus is also
recorded as about 2.5 m.y. old, e.g. the age of the ‘Black Skull’ (WT 17000, so-
called ‘A. aethiopicus’, Walker et al., 1986; Kimbel et al., 1985 – disqualiﬁed
above). But there is apparently an even more primitive Paranthropus, a fragmen-
tary skull from Sterkfontein reconstructed by Clarke (1988) with concave face and
the large molars, but no parietal crest, and even more primitive by being rather prog-
nath and with much larger canines and incisors (not named – should, however, be
critically compared with A. garhi of approximate same age (White et al., 1999; see
below), which also has very large molars, and lacks a parietal crest). This is the
same age as A. africanus from this locality, about 21/2–3 m.y. But some records are
almost always forgotten (at least not mentioned): In the lower part of the Omo sec-
tion (Shungura Fm.), two very large deciduous molars have been found with an age
about 2.9 m.y. (Coppens, 1975; Groves, 1991, p. 195), and it is quite likely they
represent Paranthropus. And one should recall that at the beginning when hominids
were found in the Afar region (Johanson & Taieb, 1976; Coppens, 1977; Taieb et al.,
1976), the diversity of species was supposed to be two or three hominids, and some
researchers later on thought that the so-called ‘ﬁrst family’ at locality 333 repre-
sented early, robust australopithecines (e.g. Olson, 1985) – now known to have an
age of 3.22 m.y. (Walter & Aronson, 1982). And it is sometimes indicated that there
might be ‘robust’ types in Makapansgat (Tobias, 1989, but cf. Clarke, 1985 – orig-
inally called A. prometheus by Dart, 1948, now A. africanus), perhaps of a similar
age over 3 m.y. In fact, the ideas of some people were that there was more than one
taxon in most of the South African cave localities.

160
N. Bonde
9.6 Our Stem-Mother ‘Lucy’
Over the next few years after the ﬁnd of the skeleton ‘Lucy’ (40% preserved, very
little skull but the lower jaw) this very variable ‘sample’ over 3 m.y. old from the
Afar region (Senut, 1978; Johanson & Taieb, 1976) was said to be more than one
species (one Homo-like, one like A. africanus acc. to Johanson (1978), but a few
month later considered the same taxon as known from jaw fragments from Laetoli
in the Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania (White, 1977), half a million years older). This
taxon was a new species called Australopithecus afarensis, but with the holotype
jaw from Tanzania (Johanson, White, & Coppens, 1978). This will create eternal
confusion, and this despite Coppens’ (1977) demonstration that the lower denti-
tion, especially the premolars are quite different in ‘Lucy’ (much more primitive,
Coppens’ gracile ‘pre-Australopithecus’ (e.g. 1994)), and the AL (= Afar Locality)
333 sample is more robust and advanced, Homo-like. These and other differences
are said by White (1985; Kimbel, White, & Johanson, 1985; Johanson & White,
1979) to be bridged by intermediate forms in the samples, or they may be con-
sidered sexual differences. But this seems highly dubious, especially for the elbow
and knee joints (Senut, 1978, 1980; Tardieu, 1979; Senut & Tardieu, 1985; both
students of Coppens), as well as the heelbone and ankle (Stern & Susman, 1983;
Susman et al., 1985). This ‘taxon’, as usual when White is involved, is claimed to
be the ancestor of all younger hominids (White et al., 1981, 2009 – it is a remark-
able incidence that one single person can, many times, ﬁnd something so extremely
rare as ‘direct fossil ancestors’ – and make other people believe it). It has become
enormously popular, nicknamed as it is, from the Beatles’ song (Johanson & Edey,
1981), and mostly palaeoanthropologists – surprisingly – seem to accept this taxon,
of which even the name is not appropriate, as it should be Praeanthropus africanus,
the name of the ﬁrst hominid fragment found at Laetoli/Garusi in the 1930s (see
Bonde & Westergaard, 2004; Strait et al., 1997). Below follows more on Lucy’s
bipedality and the controversy around her ‘walking style’, as well as problems with
the famous foot prints in Laetoli, and the ‘name-business’.
‘Lucy’, age 3.18 m.y. (Walter & Aronson, 1982) and some other Afar fossils con-
stitute another, much more primitive species, dubbed Homo antiquus by Ferguson
(1984) with the famous skeleton as holotype. But although it is far too primitive
to be a member of Homo, it still has not received a proper generic name (in the
Linnaean tradition), but is just called nov. gen. antiquus by Bonde & Westergaard
(2004). To provoke a discussion of this important and primitive taxon (which due
to its too young age is not ancestral to any other taxon/group, whether it has known
autapomorphies or not, but must be a ‘blind’ side branch) this new generic name will
here be proposed as Afaranthropus (Afar after this important region where Lucy’s
species so far seems to be endemic) with type species A. antiquus (Ferguson, 1984).
The diagnosis of both genus and the single species can be taken as the charac-
ter combination from Groves’ analysis (1991, p. 223 ﬁg. C and features favouring
this cladogram C from the scheme p. 224) – despite the not so convincing autapo-
morphies for a proper cladistic characterization. The relatively long pubis might,
however, be one more specialization creating a ‘true’ clade for ‘Lucy’ and her kin
(Fig. 9.2). Discussion and synonomies by Groves (1991, pp. 249–251) as gen. indet.

9
Hominid Diversity and ‘Ancestor’ Myths
161
Fig. 9.2 Cladograms modiﬁed from Groves (1991) by addition of cladogram B1 showing in detail
the position of Homo hadar Bonde and Westergaard (2004; = 333). Homo in the other diagrams
comprises Australopithecus africanus (as a primitive member). x is that one of the three subdi-
visions of the polyphyletic ‘Au.’ afarensis, which is tested in the resp. diagram. So B and B1
support inclusion of AL 333 fossils in Homo, while C indicates that ‘Lucy’, now Afaranthropus
antiquus (Ferguson, 1984) is most primitive. For the Laetoli sample (incl. type of ‘Au.’ afarensis)
two charaters weakly favour each of the cladograms A and B, but overall similarity is with the
primitive Au. africanus (acc. to Groves), so it can best be placed with some uncertainty as an early
member of that lineage. This is very important, because this implies a minimum age ca. 3.7 m.y.
for the split between Homo and Paranthropus, meaning that both of those lineages are nearly 4
m.y. old. If the Laetoli sample is part of Australopithecus (s. s.), then it can – as Au. africanus is
occupied – retain the name Au. afarensis (unfortunately), but if not, then the name shifts back to
Praeanthropus africanus with the Garusi maxilla as type specimen (and afarensis as synonym)

162
N. Bonde
antiquus. We (Bonde & Westergaard, 2004) disagree with Groves concerning the
much older Lothagam and Tabarin mandibles, they can certainly not be included
in the same species as Lucy, as they are even more primitive, the former named
lothagamensis by us and the latter praegens by Ferguson (1989 – see further below
under ramidus, p. 167).
These are the ‘gracile’ or ‘small’ Afar fossils distinguished by Groves plus a
rather large palate (showing that not all antiquus are small) which was used for the
reconstruction of the skull of ‘A. afarensis’ (Kimbel & White, 1980; Kimbel et al.,
1984), often supposed to be the skull of ‘Lucy’, although almost all of the other parts
are from H. hadar, AL 333 (only small fragments of the braincase were found with
the type skeleton of Lucy). Therefore important parts of the usual reconstructions of
‘Lucy’ are misleading; also the ﬁngers and toes are from the AL 333 sample (none
found with Lucy). And this likewise counts for the claim by Lovejoy (1988, also
Johanson, Lovejoy et al., 1982) and others, that Lucy had a striking gait, almost
exactly like modern humans. This must be wrong, as the shape and ‘ﬂare’ of the
pelvis is different from the modern condition, and so is the relative length and the
shape of the femoral neck and the pubis (critique also by Stern & Susman, 1983;
Susman et al., 1985). So the muscles must have worked at least in a slightly different
way, and furthermore her body proportions are unlike ours, making it extremely
unlikely that she would have walked exactly like us. This mistake seems repeated
by White and his team (2009), where ‘A. afarensis’ is supposed to be a ‘very modern
biped’ compared with its ‘direct ancestor’, A. ramidus (this actually constitutes two
mistakes, or something unknown).
This controversy is reviewed in some detail by Cherfas (1983), incl. some aspects
of the Laetoli footprints and who made them, a problem later treated by Anderson
(1983) also in New Scientist, and Hay and Leakey (1992). Stern and Susman (1983)
as well as Senut and Tardieu (1985) have demonstrated that the small specimens
in the Afar area, like Lucy, and the larger ones like those from AF 333 are charac-
teristically different concerning the postcranium, all with reference to mobility and
ability for climbing and walking. In all cases, comparing elbows, knees, ankle joints
and heelbones shows that the ‘small’ sample (Lucy) is much more ape-like, and the
large specimens much more Homo-like. Lucy has retained many primitive features
connected to climbing abilities, and she could well walk upright also, although not
exactly a striding gait like modern humans, but probably with a slight bend in hips
and knees. The large specimens were better adapted for walking on the ground. Lucy
also had relatively long arms compared to the legs like in apes, while this measure
is unknown for the larger specimens. Lucy has an unicuspid lower anterior premolar
somewhat like apes, while the larger jaws tend to have a high inner cusp on that pre-
molar like in man. Although male gorillas live more on the ground than the females
which are more frequently climbing, it seems impossible to explain these differ-
ences just as sexual dimorphism; it is much more likely to be species differences
between primitive Afaranthropus antiquus and the more Homo-like AL 333 – the
same pattern which appeared from Groves’ analysis of some different characters.
And the two species are usually not found together on the same locality. The Lucy

9
Hominid Diversity and ‘Ancestor’ Myths
163
skeleton is from a higher member of the local formation with an age like 3.18 m.y.,
while the AL 333 sample is from the member immediately below with age 3.22 m.y.
(Walter & Aronson, 1982). The Laetoli sample with the type of afarensis is a much
older third species, its proper name being Praeanthropus africanus (above under
Lucy).
9.7 Very Early Homo
The only profound cladistic analysis of this mess is that by Groves (1989, 1991 – and
I have seen no valid arguments against it – those by White (e.g. 1985) seem so biased
towards his original idea of one taxon that they are very difﬁcult to use). Groves
found to his own surprise, when the nearly 30 characters differing between the three
localities/samples were analysed, that the ‘robust ﬁrst family’ (AL 333) was quite
advanced and Homo-like (Coppens, 1994; Senut & Tardieu, 1985 agree). This taxon
even has several synapomorphies with Homo which are not found in the slightly
younger Australopithecus africanus (Fig. 9.2). Recently, Westergaard and I (2004)
have created a name, Homo hadar (or homo-hadar, non-Linnaean – see Groves,
1989, 1991, p. 260, where he almost implied this name in the headline) for this
important taxon, the earliest, 3.22 m.y. old, representative for the Homo lineage (as
distinct from Paranthropus) with the incomplete skull AL 333–45 as holotype (face
lacking, but a juvenile one is known (see e.g. Olson, 1985; Johanson & Edgar, 1996),
comparable to the type of A. africanus (‘Dart’s baby’ of 1925)). We also indicated
autapomorphies as diagnosis for H. hadar as a true clade using features listed by
Groves. See a detailed discussion of this species (‘unnamed’) of Homo by Groves
(1991, pp. 260–263). At loc. 333 (where now over 250 bones of the so-called ‘ﬁrst
family’ have been found) a recent ﬁnd of a foot bone, metatarsal 4, has indicated – as
expected from the heel and ankle – that the foot of this Hadar hominid is very Homo-
like, and it indicates an arch in the foot like in modern humans (Ward et al., 2011),
and therefore a human-like gait. This is clearly different from the condition indicated
by the ankle of the more primitive skeleton of Lucy (Af. antiquus – see above under
Lucy), although this is not the point made by the authors (incl. Johanson, Lucy’s
ﬁnder).
It appears that no-one has criticized and refuted the distribution of characters
used by Groves (1991), so here his conclusion which now and then is conﬁrmed, is
as just shown, and many implications follow: AL 333 is a very early representative
of the Homo lineage in East Africa – exactly like the Leakey family used to predict
but now apparently will not admit, or even mention in a book on the origin and
evolution of Homo (R. Leakey, 1994). So, unfortunately the traditional story told
about these important fossils from Afar, also in the textbooks (e.g. Benton, 2005),
is quite misleading, and it should clearly be revised and the taxonomy rectiﬁed.
These unexpected ﬁndings concerning AL 333 have several important implica-
tions:

164
N. Bonde
(1) There must be representatives of the more primitive Homo (Australopithecus)
africanus somewhere of at least the same age, probably somewhat older.
(2) Also, an early member of the robust Paranthropus lineage (sister group to
Homo) must exist somewhere in Africa, over 3 m.y. old. Perhaps the so-called
‘Little Foot’ skeleton from Sterkfontein, S-Africa is of relevance here, because
it clearly has a strong parietal crest and is rather prognath. Its age is said to
be about 3.3 m.y. (Clarke, 2002) from an old ‘pocket’ in the limestone cave.
Could it be the predicted old Paranthropus?
(3) Clearly, there is sufﬁcient ‘unknown’ space in Central and Western Africa to
accommodate such ancient species – almost nothing is known of fossiliferous
layers of the right age in these regions.
(4) The large and slightly younger skull from Afar, AL 444-2, ca. 3 m.y. old –
said to be the largest ‘australopithecine’ skull known, at least widest in
the eye region (Kimbel et al., 1994 – nicknamed ‘Boy of Lucy’), could
rather be an advanced male of H. hadar, a species different from ‘Lucy’.
The former’s relationship with the so-called ‘advanced or primitive’ (?)
‘Australopithecus’, A. garhi (White et al., 1999) – suggested as more ‘Homo-
like’, but with big molars – has not been thoroughly investigated (see below
under ‘Stem-mothers’).
(5) The Laetoli sample from Tanzania of age 3.6 m.y., incl. the holotype lower
jaw LH 4 of Australopithecus afarensis (Johanson et al., 1978 – a most pecu-
liar and unfortunate choice combining name and type, see Johanson & Edey,
1981; Tattersal, 1995, p. 152) is of more uncertain relationship. It was said
by Groves (1991) to be ‘most similar’ to A. africanus. In that case, it could
be the early africanus relative predicted above (under point 1), and one could
argue that it should preserve its speciﬁc name, but as Homo (Australopithecus)
afarensis. The nomenclature is more complicated, however: The Laetoli sam-
ple has always been considered just one single speciﬁc taxon (despite debate
on who made the famous footprints). Therefore it comprises the ﬁrst hominid
fragment found in that locality in the 1930s, the so-called ‘Garusi maxil-
lary’ (Kohl-Larsen & Reck, 1936), which was ﬁrst named Meganthropus
africanus. It was later considered unlikely to represent this Javanese ‘genus’,
and was therefore referred to a new genus Praeanthropus (see the story in
Strait et al., 1997). Accordingly, if the Laetoli sample is not believed to
belong to Australopithecus, then its proper name is Praeanthropus africanus
(syn. A. afarensis) as also used e.g. by Bonde & Westergaard (2004) – in
our non-Linnaean nomenclature, however, it should be just one name, e.g.
praeanthropus, for that terminal taxon/LITU.
(6) The relationship of that rather primitive species and others with ages around
3–4 m.y. like ‘Australopithecus’ anamensis (Ward et al., 2001 – clearly not
a Homo (Australopithecus) sensu stricto) and Kenyanthropus (Leakey et al.,
2001) and ‘A.’ bahrelghazali, a lower jaw from Tschad (Brunet et al., 1996),
should obviously be cleared up. Our suggestion (Bonde & Westergaard, 2004)
is shown in the tree and classiﬁcation below, but note: without implying the
reasonable splitting of praeanthropus (= afarensis) into three different taxa.

9
Hominid Diversity and ‘Ancestor’ Myths
165
(7) An even more critical analysis would probably have a sequence of advanc-
ing sister groups: lothagamensis (Bonde & Wesytergaard, 2004), anamensis,
kenyapithecus, antiquus, (which are more primitive than) praeanthropus,
bahrelghazali below the split between Paranthropus and Homo (combined
in the clade Parhomo by Bonde & Westergaard, 2004), but with the latter
two ‘species’ possibly interchangeable with the Parhomo stem (indicated as
sedis mutandis, of uncertain and interchangeable interrelationship). And as the
faces and ear regions are unknown or very little known for all of the last three
‘species’, their relationship with the characteristic, ﬂat-faced kenyanthropus
skull may seem quite uncertain too. The AL 333 sample should be removed
from the praeanthropus/afarensis group together with a few slightly older Afar
specimens, they all clearly seem to belong in the Homo-lineage, though not as
the most primitive members (see comments above).
(8) ‘Lucy’ (= Af. antiquus) is by no means the stem-mother/ancestor of all later
hominids, like it is most often presented by the ‘White-Johanson group’ (e.g.
Johanson & White, 1979 – now separated for good? – Kimbel et al., 1984,
White et al., 2009) and by the popular press. She (if it is not a male – cf.
Schmid, 1983) is quite primitive, but simply too late in the stratigraphy, and
therefore must be an old, extinct side branch of the phylogenetic tree.
(9) This entire ‘story’ has great consequences for estimates of the (minimum) age
of the Homo lineage – more than 3.2 m.y. or maybe more than 3.6 m.y., if
praeanthropus is really closest to H. [Australopithecus] africanus, while the
modern ‘tradition’ mostly claims about 21/2 m.y. (e.g. Leakey, 1994; Kimbel
et al., 1996), based on the earliest ﬁnds of H. rudolfensis and/or H. habilis,
two taxa which Wood & Collard recently (1999a, 1999b) would even relegate
to ‘Australopithecus’ for entirely ‘adaptationistic’ reasons, making Homo less
than 2 m.y. old. It will, however, be indicated below that quarrels about these
ages and the boundaries of the ‘genus Homo’ are completely arbitrary. They
have, as usually employed, no ‘precise meaning’ at all, but are consequences of
sub-optimal classiﬁcations and often adaptationistic decisions about so-called
‘key-characters’. In fact, the same counts for our own ‘species’, Homo sapiens!
(10) It should be absolutely obvious, that the traditional names and terms for
Australopithecus and Australopithecinae (both incl. ‘gracile’ and ‘robust’
forms, and perhaps even older, more primitive taxa) are paraphyletic or
polyphyletic concepts of no use in a consequent (natural) phylogenetic classiﬁ-
cation. Even in the vernacular form, ‘australopithecines’ can only be imprecise
and spread confusion. This is entirely neglected by many prominent palaeoan-
thropologists like Berger et al. (2010) referring the clearly Homo-like new
species sediba to a very ‘broad’ Australopithecus (incl. from (a broad) afaren-
sis to boisei). This despite a phylogenetic analysis clearly showing sediba to
be sister group of Homo (from habilis to (a broad) erectus) in the cladogram
(ﬁg. S 3 in Supp. Mat homepage), because all the derived features are held
in common with Homo while similarities with Australopithecus clearly are
in ‘primitive’ characters (cf. Berger’s diagnosis of sediba and table 1). His
analysis also supports A. africanus as the next sister group, that is, as a more

166
N. Bonde
primitive Homo, as argued above.The same ‘broad Australopithecus’ also incl.
anamensis is used explicitly by White et al. (2009 – in the thematic issue on
Ardipithecus in Science – see p. 165), and in many of their texts they employ
such ‘grade groups’ which are obviously paraphyletic and cannot be discussed
in a precise way concerning relationships and phylogeny.
9.8 Stem-Mothers, ‘Australopithecus’ and Australopithecines
So much for ‘stem-mothers’ like ‘Lucy’ or ‘Australopithecus’ afarensis, or for her
‘Boy’ AL 444-2, or for ‘ancestors’ like the ‘ﬁrst family’, H. hadar (AL 333), a neat
little ‘social group’ (Radosevich & Retallack, 1988; Tattersal, 1989), or species like
‘Australopithecus’ anamensis, none of which can convincingly be shown to be the
closest relatives of Australopithecus africanus, the type species of this ‘genus’ (Dart,
1925). All of this makes the ‘taxa’ or groups Australopithecus (also with A. garhi
from Ethiopia included [White et al., 1999]), and the subfamily Australopithecinae
(‘australopithecines’) utterly paraphyletic. The ‘genus’ is almost polyphyletic as
Kenyanthropus is excluded. This means nonsensical ‘non-groups’ of which one can-
not speak precisely of neither phylogenetic relationships, their characteristic traits,
nor literal extinction (see Bonde, 1975, 1977, 1981; Patterson, 1980). It appears
extremely unfortunate that some modern anthropologists (Cela-Conde & Altbara,
2002) have tried to revive this counter-productive ‘subfamily’. Perhaps even worse,
Wood & Collard (1999a, 1999b) and Carbonell & Bermudez de Castro (2004)
expand this ‘group’ by including some primitive species of Homo like habilis and
rudolfensis in ‘Australopithecus’ because of their presumed ‘lack of certain key
adaptations’. As Patterson argued (1980) it is difﬁcult/impossible to characterize
something by features it does not have – this creates ‘non-groups’ (paraphyletic).
There are so many myths and so much propaganda around this supposed ‘taxon’
(‘Au. afarensis’), and the genus Australopithecus that it is very difﬁcult for even
professional (palaeo)anthropologists to disentangle.
Recently a still more unlikely, if not outright impossible, ‘ancestor story’ has
been published by Science (Berger et al., 2010). Based on two new skeletons with
skulls found in the Malapa Cave in Transvaal, S. Africa not far from the famous sites
in the Sterkfontein Valley, a new species of Australopithecus is described and named
Au. sediba, although it is pointed out that it has several derived Homo-like features
not found in any other Australopithecus (see above point 10). Despite it is made
clear in this way that this species is most closely related to Homo, it is still referred
to Australopithecus anyway because of a number of primitive features they have in
common (symplesiomorphies) – exactly the type of arguments which cannot create
a classiﬁcation with natural (monophyletic) groups, and therefore cannot contribute
to the reconstruction of phylogeny or evolutionary history (presumbly the aim of
such a paper).

9
Hominid Diversity and ‘Ancestor’ Myths
167
9.9 Anthropologists, Ancestors, Adaptations and Annoyances
Now this has been known as a methodological fact for nearly ﬁfty years since
Hennig’s book Phylogenetic Systematics (1966), so how come that some ‘scien-
tists’ today can be completely ignorant of that, and how can that be accepted by
reviewers of professional journals? Is it really impossible to convey such simple and
logical biological methodology to anthropologists – or don’t they care? Wood’s &
Collard’s idea (1999) of moving some of the most primitive species of Homo over to
Australopithecus would have the same effect, namely creating an even more useless
paraphyletic taxon, ‘Australopithecus’. How come that they can propose such mean-
ingless taxa without giving any reasonable ‘explanation’ but traditional, unfounded
Simpsonian, adaptationalism? Lacking a supposed ‘adaptation’ (or belonging in a
certain ‘adaptive niche’) is no character to be used in in taxonomy, systematics or
phylogeny reconstruction – it is pure fantasy, ‘just-so stories’ of the most useless
sort in an empirical science (cf. also under ramidus). Having supposed functional
‘adaptations’ is interesting, it just has nothing to do with classiﬁcations (Bonde,
1984a).
So what is the possible ‘motivation’ for such choice? In Berger’s case, apparently,
it has to do with being an (almost) ‘ancestor’, while everybody inclusive the authors
themselves can see that this is not really the case – but this can be ‘sold’ to the
journalists, media, and publishers of Science (same motivations for White, Johanson
et al. concerning ‘afarensis’, ramidus etc). Here, ‘Au.’ sediba is obviously not an
ancestor of Homo, because it is (even in the most favourable model) about 0.5 m.y.
too young with its age of 1.8–1.9 m.y. There are early Homo (rudolfensis or habilis)
about 2.5 m.y. old – in reality even much older Homo (see above), and Berger claims
‘It is not possible to establish the precise phylogenetic position to the various species
assigned to early Homo’.
If this were really what we know about sediba, then it should be classiﬁed as
incerta sedis (or sedis mutandis), as H. sediba inc. sed., at level with and sequensed
with H. rudolfensis, H. habilis and the taxon of ‘higher’ Homo (georgicus, ergaster,
erectus, sapiens etc.), and all of these would be inc. sed. So clearly, sediba is
just another ‘dead end’, something Berger admits by stating that it ‘represents a
candidate ancestor of the genus [Homo], or a sistergroup to a close ancestor that per-
sisted for some time after the ﬁrst appearance of Homo’ (precise meaning? Science
News, 2010). If this is what Berger knows, then why not convey that information
to the readers of the scientiﬁc paper and to the public, instead of relegating sediba
to that mess of ‘Australopithecus’ as traditionally (mis-)used? Then, on the other
hand, Au. africanus is also just another primitive relative of Homo (as opposed to
Paranthropus), and H. hadar from AL 333 is just a little more advanced (see above),
so the real job would be putting sediba in a more precise phylogenetic relationship
with all of these early members of the Homo-branch.
The interesting fact about H. sediba may well be that it could be near sympatric
with Homo sp. (?habilis) from Sterkfontein, age between 11/2 and 2 m.y., and/or
the Homo sp. from Swartkrans lower horizon, Mb 1, originally called Telanthropus
capensis, a mandible and a fragmentary part of a face. This is said by Groves (1991,

168
N. Bonde
p. 239) to be ‘indistinguishable from the 3733 taxon’, which he classiﬁed as Homo
sp. (unnamed) with the beautiful skull ER 3733 (ER = E of L. Rudolf = L. Turkana)
implied as the type. This skull was later, by Zeitoun (2000), made the type spec-
imen of H. turkanensis but it is by many people (incl. Bonde & Westergaard
(2004)) referred to H. ergaster and considered an adault skull of age ca. 1.8 m.y.
corresponding to the juvenile skeleton, ‘Turkana boy’ WT 15000, from the area W
of L. Turkana which is roughly contemporaneous with the type jaw of H. ergaster,
ER 992 (Groves & Mazak, 1975), age ca. 1.6 m.y.
Another ‘Australopithecus’ which is in a similar way said to be ‘Homo-like’ is
Au. garhi (White et al., 1999) from Ethiopia, mentioned above, and also attempted
by its authors to be ‘sold’ as ancestral to Homo. This is yet another ‘taxon’ which
may be a mix of two different taxa from two localities: The skull appears ‘prim-
itive’ and has very large cheek teeth, while the femur may be more advanced
and Homo-like, but is from another nearby locality, so it could easily represent
another taxon. Checking the list of characters described from the skull, most
are very Australopithecus africanus-like, and very little, in fact, seems to point
towards Homo. Its age is about 21/2 m.y., possibly just a little older than the old-
est skull fragments and tools traditionally referred to Homo (e.g. H. rudolfensis
of 2.3 m.y.).
9.10 The ramidus Story – Our ‘Roots’?
This everlasting story of ‘famous ancestors’ can easily be expanded with both
recent and more ancient examples. From the front cover of Nature: the ‘old-
est ancestor’ of everything human, the so-called Australopithecus ramidus (White
et al., 1994 referring to ‘our roots’), age ca. 4.5 m.y. from Middle Awash in
Ethiopia. It was shown, however, already in the invited commentary to the paper
by Wood (1994), that this species was too specialized in the skull base to be ances-
tral to all later ‘hominids’ (and thus implicitly should not have been referred to
Australopithecus). In fact, it was not at all our successful ‘ancestor’, but rather
the oldest human ‘failure’, a blind side branch. In our model of the phylogeny
(Bonde & Westergaard, 2004 and below) even a long ‘dead end’, as the older
Lothagam mandible (age about 5 m.y.) appears to have more advanced corpus
and molars (we gave it a new LITU name, lothagamensis). Curiously, Nature
allowed White et al. to publish the generic name Ardipithecus as a ‘correction’
to the original paper shortly after in 1995– well, somebody or several, includ-
ing editors and reviewers, had made mistakes – presumably selling more issues
that week with that front page and getting, in the long run, more quotations
(like here).
Worse, even the speciﬁc name is dubious, as the new fossils from Ethiopia were
not properly distinguished from the so-called ‘Tabarin mandible’ of about same
age from North Kenya (Bonde & Westergaard, 2004) which Ferguson had already
(1989) named as a subspecies, Homo antiquus praegens (in his opinion closely

9
Hominid Diversity and ‘Ancestor’ Myths
169
related to ‘Lucy’), so ramidus is perhaps synonymous with praegens (for nomencla-
ture it makes no difference that the latter was suggested as a subspecies – Johanson
(1996) also vaguely indicates that ramidus and praegens may be the same species,
and so does Tattersal (1995)). Perhaps this ‘scientiﬁc story’ is what Feyerabend
(1975) means by ‘anything goes’ as a piece of propaganda for ‘anarchistic science’
against methods.
But seen from a phylogenetic perspective, the example Ardipithecus grew even
more ridiculous as Haile-Selassie (2001) published some much older fossils from
Ethiopia, with an age more than 5.5 m.y., as a ‘subspecies’ A. ramidus kadabba. As
the new ‘subspecies’ (presumably in the traditional sense of chrono(-sub-)species,
like in Simpson (1961) as modiﬁed by Bonde (1981, 2001)) clearly has a more
primitive dentition than the original A. ramidus ramidus, this makes both the genus
and species of A. ramidus paraphyletic, because the type-subspecies is more closely
related to ‘higher hominids’ (see Fig. 9.3).
We simply classiﬁed this LITU as kadabba, noting that as described it lacks
autapomorphies, and therefore cannot be distinguished from a ‘true ancestor’.
Because it is so fragmentary, this really does not mean much – and this counts to an
even higher degree for the probably slightly younger LITU lothagamensis, a lower
jaw fragment likewise without its own specializations.
As a curiosity, the single toe bone referred to this new ‘subspecies’ kadabba as
the sole argument for its upright stance is about 0.5 m.y. younger than the type series
of fossils – and obviously may quite likely belong to another taxon, as there are no
points of comparisons. See also the nice and fanciful reconstructions in Lemonick
and Dorfman (2001).
And ‘curiosities’ do not stop here, because White et al., Suwa et al., Lovejoy
et al., etc. with an introduction by Gibbons (all 2009 in Science) have ﬁnally com-
pleted the long awaited and secretive task of describing the fragile partial skeleton
referred to A. r. ramidus (found 1994, the year of description of the type mate-
rial by White et al. in Nature). It is now claimed that this skeleton and its limbs
and their proportions show that proper ‘hominids’ never went through a stage
of knuckle walking like chimps, although this seemed indicated by the detailed
anatomy of some hand-bones of both ‘afarensis’ and the older ‘A.’ anamensis (Strait
et al., 1997 – and the latter would imply a simple refutation of the supposed ‘joint
advanced feature’ or synapomorphy, knuckle walking, in only chimps and gorillas).
So we are not so closely related to chimps, it is argued in the ‘popular press’ and
internet by its commentaries. How all that can be concluded from this remarkable
skeleton (more complete than ‘Lucy’) beats me. But apparently, every published
fossil hominid has to imply some sort of ‘sensational news’ (for reasons of publicity
and funding, presumably, and ranking of publications from the ‘group’, department
or institute or the journal – it is a competitive world, especially after Reagan and
Thatcher). And it is getting worse with revised university legislation all over Europe,
and enormous cuts in the state support to teaching and basic research, so we can
expect more ‘ancestors’ and other ‘sensations’ in near future (see below).

170
N. Bonde
Furthermore, the entire set of papers in Science are performed in an unusually
adaptationistic style. In the conclusion by White et al. concerning ‘paleobiology
of early hominids’, the word ‘adaptive’ is mentioned about ten times (adaptive
shifts, plateaus, phases etc.). The entire narrative has the character of ‘just-so sto-
ries’ with the arguments not very convincing. The late Steve J. Gould would have
made fun of this, presumably in one of his essays (see Gould & Lewontin, 1972).
Why should such ‘stories’ be necessary, however interesting they may seem to some
‘evolutionists’? I hoped they had died out more quickly after Simpson (e.g. 1961,
1976). Is it really informative with all these detailed scenarios where almost none
of the arguments can be strictly tested? They are just ﬁctitious, (science?) ﬁctions,
poems, if you wish. Lovejoy (2009) is even working within a framework of ‘adaptive
suites’, said to be ‘semiformal, largely inductive algorithms that causally interrelate
fundamental characters that may have contributed to an organisms total adaptive
pattern’. Does this mean that we now have to know, which characters are ‘fun-
damental’, and what is the ‘total adaptive pattern’? Because one of the rationales
behind this thematic issue of Science was the Darwin anniversary, and Darwin is
quoted in almost every paper, I should like again to point to the quotation above
(section on ‘diversity’) from the great hero about ‘the immense amount of rubbish
about the value of characters’ – and to leave this as a warning.
9.11 Homo Ancestor Habilis?
So much for our ‘oldest ancestor’ ramidus – out on a limb – and we could go
on with earlier and important examples: Homo habilis from Tanzania was consid-
ered an almost ‘ideal ancestor’ for the younger Homo spp. when it was described
in 1964 (Leakey, Tobias, & Napier, 1964) and for about twenty-ﬁve years, when
ﬁnally Groves’ analyses (1989, 1991) showed that it has too narrow premolars, a
specialization which prevents it from being an entirely convincing ‘ancestor’. The
proper, detailed description came in 1991 by Tobias (most of these Olduvai fossils
found around 1960). And even here there has been, right from the beginning, some
doubts whether the oldest specimens from Olduvai ‘Lower Bed 1’, like the type
mandible, OH 7 (Olduvai Hominid 7, incl. parietal and postcranial fragments like
the famous ‘manipulative’ hand supposed to be from the same young individual –
the foot OH 8 is not from habilis, but more likely P. boisei), and the younger spec-
imens (skulls, one with lower jaw) from the upper ‘Bed 1’ and bottom of ‘Bed 2’,
are really the same taxon. And further, whether the ﬁne skull ER 1813 from the
East side of Lake Turkana, N. Kenya (ER = East Rudolf, the older German colo-
nial name of the lake), found in the 1970s and of about the same age as the type
(1.8–1.9 m.y.) also belongs in that taxon (see e.g. Rightmire 1993 contra Wood,
1992). ER 1813 has also been referred to H. ergaster, and the youngest habilis
specimens were said to be more ‘erectus-like’ (which they hardly are, but perhaps
ergaster like).

9
Hominid Diversity and ‘Ancestor’ Myths
171
This mess leaves us with a not so ‘ideal ancestor’. The phylogenetic tree (Fig. 9.3)
shows that in this time interval between 11/2 m.y. and 2 m.y. the diversity of hominids
was at its peak with about a dozen taxa worldwide, but only two outside of Africa,
namely Homo (Pithecanthropus) erectus on Java and H. georgicus in SE-Europe.
The remaining forms were living in Africa, and if Zeitoun’s two new species (2000)
from East Turkana are included, then about 7 of them lived more or less at the
same time in the East African Rift valley – how to explain that in ecological and
‘adaptationistic’ terms?
9.12 H. ergaster – A ‘True Ancestor’? – And the ‘Flores Dwarf’
or Hobbit
The next ancestral ‘grade’ on the ladder towards modern man is H. ergaster, mainly
from Koobi Fora, East Turkana, age ca. 1.5–1.9 m.y. (the type mandible ER 992
youngest). And as can be seen on our tree, in our analysis we ﬁnd it very difﬁ-
cult, even with the inclusion of the very excellent skull and skeleton of the ‘Turkana
Boy’ (WT 15000; WT = West Turkana) from West of the lake (as by Westergaard &
Bonde, 1986; Wood, 1992), to distinguish this taxon from an ideal ancestor of all the
younger Homo spp. – so we classify it partly as an ‘ancestor’ by dividing it into two
similar parts and repeat it twice in the classiﬁcation. And this taxon should probably
not be treated under the name H. erectus (or ‘African erectus’) as done by Leakey
(1994 and his TV-series, Walker & Leakey, 1993; Bräuer, 1994; Rightmire, 1990,
1998), a name of an apparently characteristic taxon from East and SE-Asia which
is somewhat more specialized (Bonde, 1976, 1977; Andrews, 1984; Groves, 1991;
Wood, 1994; Anton, 1997; Anton et al., 2002). And it may turn out to be nearly
just as old on Java (about 1.7 m.y. (Schwisser et al., 1994), but perhaps more likely
only a little more than 1.5 m.y. (Larick et al., 2001)). Note, though, that Zeitoun’s
detailed cladistic analysis (2000) based on a large number of measurements from
all the relevant skulls (each of them used as a ‘terminal taxon’ in the analysis),
surprisingly placed WT 15000 in the middle of Asian Pithecanthropus, although it
seems to lack the more evident specialisations of the ‘proper’ Asian erectus skulls
(claimed by Walker & Leakey (1993) to be due to its young age, perhaps 9–10 y. in
the midst of changing its milk-canines). Also analyses by Rightmire and Bräuer (cit.
above) found no obvious differences between the African and Asian samples (see
illustrations in Schwartz & Tattersall, 2003). Zeitoun also found that the adult skulls
ER 3733 and 3883 are not adults of the same form as WT 15000, but represent
two more primitive taxa, each characterized by almost a score of autapomorphies
(specializations). Accordingly, he gave them two new separate species names, e.g.
3733 = Homo turkanensis (not used in Bonde & Westergaard, 2004), thereby indi-
cating even more diversity between 1.5 and 2 m.y. Also Groves (1991) has 3733 as
a separate taxon (unnamed).
The Caucasian ﬁnds from Dmanisi of an age about 1.7 m.y. are very ‘ergaster-
like’, perhaps even slightly more primitive, and the three good skulls seem quite
variable, but they have all been dubbed H. georgicus (Gabounia et al., 2002; Vekua
et al., 2002; Balter & Gibbons, 2000).

172
N. Bonde
Anyway, the oldest part of H. ergaster (represented by a skull like ER 3733 in
Bonde & Westergaard, 2004 and the classiﬁcation below) could in principle, per-
haps, be ancestral to all later Homo (but cf. again Zeitoun, 2000 placing it on a ‘long
sidebranch’ as H. turkanensis and ER 3883 also on the next higher, long, specialised
sidebranch). The younger part, incl. ER 3883, WT 15000 and the type jaw, ER 992,
perhaps cannot be such common ancestors, because being of too young ages to be
stem-forms of Pithecanthropus. However, they may be ancestral to the line towards
neanderthals and sapients (the ‘Euhomo’ of Bonde & Westergaard, 2004).
And in this connection it should be mentioned that the controversial ‘Hobbit’ or
Flores dwarf, H. ﬂoresiensis from a large cave on Flores, Indonesia ( Brown et al.,
2004; Morwood et al., 2005) including one buried skeleton about 18000 y. old and
not much over 1 m tall, has a skull as primitive as this ‘ergaster-level’. This implies
an age for this line of small Homo as more than 11/2 m.y., and a very long ‘ghost
lineage’. This might indicate the earliest migration ‘out of Africa’. Including it in the
modern H. sapiens as abnormal or pathological dwarf seems out of the question as
indicated by several studies of both skull and feet (Falk et al., 2005, 2007; Jungers &
Baab, 2009), despite claims to the contrary (Martin et al., 2006; Obendorf et al.
2007; Oxnard, 2010 – ﬁrst stated by the Indonesian palaeoanthropologist T. Jacob
in newspapers and television, see Jacob et al., 2006).
The hope of ﬁnding ancient DNA in these very recent fossils from layers only
about 12000 to ?28000 years old unfortunately seems to have faded away, because
DNA cannot be preserved in such warm and humid conditions. It would have been
very interesting to have a ‘molecular clock’ estimate of the approximate age of
ergaster, georgicus or erectus/Pithecanthropus lineages. There are very old tools on
Flores (Morwood et al., 1998) and the ‘Hobbit’ is sometimes ‘associated’ with these
without any shred of evidence, and the tools seem too large anyway for that small
human. They are about 0.8 m.y. old and the most interesting about them is clearly,
that someone must have been crossing a reasonable stretch of water and the ‘Wallace
Line’ to reach Flores even during the lowest water level during a glaciation – so that
someone knew how to sail already at that date or before! (The world’s oldest known
boats are those from the Mesolithic Ertebölle culture in Denmark, only 7–8000 y.
old). The passage to Australia, where the oldest fossil Homo are 50–60000 y. old
(and not dwarfs) also runs through Flores and across the continental shelf known as
‘Sahul Land’ when dry during hard glaciations.
9.13 The ‘erectus Stage’ – En Route Towards Sapiens?
The ‘erectus group’ – by Bonde and Westergaard (2004) revived as clade
Pithecanthropus (Dubois, 1892, and ﬁrst used by Haeckel as a hypothetical
‘P. alalus’, the ‘apeman with no language’ (1866)) – is another classical ‘mistake’ as
ancestor of H. sapiens (and Neanderthals). An almost universal claim some 40–60
years ago (e.g. Weidenreich, 1946; Day, 1965, textbooks like Romer, 1966; Carroll,
1987; Trinkaus & Shipman, 1992; Benton, 2005 wavering a little, and all popular
literature, even today) – only old Louis Leakey strongly contradicted this (1963;
Leakey & Goodall, 1969) and found his own H. habilis a better candidate, and

9
Hominid Diversity and ‘Ancestor’ Myths
173
therefore moved erectus out as a sidebranch. This placement seemed rather obvi-
ous when looking at the many characteristic specializations in the faces of both
Java- and Peking-man (Bonde, 1976, 1989; Andrews, 1984; Wood, 1992, 1994
contra Rightmire, 1990 – Bonde & Westergaard revived the relevant older names
Javanthropus and Sinanthropus for these two subclades).
Many seemed to have greatly favoured calling their pet-fossils by this popu-
lar ‘ancestral name’, such as Lumley (1982) for the ‘Tautavel man’ from Arago
Cave – it seemed to be more interesting to have a ‘true erectus ancestor’ (per-
haps for funding reasons?) rather than just another ancient Neanderthal, of which
there are so many in France (the Arago skull and face and jaws have but one pos-
sible advanced feature in common with Pithecanthropus, all other similarities are
‘primitive’ symplesiomorphies). Likewise R. Leakey also ‘hung his hat’ on the well
known ‘ancestor H. erectus’ for his pet skulls from Koobi Fora, ER 3733 and 3883.
(Walker & Leakey, 1978; Leakey, 1994 – but see critique by Groves, 1991). And
later H. erectus was used also for the even better ﬁnd, the ‘Turkana boy’ from
Nariokotome, WT 15000 (Walker & Leakey, 1993). But as mentioned above, it
appears to lack the specializations of the face and skull and limp bone thickness
of typical Asian Pithecanthropus (but cf. Zeitoun [2000] who referred those three
specimens to as many different taxa!), and we prefer to classify them as a possible
‘ancestor’, H. ergaster, like most people do today (Westergaard & Bonde, 1987;
Tattersal, 1995; Schwartz & Tattersal, 2003; Wood, 1992). Recall that Wood, in his
huge monography on the Koobi Fora fossils (1991), was not allowed by the editor
R. Leakey even to mention the name ergaster! The reason being that Leakey was
furious over the publication of the name by Groves & Mazak (1975 – see comments
and excuse by Groves (1991, p. 197)). By now it is fair to state that H. ergaster
is a much more acceptable ‘human ancestor’ than erectus. The latter, on the other
hand, with its youngest and most specialized representative, the Solo man, H. (P.)
soloensis, now dated as less than 50000 y., has therefore become a late contempo-
raneous human with ‘modern’ H. sapiens in the far East, and presumably also with
the ‘primitive dwarf’ H. ﬂoresiensis.
Therefore all the nonsense about an erectus-sapiens transition and what this
implies of shifts in ‘adaptations’ etc. (Weidenreich, 1946; Campbell, 1963; Day,
1965; Romer, 1966; Rightmire, 1990; Wu & Poirier, 1995) is now utterly outdated –
it never took place. The African ergaster and the equally old and enigmatic ﬁnds
from Dmanisi in Caucasia of Georgia (Europe’s oldest hominids, about 1.7 m.y.)
called H. georgicus, with its great variation between the three skulls (Gabounia
et al., 2000, Vekua et al., 2002; Balter & Gibbons, 2000) should rather be in focus
of our ‘ancestral interests’. They may hold the keys to the ﬁrst (or second?) ‘out
of Africa’, at least that migration which created Neanderthals and the line towards
modern man (see also Stringer, 2002, 2003). There is also a partial skeleton asso-
ciated with one skull and many other limb bones (Lordkipanidze et al., 2007). The
skeleton is small like the skulls, which have cranial capacities between 600 and
780 cc., that is, in the range of H. habilis. Despite some variation between the three
skulls, they are recognized as belonging to one species, and this is most similar
to H. ergaster from E-Africa.The common ‘stem lineage’ of the neanderthals and

174
N. Bonde
the modern groups (dubbed Neanderthalia and Sapientia in Bonde & Westergaard,
2004) may well lie close to such fossils as H. antecessor, 0.8 m.y. from Atapuerca
in N-Spain (Carbonell et al., 1995; Bermudes de Castro et al., 1997, 1999 – and
recently a fragmentary lower jaw, provisionally referred to the same species, and
stone tools have been found at a lower level, age 1.1–1.2 m.y. (Carbonell et al.,
2008)) and H. cepranensis, 0.9 m.y. old from Italy (Mallegni et al., 2003). And
these may represent the same ‘species’ on the other side of the Mediterranean,
e.g. the Algerian Terniﬁne (Thigenif) skull and jaw, Atlanthropus mauretanicus’
(Arambourg, 1963) and/or from Morocco the Salé skull, all claimed to be more than
0.5 m.y. old (Hublin, 1985 – if only one taxon, it should be named H. mauretani-
cus). The OH 28 skull from Olduvai may also be a candidate. The 1 m.y. old skull
of Eritrea may also be of interest here (Abbate et al., 1998), as well as an Ethiopean
skull of about same age (Manzi et al., 2003), but the interrelationships of those skulls
and the older ﬁnds have never been satisfactorily analysed (cf. Rightmire, 1990, who
referred the earlier African ﬁnds to ‘erectus’), although it should be obvious, that it
is among those fossils from Europe and/or Africa we might ﬁnd the ancestors of
Neanderthals and ourselves. Great potential of the Mediterranean region. But in N-
Europe there were people already 0.7 m.y. ago, as wittnessed by their ﬂint tools
from SE-England (Parﬁtt et al., 2005). In Denmark the oldest tools may be derived
ﬂints from sediments of the last interglacial in S-Jutland (Holm, 1996), but of a type
(if they are tools at all) most similar to Tayacien and Clactonian in France and UK,
earlier dated to the previous interglacial about 0.25 m.y., but now suppossed to be
around 0.4 m.y. old. The northernmost occurrence of stone tools is probably ‘The
Cave of the Wolf’ in Finland, said to be from the last interglacial, ca. 130000 y
(Pettitt & Niskanen, 2005; Schultz, 2010). All of those tools must have been made
by Neanderthalia.
9.14 Neanderthal and Sapient ‘Ancestors’?
Can we ever expect to ﬁnd such actual ‘ancestors’? We believe it is not entirely
impossible (Bonde & Westergaard, 2004), and that both the neanderthal and sapient
lineages may show reasonable examples of such ‘ancestral fossils’ in an accretion
model with about four stages (chronospecies) om each limb. Both lineages during
the latest half a million years or more seem to have been separated and living in
different geographic regions, some of them under quite different ecological regimes
(Stringer & Gamble, 1993; Stringer & McKie, 1996; Trinkaus & Shipman, 1992;
Trinkaus, 1983; Foley, 1987; Arsuaga, 1999; Schwartz & Tattersall, 2002). This
age of the split seems to agree reasonably well with the ancient DNA evidence
(Krings et al., 1997, 2000), and to be older than that indicated by traditional mor-
phology often citing the neanderthal lineage as being about 0.3 m.y. (Tattersal’s
fossil record diagram 1995, partly also Stringer & McKie’s diagram) and that of
Homo sapiens as being about 0.13 m.y. (Stringer & Gamble, 1993, ﬁg. 28), and
Winkler and Schweikhardt (1982) take pre-neanderthals only back to ca 0.1 m.y,
but pre-sapients (in Europe) ca. twice as long. But both of the latter ages are clearly
misleading seen from a cladistic viewpoint (Bonde & Westergaard, 2004), as the

9
Hominid Diversity and ‘Ancestor’ Myths
175
socalled Homo heidelbergensis incl. its type specimen, the ‘Heidelberg jaw’ from
Mauer has a few neanderthal specialisations in the dentition (e.g. size of dentition,
weak taurodonty), the Petralona skull from N-Greece and the Arago face from S-
France lack a ‘fossa canina’ like the neanderthals, and they likely represent the very
early and primitive part of the neanderthal lineage, a clade we in 2004 dubbed
‘Neandertalia’ (see, Schwartz & Tattersal, 2001 about European fossils – earlier
the heidelbergensis was seen as a possible ‘ancestor’ of both neanderthals and sapi-
ents – Bonde, 1976, 1977, 1981; Stringer, 1984, 1985; Groves, 1991). This lineage
can now be ‘followed through time’ from the Heidelberg and perhaps the Petralona
fossils being about 0.6–0.7 m.y. in an ‘accretion model’ of successive ancestors via
‘steinheimensis’ (e.g. from Steinheim, Swanscombe, Reilingen (Dean et al., 1998)
and Atapuerca SH (Arsuaga et al., 1997)). Not all the features of all the fossils will
entirely follow the ‘model’, the Steinheim skull e.g. seem to have a fossa canina
like sapients, and it has been used as an argument for two lineages in Europe. I
once used this as an indication for possible gene ﬂow between the two lineages
when arguing, that they might be just ‘subspecies’ seen from a ‘time-bio-species’
viewpoint (Bonde, 1989) resulting in a ‘hybrid’ like the Steinheim skull with both
fossa canina and the Neanderthal mark of a suprainiac fossa at the back of the skull
(Hublin, 1988).
9.15 Homo and H. sapiens???
Within Homo and H. sapiens as generally used, there is a problem part of which to
day is based on ‘political correctness’ (as expressed by Gould (1977) and Ghiselin
(1997) and many others who do not want to be framed as ‘racists’). This means acc.
to the above two, that one ought not scientiﬁcally discuss the possible valid subdi-
visions of our own species and e.g. map their history, because such might have to
do with discrimination – or rather some others might misuse it for purpose of racial
discrimination. Knowing how much interest there is in the populations for follow-
ing the history of their own family or ‘ethnic group’ or population, and the relevans
of ‘ethnic’ medicine, this is a very peculiar constraint to impose on the scientists.
Should scientists be censored because of a possibility of ‘misuse’ of their results,
then physics and chemistry could shut down immediately. And biology, computer
science, sociology and economics could follow soon.
Because of this legitimate interest in population history, your own ‘roots’, and
the possibilities given by modern genetic techniques, it is worth pointing out that
the pattern of relationships does not follow the boundaries of the traditional ‘races’
based on skin colour, shape of hair and other very superﬁcial features. Many of these
features can often be explained by selection pressure from the local environment and
climate.
Such features and measurements of skulls (skull indices by the Swede Retzius in
1842), body shapes, height etc are classical parametres to characterise the human
‘races’ in the 19th century. These already had Linnaean names since his ﬁrst
small edition of ‘Systema Naturae’ (1735), namely classiﬁed under Homo sapiens
(‘know yourself’) as Europaeus (‘white’), Americanus (red), Asiaticus (yellowish)

176
N. Bonde
and Africanus (black). They were re-named shortly after 1800 by the Germann
Blumenbach, based on his huge collection of skulls from all over the world. He
added the Malaysian race, and he chose to call the white race ‘caucasicus’, because
he had such a ‘perfectly’ beautiful female skull from Caucasia. From this type he
thought the other races were developed by degeneration (today still believed by the
‘Watchtower’ sect in their propaganda material). This was a sort of ‘evolutionary
theory’ also held by the great French naturalist Buffon (1749) concerning human
races, and in 1766 he expanded that concept to all animals – but such changes are
conﬁned within a species. Here it is also worth noticing that his pupil Lamarck
when describing the ﬁrst proper evolutionary theory in 1809, exposed the idea that
humans were derived from the most perfect ape, the chimpanzee (orang-utan was
less perfect, and gorilla unknown), which as such was on its way to greater perfec-
tion, the general trend of changes (that is evolution) in all lines. Lamark’s general
trend towards higher organisation has in modern times been taken up in theories
about orthogenesis, often as evolution aiming at a ‘higher goal’ (e.g Teilhard de
Chardin (1955)).
A reﬁnement much later was mapping of such features as blood types, they did
not follow the limits of the traditinal ‘races’, although Coon (1962) tried to apply the
traditional race-concepts to a lot of different physical anthropology and compared
with available fossils. His results were not very successful, and they were expressed
in a ‘multiregional model’ (see below) of local, isolated, parallel development from
fossil ‘erectus-like’ forms, which were not very obviously related to their postu-
lated, modern H. sapiens ‘descendants’. And he had very few ‘negroid’ fossils to
illustrate his claim, that the ‘negroes’ were the last ones to cross the ‘boundary’
between modern H. sapiens and their erectus forrunners although postulating that
such took place all over the old world. Neither did the mapping of certain genes
or other genetic markers (Bodmer & Cavalli-Sforza, 1976; Lewontin, 1982) have
obvious success, and no consistent pattern appeared.
But the research on the diversity of human mitochondrial DNA (MtDNA) since
1987 (Cann et al.) indicated a picture (if a constant molecular clock is assumed)
of origin of modern humans in Africa, where the largest population differences are
found, and then spread to Eurasia. The last common ancestor of all living humans
was calculated at roughly 200000 ± 100000 y., and the exodus from Afrika about
half that old. This picture was quickly backed up by Stringer & Andrews (1988)
based on fossil distribution through time. Our ‘stemmother’in Africa was dubbed
the ‘mitochondrial Eve’ or ‘African Eve’ (Brown [1990] on the background and
research history), and the early results and some controversies are reviewed by
Johanson (1996), and Stringer and McKie (1996). Although reasonable criticisme
of the original research and its methodology quickly came up, it turned out that
most subsequent studies more or less conﬁrm the general pattern, then called ‘out
of Africa’ (Vigilant et al., 1991; Wilson & Cann, 1992; Horai et al., 1995), but the
timing changed quite a bit. Search for ‘Adam’ based on Y-chromosomes gave a
shorter time frame (Hammer, 1995), one study a very young common ancestor, less
than 50000 y. And some studies of nuclear DNA also gave rather short ranges of
time, about 100000. The age estimates have mostly been handled as if they gave

9
Hominid Diversity and ‘Ancestor’ Myths
177
the ‘origin’ as the age of the last common ancestor (LCA) of all living humans. But
one should realise that all these calcultions probably rather give the age of a certain
change in the genome, one or more mutations, and the ‘African Eve’ is more likely
a position along the stem of our group somewhere before the split of the LCA.
So these ages are maximum ages for the LCA, that could be much younger. And
this is probably the case, and the agreement today lies somewhere between 100000
and 50000 y. for our LCA. This is apparently in agreement with the few relevant
fossils of early, but entirely anatomical ‘modern’ people – none of these are over
40000 y. old (such as the Niah skull on Borneo), apart from earliest Australians
perhaps 50–60000 y. The whole ‘out of Africa’ is treated in detail by Stringer and
McKie (1996) in the book ‘African Exodus’.
Certain rare mutations can characterize large groups of the living humans, and
they have been mapped especially for sequences of haplotypes in the ‘genographic
project’ by Wells (2002), so that by now the migrations both within and out of Africa
can be followed in great detail because of a relatively small number of very rare and
characteristic mutations. This is not in focus of this review, but can also be picked
up in textbooks by Molnar (1998), Jobling et al. (2004), and in Denmark in excellent
books by Jensen (2004, 2008) explaining the genetic background.
But how much do we know about the fossil record of even late Pleistocene
hominids? Well, The ‘Hobbit’, Homo ﬂoresiensis, turned up in very young layers
a few years ago, an entire skeleton of a completely unknown and very primitive
branch of the phylogenetic tree (Brown et al., 2003). A neanderthal was recently
identiﬁed from MtDNA in a bone fragment from southern Sibiria, and now another
bone fragment, an isolated ﬁnger bone about 40000 y. old from the Denisova Cave
in the Altai Mountains in S-Sibiria turns out to be a completely unknown type of
hominid based upon its MtDNA, which show marked differences from both nean-
derthals and the sapiens lineage (Krause et al., 2010 – but clearly a neanderthal
acc. to E. Willerslev, pers. comm. 2011). So big are the said difference that the new
Denisova hominid should be the sister group of neanderthals plus sapients, and its
origin can be calculated to about 1 m.y. ago, if the split between neanderthals and
modern man was about 0.5 m.y. ago. With the new and very precise sequence meth-
ods, we are likely to encounter other surprises in the near future, and recalling the
surprising ﬁnd of the Hobbit such may come even from the palaeontological front.
9.16 Age and Limits of H. sapiens
What about our own species, presumably the most thoroughly surveyed species in
the world? Is some agreement possible around this ‘important species’? Apparently
not – and from a cladistic viewpoint not at all. First, there are two competing models
of the origin and evolution of our species, the ‘multiregional model’ and the ‘out of
Africa’ or ‘replacement model’ mentioned above.
The multiregional model is vividly defended by only a few, like Wolpoff (1980,
1984), Thorne and Wolpoff (1992). This model derives living H. sapiens in parallel
locally on all continents of the Old World from H. erectus stages, in some areas

178
N. Bonde
like Europe and the Middle East via a neanderthal stage, and with only little inﬂu-
ence from other regions. Some hybridization is not excluded, but it is used as an
explanation for the parallel development towards the more advanced H. sapiens in
all regions, as ‘well adapted’ genes and traits are spread over the continents out-
competing the less favourable. From a biological species viewpoint where a species
is a group of interfertile organisms isolated (concerning reproduction) from other
species, then it is clear that one consequence of the model is that H. sapiens and H.
erectus are actually the same species, just gradually changing through time (anagen-
esis or phyletic evolution), so there is no use for two names. And neanderthals form
a subgroup of that species also. Wolpoff has also argued for this, and one could then
easily subdivide this ‘species’ into chronosubspecies, one slowly replacing the other
through time.
Unless one wants to follow such a scheme all the way back to the beginning of
life (in a truely Lamarckian model of great numbers of parallel lines with the same
evolutionary tendencies, eternal orthogenesis), then this will have to stop some-
where – but where? Well, earlier than about 2 m.y. there are only human fossils in
Africa, so in some way it will presumably have to start there with a migration out of
the contient after that date, and this corresponds well to the oldest fossils in Europe,
H. georgicus, and the oldest Java populations, in both areas very ‘erectus-like’ and
about 1.7 m.y. old., so this will also become the age of H. sapiens sensu lato. If this is
not upheld, and the transition from erectus to sapiens-like occurs between species at
different ages in different regions, then the question of the age of H. sapiens is trou-
blesome. The downside of this model, apart from the age problem, is from a cladistic
viewpoint the excessive parallel evolution, which is very un-parsimonious: the same
shift occurring many times. In a cladistic model or reconstruction of the phylogeny,
one would use the mutual derived/advanced features as potential synapomorphies
showing that all H sapiens individuals are more closely related to each other than to
any H. erectus lacking these traits, and this would imply that erectus became truly
extinct (not just technically that the name stopped to apply).
In that way we are suddenly in the alternative ‘model of replacement’ and, as
we saw, there has to be at least one out-of-Africa event ca. 2 ,m.y. ago. This model
operates, however, with several migrations from Africa, and it is especially the last
one or last few ones that are in focus when speaking of H. sapiens. As seen above,
the genetic results seem to clearly conﬁrm an ‘out of Africa’ model, and that modern
type H. sapiens originated say 50000–200000 y. ago in (E-)Africa and from there
expanded to the rest of the world replacing more archaic populations on the way.
And from a genetic viewpoint, there seems not to be much evidence of mixing with
the local, archaic populations (or there may be few characteristic genes that have
been lost in our populations).
The replacement model avoids excessive parallel evolution and is therefore more
simple and satisfactory from a cladistic methodological viewpoint, but this does not
necessarily mean that it is the ‘true’ description of the history. It could also be better
expressed in a system of natural groups of phylogenetic relationships (monophyletic
or clades). In this model, the age of H. sapiens (or the subspecies H. s. sapiens
depending on the reproductive relation to the neanderthals and the late erectus) is
not so troublesome, if one can agree on how to deﬁne and recognise its origin. Is

9
Hominid Diversity and ‘Ancestor’ Myths
179
that when it ﬁnally split up into the ﬁrst two subgroups still living today, or is it
when our lineage split away from our sister(?sub-)species neanderthalensis (that is,
a stem-deﬁnition)? Or is it somewhere in between?
The ﬁrst deﬁnition from the point of diversiﬁcation (the end of last com-
mon ancestor) would give a minimum age about 50–60000 y (the age of oldest
representative from a subgroup, in this case australians which are said to be 50–
60000 y. old). If the age corresponds to the split from neanderthals, then this is
around, possibly over, 0.5 m.y. And if we pick one speciﬁc character or a functional
character complex somewhere in between, then the age of the oldest fossil with
that speciﬁc feature indicates a minimum age. Unfortunately, palaeontogists nearly
always select the latter deﬁnition and point to a ‘key character’, in this case perhaps
a chin and/or a vertical forehead, or if we could ﬁnd a good indication, perhaps
something like spoken language (perhaps of a certain complexity?) – and in this
way we could quarrel from now to eternity without ever being able to agree upon
the ‘relevant’ character. This is why a simple question about age can simply not be
answered before we agree about some conventions.
In this way, both the inclusiveness and the age of H. sapiens is uncertain and
completely arbitrary. We may give reasonably precise upper and lower limits, here
minimum 60000 y and maximum ca. 0.5 m.y., but what you see in the textbooks
and papers is something like ca. 0.2 m.y. (for the Kibish 1 fossil from Kenya), and
before that it was ca 0.13 m.y. because that was the supposed age of those sediments
found with the oldest so-called ‘anatomically modern man’. And this is actually a
misnomer, because it has too large eyebrow ridges (tori supraorbitales) for ‘modern
man’, which can really not be traced further back than to 40–60000 y.
Exactly the same uncertainty counts for genus Homo or any other taxon in the
system, it is completely arbitrary where the taxonomist chooses to ‘cut off’ the
group, so all ages are completely arbitrary. This is why our system (Bonde &
Westergaard, 2004) indicates only (minimum-)ages of splits in the tree, so that
a group has the minimum age of the oldest fossil of its subgroups. And this
age can also replace Linnaean rank, both relative and absolute at the same time.
So here the age of H. sapiens is (40-) 60000 y., and 0.5 m.y. is the age of
the (unnamed) group embracing H. sapiens (and Sapientia) and the sister group
Neanderthalia, indicated by the oldest fossil, the Heidelberg jaw of the latter sub-
group (ca 0.5–0.6 m.y.) – or from molecular biology, ancient DNA and the molecular
clock (Krings et al., 1997 – here giving about the same result). We suggested
that both ages be indexed: Sapientia + Neanderthalia: 0.5–0.6 m.y.; m: 0.5 m.y.
(m: for molecular age).
How old then is Homo? Well here one consequent way of doing it would be all
the way down to the split from chimps 6–7 m.y. ago – and actually some of the
molecular biologists have recently suggested including chimps in Homo (Wildman
et al., 2003). In this way, the split age within Homo would be 6–7 m.y. (molecular
age probably a little less?). We have however, arbitrarily, decided to delimit Homo
at the major extinct sister clade, the ‘robust’ Paranthropus, both lineages members
of the clade Parhomo. The oldest fossil giving the minimum age in the phylogenetic
model here is then ‘afarensis’/praeanthropus ca 3.7 m.y. on the Homo-line, and if
this is not acceptable, then H. hadar ca. 3.4 m.y will indicate the minimum age (all

180
N. Bonde
fossils on the Paranthropus line are younger). We could have chosen another rather
large sister group as ‘cut off’, namely Pithecanthropus, giving quite a different result
(between 11/2 and 2 m.y.). If so the traditional system would need a lot of new generic
names for branches between Pithecanthropus and Paranthropus.
9.17 Evolution of ‘Soft’ Traits: Language
Only one example will be presented concerning ‘non-fossilisable’ features, and as
this is about the ‘Symbolic species’, then it has to be about language. How can
we judge the origin of spoken language, and is there a reasonable way of esti-
mating its age? There must be a phylogenetic framework, and we here have one
model based on fossils, but with some corners conﬁrmed by molecular biology
and clocks, such as the split-ages mentioned above. Here, an interplay between a
well known phylogenetic model, that of the ‘African Eve’ theory, and a much less
known model of all languages made by the old Polish historical linguist, R. Stopa
in his hunt for the origin of the Indo-European language which also brought him to
Africa.
The model by Vigilant et al. (1991) gave a tree of the interrelationships of modern
populations based on MtDNA and with chimps as outgroup (the latter is important;
the ﬁrst model on ‘Eve’ by Cann et al. (1987) did not have an outgroup). The struc-
ture of Vigilant’s model is approximately as follows: large difference between Pan
and Homo, difference that can be translated to age spans, if the age of the split
between the two groups can be estimated. (Had bonobo, P. paniscus, been incl. in
the study, it should split away from the other chimps about halfway out the branch).
All the sapient populations, of which many are from Africa (as opposed to Cann’s
study), are close together at the beginning of the Homo clade with only very small
differences between them. The structure of their interrelationship is so that just about
the dozen of branches ﬁrst to split off are all from Africa, so these branches are long
with relatively big differences between them, when compared to the closely packed
branches at the top of the stem, whch are all from outside Sub-Saharan Afrika. Some
of the very ﬁrst groups to split off are some pygmees and !Kung-San people and sev-
eral of the next branches are Bantu speaking people, then comes the rest of Africa
and the rest of the world.
Stopa’s studies in his books on the evolution of languages (1972, 1979) and his
short review of his theory (1973) indicate that he ﬁnds 4–5 major levels in the early
evolution of languages, and he translates many expressions/‘sentences’ between
these levels of increasing complexity. In the 1972 book, Stopa analysed the African
languages and compared them with Arabic and Indo-European on the one hand, and
with ‘Bushman’ on the other side to see how sounds, clicks, phonemes and also
body language (gesticulation) transforms from one language to the others.
Bushman (Khoisan) language appears to be the most ‘primitive’ (explained at
length 1972, pp. 35 ff. and 1979, pp. 17–20), but also quite complicated and full of
dental clicks and other sounds with the lips, as well af gesticulation when speaking.
Words are very short, just one consonant and one vowel, can often mean several
things, sentences very short, of one word or repeats of the same word, and there are

9
Hominid Diversity and ‘Ancestor’ Myths
181
no abstract words, only concrete ones. Counting goes one, two, three = many, and
general terms are missing, such as ‘to eat’, there is only a word for eating something
speciﬁc like meat, and no word for fruit, only words for concrete fruits.
But the most interesting aspect is his direct comparison (rather ‘translations’) of
a number of expressions by chimps and Bushmen in different categories like ‘calls
connected with food’, warning signals, calls for help, calls to partner of the other
sex, cries of pain, laughter, and a sound when looking through the other chimps fur
(for lice etc). These he describes (1972, pp. 34–35) as 23 calls (‘words’) of chimps
and similar words of Bushmen, and in a large scheme pp. 50–57 comparing the
‘chimp language’ with six different Bushman languages.
These chimpanzee words he got exclusively from Yerkes’ primate laboratory
from the observations of Miss Blanche Learned (very suitable name) as published
in a book by Yerkes and Learned in 1925. And there is indicated the number of
observations for each utterance, most of them have been observed 100–300 times.
I have checked this source, and admit that I had difﬁculties ﬁnding this exact ‘list
of words’ or utterances. But never mind, in the 1979 book he expands the com-
parative schemes (pp. 100–103) as a ‘dictionary’ running from chimpanzee words
to Bushman, then West Sudanic, and lastly Bantu, and in other parts of the books
the ‘translation’ is continued to the level of other African languages + Hamitic +
Indo-European.
The little summary of his linguistic studies (1973) and speculations about the
origin of languages is interesting, because he tries to reconstruct the structure of
a ‘proto-language’ between those of chimps and of Bushmen, the language of
‘Homo fossilis’ as he calls it. And ﬁnally, in the appendix, he characterises four
levels of ‘languages’, the ﬁrst being from animals, just sounds, no proper lan-
guage, the second Bushmen, Hottentots, Zulu-Kaﬁrs etc., the third Bantu, Hamites,
some Caucasian and American (probably Na-Dene), and the fourth Europe, Asia,
Australia, Oceania. He speciﬁes the structure and how they are being spoken, how
sounds are combined, and their cultural background like hunter-gatherers, ﬁsher-
men, herdsmen, agriculture and trade. And further he speciﬁes, for each group of
sounds/languages, how they are produced in terms of form and function of the
sounds. This is clearly a grade system going from ‘primitive’/original to different
levels of advancement.
If such a grade-scheme should be translated into a cladistic scheme of relation-
ships, it would show the following pattern: animals (here of relevance Chimps) as
sister group of the remaining groups combined. Within these Bushman-Hottentot
sister group to the two advanced groups, Bantu + Hamites etc and the rest of the
world. This pattern of relations is exactly included in the relationships based on
MtDNA: Chimps – Bushmen – Bantu – rest of the world.
That these two completely independent and entirely different analyses should
give the same result can hardly be coincident. It must be signiﬁcant, and one would
predict that the language of neanderthals would be like the reconstruction for the
missing level, that of ‘Homo fossilis’. Neanderthals do ﬁt into the scheme based on
DNA, but how to test the level of their actual language will presumably be difﬁcult.
As to very early or very late origin of modern people’s type of languages, I tend
to believe it is fairly late, that is, an origin within the last million of years, but before

182
N. Bonde
we split away from neanderthals ca 0.5 m.y. ago, because the latter with their very
large brains must have had a rather advanced language as well, but probably no more
advanced than that of Bushmen. As the latter split off between 50000 and 100000 y.
ago, the evolution of languages was probably very slow until humans rather quickly
spread all over the world, also accellerating the pace of linguistic evolution. But
language probably did not evolve very suddenly and full ﬂedged as some linguists
(e.g. Chomsky) seem to believe, with complicated grammar and everything from the
beginning. Such does not exist in Bushman language and could well be something
developed within the last 30–40000 y. in the Late Palaeolithic when almost all other
sorts of people had gone extinct: erectus, almost the neanderthals, and rather soon
the Flores dwarfs leaving us alone to chat.
That there has literally been a sort of ‘proto language’, a ‘mother tounge’.or
‘Ursprache’ is quite obvious from the genetic research, because this points to some
sort of rather recent bottleneck (less than 0.1 m.y.) with a population less than 10000
people as ‘founders’ for all living people. So whatever sort of languages there may
have existed at that time, only that from one little group survived and evolved untill
today. The mother tounge is something many linguists look upon with much scepti-
cism, and some believe that the different recent language groups are so different that
they must have originated separately. This is pure nonsense, even if languages way
back originated several times independently, then there still is a common mother
tounge for all the living languages – and it must be possible to reconstruct some
aspects of it by cladistic methods.
One should remember that historical linguistics has actually employed cladistic
methods or something very close to that for longer than the biologists (Platnick &
Cameron, 1977), and that this has been based on a tradition from ‘textual critics’,
the reconstruction of the history of old manuscripts and books, which have been
copied from each other – a method several hundred years old. So surely the lin-
guists have encountered all the same difﬁculties and controversies over ‘ancestors’,
primitive features, classiﬁcations and the like. And there have been many attempts to
reconstruct language evolution, not the least for Indo-European languages. Stopa’s
is a brave attempt to establish an overview of all languages and their common ori-
gin. Cavalli-Sforza et al. (1989) compared their tree based on genetic data for the
world population with an evolutionary tree of all languages. They were satisﬁed
with the match, but in reality the language tree was not sufﬁciently resolved to be
very informative, as half of its groups were single branches of uncertain relation-
ship, and therefore these groups could ﬁt almost any other tree, so I believe the test
failed, or was not very convincing. Stopa’s language relations and their congruence
with the MtDNA tree is much more signiﬁcant, but should be speciﬁed in more
detail.
How far back one can trace other features connected with language is much
more uncertain. People have looked at brain endocasts for traces of symmetry and
Broca’s area and believe they can observe the latter ‘bump’ in Homo rudolfensis, ca.
2 m.y. ago, but whether this is really signiﬁcant for location of a center for speach
and has anything to do with an association center is very doubtful. Other ‘soft’
features which have no way of connecting directly or indirectly to the skeleton are
clearly even worse to reconstruct from the fossils, and one will have to go to another

9
Hominid Diversity and ‘Ancestor’ Myths
183
abstraction level like supposed social relations or tool making to get a faint and very
unsecure idea of language, conciousness and the like. But here is a ‘free playground’
for adaptationists and their ‘just-so stories’.
9.18 Discussion
The proper phylogenetic framework establishing the ‘simplest’ relationship between
the relevant groups based on analyses of their features (what else?) is essential
for understanding the evolutionary history of man and his relatives inclusive the
many fossils, be they ‘complete’, fragmentary or just scraps. Here the relation-
ships, the phylogenetic tree, is based on cladistic methods, meaning that only shared,
derived traits (synapomorphies; concerning morphology, molecules, behaviour etc.)
count as evidence for close phylogenetic relationship. Another demand or ideal
convention of this evolutionary philosophy here called ‘phylocladistics’ is that in
phylogenetic systematics the ‘natural’ classiﬁcation should portray these relation-
ships (the ‘tree of life’) as precisely as possible and comprise taxa (named groups),
be they mono-(holo-)phyletic, paraphyletic, metaphyla, ancestral, hybrids or of
another biologically relevant sort, which may be expressed in a hierarchy.
Such classiﬁcation and the corresponding evolutionary tree have to be the basis
for speculations about the evolution of both the features on which the tree is
based (most often morphology and molecules) and other features, e.g. ‘soft’ parts,
development, genetics, ‘adaptations’, functional anatomy (e.g. upright stance and
walking), behaviour, ecology, ‘change’ (evolutionary rates and ‘kinds’), abilities
for tool making, types of communication (language etc.) and conciousness, ritu-
als, religions etc. That is, all these ‘exotic’ phenomena which most anthropologists
seem to be mainly interested in, the origin of ‘key adaptations’, the ‘real biological
evolution’, not just the dry bones or dull molecules (an exception to the ‘dullness’
seeming to be such genes from ancient DNA by which we can reconstruct features
such as colours, earwax etc. of a ‘fossil’ organism, in case a 4000 years old inuit –
see Nielsen et al., 2010).
So what are the relations between all these interesting features and phenomena
and the phylogenetic tree and ditto hypotheses – and the ‘data’ upon which the latter
is based? Here, it appears that closest to the ‘data’, the traits, features or characters
is the simplest cladogram (or cladograms) as a symbol or a mapping of the distri-
bution of features which employs as many of these as possible as synapomorphies
(characterization of groups, clades, taxa), and therefore makes the groups maximally
characterized (meaning that as many as possible generalisations can be made about
these taxa; this is actually the reason why we use classiﬁcations at all – see e.g.
Patterson, 1980; Nelson & Platnick, 1981; Bonde, 1984a). The ‘data’ here are put in
quotes because they depend on hypotheses of homology (some sort of ‘evolutionary
sameness’), and are not just raw and ‘objective’ facts.
When a certain cladogram among several, perhaps many, possible ones is
preferred, then that one can be transformed into a phylogenetic tree, implying the
minimum number of changes of features on the tree, by adding some assumptions
like time, and that the groups are ‘blood related’ in terms of ‘nearness of common

184
N. Bonde
ancestry’ that is one aspect, the cladistic one, of evolution (which some of us would
consider a ‘discovered fact’ about nature), that features change along the branches
of the tree, which is another aspect called ‘phyletic evolution’, and perhaps also that
some taxa may be ‘ancestral’ to others (Bonde, 1977, 2001).
In general, many trees will be possible as corresponding to a certain cladogram,
e.g. by just changing the timing of the splits a little (most of them are fossil based
minimum ages anyway), or by changing position of sister groups (the sister clades
of the tree may all be turned 180 degrees or interchanged), but these are insigniﬁcant
banalities.
There are more principal differences between the possible trees when there are
polytomies in the cladogram (expressing uncertainties) because for any trichotomy
four different trees are ‘equally good’ (or possible), and this number increases
alarmingly at multi-splits in the cladogram (Platnick, 1977; Patterson, 1980). From
the tree (or rather from a characterstate tree) one or several precise classiﬁcations
may be made which are ‘isomorphic’ with the tree, if certain conventions are obeyed
(and disagreement can obviously exist concerning such conventions).
Should a certain phylogenetic tree (‘stem tree’; or just a few of them) be prefer-
able, then this may be seen as a model of the evolutionary history, and then
further assumptions can be added about, say, economizing principles and functional
anatomy implying certain behaviour and perhaps ecology. These phenomena can be
‘mapped’ onto the tree with implications for certain changes along the branches (or
rather between the splits assumed to be ‘speciations’). And even further assumptions
can be added, if necessary, such as believing that these changes were ‘adaptive’,
and stories about why some branches were more successful than others which died
out, may be reconstructed. By asking and ‘answering’ these many ‘why’ questions
(and not just ‘how’) by selecting preferred models among several possible, one
presumably approaches the ideal of a complete ‘evolutionary scenario’.
Now a characteristic feature of this ‘layered’ scientiﬁc process adding more and
more assumptions about the world (‘Nature’) seem to be that, if controversies should
rise about different models, the many extra assumptions make it very difﬁcult to
perform a precise test. Actually, it is only at the level of the cladogram that simple
and precise tests based on ‘data’ can be carried out (more and/or ‘better’ characters
by outgroup method = congruence among characters, which is really not a test
against ‘Nature’; or even closer to observable data by comparing with ontogeny
[Patterson, 1983; Bonde, 1984b]).
Even at the next level of abstraction, that of the ‘stem tree’, so many extra
assumptions have been added to make it less transparent what should be tested in
case of evaluating two different models (trees), because a number (or all) of the
assumptions might be wrong (presuming that the cladistic analyses at the lower level
were all right). It is easy to see that the more assumptions, the further away from
the ‘data’ and the more complicated the tests – if they are possible at all. Increasing
the levels of abstraction evidently decreases the possibilities for precise tests. What
may seem, instead, to increase when raising the level of abstraction is the tendency
to use teleological explanations, as shown in my schematic diagram from 1984a.
The more ‘why’ questions, the more ‘purposefulness’ – and probably more ‘anthro-
pocentrism’. This is the reason why S. J. Gould called the adaptive scenarios ‘just-so

9
Hominid Diversity and ‘Ancestor’ Myths
185
Fig. 9.3 Phylogenetic tree of hominins and Pan from Bonde and Westergaard (2004), but shaded
version, based on characters and arguments in that paper, which is linked as pdf with the many
references to the publisher’s and N. Bonde’s homepages – see p. 189. This tree is isomophic with
the ‘phylocladistic’, non-Linnaean classiﬁcation in Fig. 9.4

186
N. Bonde
Hominina  [/Sapiens ] (?6.5) 
1 + orrorin (6.0−5.7) 
2 + sahelanthropus (?6.5) 
3 ? (+) kadabba* (5.8−?5.2) 
4 + ardipithecus (?syn. praegens) (4.5−4.3) 
5 ? (+) lothagamensis* nov. (?5.0) 
6 + anamensis (4.2−3.9) 
7 + kenyanthropus (3.5−3.3) 
8 (+) praeanthropus* (syn. afarensis) (3.6−?3.3) 
8 + praeanthropus* (syn. antiquua) mut. (?3.3−3.0) 
9 ?+ bahrelghazali mut. (? 3.3) 
 
Parhomo nov. mut. (3.2) 
 
 
+ Paranthropus (2.7−1.1) 
10   
+) aethiopicus* (2.7−2.4) 
11   
+ robustus* (1.9−1.7) 
12   
+ crassidens (1.8−1.1) 
13   
+ boisei (2.4−1.2) 
 
 
Homo (3.2) 
14   
+ australopithecus (3.2−2.0) 
15   
+ garhi (2.5) 
16   
+ rudolfensis (2.4−1.8) 
17   
+ habilis (1.9−1.6) 
18   
+ georgicus (?syn. wushanensis) (1.8) 
19   
(+) ergaster* (1.9−1.8) 
 
 
 
+ Pithecanthropus (1.8−?0.08) 
 
 
 
 
+ Javanthropus (1.8−?0.08) 
20   
 
 
+) erectus* (1.8−0.7) 
21   
 
 
+) erectur-soloensis* (?0.2−?0.08) 
22   
 
 
+ soloensis (?0.08) 
 
 
 
 
+ Sinanthropus (1.2−0.4) 
23   
 
 
+) lantianensis* (1.2) 
24   
 
 
+ pekinensis (0.7−0.4) 
 
 
 
Euhomo nov. (1.8) 
19   
 
 
(+) ergaster* (1.8−1.4) 
25   
 
 
+ louisleakeyi (1.2) 
26   
 
 
(+) antecessor* (?syn.mauritanicus) (1.0−0.8) 
 
 
 
 
 
+ Neandertalia (0.7−0.03;m0.6) 
27   
 
 
 
+) heidelbergensis* (0.7−0.4) 
28   
 
 
 
+) steinheimensis* (0.4−0.2) 
29   
 
 
 
+) aniensis* (0.2−0.1) 
30   
 
 
 
+ neanderthalensis (0.1−0.03) b 
 
 
 
 
 
Sapientia (0.6) 
31   
 
 
 
(+) rhodesiensis* (0.6−0.2) 
32   
 
 
 
(+) helmei* (syn. idaltu) (0.2−0.13) 
33   
 
 
 
(+) palestinus* (0.13−0.09) 
34   
 
 
 
sapiens (?0.07) b,g 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[/Sapiens (m0.1−0.2) b,g 
 
 
34.1   
 
afer (?0.07) 
 
 
34.2   
 
australis (0.04) 
 
 
34.3   
 
europaeus (0.04) 
 
 
34.4   
 
asiaticus (?0.03) 
 
 
34.5   
 
americanus (0.01)] 
Fig. 9.4 Phylocladistic,
non-Linnaean classiﬁcation
of Hominina corresponding
to the phylogenetic tree in
Fig. 9.3, and with conventions
explained by Fig. 9.5. From
Bonde and Westergaard
(2004)

9
Hominid Diversity and ‘Ancestor’ Myths
187
LITU's from traditional monotypic genera are given the genus name to save the species name for any later
subdivisions. 
 
The classification of recent crowngroups and LITUs (Least Inclusive Taxonomic Units) is shown by
subordination of their names in boldface, while totalgroups (marked: Name  ) with names of fossils (marked:
+) mostly sequenced can easily be included or removed. 
 
Paraphyletic groups are problematic and should be avoided, but can temporarily be classified by marking
them with quotation marks. Significantly, a paraphyletic fossil group (“+ Name”) may as a stemgroup not be
extinct. 
 
Informal ranks of recent crowngroups can be provided by their absolute age in million years in brackets: (m-
number), as suggested by Westergaard (1989), and calculated by the molecular clock by Goodman et alii
(1998, 1999). 
 
Ages of fossils (here taken from Hertwig, 2002), giving minimum ages of taxa, are also put in brackets: 
(number), and informal ranks of extinct groups may be defined as their (minimum) time span (Farris'
suggestion from 1976). 
 
Further conventions are as follows; (?number): uncertain age; crowngroup (Name): last common ancestor
and all its known descendants for a monophyletic group or clade of recent taxa; totalgroup (Name  ):
crowngroup with addition of all known fossils from its paraphyletic stemgroup (usually not named),
demarcated by recent diversification point and branch  to recent sistergroup; ?+: fragmentary fossil of
uncertain status; (+): possibly ancestral LITU (or part of LITU), where fossils are older than fossils from its
recent descendant groups; +): same for extinct descendant groups; *; metaphyletic (plesiomorphic) LITU;
syn.: synonymous name; inc.: incerta sedis. taxon with uncertain relationships; mut.: sedis mutandis. taxon
being included in an unresolved polytomy; nov.: nomen novum, new name; b: taxon being a biological
species (‘biospecies’), isolated by internal reproductive isolation mechanisms; g: taxon being a gamogenetic
species (‘gamospecies’), integrated by gene flow (see  Westergaard, 1989); a LITU usually corresponds to
the smallest recognisable so-called phylogenetic species (‘phylospecies’). With adequate conventions, it
would also be possible to classify these different ‘pluralistic’ levels of species and hierarchies (Westergaard,
1989). Sistergroups are indented the same distance. 
Fig. 9.5 Explanation of the conventions used for the classiﬁcation Fig. 9.4. From Bonde and
Westergaard (2004, pp. 46–47). Further in the pdf linked to the homepage, see p. 189
stories’ (Gould & Lewontin, 1978). And philosopher I. Kant would presumably say
(1795), that this is because our minds prefer such explanations, so we never see the
world ‘as it is’.
9.19 What Can Be Known About Hominid Evolution?
Clearly the evolution of the characters which were used in reconstructing the tree
(Fig. 9.3) can be followed in detail: There are from 1 to 6 characters mentioned
as synapomorphies for each group among the nearly 40 taxa, say three as a mean,
giving about 120 features. And to these should be added a few autapomorphies for
each terminal taxon, about two for each of these 35, giving another 70, that is in
toto nearly 200 changes of characters. Of these, between 40 and 50 are on the line
from the split from chimps to the last common ancestor of modern humans. So the
change of these skeletal features can obviously be followed from split to split, but to
discover the sequence of new traits between the splits among these up to 6 changes
demands discovery of more ‘intermediate’ fossils with their speciﬁc combinations
of features.

188
N. Bonde
Concerning most of the ‘soft’ and other interesting features mentioned above in
which we believe ourselves to be different from chimps, and which cannot directly
be seen in fossils or be ﬁrmly correlated to skeletal traits, when did they occur?
This is the issue of when did language originate, or ‘hairlessness’, or tool making or
self-consciousness (Linnaei most important character for H. sapiens) or big female
breasts or a big penis or association of certain centres in the brain.
The most precise that can be said is that it happened somewhere between the
two splits just mentioned above, the origin of our lineage and the diversiﬁcation
of modern humans – that is, between about 7 and 0.1 m.y. ago, not a very precise
result. And there is even a tendency to discover more and more of these ‘human
characteristics’ in some chimps, meaning that their origin was most likely before
our split from the chimps (e.g. tool making, self-conciousness – and may be even
‘language’, although not a ‘spoken’ one, but see Stopa, 1972, 1979, and above).
Sophistication of tool making can only be followed in detail if we can make sure
which taxon most likely made the tools from a certain deposit – and then, as always
with fossil ﬁnds, they only give a minimum age of features and thereby have no
direct association with tools. At the ‘low level’ within modern humans, the evolution
of languages can be seen in a similar light and symbolized by evolutionary trees e.g.
by the historical linguist Schleicher (1861, 1863, directly inspired by Darwin’s ‘tree
of life’, 1859) – and further inspiring his friend Haeckel (from 1866 the ‘world
champ’ in phylogenetic trees). That the methods behind such trees in phylogenetic
systematics and historical linguistics are almost identical was shown by Platnick
and Cameron (1977).
9.20 Conclusion
The diversity of fossil hominid taxa is a lot larger than usually appreciated. Here
is demonstrated a phylogenetic tree with 35–40 units/LITUs of fossil hominids
and a corresponding ‘phylocladistic’ and non-Linnaean classiﬁcation. The data and
arguments for this recontruction is from Bonde and Westergaard (2004 – and can
be seen as link from the homepage, also presenting the many references to the data
background, which are not repeated here). Some few taxa are accepted as possible
‘ancestors’ and are placed on the branches not as terminal taxa (this seems to be
in conﬂict with most other cladists). Therefore, it is a phylogenetic tree, elevated
at least one abstraction level above a cladogram. Many other myths about ‘direct
ancestors’ in the traditional phylogeny of hominids, such as Lucy, Australopithecus
afarensis, Ardipithecus ramidus/praegens, Australopithecus africanus, ‘Au.’ garhi,
‘Au.’ sediba, Australopithecus in general, Homo habilis, and H. erectus are all
shown not to be such ‘ancestors’ as claimed by their authors and many others.
Trying to trace the origin of the Indo-European languages, the Polish linguist
R. Stopa has done a formidable study of the African languages, especially the Sub-
Saharan ones and those of the Bushman tribes. In several books and large papers
(1972, 1973, 1979) he has established that the Bushman languages are the most

9
Hominid Diversity and ‘Ancestor’ Myths
189
‘primitive’ in the world characteristic with a large number of click and lip sounds,
gesticulations and a very simple structure of the language, sentenses and words, lack
of abstractions and no grammar. By comparing with other African languages, he has
established a grade system of increasing complexity from Bushman languages over
Bantu (which still has some clicks) to other African languages, Hamitic, and Indo-
European languages. And interestingly, he claims he can directly translate from
utterances by chimps to the equivalent expressions in the Bushman languages. The
pattern of his hierarchical evolutionary model, chimp – Bushman – Bantu – other
African languages plus the rest of the world, if interpreted in cladistic terms, can
directly be compared with the model of relationships between the world popula-
tions based on MtDNA. Thus it becomes evident that the branching structure of the
two models is exactly the same, which can hardly be a coincidence, so the two mod-
els conﬁrm each other, and human language originated from ape utterances. This
proves the utility of precise cladistic models of interrelationships, and the very com-
plicated human family tree should be a warning against making very rash decisions
about adaptationistic scenarios. The diversity of early humans in Africa was very
high, especially in the interval between 11/2 and 2 m.y. ago with about a dozen forms
living at the same time worldwide, 10 of these in East and South Africa, 7 of them
in the East African Rift valley at the same time.
Acknowledgments Thanks to the organisers for two very pleasant and in formative meetings in
Copenhagen, and to the editors and publisher for their patience. Thanks also to the late Bjarne
Westergaard, with whom I used to discuss lots of these problems with primate and hominid evo-
lution and classiﬁcations, and cladistic methods and philosophy in general, he was a rich source
of information – and thanks to his family who after his incomprehensible and unreasonable death
in 2008 transferred his huge primate library to me and to the Natural History Museum (SNM).
Further thanks to drs. Chris Stringer and Peter Andrews, Museum of Natural History, London, for
discussions on hominids and phylogenetic systematics, and to Drs Ian Tattersal and Eric Delson
with whom I enjoyed studying the many original fossil hominids from all over the world at the
famous ‘Ancestors’ meeting in American Museum of Natural History in New York almost 30 year
ago. I am grateful to my institute for workspace and fascilities as well as for support some years
ago to journeys to symposia, where some of these ideas on hominids and cladistic classiﬁcations
were presented e.g. in Oxford 2003.
References
A large number of references especially concerning the reconstruction of the phylogenetic tree
from Bonde and Westergaard (2004) are not repeated here, but are available on the homepage of
the publisher (http://extras.springer.com) as well as on NB’s homepage (www.Institut.Geograﬁ.
Geologi.ku.dk/emeritus/Niels.Bonde) as link to a pdf. A long list with the remaining literature
is also placed with a link on the homepage.
Anderson, I. (1983). Who made the Laetoli footprints? New Scientist, May 12, 1983, 373.
Berger, L. R., de Ruiter, D. J., et al. (2010). Australopithecus sediba: A new species of Homo-like
australopith from South Africa. Science, 328, 195–204.
Bonde, N. (1977). Cladistic classiﬁcation as applied to vertebrates. In M. K. Hecht, et al. (Eds.),
Major patterns invertebrate evolution (pp. 741–804). New York: Plenum.
Bonde, N. (1984a). Functional anatomy and reconstruction of phylogeny. In E. Buffetaut, et al.
(Eds.), Actes du Symposium Paléontologique Georges Cuvier, Montbeliard, France 1982
(pp. 11–26). Imprim. Commune Montbéliard.

190
N. Bonde
Bonde, N. (1989). Erectus and neanderthalensis as species or subspecies of Homo, with a model
of speciations in hominiods. In G. Giacobini (Ed.), Hominidae. Proceedings of the 2nd
international congress of human paleontology (pp. 205–208). Milan: Jaca Book.
Bonde, N. (2001). L’éspéce et la dimension du temps. Biosystema, vol. 19. Systématique et Paléon-
tologie –2001, 29–62.
Bonde, N., & Hoeg, J. T. (2008). Bjarne Westergaard, 25.05.1948–29.01.2008. Da.Naturhist.
Foren., Yearbook 2007/2008, pp. 83–88.
Bonde, N., & Westergaard, B. (2004). Progress in hominid classiﬁcation: Cladistic approaches.
Micselanea a E. Aguirre, lll, Paleoantropologia, pp. 36–57. Zona Arquelogica, Num. 4, (Museo
Arquelogico Regional).
Brown, P., Sutikna, T., et al. (2004). A new small bodied hominin from the Late Pleistocene of
Flores, Indonesia. Nature, 431, 1055–1061.
Carroll, R. (1987). Vertebrate paleontology and evolution (pp. 277–285). New York: W.H. Freeman
and Co.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., et al. (1989). Reconstruction of human evolution: Bringing together genetic,
archaeological and linguistic data. PNAS USA, 85, 602–606.
Cherfas, J. (1983). Trees made man upright. New Scientist, 97(1341), 172–178.
Coon, C. (1962). The origin of races. London: J. Cape.
Day, M. (1965). Guide to fossil man (4th ed., 1986). New York: Cassell.
Feyerabend, P. (1975). Against methods. London: Methuens.
Foley, R. (1987). Another unique species. New York: Wiley.
Gibbons, A. (2009). Ardipithecus ramidus: The view from Afar. Science, 326, 41–43.
Groves, C. P. (1991). A theory of human and primate evolution. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Haile-Selassie, Y. (2001). Late Miocene hominids from the Middle Awash, Etiopia. Nature, 412,
178–181.
Johanson, D., & Edey, M. (1990). Lucy, the beginnings of humankind. London: Granada.
Johanson, D., & Edgar, B. (1996). From Lucy to language. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.
Jungers, W., & Baab, K. (2009). The geometri of hobbits: Homo ﬂoresiensis and human evolution.
Signiﬁcance. DOI: 10.1111/j.1740-9713.2009.00389.
Krause, J., Qiaomei, F., et al. (2010). The complete mitochondrial DNA genome of an unknown
hominin from southern Sibiria. Nature. DOI: 10.1038/nature08976.
Leakey, L. B. S., Tobias, P., & Napier, J. (1964). A new species of the genus Homo from Olduvai
Gorge. Nature, 202, 5–9.
Leakey, R., & Walker, A. (1976). Australopithecus, Homo erectus and the single species hypothe-
sis. Nature, 261, 572–574.
Pettitt, P., & Niskanen, M. (2005). Neanderetals in Susiluola Cave, Finland, during the last
interglacial period. Fennoscandia Archaeologica, XXII, 79–87.
Romer, A. S. (1966). Vertebrate paleontology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Schmid, P. (1983). A reconstruction of the skeleton of A.L. 288-1 (Hadar) and its consequences.
Folia Primatol, 40, 283–306
Senut, B., & Tardieu, C. (1985). Functional aspects of Plio-Pleistocene hominid limb bones:
Implications for taxonomy and phylogeny. In E. Delson (Ed.), Ancestors: The hard evidence
(pp. 193–201). New York: A.R. Liss.
Stern, J. T., & Susman, R. L. (1983). The locomotor anatomy of Australopithecus afarensis,
American Journal of Physical Anthropology, 60, 279–317.
Stopa, R. (1973). Hominization. Journal of Human Evolution, 2, 371–378.
Stopa, R. (1979). Clicks, their form, function and their transformtion or how our ancestors
were gesticulating, clicking and crying. Acta Scient. & Litterar. 561, Universitas Iagellonica.,
Krakow.
Stringer, C., & Gamble, C. (1993). In search of the Neanderthals. London: Thames & Hudson.
Stringer, C., & McKie, R. (1996). African exodus. The origin of modern humanity. London: Cape.
Tattersal, I. (1995). The fossil trail. New York: Oxford University Press.

9
Hominid Diversity and ‘Ancestor’ Myths
191
Tobias, P. V. (1967). The cranium and maxillary dentition of Australopithecus (Zinjanthropus)
boisei. Olduvai Gorge 2. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Vekua, A., Lordkipanidze, D., et al. (2002). A new skull of early Homo from Dmanisi, Georgia.
Science, 297, 85–89.
Vigilant, L., Stoneking, M., et al. (1991). African populations and the evolution of human
mitochondrial DNA. Science, 253, 1503–1507.
Wells, S. (2002). The journey of a man. A genetic odyssey. London: Penguin.
White, T., Asfaw, B., et al. (2009). Ardipithecus ramidus and paleobiology of early hominids.
Science, 326, 75–86.
White, T. D., Suwa, G., & Asfaw, B. (1994). Australopithecus ramidus, a new species of early
hominid from Aramia, Ethiopia. Nature, 371, 306–312.
White, T. D., Suwa, G., & Asfaw, B. (1995). Australopithecus ramidus, a new species of early
hominid from Aramia, Ethiopia. Nature, 375, 88.
Wolpoff, M. H. (1980). Paleoanthropology. New York: Knopf.

Chapter 10
The Tripod Effect: Co-evolution of Cooperation,
Cognition and Communication
Peter Gärdenfors, Ingar Brinck, and Mathias Osvath
Abstract This article concerns the co-evolution of hominin cooperation, commu-
nication and cognition. Certain hominin ecologies seem to have relied on cognitive
foresight. The capacity of planning for future needs, combined with more devel-
oped cooperative skills, opened up the cognitive niche of cooperation towards future
goals. Such cooperation requires complex intersubjectivity (theory of mind). We
analyze ﬁve domains of intersubjectivity: emotion, desire, attention, intention, and
belief; and argue that cooperation towards future goals requires, among other things,
joint intentions (we-intentions). We scrutinize the cognitive and communicative
conditions for reciprocal altruism, found in some species; and indirect reciprocity, a
form of cooperation typical in the hominin line.
Sharing intentions and beliefs about the future requires communication about
what is not present in the current environment. Symbols are efﬁcient tools for this
kind of communication, and we argue that the beneﬁts of cooperation for the future
selected for the evolution of symbolic communication. In line with recent models
describing how indirect reciprocity might develop into an evolutionarily stable strat-
egy, we emphasize the need for yet more complex intersubjectivity and symbolic
communication, including a minimal syntax.
Our argumentation triangulates hominin cognition, cooperation, and communi-
cation, showing how these interdependent factors mutually reinforce each other
over the course of evolution. The new take in this article is the combined anal-
yses of cooperation and cognitive mechanisms. Finally, our theses are linked to
archaeological evidence.
10.1 Program
The focus of this article is the co-evolution with communication and cognition of
typically human forms of cooperation. The basic assumption is that certain ecologi-
cal settings, present in hominin evolution, harbored selective pressures that fostered
P. Gärdenfors (B)
Department of Philosophy, Lund University, Lund, Sweden
e-mail: Peter.Gardenfors@lucs.lu.se
193
T. Schilhab et al. (eds.), The Symbolic Species Evolved, Biosemiotics 6,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-2336-8_10, C⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2012

194
P. Gärdenfors et al.
cooperation. The new forms of cooperation presume cognitive foresight and com-
plex forms of intersubjectivity that probably were less developed in the hominin
predecessors. Our central thesis is that the presence of these cognitive mecha-
nisms enabled the cooperation towards future goals to co-evolve with symbolic
communication.1
Our argument triangulates cognition, cooperation, and communication. We sub-
mit that each of these domains contains several interdependent sub-components,
and that these sub-components appeared gradually, inﬂuencing the development of
other cognitive domains. The new take in this article is the emphasis on the evo-
lution of hominin cooperation coupled with analyses of the relevant cognitive and
communicative mechanisms.
Cooperation, symbolic communication, and cognition are intertwined in con-
voluted co-evolutionary processes. Our triangulation begins with two mechanisms
typical of human cognition: foresight and intersubjectivity. The second part of the
triangulation concerns the role of cooperation in hominin societies as a selective
pressure in the evolution of human cognition and communication. We examine
those aspects of the hominin ecology that promoted advanced forms of collabo-
ration and an improved understanding of other minds. We discuss the role of two
kinds of cooperation typical among humans: cooperation towards future goals and
indirect reciprocity. Reciprocal altruism (“you scratch my back; I’ll scratch yours”)
is found in several animal species. Indirect reciprocity is a more extreme form of
altruism: “I help you and somebody else will help me.” The conditions for this
to evolve as an evolutionarily stable strategy have recently been modeled (e.g.,
by Nowak & Sigmund, 2005). The crucial aspect for our argument is that these
conditions presume complex forms of intersubjectivity and communication.
As a third part of the triangulation, we take a further step towards an ecologi-
cally grounded explanation of the function of human language (see also Bickerton,
2002; Gärdenfors & Osvath, 2010). To explain uniquely human adaptations such
as language, it is not sufﬁcient to present an evolutionary scenario that shows how
useful linguistic skills might have been for human ancestors. What needs explain-
ing is not just why those ancestors evolved language, but also why chimpanzees
and other apes did not, even though they share a fairly recent common ancestor. It
must be shown that language was useful and adaptive speciﬁcally for the human line
and not for the chimpanzee line (Brinck, 2001; Bickerton, 2002; Gärdenfors, 2004;
Johansson, Zlatev, & Gärdenfors, 2006). Many scenarios concerning the origin of
language fail this test. The answer to why linguistic capacities started to evolve in
human ancestors lies in the ecological conditions under which they lived.
Our analysis starts from a fairly traditional distinction between signaling systems
and symbolic communication. As regards symbols, we focus on their referential,
functional, and combinatorial properties. Our main conclusions are that cooperation
towards future goals requires symbolic communication; and that indirect reciprocity
1 Our strategy is thus similar to that of Whiten (1999). However, we put more emphasis on
analyzing the sub-components in the three domains.

10
The Tripod Effect: Co-evolution of Cooperation, Cognition and Communication
195
requires more complex symbolic communication, including names and markers for
roles (and thus a minimal syntax). At the end of the article, these claims will be
linked to potential supporting archaeological evidence.
Connecting the three parts, we argue that the cooperative behavior of agents must
be judged in relation to their cognitive and communicative adaptations. These fac-
tors do not seem to have been sufﬁciently considered in game-theoretical analyses.
For example, in Lehmann and Keller’s (2006) classiﬁcation of models of the evo-
lution of cooperation and altruism, only two parameters related to cognition and
communication are included: a one-period “memory” parameter, deﬁned as the
probability that “an individual knows the investment into helping of its partner at
the previous round”; and a “reputation” parameter, deﬁned as the probability that
“an individual knows the image score of its partner” (Lehmann & Keller, 2006,
p. 1367). We shall argue that these parameters are insufﬁcient.
To summarize, our analysis of cooperation combines a game-theoretical account
with an ecological/cognitive analysis. Our main purpose is to show how communi-
cation, based in intersubjectivity and cognitive foresight, opens up new possibilities
for cooperation in hominin societies. Tomasello (1999) writes about the “ratchet
effect” of human culture. We would rather propose the tripod effect of cognition,
cooperation, and communication, lifting human culture by successively lengthening
of each of the legs. This process has allowed hominins to raise their culture in a way
that resulted in a qualitatively different form from that of other species.
10.2 Characteristics of Human Cognition
There have been many proposals as to which cognitive features are uniquely human:
tool use, symbol use, mental time travel, etc. One by one, it has been shown that
these features can be found, at least to some extent, in other animal species. The
upshot may be that human cognition does not have any truly unique elements
(Brinck, 2008b). Rather, there might be unique combinations of elements or more
developed mechanisms in some domains (or both). Here we focus on three mecha-
nisms that appear to be particularly advanced in humans: detached representations,
cognitive foresight, and intersubjectivity. In Section 10.3, we will argue that they
are necessary for human forms of cooperation.
10.2.1 Detached Representations and Inner Worlds
To give intelligible descriptions of many phenomena in animal and human cogni-
tion, it is useful to distinguish between cued and detached mental representations
(Gärdenfors, 1996, 2003). A cued representation refers to something in the cur-
rent external situation of the subject or something that triggered it in a recent
situation. Delayed responses, in the behaviorist’s sense, are cued representations
resulting from perceptual categorization. When, for example, a particular object is
categorized as food, the subject will act differently than if it had been categorized
as a potential mate.

196
P. Gärdenfors et al.
By contrast, detached representations stand for objects or events that are not
present in the subject’s current or recent external context and so could not directly
trigger the representation.2 A memory that can be evoked independently of the con-
text in which it was created is an example of a detached representation. The behavior
of a chimpanzee who walks away from a termite mound, peels the leaves off a twig
to make a stick, returns to the termite mound, and uses the stick to ﬁsh for termites
is difﬁcult to explain without ascribing to the chimp a detached representation of a
stick and its function. Detached representations make it possible to refer to entities
that occur only in the imagination. For example, unicorns, elves, and trolls inhabit
our imaginative worlds and invade our language, but do not exist in the external
world.
Having a detached representation requires that present sensations are suppressed;
otherwise they will come into conﬂict with the representation (Glenberg, 1997). This
places new demands on mental capacities. The suppression of information appears
to be managed by the frontal lobes of the brain, which have expanded most rapidly
during hominin evolution. The frontal lobes are crucial for skills such as planning,
fantasizing, and self-control.
The “inner world” of an individual is a collection of detached representations and
their interrelations. Donald (1999, p. 143) argues that something like an inner world
is a precondition for rehearsing skills: “hominins had to gain access to the contents
of their own memories. You cannot rehearse what you cannot recall.” There are
strong indications that humans have more complex inner worlds than other animals,
in particular, due to human capacities for creating cultural artifacts and detachment
of time, and the conscious reﬂection (mentioned by Donald) made possible by these
capacities (Gärdenfors, 2003; Sterelny, 2003; Arp 2006; Brinck, 2008b). Gomez
(2004, p. 20) argues that the prolonged immaturity in the children of apes and, espe-
cially, humans results in a greater capacity to form representations, which in turn
leads to greater cognitive and behavioral ﬂexibility.
10.2.2 Cognitive Foresight
Many animal species rely on forecasts of the future. Those which mainly depend
on predicting stable and recurring scenarios solve the forecasting problem with
comparably rigid mechanisms. Innate releasing mechanisms are one way of solving
problems that relate to future scenarios. The urge for food hoarding in the autumn is
a prime example of such mechanisms. Nest building, migration, and hibernation can
also be governed by innate mechanisms. Ecological niches with a higher variability
of possible futures require a corresponding ﬂexibility in the organisms’ systems of
anticipation. Associative learning, coupling current stimuli with future outcomes,
constitutes a system that is advantageous in a changing environment. This kind of
2 Detached representations are called secondary representations in Suddendorf and Whiten (2001)
and decoupled representations in Sterelny (2003).

10
The Tripod Effect: Co-evolution of Cooperation, Cognition and Communication
197
learning requires a sufﬁcient stability in the environment to enable reinforcement
learning of relationships during one individual’s life.
Associative learning is too rigid for ﬂexible foresight, which might involve novel
elements or scenarios. Humans rely on their episodic system when making such
foresights. Episodic foresight appears to make us pre-experience potential future
events by sensorial simulations of such events (simply put: by using “the inner
eye”). This ability is closely connected to the capacity for episodic memory, ﬁrst
described by Tulving (1972). The deﬁning characteristic of an episodic system is the
ﬁrst-person experience of re- or pre-experienced events. Episodic memories enable
recall – as opposed to mere factual knowledge, which is characteristic of semantic
memory. Projection into possible futures is most likely based on the same cogni-
tive system as episodic memory. Episodic foresight constructs events rather than
reconstructing them, as is the case with episodic memories (see e.g. Suddendorf
& Corballis, 1997, 2007; Atance and O’Neill, 2005; Suddendorf & Busby, 2005;
Tulving, 2005). Accumulated neurological data conﬁrm that episodic foresight and
memory – and perhaps even intersubjectivity – rely on the same core brain network
(for a review see Buckner & Carroll, 2007). Episodic retrospection and prospection
are often referred to together as mental time travel (e.g., Suddendorf & Corballis,
2007).
The foresight system is used in deliberative planning for the future: a voluntary
act aimed towards a forecasted future. Such planning is often divided into two broad
categories: planning for an immediate need and planning for a future need. The cate-
gories pinpoint the mechanisms that instigate planning. In the former case, a current
drive state, which precedes any foresight, is present in the individual. In the latter
case, the drive state that triggers the planning follows from foresight. This distinc-
tion is used as a behavioural criterion in animal studies on episodic-like planning.
An inhibitory ability is also needed for planning for a future drive state, in order that
the current state can be disregarded in favor of a possible future one. Exactly how
foresight itself is triggered is still subject to research.3
To explain self-projection into the future, we focus on two kinds of self-
awareness (Brinck, 1997; Brinck & Gärdenfors, 1999). Indexical self-awareness
occurs when the agent develops a dynamic representation of egocentric space, in
which items in the surroundings are located relative to the agent’s vantage point.
There is no explicit self-representation, but the self is implicitly situated in egocen-
tric space. The agent represents the surrounding objects as units that are causally
connected over time, with which she can therefore interact causally. Indexical, self-
relative representations are necessary to move the agent to action; they occur in at
least all mammals and birds.
Detached self-awareness emerges when the agent has self-representations that
concern her future or past conditions, and can imagine herself as having different
3 Nevertheless, it is fairly safe to conclude that some sort of cuing takes place in the present situ-
ation: a cue in the physical or “mental” environment; if not, it would be the result of chance, just
popping up in the brain.

198
P. Gärdenfors et al.
properties in different domains. This paves the way for the self-ascription of proper-
ties that the agent does not in fact have, and thus for counterfactual reasoning about
the self. Together, indexical and detached self-awareness allow an agent to think
of herself now, relative to the objects at hand and the environment she is located
in, while projecting herself into future situations where the things around her, her
needs, and her possibilities for action have changed.
It has been argued that the ability to plan for future needs is exclusive to
humans (e.g., Atance & O’Neill, 2005; Gilbert & Wilson, 2007; Gulz, 1991; Köhler,
1921; Noble & Davidson, 1996; Roberts, 2002, 2006; Suddendorf & Busby, 2005;
Suddendorf & Corballis, 1997, 2007; Tulving, 2005). The Bischof-Köhler hypothe-
sis asserts that non-humans are unable to use ﬂexible cognitive prospection beyond
their present needs (Suddendorf & Corballis, 1997). However, recent studies suggest
episodic foresight in great apes, with a similar ability in corvids (Mulcahy & Call,
2006; Naqshbandi & Roberts, 2006; Correia, Dickinson, & Clayton, 2007; Raby
et al., 2007; Osvath & Osvath, 2008; Osvath, 2009).
The earliest clear indications in hominins of planning with foresight are found
among the remains of the Oldowan stone tool culture, which was founded at least
2.6 Mya (Toth, 1985; Osvath & Gärdenfors, 2005).4 Hominin life on the savannah
resulted in selective pressures to change diet from a predominantly vegetarian one
to a more protein- and fat-based one. As a consequence, the day ranges of the early
hominins must have been longer than those of extant apes. There is clear evidence
that, already more than two million years ago, transport of artifacts (at least the stone
tools) was an important trait of the Oldowan culture (Toth, 1985). Most probably,
there were selective advantages to transporting tools and carcasses. Given the posi-
tive results of the great ape studies and the phylogenetic proximity of these hominins
to H. sapiens, it is very likely that they used episodic foresight. As a consequence,
hominin life on the savannah during the Oldowan era opened up many new forms
of cooperation towards future goals (Sterelny, 2003; Plummer, 2004).
10.2.3 Intersubjectivity
Whereas cognitive foresight requires some form of self-awareness, many forms of
cooperation additionally demands other-awareness and intersubjectivity. Indexical
self-awareness becomes intersubjective when the agent’s egocentric space contains
other agents and not just objects, and when the agent can react to those agents’ expe-
riences. Detached self-awareness becomes intersubjective when, from an allocentric
point of view, the agent perceives herself as one agent among others exchanging
information about themselves.
In developmental psychology, intersubjectivity is frequently described as a delib-
erate sharing of experiences about objects and events (cf. Trevarthen & Hubley,
4 Which species used these stone tools is not fully established. It might have been several hominin
species: for example, A. gahri, H. habilis, and later perhaps H. ergaster.

10
The Tripod Effect: Co-evolution of Cooperation, Cognition and Communication
199
1978; Stern, 1985). In philosophical and psychological debate, it is commonly
known as having a “theory of mind”, with an emphasis on belief. Premack and
Woodruff (1978) originally distinguished between having a theory of others’ inten-
tions and motives, on the one hand, and having a theory of their knowledge and
beliefs, on the other. They claimed that apes have a theory of mind in the ﬁrst sense,
and suggested testing them for the second.
We interpret intersubjectivity as the capacity to react, or respond, to others’ man-
ifest states of mind, including their emotions, attentions, intentions, desires, and
beliefs. Updating the analyses in Gärdenfors (2003) and Brinck (2008a), we argue
that intersubjectivity is multi-faceted and decomposable into at least ﬁve capacities5:
(1) Reacting to the emotions of others.
(2) Reacting to the desires of others.
(3) Reacting to the attention of others.
(4) Reacting to the intentions of others.
(5) Reacting to the beliefs and knowledge of others.
As we will argue in Section 10.2.4, this ordering of intersubjective capacities is
supported by the phylogenetic and ontogenetic evidence from the hominin lineage.
10.2.3.1 Reacting to Emotions
The ability to share others’ emotions is often called empathy. Bodily and vocal
expressions of emotions communicate the agent’s negative or positive experiences;
they are most obvious among social animals. Preston and de Waal (2003, p. 4) deﬁne
empathy as “any process where the attended perception of the object’s state gener-
ates a state in the subject that is more applicable to the object’s state or situation
than to the subject’s own prior state or situation.” The phrase “more applicable”
indicates that the subject, at least so some extent, mimics the emotional state of
the object. Preston and de Waal argue that, as a mechanism linking perception and
action, empathy in a basic form is available to most, if not all, mammal species. This
suggests that empathy has comparatively early evolutionary roots. They see a clear
5 We have not found any other researcher who grades what is involved in intersubjectivity in this
way. Tomasello (1999, p. 179) distinguishes between three levels of a child’s development: see-
ing others as agents, seeing others as intentional agents, and seeing others as mental agents. His
second and third levels correspond roughly to our capacities 4 and 5. Baron-Cohen (1994) pro-
poses that “mind reading” has four components: an intentionality detector (ID), an eye-direction
detector (EDD), a shared-attention mechanism (SAM), and a theory-of-mind mechanism (ToMM).
Wellman and Liu (2004) write about a “scaling of theory-of-mind tasks” when they address the
“sequence of understandings” in children’s developing intersubjectivity. They do a meta-analysis
of studies of children’s understandings of different forms of intentions, emotions, desires, and
knowledge. There is a considerable overlap with the capacities presented here. Stern (1985)
and Brinck (2008a) distinguish between interaffectivity, interattentionality, and interintentionality
without emphasizing the distinct roles of desires and beliefs.

200
P. Gärdenfors et al.
evolutionary motivation for its emergence in the ability to recognize and understand
the behavior of conspeciﬁcs.6
10.2.3.2 Reacting to Desires
Whereas emotions express how an individual feels, desires express an individual’s
positive and negative attitudes towards objects, events, and other agents. Because
desires (in this sense) are relational (or referential), reacting to desires is a more
complex capacity than reacting to emotions.7 Infants react to the desires of others,
as expressed for example by pointing or facial expressions, by ten months of age.
A slightly more advanced form of this capacity is understanding that others may not
have similar desires as oneself. This capacity develops before reacting to beliefs (cf.
Flavell, Flavell, Green, & Moses, 1990; Wellman & Liu, 2004) – as the following
study shows. In a non-verbal test on 14- and 18-month-old infants (Repacholi &
Gopnik, 1997), the infants were presented with a plate of broccoli and a plate of
crackers. All of the infants preferred the crackers. The experimenter indicated her
preference for one of the foods by producing emotional expressions of either disgust
or pleasure. Then she reached out her hand and asked the infant to give her food.
The older infants gave her the food for which she had indicated her preference, even
if it was different from their own. The younger ones always gave the experimenter
the crackers.
The capacity for reacting to desires has been little investigated in animals. One
positive example involves the way that begging gestures in primates are some-
times rewarded. Experiments with chimpanzees about so-called other-regarding
preferences indicate that they are not willing to deliver food (even at a very
low cost to themselves) to unrelated group members (Silk et al. 2005); whereas
Burkart, Fehr, Efferson, and van Schaik (2007) show that marmoset monkeys pro-
vide food to others altruistically. Burkart et al. speculate that the relevant difference
between the species is that marmosets are cooperative breeders (like humans), while
chimpanzees are not.
10.2.3.3 Reacting to Attention
Besides primates, the capacity to follow another’s gaze towards a target is well
attested in canines, goats, dolphins, and corvids (Povinelli & Eddy, 1996; Emery,
6 It is characteristic of facial signals, such as the play-face expressions of chimpanzees and gorillas,
that they carry emotional rather than referential meaning.
7 Understanding the desires of others does not require representing their beliefs: thinking “A wants
X” does not require thinking “A believes that X is most desirable.”. Thus, desires need not be
“value beliefs” as Flavell et al. (1990) maintain. Similarly, ascribing a desire to somebody does not
entail an ascription of explicit intention: thinking “A wants X” does not require thinking “A intends
to choose X.” As long as the desired object is present or a physical representation of it exists in
the shared context, the agents’ behaviorally manifest attentional states reveal their intentions to act
(Brinck, 2001, 2004).

10
The Tripod Effect: Co-evolution of Cooperation, Cognition and Communication
201
2000; Bugnyar, Stöwe, & Heinrich, 2004; Kaminski et al., 2005). Gaze following
can occur by a simple contagion mechanism. Shared attention results when two
agents notice that they are simultaneously attending to the same target; it is well
documented among great apes (Hare, Call, Agnetta, & Tomasello, 2000). It goes
a long way towards the construction of a “consensual reality” that can be commu-
nicated about, but it does not quite reach it (Brinck, 2004). Joint attention results
when the agents have attention (or eye) contact while sharing attention to a target;
the prolonged eye contact signals mutual awareness and promotes communication
about the target. The ability to engage in joint attention has not, so far, been estab-
lished conclusively in non-human primates (though see Gomez, 2007; Leavens,
Hopkins, & Bard, 2005, 2008 for a different view).
10.2.3.4 Reacting to Intentions
Because the human cognitive system takes self-motion as a cue for goal-
directedness, goal-directedness and intentions to act can be grasped directly from
observation of behavior. Gergely and Csibra (2003) argue that infants primarily
interpret instrumental actions not by their causality but by their efﬁciency: a function
of the visible goal of the action and the physical constraints of the agent’s situation
(visual conditions, the presence of obstacles, etc.). Csibra (2003) distinguishes this
capacity for a teleological understanding of action from the intersubjective capac-
ity to perceive communicative contexts of action from others’ gaze and contingent
reactivity. Understanding referential intentions requires paying attention to others’
intentions to interact (Brinck, 2008a); it includes joint attention.
Sharing goals in terms of sharing intentions for instrumental action is sometimes
mistaken for sharing intentions for interaction, which involves communication. For
instance, Tomasello et al. (2005, p. 675) seem to neglect this distinction when they
trace the human “ability to participate with others in collaborative activities with
shared goals and intentions: shared intentionality” to the infant’s capacity for under-
standing goal-directed physical action by twelve months of age. As we will argue
below, shared intentionality involves having joint intentions and presupposes other
cognitive and communicative capacities than does sharing goals in physical contexts
of action.
The capacities for sharing referential intentions and intentions to interact are
essential to ﬂexible cooperation. We hold that joint intention requires that the agents
(i) share an intention to interact, (ii) react to each other’s individual intentions to act,
and (iii) coordinate their respective future-directed intentions. For example, in build-
ing a tower of blocks, a child may understand that the adult holding the tower steady
makes it possible for the child to place new blocks; the child may then be able to
reverse roles with the adult. Complementary role taking develops around eighteen to
twenty-four months of age (cf. Brownell & Carriger, 1990). Very likely, the capac-
ity for so-called we-intentions (cf. Searle, 1995) arises at this stage; these intentions
concern the agents as a unit and their shared relation to a global goal; they typically
strengthen individual agents’ motivation for working towards the common goal.

202
P. Gärdenfors et al.
10.2.3.5 Reacting to Beliefs and Knowledge
The most advanced test of intersubjectivity is to investigate a subject’s under-
standing of what others believe or know. Tomasello and Call (2006) review
the experimental evidence whether chimpanzees know what others have seen.
Interesting results come from a series of experiments by Hare et al. (2000; Hare,
Call, & Tomasello, 2001), where a subordinate and a dominant ape were placed in
two rooms on opposite sides of a third room. Both could see food placed in the open
or behind barriers in the middle room. The problem for the subordinate ape was that
the dominant ape would take all the food she could see. Sometimes the subordinate
ape could see food on the side of the barrier that the dominant ape could not see.
It was found that the subordinate ape went for the food that only it could see much
more often than the food that both could see. Tomasello and Call (2006, p. 375)
conclude that the chimpanzees “know not only what others can and cannot see at
the moment, but also what others have seen in the immediate past.”
It is easier to test human children, since one can communicate verbally with them
from a fairly early age. The most common experimental method uses the so-called
false belief test (see e.g. Perner et al., 1987; Gopnik & Astington, 1988). Nonverbal
versions of the test show that infants have an implicit understanding of false beliefs
by the age of 2;11 as revealed by instances of anticipatory looking (Clements &
Perner, 1994; Garnham & Ruffman, 2001; Carpenter, Call, & Tomasello, 2002).
In one nonverbal version of the test (Call & Tomasello, 1999), human infants
performed as well as in the verbal version, while the apes that were tested failed.
Human adults can have higher-order knowledge and beliefs, such as “of course
I care about how you imagined that I thought you perceived I wanted you to feel.”
This capacity forms the basis of joint beliefs, which are involved in so-called com-
mon knowledge. Joint beliefs open up typically human forms of collaboration – for
example, conventions and contracts – as we shall argue in Section 10.3.5.
10.2.4 Phylogenesis and Ontogenesis of Intersubjectivity
From the analysis in the previous section of the ﬁve forms of intersubjectivity, it
should be clear that humans exhibit forms of intersubjectivity that are not readily
found in other animals. In particular, humans have a well-developed competence
for reacting to beliefs, and also excel at forming joint intentions and joint beliefs.
The ﬁve forms of intersubjectivity are not independent: reacting to emotions and
reacting to desires both concern other agents’ feelings; but while reacting to emo-
tions is dyadic, reacting to desires is triadic, revealing other agents’ evaluations.
The capacities for reacting to attention, intentions, and beliefs all reveal something
about other agents’ current interests, thereby permitting inferences about what those
agents will do next. Reacting to attention can be seen as a special case of reacting
to intentions, the target of perceptual attention corresponding to the intended goal.
Phylogenetically speaking, when looking down our list one can detect a
decreasing number of species that exhibit the different forms of intersubjectivity,
even if the data is, in many cases, incomplete. There is evidence that at least the

10
The Tripod Effect: Co-evolution of Cooperation, Cognition and Communication
203
great apes represent others’ goals and intentions to act; but when it comes to react-
ing to intentions to interact, the situation is unclear. As far as we know, there is a
lack of evidence for joint intentions in non-human species (Tomasello et al., 2005).
As we shall see, this capacity is crucial for human cooperation. Chimpanzees, and
possibly other apes, understand that “seeing is knowing” but react differently from
adult humans to others’ beliefs and knowledge, and there is no evidence that they
form joint beliefs.
From an ontogenetic perspective, human infants react to others’ emotions from
very early on. They develop the capacity to react to others’ desires – as expressed by
pointing, facial expression, vocalization, and reaching – by the age of ten months.
They react to attention to the self by the age of two months (Reddy, 2003), start
following gaze to a target within their visual ﬁeld around the age of six months
(D’Entremont, 2000), and follow gaze in any context by the age of eighteen months.
Note that gaze will provoke different reactions if initially oriented towards the
infant’s attention than if directly oriented towards a target of action. Four-month-old
infants follow gaze if preceded by eye contact (Farroni, Johnson, & Csibra, 2004);
by seven months of age they follow pointing accompanied by head turn (Striano &
Bertin, 2005). Infants react to others’ intentions to act by between the age of ten and
fourteen months (Csibra, 2003); they react to communicative, referential intentions
by around eighteen months of age (Franco, 2005).
In brief, phylogenetic evidence, and ontogenetic evidence from human children,
roughly support a similar categorization and ordering of the different forms of inter-
subjectivity, while the data on the ontogeny of apes is, so far, too scarce to have any
signiﬁcance here.
10.3 Types of Cooperation and Their Cognitive Requirements
We have claimed that capacities for detached representations, cognitive foresight,
and intersubjectivity – in the forms of joint attention and intention as well as reacting
to beliefs and knowledge – have played a crucial role in the evolution of human
cognition. Next, we shall present ﬁve types of cooperation and use the material
from previous sections to explain which cognitive capacities each type presupposes.
In doing so, we shall take an evolutionary perspective and use a game-theoretical
approach. The various types of cooperation are presented in roughly their order of
complexity – which, arguably, matches a decreasing number of species that exhibit
them. The communicative skills required for the different types of cooperation will
be discussed in Section 10.4.
Broadly deﬁned, to cooperate is to work together for a joint beneﬁt. Cooperation
can occur by the mere coordination of behavior, but can equally presuppose a mutual
sharing of representations of means and goals. Few kinds of group behavior could
be called cooperation in the literal sense of the word. Among those that cannot,
we ﬁnd the visceral coordination of behavior: for example, termites building ter-
mite mounds. Some of the types of cooperation we describe in this section depend

204
P. Gärdenfors et al.
on elaborate long-term planning and negotiation; therefore they require cognitive
foresight, as well as complex kinds of intersubjectivity.
In true cooperation, all participants are actively involved. For instance, when a
leader manipulates other subjects in order to reach a personal goal, we do not say
that the other subjects are cooperating with the leader. Cooperation demands that
all agents are in control of their own behavior relative to the goal. A narrower deﬁ-
nition of cooperation concerns situations in which joint action presents a dilemma,
the paradigmatic examples being the prisoners’ dilemma (PD) game and iterated
versions of it. Here, the focus will be on the narrower deﬁnition.
Cooperative games have been studied within two frameworks. In general, tradi-
tional game theory has assumed that cooperation takes place between individuals of
the species Homo oeconomicus, who are ideally rational and have a perfect “theory
of mind.” Alternatively, within an evolutionary framework (Axelrod & Hamilton,
1981; Maynard Smith, 1982), the players are the genes of different animal species,
assumed to have no rationality or cognitive capacities at all. However, their strate-
gies can slowly adapt, over a number of generations, via the mechanisms of natural
selection. A key concept is that of an evolutionarily stable strategy (Maynard Smith,
1982). This is a strategy that, if adopted by a population of players, cannot be
improved upon by any alternative strategy that initially is rare in the population.
Within the evolutionary framework, intersubjectivity is considered irrelevant. The
differences of the two frameworks in their assumptions about the players’ cogni-
tive and communicative skills are seldom discussed. We shall argue that, in order
to understand the evolution of cooperation, cooperative behavior must be judged in
relation to the agents’ cognitive and communicative capacities.
10.3.1 In-Group Versus Out-Group
A simple way to determine cooperation in an iterated PD or similar game is to
divide individuals into an in-group and an out-group. The basic strategy is then
to cooperate with everybody in the in-group and defect against everybody in the
out-group. Many species solve this problem via olfaction: for example, bees from
a different hive smell differently and are treated with aggression. For another kind
of example, Dunbar (1996) speculates that dialects have evolved to serve as mark-
ers of the in-group among humans. In general though, in-group cooperation does
not require intentional communication and cognitively only presumes a perceptual
mechanism that separates members of the in-group from the rest. In general, the
in-group requires some form of marker that helps distinguish the in-group from
the out-group. Evolutionary biologists (e.g. Zahavi, 1975) stress that such markers
should be hard to fake, in order to exclude free riders from the in-group.
The evolutionary origin of in-group formation lies in kin selection. In a kin
group, the outcomes of a PD game must be re-evaluated due to the genetic
relatedness of the individuals. In many cases, this makes cooperation the only
evolutionarily stable strategy. In other words, a game that is a PD game on the
individual level may be perfectly cooperative, when the genes are considered to

10
The Tripod Effect: Co-evolution of Cooperation, Cognition and Communication
205
be the players. Kin groups may then form kernels from which larger cooperative
groups develop (Lindgren, 1997, p. 351).
10.3.2 Reciprocal Altruism
In an iterated PD game, one player can retaliate against another’s defection. Trivers
(1971) argues that this possibility can make cooperation more attractive and lead to
what he calls reciprocal altruism. Such cooperation can be formulated as a slogan:
“you scratch my back; I’ll scratch yours.” Field studies of vampire bats (Wilkinson,
1984), ﬁsh, and primates have reported the presence of reciprocal altruism. Still, the
evidence for reciprocal altruism in non-human species is debated; what reciprocal
altruism there is seems to be largely restricted to short-term reciprocity.
Some laboratory experiments show negative results (Stephens, McLinn, &
Stevens, 2002; Hauser, Chen, Chen, & Chuang, 2003). In line with this, Stevens
and Hauser (2004) argue that the cognitive demands of reciprocal altruism have
been underestimated. They claim that reciprocal altruism will be evolutionarily sta-
ble in a species only if the temporal discounting of future rewards is not too steep,
the discrimination of the value of the rewards sufﬁcient to judge that what an altru-
ist receives back is comparable to what it has given itself, and memory capacity
sufﬁcient to keep track of interactions with several individuals.
Although the methodology of the experiments varies, studies of temporal dis-
counting reveal that rates differ drastically between the few species that have been
investigated (Kacelnik, 2003). Humans have a comparably low discount rate: a pre-
requisite of the cognitive foresight that was presented in Section 10.2.2. Studies on
great apes reveal that, in some food contexts, they perform at level with humans
(e.g. Rosati, Stevens, Hare, & Hauser, 2007; Osvath & Osvath, 2008). What fac-
tors – ecological, cognitive, neurological, etc. – explain the discounting rate of a
particular species is an interesting problem that should receive more attention within
evolutionary game theory.
Countering the arguments of Stevens and Hauser (2004), de Waal and Brosnan
(2006, pp. 103–104) have proposed distinguishing three types of reciprocity. (1)
Individual reciprocity is based on symmetrical features of dyadic relationships: kin-
ship, or similarities in age or sex. This is the cognitively least demanding form of
reciprocity: “it requires no scorekeeping since reciprocation is based on pre-existing
features of the relationship. . . . All that is required is an aversion to major, lasting
imbalance in incoming and outgoing beneﬁts” (de Waal & Brosnan, 2006, p. 104).
(2) In attitudinal reciprocity, individual willingness to cooperate depends on the
attitude that one’s partner has recently shown. It involves few cognitive capacities:
only that individuals are recognized over time and the “attitude” of the partner in
various interactions remembered (or learned by some conditioning mechanism). As
de Waal and Brosnan write, this kind of reciprocity is “contingent upon the part-
ner’s immediate preceding behavior.” If it can be described as a tit-for-tat strategy,
the cooperation need not involve any intersubjectivity except for reacting to emo-
tions. No intentional communication is required for any form of reciprocal altruism;

206
P. Gärdenfors et al.
but the interaction is enhanced when desires are expressed: e.g., by begging. (3) In
calculated reciprocity, “individuals reciprocate on a behavioral one-on-one basis
with a signiﬁcant time interval.” Calculated reciprocity requires more advanced
memory of the interactions, reacting to the desires of others and some form of score-
keeping. This type of reciprocity is the most difﬁcult to achieve, since it “requires
memory of previous events, some degree of score-keeping, partner-speciﬁc con-
tingency between favors given and received” (de Waal & Brosnan, 2006, p. 104).
The reciprocity discussed by Stevens and Hauser (2004) is closest to this type of
reciprocity; therefore it is not surprising that it would be the most difﬁcult type to
achieve. Van Schaik and Kappeler (2006, p. 11) write: “Chimpanzees are capable of
the ‘calculated reciprocity’. . ., but this mechanism may be rare among other species,
if it occurs at all.”
Reacting to the partner’s attitude is a general mechanism for improving coop-
eration. Charness and Dufwenberg (2006, p. 1580) introduce the concept of guilt
aversion to explain why individuals behave more cooperatively than game theory
predicts. According to them, “decision makers experience guilt if they believe they
let others down.” That is, considering the desires of one’s partners and having an
emotional mechanism that makes one avoid letting them down changes the payoff
matrix of, for example, a PD game: the player ends up being more cooperative than
traditional game theory predicts. The situation is analogous to that of kin selection,
where a PD game is also turned into a cooperative game, when the inclusive ﬁtness
of the kin is considered.
Charness and Dufwenberg (2006) claim that guilt aversion involves having
beliefs about others’ beliefs. However, this claim about the intersubjectivity of deci-
sion makers seems unnecessarily strong for the mechanism they are investigating.
It is sufﬁcient that the decision maker can react to others’ desires by feeling guilty.
In spite of this reservation, the notion of guilt aversion seems central to analyz-
ing many forms of human cooperative behavior and merits further theoretical and
experimental investigations.
The extent to which guilt aversion exists in other species is an interesting ques-
tion.8 The so-called ultimatum game could be a benchmark for testing guilt aversion
and thereby, indirectly, the capacity to represent the desires of others. In this game,
a proposer is offered a sum of money, which she is free to divide in any proportion
with a responder. The crucial feature is that the responder can accept or reject the
offer. If she accepts, both players receive the proposed division; but if she rejects,
both receive nothing. With human subjects, proposers typically offer responders
40–50% of the amount given, and responders generally reject offers under 20%.
These results indicate that the responders want the proposers to take their desires
into account and will punish a proposer who is too unfair.
By contrast, Jensen Call, and Tomasello (2007) showed that, when chimpanzees
were used as subjects and proposers given a choice between an 8-2 and a 5-5 offer,
8 This question relates to the studies concerning other-regarding preferences presented in Section
10.2.3.

10
The Tripod Effect: Co-evolution of Cooperation, Cognition and Communication
207
75% chose the 8-2 offer, which was rejected by only 5% of the responders. Even
more drastically: when the proposers could choose between a 10-0 and an 8-2 offer,
46% choose the 10-0 offer, which was then rejected by 44% of the responders.
These results indicate that, in food-related tasks, chimpanzees do not exhibit guilt
aversion as strongly as humans. This might be a result of certain rules that chim-
panzees adhere to when it comes to food possession; but it could also suggest a more
general lack of guilt aversion. Bräuer, Call, and Tomasello (2009) found differences
between chimpanzees and bonobos suggesting that bonobos generally expect equity
and might perceive violation of it more acutely.
10.3.3 Cooperation Towards Future Goals
Many types of animal cooperation do not seem to require detached representations
(Brinck & Gärdenfors, 2003). If the goal is present in the immediate environment –
say, food to be eaten or an enemy to be fought – the collaborators do not need to
coordinate their representations of it before acting. If, on the contrary, the goal lies
in the future, a shared representation of that goal must be produced before planning
can begin or joint action be taken.
We have suggested that the hominin lifestyle opened up new forms of cooper-
ation about future states involving coordinated action towards a common goal –
as well as, probably, complementary role taking and role reversal. Thus, Plummer
(2004, p. 139) writes that “competition with large carnivores may have favored
cohesive groups and coordinated group movements in Homo habilis, cooperative
behavior including group defense, diurnal foraging (as many large predators pref-
erentially hunt at night) with both hunting and scavenging being practiced as the
opportunities arose, and the ability (using stone tools) to rapidly dismember large
carcasses so as to minimize time spent at death sites.” If this hunting was organized
in the same way as in extant hunter-gatherer societies, it would be an example of
division of labor and require both complementary role taking and joint intentions.
We will return to the cognitive and communicative demands of labor division in
Section 10.4.2.
Another important aspect of cooperation towards future goals is that the value
of the goal cannot be determined in the current situation (Brinck & Gärdenfors,
2003). In contrast to a goal that is already present on the scene – say, a certain kind
of prey – the value of a future goal must either be estimated individually by each
agent or calculated jointly. The former strategy requires the capacity for cognitive
foresight; the latter presupposes a rather elaborate communication system.
To sum up the cognitive requirements: cooperation towards future goals involves
not only cognitive foresight, but also the recognition of individuals, the inhibition
of current desires, and the capacity to react to the emotions, desires, attention,
and intentions of others. Thus, our theory generates the testable prediction that,
among extant species, only humans will exhibit cooperation towards future goals.
The central question concerning what kind of communication is required for this
joint-intention-involving collaboration will be addressed in Section 10.4.2.

208
P. Gärdenfors et al.
10.3.4 Indirect Reciprocity
In social species, individuals often face a decision whether or not to cooperate. In
the analyses in standard game theory of prisoners’ dilemma and similar games, it
is taken for granted who the potential collaborators are. In practice, however, the
most important question is: how do you know whom to cooperate with? (See e.g.
Dessalles, 2007, p. 360.) When choosing one’s partner, trust may be one factor, the
competencies of one’s collaborator another.
As we have noted, reciprocal altruism is found in some other animal species
and is common among humans. That said, in humans one often ﬁnds more extreme
forms of altruism: “I help you and somebody else will help me.” So far, there is
no evidence that this form of cooperation – called indirect reciprocity – exists in
nonhuman animals.9
Nowak and Sigmund (2005, p. 1291) show that – under certain conditions –
indirect reciprocity can function as an evolutionarily stable strategy. However, as we
shall see in Section 10.4.3, their explanation depends on strong assumptions about
the interactors’ communicative capacities. The key concept in their evolutionary
model is that of individual reputation (see also e.g. Leimar & Hammerstein, 2001;
Panchanathan & Boyd, 2004; Fehr, 2004). Typically, the reputation of an individual
i is built up as members of the society observe i′s behavior towards third parties
and convey what they have observed to other members of the society. This form
of communication requires detached representations. The level of i’s reputation can
then be used by any other individual when deciding whether to help i in a situation
of need.
Nowak and Sigmund (2005) term a strategy ﬁrst order if the assessment of an
individual i in a certain group depends only on I’s actions. More sophisticated strate-
gies distinguish between justiﬁed and unjustiﬁed defections. justiﬁed in defecting as
a form of punishment. However, the donor then runs the risk that his own reputation
drops. To prevent this, the donor should communicate that the reason she defects is
the receiver’s bad reputation, making it possible for other individuals to understand
her intentions.
Nowak and Sigmund (2005) categorize a strategy as second order if it depends
in part on the reputation of the receiver and third order if it additionally depends
on the reputation of the donor. They then show that only eight of the possible
second- and third-order strategies are evolutionarily stable, and that all of these
depend on the distinction between justiﬁed and unjustiﬁed defection. The intersub-
jectivity required by such comparisons includes empathy and reacting to desires and
attention, but also, more importantly, reacting to the intentions of the donor.
9 A possible exception is revealed in a study by Warneken and Tomasello (2006). They let three
human-raised juvenile chimpanzees watch while a human attempted, but failed, to achieve a suc-
cession of goals. Sometimes the chimpanzees helped the humans, mainly in situations where the
human reached for objects but failed to grasp them. By contrast, Warneken and Tomasello (2006)
showed that 18-month-old human infants did help an adult experimenter in a large majority of the
cases involving various scenarios. See also Warneken, Hare, Melis, Hanus, and Tomasello (2007).

10
The Tripod Effect: Co-evolution of Cooperation, Cognition and Communication
209
Nowak and Sigmund (2005, p. 1291) also claim, without spelling out the details,
that indirect reciprocity seems to require some form of “theory of mind.” An
individual watching a second individual (a donor) not helping a third in need (a
receiver) must judge whether or not the donor is non-cooperative as a punishment
for a receiver of bad reputation, or is simply being non-cooperative. Such judg-
ment involves understanding the intentions of the donor. Thus, indirect reciprocity
at least demands the ability to (a) recognize other players over time; (b) remember
and update their reputation scores (and one’s own); (c) represent others’ emotions,
desires, attention, and intentions in such a way that one can judge whether a par-
ticular donor action is “good” or “bad”; and (d) inhibit current desires in order to
help somebody in need.10 Again our theory predicts that only humans will exhibit
indirect reciprocity. We will return to the communicative requirements on how
reputation is spread in Section 10.4.3.
It should be stressed that reputation is not something visible to others – unlike
status markers, such as a raised tail among wolves. Rather, each individual in a soci-
ety must either keep a private account in memory of the reputation of others, or be
able to communicate with others about the reputation of particular individuals. Kuhn
and Stiner (2008) write that body decorations and emblems may have been used as
status markers in hominin societies. Semmann, Krambeck, and Milinski (2005) have
demonstrated experimentally that building a reputation through cooperation is valu-
able for future social interactions; not only within but also outside one’s own social
group.
The trust that is built up in reciprocal altruism is dyadic: it is a relation between
two individuals. By contrast, reputation is an emergent social phenomenon, involv-
ing most, if not all, members in the group. Nowak and Sigmund (2005, p. 1296)
write: “Indirect reciprocity is situated somewhere between direct reciprocity and
public goods. On the one hand it is a game between two players, but it has to be
played within a larger group.” Socially shared information about the reputation of
different individuals is a characteristic feature of the game.
There may be other factors than those considered by Nowak and Sigmund inﬂu-
encing the reputation of an individual. In many situations, people are not only
willing to cooperate but also ready to punish free riders. Punishing behavior is
difﬁcult to explain, both because it is costly and because the cooperative non-
punishers may beneﬁt (Fehr & Gächter, 2002). Sterelny (2003, p. 131) notes that,
for cooperation to become important for hominin societies, punishment of defection
must be cheap. Barclay (2005) presents evidence that the reputation of a punisher
increases over time and that people are more willing to cooperate with punishers.
Such a mechanism entails that punishing behavior that is costly in the short run will
eventually become beneﬁcial for the punisher: i.e., punishing behavior is rewarded
10 Van Schaik, and Kappeler (2006, p. 15) write: “the three basic conditions for reputation are indi-
vidual recognition, variation in personality traits, and curiosity about the outcome of interactions
involving third parties.” In our opinion, these criteria are too weak, since they do not include that
reputation is communicated and therefore requires ﬂexible, referential communicative skills.

210
P. Gärdenfors et al.
in the long run (see also Sigmund, Hauert, & Nowak, 2001); furthermore, it can
stabilize cooperation in iterated PD-style interactions (Lindgren, 1997). Symbolic
communication enhances this tendency, since it can turn punishment into common
knowledge. In contrast to human conduct, there are no observations of altruistic pun-
ishment in natural animal behavior (van Schaik & Kappeler, 2006, p. 15) – although
de Waal and Brosnan (2006) report a case of experimentally induced refusal to
cooperate that is costly for the non-cooperative individual.
10.3.5 Conventions, Commitments and Contracts
In human societies, many forms of cooperation are based on conventions (Lewis,
1969). Conventions may be established without explicit communication; but, of
course, communication makes the presence of a convention clearer. The central cog-
nitive requirement for conventions is that they presuppose enduring joint beliefs or
common knowledge. For example, if two cars meet on a gravel road in Uganda, both
drivers know that this coordination problem has been solved in this society numer-
ous times before by driving on the left-hand side; both know that both know this;
both know that both know that both know this, and so on. They both then shift to
the left without any hesitation.
In general, joint beliefs form the basis for much of human culture. Commitments
and contracts are special cases of joint-belief-involving cooperation about the future.
When you commit yourself to someone to do some action, you intend to perform
the action in the future; the other person wants you to do it and intends to check
that you do it; and you and they have joint beliefs concerning these intentions and
desires (Dunin-Kepliz & Verbrugge, 2001). Commitments cannot arise unless the
agents have the capacity for cognitive foresight and can form joint beliefs.
Contracts represent a uniquely human activity. The reason again is that a con-
tract, among other things, presumes that the partners have joint beliefs: if we agree,
for example, that I shall deliver a duck next time I am successful in my duck hunting,
in exchange for the axe you have given me now, then I believe that you believe that I
will deliver the duck, and you believe that I believe that our agreement will then be
fulﬁlled – and so on. A contract also depends on the possibility of future sanctions:
if I don’t deliver the duck, you or the society may punish me for breaching the agree-
ment. Like commitments, contracts presume cognitive foresight. Furthermore, the
reputation mechanism that supports indirect reciprocity will beneﬁt the formation
of contracts.
10.4 The Evolution of Symbolic Communication
This section will bring together the concepts and material from the preceding sec-
tions in an account of the communicative demands on two of the types of human
cooperation discussed in Sections 10.3.3 and 10.3.4: cooperation towards future

10
The Tripod Effect: Co-evolution of Cooperation, Cognition and Communication
211
goals, and indirect reciprocity. We will argue that a major force behind the evo-
lution of human language is that it enhances these forms of cooperation. In addition
to describing the characteristics of any particular system of communication, it is
desirable to give an independent evolutionary – ecological or sociocultural – expla-
nation of why this particular kind of system has arisen. In the following sections
we shall present our account of the ecological and social forces that have generated
symbolic communication as a uniquely human system.
We will start from a distinction between signals, icons, and symbols. On the basis
of these notions, we will analyze the role of different forms of communication and
how they support cooperation.
10.4.1 From Signaling to Symbolic Communication
A decisive difference between language and signaling is that signals merely indi-
cate what is present in the environment. Bees only dance directly upon returning to
the hive when they have found nectar. Vervet monkeys only seem to signal when
danger is immediate. However, icons and symbols make it possible to communicate
about things that may not even exist. Both are tools of communication; both can
be expressed in various ways, such as by sounds, pictures, or gestures. Icons and
symbols – and also acts of pointing (by proxies or stand-ins) – retain meaning in the
absence of the referent. Iconic and symbolic communication can be used to ofﬂoad
the demands of intersubjective cognition: with icons and symbols, one can commu-
nicate one’s emotions, desires, intentions, and beliefs, so that one’s addressee need
not rely only on mind reading. An additional property of symbols, not in general
shared with icons, is that their meanings can be related in systematic ways. Deacon
(1997) emphasizes logical relations, while Gärdenfors (2000) discusses similarity
relations.
The signals used in communication are more or less identical in all members of
an animal species, barring sexual and age differences. A symbol, on the other hand –
and, in many cases, an icon, too – is a convention that one must learn if one is to
use it as a communicative tool. Symbols vary widely between different groups.
In all probability, the transition from a signaling system to an iconic or sym-
bolic language has not been made in one step. Bickerton (1990) among others has
proposed a stage in the evolution of language when a protolanguage – containing
only the semantic components of language but not the syntactic markers – was used.
Like language, protolanguage is compositional: complex signs are composed out of
individual, meaningful signs that relate systematically to each other and to other,
similar, signs. It is also conventional: a sign is a part of mutual knowledge and must
be learned. However, protolanguage is not grammatical. According to Bickerton
(1990), Homo ergaster/erectus mastered a protolanguage, but it was not until Homo
sapiens that a language with a grammatical structure emerged.11 For purposes of
11 Partly following Donald (1991), Zlatev, Persson, and Gärdenfors (2005) argue that, in addition
to protolanguage and language with syntax, one can distinguish communication systems based on

212
P. Gärdenfors et al.
this article, we need not subscribe to Bickerton’s (1990) theory of protolanguage.
The only assumption we need is that there is a stage in the evolution of language
where compositional and conventional symbols emerged.12
10.4.2 Cooperation About Future Goals Requires Symbolic
Communication
In recent work (Brinck & Gärdenfors, 2003; Gärdenfors, 2003, 2004; Osvath &
Gärdenfors, 2005; Gärdenfors & Osvath, 2010), we have proposed a strong connec-
tion between a lifestyle dependent on cognitive foresight on the one hand, and the
evolution of symbolic communication on the other. In brief, our argument is that
symbolic communication makes it possible to cooperate towards future goals that
are not mutually manifest to the agents: i.e., neither known to be repeated at a cer-
tain interval, nor present in the shared environment. Goals that so far exist only in an
agent’s imagination – along with the means to attain them – can be shared socially
by using the manifest symbols that represent them.
Clearly, communicating about non-present entities presupposes capacities for
detached representations and cognitive foresight. It additionally requires a means
for making one’s representations accessible to others and thus for referring to absent
objects and agents. In this case, signaling will not do. One cannot point or use an
alarm call to refer to a deer that one saw down by the river yesterday; but one can
use a symbol to do so. The symbol takes the place of the deer in the exchange of
ideas.
An additional requirement is that the means for communication should make
it possible to describe non-actual scenes. Theories about the evolution of sym-
bolic communication abound. Most of them miss that the act of describing a
scene is most valuable when the scene is not present. Describing something that
happened in the past or an activity that lies in the future requires symbols that
can have different functions, corresponding to actions and objects and agents. It
requires that symbols can be put together in a variety of ways, making possible
combinations such as <Go, Mountain>, <Mountain, Deer, John>, <Boy, Man, Go,
Woman>. Such combinations are ambiguous, but because the communication is
either verbal or gestural – and consequently the communication between speaker
and listener is direct – the problem is minor. Besides, the physical context in
dyadic and triadic mimesis. They argue that untrained apes can communicate at least via dyadic
mimesis: e.g., by gestures (see also Pika et al., 2003). However, the natural gestural communica-
tion of apes does not constitute a protolanguage because it is not conventionalized (and thus not
symbolic) and has only limited compositionality. On the other hand, the communications of Kanzi,
Koko, and other language-trained apes satisfy the criteria for protolanguage. Jackendoff (1999)
likewise distinguishes several stages in the evolution of syntactic structures.
12 Partly conventionalized compositional icons may be sufﬁcient for many situations, although
fully developed symbols are more efﬁcient.

10
The Tripod Effect: Co-evolution of Cooperation, Cognition and Communication
213
which the communication takes place will help disambiguate the exchange, even
without any explicit efforts by the speakers.
The sharing of imagined scenes is a sine qua non of cooperation towards future
goals.13 The goal is not present, so the actions leading to it must be imagined and
their consequences evaluated. For example, by uttering (or signing) “meet mountain
well sunset”, one individual can convey to another an image of a scene – a moun-
tain – that constitutes a plan in respect to a future goal, one that is mutually beneﬁcial
to both individuals. If the scene is something new, there is no way a signaling system
can communicate these imagined elements.
A particular form of future-oriented cooperation is division of labor, which, as a
cultural phenomenon, seems to be unique to the human species. Simple commands
can be expressed with the aid of combinatorial icons or symbols, in accordance
with the various ways of dividing the tasks within a group. As regards the prag-
matics of communication, commands and questions are more central modes of
communication for setting up cooperation than are declarative statements.
The long ranging lifestyle of the Oldowan hominins resulted in selective pres-
sures favoring a communicative system that made it possible for the members of a
group to share detached representations of future collaborative scenes. The evolution
of symbolic communication could have lead to a solution that was, in evolutionary
terms, locally optimal for a society built around cooperation towards future goals.14
Iconic communication, in the form of miming (Donald, 1991), can achieve much
towards the coordination of scenes; but arbitrary symbols are more efﬁcient for the
task.
Showing the evolutionary importance of cooperation towards future goals,
Deacon (1997, pp. 385–401) suggests that the ﬁrst form of symbolic communica-
tion was marriage agreements: that is, deliberate commitments to pair bonding. He
argues that there was strong evolutionary pressure in hominin societies to establish
relationships of exclusive sexual access. He writes (Deacon, 1997, p. 399) that such
an exclusive sexual bond “is a prescription for future behaviors.” Even though we
do not know of any evidence that marriage agreement was the ﬁrst form of sym-
bolic communication, still, we ﬁnd this claim interesting in the discussion of early
cognitive foresight.
In brief, our thesis is that cooperation towards future goals co-evolved with sym-
bolic communication, presumably with gestural communication as an intermediary
stage. However, without the presence of well-developed cognitive foresight and
intersubjectivity, the potential for cooperation, and the ensuing selective pressures
that resulted in symbols, would not have emerged. Unlike most other theories of the
evolution of language, the ideas presented here explain why humans are alone in
having symbolic language. Being able to cooperate towards future goals requires
13 Arp (2006) argues, albeit from a different perspective, that scene visualization is unique to the
Homo line.
14 This kind of local optimality is one of the four conditions that Dessalles (2007, pp. 173-174)
presents for protolanguage.

214
P. Gärdenfors et al.
planning with cognitive foresight, and complex forms of intersubjectivity. Both
these cognitive capacities are far more developed in humans than they are in other
species.
10.4.3 Indirect Reciprocity Requires Syntactic Markers
One could argue that indirect reciprocity is a way of preparing for future coop-
eration, since it is, in effect, a behavior indicating whom can be trusted to be
cooperative. If we follow the model presented by Nowak and Sigmund (2005), the
success of indirect reciprocity depends heavily on the mechanism of reputation.
However, they do not analyze what kind of communication is required for strategies
based on reputation. First of all, the communication system of the group must be
capable of referring to individual members in their absence: e.g., by names or prox-
ies. No known animal signaling system has this capacity. Second, to capture the
second-order strategies required for evolutionary stability in Nowak and Sigmund’s
model, the communication system must be able to express relations such as “x was
good to y” and “y was bad to x” and distinguish these expressions from “y was good
to x” and “x was bad to y”.15 Such expressions involve assigning two individuals
in a particular interaction different roles: the rudiments of agent and patient. Such
roles are difﬁcult to convey unambiguously without using syntactic markers.
The communication required by indirect reciprocity concerns different aspects of
whom you can trust. The information often concerns absent individuals and hence
can be characterized as gossip. Gossip normally contains expressions of the form
“who did what to whom.” It involves identifying roles that require some form of
syntax. Thus, according to the theory presented here, gossip plays a role in the evo-
lution of language; however, it does not function as a replacement for grooming as
Dunbar (1996) suggests.
Indirect reciprocity may not be the only causal factor behind syntax: there may be
other ecological pressures that have led to more complex language. One candidate is
planning for division of labor – a special case of cooperating towards future goals –
which also involves assigning roles for future actions to different individuals. If the
individuals are present, perhaps such assignment can be achieved with the aid of
pointing or other forms of indexicals. However, if the individuals are not present,
the availability of syntax will facilitate the coordination of future actions.
The need for communication depends on the size of the group facing the sit-
uations in which a potential for cooperation exists. In a tightly knit group where
everybody sees everybody else most of the time, a reputation mechanism is not
needed. One can compare this with how the ranking within such a group is estab-
lished. If you observe that x dominates y and you know that y dominates you, no
15 In this context, it should be noted that Nowak and Sigmund’s (2005) model considers only two
kinds of interaction: “good” and “bad.” It goes without saying that, in real groups, communication
about reputation builds on ﬁner nuances.

10
The Tripod Effect: Co-evolution of Cooperation, Cognition and Communication
215
(aggressive) interaction or communication is needed to conclude that x dominates
you. On the other hand, in large and loosely connected groups, these mechanisms
are inadequate; and so some form of communication about non-present individuals
is required.
A consequence of this argument is that the evolutionary mechanisms favoring
indirect reciprocity will be stronger when the population increases and contacts
between people become increasingly distant (Gamble & Steele, 1999; Leonard &
Robertson, 2000). The conditions for reciprocal altruism seem similar to those for
the cultural innovations analyzed by Shennan (2001). However, since hominin popu-
lations have probably mostly been small, and there have been bottlenecks (Ambrose,
1998; Richerson, Boyd, & Heinrich, 2003), the selective signiﬁcance of indirect
reciprocity may have varied considerably over time.
10.5 Connections to Archaeology
Our arguments have built on a theoretical analysis of the cognitive and communica-
tive prerequisites for the speciﬁcally human forms of cooperation. As directions
for future research, we want to draw attention to the further empirical support that
may be obtained from new archeological data or new analyses of existing such data.
One ﬁnds evidence for cognitive foresight in the Oldowan culture (Toth, 1985). Of
course, evidence of cooperation towards future goals would help to determine when
protolanguage evolved. Three areas seem to be particularly relevant to this prob-
lem.16 First, signs of cultural division of labor (e.g. Hawkes, O’Connell, Blurton,
Alvarez, & Charnov, 1998; O’Connell, Hawkes, & Blurton Jones, 1999; Bird, 1999)
would be evidence of communication about future cooperation. Second, big game
hunting seems to require such communication. The spears found at Schöningen
(Thieme, 1997) suggest that such hunting was practiced by Homo heidelbergen-
sis 400 Kya.17 The ﬁndings from this site await detailed analysis; their cognitive
and communicative implications are, as yet, far from clear (but see Haidle, 2009).
Third, large constructions – dwellings or other kinds of built structure – would also
be indicative of communication about future cooperation. Although disputed, the
Terra Amata construction (Villa, 1983) – which, it has been estimated, was built
400 Kya – is a possible candidate.
If our arguments are correct, it is sufﬁcient to establish the presence of symbolic
communication if there is clear evidence in any one of these three areas. All in all,
we believe the archaeological evidence available at present supports the view that
cooperation towards future goals – and thus the use of combinatorial symbols – was
16 We wish to thank Miriam Haidle, Steven Mithen, and April Nowell for helpful discussions on
these matters.
17 Thieme (1999) writes: “equipped with outstanding technical talents for processing wood, they
were already in this early period qualiﬁed to plan a future large game hunt with special weapons,
to organize it, to coordinate it and to successfully accomplish it” (our translation).

216
P. Gärdenfors et al.
established at least 400 Kya, well before the evolution of Homo sapiens. Although
our argument is different, this conclusion accords with Bickerton’s (1990) proposal
that protolanguage emerged with Homo erectus.
It would be interesting to discover during which time period evidence for indirect
reciprocity can be established in the archeological data: for example, evidence of
individual reputation being of social importance. If our analysis in Section 10.4.3
is correct, such a datum would provide an upper bound to when the ﬁrst syntactic
markers evolved among hominins.
The role of ornaments and body decoration as reputation “markers” could be an
interesting target for archaeological analysis. For example, Kuhn and Stiner (2008,
p. 43) argue that ornaments have, as their main communication target, strangers at a
“middle distance” of social relations: that is, individuals who share the same cultural
background but do not know the wearer personally.18 This kind of information is
clearly important for deciding whether or not to cooperate.
10.6 Conclusion
Our main argument has been that cognitive foresight and increasingly complex
forms of intersubjectivity opened up new forms of cooperation involving future
goals and indirect reciprocity. Historically, such cooperation has secured selective
advantages for the members of the most cooperative hominin groups. New forms
of cooperation created a need for a communication system for sharing detached
representations about future goals and the reputation of other individuals. We have
argued that the required system must be symbolic. Our two central theses are, ﬁrst,
that cooperation towards future goals requires combinatorial symbolic communica-
tion; and, second, that indirect reciprocity additionally requires items such as names
and role markers, and thus a minimal syntax.
Table 10.1 summarizes the cognitive and communicative requirements of the dif-
ferent forms of cooperation as they have been analyzed in Sections 10.2, 10.3, and
10.4. The list is not intended to be complete: in particular, the forms of cooperation
could be given a more ﬁne-grained analysis (see e.g. Gärdenfors, 2008). We have
only included the cognitive and communicative features that are characteristic of
each particular form of cooperation. As one goes down the list, one observes a gen-
eral increase in cognitive and communicative demands. Cooperation towards future
goals, indirect reciprocity, conventions, commitments, and contracts are forms of
cooperation that are, so far, found only in humans.
In this article, we have presented a theory that connects different forms of cogni-
tion and communication with different forms of cooperation, within an evolutionary
framework. A future extension of the research program might consider individual
18 In agreement with our argument, Kuhn and Stiner (2008, p. 48) conclude: “if . . . beads and
other forms of body ornamentation represent a new way of communicating, then it follows
humans must already have been using symbols to communicate when ornaments ﬁrst appeared in
Paleolithic sites.”

10
The Tripod Effect: Co-evolution of Cooperation, Cognition and Communication
217
Table 10.1
The cognitive and communicative requirements on different forms of cooperation
Type of cooperation
Cognitive demands
Communicative demands
In-group out-group
Recognition of group member
None
Reciprocal altruism
(attitudinal reciprocity)
Recognition of individuals,
(minimal) memory
of interactions
None, but enhanced by
expressing emotions and
desires
Reciprocal altruism
(calculated reciprocity)
Recognition of individuals,
memory of interactions,
inhibition of current desires,
reacting to the desires of
others
Expressing emotions and
desires
Cooperation towards
future goals
Recognition of individuals,
cognitive foresight, reacting
to emotions and desires, joint
intentions
Symbolic (or iconic)
communication
Indirect reciprocity
Recognition of individuals;
inhibition of current desires;
reacting to emotions, desires,
attention and intentions
of others
Symbolic communication in
a language with names
and syntax for roles
Cooperation based
on convention
Joint beliefs
None, but enhanced by
symbolic communication
Commitment and contract
Recognition of individuals,
cognitive foresight, joint
beliefs
Symbolic communication
differences in intersubjective, foresight and communicative capacities, and aim at
connecting these to variations in cooperative behavior.19 The analysis presented in
Table 10.1 could then be used to generate empirically testable connections between
these factors.
Acknowledgments Most of the work for this article was done as part of the EU project Stages
in the Evolution and Development of Sign Use (SEDSU). We want to thank the participants of
the project for helpful comments and ideas. Peter Gärdenfors gratefully acknowledges support
as a Senior Individual Researcher from the Swedish Research Council as well as support from
the Linnaeus project Thinking in Time: Cognition, Communication and Learning during the ﬁnal
stages of the work. The research of Ingar Brinck was ﬁnanced by the Bank of Sweden Tercentenary
Foundation through the Centre for Cognitive Semiotics at Lund University.
References
Ambrose, S. (1998). Late Pleistocene human population bottlenecks, volcanic winter, and differ-
entiation of modern humans. Journal of Human Evolution, 34, 623–651.
Arp, R. (2006). The environment of out Hominin ancestors, tool-usage, and scenario visualization.
Biology and Philosophy, 21, 95–117.
19 We wish to thank Ernst Fehr for this suggestion.

218
P. Gärdenfors et al.
Atance, C. M., & O’Neill, D. K. (2005). The emergence of episodic future thinking in humans.
Learning and Motivation, 36, 126–144.
Axelrod, R., & Hamilton, W. D. (1981). The evolution of cooperation. Science, 214, 1390–1396.
Barclay, P. (2005). Reputational beneﬁts for altruistic punishment. Evolution and Human
Behaviour, 27, 325–344.
Baron-Cohen, S. (1994). How to build a baby that can read minds: Cognitive mechanisms in
mindreading. Cahiers de Psychologie Cognitive, 13(5), 513–552.
Bickerton, D. (1990). Language and species. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Bickerton, D. (2002). Foraging versus social intelligence in the evolution of protolanguage. In
A. Wray (Ed.), The transition to language (pp. 207–225). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bird, R. (1999). Cooperation and conﬂict: The behavioral ecology of the sexual division of labor.
Evolutionary Anthropology, 8(2), 65–75.
Bräuer, J., Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2009). Are apes inequity averse? New data on the token-
exchange paradigm. American Journal of Primatology, 71, 175–181.
Brinck, I. (1997). The indexical ‘I’. The ﬁrst person in thought and language. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Brinck, I. (2001). Attention and the evolution of intentional communication. Pragmatics and
Cognition, 9(2), 255–272.
Brinck, I. (2004). Joint attention, triangulation and radical interpretation: A problem and its
solution. Dialectica, 58(2), 179–205.
Brinck, I. (2008a). The role of intersubjectivity for the development of intentional communica-
tion. In J. Zlatev, T. Racine. C. Sinha, & E. Itkonen (Eds.), The shared mind: Perspectives on
intersubjectivity (pp. 115–140). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Brinck, I. (2008b). From similarity to uniqueness: Method and theory in comparative psychology.
In L. S. Röska-Hardy & E. M. Neumann-Held (Eds.), Learning from animals? Examining the
nature of human uniqueness (pp. 155–170). London: Psychology Press.
Brinck, I., & Gärdenfors, P. (1999). Representation and self-awareness in intentional agents.
Synthese, 118, 89–104.
Brinck, I., & Gärdenfors, P. (2003). Co-operation and communication in apes and humans, Mind
and Language, 18(5), 484–501.
Brownell, C. A., & Carriger, M. S. (1990). Changes in cooperation and self-other differentiation
during the second year. Child Development, 61, 1164–1174.
Buckner R. L., & Carroll, D. C. (2007). Self-projection and the brain. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
11, 49–57.
Bugnyar, T., Stöwe, M., & Heinrich, B. (2004). Ravens, Corvus corax follow gaze direction of
humans around obstacles. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, B, 271, 1331–1336.
Burkart, J. M., Fehr, E., Efferson, C., & van Schaik, C. P. (2007). Other-regarding prefer-
ences in a non-human primate: Common marmosets provision food altruistically. PNAS, 104,
19762–19766.
Call, J. & Tomasello, M. (1999). A nonverbal false belief task: The performance of children and
great apes. Child Development, 70(2), 381–395.
Carpenter, M., Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2002). A new false belief test for 36-month-olds. British
Journal of Developmental Psychology, 20, 393–420.
Charness, G., & Dufwenberg, M. (2006). Promises and partnership. Econometrica, 74, 1579–1601.
Clements, W. A., & Perner, J. (1994). Implicit understanding of belief. Cognitive Development, 9,
377–397.
Correia, S. P. C., Dickinson, A., & Clayton, N. S. (2007). Western scrub-jays anticipate future
needs independently of their current motivational state. Current Biology, 17, 856–861.
Csibra, G. (2003). Teleological and referential understanding of action in infancy. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society, B 29, 447–458.
Deacon, T. (1997). The symbolic species. London: Penguin Books.
D’Entremont, B. (2000). A perceptual-attentional explanation of gaze following in 3- to
6-months-olds.” Developmental Science, 3, 302–311.
Dessalles, J.-L. (2007). Why we talk. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

10
The Tripod Effect: Co-evolution of Cooperation, Cognition and Communication
219
De Waal, F. B. M., & Brosnan, S. F. (2006). Simple and complex reciprocity in primates. In P. M.
Kappeler & C. P. van Schaik (Eds.), Cooperation in primates and humans (pp. 85–105). Berlin:
Springer.
Donald, M. (1991). Origins of the modern mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Donald, M. (1999). Preconditions for the evolution of protolanguages. In M. C. Corballis, & S. E.
G. Lea (Eds.), The descent of mind (pp. 355–65). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dunbar, R. (1996). Grooming, gossip and the evolution of language. London: Faber and Faber.
Dunin-Kepliz, B., & Verbrugge, R. (2001). A tuning machine for cooperative problem solving.
Fundamenta Informatica, 21, 1001–1025.
Emery, N. J. (2000). The eyes have it: the neuroethology, function and evolution of social gaze.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 24, 581–604.
Farroni, T., Johnson, M. H., &Csibra, G. (2004). Mechanisms of eye gaze perception during
infancy. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 16(8), 1320–1326.
Fehr, E. (2004). Don’t lose your reputation. Nature, 432, 449–450.
Fehr, E., & Gächter, S. (2002). Altruistic punishment in humans. Nature, 415, 137–140.
Flavell, J. H., Flavell, E. R., Green, F. L., & Moses, J. L. (1990). Young children′s understanding
of fact beliefs versus value beliefs. Child Development, 61(4), 915–928.
Franco, F. (2005). Infant pointing. In N. Eilan, C. Hoerl, T. McCormack, & J. Roessler (Eds.), Joint
attention, communication, and other minds (pp. 129–164). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gamble, C., & Steele, J. (1999). Hominid ranging patterns and dietary strategies. In H. Ullrich
(Ed.), Hominid Evolution: Lifestyles and Survival Strategies (pp. 396–409). Leipzig: Edition
Archaea.
Gärdenfors, P. (1996). Cued and detached representations in animal cognition, Behavioural
Processes, 36, 263–273.
Gärdenfors, P. (2000). Conceptual spaces: The geometry of thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gärdenfors, P. (2003). How homo became sapiens: On the evolution of thinking. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Gärdenfors, P. (2004). Cooperation and the evolution of symbolic communication. In K. Oller &
U. Griebel, (Eds.), The evolution of communication systems (pp. 237–256). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Gärdenfors, P. (2008). The role of intersubjectivity in animal and human cooperation. Biological
Theory, 3(1), 1–12.
Gärdenfors, P., & Osvath M (2010). The evolution of anticipatory cognition as a precursor to
symbolic communication. In R. K. Larson, V. Déprez, & H. Yamokido (Eds.), The evolution of
human language: Biolinguistic perspectives (pp. 103–114). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Garnham, W. A., & Ruffman, T. (2001). Doesn’t see, doesn’t know: Is anticipatory looking really
related to understanding or belief. Developmental Science, 4, 94–100.
Gergely, G., & Csibra, G. (2003). Teleological reasoning in infancy: The naive theory of rational
action. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7, 287–292.
Gilbert D. T., & Wilson, T. D. (2007). Prospection: Experiencing the future. Science, 317,
1351–1354.
Glenberg, A. (1997). What memory is for. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 20(1), 1–55.
Gomez, J. C. (2004). Apes, monkeys, children, and the growth of mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Gomez, J. C. (2007). Pointing behaviors in apes and human infants: A balanced interpretation.
Child Development, 78(3), 729–734.
Gopnik, A., & Astington, J. W. (1988). Children’s understanding of representational change, and
its relation to the understanding of false belief and the appearance-reality distinction. Child
Development, 59, 26–37.
Gulz, A. (1991). The planning of action as a cognitive and biological phenomenon. Lund: Lund
University Cognitive Studies 2.

220
P. Gärdenfors et al.
Haidle, M. (2009). How to think a simple spear? In S. de Beaune, F. Coolidge, & T. Wynn (Eds.),
Cognitive archaeology and human evolution (pp. 57–75). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Hare, B., Call, J., Agnetta, B., & Tomasello, M. (2000). Chimpanzees know what conspeciﬁcs do
and do not see, Animal Behaviour, 59, 771–85.
Hare, B., Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2001). Do chimpanzees know what conspeciﬁcs know? Animal
Behaviour, 61, 139–151.
Hauser, M. D., Chen, M. K., Chen, F., & Chuang, E. (2003). Give unto others: Genetically unrelated
cotton-top tamarin monkeys preferentially give food to those who altruistically give food back.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, B 270, 2363–2370.
Hawkes, K. J., O’Connell, F., Blurton, N. G., Alvarez, J. H., & Charnov E. L. (1998).
Grandmothering, menopause, and the evolution of human life histories. PNAS, 95, 1336–1339.
Jackendoff, R. (1999). Possible stages in the evolution of the language capacity. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 3(7), 272–279.
Jensen, K., Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2007). Chimpanzees are rational maximizers in an ultimatum
game. Science, 318, 107–109.
Johansson, S., Zlatev, J., & Gärdenfors, P. (2006). Why don’t chimps talk and humans sing like
canaries? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 29(3), 287–288.
Kacelnik, A. (2003). The evolutioin of patience. In G. Lowenstein, D. Read, & R. F. Baumeister
(Eds.), Time and decsioin: Economic and psychological perspectives on intertemporal choice
(pp. 115–138). New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Kaminski, J., Riedel, J. Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2005). Domestic goats, Capra hircus, follow
gaze direction and use social cues in an object task. Animal Behaviour, 69, 11–18.
Köhler, W. (1921). Zur psychologie des schimpansen. Psychologische Forschung, 1, 2–46.
Kuhn, S. L., & Stiner, M. C. (2008). Paleolithic ornaments: Implications for cognition, demography
and identity. Diogenes, 214, 40–48.
Leavens, D. A., Hopkins, W. D., & Bard, K. A. (2005). Understanding the point of chimpanzee
pointing: Epigenesis and ecological validity. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 14,
185–189.
Leavens, D. A., Hopkins, W. D., & Bard, K. A. (2008). The heterochronic origins of explicit
reference. In J. Zlatev, T. Racine, C. Sinha, & E. Itkonen (Eds.), The shared mind: Perspectives
on intersubjectivity (pp. 187–214). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Lehmann, L., & Keller, L. (2006). The evolution of cooperation and altruism – A general
framework and a classiﬁcation of models. Journal of Evolutionary Biology, 19, 1365–1376.
Leimar, O., & Hammerstein, P. (2001). Evolution of cooperation through indirect reciprocation.
Proceedings of the Royal Society London, B 268, 745–753.
Leonard W., & Robertson, M. L. (2000). Ecological correlates for home range variation in pri-
mates: Implications for human evolution. In S. Boinski & P. A. Garber (Eds.), On the move:
How and why animals travel in groups (pp. 628–648). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.
Lewis, D. K. (1969). Convention. Boston: Harvard University Press.
Lindgren, K. (1997). Evolutionary dynamics in game-theoretic models. In B. Arthur, S. Durlauf, &
D. Lane (Eds.), The economy as an evolving complex system II (pp. 337–367). Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley.
Maynard Smith, J. (1982). Evolution and the theory of games. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Mulcahy, N. J., & Call, J. (2006). Apes save tools for future use. Science, 312, 1038–1040.
Naqshbandi, M., & Roberts W. A. (2006). Anticipation of future events in squirrel monkeys
(Saimiri sciureus) and rats (Rattus norvegicus): Test of the Bischof-Kohler Hypothesis. Journal
of Comparative Psychology, 120, 345–357.
Noble, W., & Davidson, I. (1996). Human evolution, language and mind: A psychological and
archaeological inquiry. Melbourne: Cambridge University Press.
Nowak, M. A., & Sigmund, K. (2005). Evolution of indirect reciprocity. Nature, 437, 1291–1298.

10
The Tripod Effect: Co-evolution of Cooperation, Cognition and Communication
221
O’Connell, J. F., Hawkes, K., & Blurton Jones, N. G. (1999). Grandmothering and the evolution
of Homo erectus. Journal of Human Evolution, 36, 461–485.
Osvath, M. (2009). Spontaneous planning for future stone throwing by a male chimpanzee. Current
Biology, 19, 190–191
Osvath, M., & Gärdenfors, P. (2005). Oldowan culture and the evolution of prospective cognition.
Lund: Lund University Cognitive Studies, 122.
Osvath, M., & Osvath, H. (2008). Chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes) and orangutan (Pongo abelii)
forethought: self-control and pre-experience in the face of future tool use. Animal Cognition,
11, 661–674.
Panchanathan, K., & Boyd, R. (2004). Indirect reciprocity can stabilize cooperation without the
second-order free rider problem. Nature, 432, 499–502.
Perner, J., Leekam, S., & Wimmer, H. (1987). Three-year-old’s difﬁculty with false belief: The
case for a conceptual deﬁcit. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 5, 125–137.
Pika, S., Liebal, K., & Tomasello, M. (2003). Gestural communication in young gorillas (Gorilla
gorilla): Gestural repertoire and use. American Journal of Primatology, 60(3), 95–111.
Plummer, T. (2004). Flaked stones and old bones: Biological and cultural evolution at the dawn of
technology. Yearbook of Physical Anthropology, 47, 118–164.
Povinelli, D. J., & Eddy, T. J. (1996). What young chimpanzees know about seeing. Monographs
of the Society for Research in Child Development, 61(2), Serial No. 247.
Premack, D., & Woodruff, G. (1978). Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind? Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 4, 515–526.
Preston, S. D., & de Waal, F. (2003). Empathy: Its ultimate and proximal bases. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 25, 1–72.
Raby, C. R., Alexis, D. M., Dickinson, A., & Clayton, N. S. (2007). Planning for the future by
western scrub-jays. Nature, 445, 919–921.
Reddy, V. (2003). On being the object of attention: Implications for self-other consciousness.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 7(9), 397–402.
Repacholi, B., & Gopnik, A. (1997). Early understanding of desires: Evidence from 14 and 18
month olds. Developmental Psychology, 33, 12–21.
Richerson, P. J., Boyd, R. T., & Heinrich, J. (2003). Cultural evolution of human cooperation.
In P. Hammerstein (Ed.), The Genetic and Cultural Origins of Cooperation (pp. 357–388).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Roberts, W. A. (2002). Are animals stuck in time? Psychological Bulletin, 128, 473–489.
Roberts, W. A. (2006). The questions of temporal and spatial displacement in animal cognition. In
E. A. Wasserman & T. R. Zentall (Eds.), Comparative cognition: Experimental explorations of
animal intelligence (pp. 145–163). New York: Oxford University Press.
Rosati, A. G., Stevens, J. R., Hare, B., & Hauser, M. D. (2007). The evolutionary origins of human
patience: Temporal preferences in chimpanzees, bonobos, and human adults. Current Biology,
17, 1663–1668.
Searle, J. (1995). The construction of social reality. New York: Free Press.
Semmann, D., Krambeck, H.-J., & Milinski, M. (2005). Reputation is valuable within and outside
one’s own social group. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology, 57, 611–616.
Shennan, S. (2001). Demography and cultural innovation: A model and its implications for the
emergence of modern human culture. Cambridge Archaeological Journal, 11(1), 5–16.
Sigmund, K., Hauert, C., & Nowak, M. (2001). Reward and punishment. PNAS, 98, 10757–10762.
Silk, J. B., Brosnan, S. F., Vonk, J., Henrich, J., Povinelli, D. J., Richardson, S. J., et al.
(2005). Chimpanzees are indifferent to the welfare of unrelated group members. Nature, 437,
1357–1359.
Sterelny, K. (2003). Thought in a hostile world. Oxford: Blackwell.
Stern, D. N. (1985). The interpersonal world of the infant: A view from psychoanalysis and
developmental psychology. New York: Basic Books.
Stephens, W., McLinn, C. M., & Stevens, J. R. (2002). Discounting and reciprocity in an iterated
prisoner’s dilemma. Science, 298, 2216–2218.

222
P. Gärdenfors et al.
Stevens, J. R., & Hauser, M. (2004). Why be nice? Psychological constraints on the evolution of
cooperation. Trends in Cognitive Science, 8, 60–65.
Striano, T., & Bertin, E. (2005). Social-cognitive skills between 5 and 10 months of age. British
Journal of Developmental Psychology, 23, 1–11.
Suddendorf, T., & Busby, J. (2005). Making decisions with the future in mind. Learning and
Motivation, 36, 110–125.
Suddendorf, T., & Corballis, M. C. (1997). Mental time travel and the evolution of human mind.
Genetic, Social and General Psychology Monographs, 123, 133–167.
Suddendorf, T., & Corballis, M. C. (2007). The evolution of foresight: What is mental time travel
and is it unique to humans? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 30, 299–351.
Suddendorf, T., & Whiten, A. (2001). Mental evolution an development: Evidence for secondary
representation in children, great apes, and other animals. Psychological Bulletin, 127(5),
629–650.
Thieme, H. (1997). Lower Paleolithic hunting spears from Germany. Nature, 385, 807–810.
Thieme, H. (1999) Altpaläolithische Holzgeräte aus Schöningen, Lkr. Helmstadt. Germania, 77,
451–487.
Tomasello, M. (1999). The cultural origins of human cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Tomasello, M., & Call, J. (2006). Do chimpanzees know what others see – or only what they are
looking at? In S. Hurley & M. Nudds (Eds.), Rational animals (pp. 371–384). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., Call, J., Behne, T., & Moll, H. (2005). Understanding and sharing
intentions: The origins of cultural cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 28, 675–735.
Toth, N. (1985). The Oldowan reassessed: A close look at early stone artifacts. Journal of
Archeological Science, 12, 101–120.
Trevarthen, C., & Hubley, P. (1978). Secondary intersubjectivity: Conﬁdence, conﬁding, and acts
of meaning in the ﬁrst year. In A. Lock (Ed.), Action, gesture, and symbol: The emergence of
language (pp. 183–229). New York: Academic.
Trivers, R. L. (1971). The evolution of reciprocal altruism. Quarterly Review of Biology, 46, 35–57.
Tulving, E. (1972). Episodic and semantic memory. In E. Tulving & W. Donaldson (Eds.),
Organization of memory (pp. 381–403). New York: New York Academic Press.
Tulving, E. (2005). Episodic memory and autonoesis: Uniquely human? In H. Terrace & J.
Metcalfe (Eds.), The missing link in cognition: Evolution of self-knowing consciousness (pp.
3–56). New York: Oxford University Press.
Van Schaik. C. P., & Kappeler, P. M. (2006). Cooperation in primates and humans: closing the
gap. In C. P. van Schaik & P. M. Kappeler (Eds.), Cooperation in primates and humans (pp.
85–105). Berlin: Springer.
Villa, P. (1983). Terra amata and the middle pleistocene archaeological record of Southern France.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Warneken, F., Hare, B., Melis, A. P., Hanus, D., & Tomasello, M. (2007). Spontaneous altruism by
chimpanzees and young children. PloS Biology, 5, 1414–1420.
Warneken, F., & Tomasello, M. (2006). Altruistic helping in human infants and young chim-
panzees. Science, 311, 1301–1303.
Wellman, H. M., & Liu, D (2004). Scaling of theory-of-mind tasks. Child Development, 75,
523–541.
Whiten, A. (1999). The evolution of deep social mind in humans. In M. C. Corballis & S. E. G. Lea
(Eds.), The descent of mind: Psychological perspectives on hominid evolution (pp. 173–193).
New York: Oxford University Press.
Wilkinson, G. S. (1984). Reciprocal food sharing in the vampire bat. Nature, 308, 181–184.
Zahavi, A. (1975). Mate selection – A selection for a handicap. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 53,
205–214.
Zlatev, J., Persson, T., & Gärdenfors, P. (2005). Bodily mimesis as the “missing link” in human
cognitive evolution. Lund: Lund University Cognitive Studies, 121.

Part III
The Cognitive and Anthropological
Connection

Chapter 11
Language as a Repository of Tacit Knowledge
Harry Collins
Abstract The relationship between language and practice has been badly and pro-
foundly misunderstood. There is an intimate relationship at the collective level and
the content of language is formed by the practices of a community. It is not the case,
however, that an individual has to engage in all the practices of a community in order
to acquire the language and the practical understanding that goes with it. Were this
not the case there could be no societies: societies depend on the division of labour
and any profound division of labour depends on practical understanding by those
who do not themselves practice what they have to understand. Were it not the case
that individuals could learn language without practicing it then the speech of the
congenitally wheelchair-bound, or blind, would be noticeably limited. The chapter
works through this position, contrasting it with the position developed by philoso-
phers of practice such as Hubert Dreyfus, describes experiments which support the
position, and explores the question of the extent to which this means experience can
be captured by language.
11.1 Introduction: The Main Argument
Computer enthusiasts, of the group sometimes referred to as the ‘artiﬁcial intelli-
gentsia,’ tried to persuade us that human abilities including ﬂuent language speaking
could be captured in programs if only those programs were complicated enough.
Some of those who thought hard about the matter, such as philosopher Hubert
Dreyfus (1972), argued that they could not be so captured. They argued that human
knowledge was not conﬁned to symbols but involved physical involvement with the
world. In this they were right – human knowledge does involve physical involve-
ment with the world. I am going to argue below that the nature of that ‘involvement’
was misunderstood, but let it go for the time being. For the moment we can agree
that Wittgenstein was right when he said, ‘if a lion could speak we would not under-
stand him.’1 And he was right in saying that we would not understand him because a
1 Ludwig Wittgenstein (1953, p. 223).
H. Collins (B)
SOCSI, Cardiff School of Social Sciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, Wales CF10 3WT, UK
e-mail: CollinsHM@cf.ac.uk
225
T. Schilhab et al. (eds.), The Symbolic Species Evolved, Biosemiotics 6,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-2336-8_11, C⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2012

226
H. Collins
lion’s physical engagement with the world is so different to ours. Since our language
was not built up out of experiences pertaining to the physical world of lions – such
as using your teeth and claws to rip raw ﬂesh from zebras that have just been pulled
down and killed – it does not contain the knowledge of lions. A talking lion might
be able to express what doing lion-like things was like in the symbols of Lionese,
but Lionese would not mean anything to us that corresponded with what it means to
talking lions. Hence, Hubert Dreyfus entitled one of his earliest papers on the topic
‘Why Computers Must Have Bodies in Order to Be Intelligent.’2 He called it that
because he could see, quite correctly, that our knowledge had to do with the way we
used our bodies. The same applies in a slightly different way to groups of people
who live in different social settings: our language cannot capture what it means to
divine a witch using the Azande poison oracle and the language of the Azande can-
not capture what it means to take out a mortgage because, though we have similar
bodies, we use them in very different ways.3
Unfortunately, the inference was inexact. Nobody noticed the problem nor, at the
time, was there any reason to notice the problem, because Dreyfus was ﬁghting a
good war with enormous courage in spite of the contumely being heaped upon his
head and it was vital that he win it. Nevertheless, ‘war-damage’ was being inﬂicted
and now that the war is over we can see that it was pretty serious. The damage is
that language and symbols have been equated; in throwing out the strings of digital
symbols used by computers as a potential repository of human knowledge, language,
which, on the face of it, is composed of symbols rather than physical activity, was
also thrown out. The result is that the possibility that language could be a repository
of human knowledge has been excluded from consideration in a doctrinaire way.
The argument is that if understanding Lionese involves zebra-ripping then anyone
or anything who/which understands the language must have ripped zebras; the lan-
guage, it was said, cannot itself capture what it is to rip zebras, only the language
plus the practice can contain it.
The fallacy is this: It is true that there could be no Lionese as we know it without
zebra-ripping among lions at the collective level. This is what I have elsewhere
called the ‘social embodiment thesis’ – the collectivity of lions develops its speciﬁc
language as a result of the typical form of lions’ bodies and the typical things they
do with them. Not every individual who speaks Lionese with ﬂuency has, however,
to be a zebra-ripper. Lionese is the collective property of lions and their ‘form-of-
life’ but that does not stop non-lions (or individual non-zebra-ripping lions if such
there are), from acquiring it if they put in enough effort. The ‘minimal embodiment
thesis’ claims that not every member of the collectivity has to have a lion-like body
or engage in lion like activities to become ﬂuent in the language of the collectivity
2 Dreyfus (1965).
3 Another incarnation of the argument is to do with the incommensurability of Kuhnian
‘paradigms’ in science. (Kuhn, 1962).

11
Language as a Repository of Tacit Knowledge
227
and certain individuals can, therefore, get by with a minimal body.4 This is possible
because a language, like Lionese, itself contains some or all of the knowledge and
understanding of the practical activities that went to build it up in the collectivity
of active lions, so that to acquire the language with ﬂuency is to acquire some or
all of that knowledge and understanding. To put this another way, the language of
Lionese, when ﬂuently exercised, does contain much or all of the tacit knowledge
of what it is to be a zebra-ripper.
To acquire a language with the degree of ﬂuency needed to capture the meaning
that goes with it is not a trivial accomplishment. Such ﬂuency is, as a matter of
fact, nearly always acquired along with the carrying out of the practices pertaining
to the language and that is another reason why it has not been noticed that it can
be acquired without engaging in the practices – it is a rare thing. It is also why it
remains the case that if lions could speak most of us would not understand them.
Nevertheless, one or two of us, who had put in the effort that it takes to become ﬂuent
in Lionese from immersion in the spoken discourse alone, could understand lions
in the absence of claws and ripping-teeth. It may be the case that strings of digital
symbols cannot capture zebra-ripping but it is not the case that language cannot
capture zebra-ripping because language is more than strings of digital symbols.5
What follows is that, contra Dreyfus, it has not been proved that a computer
must have a body to be intelligent. The argument so far, if it is correct, shows that
there is logical space for a computer to learn a practice-based language without
practice because there is logical space for humans to learn a practice-based language
without practice. This does not prove that computers can acquire such a language –
I believe that they cannot while I will also argue that humans can. The reason I
think computers (as we know them) cannot acquire language, is that they merely
manipulate digital symbols not that they do not have bodies. It could be argued
that the reason they merely manipulate symbols rather than engage in linguistic
discourse is because they don’t have bodies but if individual humans can acquire
language without bodies, or without much in the way of bodies, then it seems odd
to impose the need for bodies on computers.
That a human does not need a body, or much of a body, to speak ﬂuently, and
therefore capture the ‘tacit knowledge’ of a community whose physical practices
have not been shared, should be obvious. Everyone in a wheel chair can do it!6 The
reason it has not been obvious, and the reason it has been such hard work to establish
the point, was, I believe, and as I have intimated, to do with the role of symbols in
the artiﬁcial intelligence debate. It was felt that to allow ﬂuency relating to bodily
experience to entities without proper bodies would allow ﬂuency, and hence human
knowledge, to computers. Thus Dreyfus, to be consistent, also has to argue that
4 See Collins (2004a) for the ‘social embodiment thesis’ and its counterpart, the ‘minimal
embodiment thesis’.
5 For the difference between symbol manipulation and language see the ‘The Transformation-
Translation Distinction’ in Collins (2010, p. 25).
6 See, for example, Collins (2004b).

228
H. Collins
sports coaches or commentators who have not played a game to a high level cannot
coach or comment properly and that non-surgeons cannot talk sensibly about the
kind of cuts a surgeon makes:
You may have mastered the way surgeons talk to each other but you don’t understand
surgery unless you can tell thousands of different cuts from each other and judge which
is appropriate. In the domain of surgery no matter how well we can pass the word along we
are just dumb. So is the sportscaster who can’t tell a strike from a ball until the umpire has
announced it.7
Arguers like Dreyfus have to say such things because they have to say that even
humans who have not been engaged in the physical activities they try to talk about
cannot talk about them ﬂuently.
But the barrier was being put in the wrong place. To win the good war against
the ‘intelligence’ of computers one had to argue, not that they must have bodies, but
that digital symbols located in an entity that was not embedded in social life were
not sufﬁcient for it to become and remain ﬂuent in language.8 The crucial point is
that even a fully embodied human being that is isolated from society cannot become
or remain ﬂuent in the language. The example of feral children exhibits the ﬁrst part
of the prohibition, the growing apart of physically separated cultures exhibits the
second part.9
The logic of the two positions is set out in cartoon form in Fig. 11.1 which has
language speakers in the left half and entities that fail to speak language in the right.
The Dreyfus position (the top boxes) concentrates on individuals: it claims that only
those who practice (represented by hammer and anvil) can speak ‘Hammer-and-
Anvil Language’ (HAL) ﬂuently – case ‘A’. Anyone who is isolated from hammer
and anvil – case ‘B’ – (dotted boxes indicate isolation) cannot be ﬂuent in HAL and
is bound to speak a different language at best. Since computers – case ‘C’ – cannot
engage in any physical activity they cannot be ﬂuent in any language.
The position being argued for here is that a language like HAL can only develop
if there is a community of hammerers on anvils but that the language, once devel-
oped, has, to some extent, ‘a life of its own.’10 An individual who immerses
themselves in that language – case ‘D’ – can acquire it and speak it ﬂuently even
though they do not do any hammering themselves. On the other hand, those isolated
from the HAL community – case ‘E’ – (dotted boxes indicate isolation once more)
will not be able to speak HAL even if they do use hammers and anvils. Furthermore,
7 Selinger, Dreyfus, and Collins (2007 at p. 737).
8 It was unfortunate that one of the most salient arguments against the potency of computers, John
Searle’s ‘Chinese Room’ argument, starts by positing the existence of a completely ﬂuent com-
puter. Actually, the Chinese Room would not work without it being embedded in society through
the medium of a human being (Collins, 1990, 2010).
9 See the quotation from H G Well’s ‘Country of the Blind’ below.
10 I am sure Dreyfus too would believe that a community of hammerers is necessary to develop
the HAL language but he does not work out the consequences, concentrating on the practices of
individuals.

11
Language as a Repository of Tacit Knowledge
229
DREYFUS-LIKE ARGUMENT
COLLINS-LIKE ARGUMENT
A
B
C
F
E
D
Fig. 11.1 The language barrier: Dreyfus-like (upper) and as argued here (lower)
humans physically isolated from all societies cannot speak any language with ﬂu-
ency and computers – case ‘F’ – always being isolated from society even when
physically located within it, cannot speak any language with ﬂuency either. But the
problem is the isolation, not the inability to practice.11
In sum, a language is formed in intimate relationship with the practices of the
speaking community – whether zebra-ripping or hammering – but that does not
mean that each individual who speaks the language has to engage in those practices;
they can learn the language from immersion in the discourse alone as in case ‘D’.
At the same time, engaging in the practice without immersion in the discourse, as in
case ‘E’, does not enable the discourse. The rest of this chapter is a commentary on
this argument and on the nature of language 12.
11.2 Experiments on Interactional Expertise
Lest the example of the disabled is insufﬁcient on its own, we have conducted
a series of experiments designed to show that it is possible to become ﬂuent in
the language of a practice-based domain without practicing (e.g., Collins, Evans,
Ribeiro, & Hall, 2006). These experiments involve the ‘Imitation Game.’ The
Imitation Game is similar to the ‘Turing Test’ but the entity being tested is a
human not a computer. In these experiments, and the theoretical developments
11 I am sure Dreyfus would agree that isolated individuals and isolated computers could not speak.
Again, however, it is a matter of what you concentrate on. He concentrates on their activity rather
than their isolation.
12 See also Collins (2011) for development of the point.

230
H. Collins
which underpin them, a person who has acquired the language of a practical domain
without practicing is said to possess ‘interactional expertise’ in that domain. A per-
son who has acquired practical ability is said to possess ‘contributory expertise.’
It is assumed that barring special cases such as inarticulateness or social isolation –
which we call lack of ‘interactive ability’ – one who possesses contributory expertise
also possesses interactional expertise.
In the Imitation Game, a judge, who has contributory expertise, tries to distin-
guish between a human who has contributory expertise (Participant ‘A’ in Fig. 11.2,
who also has contributory expertise), and another human who has only interac-
tional expertise (Participant B in Fig. 11.2). The judge asks questions freely over
an internet link.
Success for ‘Participant B’ is indicated when the judge can do no better than
chance in his or her identiﬁcations.
We nearly always run the experiments with a control, or ‘quasi-control’ condi-
tion. For example, blind persons are expected to possess interactional expertise in
sighted-persons’ discourse because they have been immersed in the language of the
sighted all their lives. Running the experiment with a blind person pretending to
be a sighted person is called the ‘chance condition’ because we expect the judge
will do not much better than chance when he/she tries to identify the participants.
The quasi-control or, ‘identify condition,’ has the reverse polarity. In the case of the
blind we ask sighted persons to try to imitate the blind using a blind judge. Here we
expect the judge to be able to identify the participants because the sighted have not
been immersed in the discourse related to the practices of the blind.
The experiments that we did with the blind showed that the balance of correct
guesses over failures to identify in the chance condition was 13% whereas in the
identify condition it was 86%. Exact chance in the chance condition should not be
expected because there are many ways to catch the pretending person out: they have
to lie convincingly as well as demonstrate their possession of sighted discourse.
The experiment has also been run successfully with both polarities on the colour-
blind, those with perfect pitch, a sociologist long immersed in the language of
gravitational-wave physics pretending to be a gravitational-wave physicist, ‘gays’
pretending to be ‘straights’ and active Christians pretended to be non-Christians.13
PARTICIPANT 
has target 
expertise 
JUDGE 
has target 
expertise 
PARTICIPANT 
pretends to 
have target 
expertise 
A
B
Fig. 11.2 The imitation game
13 Latest results can be found at www.cf.ac.uk/socsi/expertise

11
Language as a Repository of Tacit Knowledge
231
Readers should think about which they expect to be the chance condition and which
the identify condition in each case. From here on I will take it that the existence of
interactional expertise – that which is represented on the left hand side of the lower
box in Fig. 11.1, has been established.14 It now remains to explore the notion in
more detail.
11.3 Domain Speciﬁc Languages and Language in General
The idea of interactional expertise contradicts the idea that each individual must
have a body, that is capable of doing the practical activities corresponding to the
concepts of the language, if linguistic ﬂuency is to be attained. This claim has been
disputed.15 The confrontation between Dreyfus and Collins on this matter is clear in
the case of domain speciﬁc languages. Thus Dreyfus insists that one cannot speak
ﬂuently about the cuts used in surgery unless one is a surgeon, one cannot commen-
tate expertly on a sport unless one has played it, one cannot comment on chess unless
one is an expert chess-player, and so forth. Collins, on the other hand, insists that all
this can be accomplished in the absence of the corresponding practical experience
so long as the immersion in the corresponding discourse is sufﬁciently profound;
this explains why, according to Collins and contra-Dreyfus, non sports players can
be excellent coaches and commentators and why the disabled can be ﬂuent in the
discourse of those who are not disabled. Furthermore, the only way smooth division
of labour in complex areas, such as large technological projects, can be understood
is via the mediation of interactional expertise: in such circumstances we have to be
able to understand each other’s jobs if we are to work smoothly in a team even if
we cannot execute those jobs. Collins believes that the arguments and experiments
strongly favour his viewpoint on this disagreement.16
When it comes to the ability to acquire language as a whole, as opposed to
domain speciﬁc languages, the argument is more nuanced. Collins has to accept
that languages cannot develop in the absence of certain bodily features – lungs, lar-
ynx, ears, certain brain developments, and so forth. That there are no speaking lions
almost certainly has to do with the fact that they do not have these bodily features.
Thus, human-like bodies are essential to the development of languages – and that is
why only humans possess them in the ﬁrst place – the social embodiment thesis. To
save any possible confusion, this does indeed mean that no collectivity of computers
could acquire a language of its own – ‘Computerise’, as it were. And it would not
be able to do this for the reasons that Dreyfus provides – computers are not suitably
14 For a ‘philosophical’ discussion of the notion see Collins et al. (2006) or Collins and Evans
(2007).
15 For example, Selinger et al. (2007), Collins (2008).
16 For a recent analysis of the relationship between ‘contributory expertise’ and ‘interactional
expertise’ see Collins (2011).

232
H. Collins
embodied. It does not mean, however, that, simply in virtue of the absence of a body,
a single computer could not acquire language from the surrounding human society.
In humans, the requirement for a body also applies only at the species (collective)
level and not to individuals. Thus, the congenitally profoundly deaf, who do not
normally acquire ﬂuency in the native language of the hearing, can acquire it if given
intense and special help from an early age – such as learning to recognise sound
through vibrations transmitted through a balloon. It seems reasonable to suppose
that those born without the ability to form words could also learn to do so if given
prostheses and specialised help. The most natural hypothesis appears to be that the
body required by an individual who is to learn a native language is minimal: on the
basis of this argument, it looks as though something close to a ‘brain in a vat’ could
learn to speak if given the right prostheses to allow deep immersion in the spoken
discourse.17 Others have argued that it would be impossible to learn human-like
languages without the senses of back and front, forward and backward, possession
and loss, and so forth that come with a body.18 As soon, however, as one begins to
strip away the need for practice, and the corresponding body parts that correspond
with understanding in every domain, there seems no obvious point at which the
stripping-away has to stop. Therefore, my claim would be that though a community
of brains-in-vats, would, like lions, and computers, not have the right kind of bodies
to acquire any language as a species, individual brains-in-vats could acquire the
ordinary human language of a fully embodied human linguistic community. It seems
to me that the onus is now on those who want to argue for the need for a body
in every individual who/which is to acquire language to show where and why the
stripping away of bodily features has to stop.
11.4 Can Interactional Expertise Give Rise to a Self-Supporting
Language
It seems probable that ‘interactional’ languages are parasitical. Let us deﬁne the
language pertaining to a domain of practice as an ‘interactional language.’ So, the
language of gravitational wave physics can be called ‘Interactional Gravitational
Wave language’ or ‘IGW.’ For the sake of exposition we will also deﬁne CGW,
which is the language spoken by those with contributory expertise in gravitational
wave physics. According to the interactional expertise hypothesis, IGW and CGW
are one and the same thing, so long as those who speak IGW are in continuing
contact with those who speak CGW! Now imagine that enough people to support a
17 A ‘brain-in-a-vat’ is here assumed to be different to a computer. A computer, (here by deﬁnition)
is a digital symbol manipulator or transformer. It is not immersed in language, only in symbols,
irrespective of its physical connections to the rest of society. The brain-in-the-vat, we assume, has
some mysterious properties that allow it to be immersed in meaningful language, as opposed to
symbols, if the right prostheses are added. It should be thought of as a human from whom more
and more bodily parts have been stripped away.
18 Selinger et al. (2007).

11
Language as a Repository of Tacit Knowledge
233
living natural language, each of whom was a speaker of IGW/CGW, went to live on
a distant island where there was no contact with gravitational wave physics. Once
they landed on the Island they would have to cease doing gravitational wave physics
so we will refer to them as speakers of IGW. It seems probable that the IGW they
spoke would soon cease to bear much resemblance to the language of those doing, or
interacting with gravitational wave physicists who were left behind. This is for two
reasons: the ‘host language’ – CGW – would be changing all the time in response
to changes in the technology whereas IGW as spoken on the island would not be
so affected – it would cease to be IGW and become ‘Island-IGW’; at the same time
Island-IGW would change as it responded to the new demands of Island society and
practices. Island-IGW would come to look like the Paciﬁc Islanders’ cargo-cult lan-
guage – including talk of ‘cargo’ and its correlates continuing long after the planes
had left but bearing less and less resemblance to the living contributory language
associated with the domain of air-freight. Island-IGW and IGW/CGW would pull
apart. This does not mean that Island-IGW would cease to be a language sui-generis
it would just mean that it would no longer be IGW because it would have less and
less to do with gravitational waves – it would just be a new language. For IGW and
CGW to remain identical, those who only speak but do not practice have to remain
in contact with the lived activity of the community of practitioners.
H.G. Wells makes the point in his short story: ‘The Country of the Blind.’ He
imagined a people who were completely blind and were isolated in a hidden valley.
For fourteen generations these people had been blind and cut off from all the seeing world;
the names for all the things of sight had faded and changed; the story of the outer world was
faded and changed to a child’s story . . .19
11.5 Does Interactional Expertise Carry Experiences?
What we call the ‘Strong Interactional Hypothesis’ is, to use the terminology of
the last section, that IGW and CGW, and their equivalents in every other domain
of practice, are identical. The hypothesis is that those with maximal interactional
expertise are indistinguishable from those with contributory expertise in any test
involving language alone.
This implies that the judgements made by such persons would also be identi-
cal. This is the implicit, but generally unnoticed, assumption behind all assessment
committees where large issues are at stake and the committee members cannot
have the skills associated with each and every facet of what has to be judged:
it is the assumption behind what probably counts as good management.20 In the
19 H. G. Wells (1911) ‘The Country of the Blind.’ The quote can be found on page 474 of the
Odhams collected edition of Wells’s works. One might illustrate the point further with the metaphor
of the immune system: however well a child is prepared for the biological environment via the
antibodies in its mother’s milk, isolate it from dirt and its immune system will start to fail – it will
no longer be ready for interaction with the changing world of infective agents.
20 See Collins and Evans (2007), and Collins and Sanders (2007), for more on this.

234
H. Collins
Imitation Game judges will spend a lot of time asking participants to make technical
judgements as the ability to make sensible judgement is a good test of expertise.
Even if the Strong Interactional Hypothesis is true, having interactional expertise
is not necessarily going to carry contributory expertise with it. It seems likely that
no amount of talking to bike-riders is going to enable one to get on a bike and ride if
one has never ridden before. So we know that what happens in the body of an inter-
actional expert is not the same as what happens in the body of a contributory expert
(and this is the essential point behind the experiments on the blind and similar). But
how does it feel to be an interactional expert as opposed to a contributory expert?
There is some evidence from sports psychology that ‘visualising’ an activity can
help in the performance. This might be explained by the fact that some of the neu-
rons that ‘ﬁre’ when an activity is visualised – the mirror neurons – are the same as
some of those that ﬁre when an activity is practised.21 It is tempting to say, then,
that the experience is the same.
It is hard to know how one might test for identity of experience given that, if the
Strong Interactional Hypothesis is true, systematically different way of experiencing
a domain will not be revealed in differences in the words that are spoken about it
or judgements made within it. For example, we would not expect that the invented
accounts of First World War experiences written by Sebastian Faulks, who did not
serve in the trenches, would be obviously different to the accounts of Robert Graves,
who did. According the Strong Interactional Hypothesis, even Graves would not
be able to tell that Faulks had not served if Faulks had done the best job possible
in terms of gaining interactional expertise in respect of trench life by immersing
himself in the discourse of the soldiers who served in the war.22
It is true, of course, that, other things being equal, failures to acquire inter-
actional expertise would indicate failures to share experience with contributory
experts. Schilhab believes that preliminary Imitation Game tests she has run with
midwives and mothers show that the experience of giving birth are not sufﬁciently
well embedded in the language to allow non-mother midwives to acquire the interac-
tional expertise of mothers. If non-mothers cannot acquire the interactional expertise
we can be sure they cannot have imaginatively reconstructed the experiences. Again,
do the masturbatory fantasies of a virgin – which many of us could try to recollect
– match the actual ﬁrst experience of sex? Probably not – in many cases because
the experience is so disappointing, in other cases because it is so unlike what was
expected, and in still other cases because the experience was so elevating.
Suppose Schilhab’s results are right and suppose also that virgins cannot
imaginatively reconstruct sexual experience. These are not decisive proofs that
interactional expertise cannot carry experience. Perhaps the problem is that the con-
ditions have not been right for the acquisition of the interactional expertise. Thus my
21 For a discussion in the context of interactional expertise see Schilhab (2007).
22 Whether this could be achieved as a matter of fact rather than principle is not so clear since
serving soldiers’ discourse would begin to change as soon as the war ended.

11
Language as a Repository of Tacit Knowledge
235
own experience suggests that people do not spend a lot of time in deep conversa-
tion about the moment-by-moment physical experience of sex so there is no reason
to suspect that one is in a position to gain interactional expertise in respect of sex
when one is a virgin, or indeed at any time. The same might be true of Schilhab’s
midwives. Do women spend hours in deep conversation about the moment-by-
moment experience of childbirth? Interactional expertise is not easy to acquire (see
below); it may be that a midwife who has attended multiple births has not been
much engaged in detailed and skilfully descriptive interchange about moment-to-
moment sensation; the birth of a child might be too traumatic for all but the most
phenomenological reﬂexive mothers to engage in such an accounting.
In sum, to know the extent to which interactional expertise carries experience
it is necessary to reﬂect about those experiences prior to which one has good rea-
son to think one already has excellent interactional expertise. It is quite hard to
know that one has good interactional expertise, however, as the examples of sex
and birth-giving indicate. One might think one knows so much about a topic that
one has interactional expertise in it but further reﬂection might show that this is far
from clear. Consider, for example, the case of war. Soldiers say that no-one who has
experienced war would ever go to war again. This is in-spite of the fact that huge
amounts have been written and spoken about war. If it is true that those without
war experience are much more ready to go to war – as is often said about politi-
cians – then it goes against the drift of my argument and it goes against the Strong
Interactional Hypothesis. But do those who embrace war more willingly than the
experienced soldier really have good interactional expertise? Soldiers are normally
portrayed as ﬁnding it too painful to talk of the most horrible details of battle while
pro-war sentiment is deliberately spread before a war so it may be very hard to
gain the real thing because the ‘language of war’ is subject to continual distortion.
Further consideration indicates that in a case like the First World War the discourse
is sufﬁciently strong so that no-one hungers for a repeat of that experience, not even
the most bloodthirsty politicians. So the case of war is, at best, ambivalent.
My inclination is, nevertheless, to say that interactional expertise cannot carry
every kind of experience. I cannot imagine that talk could ever reproduce the con-
dition for the experience of (a) the rare intense sexual desire for an individual
associated with either love or infatuation and (b) the witnessing of the birth of
one’s own child and the early years of parenthood. The astonishing intensity of
these experiences is, in each case, a thing that I cannot imagine being imaginatively
reconstructed. But this is not a proof – it may just be a failure of imagination on my
part.
Crucially, whether such experiences can be reconstructed through the medium of
discourse or not, the Strong Interactional Hypothesis can still be true. The Strong
Interactional Hypothesis does not depend on re-experiencing practice even in the
imagination. If the Strong Interactional Hypothesis is true, language alone carries
a sufﬁciently good repository of tacit knowledge to enable judgements to be made
about practical matters which have not been directly, or even imaginatively, expe-
rienced. Perhaps serious drug addiction is an example. This is an experience that I
have not had though I would guess it is something like intense sexual infatuation.

236
H. Collins
But even without imagining it I think discursive experience of it would make it
possible to make good judgements in respect of it.
This section has dealt with the question of whether the possession of interactional
expertise carries experiences with it which are similar to those of the contributory
expert. The visualisation process of athletes, along with the idea of ‘mirror neurons,’
indicates that some experiences can be reproduced imaginatively in the absence
of practice.23 I have suggested that I ﬁnd it hard to believe that all experiences
can be reproduced in this way. But proofs have not been developed, only invita-
tions for more phenomenological introspection and more experiments on language
acquisition.
11.6 How Is Interactional Expertise Acquired?
The easiest way to acquire interactional expertise is to become a contributory expert.
While learning to do the things that have to be done in a domain of practice, the
language will be learned. Learning to do the thing ensures the most intense immer-
sion in the spoken discourse of the community – the person learning to practice
is continually alongside ﬂuent instructors, continually listening to the ‘war stories’
and hearing the myths of the community being recounted; there is no better way
of becoming deeply immersed in the language. Of course, it may turn out that a
contributory expert is not very good at language – they are inarticulate or lack inter-
active ability – but other things being equal, immersion in the practice is the best
way of being immersed in the language.
One of the hardest ways to acquire interactional expertise is in the way the author
of this chapter acquired the interactional expertise of gravitational wave physics.
This was to enter the social domain of the target group and set up specially arranged
conversational encounters. Many status barriers have to be jumped, the participants
have to be persuaded to expend valuable time, and relatively little time can be spent
immersed in the discourse when it is compared to the time spent by a practitioner. It
is a long process, taking this author about ten years to gain what he has in the way
of interactional expertise in gravitational wave physics. His interactional expertise,
by the way, was enough to pass an Imitation Game test and to have his remarks
about physics listened to and taken seriously by the practitioners and even, on one
or two rare occasion, to win a debating point about the physics itself.24 Once the
initial barriers have been overcome, however, becoming more ﬂuent is an enjoyable
process, especially if one enjoys the company of those whose language one is trying
to learn.
23 Schilhab (2007).
24 See also Collins (2004, chapter 23), where I give an account of my participation in a review
committee and my feeling that I understood the technology in question better than some of the
ofﬁcial reviewers.

11
Language as a Repository of Tacit Knowledge
237
These two accounts of acquiring interactional expertise at either end of the spec-
trum of possibilities obscure a host of subtleties to do with exactly how one mixes
with the community. The possibilities have been referred to as ‘levels of immer-
sion.’25 Thus, I claim to have acquired interactional expertise purely from talking to
the scientists but actually I spent as much time as I could around the apparatus they
were building, looking at it, and ‘getting the feel’ of it. I suspect that, as a person
who likes diagrams, and likes having a visual image of things that are being spoken
of, I would have been, at best, much slower at acquiring the expertise without these
contacts with the physical correlates of the world of practice. Rodrigo Ribeiro, who
is making a special study of levels of immersion and interactional expertise, will
almost certainly ﬁnd that deeper immersion results in better interactional exper-
tise. Whether this is a result of the logistics of deeper immersion, or whether there
is some barrier that cannot be surmounted without visual experience of physical
settings, is going to be hard to show. My inclination is to say that the arguments
and evidence gathered to date indicate that a space has to be left for the possibil-
ity of acquiring full interactional expertise in the absence of any visual immersion
or physical contact – this is what the experiments on the blind and the argument
about the brain-in-the-vat seem to show. But it might also be the case that for many
practical purposes there might as well be a barrier between shallow immersion and
deep immersion since it is so hard to get a high level of interactional expertise from
shallow immersion and it is not something that anyone should choose unless forced.
11.7 Conclusion: Symbols and Language
In the introduction it was argued that language was more than a set of computer-like
symbols, it was a repository of understanding. It was then argued that since ﬂuency
in the language without ability in the practices to which a language referred, still
makes it possible to make good judgements about practical matters pertaining to the
domain, language was a repository of tacit knowledge.
How can something that is expressed in symbols be more than the symbols?
How can something expressed in the medium of explicit knowledge be a repository
of tacit knowledge? The circle is squared because language is itself a practice. It is
learned in communities which practice spoken discourse; discoursing is a practical
activity. Thus, when one learns a natural language, one learns not only words but
how to make well-formed sentences in the language in question and reject some
badly-formed sentences or expressions while understanding and generating others
that are not well-formed according to any formal rule, or even any rule that can be
anticipated, but can be understood as though they did conﬁrm. The rules of sentence
or phrase formation are like any ‘social rule’ – they do not contain the rules for
the own application; thus language ﬂuency contains the tacit knowledge of sentence
25 The term belongs to Rodrigo Ribeiro ex-Cardiff PhD student and professor at the University of
Minas Gerais in Belo Horizonte, Brazil.

238
H. Collins
and phrase formation. In the same way learning the language of a practical domain
contains the tacit knowledge needed to make judgements including judgements that
would be impossible to anticipate. Perhaps it is contained in the exact nuance or
rhythm of words or phrases, perhaps it is in the sentence pattern of paragraphs of
the emphases within them – I do not know. Again, the rules of these judgements
would not contain the rules of their own application and so knowing how to apply
them would be a matter of tacit knowledge. One way or another, it does seem that
to become good at the practice of spoken discourse is to come to know how to
understand the practical implications of words and the way they capture the life of
a community. Remember, it is the way words are bound into practices that would
prevent most of us understanding speaking lions, so to speak Lionese ﬂuently – and
the idea of interactional expertise and the experiments that correspond to it show it
can be done without doing the practices – must be to understand the practices that
gave rise to Lionese. When language is taken on in the spirit of a way of being in
the world, it contains the tacit knowledge of that way of being in the world.
One can also be bad at spoken discourse, in the way computers are bad, in which
case the words are merely frozen representations of momentary states of affairs,
not participating in the lived life and lived practices of a community, and not con-
taining the tacit knowledge of the practices. Indeed, computers cannot understand
the way to form those bad/good sentences on which so much ordinary speech is
composed. The ﬁrst shock of the new computer user is that every ‘word’ has to be
spelled exactly right for the computer to use it as an instruction whereas humans
cope with small mistakes without even noticing. Improved computers are making
better guesses at how to rectify mistakes but it is always a matter of statistics not the
kind of ‘meaning repair’ that comes with understanding.
The argument of this chapter begins with the idea that language is a property of
social groups and that individuals only share in it. Now that the computer-wars are
over, the war damage can be repaired by keeping this constantly in mind.
References
Collins, H. (1990). Artiﬁcial experts: Social knowledge and intelligent machines. Cambridge
Mass.: MIT Press.
Collins, H. (2004). Gravity’s shadow: The search for gravitational waves. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Collins, H. (2008). Response to selinger on dreyfus. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences,
7, 309–311.
Collins, H. (2010). Tacit and explicit knowledge. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Collins, H. (2011). Language and practice. Social Studies of Science, 41(2), 271–300.
DOI: 10.1177/0306312711399665.
Collins, H., & Evans, R., (2007). Rethinking expertise. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Collins, H., & Sanders, G. (2007). They give you the keys and say “drive it:” Managers, referred
expertise, and other expertises’. Case Studies of Expertise and Experience: Special Issue of
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, 38(4), 621–641 [December].
Collins, H. M. (2004a). Interactional expertise as a third kind of knowledge. Phenomenology and
the Cognitive Sciences, 3(2), 125–143.

11
Language as a Repository of Tacit Knowledge
239
Collins, H. M. (2004b). The trouble with madeleine. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences,
3(2), 165–170.
Collins, H. M., Evans, R., Ribeiro, R., & Hall, M. (2006). Experiments with interactional expertise.
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, 37(A/4), [December] 656–674.
Dreyfus, H. L. (1965). ‘Why computers must have bodies in order to be intelligent. Review of
Metaphysics, 21, 13–32.
Dreyfus, H. L. (1972). What computers can’t do. New York: Harper and Row
Kuhn, T. (1962). The structure of scientiﬁc revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Schilhab, T. (2007). Interactional expertise through the looking glass: A peek at mirror neurons.
Case Studies of Expertise and Experience: special issue of Studies in History and Philosophy
of Science, 38(4), 741–747.
Selinger, E., Dreyfus, H., & Collins, H. (2007). Embodiment and interactional expertise. Case stud-
ies of expertise and experience: Special Issue of Studies in History and Philosophy of Science,
38(4), 722–740 [December].
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical investigations. Oxford: Blackwell.

Chapter 12
Levels of Immersion and Embodiment
On the Relation Between Different Types of Practice
and the Acquisition of Language
Theresa Schilhab
Abstract Contemporary neuroscience seems to suggest that conceptual under-
standing as in reading and discourse at least in part is perceptually and sensory-
somatically corroborated. In other words, conceptual knowledge seems to involve
reenacting forms of perceptual experiences. However, in many aspects of life we
do not have ﬁrst hand experiences of the concepts we master to perfection. Who
has ever had personal experiences with unicorns, the ice ages or Big Bang? In this
chapter, I expand on the relation between symbol use as it applies to the linguistic
exchange in professional communities and different levels of immersion in the asso-
ciated practices to clarify the issue of levels of embodiment from a cognitive point
of view.
12.1 Introduction
Knowledge acquisition can be separated according to levels of immersion (see
Collins & Evans, 2007). At one end, knowledge seems to involve intense hands on
experiences, e.g. to tie shoelaces and, at the other end it involves linguistic ‘adroit-
ness’ as when one memorises the capitals of the world. Obviously, the degree of
bodily involvement differs. Knowing how to tie one’s shoelaces is both to know the
practice of binding bows and being able to explicate it, whereas hands-on experi-
ence seems irrelevant in relation to knowing that Paris is located in France. Tying
shoelaces has a practical as well as a theoretical dimension, whereas ‘capital knowl-
edge’ rests solely on the theoretical dimension (or so it seems). If measured by
the degree of bodily involvement, these two examples make up two ends of a
‘knowledge axis’.
T. Schilhab (B)
GNOSIS Research Centre, Danish School of Education, University of Aarhus,
2400 Copenhagen, Denmark
e-mail: tsc@dpu.dk
241
T. Schilhab et al. (eds.), The Symbolic Species Evolved, Biosemiotics 6,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-2336-8_12, C⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2012

242
T. Schilhab
Within science and technology studies, versions of these ends have recently been
termed ‘interactional’ and ‘contributory expertise’,1 respectively (Collins & Evans,
2002; Collins, 2004; Collins, Evans, Ribeiro, & Hall, 2006). Contributory expertise
involves both ‘knowing how’ and ‘knowing that’ and applies to full blown immer-
sion in a domain. Ideally, the contributory expert is the physicist who knows his
way around the laboratory; a versatile and competent user of equipment who is
also theoretically and linguistically proﬁcient.2 Interactional expertise, on the other
hand, applies to extensive linguistic knowledge of things, i.e. objects, phenomena or
situations we have never actually encountered before, but which we know of only
from conversations and similar indirect means.3 Interactional expertise depends on
a context provided by a linguistic community and is not to be mistaken for symbolic
or formal knowledge, which could be picked up by reading a book. As suggested
by Collins (2004), interactional expertise could be acquired by the sociologist who
has interviewed several physicists and, while being immersed in their culture, has
acquired proﬁciency in speaking about the domain to an extent that makes him
indistinguishable, at the linguistic level, from the contributory expert.4
Despite the obvious differences between interactional and contributory expertise,
they both rely on immersion in a culture that includes embodiment, but to a different
extent. Whereas contributory immersion also involves activities concerning objects
and actions, interactional immersion exclusively involves linguistic procedures.
The question is; could detailing the components behind the differing degrees
of embodiment help us explicate obvious peculiarities, inadequacies and virtues of
interactional and contributory expertise? On this basis, would we be able to identify,
explicate and eventually anticipate characteristics of knowledge linked to different
levels of immersion?
In this chapter, I will address the issue of levels of embodiment in interactional
and contributory expertise from a cognitive point of view. To begin answering the
questions, we must specify what is meant by ‘embodiment’ in a cognitive perspec-
tive. To that end, we ﬁrst need to probe the cognitive components and mechanisms
behind contributory and interactional expertise.
1 Collins and Evans discuss the taxonomy of expertises, the natural or acquired facility in a speciﬁc
activity. In this chapter focus is on the characteristics of the knowledge associated to particular
expertises.
2 Physicists (like all specialists) are unique. Lumping them together is therefore bound to result
in superﬁcial and inaccurate characterizations. Naturally, some physicists have specialized in
experimental designs; others in theoretical approaches.
3 To count as a genuine interactional expert, knowledge must be obtained away from the concrete
context relevant to contributory experts. In reality such clear cut examples are rare. For the sake of
argument, I have the serene form in mind.
4 Bear in mind though that according to the theory, the interactional expert does not contribute to
the evolvement of physics as a science.

12
Levels of Immersion and Embodiment
243
12.2 Contributory Expertise and Embodiment
Contributory experts acquire knowledge by conversations, writings and hands-on
experience. Thus, at some point theory about the domain is or becomes ‘coupled’
to practice. Simultaneity is of signiﬁcance to the present discussion, as the pairing
of physical activity and exposure to language seems to facilitate embodied knowl-
edge (see Wilson, 2002). To grasp the criticality of concurrency even in elementary
settings, think of the acquisition of a common concept, say apples. A child born
where apples are a regular part of diet supplement is likely to know apples also by
its senses. Possibly, the very ﬁrst step towards apprehension of the notion of apple
happens simultaneously with the ﬁrst taste and tactile experiences of the fruit (see
Glenberg, 2008). On the other hand, children born where apples are rare are more
prone to learn about apples ‘at a distance’ – from fairytales such as ‘Snow White
and the seven dwarfs’ or as a nickname for New York City.
‘Apple-knowledge’ acquired through ﬁrst-hand experiences with the referent is
likely to rest on a combination of certain linguistic expressions and particular state of
affairs; i.e. qualities typical of apples and their context which are usually implicitly
perceived.
The fact that knowledge is grounded in non-symbolic processes i.e. percep-
tion, is strongly supported by numerous neuropsychological studies (e.g. Barsalou,
Simmons, Barbey, & Wilson, 2003; Barsalou, 2008). Studies show activation of
‘perceptual symbols’ of referents in, for example, the shape of objects when
we comprehend sentences such as ‘the ranger saw the eagle in the sky’ or ‘the
ranger saw the eagle in its nest’ (Zwaan, Stanﬁeld, & Yaxley, 2002) or simula-
tion of perceptual experiences when forming lexical decisions about sentences (e.g.
Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002; Barsalou et al., 2003; Holt & Beilock, 2006; Schilhab &
Gerlach, 2008a; Schilhab & Gerlach, 2008b). Simulation in these senses is ‘reacti-
vation’ of the neural circuits that were employed during the original experience.
Accordingly, ‘. . . .perceptual symbols are the residues of perceptual experiences,
stored as patterns of activation in the brain’ (Zwaan et al., 2002, see p. 168).
Various Reaction Time studies (RT), in which the reaction time of subjects in
sensibility judgments is measured, suggest that simulation implies revival of neu-
ral traces of past actual experiences. In a study by Glenberg and Kaschak (2002)
implied action direction of the sentence was either compatible or contrary to the
direction of the response. When asked to assess the sensibility of the sentence ‘close
the drawer’, subjects were to respond ‘yes’ by either pulling or pushing a handle
resulting in a movement towards or away from their body. RT’s were signiﬁcantly
lower in the compatibility conditions than in the incompatibility condition. Making
sense of the sentence; ‘close the drawer’, seems to recruit neural connections nec-
essary when executing the actual movement. Also a study by Pecher and colleagues
(2003) suggests that knowledge about concepts is partly grounded in perceptual
processes (see also Boroditsky & Ramscar, 2002; Markman & Brendl, 2005). In
these studies, subjects were exposed to concepts along with an associated property
and asked to verify or reject the validity of the association. Subsequently, subjects
were exposed to the same concept accompanied by either a property of the same

244
T. Schilhab
or another modality. For instance ‘apple’ was accompanied by the visual property
‘green’ and subsequently ‘shiny’ (same modality) or ‘tart’ (different modality). If
the second property belonged to the same modality RT’s were markedly reduced
(see also Marques, 2006).
Imaging studies of the organisation of language show that, in language acquisi-
tion, the concurrent stimulation of the senses together with linguistic processes is
simulated when we retrieve verbal knowledge (Pulvermüller, 2005). Subsequently,
knowledge about and remembrance of e.g. apples seems to be sustained by reacti-
vation of the neural correlate, maintaining the perception and linguistic processing.
This explains why merely reading words with strong olfactory associations (e.g.
‘cinnamon’ or ‘garlic’) recruits primary olfactory cortices normally involved in per-
ceptual processing (González et al., 2006). In fact, mere reading of words recruits
neuronal areas which are normally correlated to the actual experience of a smell.
(For theories that link words and senso-somatic processing, see Myung, Blumstein,
Sedivy, 2006; for causal links between the motor system and the comprehension of
language see Glenberg, Sato, & Cattaneo, 2008; Meteyard & Vigliocco, 2008).
12.3 Interactional Expertise and Embodiment
One might argue that immersion in a linguistic culture, constitutive of interactional
expertise, is likely to include at least some contact to practical dimensions of the
domain. For example an anthropologist who studies Lappish weather rites might
not participate directly in the ancient rituals, but observation potentially offers a
case of indirect, second hand acquisition of knowledge (for discussion in relation
to mirror neurons, see Schilhab, 2007a). The term ‘physical contiguity’ describes
such proximity to practices of a domain that falls short of active involvement or
‘hands-on’ experience (Ribeiro, 2007a, 2007b).
For the sake of the argument, let us consider what is to become of embodiment, if
one obtains knowledge from linguistic socialisation exclusively? At least two tracks
are open for investigation.
First, to pick up language and speak ﬂuently, one needs ears to hear with (see
Steger & Werker, 1997) and something akin to the hyoid bone to manage human
speech sounds (2003; Nishimura, Mikami, Suzuki, & Matsuzawa, 2003); inimitable
prerequisites that Collins denotes ‘minimal embodiment’ (Collins, 2004; Selinger,
Dreyfus, & Collins, 2007; Schilhab & Gerlach, 2008a). Surely, embodiment in this
sense is undisputed under any assertion about knowledge and expertise.
The second track is more radical. This implies accepting that embodiment is a
critical prerequisite in all ontogenetic learning (i.e. within the lifetime of the individ-
ual). In a linguistic setting, immersion depends on bodies. First, linguistic cultures
that sustain interactional expertise depend on contributory experts (i.e. their bodies)
that converse and exchange ideas. Naturally, interactional knowledge ‘piggybacks’
on contributory knowledge, and thus on fully embodied language (Collins, 2004;
Schilhab, Juelskjær, Moser, 2008). Secondly, interactional experts participate in
the linguistic culture and implicitly perceive regularities in the environment. This

12
Levels of Immersion and Embodiment
245
pattern recognition makes their participation in the linguistic community similar to
the participation of the contributory expert in his community.
Implicit learning, which goes on non-stop, may explain why. Implicit learning
presupposes and builds on innate sensitivity and natural assessments which are ‘rou-
tinely and automatically registered. . .. .without intention or effort’, as described by
Kahneman (2002). Implicit learning owes its existence to environmental regularities
from which the organism could proﬁt (i.e. Reber, Walkenfeld, & Hernstedt, 1991;
Berry & Dienes, 1993; Reber, 1993; Goldstone, 1995; Stadler & Frensch, 1998).
Whenever A happens, inevitably B follows, in a one-to-one relation.5 Such plain
stimulus/response relations immanent to the organism originate from prolonged
adaptive processes shared by all individuals of the same species. Thus, all that is
needed for implicit learning to occur is regularities in the environment (i.e. the world
is not random) (Schilhab, 2007b).
One could argue that there is no signiﬁcant cognitive difference between contrib-
utory and interactional expertise. When they pick up phrases, interactional experts
immersed in the relevant linguistic community equally expose themselves to con-
textual stimuli, some of which are linguistic and some non-linguistic. In support of
this interpretation, Watkins and colleagues (2003) show that perception of speech,
both auditory and visual, result in changes in the excitability of the motor system
that allows for speech production. Exposure to conversations primes the listener’s
ability to speak the words himself.
While contributory experts ground notions and phrases in neural circuits that are
also employed for actions and tangible objects, interactional experts ground their
notions in circuits predominantly, but not exclusively, concerned with processes of
speech (see Ross, Wang et al., 2007). These processes include the above-mentioned
auditory and visual clues associated to speech activities and the concrete linguistic
context (i.e. the string (sea) of words). The point is that even in the interactional
case, contextual regularities corroborate the understanding of the linguistic string
as manifested by the neural correlate. For example, fMRI studies in pursuit of
the contiguous activation of sensory-motor cortices and linguistic areas seem to
emphasise so-called semantic ﬂexibility. It means that ‘semantic context determines
the degree to which alternative senses and features are processed when a word
is heard’ (Raposo, Moss, Stamatakis, & Tyler, 2009, p. 394). In this study, sub-
jects were presented with action verbs in isolation such as ‘kick’ or ‘trample’, and
signiﬁcant motor activation was found to result. But if action verbs were embed-
ded in metaphoric expressions motor activation was insigniﬁcant. The inability of
metaphoric phrase reading to activate neural areas corroborating the motor activ-
ity of certain effectors, say hands or feet, is also found in Aziz-Zadeh, Wilson,
Rizzolatti, and Iacoboni (2006).
5 In the simple version; for example sensitisation and conditioning in Kandel’s Aplysia califor-
nica, a seahare, involves the linking of various external stimuli enabled by the phylogenetically
determined, neural connections (Kandel, 2001).

246
T. Schilhab
Context matters to interactional experts. Think of the concept of jealousy. Even
if it is impossible to literally grasp the referent of the term in the way you grasp
an apple, the concept might still appear in conversation under circumstances partic-
ular to that feeling which therefore signify it and act as the referent. For instance,
it is likely that talk about jealousy is connected to particular grimaces of the talker
which affect the listener (in early stages; the learner) (for emotional content and neu-
ral underpinning when imitating see Glenberg, Havas, Becker, R., & Rinck, 2005;
Bastiaansen, Thioux, & Keysers, 2009). This is the non-verbal (environmental) part
of perceivable regularities. However, the notion of jealousy might also appear in
particular linguistic connections non-consciously perceived by the listener that is,
the linguistic part (linguistic regularities). Sentences like: ‘She handed him jeal-
ousy’ or ‘The dog sniffed the jealous tree’ are meaningless, since they do not follow
conventions governing linguistic use.
So, what are the differences between contributory and interactional expertise
after all? While the embodiment of contributory experts involves concrete items
in particular, the embodiment of interactional experts is less clear-cut but still
involves embodiment in non-trivial ways because of the implicit susceptibility to
both environmental and linguistic regularities.
12.4 Characteristics of Knowledge?
12.4.1 Different Kinds of Creativity
So far, I have proposed that embodiment plays a part in both interactional and con-
tributory expertise, but in different ways and to a different extent. I have claimed
that both contributory and interactional experts are exposed to linguistic regulari-
ties as well as environmental, but to different proportions. Contrary to interactional
cultures, contributory cultures consist of vast amounts of bits and pieces; laboratory
items and standard actions and practices. In the interactional case, linguistic sources
precede more over non-linguistic sources. In the contributory case, however, lin-
guistic and non-linguistic sources jointly compose the conceptual representation.
The concreteness of practical life has a higher degree of regularity; laboratories
have standard equipment, fume cupboards and plastic gloves. These regularities
afford and ﬁxate the senses so that contributory concept formation rests on ﬁrm
somatosensory perceptions. To interactional experts, environmental regularities are
less overt. Actions and regularities are by no means absent in verbal cultures, but
the constancy of concrete items and set routines are considerably lower.
For example, interactional experts who gain knowledge of a ﬁeld would be
exposed to standard regularities of a generalised and abstract kind such as sitting
on chairs, using keyboards and observing contributory experts giving lectures. In
such ‘genuine’ theoretical conditions, facial muscle contractions, body language and
similar concomitant phenomena of contemplative activity is implicitly perceived by
the interactional expert. However, these behavioural fragments are generalised in

12
Levels of Immersion and Embodiment
247
the sense that they are separated from the context of the lecture hall or ofﬁce since
they could easily occur almost anywhere else (see also Schilhab, 2007a, Schilhab,
in print).
When they build domain-speciﬁc knowledge, interactional experts are then more
prone to combine new understanding with already established theoretical knowl-
edge (linguistic networks) than contributory experts, who might naturally also
incorporate sensations and personal experiences to substantiate their interpretation.
While interactional experts create knowledge that is relatively more conceptu-
alised, contributory experts establish knowledge that draws more on recurring
somatosensory experiences.
Despite obeying linguistic rules, linguistic understanding is fundamentally
abstract, in the sense that interactional understanding is characterised by more
degrees of freedom, that is, higher number of ‘elements’ in the understanding are
free to vary. If you only know the exact conﬁguration of items referred to e.g. lin-
guistically; correct completion of procedures or dimensions of the phenomena in
question only linguistically (interactional knowledge), you might allow yourself
a less strict interpretation of the referent. In contributory knowledge, there is a
direct correlation between symbol and referent, which means that changes in the
referent will cause changes in the symbol (Barsalou, 1999). Therefore, contribu-
tory experts who have formed knowledge by ﬁrst-hand experience have less ﬂexible
interpretations.
As a side-effect of relatively more contextual regularity that feeds the implicit
learning capacity, the contributory expert might possess a more rigid understanding
of phenomena related to the ﬁeld. Experts, as deﬁned by the Dreyfus Model of Skill
Acquisition (Dreyfus & Dreyfus, 1986) compensate for this effect of practice learn-
ing by acquiring many personal learning instances as well as obtaining instructions
from more than a single teacher to broaden the reference of experiences.
How could more or less ‘degrees of freedom’ in conceptualisation be recognized?
The linguistic network is the predominate point of reference; one might expect a
bolder and more innovative use of phrases and concepts from interactional experts
because of their lack of reference to concrete items and actions (for a linguistic
analysis of deception, see Newman, Pennebaker, Berry, & Richards, 2003).
However, imagination could be an element of human cognition that might pull
interactional conceptual learning signiﬁcantly nearer to contributory learning. In so
far as interactional experts corroborate conceptual learning by self-induced visual-
ization, e.g. by envisioning oneself or a substitute experiencing the situation, they
might transcend the alleged boundary of theory and practice, which would eventu-
ally blur any distinct signs of differences in experiential quality (Schilhab, 2007a,
see also Schilhab, 2011).
If the power of imagination has the compensatory abilities in question, we must
eventually explain what it takes to establish imagination. Do imaginative powers rest
on versatile somatosensory experiences founded at an early age? And does imag-
ination hinge on the interplay between somatosensory experiences and extensive
conscious reﬂection?

248
T. Schilhab
12.4.2 Reduced RT
Could the different levels of immersion produce other traceable effects? A study
by Holt and Beilock (2006) in which drawings of domain-speciﬁc (or everyday)
objects or actions were presented to expert hockey and American football players
as well as novices accentuate differences in the pace of neural processing. The task
was to judge whether any mentioning of represented objects or actions that followed
sensible sentences had occurred. When the respondents assessed the occurrence of
pictured items or actions that had also been mentioned in a preceding sentence,
experts showed larger reductions in RT (response time) than novices. In the every-
day condition, subjects were exposed to sentences like ‘the child saw the balloon in
the air’. Subsequently, they were exposed to pictures of either an inﬂated or deﬂated
balloon and had to judge whether the represented object had just been mentioned in
the sentence before.
In the case of the inﬂated balloon the target matched the sentence. In case of
the deﬂated balloon the target mismatched the sentence because deﬂated balloons
are unlikely to appear in the air. Experts and novices were equally competent at
responding to everyday objects and situations. However, in the domain-speciﬁc
condition; when football players and novices were asked to assess a sentence like:
‘the trainer saw the offensive lineman protect the quarterback’, only experts showed
reduced RTs.
In this study, being a non-expert did not exclude the possibility of coming up
with the right answer, although response times increased. How are we to explain
that?
In the acquisition phase of, say, apples, the perceptual contribution to the neural
correlate of knowledge seems to facilitate retrieval processes (Ross, Wang et al.,
2007). Apparently, processes in the neural substrate corroborating the concept of
apples improve because of the inclusion of somatosensory experiences.
In the study by Holt and Beilock (2006) one obvious explanation of the results
with hockey experts (contributory experts) would be that mere reading of the sen-
tence; ‘the trainer saw the offensive lineman protect the quarterback’ recruits neural
areas that are active when we experience that ‘the trainer saw the offensive lineman
protect the quarterback’. In that case the sentence; ‘the trainer saw the offensive
lineman protect the quarterback’ is, among others things, neurally constructed from
different modalities; say sight, smell and texture (due to embodiment in the acquisi-
tion phase). The hockey expert has numerous practical experiences of protection of
quarterbacks that ﬁt such descriptions. To him, the neural correlate which constitutes
the understanding of the sentence consists of input from many different modalities,
which, due to concurrent activation, are tightly connected. Another likely explana-
tion is that understanding the sentence induces activity in neural areas that are also
active when we make sense of the pictured actions, which ultimately reduces the
reaction time.
In contrast, interactional experts on hockey would incorporate the concept of
protection of quarterbacks almost entirely in the linguistic framework. The neural
representation of the concept would be based on less robust connections, which
again would make the recruitment less efﬁcient.

12
Levels of Immersion and Embodiment
249
Exposure to (and interest in) concrete items is elementary to the natural develop-
ment of preverbal children, therefore one might wonder whether concrete contexts
are somewhat more familiar and therefore perhaps easier to acquire and incorpo-
rate in the knowledge (the neural nets that sustain the learning might be easier to
establish, because major parts of it already exist?).
However, this is not to say that the employment of wholly linguistic knowl-
edge is always delayed compared to conceptual knowledge linked to somatosensory
experiences. For sure, neural connections that sustain genuine conceptual knowl-
edge could be potentiated by systematic recruitment. One could imagine scenarios
in which various conversations that employ (the use of) particular concepts could
strengthen and thereby speed up the efﬁcacy of the involved neural connections to
an extent which would match or even exceed the efﬁciency of neural connections
that correlate to contributory concepts. This might actually apply to the ﬁnal stages
of becoming an interactional expert.
12.5 Conclusion
To interpret interactional and contributory expertise by levels of embodiment raises
questions about the applicability of the cognitive framework. In many scientiﬁc
domains, students are exposed to theoretical knowledge before they are exposed to
practice. In domains where apprenticeship is prevalent, the order might be reversed
or theory and practice offered simultaneously during education. No doubt, the order
of presentation of theory and practice may have an impact on the underlying neural
organization of domain-related knowledge.
Also, we must consider to what extent relevant similarities exist between young
children who learn the concept of ‘apple’ and novices in scientiﬁc disciplines who
learn the linguistic setting of laboratory practices in the ﬁeld.
No doubt, the synchronized presentation of referents and concepts is likely to
be the ‘original’ way we obtain our ﬁrst language (Glenberg, 2008; Glenberg et al.,
2008). However, for professional jargons, learning is always second to the well-
established ﬁrst language, so linguistic fundamentals are in place when contributory
or interactional expertise is created (e.g. Perani et al., 1998).
Even if learning the language of a new domain is like learning your mother
tongue in the sense that it too involves the acquisition of new concepts, being second
and therefore feeding on natural language results in an adapted neural organization.
Logically, to learn a second language is entirely different from learning the ﬁrst lan-
guage, which includes cracking the code of symbol use. The competent language
user has long passed this stage by learning the ﬁrst language. On this account, the
comparison of the learning of contributory language with natural language might be
ﬂawed.
However, taking different levels of embodiment into account cognitively
differentiates contributory and interactional knowledge in fundamentally new ways.
Qualifying their differences in cognitive terms provides us with valuable insight into
human thinking and stipulates promising subﬁelds that await further research.

250
T. Schilhab
References
Aziz-Zadeh, L., Wilson, S. M., Rizzolatti, G., & Iacoboni, M. (2006). Congruent embodied rep-
resentations for visually presented actions and linguistic phrases describing actions. Current
Biology, 16, 1818–1823.
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577–660.
Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual Review of Psychology, 59, 617–645.
Barsalou, L. W., Simmons, W. K., Barbey, A. K., & Wilson, C. D. (2003). Grounding conceptual
knowledge in modality-speciﬁc systems. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7(2), 84–91.
Bastiaansen, J. A. Thioux, C. J. M., & Keysers, C. (2009). Evidence for mirror systems in emotions.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 364, 2391–2404.
Berry, D. C., & Dienes, Z. (1993). Implicit learning. East Sussex: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates Ltd.
Boroditsky, L., & Ramscar, M. (2002). The roles of body and mind in abstract thought.
Psychological Science, 13(2), 185–189.
Collins, H. (2004). Interactional expertise as a third kind of knowledge. Phenomenology and the
Cognitive Sciences, 3, 125–143.
Collins, H., & Evans, R. (2007). Rethinking expertise. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Collins, H., Evans, R., Ribeiro, R., & Hall, M. (2006). Experiments with interactional expertise.
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, 37(a), 656–74.
Collins, H. M. & Evans, R. (2002). The third wave of science studies: Studies in expertise and
experience. Social Studies of Science, 32, 235–296.
Dreyfus, H., & Dreyfus, S. (1986). Mindover machine. New York: Free Press.
Glenberg, A. M. (2008). Embodiment for education. Handbook of cognitive science. In P. Calvo &
T. Gomila (Eds.), An embodied approach (pp. 355–372). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Glenberg, A., Havas, M. D., Becker, R., & Rinck, R. (2005). Grounding language in bodily states:
The case for emotion. In D. Pecher & R. A. Zwaan (Eds.), Grounding cognition (pp. 115–128),
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Glenberg, A. M., & Kaschak, M. P. (2002). Grounding language in action. Psychonomic Bulletin
and Review, 9(3), 558–565.
Glenberg, A. M., Sato, M., & Cattaneo, L. (2008). Use-induced motor plasticity affects the
processing of abstract and concrete language. Current Biology, 18(7), 290–291.
Goldstone, R. L. (1995). Effects of categorization on color perception. Psychological Science, 6(5),
298–304.
González, J., Barros-Loscertales, A., Pulvermüller, F., Meseguer, V., Sanjuán, A., Belloch, V., et al.
(2006). Reading cinnamon activates olfactory brain regions. NeuroImage, 32, 906–912.
Holt, L. E., & Beilock, S. L. (2006). Expertise and its embodiment: Examining the impact of
sensorimotor skill expertise on the representation of action-related text. Psychonomic Bulletin
and Review, 13(4), 694–701.
Kahneman, D. (2002). Maps of bounded rationality: A perspective on intuitive judgment and
choice (Nobel Prize Lecture). Les Prix Nobel. T. Frangsmyr. Stockholm, Aula Magna,
Stockholm University.
Kandel, E. R. (2001). The molecular biology of memory storage: A dialogue between genes and
synapses. Science, 294, 1030–1038.
Markman, A. B., & Brendl, C. M. (2005). Constraining theories of embodied cognition.
Psychological Science, 16(1), 6–10.
Marques, J. F. (2006). Specialization and semantic organization: evidence for multiple semantics
linked to sensory modalities. Memory and Cognition, 34(1), 60–67.
Meteyard, L., & Vigliocco, G. (2008). The role of sensory and motor information in semantic
representation: A review. In P. Calvo & T. Gomila (Eds.), Handbook of cognitive science. An
embodied approach (pp. 293–312). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Myung, J.-y., Blumstein, S. E., & Sedivy, J. C. (2006). Playing on the typewriter, typing on the
piano: Manipulation knowledge of objects. Cognition, 98, 223–243.

12
Levels of Immersion and Embodiment
251
Newman, M. L., Pennebaker, J. W., Berry; D. S., & Richards, J. M. (2003). Lying words: Predicting
deception from linguistic styles. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29(5), 665–675.
Nishimura, T., Mikami, A., Suzuki, J., & Matsuzawa, T. (2003). Descent of the larynx in
chimpanzee infants. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 100(12), 6930–6933.
Pecher, D., Zeelenberg, R., & Barsalou, L. W. (2003). Verifying different-modality properties for
concepts producesswitching costs. Psychological Science, 14(2), 119–124.
Perani, D., Pauesu, E., Galles, N. S., Dupoux, E, Dehaene, S., Bettinardi, V., et al. (1998).
The bilingual brain. Proﬁciency and age of acquisition of the second language. Brain, 121,
1841–1852.
Pulvermüller, F. (2005). Brain mechanism linking language and action. Nature, 6, 576–582.
Raposo, A., Moss, H. E., Stamatakis, E. A., & Tyler, L. K. (2009). Modulation of motor
and premotor cortices by actions, action words and action sentences. Neuropsychologia, 47,
388–396.
Reber, A. S. (1993). Implicit learning and tacit knowledge. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Reber, A. S., Walkenfeld, F. F., & Hernstedt, R. (1991). Implicit and explicit learning: individual
differences and IQ. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition,
17(5), 888–896.
Ribeiro, R. (2007a). The role of interactional expertise in interpreting: the case of technology
transfer in the steel industry. Studies In History and Philosophy of Science Part A, 38(4),
713–721.
Ribeiro, R. (2007b). Knowledge transfer. Cardiff: Cardiff University.
Ross, B. H., Wang, R. F. Kramer, A. F. Simons, D. J., & Crowell, J. A. (2007). Action information
from classiﬁcation learning. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 14(3), 500–504.
Schilhab, T. (2007a). Interactional expertise through the looking glass: a peek at mirro neurons.
Studies In History and Philosophy of Science Part A, 38(4), 741–747.
Schilhab, T. S. S. (2007b). Knowledge for real – On implicit and explicit representations and
education. Scandinavian Journal of Education, 51(3), 223–238.
Schilhab, T. S. S. (2011). Neural perspectives on ‘interactional expertise’: The plasticity of
language. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 18(7–8), 99–116.
Schilhab, T. S. S., & Gerlach, C. (2008a). Embodiment, corporeality and neuroscience. In
T. Schilhab, M. Juelskjær, & T. Moser (Eds.) Learning bodies (pp. 19–43). København:
Danmarks Pædagogiske Universitetsforlag.
Schilhab, T. S. S., & Gerlach, C. (2008b). Connections in action – Bridging implicit and explicit
domains. In J. Hoffmeyer (Ed.), A legacy for living systems (pp. 135–144). København:
Springer.
Schilhab, T. S. S., Juelskjær, M., & Moser, T. (2008). Post Scriptum – On ‘Learning bodies’. In
T. Schilhab, M. Juelskjær, & T. Moser (Eds.), Learning bodies (pp. 303–315). København:
Danmarks Pædagogiske Universitetsforlag.
Selinger, E., Dreyfus, H., & Collins, H. M. (2007). Interactional expertise and embodiment. Studies
in History and Philosophy of Science Part A, 38(4), 722–740.
Stadler, M. A., & Frensch, P. A. (Eds.). (1998). Handbook of implicit learning. Thaousand
Oaks: Sage.
Steger, C. L., & Werker, J. F. (1997). Infants listen for more phonetic detail in speech perception
than in word learning tasks. Nature, 388, 381–382.
Watkins, K. E., Strafella, A. P., & Paus, T. (2003). Seeing and hearing speech excites the motor
system involved in speech production. Neuropsychologia, 41, 989–994.
Wilson, M. (2002). Six views on embodied cognition. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9(4),
625–635.
Zwaan, R. A., Stanﬁeld, R. A., & Yaxley, R. H. (2002). Language comprehenders mentally
represent the shapes of objects. Psychological science, 13(2), 168–171.

Chapter 13
Emerging Symbols
Stefan Leijnen
Abstract Using a neural network simulation of a series of language training
experiments with chimpanzees, the difference between indexical and symbolic inter-
pretation is explored. From the results of the simulation follows a discussion about
the systemic requirements for crossing the symbolic threshold and how the primacy
of icons applies to computational models.
13.1 The Meanings of Symbol
In a study aiming to test the linguistic abilities of chimpanzees, several experi-
ments are devised and conducted to demonstrate how different learning strategies
produce different uses of language (Savage-Rumbaugh & Rumbaugh, 1978). The
study shows how their learning curves can be understood from the way these
chimps acquire language, allowing for a behavioral operationalization of language
acquisition. The results are embedded within a larger semiotic theory of symbolic
interpretation, distinguishing between three types of signs (icons, indices and sym-
bols) that describe how an object can be related to a referent by an interpreter
(Buchler, 1955; Hookway, 1985; Chandler, 2002).
Several other language training studies (Gardner & Gardner, 1977; Premack,
1976; Rumbaugh, 1977) show that apes can acquire large vocabularies. The sub-
ject has to point to one or more lexigrams on a board in order to express its thoughts
or desires. Researchers stimulate the apes to use the correct lexigrams and apply
appropriate grammar rules. However, even though their sentence construction capa-
bility can be trained to be more or less ﬂawless, their learning strategy appears to
differ from the way humans would approach such a problem. Although they appear
to use lexigrams as representations of the objects they stand for (like humans do)
their pointing behavior is a trained response to the presented stimulus.
S. Leijnen (B)
Institute for Computing and Information Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen,
6525 AJ Nijmegen, Netherlands
e-mail: stefan@leijnen.org
253
T. Schilhab et al. (eds.), The Symbolic Species Evolved, Biosemiotics 6,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-2336-8_13, C⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2012

254
S. Leijnen
The often implicit assumption that these apes use lexigrams as representations for
something else is not to be easily overlooked. For us to talk about apes using lan-
guage and having a vocabulary, evidence is required that – indeed – these apes use
linguistic skills to solve a problem, instead of associative skills to merely discover
a correlation between stimuli and responses leading to a reward. The difference
between these two skills is subtle but crucial, especially considering the principal
reason for doing ape language studies is ﬁnding out if they are actually capable of
learning a language.
So how are we to make this distinction clear? We ﬁnd two contrasting deﬁnitions
of symbols in which the difference is expressed (Deacon, 2003):
(S1) A symbol is one of a conventional set of tokens manipulated with respect
to certain of its physical characteristics by a set of substitution, elimination,
and combination rules, and which is arbitrarily correlated with some referent.
(S2) A symbol is one of a conventional set of tokens that marks a node in a
complex web of interdependent referential relationships and speciﬁc refer-
ence is not obviously discernible from its token features. Its reference is often
obscure, abstract, multifaceted, and cryptic, and tends to require considerable
experience or training to interpret.
The chimpanzees in the Savage-Rumbaugh and Rumbaugh study are subjected to
a training program that causes the disparity between these two kinds of symbols to
become salient, demonstrated by a signiﬁcant difference in performance results. In
one experiment, the chimps learn to distinguish lexigrams for four objects (banana,
orange, coke and milk) and two verbs (give and pour). The chimpanzees are required
to use the correct verb with each noun by arranging them in a sentence. Producing
accurate sentences like give orange or pour milk is rewarded; producing incorrect
compounds like pour banana or coke milk is discouraged.
Once the chimps have learned to associate pairs correctly, a follow-up experiment
shows that their symbol use is, in fact, non-symbolic. As the researchers introduce
new edibles and liquids to the experiment, the amount of trials needed to learn to
embed these words into sentences grows. Instead of using the web of relations to
which the lexigrams refer – the chimps know that edibles are given and liquids
are poured, but they don’t apply this knowledge to the construction of lexigram
sentences – they memorize each verb-noun correlation as a rule. The chimps use
lexigrams as
[. . .] a set of events which come to precede the receipt of a desired action or object.
[. . .] errorless trials, though given in a fashion which closely approximates that of the
ﬁnal choice, do not lead to symbolic learning even in simple tasks such as food names
(Savage-Rumbaugh & Rumbaugh, 1978).
The apes have learned to use symbols as deﬁned by S1, but not according to the
more strict deﬁnition S2. The relations between the lexigrams are arbitrary as the
chimps fail to notice the analogy with the relations between objects and actions.
S1 is a rather shallow, computational deﬁnition of symbols that doesn’t capture the
way humans use symbols as expressed in S2. Hence, phrased in semiotic terms, the

13
Emerging Symbols
255
chimpanzees have learned to use lexigrams as indices. An index pairs two things
together based on their co-appearance, like a thermometer (number and tempera-
ture) or a windsock (position and wind direction). In this case, a noun lexigram is
paired with a verb lexigram.
For the ape subjects to use the lexigrams as symbols (according to S2) a reference
is required to the network of relations for which the lexigrams stand. Evoking such
a reference is exactly the goal of the next experiment in the chimp language training
program. It is set up in almost the same way as in the previous ones, but this time the
apes’ attention is drawn towards the food and drink dispensers by increasing their
saliency with light and sounds signals. The apes now notice the dispensers opening,
also when they’re empty. This causes some of the apes to pair their understanding of
objects and actions with their understanding of lexigrams, and transfer knowledge
between these networks. Instead of memorizing each and every lexigram combina-
tion as an index these chimps have created a symbolic link, which offers them a
more efﬁcient way of storing information in the long run.
13.2 Simulated Learning
The chimp language training research supports the claim that symbolism is not
intrinsic to a word, lexigram or object, but is dependent on the interpretation itself.
Interpreters can be iconic, indexical and symbolic, and some of the apes where capa-
ble of all three of these skills while others could only reach the indexical level. In
order to explain this gap, it would be insightful to take a peek inside a chimp’s
head, study how signals travel between neurons and how eventually a lexigram sen-
tence comes about. In a meticulous study of the chimp’s interpretation process, the
differences that cause the symbolic shift could be unveiled. Of course, the sheer
complexity and size of the brain would result in far too many parameters for us to
make sense of. As an alternative, computer simulated models of smaller, less com-
plex brains can be used in order to discover the systemic requirements for symbolic
interpretation.
For our experiments we will use an artiﬁcial neural network: a three-layer percep-
tron (McCulloch & Pitts, 1943) with full connectivity (Fig. 13.1). The nodes in the
hidden and output layer are implemented with a step activation threshold function
(1) (cf. Table. 13.1).
yj =
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
1 if
n
i=1
(wixi) ≥θ
0 if
n
i=1
(wixi) < θ
(13.1)
By varying the connection weights between neurons different network archi-
tectures are generated, each with a potentially different behavior (i.e. returning
a speciﬁc output in response to a certain input). After a set of random weight

256
S. Leijnen
Fig. 13.1 Three-layer
perceptron with
full-connectivity
Table 13.1
Step activation
threshold parameters
yj
Base value for output connection j
xi
Base value for input connection i
wi
Weight of input connection i
n
Number of input connections
θ
Threshold parameter (0.85)
Table 13.2
Parameters of
the genetic algorithm
# Children per generation
50
# Elites per generation
10
# Maximum generations
30000
# Learning runs
100
P (mutation) per bit
0.01
conﬁgurations has been selected, each of their input layers is activated with trial
data and propagated as an activation wave through the network. Weight conﬁgu-
rations are stored in a binary array. A score is awarded to each network based on
the percentage of desired output values in a series of training sessions. The highest
scoring networks (the elites) are then recombined using cross-over and mutation to
form a new generation of network conﬁgurations, and so on. Due to the similarity
with biological evolution and the storage of information in gene-like data arrays, this
method is formally known as a genetic algorithm (Holland, 1975). The parameters
of this particular GA are given in Table 13.2.
13.3 Experiments
Using the computational tools described above, the difference between indexical
and symbolic interpretation is shown in a series of experiments. The two types of
chimps (symbolic and non-symbolic) of the original language training research are
modeled as neural networks. Objects, actions and lexigrams are replaced by binary
strings of input and output data. The genetic algorithm acts as a training program,
forwarding input data into the networks and evaluating the results.
For the indexical learning model, the objects, actions and lexigrams are coded
according to the method displayed in Table 13.3. There are a couple of things

13
Emerging Symbols
257
Table 13.3
Binary encoding examples for the indexical experiment
Network input
Binary string
Correct output
Binary string
banana + bias
1000000001
banana lexigram + give lexigram
1000000010
coke + bias
0100000001
coke lexigram + pour lexigram
0100000001
orange + bias
0010000001
orange lexigram + give lexigram
0010000010
that should be noted about this encoding. First, it disregards iconic interpretation
processes by translating multifaceted entities into easily discernable icons. The
chimpanzees are required to make distinctions between, bananas, yellow lexigrams,
cans of coke and acts of pouring, but the neural network simply uses a ten bit binary
string as input and output of the indexical process. This ensures that the neural
network learns to create indexical associations, instead of a mixture of icons and
indices: marginalizing the role of iconic interpretation isolates the indexical inter-
pretation process which facilitates the study of its features. Also, in order to allow
for a fair comparison with the symbolic network, a bias unit is added to the input
vector.
The neural network is trained by the genetic algorithm to output the correct
binary string, given a certain input string. For the input string, the leading eight
bits indicate the presence of a particular edible or liquid, the ninth bit is always zero
and the tenth bit is always one. The output string uses the leading eight bits to sig-
nify the use of a food or drink lexigram. The trailing two bits denote the use of an
action lexigram.
Once the ﬁrst pairing has been learned (i.e. banana with give banana), a second
pair is added to the dataset. The learning continues with the same network and a
training set of two possible input strings. This process is repeated until all eight
objects have been associated with correct output sentences. The time it takes the
network to learn each additional object is displayed in Fig. 13.2a.
The chimps that learn to manipulate lexigrams as symbols are induced to adopt
a new learning strategy by the food and drink dispensers. These dispensers make
them reconsider the relation between the lexigram buttons and obtaining a reward.
They notice a systemic similarity between the system of lexigrams and the system
of objects and actions (Deacon, 1997) and use their existing knowledge of the object
domain to produce correct lexigram sentences.
For the symbolic learning model we use the same approach as for the indexical
simulation, with the exception of the domain knowledge being available in the input
string. In other words, the subject already knows that a banana is given (not poured)
and takes this knowledge into account when it constructs a sentence. The additional
information helps to predict the correct outcome, as actions and action lexigrams
are correlated. The training data is shown in Table 13.4, the resulting learning curve
in Fig. 13.2b.
A comparison between the learning curves of the indexical and symbolic models
is somewhat biased. Just as the chimpanzees were at some point required to learn
that bananas are given and milk is poured, so should the symbolic network, one

258
S. Leijnen
Fig. 13.2 Learning curves for the indexical task (a), the symbolic task (b) and the domain task
(c). The y-axis indicates the number of generations it takes for each additional object (x-axis) to be
learned
Table 13.4
Binary encoding examples for the symbolic experiment
Network input
Binary string
Correct output
Binary string
banana + give
1000000010
banana lexigram + give lexigram
1000000010
coke + pour
0100000001
coke lexigram + pour lexigram
0100000001
orange + give
0010000010
orange lexigram + give lexigram
0010000010
Table 13.5
Binary encoding examples for the domain experiment
Network input
Binary string
Correct output
Binary string
banana + bias
1000000001
give + bias
1000000001
coke + bias
0100000001
pour + bias
0100000001
orange + bias
0010000001
give + bias
0010000001
could argue. The goal of these experiments is to test the difference between index-
ical and symbolic learning; to exclude learning the domain knowledge would be a
bias. Therefore, a third experiment is carried out. A neural network learns to asso-
ciate objects with corresponding actions, using the same method as in the previous
experiments. Table 13.5 contains the training data, the resulting learning curve is
displayed in Fig. 13.2c.
13.4 Conclusion
A neural network model is used to simulate two different learning strategies in a
series of three experiments. A genetic algorithm operates on a population of net-
works to train them in producing the desired output string. To generate a training
dataset with input and output patterns, eight objects, two actions and ten lexigrams

13
Emerging Symbols
259
that were also used in the chimpanzee trainings tasks are encoded into binary pat-
terns. For each of the experiments this results in a learning curve, showing the
average number of generations needed by the genetic algorithm to ﬁnd a working
network conﬁguration when a new object is inserted into the training dataset. The
ﬁrst experiment (indexical task) simulates how much learning time is required to
map objects to lexigram sentences. In the second experiment (symbolic task) both
the object and the action are part of the input. Finally, a third experiment (domain
task) is added to avoid a possible bias. In comparing the indexical and symbolic task
the learning time required for the domain knowledge task is added to the learning
time for the symbolic task. This gives four learning curves, as shown in Fig. 13.3.
Several conclusions can be drawn from these curves. The domain knowledge
task takes considerably less time than the other tasks, which can be attributed to the
required output containing only one variable (either give or pour) instead of two.
Also, there is an overall decrease in learning time after the third object is added.
Once the two possible output patterns have been learned, the network has created a
tendency to produce the right kinds of output patterns in the future. This holds for
the indexical and symbolic tasks as well as for the domain task; however, due the
steep learning curves of the former two this effect is not as signiﬁcant.
The chimpanzee experiment claims that the apes that adopted a symbolic
approach required more training time and made more errors during training, but
once they had crossed the symbolic threshold they were able to produce better sen-
tences and learn new symbols faster. Figure 13.3 shows that this also holds for the
simulated interpreters. Requiring less time to learn the ﬁrst objects, the indexical
learning curve grows steeper than the symbolic learning curve in the long run.
Fig. 13.3 Learning curves for all three tasks compared. The y-axis indicates the number of
generations it takes for each additional object (x-axis) to be learned

260
S. Leijnen
13.5 Discussion
We have set up the neural network experiments in order to investigate the differences
between indexical and symbolic learning. Although such a difference can be shown
to exist in our models, the experimental ﬁndings do not prove the accuracy of the
models used nor do they validate the conversion from the chimpanzee language
training program to the simulation. It should be noted that too many simpliﬁcations
and assumptions had to be made to call these networks either indexical or sym-
bolic interpreters. In order to reduce the complexity and tractability of the learning
task, a relatively straightforward neural network is used. Also, even though a bias is
avoided by adding the domain task, it is unclear how exactly the learning curve of
the domain task and the symbolic curve ought to compare to the results of the indexi-
cal task. One should therefore be prudent with generalizing the particular model and
approach used in these experiments.
However, when the results are projected onto the semiotic theory (similar to the
approach taken by Savage-Rumbaugh and Rumbaugh), they do allow for interesting
conclusions to be drawn. The learning curves help to identify the mechanisms that
underlie the shift to symbolism. The ﬁndings show that this shift serves a practical
purpose as it allows the subject to off-load memory from one domain to another,
thereby avoiding duplication of information. With selection pressure favoring lan-
guage use, this gives an advantage to symbolic over non-symbolic systems. The
ﬁndings also indicate that for a symbolic shift to take place, the different domains
(e.g. the domain of objects and actions and the domain of lexigram relations) are
required to be mapped onto each other by the interpreter. Understanding how this
mapping takes place is an important step towards a more accurate simulation of the
interpretation process and the role of symbols herein.
Recall our two deﬁnitions of symbols, S1 and S2. In the case of S1 a lexigram
would point directly to a referent (i.e. an index). According to the second deﬁnition
S2, the symbol would also have a pointing relation to its referent, albeit a more
obscure one which is embedded in a web of interdependent referential relationships.
In the chimp experiments, the relations that exist among objects and lexigrams are
also embedded in a web that spans both the lexigram domain and the object-action
domain. A lexigram can be an index for another lexigram: their simultaneous use
will likely lead to a pointing relationship from one to another (banana lexigram
is usually followed by give lexigram, hardly ever by pour lexigram). The realm of
objects and actions has a similar system of pointing relations (coke is always poured
and never given). Therefore, a symbolic relation is, as one might say, a higher-order
pointing relation from one domain to another.
For the interpreter to create this kind of relation, it needs to ﬁnd domains that
can be mapped onto one another. Not every pairing of indexical systems is viable,
there has to be a correlation between them that makes linking them purposeful. The
input data presented in the symbolic task has some redundancy in it, so it makes
sense for the interpreter to correlate the system of lexigrams with the system of
actions and objects (cf. Table 13.4). It is exactly this redundancy or system iconicity
(redundancy implies a lack of difference) in the topology of the systems that makes
a symbolic relation advantageous (Deacon, 1997). A symbol, therefore, is a triadic

13
Emerging Symbols
261
relation that requires two systems of indices with topological redundancy, resulting
in a higher-order index between two loci in those systems. The recognition of this
redundancy, the insight that two domains are alike, is prerequisite for the symbolic
shift to occur in an individual.
We can take this deconstruction of the sign one step further and consider what an
index, being the constituent of symbols, is itself composed of. A pointing relation
always points from one thing A to another B, which may in turn point to a third
C and so on. The index from A to B is activated by the recognition of A (which is
an iconic process). By virtue of their indexical relationship, A causes B to become
active (as though B has been recognized). Suppose for example that A is smoke and
B is a ﬁre. The thought of a ﬁre may cause a new thought C, no matter whether
the ﬁre was perceived directly (icon) or thought of after perceiving smoke (index).
Consequently, what is caused by an index is also an icon.
The pointing relation itself is caused by a recurring appearance of signal and ref-
erent, being in close proximity to each other in one or more dimensions (i.e. spatial
or temporal). Recognizing B frequently after recognizing A causes the interpreter
to make a prediction about the future occurrences of B after A. The commonality
of these situations is the simultaneous occurrence of signal and referent. Once the
signal appears again, the interpreter recognizes the state as one of those situations
where both signal and referent occur together. This recognition is itself a higher-
order icon, because it classiﬁes the signal-referent relation as one of many that have
occurred before. Hence, an index is a relation between two icons that exists by virtue
of a higher-order icon: their regular co-occurrence.
As an index is solely composed of icons, and a symbol is a particular conﬁgu-
ration of indices, it follows that icons are the primary building blocks for all three
types of interpretation. This conclusion does not imply that every iconic interpreter
is also an indexical or symbolic interpreter. As the ape language training tasks as
well as the simulation experiments show, a speciﬁc conﬁguration is required for
symbolic interpretation. Some apes were clearly unable to do symbolic interpre-
tation even though they had indexical capacities. The neural networks that were
trained to learn indices clearly show a behavior that differs from symbolic networks.
Likewise, indexical interpretation requires a speciﬁc setup of iconic skills in order
to induce the formation of a higher-order icon.
This conclusion does imply that iconic interpretation is a fundamental skill for
interpretation. The ﬁrstness of icons is argued for in semiotics (Peirce, 1894) but
also by the proﬁciency of simple neural network models in classiﬁcation tasks,
where their robustness allows them to deal with distorted data (Kohonen, 1982;
Harnad, 1990). The potential of these computational models for recognition and
classiﬁcation tasks makes them a good starting point for further investigations into
associative and symbolic models of interpretation.
References
Buchler, J. (1955). Philosophical writings of Peirce. New York: Dover.
Chandler, D. (2002). Semiotics: The basics. London: Routledge.

262
S. Leijnen
Deacon, T. W. (1997). The symbolic species: The co-evolution of language and the brain. New
York: W. W. Norton & Co.
Deacon, T. W. (2003). Universal grammar and semiotic constraints. Language Evolution, 7,
111–139.
Gardner, R. A., & Gardner, B. T. (1977). Comparative psychology and language acquisition.
Psychology: The state of the art, 309, 37–76
Harnad, S. (1990). The symbol grounding problem. Physica, D42, 335–346.
Holland, J. H. (1975). Adaptation in natural and artiﬁcial systems. Ann Arbor, MI: University of
Michigan Press.
Hookway, C. (1985). Peirce. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Kohonen, T. (1982). Self-organized formation of topologically correct feature maps. Biological
Cybernetics, 43, 59–69.
McCulloch, W., & Pitts, W. (1943). A logical calculus of the ideas immanent in nervous activity.
Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics, 7, 115–133.
Peirce, C. S. (1894). What is a sign? The essential peirce: Selected philosophical writings, 2, 4–10.
Indiana University Press.
Premack, D. (1976). Intelligence in ape and man. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Rumbaugh, D. (1977). Language learning by a Chimpanzee: The Lana project. New York:
Academic.
Savage-Rumbaugh, S., & Rumbaugh, D. M. (1978). Symbolization, language and chimpanzees:
A theoretical reevaluation on initial language acquisition processes in four Young Pan
Troglodytes. Brain and Language, 6, 265–300.

Chapter 14
Gender in Innovative Techno Fantasies
Cathrine Hasse
Abstract Human beings are a symbolic species with a special capacity for fan-
tasy. It has been argued by Terrence Deacon that the prefrontal cortex has developed
alongside with language and tool-making and that this part of the brain is also con-
nected with making plans (Deacon, 1997). This could mean that human agents have
developed a particular capacity for creating their habitats according to their fantasies
about how they would like to live in the future. However, this general argument
does not allow for a deeper understanding of difference in human fantasies and
how these differences might relate to gendered experiences. Human fantasies about
future developments might differ with gendered human experiences. In feminist
studies it has been a recurring theme whether we can argue for a gendered status
of epistemic agency. In this article I shall inspect the claim of gendered epistemolo-
gies from the angle of gendered connectionism in relation to robotics and physics.
The argument I want to make is that there might be no detectable difference in how
female and male researchers envision scientiﬁc innovation, but there are differences
in feminist and masculine techno fantasies and this might inﬂuence how we plan our
future with technological tools.
To take off his ﬁlthy garments & clothe him with Imagination.
William Blake “Milton”
Science and technology are two interdependent realms of creativity which shape our
futures in particular ways. In understanding the nature of scientiﬁc practice, femi-
nists have asked ‘whose knowledge’ scientists are creating (Harding, 1991). They
have answered by a harsh critique of what they have seen as a western, white male
scientiﬁc rationality. Feminists have claimed that science and technology is basically
developed by white, masculine fantasies, which by and large excludes marginalized
people from non-western countries and women, while at the same time upholding an
imaginary idea of a value-free, culture-free, objective scientiﬁc practice. Feminists
furthermore claim that the masculine gender is inherent not only in how science
is practiced, but also in how it is developed and how it is implemented in new
technologies.
C. Hasse (B)
Department of Learning, Institute of Learning, University of Aarhus, Copenhagen, Denmark
e-mail: caha@dpu.dk
263
T. Schilhab et al. (eds.), The Symbolic Species Evolved, Biosemiotics 6,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-2336-8_14, C⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2012

264
C. Hasse
Feminist epistemology has been engaged in this deconstruction of how masculin-
ity has reconﬁgured science in its own picture of ‘normal subjectivity’, which is not
(only) masculine, but ‘phallogocentric’ (nostalgia for the presence of the One true
Word) (Haraway, 1991). Science will, in this perspective come to understand itself
as being universal, rational and capable of transcendence through a denial of the
importance of the body.
Would female epistemology open up for an entirely different approach to science
than the masculinity approach? This is frequently discussed by feminist epistemol-
ogists – but just as often rejected partly because what is underlined is the situated
nature of all subjectivities. The critique of the detached knower, which feminist
epistemology share with the general community of Science and Technology studies
(STS), has lead to an acknowledgement of situated knowledges (Haraway, 1991).
This is the true feminist objectivity.
Scientists’ agency matters in the creation of technologies. Scientists’ engineers
and their techno fantasies literally reconﬁgure our worlds through their inventions.
In the words of the feminist physicist Karen Barad: ‘Agency is not an attribute but
the ongoing reconﬁgurings of the world’ (Barad, 2003, p. 818). Often the new devel-
opments are invented and carried out by scientists in collaboration with engineers.
Both of these ﬁelds have a lack of females researchers involved in the development
and innovations of science and technology. It is however an open question whether
more female scientists would make a difference in science.
If gender matters to physicists’ agency and if it is a particular kind of fantasies
guiding the agency of especially male scientists and engineers (e.g. science ﬁction
inspired fantasies), it is no innocent claim. As science has been utopian and vision-
ary from the start, the question is not only ‘whose knowledge’, but ‘whose visions
and techno fantasies’ (Haraway, 1991, p. 186) will make up our future man-made
worlds?
14.1 Emotional Human-Robot Interaction
One area where science and technology recently have contributed with innovation
which almost certainly radically will change human interrelations is in the area of
robotics. One of the salient examples of science ﬁction-like techno fantasies inﬁl-
trating with the real life of people is found in the so-called ‘artiﬁcial emotional’
robots already being put to use as devices to calm down senile people in old-age
homes e.g. in Japan and Denmark.
Often these robotic techno fantasies of Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) have
been created to solve problems, which have gender dimensions. In 2050 demo-
graphics show that one third of the population in Japan will be over 65. In Denmark
the picture is more or less the same. In both countries it is traditionally the role
of women to look after elderly people, and there is no doubt that the increasingly
aging population will put a pressure on the demand for old-age home workers. This
can lead to a demand for a more educated workforce, who can drive innovation and
develop innovative new thinking on-the-spot.

14
Gender in Innovative Techno Fantasies
265
Another solution has been suggested from robot scientists: create robots which
can take some of the pressure from the demanding tasks done by the primarily
female old homes staff. One such robotic invention is Paro, a creature of aluminium,
nuts and bolts covered with soft, white, antibacterial fur formed in the shape of a
baby harp seal and with huge dark eyes. Paro was originally designed in 1993 by a
male scientist, Takanori Shibata, from Intelligent Systems Research Institute at the
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST) in Japan.
The creature weighs three kilo and is designed to create emotions in old people
through physical interaction. It has inbuilt tactile sensors and adaptors, which makes
it possible for the seal to ‘learn’ from human contact and it can react to touch, sound
etc. In clinical tests it has been shown to relax and comfort elderly senile people and
even increase their brain activity. In a small study of the effect Paro had on elderly
people the robot apparently made old people more communicative than usual and
even showed effects on dementia (Wada, Shibata, Saito, & Tanie, 2004; Tamura
et al., 2004, p. 609).
It has already been tested and put to use in a number of old peoples homes in
Denmark, where it apparently stands out as a huge success.
At for example the old people’s home, Bakkeager, in the municipality of Vejle,
Paro was met with enthusiam. The home has 50 inhabitants from the age 66–100
years and 75 % of the old people are senile.
It is underlined by the manager that Paro is not a substitute for human con-
tact with the staff, but should be seen as a supplement. The staff follows courses
where they are certiﬁed in the use of Paro, so they can make professional use
of the robot in their daily work. Employees at old peoples’ homes thus learn
how to deal with the innovative device developed in Japan rather than develop
innovative solutions themselves. One area where Paro can help the staff is when
conﬂicts arise at the centre. Here Paro can be used as a ‘diversion’. On a home-
page connected to the old-age home it is described in these words: ‘The lively
and affectionate baby seal has proven to have a positive and stimulating effect on
the people with senile dementia. It awakens positive sentiments, curbs aggressive
behaviour and can in some cases increase brain activity in the residents with senile
dementia.’1
Could a female scientist have developed a similar creature? Would the pre-
dominantly female staff have imagined this solution to their everyday problems
themselves? Is Paro the result of a particularly male scientists’ techno fantasy or
are new assistive robot technologies a sign, that women bring experiences from
health care environments to the sciences and are opening for a new development of
assistive technologies building on women’s fantasies?
1 www.teknologisk.dk/paro

266
C. Hasse
14.2 Lack of Female Scientists
There are three arguments for why women generally could be expected to drive
the development of techno fantasies in science to a lesser degree than their male
colleagues:
1. Women‘s’ work receive less acknowledgement than males in natural science and
engineering and often they do not receive full credit for their contributions or
support for development of their ideas.
2. Women in general care less about developments in science and technology than
men. They prefer to study human subjects, such as psychology and languages,
and are underrepresented in studies of science and engineering.
3. Women who set out on a career path in science and engineering are to a com-
paratively easier pushed out through subtle cultural mechanism than their male
colleagues and thus excluded from developing science education and practice.
It is well documented, that female scientists are not receiving the same attention and
support and that their work in science and engineering is considered less important
than the work of their male colleagues – even when they were working side by side.
The place of women in science has been in the margins. This has been documented
in close-up studies of women’s possible career paths within a wide array of scientiﬁc
ﬁelds such as biology (e.g. Haraway, 1989; Keller, 1983), engineers (e.g. Meilwee &
Robinson, 1992), physics (e.g. Schiebinger, 1989; Keller, 1977; Wertheim, 1995),
mathematicians (e.g. Henrion, 1997). It has even been argued, that the few women
entering a career in science, try to hide their womanhood (Schiebinger, 1989) and
deny the experiences and preferences of being female. Even though women have
entered the sciences in increasing numbers at student level the dismal picture has
not changed much over the past thirty years (Chimba & Kitzinger, 2010).
The lack of women in science and engineering has increasingly been enunciated
by politicians as a problem in line with universities having turned into ‘mass uni-
versities’ – not least due to a massive intake of female students. Higher education
in science and engineering have not beneﬁtted from the development. Women have
chosen to study human subjects such as psychology, design, anthropology and other
areas which involve human factors. Girls already in secondary school deselect sci-
ence issues and show much less motivation than boys for learning scientiﬁc and
technological subjects (Sjöberg & Schreiner, 2005). This has led to discussions of
whether the diversity in interests mirrors basic differences between boys and girls
(Stadler, Duit, & Benke, 2000). The lack of women in science and engineering has
also been documented statistically in a number of studies, Osborn et al. (2000),
Bebbington and Glover (2000), Rees (2002), European Commission (2009).
The same studies show that women enrolling in science and engineer studies
do not advance to the same degree as their male colleagues. Even though we ﬁnd
cultural differences (Barinaga, 1994; Rees, 2002; Hasse & Trentemøller, 2008) it
is a general trend in all countries that women do not advance in science and engi-
neering to the same extent as their male counterpart – no matter how equal their

14
Gender in Innovative Techno Fantasies
267
numbers are when enrolling in higher education to study science or engineering
(TERSTI, 2003, p. 263; Osborn et al., 2000). One explanation for this leaking from
science careers (Alper, 1993) or rather the free choice of not wishing for at career
in science (Svinth, 2008) has been argued to be tied to a male dominated research
environment which through subtle everyday exclusion mechanisms exclude women
from advancing in their careers and eventually make them want to leave (Hasse &
Trentemøller, 2008). There is a certain ‘policing’ of the borders of science (Rouse,
1991) which seems to exclude women. But women also in their own right deselect
natural science and engineering at an early stage in their educational patterns and
prefer other kinds of more humanistic oriented studies. (e.g. Etzkowitz, Kemelgor, &
Uzzi, 2000). As a new trend women enrol in technological and scientiﬁc studies
when they have been connected to softer skills than just mechanical and technical
skills – for example new combinations of design and engineering. All though this
cultural pattern of in- and exclusion is not directly linked to knowledge production,
male and female scientists might work from different gendered experiences which
are more or less acknowledged by the scientiﬁc community and in the end also
affect the scientiﬁc knowledge itself (Hasse & Trentemøller, 2008). Would science
change if more women held top-positions in science and women’s experiences were
allowed to inﬂuence the creation of what was considered valuable scientiﬁc knowl-
edge and technological innovations? Would we see fewer or more robots like Paro?
Do women prefer science with a more humanistic aspect to it?
The answer to the latter question is a cautious ‘yes’: not only do we ﬁnd more
women in the humanities than in natural science (European Commission, 2009);
within natural science many women prefer to work in areas with direct implications
for human beings like e.g. in medical physics rather than in the more ‘aloof’ areas
of theoretical physics (Hasse, Trentemøller, & Sinding, 2008, pp. 150–153). And
an even more cautious ‘yes’ to the ﬁrst question: maybe science would change if
more women had science careers. But does that necessarily mean that gender mat-
ters in scientiﬁc re-conﬁguration of our common world? I shall argue, though more
research is needed to make the argument stronger, that we would see more emotional
robots like Paro if more women entered science. Not because they are women, but
because the new type of emotional robots represent a turn to soft skills more con-
nectable to many women’s experiences – skills which are also increasingly shared
by men.
The development of emotional robots can be seen as a post-Fordist develop-
ment, which has come to trump hard skills. Hard skills were during the Industrial
Revolution and through the Fordist era, associated with manual and mechanical
operations and led to scientists and engineers development of industrial robots. Soft
skills are conceptualized as being parts of ones self such as social sensitivity, emo-
tionality and modes of thinking, communication and conﬂict handling social skills –
and it is these capacities which today are wanted, even dictated by an inventory of
national, social, and market needs (Urciuoli, 2008). These skills have been the ones
sought-after in the typical woman occupations – such as the staff at old people’s

268
C. Hasse
homes.2 Making robots like Paro illustrates the change from a focus on hard skills
in the Industrial society coupled with a focus on hard technology towards a new
soft skill society dominated by values traditionally and stereotypically ascribed to
womanhood.
14.3 From Sci-Fiction to Sci-Facts
Industrial robots are an integrated aspect of human worklife today as well as occupy
an important position in the science ﬁction fantasies of tomorrow consumed (and
sometimes also written) by male physicists and engineers. Physicists and engineers
share a passion for what has been called ‘hard science ﬁction’. Science ﬁction moti-
vates many physicist students to study physics – but mainly the male students. Even
though there is no clear connection between the actual doings of science, technology
and science ﬁction many possible links have been documented.
In my own work as an anthropologist at the Niels Bohr Institute I enrolled as a
ﬁrst year student of physics with the aim of studying gender in relation to what could
be analysed as a cultural world of physics as seen from a position of a newcomer
(a woman and anthropologist – with all the problems and possibilities following
from these positions). More speciﬁcally I studied how newcomers became old-
timers (Lave & Wenger, 1991) through processes of embodied learning connections
between systems of meaning and physical objects (Hasse, 2008a, 2008b). This is
in line with the feminist methodology in science studies. ‘If natural sciences and
their preoccupations in reporting on nature are embedded in and complicituos with
social projects, then a causal, scientiﬁc grasp of nature and how to study it must be
embedded in – be a special area of – causal, scientiﬁc studies of social relations and
how to study them’ (Harding, 1991, p. ix).
As also noted by the anthropologist Mary Douglas, inspired by Ludwig Fleck,
science is fundamentally a ‘thought world’ (Douglas, 1987). To come to know this
thought world you must engage in the everyday practice, which opens up your own
phenomenological learning process (Hasse, 2008a, 2008b). This is not least true if
you want to learn about the fantasy and imaginaries connected to the thought world.
Anthropologists have formerly studied apparently more exotic ‘imagined thought
worlds’ than the what can be found at the Niels Bohr Institute. Even so I was also in
the apparently familiar environment introduced to strange traditions and behaviours.
I agree with one of the founding fathers of interpretative anthropology, Clifford
Geertz, when he states that: ‘Anthropology is only apparently the study of customs,
beliefs, or institutions. Fundamentally it is the study of thought’ (Geertz, 1973,
p. 352). It is, however, also a study of materiality and the entanglement between
thoughts (and fantasies) and physical objects and spaces.
2 It is a general trend in Western Countries that labour markets are gender segregated and that
women take jobs in areas connected with care and soft skills. See e.g. International Labour
Organization, http://www.ilo.org.

14
Gender in Innovative Techno Fantasies
269
In my study I used the method of participant observation and took it literally that
participation in everyday activities of all kinds is the road to learning (Lave, 1997)
also in educational institutions (Billett, 2004). I followed introductory courses in
physics, math, astronomy and I also followed the students in other everyday activ-
ities connected to physics study. I went to FREBAR (Friday Bar hang-out-time),
parties, and participated in the yearly student theatre show ‘Fysikrevy’. What I
learned was that, in addition to what others have had to say about learning physics
as a thought world – most notably the science historian Thomas Kuhn (1977) – this
thought world consisted of much more than learning symbolic reading of nature
through learning equations combined with learning an arsenal of ‘best exemplars’
and other elements of a disciplinary matrix in classes such as these on the class
schema.
In the study of thought worlds what matters for anthropology is to bring ‘con-
nections to light’ to quote another anthropologist Marc Augé (1999). Following
a cultural-historical approach these connections can be perceived as connections
between meaning-systems and materiality (Cole, 1996), but we could add to this the
connection between manifest expressions of fantasies of the future (e.g. in books,
movies and talk) and dreams of how to make this future come true. This is what
I have elsewhere termed the ‘relational zone of proximal development’ of physics
(Hasse, 2001). What became the biggest surprise for me learning among the physi-
cists students were the new unexpected connection I learned to make between the
scientiﬁc ‘core’ of textbook physics and a lot of seemingly extracurricular and there-
fore seemingly unconnected other fantastic aspects of a physicist students everyday
life (Hasse, 2008a).
In my further analysis one aspect stood out: the frequent reference to science
ﬁction (primarily among the students). It was a surprise that although male students
actively engaged in conversations about the connections between science ﬁction
and physics – almost no women participated neither in everyday conversations, nor
in the ‘Fysikrevy’ where these issues were treated in an ironic fashion by the stu-
dents themselves. In this particular thought world I learned that material objects like
magazines on humanistic subjects were ‘out’ and science ﬁction literature was ‘in’.
In the institutional cultural logic reading science ﬁction was considered a serious
occupation because it contained the seeds of tomorrow’s future physics. Old timers
among the students discussed science ﬁction literature, and science ﬁction related
subjects openly. Discussions in the student room and other places often brought in
science ﬁction topics like ‘warp speed’, antimatter as propellant fuel, space creatures
and cultures like ‘the Klingons’. Through science ﬁction discussions the students
formed questions that are also important for part of physics science today: is there
life in space? Is travel to other solar systems possible? The students would take as a
point of departure for questions of time and curving space the episode of ‘Starwars’
where the pilot Han Solo makes his starship ‘Millenium Falcon’ speed up. From
this point of departure they would discuss how it would be possible to develop what
in the movies are called hyperdrive propulsion system that propel a starship through
an alternate dimension of hyperspace and thereby make travel between star sys-
tems possible. They would also ridicule Han Solo for saying that his space ship

270
C. Hasse
is ‘[t]he one that made the Kessel run in [x] parsecs!’ because parsecs are a mea-
sure of distance, not of time. But they did not question the extremely stereotyped
presentations of gender and the almost primitive psychological landscape in these
visions.3
In a survey among the newcomer students I asked about their reasons for
enrolling in the physics studies. Among 14 possible answers only two other reasons
for enrolling got higher scores than ‘science ﬁction as contributory cause’. Almost
one third of the male students, 32%, and 7% of the female students, gave this expla-
nation for their motivation to study physics, which made it the third most popular
answer only surpassed by ‘Reading books on great physics theories’ and ‘Engaged
teaching in physics in high school’ (Hasse, 1998, pp. 16–18).
Others have noticed the connection between the development of science and
hard science ﬁction as an inspirational source for the physicists-to-be. Hard sci-
ence ﬁction is technically oriented and in physics it is ﬁctions like W.C. Well’s time
machines, Arthur C. Clark’s universe, the Star Wars movies and the television series
Star Trek which have received the most response from physicists (e.g. Nahin, 1993;
Krauss & Hawking, 1996, Kaku, 1994). At the annual American Association for the
Advancement of Science (AAAS) hard science ﬁction has also been discussed and
Leroy Dubeck has presented his theory on learning science through science ﬁction
building on the book Fantastic Voyages: Learning Science through Science Fiction
Films. And several American universities have advertised courses with titles like
‘The Physics of Star Trek’ and ‘Cosmology: Science Fact to Science Fiction’ (see
e.g. Dubeck, Moshier, Bruce, & Boss, 1993). Hard science ﬁction is even some-
times explicitly ‘helping science’ to get ideas as when science ﬁctions writers are
invited to help envision the future paths of science.4 Many natural scientists have
also turned into writers of science ﬁction novels. Science ﬁction is connected to
gender in so far hard science ﬁction is connected with male science ﬁction writers,
whereas soft science ﬁction – which includes fantasies of transformed bodies and
social skills – has more female writers. Gender is also connected to science ﬁction in
general as this genre as a whole is connected to maleness. Boys and science ﬁction
are for example often connected in literature on science learning, and science ﬁction
is used for learning purposes to spur boys’ interests for science as well as reading
(Lie, Linnakylä, & Roe, 2003, p. 52)
3 The gendered stereotypes in science ﬁction can also be found in robotics – see for example
the many chatterbots presented as ‘sexy women’ (like Amythechatterbot) or the Starﬂeet ofﬁcer
Captain Kirk from Star Trek.
4 (One example of these encounters took place in 2001 when science ﬁction novelist Ben Bova was
an invited speaker at NASA’s ‘Turning Goals into Reality’ conference on aerospace transportation
in May 18–19). http://tgir.msfc.nasa.gov

14
Gender in Innovative Techno Fantasies
271
14.4 From Hard Science to Female Fantasies?
On the one hand science has generally proven to be hostile to the claims of imag-
ination in science (Daston, 1998). Science has been argued to have an internalist
self-understanding resting on the central assumption that the success of science
is insured by its internal features (Harding, 1998, p. 2). Science sees itself as
being ‘outside of culture’ and can in the internalist self-understanding be perceived
as an objective scientiﬁc endeavour whose practitioners develop science through
hard work and natural skills and where ‘temperament, gender, nationalism or other
sources of disorder’ are of secondary importance (Traweek, 1988, p. 162).
Feminist epistemologies cover a number of diverse themes countering this per-
spective using gender as en eye-opener for new kinds of epistemic analysis. Many
feminist studies of science and technology have demonstrated that scientiﬁc prac-
tices build on what we with Helen Verran can call ‘ontic-epistemic fantasies’
connected to the speciﬁc co-conﬁguring practice which connects engagement,
metaphors and visions with our daily interactions with the material world (Verran,
1998). Verran names these fantasies and tropes ‘imaginaries’ – speciﬁc fantasies
tied up with knowledge systems, which have been simultaneously used and denied
in the western world (ibid., 250).
Scientiﬁc knowledge is in the feminist and STS-perspective ‘location, partial
embodiment and partial perspective’ (Haraway, 1991, p. 191). In feminist science
studies the situated nature of knowledge has consequences. When science is consid-
ered a human, embodied and material practice (Haraway, 1991, 1988), boundaries
between subjects and objects are never ﬁxed and observation of scientiﬁc objects
is also a practice. Therefore science needs to accept the value of multiple perspec-
tives on how to construct science to ensure values and taken-for-granted criteria of
scientiﬁc practices to be called into question (Longino, 1990). Sandra Harding even
claim that
[a]dequate social studies of the sciences turn out to be the necessary foundations upon which
more comprehensive and less distorted descriptions and explanations of nature can be built
(Harding, 1991, p. 15).
Feminist science studies is not denying some kind of reality but it is a reality bound
to be, in the words of Barad, an ‘agential realism’ (1999) including materiality and
speciﬁc situated, and never abstractable, knowers as agents. The agential realist
framework changes the question from how discourse comes to matter to how matter
comes to matter (Barad, 1998, pp. 89–90).
Gender is not shut out of these processes. Gender is rather emerging when per-
formed in the everyday practice of science. Or in the words of the physicist and
feminist Barad in our ‘intra-actions’, which create mattering matter and gender
as well. Barad (1998, p. 108) describes the process as: ‘(M)aterialization is an
iteratively intra-active process whereby material-discursive bodies are sedimented
out of the intra-action of multiple material-discursive apparatuses through which
these phenomena (bodies) becomes intelligible’. Gender is not something we have
or are in a biological sense, but something we do (Fenstermaker & West, 2002,

272
C. Hasse
Butler, 1990). This approach dissolves the stereotypical notions of culture and gen-
der found in mainstream science ﬁction. If scientiﬁc ‘doing’ involves reading ﬁction
we have to consider how it can ‘be the opportunity for the individual’s imagination
and memory to experience the existence of other imaginations and other imaginary
worlds’ (Augé, 1999, p. 99).
For many the idea of robots like Paro is an important step towards the humanoid
robot worlds depicted in science ﬁction literature. Paro is not alone out there either.
In Denmark cleaning robots is already a natural part of everyday life in public insti-
tutions and private homes. They might, like Paro, be made of aluminum, bolts and
nuts but they have anthropoid names like ‘Skupido’ and ‘Roberto’. Techno fantasies
at Japan’s University of Tsukuba has reportedly also created robots like the 2009-
launch of the baby-robot Yotaro, a baby simulator which train parents to deal with
babies shedding robotic tears before they give birth to their own child. Robots of
this kind have one thing in common. What is special about this new type of robotics
creating Paro and other artiﬁcial emotional robots is, that they are designed to do
tasks which have traditionally primarily been done by women.
Is the future of science and technology shaped through a phallogocentric and
masculine thought world feeding on science ﬁction fantasies, dreaming about a
world where female soft skills workers are replaced by robots?5
The empirical material can, when combined, can be argued to support a thesis of
techno fantasies connected to gendered embodiment and experiences (which again
could be related to the argument put forward by Theresa Schilhab) (Chapter 12, this
volume). This is, from the perspective of a feminist epistemology, not necessarily the
same as an argument for a gendered epistemology based on biological difference.
14.5 Female or Feminist Epistemologies
In the natural sciences there has for long been a struggle for trying to get more
women to become physicists. Not to improve or change science, but because it is
seen as unjust that women do not have the same opportunities as men. The idea that
this should make physics become more feminist has been seen, by male and female
physicists alike, as a kind of heresy (Auchincloss, 1998). Gender has been seen as
neutral in relation to how science develops.
Most feminists have countered the claim that science is gender neutral. In the
book Reﬂections on Gender and Science Evelyn Fox Keller argued for the link
between masculinity, notions of objectivity and the exclusion of women from the
development of science (Keller, 1985). Rosi Braidotti and her colleagues and Sandra
Harding have discussed the relation between the ﬁrst-world scientiﬁc agenda,
excluding local knowledge traditions and gender (in relation to protection of the
environment vs. Exploitation) (Braidotti, Lazaroms, & Vonk, 2001; Harding, 1998).
5 In South Korea BBC News could recently report, that a “Robot Ethics Charter” has been drawn
which discuss the rights of robots versus people.

14
Gender in Innovative Techno Fantasies
273
Many studies have shown how sex and gender have been culturally constructed from
a masculinity perspective in biology and how culture in general provide science
with perspective, metaphors and stereotypes reproduced and reinforced by scien-
tiﬁc practices and results (e.g. Daston & Park, 1998; Hird, 2002; Franklin, 1995). It
has even been argued that there is a possibility for masculinity to inﬂuence even the
most objective sciences such as physics (Rolin, 2001) and that physics is embedded
in national cultures and their respective more or less masculine dominated gender
patterns (Traweek, 1988; Hasse & Trentemøller, 2008).
Some have insisted that women for example would focus less on ‘explosions’
and solid matter and more on bodies and ﬂuids (e.g. Bleier, 1984; Irigaray, 1985)
thereby placing a direct link between biological sex and scientiﬁc research prefer-
ences. So far there has not been much serious research connected to this claim –
and it is often rejected by female scientists themselves (e.g. Stengers, 1997, 2000)
as well as feminists who see it as a return to an essentialist point of view (Wajcman,
1991). In a feminist epistemology it is pointed out those notions of ﬁxed biolog-
ically determined ‘sex’ is as ‘situated’ as knowledge (Haraway, 1989). Therefore
a feminist epistemology does not in general support the idea of biologically ﬁxed
gender differences.
In most of the feminists studies of today we ﬁnd the notion that biological sex
as well as gendered performances are constructed along side with the construc-
tion of the phallogocentric ‘view from nowhere’ (Haraway, 1991) approach. Donna
Haraway has attacked biological determinism by showing how constructions of the
female sex in biological research are inherently cultural and historical (1989).
The gendered body is never ﬁxed and bounded in stereotypes, but is a process
of reconﬁgurations, which might seem as bounded and ﬁxed, but which in reality is
moving when we are.
[O]f materialization that stabilizes over time to produce the effect of boundary, ﬁxity, and
surface we call matter. . .Crucially, then, [the construction of bodies] is neither a single act
nor a causal process initiated by a subject and culminating in a set of ﬁxed effects (Butler,
1993, pp. 9–10).
It seems therefore problematic to claim that a science governed by women should
be more carried by different scientiﬁc techno fantasies than science made by men
and that these biologically ﬁxed categories of gender is what produces differences
in techno fantasies.
14.6 Female Techno Fantasies
It should come as no surprise from this feminist perspective that one of the worlds
leading robot developers is a woman Cynthia. The work of her research group at
MIT was named one of the 50 Best Innovations of 2008 by TIME magazine. Her
special approach is to build soft skills such as sociability and capacities for learning
into robots.

274
C. Hasse
Social (or sociable) robots are designed to interact with people in a natural, interpersonal
manner – often to achieve social-emotional goals in diverse applications such as education,
health, quality of life, entertainment, communication, and collaboration. The long-term goal
of creating social robots that are competent and capable partners for people is quite a chal-
lenging task. They will need to be able to communicate naturally with people using both
verbal and nonverbal signals. They will need to engage us not only on a cognitive level, but
on an emotional level as well. They will need a wide range of social-cognitive skills and a
theory of other minds to understand human behavior, and to be intuitively understood by
people. A deep understanding of human intelligence and behavior across multiple dimen-
sions (i.e., cognitive, affective, physical, social, etc.) is necessary in order to design robots
that can successfully play a beneﬁcial role in the daily lives of people. This requires a mul-
tidisciplinary approach where the design of social robot technologies and methodologies
are informed by robotics, artiﬁcial intelligence, psychology, neuroscience, human factors,
design, anthropology, and more. (Breazeal,Takanishi, & Kobayashi, 2008).
In taking this approach to robot design Breazeal integrates particular branches of
humanistic sciences which have for long been dominated by women. She is, like
the feminists, breaking stereotypes of how natural and human sciences should be
kept apart. But she is also reproducing the stereotype of women connected with soft
skills interests.
In most universities in the western world women constitute the majority in
the humanistic studies, whereas male students dominate in the natural sciences
(European Commission, 2009). Even within the narrow discipline of physics
many women seek more down-to-earth subjects like geophysics and physics used
for developing hospital equipment rather than theoretical physics (Hasse, and
Trentemøller, 2008, p. 213).
Like Paro the robots created by Breazeal (e.g. Cog and Kismet, Huggable) are
‘artiﬁcial emotional’ robots which open up for a new understanding of what robots
can be used for. Instead of the focus on technical and mechanical robots prevalent
in the Fordist era, these post-Fordist robots focus on the soft skills. That these skills
primarily were understood as connected with being female might be what is really
the major paradigmatic change in science as well as society.
As noted by Lucy Suchman the dream of machines (and the robotic visions con-
nected to it) as the new servant class have been changing from the industrial age to
the age of the service economy. We ﬁnd this vision presented and discussed in many
critical feminist contributions – most notably by Suchman herself (e.g. Suchman,
2007).
Paradoxically lots of funding has been given to make it possible for the scien-
tists in natural science and to developers of technology to reconﬁgure our material
worlds with robots whereas the question of whether gender matters for the actual
development of scientiﬁc endeavours remain under researched. Very little empirical
work has been invested in looking into the obvious diversity on male and female
access to inﬂuence scientiﬁc reconﬁgurations – and how these reconﬁgurations are
connected to techno fantasies. From the argument presented above we should not
look for biological sex for answers. Feminism has changed science (Schiebinger,
1999; Alcoff & Potter, 1993), because we from this perspectives can ask new polit-
ical questions on how situated human beings, with partial perspectives (Strathern,

14
Gender in Innovative Techno Fantasies
275
1991) create each others worlds. ‘Feminist research orients us not only to relations
and symmetries among persons and things, but also to the politics of difference’
(Suchman, 2005, p. 6).
14.7 Cultured Bodies?
Feminist epistemologies on the one hand criticise masculine scientiﬁc techno
fantasies, but deny they are connected to the sexed body. Different politics of
science fantasies might be embodied, but bodies are not ﬁxed gendered stereotyp-
ical entities. When feminist epistemology stress the situatedness of knowledge –
including bodily situatedness (Haraway, 1991) they come close to other STS the-
ories which also acknowledge the importance of embodied experiences in science.
Postphenomenology for example also oppose the ‘classical’ notion of epistemol-
ogy where the identity of the knowing subject is not important. In this move from
decontextualised to situated knowledge both post phenomenology and feminist the-
ory reject knowledge understood as decontextualized and stable. Knowledge is
situated knowing in action. The postphenomenological understanding of percep-
tion/knowledge as it appears in the work of Don Ihde operates with an analytical
distinction of the body into two:
Body one: Micro-perception (bodily-sensory dimensions)
Body two: Macro-perception (cultural-hermeneutic dimensions) (Ihde, 1993,
p. 74).
Culture is in this perspective not a superﬁcial layer placed as a circle outside an
equally encircled individual. Agent and culture are intertwined in a manner which
makes it senseless to speak of where the body begins and the culture stop. Sense,
emotion and culture form each other.
In cultural-historical theory we ﬁnd the same assumption, which has led to many
studies of how cultural learning processes form our self-evident understandings of
how to engage with the world, which is never separate from us but emerge as we
interact (Hasse, 2008a, 2008b). Not least the practice-based approach by Jean Lave
and Etienne Wenger (1991), Yrjö Engeström (1987) and Michael Cole (1996) have
thought us that knowledge is embedded in materiality, materializes historically and
culturally and is situated in relations. We might even speak of a cultural epistemol-
ogy which makes us understand numbers in culturally informed ways (e.g. Verran,
1998). Gendered epistemology can also be argued to be cultured as cultural diversity
is formed in gendered embodied experiences. Also scientists embodied experiences
are mattering matter.
In some arguments it has been argued that being a woman gave access to dif-
ferent life experiences and thus different morals, senses of self (Gilligan, 1982).
In the cultural-historical perspective experiences are in a pragmatic and post phe-
nomenological way more than just senses, but the whole of the body engaging with

276
C. Hasse
the surrounding world (Ihde, 2002). It is not about being a stereotype (woman), but
about the cultural-historical changing possibilities for engaging with the world.
Cultural embodied knowledge is thus to be understood as embedded in subjects.
The learning body might stabilize over time to produce the effect of some kind of
boundary. The boundary formed by ongoing experiences is the gendered epistemol-
ogy building on the politics of difference. This is normally taken for granted, but
feminist epistemology has opened our eyes for how differences, also in techno fan-
tasies in science and the values they propose, are culturally created and installed in
bodies. Therefore it is likely to the point when Harding is ascertaining that
[s]ocial values cannot remain undetected in studies of the abstract laws that govern the
movements of the physical universe. It is far more likely the researchers import their
social values into studies of other humans than into the study of stars, rocks, rats, or trees.
(Harding, 1991, p. 79).
14.8 Towards a New Vision of Science
Paro and the emotional robots may not be the materialized results of male techno
fantasies. They rather point to a change in techno fantasies in general. If science
is changing it is likely because science is entangled in an emerging Post-Fordist
soft skill society. We see changes in the increasing number of women in science,
the increasing number of students studying humanistic subjects as well as in the
artiﬁcial-emotional robot designs in particular. In the new politics of difference new
scientiﬁc fantasies might appear and they might challenge what we have considered
to be innovative in the past. Technological inventions have in a naturalized way
guided scientiﬁc fantasies.
All cognitive functions including thinking in mataphors and symbols can be
argued to be tied to fantasy (Raudla, 2008). In relation to the arguments put forth
by Terrence Deacon in The Symbolic Species, it could be argued that humans can
change their environment through symbolic means and that this process is some-
how connected with human fantasies. Humans can, in other words, fantasise about
future technologies which can act as tools to change their habitat. The science ﬁc-
tion books and movies I encountered at the Niels Bohr Institute did, I shall argue,
just that. Fantasies act as directional forces on physicists and engineers construc-
tions of mattering matter, which in subtle ways led scientiﬁc endeavours forward
towards changes in the human habitat inspired by the ﬁctional Star War or Star
Trek societies.6 But will these kinds of fantasies also in the future be our source
of inspiration? Here a new interesting discussion about how symbolic meaning
of technological tools change over time is opened up. What is considered inno-
vative fantasies might be relational and tied to the diversity of human gendered
experiences. With the words of Suchman:
6 Even Breazeal has told reporters that she was inspired by science ﬁction and not least the Star
War series.

14
Gender in Innovative Techno Fantasies
277
We need to ask how projects to reclaim
creativity, invention and the like might themselves be reproductive of a, speciﬁc, cultural
and historical preoccupation with these particular values. Must those not presently iden-
tiﬁed as creative be shown in fact to be inventors in order to be fully recognized? This
question suggests that we need to pay close attention to the tensions and contradictions that
arises when we adopt a strategy that distributes practices previously identiﬁed exclusively
with certain people and places (for example, with privileged white men working in elite
institutions of science and technology) across a wider landscape (one thatincludes women).
(Suchman, 2005, p. 2).
The political reason for giving female perspectives more space in science is not
that they are women but that women may be carriers of different embodied experi-
ences in body one as well as body two and that these experiences might point to the
development of a more human and less humanoid robot vision of our future. Many
women have a passion for reading literature very different from the stereotypical
one praised in science ﬁction circles. What Susan Star and Lee Bowker questions in
informatics might concern science in general:
‘Why should computer scientists read African-American poets? What does infor-
mation science have to do with race-critical or feminist methods and metaphysics?
The collective wisdom in those domains is one of the richest places from which
to understand these core problems in information systems design: how to preserve
the integrity of information without a priori standardization and its often attendant
violence? In turn, if those lessons can be taken seriously within the emerging cyber
world, there may yet be a chance to strengthen its democratic ethical aspects. It
is easy to be ethnocentric in virtual space; more difﬁcult to avoid stereotypes. The
lessons of those who have lived with such stereotypes are important, perhaps now
more than ever’ (Bowker & Star, 1999, p. 302).
Would science develop differently if it was practiced by other kinds of people,
who for example have experienced the stereotypes of being women or black on
their own bodies? Will new symbols be created which can feed in to new fantasies
acting as directional forces on what tools to use and how humans should construct
their habitas? If science can be said to be limited in its scope by such stereotypes
how do they connect to the development of science? If personal experiences, like
reading poetry, might open up for new spaces of scientiﬁc inquiry – what kind of
driving forces develop science today? And are these present driving forces inher-
ently connected to male experiences? These questions are not just relevant from a
feminist point of view, but concern the very nature of scientiﬁc knowledge and its
development. When society move to value other kinds of soft skill experiences we
might ﬁnd conﬂicts – not between industrial robots being outnumbered by artiﬁcial
emotional robots but a war between techno fantasies and poetic fantasies.
In our contemporary world our problems develop when images build upon
images and when images are lost. This is ‘the risk that we run today with the war of
dreams’ (Augé, 1999, p. 56).
A counter project is to question the very force with which techno fantasies are
supported in society and the way innovation itself is understood as tied up with tech-
nology. The moral and political aspects of science (Haraway, 1991; Alcoff, 1996)

278
C. Hasse
also concerns what kind of embodied experiences can develop science. Access of
the marginalized to scientiﬁc practices will change the kind of questions asked in
science and thus the scientiﬁc endeavour as such (Hartsock, 1989, Harding, 1991,
1998). Maybe soft skills in the future politics of science will be connected (by male
and female scientists alike) to more poetic versions of the future than innovations
build into robots of aluminium and antibacterial fur. Maybe the innovation should
concern the staff at old people’s homes together with the old people and their
possibilities to invent and create new fantasies not already embedded in ready-to-
use technologies. Feminism directs our attention to the importance of ‘the human
aspect’ of science and towards research in our basic lack of understanding of how
culturally formed fantasies and dreams can be built into technologies shaping our
lives.
References
Alcoff, L. M. (1996). Real knowing. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Alcoff, L. M., & Potter, E. (Eds.). (1993). Feminist epistemologies. New York: Routledge.
Alper, J. (1993). The pipeline is leaking women all the way along. Science, 260, 409–411.
Auchincloss, P. (1998). Physics and Feminism. In The Back Page - APS News, May/1998. Retrieved
January 5th 2010, from http://www.aps.org/apsnews/0598/059815.html.
Augé, M. (1999). The war of dreams: Studies in ethno ﬁction (L. Heron, Trans.). London: Pluto
Press.
Barad, K. (1998) ‘Getting real: Technoscientiﬁc practices and the materialization of reality’
differences. A Journal of Feminist Cultural Studies, 10(2), 87–128.
Barad, K. (1999). Agential realism: Feminist interventions in understanding scientiﬁc practices. In
M. Biagioli (Ed.), The science studies reader (pp. 1–11). New York: Routledge.
Barad, K. (2003) Posthumanist performativity: Toward an understanding of how matter comes to
matter. Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society, 28, 801–831.
Barinaga, M. (1994). Surprises across the cultural divide. Science, 263, 1468–1472.
Bebbington, D., & Glover, J. (2000) Women and scientiﬁc employment: Mapping the European
data. Brussels: Commission of the European Communities, Research Directorate General.
Billett, S. (2004). Workplace participatory practices. The Journal of Workplace Learning, 16(6),
3123–324.
Bleier, R. (1984). Science and gender: A critique of biology and its theories on women. In G. Bowle
& R. Duelli-Kleine (Eds.), Athene series. New York: Pergamon Press.
Bowker, G. C., & Star, S. L. (1999). Sorting things out. Classiﬁcation and its consequences.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Braidotti, R., Lazaroms, I., & Vonk, E. (Eds.). (2001). The making of european women’s studies
(Vol. III). Utrecht: Athena/Utrecht University Press.
Breazeal, C. Takanishi, A., & T. Kobayashi (2008). Realism of the unreal: the Japanese robot and
the performance of representation. Visual Communication, 7, 345–362.
Butler, J. (1990). Gender trouble. New York: Routledge.
Butler, J. (1993). Bodies that matter. New York: Routledge.
Chimba, M., & J. Kitzinger (2010) Bimbo or bofﬁn? Women in science: an analysis of media rep-
resentations and how female scientists negotiate cultural contradictions. Public Understanding
of Science, 19, 609–625.
Cole, M. (1996). Cultural psychology: A once and future discipline. Cambridge, MA: The Belknap
Press of Harvard University Press.
Daston, L. (1998). Fear and loathing of the imagination in science. Dædalus, 127, 73–95.

14
Gender in Innovative Techno Fantasies
279
Daston, L., & Park, K. (1998). Wonders and the order of nature. New York: Zone Books.
Deacon, Terrence. (1997). The symbolic species: The co-evolution of language and the brain. New
York: Norton.
Douglas, M. (1987). How institutions think. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Dubeck, L. W., Moshier, S. E., Bruce, M. H., & Boss, J. E. (1993). Finding the facts in science
ﬁction ﬁlms. Science Teacher, 60(4), 46–48.
Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding. An activity-theoretical approach to developmental
research. Helsinki: Orienta-Konsultit.
Etzkowitz, H., Kemelgor, C., & Uzzi, B. (2000) Athena unbound: The advancement of women in
science and technology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
European Commission. (2009). She ﬁgures 2009: Statistics and indicators on gender equality in
science. Brussels: Publication Ofﬁce of the European Union.
Fenstermaker, S., & West, C. (Eds.). (2002). Doing gender, doing difference – Inequality, power,
and institutional change. New York and London: Routledge.
Franklin, S. (1995). Romancing the helix: Nature and scientiﬁc discovery. In J. Stacey & L. Pearce
(Eds.), Romance revisited (pp. 63–77). London: Falmer Press.
Geertz, C. (1973/1993). The interpretation of cultures. London: Fontana Press.
Gilligan, C. (1982). In a difference voice: Psychological theory and women’s development.
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Haraway, D. (1988). Situated knowledges: The science question in feminism and the privilege of
partial perspective. Feminist Studies, 14, 575–99.
Haraway, D. (1989). Primate visions: Gender, race, and nature in the world of modern science.
New York: Routledge.
Haraway, D. (1991). Simians, cyborgs, and women: The reinvention of nature. New York:
Routledge.
Harding, S. (1991). Whose science? Whose knowledge? Thinking from women’s lives. New York:
Cornell University Press.
Harding, S. (1998). Is science multicultural? Postcolonializms, feminists, and epistemologies.
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Hartsock, N. (1989). the feminist standpoint revisited and other essays. Boulder, CO: Westview
Press.
Hasse, C. (1998). Kulturelle forestillinger og køn i videnskabens samfund [Cultural conceptions
and gender in the scientiﬁc society]. In I. Henningsen (Ed.), Køn i den akademiske organisation
(Working paper nr. 4). Copenhagen: Københavns Universitet.
Hasse, C. (2001). Institutional Creativity – The relational zone of proximal development. Culture &
Psychology, 7(2), 199–221.
Hasse, C. (2008a). Cultural body learning – The social designation of institutional code-curricula.
In T. Schilhab, M. Juelskjær, & T. Moser (Eds.), Body and learning (pp. 193–215). København:
The Danish School of Education Press.
Hasse, C. (2008b). Postphenomenology – Learning cultural perception in science. In Human
Studies (pp. 43–61). Hamburg: Springer.
Hasse, C. & Trentemøller, S. (2008). Break the pattern! A critical enquiry into three scientiﬁc
workplace cultures: Hercules, caretakers and worker bees. Tartu: Tartu University Press. See
also cordis.europa.eu/documents/documentlibrary/116810421EN6.pdf
Hasse, C., Trentemøller, S., & Sinding, A. B. (Eds.). (2008). Draw the line!: International con-
ference, Copenhagen 2008. Papers, proceedings and recommendations. Tartu: Tartu University
Press. See also cordis.europa.eu/documents/documentlibrary/116810421EN6.pdf
Henrion, C. (1997). Women in mathematics: The addition of difference. Bloomington, MI: Indiana
University Press.
Hird, M. (2002). Re(pro)ducing sexual difference. Parallax, 8(4), 94–107.
Ihde, D. (1993). Postphenomenology—essays in the postmodern context. Evanston, IL:
Northwestern University Press.

280
C. Hasse
Ihde, D. (2002): Bodies in technology (Electronic mediations) (Vol. 5). Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.
Irigaray, L. (1985). This sex which is not one. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Kaku, M. (1994) Hyperspace: A scientiﬁc odyssey through parallel universes, time warps, and the
10th dimension. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Keller, E. F. (1977). The Anomaly of a Woman in Physics. In S. Ruddick & P. Daniels (Eds.),
Working it out: 23 women writers, artists, scientists, and scholars talk about their lives and
work (pp. 77–91). New York: Pantheon.
Keller, E. F. (1983). A feeling for the organism. New York: W. H. Freeman.
Keller, E. F. (1985). Reﬂections on gender and science. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Krauss, L., & Hawking, S. (1996). The physics of startrek. New York: Harperperennial Library.
Kuhn, T. (1977) The essential tension. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Lave, J. (1997). Learning, apprenticeship, social practice. Nordisk Pedagogik, 17(3), 140–151.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991/1996). Situated learning, legitimate peripheral participation.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lie, S., Linnakylä, P., & Roe, A. (2003) Northern lights on PISA. Unity and diversity in the Nordic
countries in PISA 2000. Oslo: University of Oslo Press.
Longino, H. (1990). Science as social knowledge. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Meilwee, J. & Robinson, J. (1992). Women in engineering: gender, power, and workplace culture.
New York: SUNY Press.
Nahin, P. J. (1993). Time machines: Time travel in physics, metaphysics, and science ﬁction. New
York: American Institute of Physics.
Osborn, M., Rees, T., Bosch, M., Hermann, C., Hilden, J., McLaren, A., et al. (2000). Science
policies in the European Union: Promoting excellence through mainstreaming gender equality.
A Report from the ETAN Network on Women and Science. Luxembourg: Ofﬁce for Ofﬁcial
Publications of the European Communities.
Raudla, T. (2008). Vico and Lotman: poetic meaning creation and primary modelling. Sign Systems
Studies, 1, 137–165.
Rees, T. (2002). First Results from the Helsinki Group on Women and Science Conference:
Policy review. In L. Maxwell, K. Slavin, & K. Young (Eds.), Gender & research (pp. 53–56).
Luxembourg: Ofﬁce for Ofﬁcial Publications of the European Communities.
Rolin, K. (2001). Gender and physics: A theoretical analysis. Journal of Women and Minorities in
Science and Engeneering, 7, 1–8.
Rouse, J. (1991). Policing knowledge: Disembodied policy for embodied knowledge. Inquiry, 34,
353–364.
Schiebinger, L. (1989). The mind has no sex? Women in the origins of modern science. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Schiebinger, L. (1999). Has feminism changed science? Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Sjöberg, S., & Schreiner, C. (2005). How do learners in different countries relate to science and
technology? Results and perspectives from the project ROSE. Asia Paciﬁc forum on science
learning and teaching, 6(2), 1–17. See also http://www.ied.edu.hk/apfslt/
Stadler, H., Duit, R., & Benke, G. (2000). Do boys and girls understand physics differently?
Physics Education, 35, 417–422.
Stengers, I. (1997). Power and invention: Situating science. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press.
Stengers, I. (2000). The invention of modern science. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Strathern, M. (1991). Partial connections. Lanham, MD: Rowan and Littleﬁeld.
Suchman, L. (2005). Agencies in technology design: Feminist reconﬁgurations. Paper presented at
the workshop on gendered innovations in science and engineering, Stanford University, 15–16
April.
Suchman, L. A. (2007). Human-machine reconﬁgurations: Plans and situated actions (2nd ed.).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

14
Gender in Innovative Techno Fantasies
281
Svinth, L. (2008). Women in physical science. In C. Hasse, S. Trentemøller, & d A. B. Sinding
(Eds.), Draw the line! International conference, Copenhagen 2008. Papers, proceedings and
recommendations (pp. 19–43). Tartu: Tartu University Press.
Tamura, T., Yonemitsu, S., Itoh, A., Oikawa, D., Kawakami, A., Higashi, Y., et al. (2004). Is an
entertainment robot useful in the care of elderly people with severe dementia? Journals of
Gerontology Series A: Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences., 59A, 83–85.
TERSTI. (2003). Third European report on science & technology indicators 2003. Towards
a knowledge-based economy. Brussels: European Commission, Directorate-General for
Research. Retrieved February 8th 2008 and May 2008, from http://www.dife.de/~mristow/
2003EU_3rd_report.pdf
Traweek, S. (1988). Beamtimes and lifetimes. The world of high energy physicists. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Urciuoli, B. (2008). Skills and selves in the new workplace, American Ethnologist, 35(2), 211–228.
Verran, H. (1998). Re-imagining land ownership in Australia. Postcolonial Studies, 1(2), 237–254.
Wada, K., Shibata, T., Saito, T., & Tanie, K. (2004). Effects of Robot-Assisted activity for elderly
people and nurses at a day service center. Proceedings of the IEEE, 92(11), 1780–1788.
Wajcman, J. (1991). Feminism confronts technology. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Wertheim, M. (1995). Pythagoras’ trousers: God, physics, and the gender wars. New York: Times
Books/Random House.

Index
A
Aethiopicus, 159
Afar, 152, 159–160, 162–164
Afaranthropus antiquus, 160–163, 165
Agapastic evolution, 77
Alarm calls, 10, 68, 118, 121, 134
Anticipation, 70, 111, 196
Arago, 173, 175
Ardipithecus, 166
A. kadabba, 169, 186
A. ramidus, 162, 168–170, 188
Artefact, 83
Articulation, 31, 47, 57, 60, 62
Articulatory gestures, 118, 122, 125
Artiﬁcial intelligentsia, 225, 227, 274
Atapuerca, 174–175
Australopithecines/-inae, 152, 156–157,
165–166
Australopithecus
A. aethiopicus, 159
A. afarensis, 160, 164
A. africanus, 157–158, 163–165
A. anamensis, 164–166, 169, 186
A. garhi, 159, 164, 166, 168, 186, 188
A. prometheus, 159
A. robustus, 152, 186
A. sediba, 166–167, 188
Avian
model, 4, 117–125
subjects, 117
Azande, 226
B
Back-propagation, 176
Baldwin Effect, 76–77
Baldwinian evolution, 1, 39, 76–78
Bantu, 180–181, 186
Bates, 85, 91, 99
Behaviour reading, 132
Bellbird, 124–125
Biosemiotics, 98, 105–110, 113
Birds, 14, 35, 37, 118, 120–125, 133–134, 197
Birdsong, 35, 117, 120–121
Black skull, 159
The blind, 228, 230, 233–234, 237
Blumenbach, J.F., 176
Body, 89, 98, 100, 104, 107, 113–114, 119,
121, 131, 162, 175, 180, 209, 216,
226–227, 231–232, 234, 243, 246, 264,
273, 275–277
Bonde, N., 5, 151–189
Bonobo, 2, 142, 180, 189, 207
Brace, C.L., 156–157
Brain nuclei, 121–122
Brain in a vat, 232
Broca’s area, 2, 68, 119, 122–123, 182
Broom, R., 157
Bushman, 180–182, 188–189
C
Cargo-cult language, 233
Caucasia, 173, 176
Causality, 3, 21, 74, 105, 109, 132, 146, 201
Cause-and-effect, 109, 144
Charles Sanders Peirce, 101
Chemotaxis, 42
Chimpanzee, 5, 133–134, 136–138, 142–143,
145, 151, 155, 176, 181, 194, 196,
200, 202–203, 206–208, 253–255, 257,
259–260
Chinese Room, 228
Chomsky, N., 3, 19, 25, 27, 37, 50, 182
Cladogram, 161, 183
Co-evolution, 5, 30, 33, 35, 40, 75, 108,
193–217
283
T. Schilhab et al. (eds.), The Symbolic Species Evolved, Biosemiotics 6,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-2336-8, C⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2012

284
Index
Cognition, 3, 5, 12–13, 19, 24, 27, 29, 34,
40, 44–45, 47–48, 58, 67, 70, 87, 102,
104–105, 119, 133, 136, 143, 193–217,
261
Collins, H., 5, 225–238, 241–242, 244
Communication, 2, 5, 17–19, 21, 24–27,
30–35, 40, 68–70, 74–75, 77, 90, 109,
112, 117–121, 124–125, 132–134, 145,
193–216
Community, 92, 227–229, 232–233, 236–238,
242, 245, 264, 267
Computational modeling, 261
Computerise, 231
Computers, 25, 55, 226–229, 231–232, 238
Concreteness, 12, 246
Context, 14, 16, 20–24, 30, 32, 35, 60, 68, 71,
73, 76–77, 85, 101–102, 106–107, 110,
112, 114, 118, 121–123, 144, 196, 200,
203, 212, 214, 234, 242–243, 245–247
Contextual learning vs. production learning,
134
Contributory, 230–236, 242–249, 270
Conventions, 5, 13, 18, 68–69, 77, 152–153,
155, 179, 184, 186–187, 202, 210, 216,
246
Convergent evolution, 117
Conversation, 235, 246
Coon, C., 176
Cooperation, 2, 5, 77, 104, 193–217
Coppens, Y., 152, 159–160, 163
Corollarial reasoning, 54
Cultural-historical activity theory, 19, 269,
275–276
Culture, 18, 24, 32, 49, 70, 82–83, 86–87,
172, 195, 198, 210, 215, 242, 244, 263,
271–273, 275
D
Daddesio, 85–86
Dart, R., 159, 163, 166
Dart’s baby, 159, 163
Darwin, C, 105, 154, 156, 170
Day, M., 159, 172–173
Deacon, 2–4, 9–38, 40–44, 50, 65–78, 87, 98,
106–107, 110, 113, 115, 117, 123, 211,
213, 254, 257, 260, 276
Denisova Cave, 177
Denisova hominid, 177
Denmark, 88, 172, 174, 177, 264–265, 272
Dialogue, 41, 61–62, 69
Dicisign, 39, 41, 43–46
Differentiation, 11–12, 53, 112, 142, 173, 179,
228, 292, 490, 524, 564, 593, 615, 672,
750, 795
Division of labour, 799
Donald, 77, 81–82, 86–92, 196, 211, 213
Dreyfus, H., 225–226
E
East African Rift Valley, 171, 189
East Rudolf/Turkana, 170
Embodiment, 5, 31, 226–227, 231, 241–249,
271–272
Emotions, 58, 62, 199–200, 202–203, 205,
207, 209, 211, 217, 265
England, 174
Eritrea, 174
Evans, R., 229, 231, 233
Evolution, 1, 4–5, 10, 13, 19, 25, 27, 30,
34–36, 39–62, 65–78, 81–83, 99, 101,
108–114, 117–125, 146, 156, 170,
176–180, 182–188, 193–217, 256
Evolutionary game theory, 75, 205
Evolution of language, 1, 4–5, 34, 65–78, 123,
180–182, 188, 211–213
Expertise, 114, 229–238, 242–246, 249
Explicit learning, 237–238
F
Feminist studies, 271
Finland, 174
Flores Dwarf, 171–172, 182
Franz Brentano, 103
G
Game theory, 69, 75, 77, 204–206, 208
Garusi (Laetoli), 160, 161, 164
Gender, 5, 22, 263–278
Genetic algorithm, 256–259
Georgia, 173
Gesture, 42–43, 59, 82, 86, 119, 122
Gorilla, 134, 137–140, 176
Gould, S.J., 170, 175, 184, 187
Great apes, 4, 46, 132–133, 136–139, 142–143,
145–146, 198, 201, 203, 205
Ground, 11, 22, 84–85, 108, 139, 155, 162, 245
Groves, C., 157–164, 167–168, 170–171, 173,
175
Gurwitsch, 92
H
Habit-taking, 76, 78
Haeckel, E., 154, 172, 188
Health, 113–114, 265, 274

Index
285
Health hierarchy, 183
Hennig, W., 154
Hierarchical organisation, 134, 141–142
Higher groups, 143, 209
Higher vocal center, 122
Historical linguistics, 182
Hobbit, 171–172, 177
Hominids/-idea, 5, 70, 123, 152–155, 159–160,
165, 168–171, 173, 177, 188–189
Hominina, 154, 186
Homo
H. aethiopicus, 159
H. antecessor, 174
H. antiquus, 160, 168
H. antiquus praegens, 168
H. (Australopithecus) africanus, 164
H. cepranensis, 174
H. erectus, 81, 152, 165, 167, 170–171,
173, 177–178, 188, 211, 216
H. ergaster, 156, 167–168, 170–173, 198,
211
H. ﬂoresiensis, 172–173, 177
H. fossilis, 181
H. georgicus, 167, 171–173, 178
H. habilis, 152, 159, 165–167, 170,
172–173, 188, 198, 207
H. hadar, 161–164, 166–167, 179
H. heidelbergensis, 175, 215
H. mauretanicus, 174
H. neanderthalensis, 152, 179, 186
H. pekinensis, 186
H. (Pithecanthropus) soloensis, 157, 171
H. rudolfensis, 157, 159, 165–168, 182
H. sapiens, 38, 124, 151–153, 165, 167,
172–180
H. turkanensis, 168, 171–172
Homologies, 118
Husserl, 85, 104
Huxley, T.H., 156
Hypostatic abstraction, 41, 49–62
I
Icon, 2, 4, 11–15, 40–44, 46–47, 49, 56, 60,
68, 70, 84–85, 106–107, 211–213, 253,
257, 261
Iconicity, 16, 24, 27, 70, 82, 84–85, 87, 260
Imagination, 11, 56–58, 196, 212, 235, 247,
271–272
Imitation, 4, 18–19, 26, 31, 33, 81–83, 86–89,
102, 119–121, 125, 133, 135–142,
144–146, 151, 229–230, 234, 236
Imitation Game, 229–230, 234, 236
Immersion, 3, 5, 227–229, 231–232, 236–237,
241–249
Implicit learning, 245, 247
Indexicality, 13–14, 16, 18, 22, 24, 27, 82,
84–85
Indo-European, 180–182, 188–189
Innate songs, 34, 121, 125
Intentional being, 102–103
Intentionality, 4, 97–115, 138–142, 144, 199,
201
Intentions, 4, 74, 101, 131–146, 199–203,
207–211, 217
Interactional, 229–238, 242–249
Interactional expertise acquisition of, 236–237
Interactional language, 232
Interpretation, 5, 9, 12–17, 20–21, 35, 60–61,
68–69, 72, 76–77, 89–91, 106–107,
112, 133, 245, 247, 253, 255–257,
260–261
Inuit, 183
J
Jacob, T., 172
Java Man/Javanthropus, 173
Jensen, P.K.A., 177, 206
Johanson, D., 152–153, 155, 157–160,
163–165, 169, 176
Joint attention, 21, 23–24, 34, 41, 50, 59–62,
201, 203
K
Kenyanthropus, 164–166
Khoisan, 180
Kibish, 179
Kromdrai, 157
Kuhn, T., 209, 216, 226, 269
Kung San, 180
L
Laetoli/Garusi, 160
Lamarck, J.B., 1, 76, 176, 178
Language, 152, 180
acquisition, 24, 30, 236, 244
practice, 225–238
Laterality/lateralization, 118
Leakey, L.B.S., 152, 170
Leakey, M., 152
Leakey, R., 155, 158, 164, 169, 171, 173
Learned, B., 181
Learning, 1, 3–4, 10, 23–24, 26, 33–35, 47–49,
55, 57, 76, 78, 88, 110, 112, 117–125,
134, 136–139, 142–143, 196–197, 232,
236, 238, 244–245, 247, 249, 253–260,
266, 268–270, 273, 275–276

286
Index
Levels of immersion, 5, 237, 241–249
Lexigram, 254–255, 257–260
Lion, 225–226
Lionese, 226–227, 238
Little Foot, 164
LITU, 153–155, 164, 168–169, 188
Logic, 2, 17–18, 20–22, 26, 30, 35, 44, 48, 51,
53–55, 59–62, 69, 71–72, 74–75, 144,
228, 269
Lothagam, 162, 165, 168–169
Lovejoy, A., 162, 169–170
Lucy, 152, 155–156, 160–166, 169, 188
Lucy’s Boy, 164, 166
M
Makapansgat, 157–159
Manual-role and digit-role differentiation
complexity, 137
Manual skill, 132, 134, 137
Manual tasks, 137
Masturbatory fantasies, 234
Mauer, 175
Mayr, E., 152, 156, 180
Mediation, 90, 107, 231
Medicine, 113–114, 175
Meganthropus africanus, 164
Memory, 19, 26–29, 47, 58, 62, 81–82, 86–89,
114, 195–197, 205–206, 209, 217, 260,
272
Mentalizing, 133, 145–146
Metabolism, 39–62
Middle Awash, 168
Midwives, 234–235
Mimesis, 82, 86–89, 212
Minimal embodiment, 226–227, 244
Mirror neurons (MN), 117, 119, 135–136, 234,
236, 244
Missing link, 1–5, 40–42, 49–50, 55, 78,
81–92, 117–125
Model of skill acquisition, 247
Modularity, 2, 28–29, 141
Monkey, 34, 68, 119, 122, 135, 143
Motor theory, 118
N
Neandertalia, 175
Nelson, G., 123, 155, 183
Neural network, 5, 255–258, 260–261
Neuroscience, 1, 3, 50, 66–67, 274
Niah, 177
O
Observation, 44, 47, 52, 60, 70, 75, 90, 98,
131, 137–138, 145, 181, 201, 210, 244,
269, 271
Olduvai Gorge, 160
Omo, 159
Orrorin, 186
P
Pan, 180, 185
P. paniscus, 123, 180
Parallel evolution, 178
Paranthropus
P. boisei, 170
P. robustus, 157
P. walkeri, 159
Paraustralopithecus aethiopicus, 159
Parhomo, 159, 165, 179
Parrot(s), 2, 31, 123
Parsing, 4, 12, 27, 131–146
Peirce, C., 2, 4, 11–12, 16, 40–45, 48, 50–61,
65–78, 84–85, 90–92, 101–107
Peking-man, 173
Perceptron, 255–256
Perceptual symbols, 243
Petralona, 175
Phonology, 10, 123
Phylogenetic/evolutionary tree/‘stem-tree’,
183–184, 188
Piaget, J., 83, 86, 89
Pithecanthropus
P. alalus, 172
P. erectus, 171–172
Plesianthropus, 157
Postphenomenology, 275
Praeanthropus africanus, 160, 163–164
Praegens, 162, 168–169, 188
Pragmaticism, 55–57, 66, 68, 72–73
Pre-Australopithecus, 160
Prescission, 51, 53, 55
Primate vocalizations, 133
Program-level imitation, 133, 136–137, 142,
145–146
Proposition, 20–21, 41–45, 47, 49, 51, 54, 57,
60, 70, 73
Proto-linguistic, 120
Psychology, 10, 50, 59, 61, 66, 72, 76, 90–92,
98, 113–114, 198, 234, 266, 274
Pygmees, 180
R
Reaction time studies, 243
Recognition, 12–13, 29, 87, 105, 119, 136,
207, 209, 245, 261

Index
287
Reference, 2–4, 9–14, 17–22, 24–25, 27,
40–41, 44, 56, 60, 67, 70–72, 78, 87,
88–89, 92, 118, 135, 138, 162, 185,
188, 200, 206, 247, 254–255, 266, 269,
273
Regularity, 37, 108, 246–247
Reilingen, 175
Relation, 5, 12, 27, 40–41, 43, 50–52, 57–58,
67, 84–87, 90–91, 100–103, 106–107,
109–111, 178, 195, 201, 204, 209,
241–249, 257, 260–261, 263, 268, 272,
276
René Descartes, 98
Repertoire (of actions), 134
Representation, 16–17, 24, 27, 33, 60–61,
70, 73–74, 81, 86–87, 103, 119, 123,
133, 144, 195–197, 200, 203, 207–208,
212–213, 216, 238, 246, 248, 253–254
Res cogitans, 103, 114
Resonance, 37, 119
Response facilitation, 136
Retzius, A., 175
Ribeiro, R., 229, 237, 242, 244
Robinson, J., 69, 157, 266
Robotics, 25, 264–265, 272, 274
Rule-governed behaviour, 121, 123
S
Salé, 174
Sapientia, 174, 179
Schilhab, T., 1–5, 234–236, 241–249, 272
Schleicher, A., 154, 188
Searle, J., 113, 201, 228
Segmentation of action, 134–136
Self-control, 39–62, 73, 75, 78, 196
Selinger, E., 228, 231–232, 244
Semiosis, 4, 9–10, 12, 17–32, 62, 81–92, 97,
101, 104–107, 109, 112
Semiosis, evolution, 112
Semiotic freedom, 47, 97, 103–115
Semiotic “missing link”, 40–42, 55
Semiotic realism, 4, 97, 99–103
Semiotics, 1–4, 9–10, 12–14, 16–21, 23–25,
28–32, 39–62, 66, 68, 83–86, 89,
98–103, 105–107, 109–115, 253–255,
260–261
Semiotic scaffolding, 112, 114–115
Senut, B., 162–163
Signs, 2, 4, 10–16, 19, 21, 31, 39–62, 66–75,
78, 81–92, 97, 101–102, 104–115, 118,
133, 142–145, 211, 215, 247, 253, 261,
265
Simmel, G., 91
Simpson, G. G., 156–157, 169–170
Simulation, 5, 197, 243, 257, 260–261
Sinanthropus, 173
Sonesson, G., 4, 81–92
South Africa, 157, 159, 189
Statistical regularities, 139, 141
Steinheim, 175
Sterkfontein, 157, 159, 164, 166–167
Stimulus-response, 245
Stopa, R., 180–182, 188
Strong Interactional Hypothesis, 233–235
Surgeons, 228, 231
Swanscombe, 175
Swartkrans, 157, 167
Symbol, 2–5, 9–17, 19–21, 23–24, 26, 28,
32–34, 37–38, 40–44, 49, 59–60, 65,
68–71, 73–74, 77–78, 106, 183, 195,
211–213, 215–216, 225–228, 232,
237–238, 247, 249, 253–261, 276–277
Synechism, 67, 70
Syntax, 10, 17–32, 50, 121–123, 133, 195,
211, 214, 216
System iconicity, 260
T
Tabarin, 162, 168
Tacit knowledge, 5, 225–238
Talking lion, 226
Tardieu, C., 160, 162–163
Taung, 157
Tautavel Man, 173
Techno fantasies, 5, 263–278
Technology, 2, 98, 133, 233, 236, 242,
263–266, 268, 271–272, 274, 277
Teilhard de Chardin, P., 176
Telanthropus capensis, 167
Terniﬁne/Thigenif, 174
Theatre, 269
Theorematic reasoning, 55
Theory of mind, 133, 145–146, 199, 204, 209
Tobias, P., 152, 157, 159, 170
Transformation-Translation Distinction, 227
Triad, 16, 40–44, 69, 84, 90–91, 104, 107,
109–110, 202, 212, 260
Tschad, 164
Turing Test, 229
Turkana Boy, 168, 171, 173
Type/token, 82
U
Umpire, 228
V
Vocal learning, 117–122, 124–125

288
Index
W
War, 226, 228, 234–236, 238, 276–277
Weidenreich, F., 157, 172–173
Wells, H.G., 233
Westergaard, B., 153–155, 157–165, 168,
171–174, 175, 179, 185–188
West Turkana, 159, 171
White, T, 152, 157–160, 164–166, 168–170
Wittgenstein, L., 69, 71, 225
Wolpoff, M. H., 156, 177–178
Y
Yerkes, E., 181
Z
Zebra, 226–227, 229

