Arkady Plotnitsky
Reality 
Without 
Realism
Matter, Thought, and Technology in 
Quantum Physics

Reality Without Realism

Arkady Plotnitsky
Reality Without Realism
Matter, Thought, and Technology in Quantum
Physics

Arkady Plotnitsky
Literature, Theory, and Culture Program, Philosophy
and Literature Program
College of Liberal Arts
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA
ISBN 978-3-030-84577-3
ISBN 978-3-030-84578-0 (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-84578-0
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2021
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether
the whole or part of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse
of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar
or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or
the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

If there is such a thing as a sense of reality,
and no one will doubt that it has its
justiﬁcation for existence—then there must
also be something that we can call a sense of
possibility.
—Robert Musil, The Man Without Qualities

Preface
Any observation of atomic phenomena will involve an interaction
with the agency of observation not to be neglected.
—Niels Bohr, “The Quantum Postulate and the Recent Develop-
ment of Atomic Theory” (1927) (Bohr 1987, v. 1, p. 54).
Thisbookconsidersquantumtheoryasatheorybasedonthenewrelationshipsamong
matter, thought, and experimental technology, as against those previously found in
physics, such as classical physics and relativity. There, as Niels Bohr argued from the
outset of his work on the epistemology of quantum mechanics (QM), “our … descrip-
tion of physical phenomena [is] based of the idea that the phenomena concerned may
be observed without disturbing them appreciably” (Bohr 1987, v. 1, p. 53; emphasis
added). By contrast, “any observation of atomic [quantum] phenomena will involve
an interaction[of the object under investigation]with the agency of observation not to
be neglected” (Bohr 1987, v. 1, p. 54; emphasis added). My emphasis reﬂects a subtle
nature of this contrast, due to the fact that the interaction between the object under
investigation and the agency of observation gives rise to a quantum phenomenon
rather than disturbs it. Bohr became weary of using the language of “disturbing of
[quantum] phenomena by observation” (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 64). It is possible to
say that this interaction “disturbs” the object with which the measuring instrument
interacts, but even this claim requires qualiﬁcations, discussed below and in detail
later in this study. In any event, speaking of “an interaction [of the object under
investigation] with the agency of observation,” which cannot be neglected, expresses
more precisely the irreducible role of experimental technology in the constitution of
quantum phenomena.
The argument of this book is based on its title concept, “reality without realism”
(RWR), grounded in this role, and the view, the RWR view, deﬁned by this concept,
of quantum theory, speciﬁcally QM and quantum ﬁeld theory (QFT) in their standard
versions, referring by QFT, unless qualiﬁed, to high-energy, relativistic versions of it.
(Alternative theories of quantum phenomena, such as Bohmian mechanics or spon-
taneous collapse theories, will only be mentioned in passing.) The RWR view places
vii

viii
Preface
a stratum of physical reality thus designated, in this study, in particular, the one ulti-
mately responsible for quantum phenomena, beyond representation or knowledge,
or even conception, and thus deﬁnes the corresponding set of interpretations, RWR-
type interpretations, of quantum phenomena and QM or QFT. Although quantum
phenomena and QM, or QFT, are commonly interpreted jointly, as they will, mostly,
be in this book, quantum phenomena can be interpreted separately because they are
independent of a theory accounting for them. The concept of reality without realism
presupposes general concepts of reality and existence, discussed in detail in Chap. 2.
Brieﬂy, by reality I understand that which is assumed to exist without making any
claims concerning the character of this existence. Such claims deﬁne realism, which,
in most understandings of the term, assumes the possibility of forming an (idealized)
representation or at least a conception of the reality responsible for the phenomena
considered. By contrast, the absence of such a claim allows one to place a given
reality or part of it beyond representation or knowledge, or conception, in accord
with the RWR view.
The concept of reality without realism and the RWR view were introduced by
this author previously, in several works cited later in this study. They will, however,
be given a more radical form in this study by virtue of two new assumptions. The
ﬁrst, deﬁning what I shall call the universal RWR (U-RWR) view, as against the
quantum RWR (Q-RWR) view, applicable strictly in quantum theory, is that the
ultimate constitution of nature, as responsible for all physical phenomena (rather
than only quantum phenomena), is a form of reality without realism, in the strong
version of this concept, which places this constitution beyond conception, rather than
only beyond representation or knowledge. The U-RWR view, however, allows for a
realist treatment of some physical phenomena, such as those considered in classical
physics or relativity, for all practical purposes. The second assumption is that the
concept of quantum object in the Q-RWR view, or any physical object in the U-
RWR view, is an idealization applicable only at the time of observation. Nature has
no physical objects. They are concepts or idealizations created by us in our interaction
with nature.
Speaking of “the idea that the phenomena concerned may be observed without
disturbing them appreciably” in classical physics or relativity does not imply, and
Bohr never claimed so, that these phenomena are independent of our means of
observing them, but only that they may be treated as such for all practical purposes
within the proper scopes of these theories. Hence, Bohr speaks of “the idea” that
these phenomena may be so observed, rather than that such is in fact the case. The
grounding philosophical position of this book, leading to the RWR view, ﬁrst the
Q-RWR view and then to the U-RWR view, is based on the assumption that ulti-
mately the observation of any physical phenomenon involves an interaction between
the world and our agencies of observation, beginning with that of our bodies and
brains. (The latter, too, may be seen as technologies, created by nature, of observing,
representing, and thinking about the world.) This interaction ultimately deﬁnes all
physical phenomena, without allowing us to be certain that these phenomena or
theories accounting for them represent, however ideally or approximately, nature as
it exists independently. In some cases, however, such as that of classical physics or

Preface
ix
relativity, assuming that a theory does so is, in the U-RWR view, a practically justiﬁed
idealization. QM or QFT expressly do not in RWR-type interpretations, deﬁned by
the Q-RWR view. With quantum theory, the book argues, the character of thought in
theoretical physics was radically changed by the assumption of the irreducible role
of experimental technology in the constitution of the physical phenomena consid-
ered by a given theory. These phenomena were, accordingly, no longer deﬁned by
nature alone, apart from human participation in it or by allowing one to neglect this
participation, as physical phenomena were in classical physics or relativity. Or so it
appeared. Quantum physics helped us to realize that experimental technology, begin-
ning with that of our bodies, irreducibly shapes all physical phenomena, and made
us rethink the relationships among matter, thought, and technology in all of physics
and beyond, although this book will only address this rethinking in physics.
In the U-RWR view, no representation, however idealized or approximate, of the
ultimate constitution of nature by a physical theory or even any conception of this
constitution is possible, at least as things stand now. I qualify because the possibility
that a physical theory or a set of physical theories will be able to do so in the future
cannot be excluded, which would compel even those who previously held the U-RWR
view to abandon it in favor of realism. The phrase “the ultimate constitution of nature”
(or of physical reality) which occurs frequently in this study requires qualiﬁcation as
well. A theory that is, or is assumed to be, correct, as far as things stand now, does
not necessarily need to account for this ultimate constitution. Thermodynamics is an
example of such a theory, although it is not a fundamental theory, a theory commonly
(including in this study) deﬁned as being concerned with the ultimate constitution
of nature. A nineteenth-century example of such a theory was the kinetic theory of
molecular or atomic constitution of nature, with atoms and molecules assumed to
behave individually in accordance with the laws of classical mechanics. In fact, no
current theory, speciﬁcally general relativity or QFT (two theories now considered
as workable fundamental theories), account for the ultimate constitution of nature.
It is commonly assumed that general relativity and QFT account for those aspects
of this constitution that they consider governed, respectively, by gravity and three
other fundamental forces of nature (electromagnetism, the weak force, and the strong
force). The fact, however, that these theories are not in accord with each other implies
that they do not account for how nature ultimately works. There are theories that aim
at providing, at least eventually, such an account, but they are hypothetical without
much consensus concerning their relative promise.
Unlike, at least in principle, in classical physics and relativity, in quantum physics
the experimental technology of measuring instruments capable of observing quantum
phenomenaexpresslyphysicallyinterferes withthestratumofnaturethatisultimately
responsible, by interacting with this technology, for quantum phenomena. This inter-
ference and, correlatively, the speciﬁc character of quantum phenomena, as mani-
fested in paradigmatic quantum experiments, such as the double-slit experiment, led
to the view of quantum phenomena according to which the ultimate constitution
of reality responsible for them is placed beyond representation or even conception,
thus making this reality a reality without realism. I shall speak of this concept or
this view as “weak” if this reality is assumed to only be beyond representation or

x
Preface
knowledge and as “strong” if it is assumed to be beyond conception, as it will be in
this study. Importantly, however, especially in the context of QFT and the question of
elementary particles, discussed in Chap. 8, there is, in the present view, no assump-
tion of a uniform character of the ultimate, RWR-type reality considered in either
QM or QFT, a uniformity only manifested differently in quantum experiments. This
assumption is in fact in conﬂict with the strong RWR view, adopted by this study,
which precludes any concept of this reality, including that of its uniﬁed nature. While
each time unknowable or even unthinkable, this reality is assumed to be each time
different, thus, automatically, making each quantum phenomenon, as an effect of
this reality, individual and even unique, manifesting the individual and unique nature
of this reality each time one encounters it. I shall refer to this assumption as the
quantum individuality, QI, postulate, which is, as explained below, accompanied by
the quantum discreteness, QD, postulate, according to which quantum phenomena
are irreducibly discrete relative to each other. Both postulates could be, and have
been, interpreted in realist terms, including by assuming a continuous and possibly
uniform nature of the reality ultimately underlying them, which would imply that this
individuality and discreteness arise in our interaction with this reality. This assump-
tion is in principle precluded in RWR-type interpretations, especially of the strong
type, such as the one adopted by this study. That does not mean that one cannot,
in RWR-type interpretations, relate, or relate to, quantum phenomena otherwise, in
particular, by predicting, by means of QM or QFT (or possibly other theory), the
probabilities of future quantum phenomena on the basis of already established ones.
As discussed in the Introduction, the RWR view has a longer history, extending
even from the pre-Socratics and, in modern times, from Immanuel Kant’s philosophy,
which is, arguably, the most recognizable modern precursor of the RWR view. This
view as such, however, was initiated by Bohr’s 1913 atomic theory, considered in
detail in Chap. 3. The RWR view was only partially applicable there, in deﬁning
the discrete transitions, “quantum jumps,” between the so-called stationary states of
the electrons in atoms. Stationary states were represented classically as orbits (along
which the electrons moved around the atomic nuclei) and hence in a realist way.
The theory, accordingly, has been sometimes called “semi-classical,” the term that
came to be applied, more generally, along with “the old quantum theory,” to quantum
theory preceding QM. This partial application of the RWR view does not diminish the
revolutionary nature of Bohr’s concept. This was an audacious step both physically,
because it was incompatible with classical mechanics and electrodynamics alike, and
philosophically, because it implied that it may not be possible to form a representation
and even conception of how nature ultimately works.
It was expected at the time that Bohr’s concept of quantum jumps, also the ﬁrst
instance of the QD postulate, was only a stopgap measure that would eventually
be abandoned, and that some form of realism would be restored to all fundamental
physics. It was, however, this concept that became central for Werner Heisenberg,
who built on it by abandoning an orbital representation of stationary states as well.
The RWR view, at the time in its weak form (precluding a representation of quantum
objects and behavior) grounded, fully, Heisenberg’s epistemology of QM in his

Preface
xi
discovery of the theory in 1925. Heisenberg also introduced a new form of math-
ematical formalism, based on a mathematics never previously used in physics, in
effect that of Hilbert spaces over the ﬁeld of complex numbers, C. Heisenberg did
not speak in these terms, introduced later by John von Neumann, and standard ever
since. The main credit for bringing this type of formalism into physics, however,
belongs to Heisenberg.
The interpretation of quantum phenomena and QM, or QFT, adopted by this
book builds on these and related developments, and contains several new features. In
particular, as noted, this interpretation redeﬁnes the concept of quantum object as an
idealization applicable only at the time of observation or measurement, rather than as
existing independently, in contrast to the ultimate constitution of the reality respon-
sible for quantum phenomena, along with, in this interpretation, quantum objects.
The concept ampliﬁes the signiﬁcance of experimental technology in deﬁning the
concepts of quantum theory, beginning with the concept of “quantum measurement”
as understood in this study, following Bohr, eventually leading him to his concept of
“phenomenon,” as applied in quantum physics.
This concept makes the terms “observation” and “measurement,” as convention-
ally understood, inapplicable in the case of quantum phenomena. These terms are
remnants of classical physics or still earlier history, from which classical physics
inherited them, beginning with the rise of geo-metry in ancient Greece. As under-
stood here, a quantum measurement does not measure any property of the ultimate
constitution of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena, which this constitu-
tion would be assumed to possess before, or even in, the act of observation. Hence, the
concept of observation requires a different understanding as well. An act of observa-
tion in quantum physics establishes quantum phenomena by an interaction between
theinstrumentandthequantumobject,orinthepresentview,theultimateconstitution
of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena and, at the time of measurement,
quantum objects, as applicable idealizations (which are RWR-type entities as well).
Then what is so observed, as data or information, can be measured classically, just
as one measures what is observed in classical physics, where, however, what is so
observed and measured could be associated with the object considered. As far as the
emergence of the observed data or information is concerned, a quantum measure-
ment is not a measurement of anything but a number or bit generator, something
akin to a quantum computer created by our interaction with nature. In the case of
quantum phenomena, there is thus, technically, a difference between an observation,
which construct a phenomenon, and a measurement, which classically measures one
or another physical property of this phenomenon. While keeping this qualiﬁcation
in mind, I shall, for the sake of economy, speak, in referring the whole process just
described, of quantum measurement, unless qualiﬁcations are necessary.
The overall philosophical position of this book, stated above, extends the Q-RWR
view to the view, the U-RWR view, of all physical phenomena, at least as things stand
now, assuming that the concept of observational technology extends to our bodies
and brain. Although the last assumption is applicable to phenomena beyond physics,
indeed to all possible phenomena, this book is only concerned with the U-RWR
view, or any form of the RWR view, such as the Q-RWR view, in physics rather than

xii
Preface
with possible applications of this view elsewhere. The extension of the Q-RWR view
to the U-RWR view is automatic if one assumes that the ultimate constitution of
nature is the same as that of the stratum of this constitution responsible for quantum
phenomena. This extension need not, however, depend on this assumption because
this constitution, while still inconceivable, may be different or contain strata other
than those responsible for quantum phenomena. Given that most of my use and
discussion of the RWR view will be those of the Q-RWR view, the RWR view will
hereafter refer to the Q-RWR view, unless the context requires a speciﬁcation of it
as the Q- or the U-RWR view.
At the same time (in the RWR view, by deﬁnition), it is not experimental tech-
nology alone but nature and our interactions with it by means of this technology
that are responsible for quantum phenomena and ultimately all physical phenomena,
technology, like all technology, helped by our thought, a product of our brains and
thus our bodies. No physical phenomena, any more than any other phenomena, are
possible without thought. Nor is experimental technology possible without thought,
which is necessary to create and use it. Our thought itself may be seen as, or, given
that it is more than technology alone, as providing, an essential form of technology,
however helped by other technologies, from the origins of humanity on. How we use
these other technologies, from the oldest known tools on, still depends on thought, or
society and culture, which have capacities for using technology for both enhancing
and diminishing the creative power of thought. We need thought when we use our
bodies or something already existing in nature, such as the Sun or clusters of galaxies
for gravitational lensing (observing which, however, requires telescopes and other
devices), as experimental technology. They are still made experimental technologies
by our thought. It is possible, even in performing experiments in physics, to use our
bodies or even tools apart from thinking, at least conscious thinking. Only thinking,
however, makes possible any directed or effective use and, especially, any creation
of technology. Galileo Galilei and Sir Isaac Newton, arguably, along with René
Descartes, the greatest founding ﬁgures of modern theoretical physics were also
great experimentalists and creators of new experimental devices, most, famously,
new types of telescopes. While that of Galileo was a reﬁnement of its Dutch proto-
type, Newton, in 1668, designed and built the ﬁrst practical reﬂecting telescope,
still known as the Newtonian reﬂector, part of the history of technological thought
extending to the Hubble telescope and Large Hadron Collider (LHC). Reciprocally,
however, we also think with technology, especially in physics, but not only there.
Experimental technology is a broader concept than that of measuring instruments.
It would, for example, involve devices that make it possible to use measuring instru-
ments, like the 26.7 km circular tunnel of the LHC under the Jura Mountains. It is
difﬁcult to give a strict deﬁnition of technology. There is no consensus concerning
such a deﬁnition even when it is used in the more conventional sense of referring
to tools and devices. Arguably, most generally, technology is a means, technique
(the term originating in the ancient Greek word techn¯e) of doing something, getting
“from here to there,” as it were, and helping us to do it more successfully than
previously. Or, as Brian Arthur put it, a bit more formally, technology is a means

Preface
xiii
to fulﬁll a human purpose (Arthur 2011, p. 20). He adds two other basic mean-
ings, “an assemblage of practices and components” and, most broadly “the entire
collection of devices and engineering practices available to a culture” (Arthur 2011,
p. 20). Deﬁning it as a technique of doing something serves best my purposes in this
book, including in considering thinking, which, again, may be seen as technology or
enabling technologies, for example, conceptual or mathematical thinking in theoret-
ical physics, or conceptual thinking in mathematics itself. (Arthur only deals with
technology in its conventional sense.) Bohr, in referring to the new mathematics
of Heisenberg’s matrix mechanics in 1925, spoke of “the mathematical instruments
created by the higher algebra,” in other words, the mathematical technology (Bohr
1987, v. 1, p. 51; emphasis added). The ancient Greek techn¯e also referred to art, in
the sense of making, creating an artwork. This meaning (and ancient Greek thinking
concerning techn¯e) served Martin Heidegger’s critique of modern technology, also in
its use in science, a critique that, I would argue, is only partially applicable to either
technology or science, especially quantum physics, which, as I shall suggest, may
be seen as in accord with ancient Greek thought (Heidegger 2004). This meaning
is retained in the concept of liberal arts (artes liberalis), a term found in Cicero,
and probably used before him. It is true that not all thought is technology, but much
of it is.
The experimental technology of quantum physics, helped by our thought, enables
us to understand how nature works, in the RWR view, strictly as manifested in effects
observed in measuring devices, without allowing us to know or even to conceive
of the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for these effects as quantum
phenomena.Thisrealityoranyphysicalrealityisnottechnology;itissomethingtech-
nology helps us to discover, understand, and work with. However, it can become part
of technology, beginning with the quantum parts of measuring instruments through
which they interact with this reality, or as part of devices we use elsewhere, such as
lasers, electronic equipment, or MRI machines. Most recent discoveries in funda-
mental physics, especially particle physics, such as that of the Higgs boson, were the
result of the joint workings of three technologies:
(1)
The experimental technology of particle accelerators, such as the Large Hadron
Collider (LHC), only part of which is the technology of observation and
measurement.
(2)
The technology of physical and sometimes philosophical concepts used in
physics, classical, relativistic, and quantum.
(3)
The mathematical technology of quantum theory, in this case, speciﬁcally QFT.
Any quantum event, I argue, is made possible by the ﬁrst technology and could only
be treated as quantum by the joint workings of the second and third technologies. A
more recent addition is digital computer technology, which is becoming increasingly
more prominent and even indispensable in physics. There is yet another technology
involved, that of science as a social and cultural project. Its role is, however, a
separate subject, which will only be mentioned in passing in this book. None of
these technologies, however, can exist apart from thought and the technology of
thought itself, reciprocally helped by other technologies.

xiv
Preface
Only nature itself, as matter, may be assumed to exist independently of thought,
which assumption implies that it had existed when we did not exist and will continue
to exist when we will no longer exist. Generally, “matter” is a narrower concept than
“nature,” although when the ultimate material constitution of nature is considered
both concepts merge. There are some exceptions to this view of the independent or
even any other existence of matter, including views, such as, famously, that of Plato or
his pre-Socratic predecessor Parmenides, or in modern times that of Bishop Berkeley,
that deny the existence of matter or nature, or anything apart from thought, altogether.
Such views are useful in suggesting that any conception of how anything exists, or
even that it exists, including when assumed to be independent of human thought (as
Plato’s ideal reality was as well), belongs to thought. It need not follow, however, that
something which such concepts represent, or to which they relate otherwise than by
representing it, possibly placing it beyond representation or even conception, does
not exist.
In the modern (materialist) view, which emerged roughly in the mid-eighteenth
century and was developed in the nineteenth century, thought is as an activity of the
brain and thus of our bodies, and as such is a product of our biological evolution
and, thus, ultimately of nature. On the other hand, as Kant, an eighteen-century
philosopher as well, realized the ultimate constitution of nature or matter, considered
independently, may be beyond the capacity of thought to represent or know it. Going
beyond Kant, who does not appear to have considered this more radical limit, this
book argues that this constitution may even be beyond our capacity to conceive it, in
accordance with the U-RWR view, at least in modern physics, to considering which
this book is limited. It is possible that an RWR-type view could apply elsewhere
in science, for example, by placing beyond representation or thought the ultimate
workings of living matter in biology or neuroscience, or the workings of thought in
psychology, but this is a separate subject. It could also apply, as Kant anticipated as
well (even if, as explained below, not reaching the RWR view, even the weak RWR
view), to mental reality, for example, in mathematics. Anything that we can conceive
of, however, or the assumption that something is unconceivable, still belongs to
thought.
Of course, one could (as against, the RWR view) assume, as many physicists and
philosophers have done, that phenomenal entities considered in physics could ground
representations, ideal or approximate, of nature by means of physical theories, and
thus allow one to form viable concepts of nature, or some parts of it, considered
as an independent physical reality. As, however, Kant, again, realized, it is difﬁcult
and perhaps impossible to guarantee that such mental entities, even the most basic
ones, such as space, time, and existence, or our theories based on them correspond
to how nature ultimately is, as, in Kant’s terms, a thing-in-itself (or noumena) vs.
any phenomenon, deﬁned as an entity formed by our thought. A phenomenon may
be assumed to represent or reﬂect the corresponding thing-in-itself, but is always a
construction that may not correspond to this thing-in-itself, which could, according to
Kant, also be a mental rather than only material entity. This constructive dimension of
our thought, even in the case of our immediate perceptions or what so appears (since
it is no longer assumed to be immediate but mediated by conscious or unconscious

Preface
xv
thought) distinguished Kant’s philosophy from that of his predecessors, such as and
in particular John Locke. This view makes Kant’s philosophy an important precursor
of the RWR view, in this case, the U-RWR view. The RWR view (either the Q- or the
U-RWR view) is, however, more radical than that of Kant. While Kant deﬁned objects
or noumena, as things-in-themselves, as not knowable (vs. phenomena that are repre-
sentable or knowable), he still allowed that they may be conceivable, even though
he also appears to have assumed that there is no guarantee that such a conception is
ultimately correct, as opposed to being workable in practice (Kant 1997, p. 115). By
contrast, the strong RWR view places the ultimate character of the reality considered
beyond conception, although, as explained below, this placement is only claimed here
to be workable in practice as well. Kant’s view is closer to, and may appear to be the
same as, the weak RWR view. For the reasons explained in Chap. 2, however, Kant’s
view did not reach the weak RWR view either and remained a form of realism, more-
over, classically causal in character. (I shall deﬁne the concept of classical causality,
expressly precluded by the RWR view, below.)
The U-RWR view does, however, allow one to treat, for all practical purposes,
certain observable physical phenomena as representing objects in nature and their
behavior as independent of our means of observing them. Such objects and behavior,
for example, paradigmatically, planets, and their motion around the Sun, are repre-
sented by physical theories, such as classical physics and relativity, in a suitably
idealized and mathematized way, as, in the case of the solar system, by Newton’s
classical theory of gravity or by Albert Einstein’s general relativity. This scheme
works, within the proper scope of these theories, at least up to a point, for all prac-
tical purposes, in particular, for making (ideally) exact predictions of the outcome
of experiments, observed as phenomena, which may be treated as, for all practical
purposes, representing the corresponding objects and their behavior. I qualify for the
following reasons. First, Newton’s theory, while an excellent approximation, is incor-
rect even within its proper scope, for example, in the case of the aberrant behavior
of Mercury, which requires general relativity to be accurately predicted. Secondly,
general relativity, too, has its complexities, for example, those related to singularities,
such as black holes. Of course, one still needed to create the mathematics enabling
these representations and predictions, which was a major achievement of classical
physics and relativity alike. This is why the proper names of Newton and Einstein
accompany these theories, more so than Newton’s or Einstein’s realist assumptions,
although these assumptions sometimes carry their signatures as well.
Ifsucharepresentationofobjectsinnatureonthebasisoftheobservedphenomena
is assumed to be possible, even in an idealized and approximate way, it becomes a
form of realism. Realism has other forms, and this form of it has different versions
and additional features, considered later in this study. In the U-RWR view, which
applies to the ultimate constitution of nature, any such representation can only be
understood as a provisional idealization. It is effective for practical purposes but is
underlain by an RWR-type reality of the ultimate workings of nature that in principle
precludes a representation or even conception. Throughout this study, by idealization,
I refer to a workable conception of something or, as this is an idealization as well,
a lack or impossibility of such a conception, as in the case in an RWR-type reality,

xvi
Preface
in other words, something that may be different from what it idealizes rather than,
as in some uses of this term, any form of approximation, deﬁned by a proximity to
what is idealized. In sum, if one gives the RWR view the U-RWR scope, the ultimate
character of the reality considered in physics is always that of a reality without
realism, but some phenomena allow the reality responsible for them to be treated in
realist terms.
As discussed in Chap. 6, a parallel and in fact correlative situation is obtained in
the case of causality, usually deﬁned in terms of relationships between events and
the laws of such relationships. The question is, however, what is the nature of these
relationships and these laws. In the Q-RWR view, the essential and indeed the only
relationships, when it is possible to ascertain them, between events, such as those of
measurements, are probabilistic. Indeed, all events considered are those of observa-
tion or measurement, creating phenomena (some of which can be created by nature,
but can only be events for us), underlain by the ultimate constitution of the reality
responsible for them as a reality without realism. Accordingly, any form of causality
that could be deﬁned under these assumptions is probabilistic. I shall deﬁne such
relationships in terms of “probabilistic causality.” As discussed in Chap. 6, these
relationships take a speciﬁc form, that of “quantum causality,” in quantum theory,
given the nature of quantum phenomena and the data observed in them, beginning
with the fact that, even in the case of the simplest possible quantum systems, no
predictions other than probabilistic are in general possible in quantum physics on
experimental grounds, as things stand now, because identically prepared quantum
experiments in general lead to different outcomes. (There are exceptional idealized
cases, on which I comment below.) On the other hand, in either realist or (provision-
ally) the U-RWR view, the connections between certain events or phenomena allow
the reality responsible for them to be treated in terms of the concept of “classical
causality.” This form of causality is not fundamentally probabilistic, although it may
involve probability, as a practical expedient in the cases when we lack sufﬁcient
knowledge to access the architecture of the classical causal reality underlying the
events considered. I have several reasons for adopting the term “classical causality,”
instead of just “causality,” as is more common in designating this concept, including
for founding ﬁgures considered here, beginning with Bohr, in most of his writings.
(There is an important exception in one of his later works, in 1958, when Bohr adopts
a different view of causality [Bohr 1987, v. 3, p. 4–5], which I shall discuss in Chap. 6,
Sect. 6.6) In particular, ﬁrst, although it has a much longer history, this concept has
deﬁned classical physics from its birth and was then extended to relativity, which
introduced certain restrictions on it, discussed later. Secondly, there are alternative
deﬁnitions of causality, including probabilistic in nature (which classical causality is
not), discussed in Chap. 6 (Sect.6.6). The concept of classical causality, considered
in detail in Chap. 2, is deﬁned by the claim that the state, state X, of a physical system
is determined, in accordance with a law, at all future moments of time once it is deter-
mined at a given moment of time, state A, and state A is determined in accordance
with the same law by any of the system’s previous states. It is a more complex issue,
discussed in Chap. 2 as well, whether A could be seen as the cause of X. The fact
that it is not necessarily the case and related considerations have compelled some,

Preface
xvii
beginning with P. S. Laplace, to speak of determinism instead in referring to this
concept. I shall use the term determinism differently, as an epistemological category
referring to the possibility of predicting the outcomes of classically causal processes
ideally exactly in accordance with laws that deﬁne them. In classical mechanics,
when dealing with individual objects or small systems, both concepts coincide or
rather (because they are different concepts) are correlatively applicable. On the other
hand, classical statistical mechanics or chaos theory is classically causal but not
deterministic in view of the complexity of the systems considered, which limit us to
probabilistic or statistical predictions concerning their behavior.
In the U-RWR view, then, while certain phenomena may be treated as classically
causal for all practical purposes within the scope of certain theories, the ultimate
constitution of nature responsible for these phenomena may not be, because this
constitution is assumed to be a form of reality without realism, which prevents clas-
sical causality. For one thing, this deﬁnition implies the concept of a law that governs
the strictly determined (rather than probabilistic) relationships between events and
thus at least a partial conception and even representation of the reality responsible
for these events as deﬁned by this law. Accordingly, in the U-RWR view, in doing
any form of physics (which in this respect becomes similar to QM or QFT in the
Q-RWR view), one ultimately deals only with measurements of and predictions
concerning observed phenomena or events, rather than with representing the ulti-
mate constitution of the reality responsible for them. Such a representation is, again,
only allowed to be assumed for all practical purposes in considering certain types
of phenomena. In the U-RWR view, the combined workings of all three—nature,
thought, and experimental technology (including our bodies)—are responsible for
all physical phenomena, and deﬁne our measurements and, through them, justify,
when possible, our predictions concerning physical phenomena. This remains the
case even when these predictions are predictions with probability one. Such predic-
tions are sometimes possible in dealing with quantum phenomena, although, as will
be seen, their nature acquires new complexities. The possibility of exact predictions
does not mean that we have an access to the ultimate constitution of nature, and in
the U-RWR view (or Q-RWR view) we do not. While real as part of our thought,
predictions are never part of a physical reality. Only the outcomes of observation and
measurements are, which still leaves the ultimate constitution of reality responsible
for them beyond representation or conception. Nature does not assign probabilities
and makes no measurements or predictions. Only we do.
These relationships between reality and probability (in the absence of classical
causality) in a RWR view, either a Q- or U- one, are reﬂected in my epigraph to
this book, from Robert Musil’s great unﬁnished novel, The Man Without Qualities:
“If there is such a thing as a sense of reality, and no one will doubt that it has its
justiﬁcation for existence—then there must also be something that we can call a
sense of possibility. Whoever has it, it does not say, for instance: Here this or that
has happened, will happen, must happen; but he invents: Here such and such might,
could, or ought to happen” (Musil 1995, p. 11). That, Musil adds, does not mean
that one “shrinks from reality, but sees it as a project, something yet to be invented”
(Musil 1995, p. 11). In the present view, only part of reality is open to such a project

xviii
Preface
or invention. Besides, there is “the touch of reality” that can surprise us (Musil 1995,
p. 93), sometimes in response to our own touch, for example, as in our experiments
in physics, especially in quantum physics. None of this diminishes the signiﬁcance
of either reality that which we invent and that, a reality without realism, which we
cannot invent. The RWR-type reality that we cannot invent may help us to invent the
reality or realities that we can invent, which is what happens in quantum theory in the
RWR view. Importantly, Musil only speaks about “a sense,” an assumption of reality,
thus, consistently with the view adopted here. The RWR view (of either U or Q type)
is, too, assumed by this study to be an idealization, a product of thought, which is
only practically justiﬁed, given quantum phenomena and theories predicting them,
such as QM or QFT. The existence of these phenomena is crucial for the RWR view,
inferred from nature on the basis of them, as their interpretation, rather than merely
invented or assumed on some external grounds.
Assuming that the RWR view is an idealization, ultimately only practically justi-
ﬁed, also precludes one from deﬁnitively claiming that the ultimate constitution of
the reality responsible for quantum phenomena or, in the U-RWR view, the ultimate
constitution (of the reality) of nature is unrepresentable or inconceivable. It may be or
at least may be assumed to be ultimately conceivable or even representable, in accord
with one or another realist view. At least this type of assumption or idealization might
sufﬁce for all fundamental physics, even for those who had previously adopted the
Q-RWR view or even the U-RWR view, more resilient as the latter may be. The
reason for this greater resilience in the U-RWR view is due to an extended view of
technology, which includes our bodies and brains. Our concepts and language, or
our thinking, deﬁned by our evolutionary emergence as human animals have devel-
oped in our interaction with the world of objects consisting of billions of billions of
atoms, and thus, on a scale very different from those, literally unimaginably small,
considered in quantum theory, or at the opposite end of the available physical scales,
from those at the scale of the Universe. Accordingly, there is no special reason to
assume that this thinking should be able to conceive of the workings of nature on
these scales, or even to relate these working otherwise, for example, in terms of prob-
abilistic predictions, as in QM or QFT. It is true that our thinking has done reasonably
well thus far, in particular, our mathematical thinking and our thinking that created
our experimental technology. But how far would our mathematics be able to go,
given that, at least in the present view, it is still human, a product, reﬁned as it may
be, of human thought? In any event, it is possible that the U-RWR view will lose its
raison d’être in physics. It may happen, for example, if there is no physical theory,
like QM or QFT, that deﬁes realist assumptions at least in some interpretations and
thus suggests the possibility of the U-RWR view. The U-RWR view may continue to
be held elsewhere or considered as a philosophical possibility, but physics will have
no need for it. Assuming the Q-RWR view to be only an idealization also allows for
the possibility that quantum phenomena and QM or QFT can be interpreted in realist
terms, as they have been.
If, however, one adopts the U-RWR view as the primary idealization, under-
lying all other idealizations used by physical theories, any realist view is assumed

Preface
xix
to be provisional and ultimately inapplicable. The situation can be represented
diagrammatically as follows:
(U-RWR): the ultimate constitution of nature →physical objects (deﬁned, as RWR-type
concepts or idealizations, at the time observation) →observational instruments (some of
which are observed as classical physical object) →phenomena (deﬁned by what is observed
in observational instruments).
In quantum physics, in the Q-RWR view, a parallel diagram applies, with the ultimate
constitution of the reality considered only assumed to be responsible for quantum
phenomena:
(Q-RWR): the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum objects and
quantum phenomena →quantum objects (deﬁned as RWR-type concepts or idealizations
at the time measurement) →measuring instruments (observed as classical physical objects)
→quantum phenomena (deﬁned by what is observed in measuring instruments).
That the concepts or idealizations of “physical objects” and “quantum objects” are
only applicable in considering observations is the view speciﬁcally adopted by this
study. It is not necessarily found in other versions of the RWR view, including
that of Bohr, who assumed that quantum objects can be considered as idealizations
applicable independently of observation. Either diagram would, then, need to be
adjusted accordingly. Finally, in classical physics or relativity, because it is possible,
for all practical purposes, to neglect both the interference of measuring instruments
and the ultimate constitutions of the reality considered, the diagram converts into:
(R): physical reality = objects = (or assumed to be represented by a theory on the basis of)
phenomena.
(Technically, if oneassumes theU-RWRviewas underlyinganyrealism, this diagram
should be designated as R-RWR.)
As indicated above, the extension of the Q-RWR view to the U-RWR view need
not assume that the ultimate constitution of nature is the same as that of the stratum
of this constitution responsible for quantum phenomena. This constitution may be
different and contain different inconceivable strata, responsible for different physical
phenomena. This difference could, for example, account for the fact that general
relativity cannot be brought in accord with QFT and the standard model, which may
imply that a deeper theory or set of theories is necessary to do so.
RWR-type interpretations of quantum phenomena may be different within each
set, weak or strong, as are, for example, Bohr’s interpretation, in its ultimate version
(developed by him in the late 1930s), and the one adopted in this study, although
both are of the strong RWR type and the present interpretation follows that of Bohr
in several key aspects. In particular, Bohr was, again, the ﬁrst to ground his inter-
pretation (in all of its versions) in the irreducible role of measurement technology
in the constitution of quantum phenomena and, in its ultimate version, in the RWR
view as applied to the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum
phenomena. This constitution is commonly, including in Bohr’s interpretation (in all
of its versions), associated with quantum objects. The interpretation adopted in this
study, however, takes a more stratiﬁed view, as embodied in the Q-RWR diagram:

xx
Preface
(Q-RWR): the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum objects and
quantum phenomena →quantum objects (deﬁned as RWR-type entities at the time measure-
ment) →measuring instruments (observed as classical physical objects) →quantum
phenomena (deﬁned by what is observed in measuring instruments).
In this interpretation, while what is considered as a quantum object in a given exper-
iment is made possible by the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for
quantum phenomena in its interaction with measuring instruments, and while these
two strata of reality are equally beyond conception, they are not the same forms
of idealization. The ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum
phenomena is assumed to exist independently of our interactions with it. On the
other hand, the reality idealized as quantum objects is, while still of the RWR type,
assumed to exist only at the time observation. It follows that there is no assumption
of quantum objects, such as electrons, photons, or quarks, existing independently in
natureapartfromourinteractionwithitbymeansofobservationaltechnology.Hence,
one cannot speak of the behavior of quantum objects as independent of observation
either. One can only consider this behavior as part of observations or measurement,
again, understanding by measurement the construction of quantum phenomena by
means of measuring instruments capable of interaction with the ultimate, RWR-type
constitution of the reality responsible for these phenomena. (Technically, again, this
construction is that of observed phenomena, while a measurement qua measure-
ment is a classical measurement of one or another property of a phenomena.) This
view, on this point following Bohr, makes it impossible to separate, extract, quantum
objects from quantum phenomena observed in measuring instruments. Bohr spoke
in this connection of the indivisibility or wholeness of quantum phenomena, if,
again, without assuming the present concept of a quantum object and the strati-
ﬁed idealization of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena assumed here:
the ultimate RWR-type constitution of the reality considered, idealized as existing
independently of our interaction with it; quantum objects, idealized, as RWR-type
entities, as existing only in measurement; and quantum phenomena, idealized as
effects of measurements classically observed in measuring instruments.
On the other hand, Bohr appears to have assumed the U-RWR view by suggesting
that no physical theory can represent how nature ultimately works even when, as
in classical physics or relativity, the physical objects considered and their behavior
may be treated as corresponding to the phenomena observed (e.g., Bohr 1987, v. 1,
p. 18). This view also appears to be suggested by Bohr’s reference to “the idea,” in the
sentence that I quoted at the outset: “our … description of physical phenomena based
of the idea that the phenomena concerned may be observed without disturbing them
appreciably,” (Bohr 1987, v. 1, pp. 53; emphasis added). In other words, the assump-
tion, “the idea,” that such is the case may be workable for all practical purposes, but
it need not mean, and does not in the U-RWR view, or even in Kant’s view that these
phenomena correspond to how things (objects) actually are in nature.
Quantum phenomena, deﬁned by effects, observed in measuring instruments,
allow for a representational and thus realist treatment, as do, in the ﬁrst place,
measuring instruments themselves or, more accurately, their observable parts.
Measuring instruments also have quantum strata through which they interact with

Preface
xxi
quantum objects, as considered in Chap. 2. In Bohr’s interpretation and, following it,
the present interpretation, both the observable parts of measuring instruments and,
hence, quantum phenomena are treated by means of classical physics. The quantum
character of quantum phenomena is deﬁned by the particular conﬁgurations of their
classically observed features. Bohr, accordingly, spoke of quantum phenomena as
“the idealization of observation” (Bohr 1987, v. 1, p. 55). Eventually, Bohr adopted
the term “phenomenon,” in considering quantum phenomena, as referring strictly to
what is observed or, more precisely, what has already been observed, in speciﬁed
setups, in measuring instruments, as effects of their interaction with quantum objects
(Bohr 1987, v. 2, pp. 64, 71). That Bohr’s concept refers strictly to what has already
been observed, rather than only predicted, is an important aspect of his concept, the
signiﬁcance of which will be apparent throughout this study.
Each quantum phenomenon is always discrete in relation to any other quantum
phenomena, the assumption deﬁned here as the quantum discreteness, QD, postu-
late, accompanied by the quantum individuality, QI, postulate, which assumes each
quantum phenomena to be strictly individual, unique. Bohr assumed both postulates
beginning with the introduction of what he called the quantum postulate, a form
of the QI postulate, from the outset of his interpretation of QM (Bohr 1987, v. 1,
p. 53). This discreteness is, in the RWR view, beginning with that of Bohr, not the
same as that of quantum objects, which, including elementary particles, are beyond
representation or even conception, and hence cannot, in the RWR view, be assumed
to be discrete, for example, corresponding to the idea of particles, or continuous, for
example, corresponding the idea of waves. Initially, this discreteness, responsible
for using the term “quantum,” was understood as associated with quantum objects,
ﬁrst as quanta of energy and then as particle-like objects, as it has often been later
as well. This shift of the concept of discreteness from quantum objects to quantum
phenomena emerged in Bohr as correlative to his ultimate strong RWR-type inter-
pretation. For, if it is no longer possible, as it is not in such interpretations, to know
or even conceive of how each quantum phenomenon comes about, it follows that it
is also impossible to assume them to be connected by means of a continuous and
classically causal process of the type considered in classical physics or relativity. A
different, realist interpretation of quantum phenomena and QM, or QFT, would be
required for this assumption to be workable, and such interpretations have of course
been offered.
The situation just outlined and the RWR view of it leads to what I deﬁne as “the
quantum indeﬁnitiveness postulate,” one of the key postulate of this study, correl-
ative to both the QI and QD postulates. The postulate precludes making deﬁnitive
statements of any kind, including mathematical ones, concerning the relationship
between any two individual quantum phenomena or events, indeed to deﬁnitively
ascertain the existence of any such relationship. The postulate does allow making
deﬁnitive statements concerning individual phenomena or events, statements related
to measurements, which deﬁne such individual phenomena or events. It also allows
statements concerning the relationships between multiple events, in this case state-
ments statistical in nature. The postulate only concerns events that have already

xxii
Preface
occurred, rather than possible future events, in which case one can make proba-
bilistic or statistical statements concerning connections between events that have
already occurred and possible future events.
While introduced by Bohr’s 1913 atomic theory, as part of it, and extended to
QM as a whole by Heisenberg in 1925, the RWR view was given its full-ﬂedged
conceptual form by Bohr’s interpretation (in its ultimate form, by 1930s, of the
strong RWR type) of quantum phenomena and QM in terms of complementarity, his
most famous concept, considered in Chap. 6. Complementarity is deﬁned by
(a)
a mutual exclusivity of certain phenomena, entities, or conceptions, such as,
and in particular, those of the position and momentum measurements, which
can never be performed simultaneously in view of the uncertainty relations,
and yet
(b)
the possibility of considering each one of them separately at any given point
and
(c)
the necessity of considering all of them at different moments of time for a
comprehensive account of the totality of phenomena that one must consider in
quantum physics.
In Bohr’s ultimate, strong RWR-type version of his interpretation, in place by the
late 1930s, complementarity applies strictly to quantum phenomena observed in
measuring instruments. Bohr introduced his interpretation in 1927 in the so-called
Como lecture, where, as discussed later in this study, he retreated to a more realist
view, which he, however, quickly abandoned in favor of the RWR view. He developed
his interpretation, via several revisions, culminating in his ultimate version, over the
course of the next decade, in part under the impact of his debate with Einstein
on “epistemological problems in atomic physics,” as Bohr characterized it in his
1949 account of this debate (Bohr 1987, v. 2, pp. 32–66). I shall discuss the Bohr–
Einstein debate in the Introduction. Bohr’s interpretation, in any of its versions, will
be distinguished in this study from “the Copenhagen interpretation,” because there
is no single such interpretation, as even Bohr has changed his a few times. It is more
suitable to speak, as Heisenberg did, of “the Copenhagen spirit of quantum theory”
or, as a handier shorthand, “the spirit of Copenhagen,” referring to certain common
features of a group of interpretations, which may be different in their other features
(Heisenberg 1930, p. iv). Some of these interpretations are not of the RWR type.
The RWR view was given additional dimensions, discussed in Chap. 7, by Dirac’s
discovery of antimatter, a consequence of his equation for the relativistic electron in
1928. Quantum electrodynamics (QED), the ﬁrst form of QFT, was introduced by
Dirac in 1927. QFT in general, including a theory of nuclear forces, was developed
in the 1930s.
Building on Bohr’s 1913 atomic theory, Heisenberg’s approach represented a
radical change in the nature of theoretical physics as, in Galileo’s title words, “a math-
ematical science of nature,” from classical mechanics to relativity theory (Galileo
1991). With Galileo and Descartes, physics brought together experiment and math-
ematics. According to Heidegger, commenting on the rise of modern physics with

Preface
xxiii
Descartes and Galileo, “modern science is experimental because of its mathemat-
ical project” (Heidegger 1967, p. 93). Experiment and mathematics not only relate
to each other but also mutually deﬁne each other once one bases one’s account of
nature on measurable quantities. These relationships became further mathematically
grounded, giving mathematics an even greater primacy in the project of modern
physics, with the introduction of mathematical formalisms enabling one to represent
and, as a result, predict the outcomes of experiments. All modern physics, again, only
offers an idealized and, speciﬁcally, mathematized treatment of natural phenomena.
Throughout the history of modern physics prior to Bohr’s 1913 atomic theory
and then QM, physicists, including, at early stages of quantum theory, such ﬁgures
as Max Planck and Einstein, had aimed at describing and developing (idealized)
mathematical representations of the physical objects considered and their behavior.
This imperative has never been relinquished and is still dominant in physics and
philosophy alike. It was only let go, in part, by Bohr, leading him to his 1913 atomic
theory, and, building on Bohr’s theory, altogether by Heisenberg, leading him to his
discovery of QM in 1925. At the same time, Heisenberg kept intact, on new grounds,
the mutually deﬁning reciprocity of the mathematical and experimental character of
quantum physics. This reciprocity was possible by virtue of relating his formalism
and the data considered in terms of probabilistic or statistical predictions, without
representing the ultimate nature of reality responsible for these data, thus in accord
with the (weak) RWR view. Indeed, according to Heisenberg, such a representation
only did not appear to be possible at the time, which, he said, compelled him to adopt
his approach (Heisenberg 1925, p. 265). The fact, however, that such a representation
was not part of his theory was momentous.
It is true that QM was co-discovered, as wave mechanics, by Schrödinger on the
basis of thinking deﬁned by the realist imperative of ﬁnding a physical description
and mathematical representation of quantum objects and processes, in this case in
wave terms. As discussed in Chap. 5, however, Schrödinger could not sustain his
agenda, especially as concerns the discreteness of observed quantum phenomena
and the probabilistic nature of quantum predictions. Against his own grain, he made
several mathematical moves that were in conﬂict with this agenda. It was this conﬂict
that led to him to his, correct, theory, which Bohr called, “a gigantic advance over all
previous forms of quantum mechanics” (reported in Heisenberg 1971, p. 76). Both
formalisms were quickly proven to be mathematically equivalent.
The situation thus brought about and the new relationships among matter, thought,
and experimental philosophy that it established has continued to shape quantum
theory throughout its subsequent history. Far from being found satisfactory by many
and even by most, this situation and these relationships have also deﬁned the debate
concerning quantum theory throughout its history, from the confrontation between
Bohr and Einstein to our own time. In 1949, two decades after this confrontation
commenced at the Solvay Conference in Brussels in 1927, Bohr spoke of “the dissent
among the physicists themselves [as] the cause of skepticism about the necessity of
going so far in renouncing customary demand as regards the explanation of natural
phenomena,” by this time as far as the strong RWR view of quantum phenomena
(Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 63). Einstein was foremost on Bohr’s mind, especially given that

xxiv
Preface
this comment was made in Bohr’s “Discussion with Einstein on Epistemological
Problems in Atomic Physics,” reﬂecting on their debates during these decades (Bohr
1987, v. 2, pp. 32–66). Einstein was the most prominent ﬁgure in and a symbol of this
dissent. But it was hardly Einstein alone. Schrödinger, a co-creator of QM, quickly
joined Einstein, followed by many, event most, physicists and philosophers.
While most of them, beginning with Einstein, recognized the extraordinary predic-
tivecapacityofQMandthenQFT,theirattitudetowardthisrenunciationwentbeyond
mere skepticism. It was shaped by the realist imperative of making theoretical physics
a science aiming at a representation of physical objects and behavior considered by
any physical theory, especially if fundamental. This type of project was pursued by
Einstein, unsuccessfully (which fact did not diminish his faith in this imperative),
in his attempt to unify gravity and electromagnetism for 40 years. Realism, in this
case also known as “scientiﬁc realism,” has sometimes assumed a more naïve form
than the view held by Einstein. Einstein saw the practice of theoretical physics as
that of the invention of new mathematized physical concepts, possibly quite far from
or even incompatible with our phenomenal intuition. According to Einstein, one
could only approach the ultimate architecture of physical reality by means of such
concepts (Einstein 1949, p. 47). Schrödinger held a similar view, in part following
Heinrich Hertz’s and Ludwig Boltzmann’s thinking concerning the nature of physical
theories (Schrödinger 1935, pp. 152–153). Probability and statistics would only be
allowed in considering systems whose mechanical complexity was beyond tracking
their behavior, on the model of classical statistical physics, while the predictions
concerning the behavior the ultimate individual constituents of such systems or of
nature were required to be ideally exact. This demand posed major difﬁculties in
quantum theory on experimental grounds, given that, as noted, identically prepared
quantum experiments, no matter how simple the quantum systems considered, in
general lead to different outcomes, which make our predictions concerning them
probabilistic or statistical. There are special cases, such as those of the Einstein–
Podolsky–Rosen (EPR)-type experiments, where these predictions can be ideally
exact, but only special cases, while otherwise our predictions are not exact, again,
even as concerns the simplest possible quantum systems. None of these factors
deterred Einstein, who never abandoned his belief that a future theory of quantum
phenomena (or more fundamental phenomena that underlay them) would return to
realism.
Thus, while it was seen by Bohr and a few around him as the commencement
of a new era in theoretical physics and the relationships between mathematics and
physics (Bohr 1987, v. 1, p. 51), QM was not welcome news to most physicists and
philosophers, any more than Bohr’s 1913 theory was, notwithstanding the remarkable
successes of both theories, especially QM. The realist imperative remains dominant
in physics and philosophy alike, and the hope that the development of fundamental
physics will eventually obey this imperative remains as alive as ever. A fulﬁllment
of this hope would enable one to bring QM or QFT under the umbrella of this
imperative or will replace them with realist alternatives. Some, again, argue for
realist interpretations of both theories in their present form.

Preface
xxv
This book will address the reasons for thus dominance and will comment on
approaches to QM and QFT based on this imperative. The book’s argument, however,
is in accord with Bohr’s view that QM brought with it a new era of the relationships
among matter, thought, and experimental technology in fundamental physics, and
gives this argument a broader scope and new features. The RWR view is a product
of this era. The book also argues that, far from limiting creativity in physics, as it
might appear to some to do, the RWR view has helped this creatively. It has done
so from Bohr’s 1913 atomic theory throughout the history of quantum theory, and it
might continue to do so in the future. It does, however, change the nature of thinking
and knowledge, because that which is beyond thought, ultimately nature itself in
its ultimate constitution, becomes an irreducible and shaping part of thought, and
thus of the relationships among matter, thought, and technology. Before quantum
physics, modern physics allowed one to avoid dealing with that which cannot in
principle be thought. Quantum physics brought the unthinkable into our thinking in
physics and perhaps made it unavoidable there, or at least created the possibility,
even if not necessity, to interpret quantum phenomena and quantum theory in this
way, fully in accord with the experimental data deﬁning these phenomena and the
conceptual and mathematical structure of quantum theory, QM and QFT. Beginning
with Bohr’s 1913 atomic theory, the idea, the thought, that nature or at least some
part of nature may be beyond thought has created new possibilities for thought, and
it might continue to do so. One cannot be certain that it will, especially given that
the current state of fundamental physics is incomplete in its account of the ultimate
constitution of nature. But it might. Nothing in the current state of fundamental
physics appears to preclude it either.
West Lafayette, USA
Arkady Plotnitsky
References
Arthur, B.: The Nature of Technology: What It Is and How It Evolves. Free Press, New York, NY,
USA (2011)
Bohr, N.: The Philosophical Writings of Niels Bohr, Vols. 3. Ox Bow Press, Woodbridge, CT, USA
(1987)
Einstein, A.: Autobiographical Notes (tr. Schilpp, P. A.). Open Court, La Salle, IL, USA (1949)
Galileo, G.: Dialogues Concerning Two New Sciences (tr. Crew, H., De Salvio, A.). Prometheus
Books, Amherst, NY, USA (1991)
Heidegger, M.: What Is a Thing? (tr. Barton, WB, Jr., Deutsch, V). Gateway, South Bend, IN, USA
(1967)
Heidegger, M.: The Question Concerning Technology, and Other Essay. Harper, New York (2004)
Heisenberg, W.: Quantum-theoretical re-interpretation of kinematical and mechanical relations. In:
Van der Waerden, B.L. (ed.) Sources of Quantum Mechanics, 1968, pp. 261–277. Dover, New
York, NY, USA, Reprint (1925)
Heisenberg, W.: The Physical Principles of the Quantum Theory (tr. Eckhart, K., Hoyt, F.C.). Dover,
New York, NY, USA, Reprint 1949 (1930)
Heisenberg, W.: Physics and Beyond: Encounters and Conversations. G. Allen & Unwin, London,
UK (1971)

xxvi
Preface
Kant, I.: Critique of Pure Reason (tr. Guyer, P., Wood, A.W.). Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK (1997)
Musil, R.: A Man Without Qualities, vol. 1 (tr. Wilkins, S.). Vintage, New York, NY, USA (1996)
Schrödinger, E.: The present situation in quantum mechanics. In: Wheeler, J.A., Zurek, W.H. (eds.),
Quantum Theory and Measurement, 1983, pp. 152–167. Princeton University Press, Princeton,
NJ, USA (1935)

Acknowledgments
I would like to express my special gratitude to G. Mauro D’Ariano, Gregg Jaeger,
Andrei Khrennikov, and Athanase Papadopoulos, for their knowledge and friend-
ship, which were essential in my work on this book. I additionally thank G. Mauro
D’Ariano,formanydiscussionsthatwereinvaluableinclarifyingseveralkeysubjects
discussed in the book. My additional thanks also to Andrei Khrennikov for inviting
me to many conferences at the Linnaeus University, previously Växjö University,
the longest running conference ever on quantum foundations, where many of the
ideas of this book were initially presented. I am also grateful to many participants of
these conferences for helping in my thinking. I would also like to thank Henry Folse,
Christopher A. Fuchs, Lucien Hardy, Emmanuel Haven, Laurent Freidel, Jan-Åke
Larsson, Theo Niewenhuizen, Masanao Ozawa, and Paolo Perinotti, for productive
exchanges. Most of them were among the participants of Växjö conferences as well.
I am grateful to Purdue University for its support of my work through several
research leaves and awards, most especially the great honor of Distinguished
Professorship, which also funded part of my work on the book.
My personal thanks to Paula Geyh, Inge-Vera Lipsius, and Marsha Plotnitsky.
I am grateful to Springer Nature for publishing the book, and I would like to thank
those with whom I worked there, especially my Editor Elena Griniary for so kindly
shepherding this project to its publication, and Francesca Ferrari for her work on the
ﬁnal stages of preparing the manuscript. My thanks to Martin Whitehead for his help
with editing the manuscript.
Earlier versions of portions of several chapters have been published previously as
articles“NatureHasNoElementaryParticlesandMakesNoMeasurementsorPredic-
tions: Quantum Measurement and Quantum Theory, from Bohr to Bell and from Bell
to Bohr,” Entropy 2021, 23, 1197, https://doi.org/10.3390/e23091197; “‘Something
happened’: on the real, the actual, and the virtual in elementary particle physics,”
The European Physical Journal, https://doi.org/10.1140/epjs/s11734-021-00075-3;
“The Unavoidable Interaction Between the Object and the Measuring Instruments:
Reality, Probability, and Nonlocality in Quantum Physics,” Foundations of Physics
(2020) 50:1824–1858. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10701-020-00353-5; “Reality, Inde-
terminacy, Probability, and Information in Quantum Theory,” Entropy 2020, 22,
xxvii

xxviii
Acknowledgments
747; doi: 10.3390/e22070747; “Transitions without connections: quantum states,
from Bohr and Heisenberg to quantum information theory,” The European Physical
Journal, https://doi.org/10.1140/epjst/e2018-800082-6; “The Heisenberg Method:
Geometry Algebra, and Probability in Quantum Theory,” Entropy 2018, 20 (9) 656;
https://doi.org/10.3390/e20090656; “On the Character of Quantum Law: Comple-
mentarity, Entanglement, and Information,” Foundations of Physics 47 (2017) 47:
1115–1154. However, the arguments of these articles were signiﬁcantly revised and
most of them indeed changed, sometimes leading to different conclusions.

Contents
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1
From History to Physics and Philosophy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Toward RWR Thinking, with Kant, Riemann, and Einstein . . . . . . .
6
1.3
The Rise of RWR Thinking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.4
“Logically Possible Without Contradiction”: The Bohr–
Einstein Debate and the Nature of Quantum Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.2
Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.3
Theories, Models, and Interpretations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
2.4
Reality, Realism, and Reality Without Realism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
2.5
Indeterminacy, Randomness, and Probability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
2.6
Measurement, Idealization, and Quantum Indeﬁnitiveness . . . . . . . .
65
2.7
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
3
Bohr’s Breakthrough: Quantum Jumps, Quantum States,
and Transitions Without Connections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
3.2
What is a Quantum Jump?: Quantum States and Transitions
Without Connections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
3.3
“This Insecure and Contradictory Foundation”: Bohr’s 1913
Theory as an RWR-Type Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
3.4
“Symbols Taken from the Mechanics,” the Choice
of the Observer, and the Being of the Photon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
3.5
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
xxix

xxx
Contents
4
“The Heisenberg Method”: Algebra, Geometry, and Probability
in Quantum Mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
101
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
102
4.2
Quantum Mechanics as a Fundamental Theory: Principles,
Postulates, and Formalism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
102
4.3
From Geometry to Algebra, and from Algebra to Geometry . . . . . .
111
4.4
How Algebraic is the Heisenberg Algebraic Method? . . . . . . . . . . . .
122
4.5
Geometry and Algebra in Modernist Mathematics and Physics . . . .
127
4.6
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
138
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
141
5
Schrödinger’s Great Guess: The Time-Dependent Wave
Equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
145
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
145
5.2
“The Wave Radiation Forming the Basis of the Universe”
Versus Quantum Discontinuity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
146
5.3
From “The Amplitude Equation” to “The Real Wave
Equation” to the Time-Dependent Equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
152
5.4
From Schrödinger to Dirac . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
159
5.5
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
164
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
165
6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical Law: “A Radical
Revision of Our Attitude Toward the Problem of Physical
Reality” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
167
6.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
167
6.2
From the Irrational to the Unthinkable, from the Pythagoreans
to Bohr . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
170
6.3
Bohr’s Ultimate Interpretation: Phenomena and Reality
Without Realism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
178
6.4
What Does a Measurement Measure and What Does Quantum
Theory Predict? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
192
6.5
Complementarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
197
6.6
Causality and Complementarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
207
6.7
Conclusion: Law Without Law, Reality Without Realism,
and It Without Bit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
219
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
222
7
“Without in Any Way Disturbing the System”: Reality,
Probability, and Nonlocality, from Bohr to Bell and Beyond . . . . . . . .
227
7.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
228
7.2
Confronting EPR: Completeness, Complementarity,
and Quantum Nonlocality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
229
7.3
“Can Quantum–Mechanical Description of Physical
Reality be Considered Complete?”: The EPR Experiment,
Measurement, and Complementarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
237

Contents
xxxi
7.4
Einstein-Locality and Quantum Nonlocality in the EPR
Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
247
7.5
Quantum Nonlocality and Quantum Correlations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
253
7.6
Complementarity and Entanglement: Quantum Knowledge
and Quantum Ignorance, with Bohr and Schrödinger
. . . . . . . . . . . .
258
7.7
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
269
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
270
8
“Something Happened”: The Real and the Virtual
in Elementary Particle Physics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
273
8.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
273
8.2
Elementary Particles and Quantum Fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
279
8.3
Virtual Particles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
292
8.4
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
302
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
304
9
From Circuits to Categories in Quantum Information Theory . . . . . .
307
9.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
307
9.2
Circuits, Operations, and Probabilities: Quantum Information
Theories as Principle Theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
310
9.3
Thinking Categorically: From Morphisms to Functors . . . . . . . . . . .
319
9.4
On Quantum Information Theory Beyond Reconstruction
Projects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
324
9.5
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
326
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
327
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
329

Chapter 1
Introduction
In quantum mechanics, we are not dealing with an arbitrary
renunciation of a more detailed analysis of atomic [quantum]
phenomena but with a recognition that such an analysis is in
principle excluded.
—Niels Bohr, “Discussion with Einstein on Epistemological
Problems in Atomic Physics,” (1949) (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 62)
Abstract This book primarily belongs to the philosophy of quantum theory rather
than the history of quantum theory, and the main reasons for considering the history
of quantum theory in the book are physical and philosophical, putting history in
the service of physics and philosophy. Conversely, however, neither physics nor
philosophy has ever existed or could have been possible without history. Every
theory, no matter how innovative, has a history and depends on it, a circumstance
more often used than reﬂected on. By contrast, this book takes advantage of it, by
considering the thinking of founding ﬁgures of quantum theory, most especially
Bohr, Heisenberg, Schrödinger, and Dirac, as reﬂected in this, historically oriented,
introduction. Section 1.1 offers a general perspective of the philosophy and history
of quantum theory, and their relationships. Section 1.2 considers three junctures
of the prehistory of the RWR view, deﬁned by the ideas of Kant, Riemann, and
Einstein. Section 1.3 sketches the emergence of the RWR view of quantum theory,
inaugurated by Bohr’s 1913 atomic theory. Finally, Sect. 1.4 places the argument
of this book in the context of the Bohr–Einstein debate, which still shapes our own
debate concerning quantum foundations and the nature of fundamental physics.
Keywords History · Philosophy · Philosophy of physics · Reality · Realism ·
Reality without realism · Thinking
1.1
From History to Physics and Philosophy
Historically, this book follows the development of the RWR view of quantum theory,
from Bohr’s 1913 atomic theory, which inaugurates it, to the introduction of QM,
which gives it its full-ﬂedged form in the corresponding RWR-type interpretations,
such as and, in particular, that of Bohr to the emergence of QFT, which (again,
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
A. Plotnitsky, Reality Without Realism,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-84578-0_1
1

2
1
Introduction
in the corresponding interpretations) gives it new dimensions, and then to its role
in present-day quantum theory and its interpretation. This history is outlined in
Sect. 1.3 of this introduction. The present section offers a general perspective on
the philosophy and history of quantum theory, and their relationships. Moving the
book’s historical inquiry about half a century back in time, Sect. 1.2 considers three
junctures of the prehistory of the RWR view, deﬁned by the ideas of Kant, Bernhard
Riemann, and Einstein. Finally, Sect. 1.4 places the argument of this book in the
context of the Bohr–Einstein debate on, in Bohr’s title phrase of his account of this
debate, “epistemological problems in atomic physics” and the viability of the RWR
view in fundamental physics (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 34). This debate still shapes our
own debate concerning quantum foundations and the nature of fundamental physics,
which continues with an undiminished intensity and, it appears, no end in sight.
This book, thus, offers the reader a hefty dose of history, sketched in this, mainly
historical, introduction, and discussed in later chapters. Nevertheless, as my more
philosophical preface would suggest, the project of this book does not primarily
belong to the history of quantum theory. It belongs to the philosophy of quantum
theory, considered here as a manifestation of the new relationships among matter,
thought, and experimental technology, grounding the RWR view of quantum theory,
the Q-RWR view. This view is ultimately extended by the book to the U-RWR view,
as the RWR view of all physical phenomena. The main reasons for considering the
history of quantum theory in the book are physical and philosophical as well, putting
history in the service of physics and philosophy. Conversely, however, neither physics
nor philosophy, including the philosophy of physics, has ever existed apart from or
could have been possible without history. Every theory, no matter how innovative,
has a history and depends on it, a circumstance more often used, even if without
realizing it, than reﬂected on, although not missed by Bohr or earlier Ernst Mach
(e.g., Mach 1988, pp. xxii–xxiii). By contrast, I would like to take advantage of this
circumstance by considering the thinking of some of the founding ﬁgures of quantum
theory, most especially Bohr, Heisenberg, Schrödinger, and Dirac, and, as my limits
permit, a few others, such as Einstein, Hermann Weyl, John Archibald Wheeler, and
Julian Schwinger, with the aim of contributing to a deeper understanding of QM and
QFT now and thus to our own thinking concerning these theories.
We arrive at new ideas and theories by engaging with this history, which helps us
to understand earlier ideas and to create our own, especially when earlier ideas are
those of the likes of Bohr, Heisenberg, Schrödinger, and Dirac, or Einstein, in whose
shadow the thought of all these ﬁgures has developed. This shadow, now appearing
as a spirit, now as a ghost, is enormous and has spread over the subsequent history of
fundamental physics and continues to spread over it. All these ﬁgures arrived at their
ideas by engaging with their history. Their engagement with the preceding history
of quantum theory, sometimes in each other’s works, as in that of Heisenberg with
Bohr’s thinking or that of Dirac with Heisenberg’s thinking (both cases considered
in this book), may be more apparent and more important. But their thinking was also
shaped by a longer history of physics and philosophy, from their more immediate
predecessors, such as James Clerk Maxwell or Ludwig Boltzmann, to as far back as
Aristotle and Plato, or the pre-Socratics, such as the Pythagoreans, the inventors of

1.1 From History to Physics and Philosophy
3
the mathematical view of the cosmos, or Leucippus and Democritus, the inventors
of the atomistic view of nature.
Physics is thinking about what is true or probable about nature or those aspects
of nature that physics considers, and sometimes, especially in dealing with founda-
tional questions, it is, more philosophically, also thinking about how to think about
physics. The latter type of thinking is more common in the philosophy of physics
but is not absent in physics either, especially at times of crisis, such that which
precipitated the invention of QM. In modern physics, which emerged with Kepler,
Descartes, and Galileo, what is true or probable is determined by means of mathemat-
ical structures or models by which physical theories relate to the experimental data
considered and interpretations of these theories and physical phenomena containing
these data. These models may do so either by using a mathematical representation of
the processes assumed to be responsible for these phenomena or data and predicting
them on the basis of this representation, as in classical physics or relativity, or by
only using a mathematical formalism to predict these data in the absence of such a
representation, as in QM or QFT, at least in RWR-type interpretations. How close
we come to understanding nature, including in its ultimate constitution, depends on
our interactions with nature by means of mathematical theories and experimental
technologies. These interactions are ultimately part of nature, too, but a particular
part of it, speciﬁc to us, to our thinking and the technologies that we use, beginning
with that of our bodies and brains, responsible for our thinking.
The establishment of physics as a mathematical-experimental science of nature
was a major change enacted by modern physics, vis-à-vis that of the preceding
thinking about it, from Aristotle on. This is not to say that this change was entirely
discontinuous. For example, while essentially different in its mathematical nature
and physical laws (mathematically expressed), the concept of motion in classical
physics is still Aristotelian as governed by both continuity and classical causality.
Nevertheless, making physics a mathematical-experimental science, with mathe-
matics, as stated in the Preface, deﬁning this conjunction, was a momentous change.
This change was given a new dimension in quantum theory by virtue of abandoning
altogether, in the ﬁnal break with Aristotle, the concept of motion at the level of the
ultimate constitution of the physical reality considered. On the other hand, Heisen-
berg eventually saw this ﬁnal break with Aristotle, as a return, in physics, espe-
cially via the concept of symmetry in QFT, to Plato, a more mathematically oriented
philosopher. Heisenberg had long-standing connections to Plato’s thinking, whose
dialogue Timaeus he read, in particular, the part dealing with Plato’s mathematical
and thus mental, rather than physical (as in Democritus) conception of atoms, during
his work leading to his invention of quantum mechanics (Heisenberg 1962, pp. 59–
75, 1989, pp. 71–88; Plotnitsky 2011, pp. 471–472). And yet, at the same time,
Heisenberg also used Aristotle’s concept of “potentia” in his interpretation of QM
in his later thinking, thus bringing Plato and Aristotle together and conﬁrming the
complexity of the interplay of continuities and breaks in this history of physics, from
the pre-Socratics on (Heisenberg 1962, p. 44).
But then, most breaks with the immediate history are returns of one kind or
another to an earlier history, which, however, need to merely be returns to the same

4
1
Introduction
(that of Heisenberg to Plato was not). They are returns to some previous conﬁgu-
rations of thought transformed by new conﬁgurations of thought. The originality of
thinking, such as that of Heisenberg, one of the most original thinkers in twentieth-
century physics, is always deﬁned by this combination of difference and sameness,
break and continuity, and transformation and tradition. It is radically original and
deeply traditional at the same time, admittedly a difﬁcult and sometimes paradox-
ical combination, nevertheless managed by Heisenberg or Bohr, or other key ﬁgures
considered in this study. One way to accomplish this is what Wheeler described as
a “radical conservative” way of thinking, which he expressly associated with Bohr’s
thinking but which is applicable to other ﬁgures considered in this study, certainly
Heisenberg. The phrase refers to thinking shaped by “adhering to well-established
physical law (be conservative) but follow these laws to their most extreme domain (be
radical), where unexpected insight into nature might be found. [Wheeler] attributed
that philosophy to his own revered mentor, Niels Bohr” (Misner et al. 2009, p. 40).
Radical conservative thinking, however, is thinking in the ﬁrst place, a key way of
thinking about physics for Bohr and Wheeler alike.
The primary focus on thinking in physics extends the approach adopted in this
author’s previous work (e.g., Plotnitsky 2016), in the present study with a greater
role given to mathematical thinking. This focus makes this approach different from
those grounded in, and primarily dealing with, the logical and propositional struc-
tures of quantum theory, either in their own right or in addressing ontological and
epistemological questions. Approaches of the latter type are especially common in
the analytic philosophy of physics. These questions are, of course, essential, and
they will be addressed in this study, sometimes by engaging with literature in the
analytic philosophy of physics, which made important contributions to these subjects,
although primarily along realist lines. But they will be considered as part of our
thinking concerning quantum physics, in particular, its concepts on which this study
will primarily focus. This does not prevent one from pursuing these questions with
the same philosophical rigor (I shall deﬁne this concept, as different from that of
mathematical or scientiﬁc rigor, presently) as that of the analytic philosophy of
physics.
It is true that this study relies less extensively on the technical aspects of the math-
ematics of quantum theory than most work in the latter ﬁeld does, thus potentially
making the book appeal to a broader audience, which might be interested in it because
the philosophical situation deﬁning quantum theory has important connections with
and implications for other ﬁelds of inquiry. This lesser reliance will, hopefully, not
disappoint some more mathematically inclined readers of the book, given its actual
content. Its lesser reliance on the technical engagement with and expertise in mathe-
matics does not mean that the book is not concerned with mathematics or that it does
not contain it or even is about it, including some technical mathematics of QM or
QFT. A major portion of the book (about 30% of its space) concerns both the work-
ings of mathematics in QM and QFT, and the history and philosophy of mathematics,
especially in considering the relationships between algebra and geometry. A section
of the book is devoted to these relationships in twentieth-century mathematics itself.
This section is part of Chap. 4, which offers a discussion of Heisenberg’s work from

1.1 From History to Physics and Philosophy
5
the perspective of these relationships. Chapter 5, on Schrödinger, is largely mathe-
matical in its content as well. There is also a discussion, admittedly, more conceptual
than technical, of category theory in Chap. 9. In reality, this book engages with
mathematics no less than most philosophical treatments of quantum physics, even
if in part in a different way, in part, because sometimes it does so similarly as well.
As I explained in the Preface, quantum theory emerges as a new mathematical-
experimental science of nature, with mathematics deﬁning this conjunction, as it
does in most modern physics, from Descartes and Galileo on, because, to return to
Heidegger’s assessment, “modern science is experimental because of its mathemat-
ical project.” This book is, accordingly, about mathematical thinking in physics and,
via physics, in mathematics itself. In particular, it relates quantum theory to, and even
sees it as form of, the Pythagorean thinking that emerged with the pre-Socratics and
has accompanied mathematics throughout its history into our own time as, on the
one hand, proto RWR thinking and, on the other, as thinking deﬁned by the relation-
ships between geometry and algebra (in the Pythagoreans, arithmetic). The book also
offers a new perspective on mathematics’ divorce from its connections to physics,
which has deﬁned the development of mathematics from roughly 1800, especially
“modernist mathematics,” from around 1900 on (a concept explained in Chap. 4).
This perspective arises because, beginning with Heisenberg, quantum theory found
a new way of using the abstract mathematics that emerged from this divorce, a way
very different from that of classical physics or relativity, while at the same time
reﬂecting the new relationships between algebra and geometry in modernist math-
ematics. This book is about the new type of the relationships between mathematics
and physics that emerged with Heisenberg’s discovery of QM, in which I comment
in closing this Introduction.
The philosophical rigor, which I invoked above in connection with this book’s
project, is not the same as (technical) mathematical rigor in mathematics or physics. It
is also worth keeping in mind that a rigorous use of mathematics in physics is not the
same as mathematical rigor in mathematics itself, based on strict, or at least stricter,
deﬁnitions, proofs, and so forth. The use of mathematics in physics has even been
criticized by mathematicians and philosophers, although there are also defenders
of this use even among mathematicians. This is, however, a separate subject. Most
(it is difﬁcult to think of exceptions) technically oriented books in the analytical
philosophy of physics are not pursuing calculations which relate the mathematical
formalism of physical theories to numbers observed in experiments or related to
those observed in experiments. Without doing so, even if only potentially at some
future states of a given theory, there is no mathematical rigor of physics.
This is, naturally, not a criticism of such projects in the analytic philosophy of
physics. The philosophical rigor that I have in mind is something else. While it is,
necessarily, the rigor of logic, it is, as understood by this study, most essentially
the rigor of concepts, as discussed in detail in Chap. 2. I also argue, for the reasons
explained in Chap. 2 as well, that the role of concepts and, thus, the rigor of concepts
are equally essential to mathematics and physics, especially in their creative aspects,
a role emphasized by Riemann and Einstein, both of whom the book follows on this
point. It is also worth keeping in mind that, while requiring logical, conceptual, or

6
1
Introduction
other rigor, thinking in philosophy, mathematics, or physics is never reducible to
rigor. This book will address this unavoidable supplement of rigor, to the degree
possible, because this supplement does not readily, and sometimes not at all, lend
itself to a (rigorous) analysis. One might, for example, surmise and plausibly discern
some of the reasons for Heisenberg’s invention, ultimately a guess, of his concept of
matrix variables, one of the great mathematical inventions of quantum theory, with
a mathematically rigorous connection to the experimental data he aimed to account
for. It is, however, difﬁcult to assume that one can ever really explain this guess,
or the great guess of Schrödinger, his invention of the complex wave function and
his time-dependent equation, discussed in Chap. 5, entitled “Schrödinger’s Great
Guess.” The project of this study is shaped most essentially by the role of concepts,
physical, mathematical, and philosophical (or concepts combining these types of
concepts) and the rigor of concepts in quantum theory.
As Weyl said, in opening his classic book, Space Time Matter, a great example
of an investigation focused on the role of concepts (a focus common to Weyl, and
several of his main predecessors, in particular, Riemann, Hilbert, and Einstein),
“Philosophy, mathematics, and physics have each a share in the problems presented
[in the book],” problems deﬁned by the rise of relativity theory as fundamentally
different from classical physics (Weyl 1952, p. 2). This is also true, with equally
or even more profound implications, for philosophy, mathematics, and physics, and
their relationships in quantum theory, with concepts playing the main role in each of
these ﬁelds of thought and their relationships.
1.2
Toward RWR Thinking, with Kant, Riemann,
and Einstein
One can trace some among the ingredients of the idea of reality without realism to as
early as pre-Socratic philosophy, in particular, the Pythagoreans and their discovery
of incommensurable magnitudes (which we now understand in terms of irrational
numbers), and in modern times, especially Kant’s philosophy. The latter, as noted
in the Preface, may be considered as the main modern precursor of the RWR view.
There are also important connections between Kant’s philosophy and the question
of causality, central to the history of quantum theory. The question of causality
and the role of Kant’s philosophy in considering it will be discussed later. Before,
however, I consider Kant, I would like to connect the concept of reality without
realism to Riemann’s view of physical reality (in this case that of space), which was
both inﬂuenced by and departed from Kant. This view was offered in his famous
Habilitation lecture, “The Hypotheses That Lie at the Foundations of Geometry”
(Riemann 1854), given in 1854 but not published until 1868, 2 years after Riemann’s
death. As other works of Riemann, a uniquely important ﬁgure for the development
of modern mathematics and physics, the lecture had a momentous impact on both

1.2 Toward RWR Thinking, with Kant, Riemann, and Einstein
7
ﬁelds. Einstein’s general relativity is the most famous example of its signiﬁcance in
physics, but far from the only one.
My main reason for choosing Riemann’s lecture as my starting point in this
section is that Riemann’s view of physical reality, in particular, that underlying
what we experience as space, but by implication, in general, emerged from modern
physics, rather than from philosophical considerations, although philosophy perme-
ates Riemann’s lecture and his related works. These works deal extensively with the
relationships among physics, mathematics, and philosophy, and Riemann’s lecture
traces the genealogy of his ideas about geometry to thinking in all three ﬁelds. The
lecture offered a radical reconceptualization of space and geometry. The concept
of space considered by Riemann was physical, mathematically conceptualized in
terms of his concept of manifold [Mannigfaltigkeit], which has played a major role
in mathematics and physics ever since. Riemann spaces and geometry encompassed
both Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometry (of both negative and positive curva-
tures). Euclidean space and geometry became merely special cases of these more
general concepts, rather than the primary or even the only forms of them, as they had
been before Riemann. Riemann’s reconceptualization of geometry also placed non-
Euclideangeometry(ofnegativecurvature),discoveredtwodecadesearlier,inaprop-
erly comprehensive mathematical scheme. In addition, the lecture introduced spaces
and geometries of positive curvatures, generalizing the concept of spherical geom-
etry (which was only two dimensional) to three dimensions, and mathematically, to
any number of dimensions.
The discovery of non-Euclidean geometry around 1830 already implied that phys-
ical space may not be Euclidean, which gave this discovery a revolutionary signiﬁ-
cance beyond mathematics. No measurements made at the time showed any deviation
from Euclidean geometry in physical space in the immediate vicinity of the Earth
or beyond. The possibility was momentous enough, however. The situation became
even more dramatic with Riemann. His argument implied that the inﬁnite number of
possible types of manifolds and geometries could be associated with physical space,
which also included space and geometries of variable curvatures, another major inno-
vation of Riemann, central for general relativity. Any such association is a hypothesis,
which was what “the hypotheses” of Riemann’s title referred to. As such, it is subject
to veriﬁcation, qualiﬁcation, reﬁnement, and so forth. This process can rule out some
among possible geometries as suitable for physics or require different geometries at
different scales (Riemann 1854, p. 23). This is how the situation appears in modern
physics and cosmology. Courtesy of Einstein’s general relativity, we know well
certain (more or less) local geometries, say, the one, curved, in the vicinity of the
solar system or the earth, or more esoteric ones, for example, in the vicinity of black
holes. It is, however, more difﬁcult to be certain concerning the ultimate geometry
of the Universe, although the current cosmological data suggests that it is, on the
average, ﬂat, as far as one can observe it.
In closing his lecture, Riemann used an astutely chosen phrase: “a reality under-
lying space” (Riemann 1854, p. 33). This phrase implies, on Kantian lines (although
Riemann rejects Kant’s view of the a priori nature of our intuition of space or
time), that this reality may not be spatial in our phenomenal sense. It could, for

8
1
Introduction
example, have a dimension higher than three and may even (another remarkable
insight of Riemann) be inﬁnite-dimensional. The concepts of higher dimensional
spaces, with different geometries, came into prominence in the wake of the publica-
tion of Riemann’s lecture and have become ubiquitous in the twentieth- and twenty-
ﬁrst-century physics, more recently in string theory and other approaches to quantum
gravity, or in mathematics itself. There, however, the term “space” refers to mathe-
matical objects, such as Hilbert spaces used in QM and QFT. Riemann also stated
that the reality underlying space could be discrete and thus have the topological
dimension zero. This would imply a different physics, because it would not allow
one to use differential calculus, which had grounded classical physics since Newton
(Riemann 1854, p. 33). The ideas of discrete spaces or spaces of higher (if not inﬁ-
nite) dimensions, or the corresponding forms of reality underlying three-dimensional
space, were entertained before Riemann, including, in the case of higher dimensions,
by Kant in his early (1747) work, although Kant rejected the idea (Kant 2012; de
Bianchi and Wells 2015). In part following Riemann’s rethinking of the nature of
geometry, the concept of discrete space was developed in mathematics and has been
sporadically used in physics, including in quantum theory, for example, by Heisen-
berg in the 1930s in trying to deal with difﬁculties of QFT, and more recently in
some attempts at developing quantum gravity. If the reality underlying space (or
time), or what phenomenally appears as such, as a continuous manifold, is discrete,
for example, at Planck’s scale, making space an emerging property, this reality would
imply a very different physics. In any event, the fundamental physics in discrete space
(or time) will be essentially different, as Riemann surmised nearly two centuries ago.
Riemann’s comments on the nature of physics in the lecture have a great subtlety.
He says, in particular:
Still more complicated relations can occur if the line element cannot be represented, as was
presupposed, as the square root of a differential expression of the second degree. Now it
seems that the empirical notions on which the metrical determinations of space are based,
the concept of a solid body and that of a ray of light, lose their validity in the inﬁnitely small;
it is therefore quite deﬁnitely conceivable that the metric relations of space in the inﬁnitely
small do not conform to the hypotheses of geometry; and in fact one ought to assume this
as soon as it permits a simpler way of explaining phenomena. (Riemann 1854, p. 32)
Riemann initially invoked the immeasurably small [Unmessbarkleine], also in its
direct sense of that which cannot be measured, the questions concerning which
he considers important, as opposed to those concerning the immeasurably large
[Unmessbargrosse], which “are idle questions for the explanation of nature [die
Naturerklärung]” (Riemann 1854, p. 32). Riemann offers no justiﬁcation for the
last assessment, and I shall put it aside. These questions may not be as idle as
Riemann thought given present-day cosmology, most of which, however, still deals
with measurably large scales, extremely large as they may be. Riemann then shifts
fromtheimmeasurablysmallto“theinﬁnitelysmall[Unendlichkleine],”theinﬁnites-
imally small. Riemann sees the mathematical representation of space, or time, or
physical processes in space and time, offered by classical physics, as deﬁned by
the kinematical and dynamical principles established by the ﬁgures he mentions in
the lecture—Archimedes, Galileo, and Newton (Riemann 1854, p. 32). Riemann

1.2 Toward RWR Thinking, with Kant, Riemann, and Einstein
9
also sees physics as based, mathematically, on the principles of differential calculus,
which is an analysis of the inﬁnitely small. This is not the same as the immeasurably
small, but it provides the proper mathematical representation of the physical concepts
just mentioned, which explains Riemann’s shift from the immeasurably small to the
inﬁnitely small. Riemann, thus, envisions not only that space in the immeasurably
small may not conform to the hypothesis of Euclidean geometry, but also that it may
not conform to the axioms of geometry at all, for example, to those of Riemannian
geometry, used by Einstein in general relativity. In the latter case, the concept of
metric relations still applies, although these relations are, in general, non-Euclidean
and allow for a variable curvature. Bringing together gravity and quantum theory
may change this. Riemann suggests next that “the reality underlying space” may be
“a discrete manifold”:
The question of the validity of the hypotheses of geometry in the inﬁnitely small is bound
up with the question of the basis for the metric relations of space. In connection with this
question, which may indeed still be ranked as part of the study of space, the above remark is
applicable, that in a discrete manifold the principle of metric relations is already contained
in the concept of the manifold, but in a continuous one it must come from something else.
Therefore, either the reality underlying space must form a discrete manifold, or the basis for
the metric relations must be sought outside it, in binding forces that act upon it.
Ananswertothesequestionscanbefoundonlybystartingfromtheconceptionofphenomena
which has hitherto been approved by experience, and for which Newton laid the foundation,
and gradually modifying it under the compulsion of facts that cannot be explained by it.
Investigations like the one just made here, which begin from general concepts, can only
serve to ensure that this work is not hindered by unduly restricted concepts and that progress
in comprehending the connection of things is not obstructed by traditional prejudices. This
leads us away into the domain of another science, the realm of physics, into which the nature
of the present occasion does not allow us to enter. (Riemann 1854, p. 33)
If the reality underlying space is discrete, then the ground of the metric relation of
the corresponding manifold is given by the mathematical concept of this manifold
as such, while if it is continuous, this ground is given by the concept of phenomena
justiﬁed by experience and, in physics, deﬁned by the physical principles arising
from the nature of these phenomena. Such principles may, however, need to be
changed “under the compulsion of [new] facts.” This argumentation explains and
reveals deeper implications of Riemann’s phrase “the reality underlying space” as
referring to the difference between our phenomenal concept of space and the nature
of physical reality underlying it. This difference, extrapolated to physical reality in
general, suggests the possibility of the RWR view, especially in the immeasurably
small, the physics of which was rethought by quantum theory, eventually giving rise
to the RWR view and the corresponding interpretations of quantum phenomena and
quantum theory.
I am not saying that Riemann ever adopted the RWR view and saw the reality
underlying space as being beyond representation, discrete or continuous, ﬂat or
curved, three-dimensional or higher dimensional (all of which possibilities Riemann,
remarkably, entertained in 1854), let alone beyond conception. While Riemann’s
view of physical reality, expressed in the phrase “the reality underlying space,” may
only be one step away from the RWR view, this step is not easy to make. It had, I argue

10
1
Introduction
in this study, not been made in physics before Bohr’s 1913 atomic theory. If anybody,
Kant might have been closer at least to the weak RWR view, still, as explained below,
without quite reaching it. This proximity arises because Kant denied that space, or
time, or (classical) causality or any phenomenal entities, conceptual or not (as space
and time were assumed by him to be forms of our phenomenal intuition rather than
concepts) represented the ultimate nature of reality, material, or mental, which he
saw as a noumenal object, a thing-in-itself. Riemann does not appear to have held
this type of view, and he rejected the a priori nature of our sense of spatiality or
temporality. Kant’s scheme, however, deﬁned by distinguishing noumena or things-
in-themselves, as objects (referring to the ultimate nature of reality that is beyond a
representation or knowledge, if not a conception) and phenomena (which belong to
human thought and can be known), might apply even if our intuition of space and
time has emerged from experience. Kant was right to argue that our mind actively
shapes or constructs, rather than merely perceives, the world we observe, even if it
does not entirely deﬁne the world, because the world still affects this construction,
both independently and via our bodies. This aspect of Kant’s philosophy is strongly
supported by modern neuroscience, which, on that score, follows Kant, as opposed
to John Locke, who assumed that our knowledge of the world is the product of our
accumulated experience, starting with the initial tabula rasa of thought. Hence, the
technologies of our bodies and brains, which make possible our thought, create the
world we experience rather than merely enabling us to perceive it. This does not mean
that we cannot think about the reality underlying the world that we thus experience,
or think about nature, especially in its ultimate constitution, as different from what
we thus create, quite the contrary. The possibility that such may be the case was
Riemann’s or Kant’s point. It is also the grounding assumption of the U-RWR view,
which, in its strong form, places the ultimate constitution of nature beyond thought.
This placement, however, is still a product of thought. Thought cannot escape itself
even in thinking about that which is beyond thought. On the other hand, it is capable
of thinking that something may be.
The strong RWR view is, then, manifestly more radical than that of Kant. While
Kant places things-in-themselves beyond representation or knowledge, he allows that
a conception of them could be formed and accepted as at least practically justiﬁed
and even could in principle be true, although this truth cannot be guaranteed, a qual-
iﬁcation that gave Kant’s epistemology greater subtlety (Kant 1997, p. 115). Georg
W. F. Hegel, in part building on Kant’s view of the possibility of such a conception,
and giving concepts the deﬁning role in philosophy, appears to have allowed human
thought a greater, even if never complete, power of forming a true conception of the
ultimate nature of reality, through the formation of rigorous concepts (Hegel 2019,
p. 48). Both Riemann and Einstein are closer to Hegel as concerns this possibility
and in giving the primary role to the formation of concepts, in this case physical
concepts, suitably mathematized, in this pursuit of a mathematically idealized repre-
sentation of physical reality. For the moment, Kant’s position (or that of Hegel’s) is
thus manifestly short of the strong RWR view, which places the ultimate character
of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena beyond conception, although, as
noted in the Preface, this view is assumed to be only practically justiﬁed as well.

1.2 Toward RWR Thinking, with Kant, Riemann, and Einstein
11
While Kant’s argumentation is closer to the weak RWR view, it does not amount
to this view either. This is because, once such a conception is practically justiﬁed,
a representation of things-in-themselves based on this conception becomes practi-
cally justiﬁed as well, even though it is impossible to speak of any knowledge of
things-in-themselves. Accordingly, Kant’s scheme may ultimately be seen as a form
of realism, moreover, classically causal in character, which is excluded by the RWR
view, because classical causality implies a conception, at least a partial one, of the
ultimate character of the reality considered.
In the RWR view, as the Q-RWR view, what is practically justiﬁed is not any
given representation or conception of the ultimate nature of reality responsible for
quantum phenomena, but the impossibility of any such representation (in the weak
RWR view) or conception (in the strong RWR view), either as things stand now, even
if such a conception is in principle possible, or ever, in which case forming such a
conception is precluded. The U-RWR view extends this situation to the ultimate
constitution of nature and thus to the reality ultimately responsible for all physical
phenomena, while allowing one to consider, with a practical justiﬁcation, that some
physical theories may be treated as representing the objects considered and their
behavior. The absence of classical causality, again, follows automatically, while the
probabilistic relationships between events are possible. If such a conception becomes
possible at some point, at least as practically justiﬁed, then a representation based
on this conception becomes also possible, again, at least as practically justiﬁed.
This would bring the situation into accord with Kant’s argumentation just described
and thus realism. As indicated in the Preface, however, and discussed in detail in
Chap. 2, the qualiﬁcation “as things stand now” still applies, even if one assumes
that no conception of the ultimate nature of reality is ever possible. It applies because
even this assumption may become obsolete in physics, either as the Q-RWR view,
applicable in quantum theory (because it may be replaced by a realist alternative in
interpreting quantum theory in its present form or by an alternative realist theory of
quantum phenomena), or as the U-RWR view, if there is no longer physics to justify
this view. The impossibility of forming a conception of some stratum of reality will
then only retain its value as a philosophical position, or will apply elsewhere. For
example, the ultimate nature of the workings of our brain may prove to be beyond
our capacity to conceive it.
Riemann and then Einstein went beyond merely assuming that a practical justiﬁ-
cation for a given theory is sufﬁcient, although they would have admitted that some-
times it may be. In giving, as Hegel did, concepts the primary role in this process,
they thought that a theory ideally approaching how nature ultimately works was, in
principle, possible, by means of concepts. In physics, one only deals with a mathemat-
ically idealized representation of physical reality within the scope of a given theory,
such as classical physics or relativity, which may disregard other aspects of nature,
aspects that may not be open to such a representation. The question is, however,
whether all physical reality could ever be made available to such a representation or
whether the connections between different domains or scales so represented could or

12
1
Introduction
could not ultimately be established, an alternative sometimes known as that between
“reductionism” and “emergence.” Kant, again, would not deny the possibility of
reaching, at least ideally or in part, the ultimate nature of reality by means of human
thought either, although his overall scheme would make such a claim difﬁcult for any
given conception in any domain of investigation. Riemann, Einstein, and Kant, or
Hegel, all, again, equally denied the empiricist view that our experience alone could
be sufﬁcient for understanding how nature works. For them, this understanding was
only possible by means of concepts and thus required the invention of new concepts.
Relating experimental evidence and theoretical thinking by means of concepts allows
one to conclude that the geometry of space is not Euclidean and our physics, such
as that of general relativity, is not Newtonian, as against Kant’s view or at least his
ultimate view.
Kant’s argument (which is subtler than it might appear and especially than it was
often portrayed) concerning the Euclidean and Newtonian nature of the physical
world, extensively discussed in commentaries on Kant, is beyond my scope. I would
like, however, to note that the possibility that the geometry of space is non-Euclidean
does not disprove Kant’s scheme, as it is sometimes contended. Were non-Euclidean
geometry available to him, Kant might have been more open to this possibility than
others, some Kantians (whose thinking should be distinguished from that of Kant)
among them. Kant might have been incorrect in assuming that the ultimate nature of
space is Euclidean or is governed by Newtonian physics, and both assumptions could
be questioned, against Kant’s own grain, even from within Kant’s argumentation. He
might, however, have been right insofar as our basic phenomenal spatial intuition is
Euclidean (although this claim is under debate in present-day cognitive psychology)
and that our basic phenomenal physical intuition is Newtonian. Or, in Bohr’s and
Heisenberg’s more precise terms, Euclidean geometry and classical mechanics are
mathematized reﬁnements of our general phenomenal intuition of space, time, and
motion.
As discussed in Chap. 2, however, one could only partially rely on this intuition
already in special relativity, the ﬁrst theory that showed the incapacity of our phenom-
enal intuition to grasp how nature works. One could no longer rely on this intuition
at all (except as heuristic help) in developing the mathematical formalism of QM or
QFT, or even part (“quantum jumps”) of Bohr’s 1913 theory. In the case of relativity,
however, as a realist and classically causal (indeed deterministic) theory, the mathe-
matical formalism still offered an idealized representation of the physical processes
considered. In the case of QM, at least in RWR-type interpretations, one could only
rely on the abstract mathematics of the formalism and its ability to relate to the data
observed in quantum experiments in terms of probabilistic or statistical predictions.
No other predictions concerning quantum phenomena are, again, possible.

1.3 The Rise of RWR Thinking
13
1.3
The Rise of RWR Thinking
While one can trace the prehistory of the RWR view to earlier thinking, even from the
pre-Socratics on, and in modern time, to Kant and post-Kantian thought, the history
of this view as such begins with quantum physics, inaugurated by Planck’s discovery
of his black-body radiation law in 1900. It took, however, another decade before
the difﬁculties and paradoxes of quantum theory led to the RWR view. It emerged
as a result of three revolutionary discoveries—Bohr’s discovery of his 1913 atomic
theory, Heisenberg’s discovery of QM, and Dirac’s discovery of QED, especially
his relativistic equation for the free electron in 1928, which led to the discovery of
antimatter in 1931—and crystalized with Bohr’s ultimate interpretation of quantum
phenomena and QM by the late 1930s. I summarize each of these three discoveries.
In conﬂict with classical mechanics and classical electrodynamics alike (which
could not, however, account for the manifested stability of atoms as electromagnetic
systems, a fact that served as a major impetus for Bohr), Bohr’s 1913 atomic theory
introduced the concept of “quantum jumps,” as discontinuous transitions between so-
called stationary quantum states of electrons. In each quantum jump, discrete quanta
of radiation, hv, was emitted (or absorbed) in accordance with Planck’s light-quantum
theory. Stationary states were represented by electrons orbiting nuclei, in accordance
with the laws of classical mechanics, without radiating energy while in orbit, thus
in contradiction to classical electrodynamics. By contrast, quantum jumps could not
be so represented, and appeared to allow for no mechanical representation or even
conception. Bohr’s theory was a radical transformation of the nature of thinking in
physics.
Building on Bohr’s thinking, Heisenberg, in his 1925 approach to QM, aban-
doned an orbital representation of stationary states, replacing them with just energy
levels of electrons, while retaining Bohr’s concept of discontinuous transitions,
quantum jumps, between them. Heisenberg’s theory only predicted the probabili-
ties of transitions between these energy levels, without providing any representation
of electrons themselves and their behavior. These transitions, moreover, were only
manifested as effects of the interactions between electrons and measuring instru-
ments, reﬂecting the irreducible role of experimental technology in the constitution
of quantum phenomena. Heisenberg’s approach was grounded in the circumstance
(still found in quantum physics) that no observation of quantum objects or their inde-
pendent behavior is possible. Nobody has ever observed, at least thus far, an electron
or photon as such, or any quantum object, no matter how large, and some, such as
Bose–Einstein condensates, are large, although their quantum nature is deﬁned by
their microscopic constitution. It is only possible to observe traces, such as spots on
photographic plates, left by their interactions with measuring instruments. The exis-
tence of quantum objects is inferred from these traces. Heisenberg also introduced
a new form of mathematics, never previously used in physics, in effect (he did not
use these terms), that of Hilbert spaces over C and noncommuting operators there.
This mathematics enabled the probabilistic predictions of quantum events observed
in measuring instruments, as effects of their interaction with quantum objects.

14
1
Introduction
Dirac’s introduction of QED, especially his discovery of his relativistic equation
for the electron, in 1928, was the third key discovery in the history of the RWR view.
Dirac’s theory of the relativistic electron, by means of a new mathematical theory
(while still using Hilbert spaces over C and noncommutative operators there), added
a new dimension that of particle transformation and multiplicity to quantum physics.
Unlike in low-energy quantum regimes handled by QM, or the whole preceding
physics, it was no longer possible to maintain the identity of a quantum object,
such as an electron, even in a single experiment. Dirac’s equation was an equation
for both the electron and the positron, although it took a few years before Dirac
proposed the existence of the positron in 1931. In any high-energy experiments,
dealing with quantum-electrodynamical processes, either an electron or a positron
(or a photon or an electron–positron pair) could be observed, keeping in mind that,
in the RWR view, this only means that the corresponding effect can be registered in
measuring instruments. In high-energy quantum regimes and QFT, even in a single
experiment, one can no longer deal with particles of the same type, but had to deal
with particles of other types, transforming into each other. It is this circumstance that
adds the irreducibly multiple to the irreducibly inconceivable found in RWR-type
interpretations of low-energy quantum phenomena and QM, giving Dirac’s equation
and the discovery of antimatter their signiﬁcance for the history of the RWR view.
I am not saying that other events did not play their roles in the history of the RWR
view, including several preceding the discovery of QM, such as Louis de Broglie’s
1923 theory of matter wave; Satyendra Nath Bose’s discovery of the Bose–Einstein
statistics in 1924; and the 1925 discovery of spin by Ralph Kronig, George Uhlen-
beck, and Samuel Goudsmit. I shall discuss all three in Chap. 3. Then, of course, as
arguably the most signiﬁcant of these developments, there is Bohr’s interpretation
of quantum phenomena and QM, to which a large portion of this study is devoted.
This interpretation was, however, not a discovery of a new theory, although it did
introduce new physics, deﬁned by the irreducible role of measuring instruments in
quantum phenomena, a view anticipated by Heisenberg. Schrödinger’s co-discovery
of QM was important as well. His wave mechanics played little role in the history
of the RWR view. As indicated in the Preface, however, in order to bring his equa-
tions (time independent and then time dependent) into accord with the experimental
data, Schrödinger introduced certain mathematical features that were crucial to the
mathematical formalism of QM. The importance of these features compels me to
devote a separate chapter, Chap. 5, to his derivation, especially of his time-dependent
equation. This equation had remarkable new features, in particular, a complex wave
function. It also contained the ﬁrst-order derivative in time, t, vs. the second-order
derivatives in spatial coordinates (x, y, z), which required a complex wave function.
Both features are essential to QM, including its probabilistic aspects. The ﬁrst-order
derivative in t was a deﬁning feature of Dirac’s equation, also important in estab-
lishing Schrödinger’s time-dependent equation as the non-relativistic limit of Dirac’s
equation, a key aspect of Dirac’s derivation of his equation.
Several subsequent developments were also signiﬁcant in the history of the RWR
view, including as concerns the idea, adopted here, that quantum objects are ideal-
izations deﬁned only at the time of measurement, rather than referring to something

1.3 The Rise of RWR Thinking
15
existing independently. Among them were Bohr and Léon Rosenfeld’s 1933 anal-
ysis of measurement in QFT, updated in 1950 (Bohr and Rosenfeld 1933, 1950);
the rise of the theory of nuclear forces in 1930 (with Heisenberg, again, playing a
key role, although the main credit belongs to Hideki Yukawa, who was the ﬁrst to
consider the strong force as an independent force of nature); the development, specif-
ically renormalization, of QED in the 1940s by Richard Feynman, Julian Schwinger,
Shinichiro Tomonaga, and Freeman Dyson; the development of the standard model
of elementary particle physics; and more recently the rise of quantum information
theory, to which this study devotes a chapter as well (Chap. 9). In any event, as
concerns the RWR view, none of the developments just listed was as important as
the three discoveries described above.
In accordance with the history just outlined, this book has an overarching historical
trajectory,proceedingfromtheprehistoryoftheRWRview,sketchedinthisIntroduc-
tion, to Chap. 3, anchored in Bohr’s 1913 atomic theory; then to Chap. 4, anchored
in Heisenberg’s discovery of QM and Chap. 5, in Schrödinger’s discovery of his
time-dependent equation; to Chap. 6, anchored in Bohr’s interpretation of quantum
phenomena and QM, and his concept of complementarity; to Chap. 7, anchored in
the EPR experiment, and the question of quantum nonlocality; to Chap. 8, anchored
in QFT; and ﬁnally, to Chap. 9, anchored in quantum information theory. (I shall
explain my repeated use of “anchored” presently.)
As stated at the outset of this Introduction, however, this book belongs to the
physicsand philosophyofquantumtheory ratherthantothehistoryofquantumtheory,
and the main reasons for considering the history just outlined are, again, physical
and philosophical. Each chapter offers a different angle, deﬁned by one of the main
discoveries in question and their implications (hence my use of “anchored” above),
on the nature of quantum theory. Even as concern these perspectives themselves,
it is, in each chapter, a matter of focus on one of them in relation to, rather than
as separate from, the others. Chapter 2 is outside this historical sequence: it offers
a general discussion of the RWR view and the key concepts involved. I close this
Introduction with the Bohr–Einstein debate, which will shadow the argument of this
book, just as it has shadowed the debate concerning quantum phenomena and QM
for a century by now.
1.4
“Logically Possible Without Contradiction”: The
Bohr–Einstein Debate and the Nature of Quantum
Theory
AtstakeintheBohr–Einsteindebatewasnotonlytheviabilityofquantumtheory,QM
or QFT, but also the nature of fundamental physics as a mathematical-experimental
science, with mathematics, again, deﬁning this conjunction, for Einstein as a form of
conceptual realism. The conceptual realist imperative governed Einstein’s thinking
throughout his life, in particular, his work on general relativity, where the guidance

16
1
Introduction
of this imperative proved to be so successful. Bohr, by contrast, was ready to abandon
this imperative even in his 1913 theory and found it to be no longer viable after the
discovery of QM. He, brieﬂy, returned to a realist view in his Como lecture of 1927,
a view, however, quickly abandoned by him, following his exchange with Einstein
at the Solvay Conference in Brussels about a month later. This discussion initiated
their three decade-long debate, which ended only with Einstein’s death in 1955.
It is a separate question how important this imperative was for Einstein’s physics,
as opposed to the mathematical and physical features that deﬁned it. Thus, the guid-
ance of this imperative notwithstanding, Einstein had not been able, after an unre-
lenting effort lasting 40 years (during which he also continued to ponder quantum
foundations), to unify gravity and electromagnetism along the lines of a realist ﬁeld
theory of the type he aimed at, that of continuous ﬁelds. To do so was arguably impos-
sible apart from taking QFT into account, which Einstein was reluctant to consider
in view of his belief in the type of theory he pursued and his lack of conﬁdence that
QM or QFT could lead to such a theory (Einstein 1936, p. 378).
In any event, it was his conceptual realist imperative that grounded Einstein’s
discontent with QM, at least if the latter was understood on RWR lines, as it was
by Einstein and by Bohr, with very different assessments of the RWR view itself.
EinsteinneveracceptedthatQMorQFToffereda“usefulpointofdepartureforfuture
development,” as he stated as late as 1949, more than two decades after the introduc-
tion of QM and in the immediate wake of major breakthroughs in QED (related to its
renormalization) (Einstein 1949, p. 83). Admittedly, these breakthroughs could have
hardly affected Einstein’s view. They did not convince many others either, such as
Dirac, the founder of QED, who by the 1930s no longer saw it as ultimately viable
either. These doubts in QFT, especially on the account of the manifested inﬁnities of
the formalism requiring renormalization, have never disappeared and are still around.
Einstein’s discontent with QM is most widely known by his pronouncement that
“God doesn’t play dice” (e.g., Born 2005, p. 88). It is clear, however, that this discon-
tent had more to do with the difﬁculty and perhaps impossibility of reconciling QM or
QFT with his realist imperative. Einstein realized, just as Bohr did, that the generally
probabilistic nature of quantum predictions is implied by the absence of realism, or
by RWR-type interpretations, because of the impossibility, in the absence of realism,
of attributing classical causality to the ultimate nature of the reality responsible
for quantum phenomena. Einstein’s arguably ﬁnal pronouncement on the subject,
undoubtedly with quantum (EPR type) correlations in mind, was this: “That the Lord
should play dice, all right; but that He should gamble according to deﬁnite rules, this
is beyond me” (reported in Wheeler and Zurek 1983, p. 8). It is sometimes said that
quantum dice are loaded in view of such phenomena as quantum correlations (clearly
on Einstein’s mind here), discussed in Chap. 7. In fact, however, the language of dice
is misleading. The workings of quantum probability or statistics are very different
from those of classical physics, to which a throw of the dice belongs and which has
nothing similar to quantum correlations. Accordingly, Einstein’s statement conﬁrms
and even ampliﬁes, rather than tempers, his discontent with QM.

1.4 “Logically Possible Without Contradiction”: The Bohr–Einstein Debate …
17
Bohr characterized Einstein’s position, expressed in Einstein’s 1936 article
“Physics and Reality” (a position that remained essentially the same thereafter),
as follows:
Einstein … [argued] that the quantum-mechanical description is to be considered merely as
a means for of accounting for the average behavior of a large number of atomic systems, and
his belief that it should offer an exhaustive description of the individual phenomena [was]
expressed in the following words: “To believe this is logically possible without contradiction;
but it is so very contrary to my [Einstein’s] scientiﬁc instinct that [he could not] forego the
search for a more complete conception” [Einstein 1936, p. 375]. (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 61)
Einstein’s point was given by him as an additional justiﬁcation in his article.
His statement, cited by Bohr, replied to the following rhetorical question: “Is there
really any physicist who believes that we shall never get an inside view of these
important alterations in the single system, in their structure and their [classically?]
causal connections, and this regardless of the fact that these single happenings have
been brought so close to us, thanks to the marvelous invention of the Wilson [cloud]
chamber and the Geiger counter?” (Einstein 1936, p. 375). Einstein’s question is not
unreasonable. It is not easy to believe that it is possible to ever get an inside view,
also literally in the sense of visualization [Anschaulichkeit], of the inner workings of
individual quantum objects from QM as a probabilistic or statistical theory predicting
the outcome of quantum experiments, without describing how they physically come
about in terms of independent physical reality. There is an additional wrinkle, insofar
as it is still possible to see QM, in Bayesian terms, as providing probabilistic predic-
tions even in the case of individual quantum elements, and even in dealing with most
elementary individual quantum objects, such as elementary particles. I shall consider
this subject in Chap. 2. Either way, one is likely to need a different theory to have such
a description, such an “inside view,” and thus to satisfy Einstein’s realist imperative,
if quantum phenomena will ever allow one to do so, which is a big if. As I shall
suggest presently, it was this “if” that ultimately deﬁned the Bohr–Einstein debate.
That quantum-mechanical predictions were fully in accord with all available
experimental evidence did not deter Einstein, in part, because several of his argu-
ments, concerning EPR-type experiments for the incompleteness, or else nonlocality,
of QM, were based on predictions with probability one, ideally possible in these
experiments (Einstein et al. 1935). In fact, as discussed in Chap. 7, Einstein has
continued to believe that QM could not actually predict all that was possible to
establish as real in considering individual quantum system, unless one allows for
Einstein-nonlocality, as an action at a distance. Also, even though, on this occasion
Einstein appealed to observations of quantum phenomena in the Wilson chamber and
the Geiger counter, Einstein’s belief in the power of mathematized physical concepts,
which by the time of his comments under discussion had reached its height, some-
times led him to diminish the signiﬁcance of experimental evidence (van Dongen
2010, pp. 89–95). This evidence, he argued, could change. It could. But then it also
could not. Or it could change so as further to conﬁrm a given theory, as has happened
in the case of QM or QFT thus far, including, recently, in LHC experiments, which,
some hoped, would have challenged QFT or even proved it to be incorrect. These

18
1
Introduction
experiments still might do so. Even if a more radical change is required, however, a
new theory may still be quantum or allow for RWR-type interpretations.
Bohr, by contrast, argued that “there could be no other way to deem a logically
consistent mathematical formalism as inadequate than by demonstrating the depar-
ture of its consequences from experience or by proving that its predictions did not
exhaust the possibilities of observation” (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 57). According to Bohr,
“Einstein’s argumentation could be directed to neither of these ends” (Bohr 1987, v. 2,
p. 57). The argumentation here referred to was that concerning the so-called Einstein
“photon box” experiment, but Bohr clearly had in mind Einstein’s other arguments,
in particular, those concerning EPR-type experiments. Bohr’s contention just cited
also shaped his response to Einstein’s view that “the belief that [QM] should offer an
exhaustive description of individual phenomena,” while “logically possible without
contradiction,” was “so very contrary to [Einstein’s] scientiﬁc instinct that [he could
not] forego the search for a more complete conception.” Bohr countered that a mere
rejection of, rather than a counterargument to a given theory or argumentation, such as
that of the RWR type by Bohr, and a desideratum for an alternative, “more complete
conception” (as Einstein understood it, in accordance with his realist imperative) do
not in themselves constitute a demonstration of logical or experimental deﬁciency
of this theory or argumentation. Bohr said:
Even if [Einstein’s] attitude might seem well balanced in itself, it nevertheless implies a
rejection of [rather than offers a counterargument to] the whole argumentation [essentially
that of his ultimate RWR-interpretation] that, in quantum mechanics, we are not dealing
with an arbitrary renunciation of a more detailed analysis of atomic phenomena but with a
recognition that such an analysis is in principle excluded. (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 62)
This is one of Bohr’s strongest expressions of his ultimate, strong RWR-type inter-
pretation of quantum phenomena and QM. Bohr’s statement may suggest, perhaps in
accord with his view at least on this occasion, the impossibility of a realist alternative
in general, rather than only the fact he adopts an RWR-type interpretation of quantum
phenomena and QM, possible as more viable than realist alternative. Technically, the
statement refers to Bohr’s response to Einstein’s outright rejection (in 1936) of this
type of view rather than counterarguing it. While the phrase “aiming to show” allows
one to read this statement as only referring to Bohr’s interpretation, it is still possible
to read this statement as saying that no interpretation of quantum phenomena or QM
and no alternative theory of quantum phenomena will ever be able to circumvent this
prohibition. From the present viewpoint, such statements by Bohr or others could,
regardless of the author’s intent, only represent a particular interpretation of quantum
phenomena and QM or QFT. Here, they represent a strong RWR-type interpretation
adopted by Bohr at this point, in the present interpretation of his interpretation, a
qualiﬁcation unavoidable for the same set of reasons.
Be it as it may on that score, the exchange returns me to the big “if,” invoked
above: if quantum phenomena will ever allow one to do so, that is, if they ever allow
one to fulﬁll Einstein’s desiderata for a fundamental theory of quantum phenomena
or whatever future phenomena may replace or delimit them. The debate between
Bohr and Einstein was not primarily about what QM could or could not do, on which

1.4 “Logically Possible Without Contradiction”: The Bohr–Einstein Debate …
19
point their disagreement, while not discountable, was not so crucial. Their debate was
ultimately about whether nature could allow us to do better. While Einstein thought
that it should and while it is possible that Bohr thought that it will not, the present
philosophical position implies that it may not, which is not the same as it never will.
Einstein was more certain, even if, ﬁrm as his conviction was, perhaps not entirely
so, given that “should” is still not the same as “will.” Admittedly, the RWR view is
human, just as was that of Einstein. The difference is that, contrary to Einstein’s or
others’ position advancing realism as imperative, the RWR view is not seen in this
study as imperative, but only as practically justiﬁed, as things stand now.
Most have been and remain inclined to accept Einstein’s view. The circumstance
that our fundamental theories remain incomplete (as there is no quantum theory
of gravity and even handling other forces of nature by means of QFT is still not
ﬁnalized) has often been used to support the Einsteinian hope that physics will return
to realism. Einstein prevailed in this part of his debate with Bohr, with most physicists
and philosophers taking his side. Bohr, as noted in the Preface, realized this situation,
in speaking “of skepticism [among the physicists themselves] about the necessity of
going so far in renouncing customary demand as regards the explanation of natural
phenomena” (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 63). He also realized, however, that physics itself
is a different matter. While human, it does not necessarily obey human imperatives,
which have been defeated by physics throughout its history, not the least by Einstein’s
own relativity theory. Bohr’s argument concerning and his, by that point RWR type,
interpretation of quantum phenomena and QM was and (as there has been no change
in this regard since) has remained fully in accord with the experimental data available
thus far and with the logical structure of QM (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 57). So is, I would
argue, the present interpretation, different from that of Bohr as it may be as concerns
its concept of a quantum object as an idealization applicable only at the time of
measurement. Accordingly, while a realist theory of quantum phenomena is possible
or might become necessary in view of new experimental or theoretical ﬁndings, it is
equally possible the RWR view will remain viable in grounding our interpretations of
QM and QFT, or (extended to the U-RWR view) other fundamental theories. Either
bet is possible, but only as a bet, notwithstanding the certainty of some in taking
either view, although it appears that most of those who are certain advocate realist
views.
Whatever the future of fundamental physics may bring, the following strong, but
I would argue, justiﬁed, claim could be made, at least if one adopts the RWR view.
Bohr’s thinking in his 1913 theory, especially Heisenberg’s thinking leading him
to his discovery of QM revolutionized the very practice of fundamental physics,
both theoretical physics and, in effect, redeﬁned the practice of experimental physics
when dealing with quantum phenomena. Taking advantage of and bringing together
two main meanings of the word “experiment” (as a test and as innovative creation),
I would argue that the practice of quantum physics became the ﬁrst practice of
physics or science that is both, and jointly, irreducibly (structurally unavoidably)
experimental and irreducibly mathematical.
First, it is irreducibly experimental as experimental physics in its conventional
sense because it no longer consists, as in classical or relativistic physics, in tracking

20
1
Introduction
the independent behavior of the systems considered, but in unavoidably creating
conﬁgurations of experimental technology containing traces of its interactions with
nature that reﬂect the fact that what happens is unavoidably deﬁned by what kinds
of experiments we perform, by how we affect physical reality as a reality without
realism. I emphasize “unavoidably” because, while the phenomena observed in clas-
sical physics or relativity may be affected by experimental technology and while we
do stage experiments there, in principle, one can observe these phenomena without
appreciably affecting their behavior (which also allows one to see these phenomena
as ideally representing the corresponding objects) and thus follow what happens in
any event. In quantum physics, the experiment is a creation of a new material and
phenomenal conﬁguration that enables one, by performing a measurement on the
observable part of the instruments used, to deﬁne the probabilities for outcomes of
future experiments, without it being possible to follow how these outcomes come
about. No tracking or, in RWR-type interpretations, no assumption of classical-like
continuity of events or of the continuous (or any other, for example, discrete) concept
of the ultimate nature of reality that gives rise to these events is possible.
It is true that we do not really know either why the mathematical formalism and
lawsofclassicalphysicsorrelativitywork(asopposedtootherpossiblemathematical
representations and laws). We only know that these theories work within their proper
scopes. But they work differently, including if one adopts the U-RWR view as ulti-
mately underlying these theories. In classical physics and relativity, our predictions,
deterministic or probabilistic, are deﬁned by the idealized mathematical representa-
tions of the ultimate constituents of the reality considered and their behavior. While,
in the U-RWR view, this idealization does not correspond to how nature ultimately
works even within the proper scope of these theories, it is permissible for all prac-
tical purposes. This type of idealization is, however, no longer possible in RWR-type
interpretations of quantum phenomena and QM or QFT. In these interpretations,
the formalism of QM or QFT only enables probabilistic or statistical predictions
of the numerical data found in quantum phenomena. (The fact alone that no other
predictions of these data are possible on experimental grounds does not preclude
realism.)
Accordingly, in the view assumed in this study, as the U-RWR view, the proba-
bilistic relationships between a given theory and observed phenomena are always,
in any physical theory, human because an assignment of probabilities is human.
As stated, nature does not assign probabilities and makes no predictions. In clas-
sical physics, however, this assignment may, in the U-RWR view, be assumed to
be physically grounded in the behavior of the systems considered because classical
physics may be assumed to represent this behavior and relate this representation to
the phenomena considered. In quantum theory, by contrast, at least in RWR-type
interpretations, this assumption is no longer possible. These relationships are still
ultimately grounded in our interactions with nature, but, in RWR-type interpretations,
we don’t know or even can’t conceive of the way in which they are so grounded.
Hence, we can no longer conceive either why these probabilistic relationships obtain
and why the mathematics of quantum theory predicts them fully in accord with the
data observed.

1.4 “Logically Possible Without Contradiction”: The Bohr–Einstein Debate …
21
By the same token, the practice of theoretical physics is irreducibly mathemat-
ical because it no longer consists, as in classical physics or relativity, in offering
an idealized mathematical representation of quantum objects and behavior, but in
inventing abstract mathematical schemes enabling us to predict, probabilistically or
statistically, the outcomes of quantum events. These schemes are unrelated to and
thus are not helped by our general phenomenal intuition, as are those of classical
mechanics or, in a more limited way, relativity. On the other hand, they are not
limited by this intuition either. Indeed, one experiments with mathematics as well,
and it is experimenting with abstract mathematics, divorced from our phenomenal
intuition or even physical concepts that, with Heisenberg, became the way to new
theories. As discussed in Chap. 8, this view of physics equally and even more radi-
cally applies, beginning with Dirac’s work, in QED and then QFT, and experimental
physics in high-energy quantum regimes, thus extending to high-energy physics the
new epoch of the relationships between and “mutual stimulation of” mathematics
and physics, which, according to Bohr, commenced with Heisenberg’s discovery
of QM (Bohr 1987, v. 1, p. 51). These relationships and the type of revolution in
fundamental physics they brought about were not what Einstein wanted, even though
he understood, more deeply than most, their radical nature. For Bohr, however, this
revolution was what quantum physics needed, given his 1913 atomic theory, which
built on Einstein’s own and Planck’s earlier thinking but which moved beyond this
thinking and opened a new trajectory of thought leading to this revolution.
References
Bohr, N.: The Philosophical Writings of Niels Bohr, 3 vols. Ox Bow Press, Woodbridge (1987)
Bohr, N., Rosenfeld, L.: On the question of the measurability of electromagnetic ﬁeld quantities.
In: Wheeler, J.A., Zurek, W.H. (eds.) Quantum Theory and Measurement, 1983, pp. 479–522.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ (1933)
Bohr, N., Rosenfeld, L.: Field and charge measurements in quantum electrodynamics. In: Wheeler,
J.A., Zurek, W.H. (eds.) Quantum Theory and Measurement, 1983, pp. 523–534. Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ, USA (1950)
Born, M.: The Einstein-Born Letters, Trans. Born, I. Walker, New York, NY (2005)
De Bianchi, S., Wells, J.D.: Explanation and the dimensionality of space Kant’s argument revisited.
Synthese 192(1), 287–303 (2015)
Einstein, A.: Physics and reality. J. Franklin Inst. 221, 349–382 (1936)
Einstein, A.: Autobiographical Notes, Trans. Schilpp, P. A. Open Court, La Salle, IL (1949)
Einstein, A., Podolsky, B., Rosen, N.: Can quantum-mechanical description of physical reality be
considered complete? In: Wheeler, J.A., Zurek, W.H. (eds.) Quantum Theory and Measurement,
1983, pp. 138–141. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, USA (1935)
Hegel, G. W. F.: Hegel’s Phenomenology of Spirit, Trans. Pinkard, T. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge (2019)
Heisenberg, W.: Physics and Philosophy: The Revolution in Modern Science. Harper & Row, New
York, NY, USA (1962)
Kant, I.: Critique of Pure Reason, Trans. Guyer, P., Wood, A.W. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge (1997)

22
1
Introduction
Kant, I.: Thoughts on the true estimation of living forces. In E. Watkins (ed.), Immanuel Kant:
Natural Science, pp. 1–155. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2012)
Misner, C., Thorn, K. S, Zurek, W. H.: John Wheeler, relativity, and quantum information. Physics
Today 62(4), 40–46 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3120095
Plotnitsky, A.: On the reasonable and unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics in classical and
quantum physics. Found. Phys. 41, 466–491 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10701-010-9442-2
Plotnitsky, A.: The Principles of Quantum Theory, from Planck’s Quanta to the Higgs Boson: The
Nature of Quantum Reality and the Spirit of Copenhagen. Springer/Nature, New York, NY (2016)
Riemann, B.: On the hypotheses that lie at the foundations of geometry. In: Pesic, P. (ed.) Beyond
Geometry: Classic Papers from Riemann to Einstein, 2007, pp. 23–40. Dover, Mineola, NY, USA
(1854)
Van Dongen, J.: Einstein’s Uniﬁcation. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2010)
Wheeler, J.A., Zurek, W. H. (eds.) Quantum Theory and Measurement. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ (1983)
Weyl, H.: Space Time Matter, Trans. Brose, H. L. Dover, Mineola, NY (1952)

Chapter 2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
But I can think whatever I like, as long as I do not contradict
myself, i.e., as long as my concept is a possible thought, even if I
cannot give any assurance whether or not there is a
corresponding object somewhere within the sum total of all
possibilities.
—Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason (1787) (Kant 1997,
p. 115)
Abstract This chapter offers a philosophical outline of the RWR view and deﬁnes
the key concepts considered in this book, both those speciﬁcally grounding the RWR
view and more commonly used concepts, such as reality, causality, or determinism.
I begin, in Sect. 2.2, with the concept of concept itself. Section 2.3 considers the
concepts of a theory, model, and interpretation, and the relationships among them.
Section 2.4 discusses the concepts of reality, realism, and reality without realism.
Section 2.5 considers indeterminacy and probability in quantum theory. Section 2.6
addresses the question of idealization in RWR-type interpretations, in particular in the
interpretation adopted in this study, in which the concept of a quantum object, while
still deﬁned as beyond conception, is only applicable at the time of measurement,
rather than referring to something that exists independently.
Keywords Causality · Concepts · Measuring instruments · Quantum
measurement · Quantum object · Reality · Realism · Reality without realism
2.1
Introduction
This chapter offers a general exposition of the RWR view of quantum phenomena and
quantum theory, and deﬁnes the key concepts considered in this study, both those,
such as reality without realism, speciﬁcally grounding the RWR view and more
commonly used concepts, such as reality, causality, and determinism, in their deﬁ-
nitions adopted here, because they can be deﬁned otherwise. Most of these concepts
are complex, and their full-ﬂedged structure will emerge as this study proceeds.
Some of them, such as quantum nonlocality, Bohr’s concepts of complementarity
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
A. Plotnitsky, Reality Without Realism,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-84578-0_2
23

24
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
and phenomenon, or elementary particles, will only be brieﬂy sketched here and
properly delineated in later chapters.
Ibegin,inSect.2.2,withtheconceptofconcept.Section2.3considerstheconcepts
of theory, model, and interpretation, and the relationships among them. Section 2.4
outlines the concepts of reality, realism, and reality without realism. Section 2.5
addresses randomness, indeterminacy, and probability. Section 2.6 discusses the
question of idealization in RWR-type interpretations, in particular that adopted in
this study, in which the concept of a quantum object, while still deﬁned as beyond
conception, is only applicable at the time of measurement, rather than referring to
something that exists independently.
2.2
Concepts
The concept of concept is rarely adequately considered in the physical or philosoph-
ical literature, in part perhaps because the role of concepts is not always sufﬁciently
appreciated there. If, however, as Franck Wilczek, a leading elementary particle theo-
rist and a Nobel Prize laureate, argues, “the primary goal of fundamental physics is to
discoverprofoundconceptsthatilluminateourunderstandingofnature,”thencreative
thinking in fundamental physics is deﬁned and fundamental physics is advanced
primarily by the invention of concepts (Wilczek 2005, p. 239). But what is a physical
concept, and what is a concept in the ﬁrst place? Wilczek does not explain it, taking
it for granted or assuming some general sense of it shared by his readers. Given that
his article was published in Nature, one might expect that these readers are sufﬁ-
ciently informed to understand the concepts that Wilczek considers, such as that of
an elementary particle, associated with that of a symmetry group (an association
explained later in this study). Thus, these concepts have mathematical components,
the presence of which has deﬁned the concepts of all modern theoretical physics.
A physical theory might then be seen, as it will be here, as an organized assem-
blage of concepts. As such, it would then relate to experimentally observed physical
phenomena in terms of logical propositions, thus conﬁrming the character of modern
physics as a mathematical-experimental science.
It is, as noted in the Introduction, the logical-propositional structure of physical
theories, in conjunction with their mathematical formalism, that tends to dominate
the philosophy of physics, in particular the analytic philosophy of physics. This struc-
ture is of course indispensable: no physical theory and no philosophical argument
concerning theoretical physics can bypass it. I would, nevertheless, contend that it
is far from sufﬁcient for understanding physical theories, especially in their creative
dimensions, where the discovery of new concepts plays a key and even decisive role.
This is the case that I would like to make in this study. I begin this section by brieﬂy
considering Émile Borel’s 1907 argument concerning the limits of the role of the
logical aspects of mathematics, an argument also applicable to theoretical physics
(Borel 1907).

2.2 Concepts
25
Borel, a major ﬁgure at the time, who made key contributions to measure theory
and probability theory (such as the concept of a Borel set and the thought experi-
ment known as “the inﬁnite monkey theorem”), questioned the logicist philosophy of
mathematics, which theorized mathematics as a form of logic and which, championed
by, among others, Bertrand Russell, was in vogue at the time. Borel was not alone in
questioning logicism. A similar critique of it was, for example, undertaken about the
same time by Henry Poincaré, whose mathematical work was closely connected to
contemporary physics and who also made important contributions to physics itself
(Poincaré 1982). Borel gave several examples of the failure of logic to capture the
essence of mathematical thought, such as the fact that the formula expressing the
invariance of the cross-ratio of four points on a line under a perspectivity is easy
to ﬁnd, but it took Michel Chasles to see in it the key to projective geometry; or
the case of the polynomial identity (the icosahedral equation) that could only have
been found to be valuable if discovered by a nonmechanical route, namely through
Felix Klein’s uniﬁcation of Galois theory with the theory of the symmetries of the
icosahedron. Borel’s view was that a truly fertile invention in mathematics consists
of the discovery of a new point of view from which to classify and interpret the facts,
followed by a search for the necessary proofs by plausible reasoning (later consid-
ered by Pólya [1958]), and only then bringing logic in. The same argument could be
made in physics, for example, in such cases as Heisenberg’s invention of matrix vari-
ables, Schrödinger’s invention of the complex wave function, and Dirac’s invention
of spinors, or of course, Einstein’s concepts of general relativity, based on Rieman-
nian geometry, to stay for the moment with mathematical concepts. Bohr’s concept of
quantum jumps provides an even more dramatic example, although in this case math-
ematics did not play as signiﬁcant a role as it did in the other cases just mentioned.
The structure of these concepts was and had to be logical, but their invention was not
deﬁned by logic, which played only an auxiliary role in this invention.
Borel’s argument has not lost its importance in assessing the philosophy of math-
ematics or, as I argue here, the philosophy of physics. According to Jeremy Gray,
“Borel’s criticisms point quite clearly toward a problem that has not gone away in
philosophers’ treatment of mathematics: a tendency to reduce it to some essence
that not only deprives it of purpose but is false to mathematical practice. The logical
enterprise, even if it had succeeded, would only have been an account of part of math-
ematics, its deductive skeleton” (Gray 2008, pp. 202–203). This is, I would contend,
equally true about much of the analytic philosophy of physics, indispensable as the
logical-propositional aspects of theoretical physics may be in turn.
It is not my aim (any more than it was that of Borel) to diminish the role of
logic or, one might add, the calculational aspects of mathematics or physics, or
to take anything away from the contribution of the analytic philosophy of physics
to our understanding of physics, including quantum theory. Several studies in this
ﬁeld were helpful to my argument in this book. Instead, I would like to give a
proper emphasis to the role of concepts, especially, again, in creative thinking in
theoretical physics, but not only there, because working with already established
concepts is indispensable in all practice of theoretical (or experimental) physics.
Besides, analytic philosophers, too, sometimes give concepts their due, beginning

26
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
with one of the founders of analytic philosophy, sometimes even seen as the founder
of it, Gottlob Frege, who gave priority to the role of concepts in mathematics and
philosophy. Frege did not deal with physics, but his work shows the difﬁculty of
making unqualiﬁed claims here, as opposed to indicating one or another degree
of emphasis. Finally, the unconditional opposition between the logical-propositional
and conceptual structures, or between calculations and concepts, is not so easy and is
ultimately impossible to maintain, even in considering ﬁgures, such as Riemann, who
gave a strong priority to thinking in terms of concepts vis-à-vis calculations. Riemann
was perfectly capable of difﬁcult calculations. Logic and calculations do involve
concepts and lead to new concepts. Calculations can also function as statements,
sometimes even as philosophical statements, thus connected to concepts. It is the
balance of these aspects of mathematical and scientiﬁc thinking that I would like to
emphasize, while giving concepts their due, as against a degree of neglect of their
role, beginning with not considering the concept of concept.1
The centrality of concepts in philosophy was emphasized most by the post-
Kantians, especially Hegel, then in mathematics by Riemann and Frege (both of
whom might have been inﬂuenced by Hegel), and in physics by Einstein. Riemann,
a major inspiration for Einstein’s general relativity, likely also concerns the essen-
tial role of concepts, observed in his 1854 Habilitation lecture, discussed in the
Introduction:
From Euclid to Lagrange this darkness [in our understanding of geometry] has been dispelled
neither by the mathematicians nor the philosophers who have concerned themselves with
it. The reason [Grund] for this is undoubtedly because the general concept of multiply
extended magnitudes, which includes spatial magnitudes, remains completely unexplored.
I have therefore ﬁrst set myself the task of constructing the concept of a multiply extended
magnitude from general notions of magnitude. (Riemann 1854, p. 24; emphasis added)
This concept is his concept of manifold [Mannigfaltigkeit], which enabled Riemann
to establish new foundations for geometry, and which became central to modern
geometry and topology, and their use in physics (Plotnitsky 2017).2 As discussed
in Chap. 6, part of the genealogy of Bohr’s concept of complementarity was one
of Riemann’s new concepts as well, that of a Riemann surface, which, introduced
by Riemann in 1851, was also part of the genealogy of the concept of manifold.
A Riemann surface is a manifold, as Riemann undoubtedly realized by 1854, even
though he did not originally deﬁne it as a manifold. Einstein saw the invention of new
1 There are still other dimensions of physical or mathematical thinking, for example, a narrative
dimension, the role of which, as a constitutive rather than (more easily recognized) auxiliary role, in
scientiﬁc or mathematical thinking, has received a considerable amount of attention during recent
decades. See, for example, a representative collection of essays, by both scholars in the humanities
and mathematicians and physicists, on the role of narrative in mathematics and physics, a collection
that contains extensive further references (e.g., Doxiadis and Mazur 2012). (For a full disclosure,
the present author was among the contributors.) Calculations, too, involve narrative dimensions:
they tell stories. My main emphasis in this study, however, will remain on concepts as the primary
creative technology of thought in physics, mathematics, and philosophy.
2 Riemann’s own last work, dealing with “the mechanism of the ear” is a remarkable earlier example
of the use of the concept of manifold in physics (Riemann 1866).

2.2 Concepts
27
concepts as deﬁning foundational thinking in physics, and as noted earlier, he argued
that only through “a free conceptual construction” one could approach the nature
of physical reality, which view deﬁned his realism as conceptual realism (Einstein
1949, p. 47).
The concept of concept that I adopt here, while in accord with the views of
these ﬁgures, follows more expressly that of Deleuze and Guattari (1994). Their
thinking was inspired, along with that of the post-Kantians, such as Hegel, by
Riemann, including by his concept of manifold (Plotnitsky 2017). Deleuze and Guat-
tari applied their concept of concept primarily to philosophical concepts, in a juxtapo-
sition to scientiﬁc or mathematical concepts (Deleuze and Guattari 1994, pp. 24–25).
However, as I have argued previously (Plotnitsky 2017), this concept of concept is
equallyapplicabletomathematicalandscientiﬁcconcepts,asconcernsboththestruc-
ture of concepts and their capacity to pose new problems, which are the two deﬁning
characteristics of concepts for Deleuze and Guattari. Deleuze and Guattari were ulti-
mately unable to sustain their juxtaposition between philosophical and mathematical
or scientiﬁc concepts either. Accordingly, concepts may be seen, as they will be here,
as primary vehicles of creative thought in all theoretical ﬁelds. Riemann’s concept of
manifold; Einstein’s concept of gravitation based on Riemann’s concept of manifold;
Bohr’s concept of quantum jumps; Heisenberg’s concept of new quantum variables,
as matrix variables; Schrödinger’s concept of the wave function; Dirac’s concepts,
such as spinors, that established QED; or Bohr’s concept of complementarity are
all concepts in Deleuze and Guattari’s sense. So are, of course, earlier physical
concepts, those of classical mechanics, thermodynamics, or electromagnetism, in
particular that of an electromagnetic ﬁeld. Each is deﬁned by a complex structure
of their elements and each posed a new problem or set of problems and opened a
space for creating new concepts, a space that we still explore now. What, then, is a
concept, according to Deleuze and Guattari?
First of all, a concept is not merely a generalization from particulars (which
is commonly assumed to deﬁne concepts) or a general or abstract idea, although a
concept may contain such generalizations or ideas, speciﬁcally abstract mathematical
ideas in physics or in mathematics itself, where these ideas may become concepts in
the present sense. A concept is a multicomponent entity, deﬁned by the organization,
composition, of its components, and some of these components may be concepts in
turn.Inthisrespect,aconceptisakintoaworkofart,aparallelthatreﬂectsthecreative
nature of concepts. This is, of course, only a general deﬁnition. What is crucial is
how the compositional structure is speciﬁcally instantiated in a given concept, which
is deﬁned by both the nature of each component and its composition, and how they
relate to each other in the structure of the concept. All key concepts considered in
this study will be discussed through the speciﬁcity of their compositional structure.
This structure is special and even unique in the case of some concepts of quantum
theory in the strong RWR view, such as Bohr’s concept of phenomenon, insofar as
these concepts are deﬁned by the combination of classical physical concepts, on the
one hand, and on the other, the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for
quantum phenomena, placed beyond conception. The present deﬁnition of concept
allows something that is beyond conception, such as a reality without realism, to

28
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
be considered a concept or placed within a concept, because it always involves
connections to something that can be conceived or known, from which the existence
of such a reality is inferred.
Simple, single-component concepts are rare, if ultimately possible at all, as
opposed to appearing as such because their multicomponent structure is provision-
ally disregarded or cut-off. In practice, there is always a cut-off in delineating a
concept, which results from assuming some of the components of this concept to be
primitive entities whose structure is not speciﬁed. These primitive concepts could,
however, be speciﬁed by an alternative delineation, which would lead to a new overall
concept, containing a new set of primitive (unspeciﬁed) components. The history of
a given concept—and every concept, however innovative, has a history—is a history
of such successive speciﬁcations and changes in previous speciﬁcations. Concepts
are never created out of nothing, as proverbially, Athena from the head of Zeus,
fully grown and armed. They are constructed and composed of elements borrowed
from earlier concepts, sometimes used in very different lines of development or
even different ﬁelds. In this sense, concepts are also akin to any technology, which
always emerges from previous technologies, sometimes by combining previously
heterogenous elements, like the phone and the computer in the cellphone. When new
concepts become to be used, either as they are or as further modiﬁed, they acquire
their history. Hence, concepts also play an important role in the regular practice in
the ﬁeld in which they are created or a ﬁeld which adopted concepts from other ﬁelds.
Consider, as an example, the concept of motion, ﬁrst, as used in daily life: it
involves various components, such as a change of place, speed, acceleration, moving
bodies, etc., some of which are concepts in turn. These components belong to our
phenomenal intuition and are not deﬁned rigorously, especially mathematically, but
are still parts of the concept of motion deﬁned by the organization of these compo-
nents. One can then view, as both Bohr and Heisenberg did, classical mechanics as a
physical and mathematical reﬁnement of daily concepts, including that of motion, by
means of such mathematically deﬁned concepts as coordinates, momentum, angular
momentum, energy, and so forth. The history of the concept of motion in classical
physics extends much further, even to the pre-Socratics, but certainly to Plato and,
especially, Aristotle, whose Physics is central to this history, although the ancient
Greeks never mathematized this concept in the way that modern physics did with
Galileo. On the other hand, modern developments such as electromagnetism and then
relativity introduced new concepts of motion, while QM, at least in RWR-type inter-
pretations, abandoned this concept as applicable to quantum objects or the ultimate
constitution of reality responsible for quantum phenomena.
Inquantumtheory,inRWR-typeinterpretations,classicalphysicalconceptsareno
longerapplicabletothisconstitution.Theystillapplytoquantumphenomena,deﬁned
as the effects of the interaction between this reality and measuring instruments,
which, in the present view, also deﬁnes quantum objects as an idealization applicable
at the time of measurement. Thus, the concepts of quantum theory still have their
history in classical physics, both physically (in considering measuring instruments
and quantum phenomena) and mathematically, for example, by adopting the concept
of the Hamiltonian, while changing the variables from those of the functions of real

2.2 Concepts
29
variables to operator variables in Hilbert spaces over C. The standard conservation
laws (those of energy, momentum, and angular momentum) are retained as well,
although new conservation laws are added, such as the conservation of the baryon
or lepton number. According to Heisenberg:
The concepts of velocity, energy, etc., have been developed from simple experiments with
common objects, in which the mechanical behavior of macroscopic bodies can be described
by use of such words. The same concepts have then been carried over to the electron, since
in certain fundamental experiments electrons show a mechanical behavior like that of the
objects of common experience [or classical mechanics]. Since it is known, however, that
this similarity exists only in a certain limited region of phenomena, the applicability of the
corpuscular theory must be limited in the corresponding way. …
As a matter of fact, it is experimentally certain only that light [too] sometimes behaves as
if it possessed some of the attributes of a particle [as reﬂected in the uncertainty relations], but
there is no experiment which proves that it possesses all the properties of a particle; similar
statements hold for matter [e.g., electrons] and wave motion. The solution of the difﬁculty
is that the two mental pictures [derived from classical physics] which experiments lead us
to form—the one of particles, the other of waves—are both incomplete and have only the
validity of analogies which are accurate only in limited cases. … Light and matter are both
single entities, and the apparent duality arises in the limitation of our language. (Heisenberg
1930, pp. 13, 10)
In the RWR view, quantum objects and behavior are beyond any representation or, in
the strong RWR view, beyond conception, including a mathematical one, which can
be sufﬁciently, even if not completely, independent of ordinary language or concepts,
as it is in the case of the mathematical formalism of QM and QFT. (In the present
view, again, quantum objects, in RWR-type entities, are idealizations applicable at the
time of measurement.) Heisenberg, on the same occasion, stresses the independence
of mathematics from ordinary language and concepts, which he, argues, helped his
invention of QM (Heisenberg 1930, p. 11). This independence eventually led him
to believe, on Platonist lines, that an abstract mathematical scheme could represent
the ultimate nature of physical reality, apart from physical concepts, at least as
we ordinarily understand them (e.g., Heisenberg 1962, pp. 145, 167–186). Bohr,
in contrast, rejected this possibility, especially in his ultimate, strong RWR-type
interpretation.
In the framework of QM, in most interpretations, wave–particle duality is replaced
by wave–particle complementarity. Using this concept, however, requires qualiﬁca-
tions. As explained in Chap. 6, wave–particle complementarity does not play a signif-
icant, if any, role in Bohr’s own interpretation (in any of its versions). The concept
of complementarity underwent an evolution in Bohr’s thinking, concomitant with
the evolution of his interpretation of quantum phenomena and QM, before it reached
its ﬁnal form, deﬁned in terms of complementary measurements or phenomena in
Bohr’s sense. As indicated in the Preface, it refers to measurements or phenomena
that are mutually exclusive, yet equally necessary for a comprehensive account of the
situation that obtains in quantum physics. In 1937, when his ultimate interpretation
was introduced, Bohr said: “In the last resort an artiﬁcial word like ‘complemen-
tarity’ which does not belong to our daily concepts serves only brieﬂy to remind
us of the epistemological situation [found in quantum physics], which at least in

30
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
physics is of an entirely novel character” (Bohr 1937, p. 87). The structure of the
concept, which does more than merely serve as such a reminder, will be discussed
in Chap. 6. For the moment, my main point is that complementarity is a new phys-
ical concept with several interrelated components, a concept that, again, “does not
belong to our daily concepts,” and which must, accordingly, be understood, as a
physical concept, in the speciﬁc sense Bohr gives it. As most innovative concepts,
complementarity, when introduced, was not deﬁned by generalization from avail-
able entities: it was something new, although it, too, had its history in physics and
beyond (Plotnitsky 2012, pp. 173–179, 2016, pp. 107–119). It was then instantiated
by multiple speciﬁc complementary conﬁgurations, say, those of the position or the
momentum measurement, which are always mutually exclusive at any given moment
of time.
In his Physics and Philosophy (Heisenberg 1962), Heisenberg used the role of
concepts in explaining the difference between positivism and “the Copenhagen inter-
pretation of quantum theory,” in his version of it. In his emphasis on concepts, Heisen-
berg followed Einstein, with whom he had exchanges concerning the subject (Heisen-
berg 1962, pp. 45–46, 1989, p. 30; Plotnitsky 2016, pp. 43–44). The phrase “the
elements of reality” is borrowed from Einstein, who used it on several occasions, most
famously in EPR’s paper (Einstein et al. 1935, p. 138). Heisenberg says: “The Copen-
hagen interpretation of quantum theory is in no way positivistic. For, whereas posi-
tivism is based on the sensual perceptions of the observer as the elements of reality,
the Copenhagen interpretation regards things and processes which are describable
in terms of classical concepts, i.e., the actual, as the foundations of any physical
interpretation” (Heisenberg 1962, p. 145). “The actual” refers to what is observed
in measuring instruments and is described by classical physical concepts. Heisen-
berg’s main point is that in order to be meaningfully used in quantum theory, “the
idealization of observation” (Bohr 1987, v. 1, p. 55), deﬁning quantum phenomena
uses classical physical concepts, just as this idealization does in the case of observed
phenomena in classical physics. There, however, it is, for all practical purposes,
sufﬁcient to assume that the physical objects considered, at least individual or sufﬁ-
ciently simple, are in principle represented by the corresponding observed classical
phenomena. In quantum physics, in contrast, one assumes a new stratum of physical
reality that is different from the observable parts of measuring instruments and that
cannot be observed, in the RWR view, represented, or even conceived of, even in the
case of the simplest possible systems considered. Measuring instruments, too, have
an unobservable, quantum stratum, which enables their interaction with the part of
this stratum assumed to exist independently, without allowing one to represent or
even conceive of it, as would be the case in a realist understanding. Accordingly, in
any interpretation, quantum phenomena, while representing classical objects asso-
ciated with measuring instruments, are irreducibly different from quantum objects.
In the present interpretation, moreover, while an RWR-type entity, the concept of a
quantum object is an idealization only applicable at the time of measurement rather
than to somethings that is assumed to exist independently, as against the ultimate,
RWR-type reality responsible for quantum phenomena.

2.2 Concepts
31
“The Copenhagen interpretation” discussed by Heisenberg is different from that
of Bohr, for example, by introducing the concept of “potentiality” or “potentia”
(Heisenberg 1962, p. 44), something quite different from “possibility” (a concept
central to Bohr), or the assumption that mathematics could in principle be able to
represent the ultimate structure of matter, a belief not shared by Bohr. Bohr would
have, of course, agreed that his understanding of the quantum–mechanical situa-
tion was “in no way positivistic,” in part for the reasons stated by Heisenberg. His
assumption of the independent stratum of physical reality, in his understanding (as
opposed to the present one) as quantum objects, ultimately responsible for quantum
phenomena was essential for Bohr, even though this stratum could not be observed as
such, but only inferred from its effects on measuring instruments. As noted, nobody
has ever seen a moving electron or photon. It is only possible to observe traces of
their interactions with measuring instruments, traces that make it difﬁcult and, in the
RWR view, impossible to reconstitute the ultimate nature of the reality responsible
for them, whether one sees this reality in terms of quantum objects or only assumes,
as here, quantum objects to be an idealization applicable at the time of measurement.
As discussed in the Introduction, the individual quantum objects that may appear
to “have been brought so close to us” by our measuring instruments, such as “the
marvelous invention of the Wilson [cloud] chamber and the Geiger counter,” made
Einstein question the RWR-type view of the ultimate constitution of the reality
responsible for quantum phenomena (Einstein 1936, p. 375). Heisenberg, on the
other hand, was led to his discovery of QM and then the uncertainty relations by
realizing that one only deals with traces of the interactions between quantum objects
and measuring instruments and not with quantum objects themselves (Heisenberg
1925,1927,1967).Inhisthinkingleadingtohisdiscoveryoftheuncertaintyrelations,
Heisenberg considered the visible and apparent continuous trajectory of an electron
in a cloud chamber (Heisenberg 1967). He realized that the position of the electron
was only known and the trajectory appears continuous because the water droplets,
consisting of millions of atoms and thus much larger than the electron (which must be
idealized as a point-like), condensed into this apparent continuity around the discrete
events, the traces of which were spreading through water. If one could zoom in on
what actually happens, one would see this discreteness of the underlying phenomena
and, as it were, “quantum jumps” from one to another, and realize that the position
and the momentum of the electron could not be known exactly or deﬁned simultane-
ously. In both Bohr’s and the present view, such variables could only be attributed to
what is observed, classically, in the cloud chamber and not to the electron itself. It is
clear that the continuity of quantum phenomena can only be apparent, while being
underlain by the discreteness and uniqueness of each, in accord with the QD and QI
postulates.
We do, of course, deal with indirect evidence in classical physics and relativity,
from that of the movement of molecules (considered classical) to that of the Big Bang
in the expansion of the universe, but in these cases, this reconstitution is possible,
at least ideally and in principle, and effective within the scope of these theories.
It is this situation that compels one, while adopting the RWR view, to introduce

32
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
the concept of a quantum object, and, in the present interpretation, also the inde-
pendent ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena,
while assuming quantum objects to be an idealization applicable only at the time
of measurement. It is not us but nature that, in its interaction with our experimental
technology (beginning with our bodies), is responsible for these effects, even though
we cannot know or even conceive how they come about. While our bodies and our
technology are natural, too, they are not sufﬁcient to produce these effects. These
effects require something in the constitution of nature apart from us and our tech-
nology, or what compels us to speak of this constitution, assuming that the term
“constitution” (or “nature”) applies.
I close this section by considering Bohr’s argument that the quantum–mechanical
situation does not require new physical concepts and could be adequately handled,
in part by using complementarity, by means of already available, “old” empirical
concepts, in effect, those of classical physics. This argument emerged in response
to the contention of Einstein and Schrödinger that the quantum–mechanical situ-
ation needed new physical concepts to resolve its difﬁculties and paradoxes (e.g.,
Schrödinger to Bohr 5 May 1928; Bohr to Schrödinger 23 May 1928; Einstein to
Schrödinger, 31 May 1928, Bohr 1972–1996, vol. 6, pp. 47–48). According to Bohr,
writing to Schrödinger: “I am not quite in agreement with your emphasis on the
necessity to develop ‘new’ concepts. We have not only, as far as I can see, no basis
for such a new-fashioning so far, but the ‘old’ empirical concepts appear to me to
be inseparably linked to the foundation of the human means of visualization” (Bohr
to Schrödinger 23 May 1928, Bohr 1972–1996, vol. 6, p. [48]; emphasis added).
“Visualization” also has a broader meaning here and elsewhere in Bohr’s writings,
in accord with German Anschaulichkeit, sometimes expressly used by Bohr as refer-
ring to our intuitive phenomenal comprehension in general. In other words, these
old empirical concepts are linked to and reﬁne our general phenomenal concepts.
Bohr, then, sees no basis for the necessity of “fashioning” new concepts in quantum
theory. This argument might appear to be in conﬂict with the preceding discussion,
which emphasizes the role of new concepts in quantum theory. Were not Heisen-
berg’s matrix variables and Schrödinger’s wave function new concepts? Was not
Bohr’s complementarity a new concept? This conﬂict, however, is only apparent.
Einstein and Schrödinger thought that the new physical concepts might enable
one to offer a physical representation (idealized and suitably mathematized) of the
behaviorofquantumobjectsinthewayclassicalphysicswasabletodobymeansofits
concepts(andatvariouspointsbyintroducingnewconcepts,asinelectromagnetism),
or relativity was able to do by means of its new physical concepts. Such concepts
would, then, restore realism, which was conceptual in nature for both Einstein and
Schrödinger, to quantum theory, and would allow one to avoid the paradoxes, or
what so appear under realist assumptions, of QM. This view was in accord with
Schrödinger’s initial program for his wave mechanics, which by this point (in 1928)
had run into difﬁculties, leading to both Schrödinger’s own and especially Einstein’s
disenchantment with it. Although, as noted, it is possible to think, as Heisenberg
did later, that such new representational concepts could be purely mathematical,

2.2 Concepts
33
Einstein and Schrödinger were clearly thinking of new physical concepts, suitably
mathematized, in the way those of classical physics or relativity are.
In contrast, Bohr’s appeal to the use of the “‘old’ empirical concepts” of classical
physics represents a very different, in effect RWR, view. Although the exchange in
question occurred before Bohr’s interpretation reached its strong, RWR-type version,
the weak RWR view, held by Bohr at the time, was sufﬁcient for his argument.3 In
Bohr’s view, such old classical concepts are applied only to the behavior of observable
parts of measuring instruments or quantum phenomena, registered in these instru-
ments, but not to quantum objects. The latter were, at the time of this exchange,
placed by his interpretation beyond a description or representation by means of any
physical concepts, even if not yet beyond conception. While complementarity was
a new concept, it only involved representational components, classical in nature,
at the level of the observed phenomena, but not as applicable to quantum objects.
Bohr, undoubtedly with the exchange under discussion in mind, stated this view in
his “Introductory Survey” (1929) to his 1931 Atomic Theoryand the Description of
Nature (Bohr 1987, v. 1):
[A]ccording to the view of this author, it would be a misconception to believe that the
difﬁculties of atomic theory may be evaded by eventually replacing the concept of classical
physics by new conceptual forms. Indeed, … the recognition of the limitation of our forms
of perception by no means implies that we can dispense with our customary ideas and
their direct verbal expression when reducing our sense of impressions to order. No more is it
likely that the fundamental concept of the classical theories will ever become superﬂuous for
the description of physical experience. The recognition of the indivisibility of the quantum
of action [h], and the determination of its magnitude, not only depend on an analysis of
measurements based on classical concepts, but it continues to be the application of these
concepts alone that makes it possible to relate the symbolism of the quantum theory to the
data of experience. At the same time, however, we must bear in mind that the possibility of an
unambiguous use of these fundamental concepts solely depends upon the self-consistency
of the classical theories from which they are derived and therefore, the limits imposed upon
the application of these concepts are naturally determined by the extent to which we may, in
our account of the phenomena, disregard the element which is foreign to classical theories
and symbolized by the quantum of action. (Bohr 1987, v. 1, p. 12)
Accordingly, Bohr’s argument, deﬁning his response to Einstein’s and Schrödinger’s
appeal to the necessity of new physical concepts, was not that “old” empirical
concepts, such as those of classical physics that were sufﬁcient to offer a repre-
sentation of the behavior of quantum objects. This argument was that no concepts,
old or new, could do so, while old concepts, speciﬁcally those of classical physics,
remained essential, although not sufﬁcient (e.g., because complementarity, not found
in classical physics, was necessary), for handling quantum phenomena observed in
measuring instruments and to the observable parts of these instruments themselves.
These instruments, again, also have quantum parts through which they interact with
quantum objects. I shall discuss this point and Bohr’s overall argument concerning the
3 As noted, Bohr’s Como lecture of 1927 (Bohr 1987, v. 1, pp. 52–91), which introduced comple-
mentarity and Bohr’s ﬁrst version of his interpretation, reinstated an instance of realism to his view.
Bohr, however, abandoned this argument and returned to the RWR view, at least in its weak form,
by the time of the exchange with Einstein and Schrödinger under discussion.

34
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
role of classical physical concepts in considering quantum phenomena and measuring
instruments in Sect. 2.4. It is clear, however, that there is no conﬂict between Bohr’s
argument and the possibility of new concepts in quantum theory. That included
Bohr’s own concepts, such as complementarity and phenomenon, once one properly
understood their structure, as deﬁned by the RWR view, combining “old” classical
concepts and that which is beyond concepts. There is only a difference between the
two views of the possible functioning of physical concepts in quantum theory, the
realist view of Einstein and Schrödinger and the RWR view of Bohr.
Thus, classical physical concepts are only part of the overall conceptual struc-
ture of Bohr’s concept of phenomenon and then of his concept of complemen-
tarity, deﬁned by the complementary character of some quantum phenomena. Clas-
sical physical concepts are used to describe the physics of the observable parts of
measuring instruments, parts assumed to behave classically. In this respect, old clas-
sical physical concepts are indispensable. On the other hand, because no concepts of
any kind can apply to the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum
phenomena, the need for new concepts to represent this reality would be meaningless
in Bohr’s view.
Both Bohr and Heisenberg argued that classical physical concepts are the prod-
ucts of a suitably mathematized reﬁnement of our general phenomenal intuition
(Anschaulichkeit), conceptuality, language, and so forth (e.g., Bohr 1987, v. 2, pp. 68–
69; Heisenberg 1930, pp. 11, 64–65, 1962, pp. 56, 91–92). These aspects of our
thinking are determined by the evolutionary biological and neurological constitu-
tion of our bodies. As such, they have emerged in our interaction with the world
of objects consisting of billions of atoms and, thus, on a scale very different from
those considered in quantum theory (or at the opposite end of the available phys-
ical scales from those at the scale of the Universe). In Physics and Philosophy,
Heisenberg addressed the key paradox (or what so appears) at the heart of “the
Copenhagen interpretation”: “[The Copenhagen interpretation] starts from the fact
that we describe our experiments in the terms of classical physics and at the same
time from the knowledge that these concepts do not ﬁt nature accurately. The tension
between these two starting points is the root of the statistical character of quantum
theory” (Heisenberg 1962, p. 56). As noted earlier, “the Copenhagen interpretation”
present in the book was a mixture of Bohr’s and his own, in some respects, different
views. In particular, again, unlike Bohr, Heisenberg at this stage believed that purely
mathematical concepts might be able to represent the ultimate constitution of nature,
apart from physical concepts (in contrast to Einstein’s and Schrödinger’s search for
new physical concepts to assume this role). On the point in question at the moment,
however, Heisenberg’s view was fully in accord with that of Bohr. Heisenberg says
the following Bohr’s argument is just considered:
Therefore, it has sometimes been suggested that one should depart from the classical concepts
altogether and that a radical change in the concepts used for describing the experiments might
possibly lead back to a nonstat[ist]ical [sic!], completely objective description of nature. . . .
This suggestion, however, rests upon a misunderstanding. The concepts of classical physics
are just a reﬁnement of the concepts of daily life and are an essential part of the language
which forms the basis of all natural science. Our actual situation in science is such that we

2.2 Concepts
35
do use the classical concepts for the description of the experiments, and it was the problem
of quantum theory to ﬁnd theoretical interpretations of the experiments on this basis. There
is no use in discussing what could be done if we were other beings than we are. At this point
we have to realize, as von Weizsäcker has put it, that “Nature is earlier than man, but man is
earlier than natural science.” The ﬁrst part of the sentence justiﬁes classical physics, with its
ideal of complete objectivity. The second part tells us why we cannot escape the paradox of
quantum theory, namely, the necessity of using classical concepts. (Heisenberg 1962, p. 56)
In other words, classical concepts reﬂect the essential workings of our biological and
speciﬁcally neurological machinery born with our evolutionary emergence as human
animals. Our thinking in general, as the product of this machinery, is classical or
classical-like in that it is consistent with and leads to the concept of classical physics.
Any concepts we actually form derive from and apply only to observed phenomena,
and, as observed phenomena, quantum phenomena are physically classical. They
are different from classical phenomena because the data observed in them prevents
us from describing how they come about by classical physics (which incapacity led
to quantum theory) or in the RWR view, by any physical theory. Quantum theory,
however, in particular, QM or QFT, can probabilistically predict these data without
describing or representing how they come about, or at least it allows for this, RWR,
type of interpretation.
The case is somewhat but, as discussed in Sect. 2.4, not entirely different as
concerns new mathematical concepts, which, as Heisenberg noted, are free from
limitations of daily language and concepts, or even limitations of classical or other
physical concepts that we can form as representing the behavior, such as motion, of
physicalobjects.Thisfreedom,Heisenbergargued(atthetimestilladoptingtheRWR
view,asopposedtohislaterworksjustcited),enabledhiscreationofQM(Heisenberg
1930, p. 11). The creation of new mathematical concepts, such as Heisenberg’s
matrix variables, Schrödinger’s wave function, or Dirac’s spinors, was essential to
QM or QFT, which would not have been possible without them. Nor would classical
physics and relativity have been possible apart from their mathematical concepts.
These concepts, however, have a representational function in these theories, while
the quantum–mechanical concepts just listed do not, at least in the RWR view.
Are, then, new quantum–theoretical physical concepts possible in the RWR view?
And what is the status of Bohr’s concepts such as phenomenon and complementarity,
which appear to be necessary, along with mathematical concepts, but which are not
mathematical? Yes, such concepts are possible, and Bohr’s concepts of phenomena
and complementarity are among them. The structure of such concepts is different,
however. Bohr’s concept of phenomenon has representational classical components,
yet entails that the ultimate nature of reality responsible for any phenomena is beyond
representation or even conception, which deﬁnes its RWR component. This is in
accord with the two-component structure of measuring instruments, and hence of the
concept ofmeasuringinstruments,consistingintheirclassicaldescribableobservable
parts or their quantum strata through which they interact with quantum objects or,
in the present view, the ultimate, RWR-type physical reality responsible for both
quantum phenomena and quantum objects (with the latter still idealized as entities
of RWR type).

36
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
In the case of complementarity, which, in Bohr’s ultimate version of the concept,
is that of phenomena in his sense, this architecture still applies, thus making it an
RWR concept as well. But complementarity contains other features, which deﬁne
it as a concept. As indicated in the Preface and as will be discussed in detail in
Chap. 6, the fact that complementary quantum phenomena, say, that deﬁned by a
position measurement and that deﬁned by a momentum measurement (in correspon-
dence with the uncertainty relations), are mutually exclusive implies that, while each
phenomenon could be described by means of classical physics, their emergence and
their complementary nature cannot be so described. This in turn implies that they
cannot be seen as parts combinable into a whole, a single entity, existing at the
same moment in time and the same location in space. Either phenomenon is the
only whole that is available at the time when it is established by a measurement. We
can, by the deﬁnition of complementarity, always establish the alternative comple-
mentary phenomenon at the same point in time. But then, the ﬁrst phenomenon
is in principle excluded at this point in time. In classical physics and relativity, in
contrast, it is always, in principle, possible to establish both quantities simultane-
ously and to represent their emergence by a mathematized classically causal process
connecting them. Indeed, this emergence is deﬁned by the fact that both quantities
could be established at any point in time, thus allowing for classical causality. In
Bohr’s interpretation of the uncertainty relations, these quantities cannot even be
deﬁned simultaneously, even though each one of them can be determined exactly by
the corresponding measurement and hence deﬁned at any point. Accordingly, in this
interpretation, the physical meaning of the uncertainty relations is complementary of
two exact measurements—their mutual exclusivity at any given point in time and yet
the possibility, by a conscious decision, to measure either one or the other exactly at
any given point in time. (Their exact determination is of course crucial here, because
both variables can be simultaneously deﬁned inexactly.)
The overall conceptual structure of QM or QFT, in RWR-type interpretations, is
then essentially deﬁned by the abstract mathematical formalism (thus far, over C) and
the physical concepts applied to observed phenomena. Some of the latter concepts are
just classical concepts. Others, however, as deﬁned by the RWR view, have the double
structure consisting, on the one hand, of classical concepts, describing measuring
instruments, observed phenomena, and the data found in them, and on the other, the
ultimate nature of physical reality responsible for quantum phenomena and quantum
objects, which are RWR-type idealizations that may be applicable to something that
exists independently or, as in the present view, only at the time of observation. The
relationships between the formalism and the observed phenomena are deﬁned by
probabilistic or statistical predictions, which also requires Born’s or analogous rules
(explained later in this study), added to the formalism, rather than derived from it.
The formalism, thus, has no conceptual connections at all to the physical concepts,
of either type, just described. Accordingly, why the formalism and Born’s rule work,
and work jointly, is beyond representation or conception as well. It is mysterious.
But if so, it is not because there is some mystical agency in charge of this situation,
as in so-called mystical or negative theology, which presupposed such an agency,
while denying that any humanly conceivable properties could be assigned to it. This

2.2 Concepts
37
mystery is, in Bohr’s words, free from any “mysticism incompatible with the true
spirit of science,” although our scientiﬁc thinking in quantum physics has plenty
of human spirit that drives it (Bohr 1937, p. 83, 1987, v. 2, p. 63). It is mysterious
without being mystical, a mystery without mysticism.
2.3
Theories, Models, and Interpretations
By a theory I understand an organized assemblage of concepts, as concepts are
deﬁned in the preceding section. Just as concepts do, every theory has its history
in preceding concepts and theories, and in its own historical development which
can change it by modifying its concepts or the relationships among them. A viable
physical theory relates (usually in an idealized way) by means of logically consistent
and experimentally veriﬁable propositions, to the multiplicity of phenomena or, via
phenomena, objects or other forms of physical reality considered by this theory. This
relationship, in modern physics by means of mathematical models (deﬁned below),
might be representational and derive its predictive capacity from this representa-
tion, as in classical physics or relativity. Doing so was assumed to be possible, at
least in principle, in the case of all classical objects, even when they could not be
observed, as in the case of atoms or molecules in the kinetic theory of gases. Certain
classical theories, such as classical statistical physics or chaos theory, introduce
additional complexities into this representational scheme that require qualiﬁcations,
but, as explained below, these complexities are not fundamental in nature. These
assumptions are, as discussed in the Preface, permissible, for all practical purposes,
in classical physics and relativity, even in the U-RWR view. This relationship may
also be strictly predictive, possibly only probabilistically or statistically predictive,
as in the case of quantum phenomena and QM or QFT, in any interpretation. RWR-
type interpretations do not offer and even preclude a representation or, in the case
of strong RWR-type interpretations, forming a conception of the ultimate nature of
reality responsible for quantum phenomena. This, again, does not mean that a realist
interpretation of quantum phenomena and QM or QFT is impossible. There is, as I
said, no shortage of such interpretations, which are likely to continue to proliferate,
although this proliferation also reﬂects a lack of consensus concerning their rela-
tive validity. There are considerably fewer nonrealist interpretations, in the present
deﬁnition of the term, as the assumption of the possibility of a representation or at
least a conception of the reality considered. I qualify because some see merely the
assumption of the existence of physical reality as a form of realism. I shall comment
on such views in the next section.
Quantum phenomena, and thus quantum physics, were initially deﬁned by the
fact that in considering them, Planck’s constant, h, must be taken into account.
Doing so allowed one, as it still does, to use classical physics in describing quantum
phenomena, as observed in measuring instruments. Classical physics, however, could
not predict these phenomena. This incapacity led to the assumption that there must
exist entities in nature the behavior of which could not be described by classical

38
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
physics, for otherwise classical physics would be able to predict them. These entities
are now understood or idealized as quantum objects, and in the present interpreta-
tion, this idealization is only applicable at the time of measurement. It is true that
quantum objects, such as electrons, were discovered within the framework of clas-
sical physics, and were expected to behave classically. With the introduction of the
photon, a relativistic quantum object by deﬁnition (and hence requiring QED for
properly handling it), and then quantum theory meeting these expectations became
increasingly difﬁcult. In the RWR view, h, is only associated with what is observed
in measuring instruments, because placing the ultimate constitution of the reality
responsible for quantum phenomena beyond representation or conception obviously
precludes associating any numerical constant with it.
While, however, measuring any quantum phenomenon known thus far involves
h, its role may not be sufﬁcient to fully distinguish quantum phenomena from clas-
sical ones, and their speciﬁcity as quantum appears to be deﬁned by a broader set of
features, some of which are not expressly linked to h. Some of them are exhibited
by classical phenomena or found in theories or “toy” models different from those of
QM.4 Accordingly, one now has a more complex sense of quantum phenomena. This
book, for example, considers, within the strong RWR view, the following features of
quantum phenomena, all, it appears, necessary (even if some of them are correlative)
to deﬁne them vs. classical phenomena—(1) the role of h, (2) the irreducible role of
measuring instruments in deﬁning quantum phenomena, (3) discreteness, (4) indi-
viduality, (5) complementarity, (6) entanglement, (7) quantum nonlocality, and (8)
the irreducibly probabilistic or statistical nature of quantum predictions. It might be
preferable to have fewer such features and derive the rest from them, perhaps only
one such feature.
I am not claiming that it is in principle impossible to do so. For example, if one
adopts the RWR view, it is tempting to argue, following Bohr, that, if there is any
single feature distinguishing classical and quantum phenomena, it is (2). Even if
Bohr thought so, however, one might prefer to err on the side of caution, even if
assuming this feature to be unavoidable. Thus, although an entanglement is part of
the interaction between quantum objects and measuring instruments, and although
these interactions relate to quantum nonlocality, neither entanglement nor quantum
nonlocality appears to be derivable from these interactions. This difﬁculty is mani-
fested in the EPR-type experiments, although, as Bohr argued, the irreducible role
of measuring instruments remains crucial there as well (Bohr 1935). What appears
to distinguish quantum and classical phenomena the most is the structure of infor-
mation, physically classical but in its organization beyond the capacity of classical
physics (or relativity) to predict it. As Bohr said in one of his ﬁnal works in 1958
(perhaps by then with Clause Shannon’s information theory in mind): “The quantal
features of the phenomenon are revealed in the information about the atomic objects
derived from the observations” (Bohr 1987, v. 3, p. 4). This structure, however,
involves other features just mentioned. Accordingly, it is more prudent to consider all
features listed above in their interactions, and these features may still not exhaust the
4 See, for example, (Spekkens 2007, 2016). I shall discuss this subject in Chap. 9.

2.3 Theories, Models, and Interpretations
39
nature of quantum phenomena. These considerations conﬁrm the view of “quantum
phenomenon” as a complex, multicomponent concept, still open to modiﬁcations in
view of possible new features added.
By quantum theory I refer to a set of conceptual schemes accounting for quantum
phenomena, comprising the three standard versions of quantum theory, the only
quantum theories considered in this study. (As noted from the outset, alternative theo-
ries of quantum phenomena, such as Bohmian mechanics or spontaneous collapse
theories, will only be mentioned in passing.) These three versions were discovered
in quick succession between 1925 and 1927, following a quarter of a century of the
old quantum theory, ushered in by Planck’s discovery of his black-body radiation
law, quantum in character, in 1900. All these theories are probabilistic or statis-
tical in nature. The ﬁrst is quantum mechanics for continuous variables in inﬁnite-
dimensional Hilbert spaces (QM), the second is quantum mechanics or theory for
discrete variables in ﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert spaces (QTFD), to be discussed as
such in Chap. 9, but until then subsumed under the heading of QM, and the third is
quantum ﬁeld theory in Hilbert spaces that are tensor products of ﬁnite and inﬁnite-
dimensional Hilbert spaces (QFT), initially introduced in the form of quantum elec-
trodynamics (QED). (There are nonrelativistic quantum ﬁeld theories, which contain
important differences from QM, but they will be mostly put aside here.) QFT, in
turn, consists of several theories, now comprising the standard model of elementary
particle physics: QED, the quantum ﬁeld theory of weak forces, and the quantum
ﬁeld theory of strong forces, known as quantum chromodynamics (QCD). The ﬁrst
two are uniﬁed in the electroweak theory. The uniﬁcation of all three, sometimes
referred to as the grand uniﬁcation (deﬁned by a single symmetry group), has not
been achieved. Nor is it always seen as imperative, insofar as the standard model in
its present form correctly predicts all known quantum phenomena within its scope. In
contrast, QFT and general relativity, the current standard theory of gravity, are incon-
sistent with each other, which, it is worth keeping in mind, does not mean that the
phenomena themselves considered by these theories are inconsistent. Resolving this
inconsistency, whether by means of one or another form of quantum gravity theory
or otherwise, is one the greatest outstanding problems of fundamental physics. It
motivated string theory and related approaches, such as brane theory or AdS/CFT
(anti de Sitter [space]/conformal ﬁeld theory), and more recently, the so-called ER =
EPR (relating the Einstein-Rosen wormhole bridge of general relativity and quantum
entanglement) of Leonard Susskind and Juan Maldacena, or alternative approaches,
such as loop quantum gravity or those based in quantum information theory. While
many of these approaches are impressive mathematically (and have contributed to
contemporary mathematics), all of the proposals that have emerged from them thus
far remain hypothetical. In any event, these developments are beyond the scope of this
study, which only addresses QM and QFT. In most of this chapter, I shall primarily
discuss QM (in either ﬁnite or inﬁnite dimensions), although most of my claims
apply to QFT.
The history of a theory is accompanied by the history of its interpretations, most
generally, deﬁned by concepts added to a theory (which, in the present deﬁnition, is
already an assemblage of concepts), such as those that establish how the theory refers

40
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
to the phenomena it considers. This distinction between a theory and its interpretation
is not unconditional, and it may be subsumed by the present concept of a theory as
an assemblage of concepts, on which I shall comment presently. But it is common
and often useful. The history of QM has been shaped by a seemingly uncontainable
proliferation of, sometimes conﬂicting, interpretations. It is not possible to survey
these interpretations here. The literature dealing with the subject is immense. Even
each rubric, on by now a long list (e.g., the Copenhagen, the many-worlds, consistent-
histories, modal, relational, pragmatist, and so forth), contains different versions.
The situation is somewhat more manageable in QFT, but interpretations multiply
there as well, for example, particle versus ﬁeld interpretations. Standard reference
sources would summarize the most prominent rubrics, but are unlikely to adequately
establish differences between interpretations within each rubric. This can only be
done by properly considering each such interpretation, in the way I attempt to do
here in considering Bohr’s interpretation, which, too, has several versions.5
As I am primarily concerned with RWR-type interpretations of QM or QFT, the
general subject of interpretation of either theory or, more broadly, of interpretation
of physical theories will only be addressed in a limited fashion. But they cannot be
avoided either, in part because of the essential difference between realist and RWR-
type interpretations. Consider Michael Redhead’s claim that an interpretation of QM
“issimplysomeaccountofthenatureoftheexternalworldand/orourepistemological
relation to it that serves to explain how it is that the statistical regularities predicted
by the formalism … come out the way they do” (Redhead 1989, p. 44). A great deal
depends on this “and/or.” While RWR-type interpretations do say something on the
subject of our epistemological relation to the world, via our thought and experimental
technology, they do not “serve to explain,” or even allow one to conceive, of “how
it is that the statistical regularities predicted by the formalism … come out the way
they do,” central to Redhead’s ideal of interpretation.6
5 A few recent monographs might be mentioned here as, in various ways, comparable to the
present book (Timpson 2016; Svozil 2018; Healey 2019; Wilson 2020). Christopher Timpson’s
book addresses related epistemological perspectives in the context of quantum information theory
and quantum Bayesianism, QBism, without, however, relating it to the work of founding ﬁgures,
speciﬁcally Heisenberg’s invention of QM, as the present book does. Karl Svozil’s book, more
technical in nature, also brings up related philosophical arguments and offers several deep insights.
There are afﬁnities between Richard Healey’s departure from realism (and toward pragmatism) in
his book and the present book, which is, however, more radically nonrealist, especially by virtue
of the strong RWR view it assumes. Neither Svozil’s nor Healey’s book addresses the work of the
founding ﬁgures extensively discussed in the present study. Healey comments on a single reported
statement by Bohr, and critically (and in my view, rightly) on Dirac’s view of quantum states (Healey
2019, pp. 253–254, 38).
6 This interpretation was perceptively discussed by Laura Ruetsche, who cited the passage and
Redhead’s elaboration on it (Ruetsche 2011, p. 4). Ruetsche’s book, which focuses on QFT, offers
a helpful treatment of the question of interpretation of QM as well, in both cases from a realist
perspective that appears to be Aristotelian in ﬂavor. I ﬁnd this perspective appealing, in part because
it enables the book’s critique of Redhead’s “pristine” ideal, and related, such as “imperialist” and
“universalist,” interpretive ideals, which represent more rigid versions of realism. It is of some
interest that neither Bohr’s nor other views in the spirit of Copenhagen are mentioned by Ruetsche,
while they could have provided helpful angles on several subjects she considered. I might note two:

2.3 Theories, Models, and Interpretations
41
Although often implicit, an interpretation is essential and ultimately unavoidable
in any workable physical theory, ﬁrst of all, by virtue of establishing the relationships
between it and the phenomena or objects it considers. In modern physics, from
Galileo on, this is customarily done by means of mathematical models. I deﬁne a
mathematical model in physics as a mathematical structure or a set of mathematical
structures that enables such relationships. (The concept of a model in mathematical
logic is a separate subject.) As that of theory and other major concepts discussed here,
the concept of a mathematical model or model, in the ﬁrst place, has a long history,
which is also a history of diverse deﬁnitions, and literature on the subject is extensive.
It is not my aim to discuss the subject as such or engage with this literature, which
would be difﬁcult to do in a contained manner and is unnecessary for my aims here.
The present concept of a mathematical model, while relatively open, is sufﬁcient to
accommodate those models that I shall consider and their functioning.7 Mathematical
models used in physics may be more geometrical, as in general relativity, or more
algebraic, as in QM and QFT. I qualify because these geometrical models contain
algebraic elements, and these algebraic models, speciﬁcally those used in QM and
QFT, have their own geometry, discussed in Chap. 4.
The relationships between a model and the objects or phenomena considered
by it may be representational. In this case the elements of a model and relations
among them would map, in an idealized way, the relevant properties of reality and
the relations among them, and relate the theory to reality by means of this mathe-
matical representation. The predictive capacity of the theory would derive from this
representation. The mathematical models used in classical mechanics or relativity
are examples of such models. Models may also be strictly predictive, without being
representational, as are the mathematical models used in QM or QFT, in RWR-
type interpretations, the predictions of which are probabilistic or statistical, even
in the case of elementary individual quantum objects and behavior. An interpreta-
tion of a given theory is, thus, always an interpretation of how the mathematical
model or models used by it relate to the phenomena or objects considered. A theory
may, however, involve other interpretive aspects, deﬁned by either its own concepts
or by some additional concepts. For example, the basis for Bohr’s and, following
Bohr, the present interpretation, is the irreducible role of measuring instruments in
the constitution of quantum phenomena. The observable parts of measuring instru-
ments are described by means of classical physics, while these instruments also have
quantum parts, through which they interact with quantum objects, or, again, RWR-
type reality via quantum objects, an interaction “irreversibly ampliﬁed” to what is
observed in measuring instruments (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 51, v. 3, p. 3). The structure of
(1) “the measurement problem,” only addressed by Ruetsche under the realist assumption that the
independent behavior of a quantum system is described by its “Schrödinger evolution, [which is]
deterministic, continuous, and reversible” (Ruetsche 2011, pp. 343–344), a view challenged below
(notes 14 and 24) and in Chaps. 4, 5 and 6 of this study; and (2) the nature of elementary particles, a
subject extensively considered by Ruetsche (in Chaps. 8–11 of her book) and discussed in Chap. 8
of this study.
7 A discussion of modeling along the lines of the analytic philosophy of science is given in (Frigg
and Hartmann 2012) and (Frigg 2014), without, however, considering RWR-type views.

42
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
quantum measurement is entirely independent of the mathematical structure of QM,
which (with Born’s rule added) can, however, correctly predict the data observed
in measuring instruments. As an idealization, the RWR view, weak or strong, of
the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena is, too,
an interpretative assumption, as is the three-partite stratiﬁcation of physical reality
adopted in this study as deﬁning quantum physics:
(Q-RWR): the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum objects and
quantum phenomena →quantum objects (deﬁned, as RWR-type concepts or idealizations, at
the time of measurement) →measuring instruments (observed as classical physical objects)
→quantum phenomena (deﬁned by what is observed, as classical objects, in measuring
instruments).
It is possible and is more rigorous, given the present deﬁnition of a theory, to see
a different interpretation of the mathematical model deﬁned by a given theory as
forming a different theory, because each interpretation may involve concepts not be
shared by others. This is the case, for example, in different interpretations in the
spirit of Copenhagen, not all of which are of the RWR-type, and some are different
RWR-type interpretations. What is shared is the mathematical model used, at least in
terms of the essential equivalence or mutual translatability of its different versions.
For simplicity, however, I shall speak of the corresponding interpretation of the
theory itself containing a given mathematical model, speciﬁcally, of one or another
interpretation of QM or QFT.
A historical example of this situation is the introduction of QM. Initially, Heisen-
berg’s and Schrödinger’s versions of the formalism of QM appeared as two different
mathematical models, giving the same predictions. They were also accompanied
by two different theories, designated as quantum mechanics and wave mechanics,
respectively. The ﬁrst was more algebraic and strictly probabilistically predictive
rather than representational, and the second was more geometrical and representa-
tional (at least in aim), by virtue of conceiving of quantum-level reality as a contin-
uous wave-like process. Each theory was given several interpretations at the time,
although interpreting either posed major difﬁculties, and these interpretations were
initially mostly implicit. These two models were then proven to be mathematically
equivalent, with one proof offered by Schrödinger himself. There is some debate
concerning how rigorous some of these proofs were, with a consensus that the ulti-
mate demonstration was given by von Neumann in the 1930s. In practice, however,
physicists started to use both formalisms interchangeably in 1926.
In any event, this equivalence allowed one to unify the mathematical model of QM,
ultimately, with von Neumann, in terms of its Hilbert-space formalism, with some
yet more abstract versions, still mathematically essentially equivalent, added later.
In contrast, the two theories—quantum mechanics (underlying matrix mechanics)
and wave mechanics—which were based on two different sets of concepts, remained
different. I would argue that they were primarily different as theories rather than as
interpretations, given how different their physics were, although it is possible to see
them as two interpretations of the same mathematical model. Schrödinger’s theory,
based on the idea of a wave-like ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for

2.3 Theories, Models, and Interpretations
43
quantum phenomena, had receded by the late 1920s, in part because Schrödinger’s
wave function received a probabilistic interpretation. The theory has not been entirely
abandoned, and Schrödinger returned to it in the 1950s (Schrödinger 1995). Its
impact, however, has been limited. The probabilistic interpretation of the wave
function has remained dominant even in realist interpretations.
2.4
Reality, Realism, and Reality Without Realism
The concept of reality without realism, RWR, is grounded in more general concepts
of reality and existence, assumed in this study to be primitive concepts and not
given analytical deﬁnitions. These concepts are, however, in accord with most, even
if not all (which would be impossible), available concepts of reality and existence
in realism and nonrealism alike.8 By “reality” I refer to that which is assumed to
exist, without making any claims concerning the character of this existence. The
absence of such claims, which deﬁne realism, allows one to place this character
beyond representation or even conception, as, when it comes to the ultimate nature
of reality, is the case in either the Q-RWR view in considering quantum phenomena,
or the U-RWR view in considering all physical phenomena. I understand existence as
a capacity to have effects on the world with which we interact. The very assumption
that something is real, including the RWR-type, is made on the basis of such effects.
Following L. Wittgenstein, I understand “the world” as “everything that is the case,”
in particular, the world of events (Wittgenstein 1924, p. 1). Quantum events are
observed as phenomena deﬁned by measuring instruments or their equivalents in
nature, which, in the Q-RWR view, are the only quantum events present. In the
U-RWR view, there are no other physical events in general either, assuming, as I
do here, that our bodies are observational technology as well. On the other hand,
while unobservable as such, the ultimate constitution of nature in the U-RWR view
or the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena in the
Q-RWR view is assumed to be “the case” as well and, hence, is part of the world.
This constitution never appears as such and hence is not an event, but it is responsible
for certain events, as its effects, from which its unthinkable character is inferred.
To ascertain observable effects of physical reality entails a representation of these
effects but not necessarily a representation or even a conception of how they come
about, which may not be possible and is not in the RWR view. The concept of an
8 These concepts could be deﬁned in a great variety of ways, and they have been discussed and
debated from the pre-Socratics on. During recent decades, this debate has acquired a new vigor
and a set of revisionary perspectives, in the work of Thomas Kuhn, Imre Lakatos, Paul Feyerabend,
and their followers in the so-called constructivist studies of science. The literature on these subjects
(both more traditional and more revisionist) is massive. I provide a few representative references.
For analytic-philosophical approaches, see (Pincock 2012) and (Van Fraassen 2008); for more
restrained post-Kuhnian approaches, see (Cartwright 1983) and (Hacking 1983), and in the context
of the relationships between classical and quantum physics (Cartwright 1999, pp. 177–233); and
for more radically constructivist treatments, see (Galison 1997; Latour 1999; Hacking 2000).

44
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
effect (in the absence of classical causality) is crucial here, and it is not surprising
that the appeal to effects (in the absence of classical causality) becomes persistent in
Bohr’s writings (e.g., Bohr 1987, v. 1, p. 92, v. 2, pp. 40, 46–47). Consider Poincaré’s
revealing remark: “[B]eyond doubt a reality completely independent of the mind
which conceives it, sees or feels it, is an impossibility. A world as exterior as that,
even if it existed, would for us be forever inaccessible” (Poincaré 1982, p. 209).
The ﬁrst sentence suggests something akin to Bishop Berkeley’s view (which was,
however, rejected by Poincaré), unless Poincaré merely means that conceiving of the
character of such a world is an impossibility, while still assuming that some form
of the world does exist, as the second sentence suggests. This sentence would, then,
be in accord with the strong RWR view, except that this world can have effects that
are accessible to us. The inaccessibility of the ultimate character of the world is an
assumption based on the totality of such effects, such as those manifested in quantum
phenomena in the Q-RWR view, which may then be extended, as it is in this study,
to the U-RWR view. This possibility does not appear to have been contemplated
by Poincaré. While aware of then (in 1905) emerging quantum theory, Poincaré,
who died in 1912, made his comment before Bohr’s 1913 theory, which inaugurated
the RWR view. The main context of his remark was more general, including his
questioning of Kant’s concept of things-in-themselves.
While, as I argue here, the RWR view changes the nature of thought and knowl-
edge, it does not in any way impede them. Instead, it opens new ways for them. The
assumption that this reality is beyond thought allows this reality to be immensely,
unimaginably (literally speaking!) rich. It is likely that, limited by our evolutionary
biological and neurological nature, we can imagine very little, as against what lies
beyond our thought, of how nature is, if the word “to be” applies to this beyond our
thought of nature, or possibly to thought itself. Over a hundred years ago, Henry
Lebesgue, one of the founders of modern integration and measure theory, observed
(while commenting on the paradoxes of set theory, shaking the foundations of math-
ematics then) that the fact that we cannot imagine or mathematically deﬁne objects,
such as “sets,” that are neither ﬁnite nor inﬁnite, does not mean that such objects do
not exist (Dauben 1990, p. 258). Lebesgue did not specify in what type of domain,
material or mental, they might exist. The statement is, however, a profound reﬂec-
tion of the limit of our thought concerning the nature of reality, material or mental.
Similarly, the fact that we cannot conceive of entities that are neither continuous nor
discontinuous does not mean that such entities do not exist in nature. The concept
of reality without realism is a response to this type of difﬁculty brought about by
quantum phenomena, beginning with the dilemma of the continuous versus discon-
tinuous character of the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum
phenomena. In RWR-type interpretations, this constitution is neither any more than
it is anything else that thought can reach.
Although there is little direct evidence to support this claim, it is conceivable
that Bohr’s thinking was inﬂuenced by these developments in post-Cantorian foun-
dations of mathematics. Bohr’s brother, Harald Bohr, with whom Bohr talked on
a daily basis, was a prominent mathematician in the ﬁeld of functional analysis
and was well familiar with these developments. He spent some time in Göttingen

2.4 Reality, Realism, and Reality Without Realism
45
when David Hilbert, whom Harald Bohr knew well, was the reigning ﬁgure there.
Hilbert made momentous contributions to both functional analysis and the founda-
tions of mathematics. He also had abiding interests and involvement in many areas
of physics, including both relativity (where he made a major mathematical contribu-
tion in formulating the ﬁeld equations of general relativity by variational methods)
and quantum theory, in this case, more indirectly, through his work in functional
analysis. This work led to the concept of Hilbert space (deﬁned by von Neumann),
crucial in QM and QFT. Hilbert was also at (Niels) Bohr’s Wolfskehl lectures on the
history of atomic theory following his 1913 theory in Göttingen in June 1922, later
called the “Bohr-Festival,” where Bohr ﬁrst met Heisenberg. This is a rich network
of historical and conceptual interconnections, in which the possibility of the RWR
view can be detected at several junctures, as Lebesgue’s statement suggests. Bohr’s
1913 theory was, however, a bold act of making the RWR view a deﬁning part of a
physical theory.
It follows from the deﬁnition of reality that a given theory or interpretation might
assume different levels and different types of idealizations of reality, some allowing
for a representation or conception and others not (keeping in mind that “idealization”
refers here to a workable conception of something or, in the strong RWR view, a lack
of such a conception, thus, possibly, something different from what it idealizes, rather
than to any form of approximation of something). As stated from the outset of this
study, the present interpretation of quantum phenomena and QM or QFT, assumes
three fundamental idealizations. The behavior of the observable parts of measuring
instruments in deﬁning quantum phenomena is, thus, idealized as representable. It
is, to return to Bohr’s language, “the idealization of observation” (Bohr 1987, v. 1,
p. 55). In contrast, the RWR-type reality ultimately responsible for these phenomena
is idealized as that which cannot be represented or even conceived of. The third
idealization, which stratiﬁes the second, is that of quantum objects. The reason for
assuming this additional idealization is as follows. On the one hand, in contrast to
classical physics or relativity, in quantum physics, in each experimental arrangement
one must, as Bohr argued, always discriminate “between those parts of the phys-
ical system considered which are to be treated as measuring instruments and those
which constitute the objects under investigation” (Bohr 1935, p. 701). On the other
hand, these two parts themselves are not uniquely deﬁned, the situation sometimes
expressed as the arbitrariness of the “cut,” discussed later in this chapter. Accord-
ingly, it is how we set up an experiment that deﬁnes what is the quantum object in this
experiment, while its quantum nature, including as an RWR-type entity, is deﬁned
by the ultimate, RWR-type reality, whose existence is independent of any experi-
ment. This conception applies to all quantum objects, from elementary particles to
macroscopic quantum objects, such as Bose–Einstein condensates or Josephson’s
junctions (although their quantum nature is deﬁned by their microscopic constitu-
tion). Macroscopic quantum objects, too, can only be established as quantum objects
by means of observations made in measuring instruments. This tripartite idealization
is a key feature of the present interpretation of quantum phenomena. It is not found
in Bohr’s interpretation, although it might be seen as a consequence of his argument,
a consequence, however, not expressly derived by him.

46
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
Realist or ontological thinking in physics is manifested in the corresponding theo-
ries, which are commonly representational in character.9 Such theories aim to repre-
sent the reality they consider, usually by mathematized models based on suitably
idealizing this reality. As noted, it is possible to aim, including in quantum theory,
for a strictly mathematical representation of this reality apart from physical concepts,
at least as they are customarily understood, as in classical physics or relativity. It is
also possible to assume an independent architecture, structure, of the reality consid-
ered, without assuming that it is either (A) not possible to adequately represent this
architecture by means of a physical theory, or (B) even to form a rigorously speciﬁed
concept of this architecture, either at a given moment in history or even ever. Under
(A), a theory that is merely predictive could be accepted for lack of a realist alterna-
tive, but usually with the hope that a proper representational theory will eventually
be developed. This was Einstein’s attitude toward QM or QFT, which he expected
to be eventually replaced by a realist theory. Even under (B), however, this architec-
ture is customarily conceived on the model of classical physics (to which relativity
philosophically, although not physically, conforms), while leaving the determination
of its speciﬁc physical or mathematical form to the future.
What, then, grounds realism most fundamentally is the assumption that the ulti-
mate constitution of reality possesses properties and the relationships between them,
or, as in (ontic) structural realism (Ladyman 2016), just a structure, in particular, a
mathematical structure. This constitution, then, may either be ideally represented and
hence, known by a theory or be unrepresented or unknown, or even unrepresentable
or unknowable, but still conceivable, usually with a hope that it will be eventually
represented and known. When this constitution is assumed to be unknowable, but
still conceivable, realism, in afﬁnity with Kant’s philosophy, borders on the weak
RWR view, except that the latter does not, in general, imply such a hope, and more
signiﬁcantly, does not assume the existence of such properties or the (the structure
of the) relationships between them, or just of a structure, on lines of ontic structural
realism. The concept of a structure apart from elements constituting it entails further
complexities, which I put aside, given that this concept is not applicable in the RWR
view.10
9 Although the terms “realist” and “ontological” sometimes designate more diverging concepts, they
are commonly close in their meaning and will be used, as adjectives, interchangeably here. I shall
adopt “realism,” as a noun, as a more general term and refer by an “ontology,” more speciﬁcally, to
a given representation or conception of the reality considered by a given theory. Another, relatively
common, term for realist theories is “ontic,” in part used because “ontology” has other meanings,
especially in post-Heideggerian philosophy.
10 One could, in principle, also see the assumption of the existence or reality of something to which
a theory can relate without representing it as a form of realism, even metaphysical realism, insofar
as this assumption is independent of a physical theory. This use of the term realism is sometimes
found in advocating interpretations of QM, for example that are nonrealist in the present sense,
for example, in (Cabello 2017; Werner 2014), or along the lines of quantum Bayesianism (QBism)
in (e.g., Fuchs 2016; Fuchs et al. 2014). It is of some interest that, while Fuchs, in building his
argument on Wheeler’s views, speaks of “participatory realism” (Fuchs 2016), Wheeler himself,
whose views are closer to those of Bohr, only speaks of a “participatory universe,” which is not
the same (Wheeler 1981, 1983, p. 194, 1990, p. 5). Fuchs, perhaps unintentionally, reveals this

2.4 Reality, Realism, and Reality Without Realism
47
Thus, classical mechanics (used in dealing with individual objects and small
systems, apart from chaotic ones), classical statistical mechanics (used in dealing,
statistically, with large classical systems), or chaos theory (used in dealing with clas-
sical systems that exhibit a highly nonlinear behavior) are realist theories. While
classical statistical mechanics does not represent the behavior of the systems consid-
ered because their great mechanical complexity prevents such a representation, it
assumes that the individual constituents of these systems are represented by clas-
sical mechanics. In chaos theory, which, too, deals with systems consisting of large
numbers of atoms, one assumes a mathematical representation of the (classically
causal) behavior of these systems.
Our phenomenal experience can only serve us partially in relativity. This is
because,whilewecangivetherelativisticbehaviorofphotonsaconceptandrepresent
it mathematically, which makes relativity a realist and classically causal and, in fact,
deterministic theory, we have no means of phenomenally visualizing this behavior, or
the behavior represented by Einstein’s velocity-addition formula for collinear motion
s =
v+u
1+(vu/c)2 . Thus, when the velocity is close to c (or is c), the relativistic concept
of motion is no longer a mathematical reﬁnement of our phenomenal sense and the
corresponding ordinary concept of motion in the way the classical concept of motion
is. Relativity was the ﬁrst physical theory that defeated our ability to form a phenom-
enal conception of elemental individual physical behavior, and it was a radical change
in the history of physics. Photons, which only exist in motion with a velocity equal
to c in a vacuum, represent the limit case. If one could put a clock on a photon, it
would stand still, and a photon would be in all locations in space at once, which of
course only means that no frame of reference, deﬁned by rods and clocks, could be
associated with a photon. Ultimately, photons are relativistic quantum objects treated
by QED. Nevertheless, relativity still offers a mathematized conceptual representa-
tion of the behavior of individual systems. This behavior could, moreover, be treated
classically causally and indeed deterministically, although because all physical inﬂu-
ences are limited by c, relativity imposes new limits, considered below, on causal
relationships between events.
All theories just mentioned are, again, based on the idea that we can observe
the phenomena considered without disturbing them sufﬁciently to affect them. As
difference: “it also seemed a worthy tribute to John Wheeler, as I thought he captured the appropriate
sentiment with his phrase “participatory universe”: “it’s as full-blown a notion of reality as anyone
could want, recognizing only that the users of quantum mechanics have their part of it too. That’s
not less reality, that’s more” (Fuchs 2016, p. 3). This may be, but this full-blown notion of reality is
still not the same as “realism,” unless Fuchs only means by realism the assumption of the existence
of reality, including that we create and observe in experiments, which would, in effect, make his
view nonrealist in the present deﬁnition. In any event, I would argue that the present deﬁnition of
realism or ontology is more in accord with most, even if, again, not all, uses of the term in physics
or philosophy. Besides, none of the authors just mentioned adopts the strong RWR view, although
QBism may be seen as consistent with this view or the U-RWR view. As in the U-RWR view, in the
QBist view, rather than describing the ultimate nature of physical reality, our physical theories only
allow us to experience observed phenomena and make predictions concerning them. In some cases,
such predictions are even possible with probability one, which, however, this still makes them only
predictions and not reality.

48
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
a result, we can identify these phenomena with the corresponding objects in nature
in their independent behavior and (ideally) represent and predict this behavior by
using this representation for all practical purposes by these theories, keeping in mind
that qualiﬁcations are necessary for classical statistical physics or chaos theory.
This identiﬁcation helps realism, but it does not guarantee it, even in the case of
classical mechanics, where representational idealizations are more in accord with
our phenomenal experience, as Kant already realized, even though, he ultimately
granted Euclidean geometry and Newtonian physics the capacity to represent the
ultimate nature of physical reality, at least with a practical justiﬁcation. It has been
also asked to what, if any, degree the mathematical architecture of relativity (further
removed from our phenomenal intuition) corresponds to the architecture of nature, as
opposed to serving as a mathematical model for correct predictions concerning rela-
tivistic phenomena (e.g., Butterﬁeld and Isham 2001). In this case, these predictions
are ideally exact, deterministic, as opposed to the probabilistic or statistical predic-
tions of quantum theory, even in dealing with most elementary individual quantum
phenomena, at least as things stand now. This is a fundamental difference, arising,
one is compelled to argue, because of the impossibility of, in principle, controlling the
physical interference of measuring instruments with the object under investigation,
in any interpretation of quantum phenomena or QM or QFT. As, however, indicated
in the Preface and discussed in detail in Chaps. 6 and 7, in the RWR view, even exact
predictions, the predictions with probability one, which are also possible (with further
qualiﬁcations) in the case of certain quantum phenomena, are still only predictions
concerning possible events. They do not, in this view, imply that the theory enabling
them represents the ultimate nature of physical reality responsible for these events,
although this assumption is, even in the U-RWR view, possible for all practical
purposes, in classical physics and relativity. It remains crucial, however, that such
predictions require special circumstances, while in general, quantum predictions are
not of this kind, even in considering the simplest possible systems, the behavior of
which can always be predicted ideally exactly in classical physics and relativity.
The representation of individual physical objects, quantum objects, and behavior
became partial in Bohr’s 1913 atomic theory, which make it the inaugural event of
the RWR view. The theory only provided representations, in terms of orbits, for
the stationary states of electrons in atoms (in which electrons had constant energy
levels), but not for the discrete transitions, “quantum jumps,” between stationary
states. This was an unprecedented and at the time nearly unimaginable step because
this concept was incompatible with classical mechanics and electrodynamics alike. It
was expected at the time that Bohr’s theory was a temporary expedient that would no
longer be necessary when a proper theory of quantum phenomena was developed.
It was, however, this concept that became central for Heisenberg, who built on it
by abandoning an orbital representation of stationary states as well. This led him
to his discovery of QM, the ﬁrst physical theory that allowed for an RWR-type
interpretation, at least of the weak type, of QM as a whole, as opposed to only
partially conforming to the RWR view, as Bohr’s 1913 theory did. Bohr offered
an RWR-type assessment of Heisenberg’s theory after it was given its full-ﬂedged
form as matrix mechanics by Born and Jordan (Born and Jordan 1925) but before

2.4 Reality, Realism, and Reality Without Realism
49
Schrödinger’s introduction, based on a realist approach, of his wave mechanics in
1926. (As discussed below, this history played a role in the development of Bohr’s
thinking.) Bohr said:
In contrast to ordinary mechanics, the new quantum mechanics does not deal with a space–
time description of the motion of atomic particles. It operates with manifolds of quantities
[matrices] which replace the harmonic oscillating components of the motion and symbolize
the possibilities of transitions between stationary states …. These quantities satisfy certain
relations which take the place of the mechanical equations of motion and the quantization
rules. (Bohr, 1987, v. 1, p. 48; emphasis added)
Following Heisenberg’s own thinking at the time, this assessment was thus based on
the RWR view, at least the weak RWR view, and the corresponding interpretation
of QM, albeit only implicit at this point. By contrast, the ﬁrst worked-out version of
Bohr’s interpretation, in his 1927 Como lecture, attempted to restore, ambivalently,
an instance of realism and classical causality to QM, by assuming that the inde-
pendent behavior of quantum objects could be represented, moreover, classically
causally, by the formalism of QM (Bohr 1987, v. 1, 52–91). Bohr’s Como argu-
ment reﬂected and was affected by several intervening developments, such as, on
the RWR side, Heisenberg’s discovery of the uncertainty relations, and on the realist
side, Schrödinger’s introduction of his wave mechanics (Plotnitsky 2009, pp. 179–
218, 2012, pp. 41–58). The Como version of his interpretation was, however, quickly
abandoned by Bohr, following his discussion with Einstein in October of 1927 at
the Solvay conference in Brussels. This discussion initiated his path toward his ulti-
mate, RWR-type interpretation, as apparent in Bohr’s next article, “The Quantum
of Action and the Description of Nature” (Bohr 1987, v. 1, pp. 92–101; Plotnitsky
2009, pp. 219–238, 2012, pp. 59–70).
Bohr’s ultimate interpretation was ﬁrst sketched in his 1937 article, “Causality
and Complementarity” (Bohr 1937). He did not speak of a “reality without realism,”
but his view, as deﬁned by the irreducible role of measuring instruments in the
constitution of quantum phenomena, clearly amounted to the RWR view, now the
strong RW view. He referred to “our not being any longer in a position to speak of the
autonomous behavior of a physical object, due to the unavoidable interaction between
the object and the measuring instrument,” which by the same token, entails a “renun-
ciation of the ideal of causality in atomic physics” (Bohr 1937, p. 87). Elsewhere,
Bohr appeals to “a ﬁnal renunciation of the classical ideal of causality” (Bohr 1935,
p. 697; emphasis added). As noted in the Introduction, this and related statements by
Bohr might have been making a stronger claim implying the incapacity of any theory
to restore this position to us. In this study, again, all such statements, are assumed to
be part of Bohr’s interpretation, from 1937 on, as a strong RWR-type interpretation,
placing quantum objects and behavior beyond conception, which is clearly the case
in this article. For, if one is no “longer in a position to speak of the autonomous
behavior of a physical object,” this behavior must also be beyond conception,
because, if one had such a conception, one would be able to say something about it.
There is still the question of whether our inability to do so only (A): character-
izes the situation as things stand now, while allowing that quantum phenomena or
whatever may replace them will no longer make this assumption and thus RWR-type

50
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
interpretations viable, thus reverting to a realist view, or (B): reﬂects the possibility
that this reality will never become available to thought. Logically, once (A) is the
case, then (B) is possible, but is not certain. There does not appear to be any exper-
imental data compelling one to prefer either. (A) and (B) are, however, different in
deﬁning how far our mind can, in principle, reach in understanding nature. This is
the main reason to distinguish these views, although my argument equally applies to
both. As discussed in Chap. 6, Bohr at least assumed (A), and some of his statements,
especially those that make stronger than interpretive claims concerning our lack of
access to the ultimate nature of reality responsible for quantum phenomena, suggest
that he might have entertained (B). The qualiﬁcation “as things stand now” applies,
however, to (B) as well, even though it might appear otherwise given that this view
precludes any conception of the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for
quantum phenomena not only now but also ever. It still applies because, as indicated
in the Preface, a return to realism in quantum theory is possible, if quantum theory,
as currently constituted, is replaced by an alternative theory that requires a realist
interpretation. This might make the strong (or weak) RWR view obsolete, replaced
by a more realist view, even for those who hold it with quantum theory in place in
its present form.
In any event, in either (A) or (B) form, the RWR view requires a reconsideration
of causality and possibly, a “renunciation of the classical ideal of causality,” as
Bohr said, although it is, as always, difﬁcult to assume such a renunciation to be
“ﬁnal.” As is clear from Bohr’s argument in this article and elsewhere, this ideal is
grounded in the concept of classical causality, sketched in the Preface. This concept
is deﬁned by the claim that the state, state X, of a physical system is deﬁnitively
(rather than with any probability other than equal to one) determined, in accordance
with a law, at all future moments of time once it is determined at a given moment
of time, state A, and state A is determined deﬁnitively in accordance with the same
law by any of the system’s previous states. This assumption, thus, implies a concept
of reality, which deﬁnes this law, thus making this concept of classical causality
ontological. Accordingly, by precluding the possibility of applying such a concept to
the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena, the RWR
view, weak or strong, precludes the application of the concept of classical causality
to this constitution and, thus, to the relationships between quantum phenomena or
events. This makes these relationships irreducibly probabilistic even in considering
the most elementary individual quantum objects, such as elementary particles, rather
than only mechanically complex systems as in classical physics. In the present view,
again, the concept of a quantum object only applies at the time of measurement.
Several qualiﬁcations of the deﬁnition of the concept of classical causality are in
order, however. In particular, this deﬁnition need not imply that A is a cause of X,
in accord, say, with Kant’s deﬁnition of causality, commonly used since Kant, and
in fact, this deﬁnition does not refer to a “cause.” Bohr, while commonly speaking
of causality (in this classical sense) does not appear to use “cause” either. On one
occasion, in one of his last works, Bohr does say that “the classical description of
the experimental arrangement and the irreversibility of the recordings concerning the
atomic objects ensure a sequence of cause and effect conforming with elementary

2.4 Reality, Realism, and Reality Without Realism
51
demands of causality,” accompanied by “the irrevocable abandonment of the ideal of
determinism” (Bohr 1987, v. 3, pp. 4–5). I shall discuss this passage and the concept
of a cause that it uses in Chap. 6 (Sect. 6.5) in the context of quantum causality and
complementarity as a generalization of causality (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 65). Given,
however, the connections between events corresponding to these recordings are, in
view of the lack of determinism (which would accompany it in classical mechanics
of individual or simple systems), it is clear that these concepts of cause and causality
are not in accord with “the classical ideal of causality” invoked by Bohr earlier, and
the concept of classical causality grounding them.
Kant was a key ﬁgure in the modern history of the question of causality, although
what he deﬁnes as the principle of causality had been used much earlier, beginning
with Plato and Aristotle, or even the pre-Socratics. Thus, according to Plato, our
“inquiry into nature” is a search for “the causes of each thing; why each thing comes
into existence, why it goes out of existence, why it exists” (Plato 2005, Phaedo, A
6–10; cited in Falcon 2015). Aristotle adopted the same type of view as well (e.g.,
Falcon 2015). Kant deﬁned, on this model, the principle of causality, as classical
causality, as follows: if an event takes place, it has, at least in principle, a cause of
which this event is an effect, deﬁned by a given rule or law (Kant 1997, pp. 305,
308). It is commonly (although there are exceptions) assumed that the cause must
be prior to, or at least simultaneous with, the effect, an assumption also known as
the antecedence postulate. Special relativity would make the antecedence postulate
required. The term causality is sometimes used in accordance with the requirements
of special relativity, which restricts (classically) causal inﬂuences to those occurring
in the backward (past) light cone of the event that is seen as an effect of this cause,
while no event could inﬂuence, be a cause, of any event outside the forward (future)
light cone of that event. In other words, no physical causes can propagate faster than
the speed of light in a vacuum, c. This limit is a manifestation of a more general
concept or principle, that of locality, discussed later in this study, which states that
physical systems can only be physically inﬂuenced by their immediate environment.
Relativity, however, only restricts classical causality by a relativistic antecedence
postulate, rather than precludes it: relativity theory, special or general, is a classically
causal and in fact deterministic theory.
Now, the fact that the physical state of a body at point t1 determines, by Newton’s
law of gravity, the state of this body at any other point t2 does not mean that the
state at t1 is the (classical) cause of the state at t2. One might argue that the real
(classical) physical cause for any determination, including that of the initial state,
A, that deﬁnes any particular case considered, is (in our language) the gravitational
ﬁeld deﬁned by the Sun and other physical objects in the Solar system, as encoded
in Newton’s law of gravity. In this view, a given state, A, of any single object can
only be seen as a (classical) physical cause of its future states insofar as the whole
conﬁguration of bodies and forces involved, which determines the law of motion and
hence causality, is seen as embodied in this state but is not necessarily conceptually
speciﬁed (which may not be possible). Its existence is assumed. Newton bracketed
the physical nature of and hence the causes of gravity and was (wisely) content with
just deﬁning a law of gravity in considering, as classically causal, the behavior of

52
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
any given object under this law, and other laws of Newton’s mechanics. All earlier
history of the emergence and development of the solar system was bracketed as well.
In general, if considered at all, the history of classical systems is usually bracketed
and involves the suspension of more remote classical causes, let alone of the ultimate
classical cause of this history. Assuming the ultimate cause (classical or probabilistic)
of anything is a major difﬁculty, put aside here; and it is, in general, not necessary,
as a more limited set of causes (which may be multiple) is usually sufﬁcient, as a
workable idealization.
This type of bracketing is workable on very large spatial and temporal scales, even
that of the Universe itself, using Newton’s theory of gravity or general relativity, up to
a point. The situation changes once one gets closer to the Big Bang or in considering
the Big Bang itself (assumed to be a complex process in which a great many things
happen even if in a very short time, by our measure), because of the quantum aspects
and possibly still other aspects of the Big Bang have to be considered. This leads to the
well-known complexities that thus far have defeated all our efforts to deal with them
and that may require physical concepts and mathematics beyond anything we have, or
possibly can even imagine now. Some of these complexities may be insurmountable
in principle for philosophical reasons, or even due to the basic ways in which our
thinking and language work. For example, even if one assumes, as some do, that the
Universe started (with the Big Bang or some pre-Bing-Bang process) from nothing,
as a ﬂuctuation of nothing, one could still ask: Who or what put this nothing there?
This question is in the nature of our thought and language; and there are proposals
to the effect that our Universe emerged, in the Big Bang (or what we assume to be
the Big Bang), from an earlier Universe, say, as the collision of M-brains, or those
of inﬁnite cosmological cycles of Universes. Mathematics could be different in each
such theory, but there is a kind of phenomenological and conceptual limit on what we
can conceive. Leibniz’s famous question, known as the main question of metaphysics,
“Why there are things rather than nothing?” may be unanswerable because of this
nature of our thinking and language. In considering questions concerning the origin
of any given situation in physics this thinking and language cannot be circumvented
regardless of how free from them is the mathematics involved. One might say that
such questions are inapplicable in this case, which may be true, especially if one
assumes the RWR view (the Q- or U-RWR view) of the early, pre-Big-Bang universe
by virtue of its possible quantum nature (in the Q-RWR view of it). But that cannot
stop others from asking these questions, including by denying the RWR view of the
early Universe.
For the moment, a well-deﬁned situation in physics usually entails the cut-off
deﬁned by the initial state and the actual or possible ﬁnal state of the system consid-
ered, with either one or both determined by measurements we do or can perform.
When at stake are predictions, this demarcation is deﬁned by the initial measurement,
performed by us, possibly using nature as part of our observational technology, and
a possible future measurement that can verify the prediction made. Such predictions
can only be made by us, even when they concern the behavior of objects in accor-
dance with classical causality and, in the case of some classically causal systems,
are deterministic. As stated from the outset, nature does not make measurements

2.4 Reality, Realism, and Reality Without Realism
53
or predictions. In the present view, nature has no quantum objects, including elemen-
tary particles, either. Perhaps, as discussed in Chap. 8, it has quantum ﬁelds, which
is to say, such a concept may reﬂect better the ultimate constitution of nature or part
of this constitution responsible for quantum phenomena.
Because of the difﬁculties, such as those just mentioned (and there are still others),
of applying the concept of (classical) cause even in classical physics and relativity, the
viability of the idea of causality in modern physics has been challenged, beginning
with Russell’s 1913 essay, which had a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the subsequent history
of this challenge (Russell 2013).11 At the same time, the view of classical physics
or relativity, or as discussed below, quantum theory as conforming to the concept of
classical causality deﬁned here (in principle, again, not requiring the idea of cause,
but only the law connecting events, which would only imply a set of classical causes),
has been nearly universally accepted, including by Russell. Thus, he says, appealing
to the law of gravitation, a paradigmatic case:
The law of gravitation will illustrate what occurs in any advanced science. In the motions of
mutually gravitating bodies, there is nothing that can be called a cause, and nothing that can
be called an effect; there is merely a formula. Certain differential equations can be found,
whichholdat everyinstant foreveryparticle ofthe system,andwhich,giventhe conﬁguration
and velocities at one instant, or the conﬁgurations at two instants, render the conﬁguration
at any other earlier or later instant theoretically calculable. That is to say, the conﬁguration
at any instant is a function of that instant and the conﬁgurations at two given instants. This
statement holds throughout physics, and not only in the special case of gravitation. But there
is nothing that could be properly called “cause” and nothing that could be properly called
“effect” in such a system. …
There is no question of repetitions, of the “same” cause producing the “same” effect; it is
not in any sameness of causes and effects that the constancy of scientiﬁc laws consists, but in
sameness of relations. And even “sameness of relations” is too simple a phrase; “sameness
of differential equations” is the only correct phrase. It is impossible to state this accurately
in non-mathematical language; the nearest approach would be as follows: -- “There is a
constant relation between the state of the universe at any instant and the rate of change in
the rate at which any part of the universe is changing at that instant, and this relation is
many-one, i.e. such that the rate of change in the rate of change is determinate when the state
of the universe is given.” If the “law of causality” is to be something actually discoverable
in the practice of science, the above proposition has a better right to the name than any “law
of causality” to be found in the books of philosophers. …
The law makes no difference between past and future: the future “determines” the past
in exactly the same sense in which the past “determines” the future. The word “determine,”
here, has a purely logical signiﬁcance: a certain number of variables “determine” another
variable if that other variable is a function of them. (Russell 2013, pp. 13–15)
Whilerejectingcauses,thisviewisclearlyfullyinaccordwiththeconceptofclassical
causality as deﬁned here. This way of understanding physical law may be and has
been deﬁned as “determinism,” which, while ontological, allows one to avoid the
concept of cause. I shall comment on this term and its (different) use in this study
below. Russell’s argument has its merits in its critique of unproblematized concepts
of causality and in inﬂuencing the subsequent thinking concerning it in physics. On
11 See (Ross and Spurrett 2007) for a reconsideration of Russell’s argument from a contemporary
perspective, allied with structural realism (Ladyman 2016).

54
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
the other hand, his view contains uncritical assumptions, ﬁrst of all, by disregarding
the role of an experiment, which even in classical physics or relativity, brings back
temporality and the difference between the past and the future, as against Russell’s
assertion and similar assertions by others. Bohr’s atomic theory, introduced in the
same year, brings these considerations into play, although it took a while to realize
them. As Bohr said later, “The unrestricted applicability of the [classically] causal
mode of description to physical phenomena has hardly been seriously questioned
until Planck’s discovery of the quantum of action” (Bohr 1938, p. 94). Russell’s
critique of causality does not amount to such “serious” questioning either. Perhaps,
one needed quantum theory for this type of questioning in physics.
Quantum phenomena, at least in the RWR view, expressly violate the principle of
(classical) causality, because no determinable event (or quantum phenomenon) could
be established as the classical cause of a given event (another quantum phenomenon).
Only statistical correlations between events could be ascertained. As Heisenberg
said in his uncertainty relation paper, “[quantum] physics ought to describe only
the correlation of observations” (Heisenberg 1927, p. 83). But then, there is, in the
RWR view, no relation of the type claimed by Russell and others either, although such
claims are found in considering QM or QFT as well. In the RRW view, the differential
equations of QM or QFT, such as Schrödinger’s or Dirac’s equation, only provide
(with the help of Born’s rule) probabilities of possible future experiments of the basis
of previously performed experiments, which implies a (local) arrow of time.
It is possible to introduce alternative, speciﬁcally probabilistic, concepts of
causality, applicable in QM, including in RWR-type interpretations, in which case
classical causality, as deﬁned here, does not apply, except as a limit case. Such
concepts were proposed by several authors, the present author among them, under
the heading of quantum causality, to be adopted in this study as well (e.g., Plotnitsky
2011b; 2016, pp. 203–207). I shall comment on these concepts and relate them to
complementarity as a “generalization of causality,” as Bohr saw it, in Chap. 6 (Bohr
1987, v. 2, p. 41). Brieﬂy, quantum causality, as understood in this study, is deﬁned
as follows. An actual event of measurement (as, in the RWR view, there are no other
actual events) that has happened determines which events may or (in view of comple-
mentarity) may not happen in the future and be predicted with one probability or
another, which is not the same that any of these events will happen. This event, A,
at time t0, deﬁnes certain possible, but only possible future events, say, X, at time t1.
The temporal precedence of A and the corresponding (local) arrow of time is crucial
to quantum causality. It follows, however, that quantum causality works without, as
in the case of classical causality, deﬁnitively establishing, or rather (since it would
already be deﬁnitively established in advance) being deﬁnitively connected to, any
future state of the system considered. Only the temporal precedence of A vis-à-vis X is
deﬁnitive. Quantum causality allows one to relate actual events in terms of statistical
correlations, such as those of the EPR-type between them, which events, however,
are speciﬁcally prepared by repeated initial measurements. By the quantum indeﬁni-
tiveness postulate, no deﬁnitive relationship between any two actual events that have
already occurred can be established even ideally, as they can always be in classical
mechanics. There these events are deﬁned by quantities that preexist measurement

2.4 Reality, Realism, and Reality Without Realism
55
rather than are established by measurement, under the conditions of complementarity
and the uncertainty relations, as they are in quantum physics in the RWR view. Hence,
there is no probability (except equal to one) in classical mechanics of individual or
simple systems, while there is always probability, in general not equal to one, in
quantum physics, no matter how simple the system considered may be. A, as an event
of measurement, is reminiscent of a classical “cause.” This reminiscence may compel
one to adopt this type of probabilistic connections between events for a general deﬁ-
nition of causality with what is deﬁned here as classical causality as the limit case
(e.g., D’Ariano 2018; D’Ariano et al 2014). For the reasons explained in Chap. 6,
I shall adopt the term probabilistic causality for this type of concept, with quantum
causality as an instantiation of this concept in quantum physics. In the case of indi-
vidual or simple (nonchaotic) classical or relativistic systems, this concept reduces to
classical causality and, correlatively, determinism as well. Quantum causality may,
thus, be seen as a symbolic version of classical causality, just as QM itself may
be seen, as it was by Bohr, as symbolic mechanics because it uses the symbols of
classical mechanics as part of a radically different, probabilistic, theory.
Some, beginning with P. S. Laplace, have used “determinism” or its avatars such
as “deterministic causality,” for classical causality, including, as noted above, on
occasion, but not commonly, Bohr (1987, v. 3, p. 5). Russell’s and related views may
in fact be seen as forms of ontological determinism, deﬁned by the mathematics of
the theory, with all possible predictions with probability either one or zero. Both
Laplace (one of the founders of probability theory) and Russell were of course
well aware of the unavoidable use of probability in the case of some phenomena
in classical physics. Both, however, and most others who use determinism along
these lines assumed it necessary only for practical, epistemological reasons, due to
our lack of knowledge concerning classically causal or deterministic relationships
ultimately deﬁning all events considered. In this study, I deﬁne “determinism” as
an epistemological category referring to the possibility of predicting the outcomes
of causal processes ideally exactly in accordance with laws that deﬁne them as
causal. In classical mechanics, when dealing with individual objects or small systems
(apart from chaotic ones), both concepts are correlatively applicable. On the other
hand, classical statistical mechanics or chaos theory are classically causal but not
deterministic in view of the complexity of the systems considered, which limit us to
probabilistic or statistical predictions concerning their behavior.12
12 It is possible to assume that the ultimate nature of reality is random or mixed, and, while classically
causal conceptions of reality have been dominant, random ones have been around since the pre-
Socratics, as in Democritus’s and then Epicurus’s and Lucretius’s atomism, without, however,
assuming, as in the RWR view, that the reality ultimately responsible for such random events is
beyond conception, and hence may not be random any more than classically causal. There are
also arguments for the possibility of classical causality and, in the ﬁrst place, realism in the case of
discrete events (e.g., [Sorkin 1991, p. 55; Smolin 2018, pp. 257–261; Rovelli 2016). Rovelli’s article
is especially relevant in the present context, because, while adopting a realist position in advocating
a discrete ontology of the ultimate constitution of the reality considered in QM, it argues against
a realist interpretation of the wave function, which may be expected given the continuous nature
of the wave function. As discussed in the Introduction, already Riemann noted the discreteness of
the ultimate constitution of reality, including space itself, will imply different physics (Riemann

56
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
In the case of quantum phenomena, deterministic predictions are, again, in general
(apart from special idealized cases) not possible even in considering the most elemen-
tary quantum phenomena, such as those associated with elementary particles. This
is because the repetition of identically prepared quantum experiments, in general,
leads to different outcomes, and unlike in classical physics, this difference cannot
be diminished beyond the limit deﬁned by Planck’s constant, h, by improving the
capacity of our measuring instruments. This impossibility is manifested in the uncer-
tainty relations, which would remain valid even if we had perfect instruments and
which pertain to the data observed, rather than to any particular theory. Hence, the
probabilistic or statistical character of quantum predictions must also be maintained
by interpretations of QM or alternative theories of quantum phenomena that are
classically causal. Such interpretations and theories are also, and in the ﬁrst place,
realist because classical causality implies a law governing it and thus a representa-
tion of the reality considered (deﬁned by the behavior of quantum objects) in terms
of this law.13 RWR-type interpretations are, again, not classically causal because
they preclude a representation or even conception of the ultimate constitution of the
reality responsible for quantum phenomena.
1854, p. 33). The difﬁculty here is that of explaining the physical mechanisms by means of which
classical causality can be established in a discrete set, although one could have mathematics for
exact predictions of discrete events. It is not clear that it is possible to conceive of such a mechanism
apart from assuming that connections between events are continuous, an assumption that grounds
classical causality in classical physics or relativity. This problem is circumvented in the RWR
view by precluding a representation, even a purely mathematical one, of how quantum phenomena,
including correlations, come about, and thus precluding classical causality. Admittedly, this type of
thinking cannot satisfy those who want realism, as all these authors do, Lee Smolin most expressly,
even by advocating a “naïve realism,” which would, as discussed earlier, not be acceptable to
Einstein, Smolin’s main inspiration (Smolin 2018).
13 As noted, the meanings of these terms ﬂuctuate in physical and philosophical literature, without a
strong consensus concerning any of them. Thus, Schrödinger’s or Dirac’s equation is sometimes seen
as “deterministic” or (classically) “causal” under the assumption that it describes, in a classically
causal way, the independent behavior of quantum objects, with the recourse to probability only
arising because of the interference of measurements into this behavior. This assumption is shared by
both von Neumann’s and Dirac’s classic books (von Neumann 1932; Dirac 1958), and ambivalently,
by Bohr in his Come lecture (Plotnitsky 2009, pp. 191–218). It poses difﬁculties, beginning with the
fact that the variables involved are complex quantities in Hilbert spaces over C, difﬁculties that, as
discussed in Chap. 5, were confronted by Schrödinger because his wave-equation was dealing with
waves in the conﬁguration space rather than physical space. I shall put these difﬁculties aside because
they do not affect my argument at the moment. In RWR-type interpretations, either equation only
determines the mathematical state, the “quantum state,” of the corresponding wave-function as a
Hilbert-spacevectoratanyfuturepointonceitisdeterminedatagivenpoint,mathematically.Indeed,
more accurately, either equation determines this state for any given value of the parameter t in the
equation,whichvaluescouldberelatedtomeasurementsatdifferentpointsintime.Therelationships
between these measurements themselves are probabilistic. Accordingly, physically, each equation
only determines, in Schrödinger’s terms, an “expectation-catalog” concerning the outcomes of
possible future experiments, to be observed in measuring instruments, without representing either
how they come about or these outcomes themselves, represented by classical physics (Schrödinger
1935, p. 154). Hence, contrary to another common claim, neither equation can be seen as (physically)
time-reversible, a point considered further in Chap. 6. See also note 24.

2.4 Reality, Realism, and Reality Without Realism
57
As stated from the outset of this study, the RWR view, while historically connected
to Kant, moves beyond Kant’s argument, deﬁning his philosophical system, which
distinguishes between “noumena” or “objects” as things in themselves, as they exist
independently, and “phenomena” or appearances to our mind, including those that we
assume to represent “objects” of nature or mind. This study is primarily concerned
with nature or matter. Kant’s “things-in-themselves” may also be mental, as can in
fact be an RWR type reality as well, for example, in mathematics, as is suggested
by Lebesgue’s comment, cited above, concerning a possible existence of a set that
is neither ﬁnite not inﬁnite or, more generally, the development of foundations of
mathematics following Cantor’s set theory (Plotnitsky 2019, 2020). Phenomena are
available to and noumena or objects are beyond representation or knowledge. While
Kant, thus, positions objects beyond knowledge, he allows, at least with a practical
justiﬁcation,thatonecanthink,formaconceptionof,objects,ratherthan,inthestrong
RWR view, placing them beyond thought altogether. As I shall explain presently,
Kant’s view does not reach the weak RWR view either and remains a form of realism.
According to Kant:
[E]ven if we cannot cognize these same objects as things in themselves, we at least must be
able to think them as things in themselves … To cognize an object, it is required that I be
able to prove its possibility (whether by the testimony of experience from its actuality or a
priori through reason). But I can think whatever I like, as long as I do not contradict myself,
i.e., as long as my concept is a possible thought, even if I cannot give any assurance whether
or not there is a corresponding object somewhere within the sum total of all possibilities.
But in order to ascribe objective validity to such a concept (for the ﬁrst sort of possibility
[that of conceiving of it] was merely logical) something more [than logic] is required. This
“more,” however, need not be thought in the theoretical sources of cognition; it may also lie
in practical ones. (Kant 1997, p. 115, p. 115 note)
A justiﬁcation in “theoretical sources of cognition” refers to what is justiﬁed by a
concept that is assumed to be objectively true concerning the object it represents and a
justiﬁcation in “the practical sources of cognition” to a concept that works in practice
and is objectively accepted (has “objective validity”), even if it cannot be rigorously
proven to correspond to the object in question. For simplicity, I shall refer to a
theoretical vs. a practical justiﬁcation. Both forms of justiﬁcation are objective in the
sense of being unambiguously deﬁnable and communicable.14 Whether, according
to Kant, such a proof is ever possible in dealing with things-in-themselves is a
14 As its etymology indicates, the origin of the term “objective” is linked to the concept of an object
(as something existing independently of us), as it was by Kant. This allows our claims concerning
it, as opposed to those concerning phenomena, to be more general and, in principle, even universal.
Such more general claims are possible even in the RWR view, as practically justiﬁed, in considering
physical objects in classical physics and relativity, but not in considering quantum objects or the
ultimate constitution of the reality that gives rise to both quantum objects and quantum phenomena
at the time of measurement. Objectivity is only possible at the level quantum phenomena, because
they are manifested in the observable parts of measuring instruments. Hence, as the observable
parts of measuring instruments themselves, they can be described classically and identiﬁed with
the corresponding physical objects (in this case, things observed in measuring instruments), in the
U-RWR view still only with a practical justiﬁcation.

58
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
complex question, which could be put aside here, given that my concern is RWR-
type interpretations, in which such a proof is not possible. On the other hand, this
study still assumes here that these interpretations are only practically justiﬁed. Kant’s
statement “I can think whatever I like” is also an expression of creative freedom of
thought in approaching reality either with a theoretical justiﬁcation, as Einstein aimed
to do by means of “a free conceptual construction” (Einstein 1949, p. 47), or only
with a practical justiﬁcation.
In physics, too, more than merely logical consistency is required for establishing
the architecture of our concepts and theories and the way in which they are related to
experimental data. Newton’s use of calculus in classical mechanics, Einstein’s use of
Riemannian geometry in general relativity, and Heisenberg’s use of matrix calculus,
and the ways (realist or RWR) these mathematical concepts relate to experiments are
obvious examples of new mathematical and physical concepts decisive for physics.
On the other hand, while Kant’s argumentation, again, manifestly short of the strong
RWR view, borders on the weak RWR view, it does not amount to this view. This
is because, once a conception of some things-in-themselves is practically justiﬁed,
a representation of them based on this conception becomes practically justiﬁed as
well, even though it is impossible to speak of knowledge of things-in-themselves,
which, in Kant, requires a theoretical justiﬁcation. In contrast, in the RWR view what
is practically justiﬁed is not a representation or conception of the ultimate nature
of reality responsible for quantum phenomena, but the inapplicability of any such
representation or conception, either as things stand now, even if such a conception is
in principle possible, or ever. If such a conception becomes possible, even if only as
practically justiﬁed, then a representation based on this conception becomes possible
as well, at least as practically justiﬁed, in accord with Kant’s argumentation. It may,
however, not become possible. On the other hand, as stated, the RWR view may
become obsolete even for those who hold it and be replaced by a realist alternative
deﬁnedbyaninterpretationofQMorQFTorbyanewtheoryofquantumphenomena.
What might, in the RWR view, be assumed to be theoretically justiﬁed are our
experimental ﬁndings and events, deﬁned by effects of the interactions between
the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena and
measuring instruments, with, in the present view, quantum objects as an idealiza-
tion only applicable in these interactions. This assumption, however, still only holds
as things stand now and is subject to interpretation, which amounts to only a practical
justiﬁcation after all. It is virtually never possible rigorously to speak of justifying
any concept or theory for all practical purposes without qualiﬁcations, beginning
with those concerning the assumptions that ground it, even if it is objective in the
sense of being unambiguously deﬁnable and communicable, a sense of objectivity
assumed by Bohr as well (e.g., Bohr 1987, v. 2, pp. 67–68). Experimental ﬁndings,
too, involve assumptions shaping their formulations and communication, and may,
as a result, be subject to interpretive qualiﬁcations and disagreements. It is even more
difﬁcult to assume a theoretical justiﬁcation for a theory or a mathematical model
that predict experimental ﬁndings. Theories can change or become obsolete, even in
the absence of new experimental data that would contradict them.

2.4 Reality, Realism, and Reality Without Realism
59
I do, however, adopt the view that a theory, although not necessarily all assump-
tions grounding it, should be falsiﬁable.15 Glossing Karl Popper’s deﬁnition, a theory
is falsiﬁed if it can be contradicted by a basic statement, always referring to a speciﬁc
entity or speciﬁc location and time, as experimentally observed quantum phenomena
would be, a statement that must correspond to a true observation in a successful falsi-
ﬁcation and to a hypothetical observation in a failed falsiﬁcation (e.g., Popper 1983, p.
xxii). In the RWR view, because nothing can be said or even thought about quantum
objects or aspects of nature so idealized, all falsiﬁable concepts, statements, and
theories can only concern quantum phenomena. On the other hand, the assumption,
realist or of the RWR-type, of the existence of an independent physical reality, of
the existence of matter, is not falsiﬁable. This fact may give support to those, such
as Parmenides and Plato or, in modern times, Bishop Berkeley, who deny that inde-
pendent material reality, matter, exists. While, as indicated in the Preface, they have
a point insofar as the assumption of the existence of this reality or any conception
of it, or placing it beyond conception, is a product of human thought, none of them
considered the RWR view of matter as a possibility.
QM and QFT are falsiﬁable by the data observed in measuring instruments, which
compels me to deﬁne either theory strictly in terms of its mathematical formalism.
Because, however, in contrast to classical mechanics and relativity, these theories are
not deterministic and thus do not allow for (even ideally) exact predictions concerning
the outcomes of individual quantum experiments, they are only falsiﬁable by their
probabilistically or statistically predictive capacity.16 The falsiﬁability of QM and
QFT, enabled by their mathematics, should, again, not be confused with the falsiﬁ-
ability of a conception of one form of the physical reality considered or a physical
ontology, because a theory need not offer a physical ontology of the ultimate consti-
tution of nature, and QM and QFT do not in the RWR view. Nor, in the RWR view,
would they offer a purely mathematical ontology of this constitution, apart from any
physical concepts, which type of ontology has, as noted, been sometimes claimed,
for example, by Heisenberg in his later writing or (ontic) structural realism. The falsi-
ﬁability of such purely mathematical ontology is, however, difﬁcult to claim. Putting
aside that the very assumption of the independent existence of material reality is
not falsiﬁable, it remains a question whether either a falsiﬁable physical ontology of
the ultimate constitution of nature or, again, a purely mathematical ontology of this
constitution is possible. Thus, the ontologies provided by the many-worlds inter-
pretation and most ontological interpretations of QM or Bohmian mechanics are
15 I am grateful to D’Ariano for bringing to my attention the falsiﬁability angle on quantum theory
and the difﬁculty of maintaining a falsiﬁable ontology of the ultimate constitution of reality there,
the problematic addressed in his recent work (e.g., D’Ariano 2018, 2020).
16 One might question whether Popper’s concept of falsiﬁability is applicable in this way, because
this concept appears to imply the possibility of a deﬁnitive falsiﬁcation of a theory’s claim by a
single case, like in its proverbial case of the claim that there are no black swans, contradicted by the
discovery of at least one black swan. I shall, however, assume that the concept can apply statistically,
at least within certain limits, because it is difﬁcult, although not impossible (e.g., D’Ariano 2020),
to speak of the falsiﬁability of QM or QFT otherwise.

60
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
unfalsiﬁable (D’Ariano 2020).17 On the other hand, while the RWR view is not falsi-
ﬁable either, it offers no ontology of the ultimate nature of reality responsible for
quantum phenomena, which is a crucial difference.
I am not claiming that falsiﬁability is a requirement for a given physical theory
or an interpretation, but only argue that it is a useful practical criterion in assessing a
physical theory, andthat quantumtheory, includingintheRWRview, is noexception.
This disclaimer also allows me to bypass the controversies surrounding the concept
of falsiﬁability since it was introduced. The RWR view tells us that, while unfalsiﬁ-
able assumptions may be unavoidable in quantum theory (and the assumption of a
reality of RWR-type is, again, unfalsiﬁable), unfalsiﬁable ontologies of the ultimate
constitution of matter are avoidable. Popper, a committed realist, who did not like
Bohr’s views (which he also profoundly misunderstood), would not have liked the
RWR view or this implication of his concept either. His concept is, nevertheless,
useful to the RWR view, an irony that is not uncommon.
2.5
Indeterminacy, Randomness, and Probability
This section offers a discussion of the concepts of indeterminacy, randomness, and
probabilityinQM, or QFT. Mydiscussioncannot dojusticetothesubject, extensively
discussed in the literature (e.g., [Khrennikov 2009; Hájek 2014]), or to the history
of these concepts. It is designed to address the points most relevant to my argument
in this study. I will, however, continue to discuss these concepts throughout the
remainder of this study. I deﬁne, ﬁrst, the concepts of indeterminacy, randomness,
chance, and probability, as they will be understood here, because, as other key terms
used in this study, they can be understood otherwise.
In the present deﬁnition, indeterminacy is a more general category, while random-
ness or chance will refer to a most radical form of indeterminacy, when a probability
cannot be assigned to a possible event, which may also occur unexpectedly. Random-
ness and chance may also be understood as different from each other. These differ-
ences are, however, not germane in the context of this study, and I shall only speak
of randomness. Both indeterminacy and randomness only refer to possible future
events and deﬁne our expectations concerning them. Once an event has occurred, it
is determined. An indeterminate nature of events may either allow for assuming an
underlying classically causal architecture (which is usually temporal) of the physical
reality responsible for this nature, whether this process is accessible to us, or not,
or disallow for making such an assumption. The ﬁrst case deﬁnes indeterminacy
in classical physics, in particular classical statistical physics or chaos theory, and
the second in QM, in RWR interpretations. It is, it might be added, impossible to
17 D’Arianoappearstobemoreopentothepossibilityofapurelymathematicalontologyofthattype,
although the falsiﬁability of such an ontology remains an open question (D’Ariano 2017; D’Ariano
and Faggin 2021). The second article, however, refers to a mathematical ontology (grounded in
a mathematical model based on the formalism of QM) of thought and speciﬁcally consciousness,
which is different from an ontology of matter in physics.

2.5 Indeterminacy, Randomness, and Probability
61
ascertain that an apparently random sequence of events, events that occurred appar-
ently randomly, was in fact random, rather than connected by some rule, such as that
deﬁned by classical causality, and there is no mathematical proof that any sequence
is actually random (e.g., Aaronson 2013, pp. 71–92). The sequences of indeterminate
events that allow for probabilistic predictions concerning them is a different matter,
although there is still no guarantee that such sequences are not ultimately underlain by
classically causal connections in the case of quantum phenomena. This would imply
that an RWR-type interpretation, which precludes such connections, does not corre-
spond to the ultimate nature of reality. Experimentally, again, quantum phenomena
only preclude determinism, because identically prepared quantum experiments, as
concerns the state of measuring instruments, in general lead to different outcomes.
Only the statistics of multiple (identically prepared) experiments are repeatable
and predictable by QM or QFT. This is fortunate because, otherwise, it would be
impossible to treat the corresponding data scientiﬁcally, as QM or QFT do.
A Bayesian view, based on dealing with probabilities of individual events, would
require one to qualify this assessment, while still entailing the fundamental difference
in question between quantum and classical physics. It is worth commenting brieﬂy on
the difference between probability and statistics. “Probabilistic” commonly refers to
our estimates of the probabilities of either individual or collective events, such as that
of a coin toss or of ﬁnding a quantum object in a given region of space. “Statistical”
refers to our estimates concerning the outcomes of identical or similar experiments,
such as that of multiple coin tosses or repeated identically prepared experiments
with quantum objects, or to the average behavior of certain objects or systems.
There are many versions of the Bayesian view (e.g., [De Finetti 2008; Jaynes 2003]).
More generally, however, it deﬁnes probability as a degree of belief concerning a
possible occurrence of an individual event on the basis of the relevant information we
possess. This makes probabilisticestimates, generally, subjective, althoughtheremay
be agreement (possibly among a large number of individuals) concerning them (and
some Bayesian approaches are more objectively oriented, as is, for example, that of
Edwin Jaynes, in contrast to that of Bruno de Finetti). The frequentist understanding,
also referred to as “frequentist statistics,” deﬁnes probability in terms of sample data
by an emphasis on the frequency or proportion of these data, which is considered
more objective. In quantum physics, exact predictions are, again, impossible even in
dealing with elemental individual processes and events. This fact could, however, be
interpreted either on Bayesian lines, under the assumption that a probability could be
assigned to individual quantum events, or on frequentist lines, under the assumption
that each individual effect is strictly random and hence cannot be assigned a prob-
ability at all.18 An example of a Bayesian approach (following de Finetti), which
18 The standard use of the term “quantum statistics” refers to the behavior of large multiplicities of
identical quantum objects, such as electrons and photons, which behave differently, in accordance
with the Fermi–Dirac and the Bose–Einstein statistics, for identical particles with, respectively,
half-integer and integer spin. A brief qualiﬁcation might be in order concerning two different uses
of statistical, referring, respectively, to multiple repeated experiments and the average behavior
of large systems. Just as one can make probabilistic or statistical estimates of ﬁnding a quantum
object in a given region of space, one can ﬁnd an electron gas occupying less than a given volume.

62
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
is of an RWR-type in the present deﬁnition, is quantum Bayesianism, or QBism
(Fuchs et al. 2014; Fuchs 2016). I qualify because, as noted earlier, QBists them-
selves sometimes speak of realism by virtue of assuming the existence of exterior
physical reality. Although most of my argument in this study would apply if one
adopts a Bayesian, RWR-type view, I adopt the frequentist, RWR-type view, consid-
ered in detail in (Plotnitsky 2016, pp. 173–186; Plotnitsky and Khrennikov 2015).19
Bohr appears to have been inclined to a statistical view as well, speaking of QM
as “a proper, essentially statistical atomic mechanics” (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 18; Bohr
1987, v. 1, 110, v. 2, p. v. 3, p. 5, 12).20 This study does, however, assume, in afﬁnity
with QBism, that our assignments of probabilities are subjective, although open to an
agreement between different individuals. It might be preferable to see this assignment
is human, which makes all probabilistic relationships between a given theory and
observed phenomena human as well, in classical, relativistic, and quantum physics
alike. In classical physics or relativity, however, these relationships may be assumed
to be physically grounded in the behavior of the system considered, because these
theories may be assumed to represent this behavior, which is no longer possible to
assume in quantum theory, in RWR-type interpretations.
Finally, probability introduces an element of order into situations deﬁned by the
role of indeterminacy in them and enables us to handle such situations better. Prob-
ability or statistics is about the interplay of indeterminacy and order. This inter-
play takes on a unique signiﬁcance in quantum physics, because of the existence of
quantum correlations, such as the EPR or (in the case of discrete variables) EPR–
Bell correlations. These correlations are properly predicted by QM, which is, thus,
as much about an order as about indeterminacy, and about their unique combination
Accordingly, predicting the second type of phenomena can also be done along either Bayesian or
statistical lines, in the latter case, under the assumption that each event is strictly random. One
would need to repeat the experiment many times to establish their statistics, while no probability is
assigned to each event as such.
19 I have adopted a Bayesian view of QM in an earlier study (Plotnitsky 2009). In contrast, in
(Plotnitsky 2016), I adopted a statistical view, as I do, at least as preferable view, in this study,
although most of my arguments would apply to Bayesian approaches, such QBism—most, but not
all, in part depending on which Bayesian approach one adopts.
20 On one occasion, referring to the old atomic theory, he does speak of “estimating probabilities for
the occurrence of the individual radiation processes” (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 34). Still, it does not appear
that he ever expressed anything akin to the Bayesian view. See (Plotnitsky 2016, pp. 180–184) for
a further discussion of Bohr’s view on the subject, again revising the reading of Bohr, along more
Bayesian lines (without strictly attributing the Bayesian view to Bohr), offered in (Plotnitsky 2009).
See note 19 above. There have been statistical interpretations of QM, commonly on realist lines.
Two instructive examples are those of Andrei Khrennikov (Khrennikov 2012; Plotnitsky and Khren-
nikov 2015) and Armen E. Allahverdyan, Roger Balian, and Theo Nieuwenhuizen (Allahverdyan
et al. 2013). While Khrennikov’s interpretation is expressly realist, that of Allahverdyan, Balian,
Nieuwenhuizen may be seen as consistent with or allowing for the RWR view, even though they
do not appear to adopte it. This is because they argue that one should only interpret outcomes of
pointer indications, and leave the richer quantum structure, which has many ways of expressing
the same identities, without interpretation. In RWR-type interpretations, this structure would be
seen as enabling statistical predictions, without representing the ultimate constitution of the reality
responsible for the outcomes of quantum experiments and thus pointer indications.

2.5 Indeterminacy, Randomness, and Probability
63
in quantum physics. The correlations themselves are collective, statistical, and thus
do not depend on either the Bayesian or frequentist view of the individual events
involved.
The circumstances just sketched and discussed in further detail later in this study
imply a different reason for the recourse to probability in quantum physics, in RWR-
type interpretations. According to Bohr, the idea of indeterminacy apart from a (clas-
sically) causal order has “hardly been seriously questioned until Planck’s discovery
of the quantum of action” (Bohr 1938, p. 94). As he said on a later occasion (in
1949): “[E]ven in the great epoch of critical [i.e., post-Kantian] philosophy in the
former century, there was only a question to what extent a priori arguments could be
given for the adequacy of space–time coordination and causal connection of experi-
ence, but never a question of rational generalizations or inherent limitations of such
categories of human thinking” (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 65). That this statement occurs
in “Discussion with Einstein” is not coincidental: it places his debate with Einstein
in relation to the history of philosophy as well as physics. Even more radical philo-
sophical questionings of causality, such as those by David Hume, are those of our
epistemological capacity to perceive the underlying classically causal world, which
would be presupposed at the ultimate level as inaccessible to us.21 It is only with
Charles Darwin’s evolutionary theory and Friedrich Nietzsche’s philosophy that this
(classical) view of causality and randomness or indeterminacy begins to be ques-
tioned. Darwin’s and Nietzsche’s thoughts are contemporaneous with the emergence
of the kinetic theory of gases and thermodynamics—both statistical theories, which,
however, assume an ultimate underlying classical causality. How far either Darwin
or Nietzsche were willing to go on this road is a complex question, which cannot be
addressed here. In any event, in physics, this more radical questioning of causality
does not appear before quantum physics. By extending the questioning of causality
to, at least for now, its limit, quantum theory also revealed the deeper nature of the
problem of causality, or again, reality. According to Bohr:
21 There is some debate concerning Hume’s and Kant’s views on this issue, including in the context
of the relationships between their view and the nature of quantum phenomena and quantum theory,
and also Bohr’s view (e.g., Palmquist 2013, and references there). It is possible, assuming Kant’s
principle of causality as an a priori form of cognition, to read, as Stephen Palmquist does, Kant as
arguing “not that everything in nature must have some deﬁnite, objective cause, but that our expec-
tation of everything having such a cause is a necessary component of our ‘empirical knowledge’
of phenomena” (Palmquist 2013, p. 96). Given that this book is not a study of Kant, I prefer to
remain open concerning possible interpretations of his views. Even assuming Palmquist’s reading,
however, this expectation would still be defeated in the case of quantum phenomena, at least in the
RWR view, which is, even in its weak form, more radical than that of Kant, as regards any claims
concerning the ultimate nature of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena. So, Bohr’s assess-
ment still stands. Certainly, there is no generalization, such as complementarity, of the concept of
causality in either Kant or Hume, who was more open to probability as a theoretical necessity rather
than only a practical expedient (recognized by Kant). In any event, Palmquist’s reading of Bohr,
primarily guided by the Como lecture (without considering changes in Bohr’s views), bypassed the
more radical aspects of Bohr’s thinking, which make it easier to see it as being closer to that of
Kant.

64
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
[I]t is most important to realize that the recourse to probability laws under such circumstances
is essentially different in aim from the familiar application of statistical considerations as
practical means of accounting for the properties of mechanical systems of great structural
complexity [in classical physics]. In fact, in quantum physics we are presented not with
intricacies of this kind, but with the inability of the classical frame of concepts to comprise the
peculiar feature of indivisibility, or “individuality,” characterizing the elementary processes.
(Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 34)
This statement is, again, seen here as expressing the strong RWR-type interpretation
adopted by Bohr at this point, in 1949 (although, historically, the statement refers to
the rise of quantum theory), even if Bohr was making a stronger than merely interpre-
tiveclaim,byassumingthissituationtobeadeﬁnitivestateofaffairsinnature.Forone
thing, as noted, some interpretations of QM, such as those by Dirac (1958) and von
Neumann (1932), or alternative theories, such as Bohmian mechanics, assume clas-
sically causal views of the behavior of quantum objects, with probability or statistics
brought in by measurement. Both individuality and especially “indivisibility” appear
to reﬂect the features of Bohr’s concept of phenomena.
“The classical frame of concepts” may appear to refer to the concepts of classical
physics, and it does include these concepts. By this time (in 1949), however, Bohr
adopts the strong RWR view, at least the Q-RWR view and arguably the U-RWR
view, which places the ultimate nature of reality responsible for quantum phenomena
and possibly all physical phenomena beyond conception. This gives the phrase “the
classical frame of concepts” a broader meaning: all representational concepts that we
can form are classical or proto-classical. They may be seen as proto-classical insofar
asthephysicalconceptsofclassicalphysicsand,asnoted,withsigniﬁcantlimitations,
relativity may be considered as reﬁnements of our phenomenal intuition, a product of
our evolutionary neurological machinery, intuition embodied in ideas like bodies and
motion.22 This reﬁnement is no longer available for representing the ultimate nature
of reality responsible for quantum phenomena, or possibly the ultimate constitution
of nature, at least as things stand now. Classical physical concepts are still used in
quantum physics in RWR-type interpretations, in particular that of Bohr or the present
one, in dealing with the behavior of the observable parts of measuring instruments
and, thus, data or information are found in these parts. But, in these interpretations,
these concepts do not apply to the ultimate character of physical reality responsible
for quantum phenomena. That need not mean that a realist interpretation of quantum
phenomena or QM, or an alternative theory of quantum phenomena, using “the
classical frame of concepts,” is impossible. It is still possible, because, as stated in
the Preface, the RWR view, possibly applicable (as the U-RWR view) to the ultimate
constitution of nature, may become obsolete in quantum theory in its present form
or whatever may replace it even for those who hold it and be replaced by a more
realist view, based “on the classical frame of concepts.” In other words, even if the
ultimate constitution of nature will still be assumed to be beyond representation or
22 See (Berthoz 2000, 2003), for a neurological analysis of, in the ﬁrst book’s title, “the brain’s
sense of movement,” as classical, and for the brain’s decision-making processes, also considered,
from the Bayesian perspective, in (Doya et al. 2007).

2.5 Indeterminacy, Randomness, and Probability
65
conception because of our own evolutionary neurological constitution, there will be
no physics that needs to take this limitation into account.
As discussed in Sect. 2.2, in RWR-type interpretations, two types of concepts
are available for dealing with the ultimate nature of reality responsible for quantum
phenomena, while the classical frame of concepts is used for describing the observ-
able parts of measuring instruments and quantum phenomena, or data or information
registered in them. The ﬁrst type is purely mathematical concepts, which, as noted,
eventually led Heisenberg to a form of mathematical realism, with a Platonist ﬂavor,
while assuming that QM or QFT does not represent quantum objects and behavior
by physical concepts, at least as we conventionally understand them, for example, in
classical physics or relativity. In contrast, in his ultimate (strong RWR-type) inter-
pretation, Bohr rejected the possibility of a mathematical representation, along with
a physical one, of the ultimate nature of reality responsible for quantum phenomena,
at least as things stand now. The present interpretation is in accord with Bohr on this
point.
The second type of concepts is physical concepts, such as Bohr’s concept of
phenomena and complementarity, when complementarity is that of phenomena.
These concepts have both (classical) representational components and RWR compo-
nents, and thus reﬂect that the ultimate nature of reality responsible for quantum
phenomena is beyond representation or conception, which deﬁnes their RWR compo-
nents. This structure is in accord with and is deﬁned by the two-component structure
of measuring instruments, consisting in their classical describable observable part
and their quantum strata through which they interact with the ultimate, RWR-type
physical reality responsible for quantum phenomena. Complementarity adds a new
dimension to this situation. While each of the two mutually exclusive complemen-
tary phenomena involved in a given complementarity, say, that of the position and
the momentum measurement, associated with a quantum objects, may be established
alternativelyatanygivenpointintime,theycannotbecombinedsoastoexisttogether
at the same moment in time and in the same location in space, in the way they can
in classical mechanics. Neither concept, however, phenomenon or complementarity,
represents the ultimate nature of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena.
They reﬂect the impossibility of representing it.
2.6
Measurement, Idealization, and Quantum
Indeﬁnitiveness
This section explains in detail and derives additional implications from the tripar-
tite structure of the idealization of physical reality assumed by the present view of
quantum phenomena as represented by the diagrams introduced at the outset of this
study:
(Q-RWR): the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum objects and
quantum phenomena →quantum objects (deﬁned, as RWR-type concepts or idealizations, at

66
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
the time of measurement) →measuring instruments (observed as classical physical objects)
→quantum phenomena (deﬁned by what is observed in measuring instruments).
As throughout this chapter, I shall mostly remain within the limits of the Q-RWR
view. This tripartite structure is, again, not necessarily adopted by all RWR-type
interpretations of quantum phenomena and QM or QFT, including that of Bohr.
Even if, given some of his statements, it might be seen as a consequence of Bohr’s
interpretation in its ultimate form or even some previous versions after the Como
lecture, Bohr never expressly stated this consequence.23
I begin by restating the deﬁning aspect of the concept of quantum measurement
adopted in this study, following Bohr (eventually leading him to his concept of
“phenomenon”). Admittedly, measurement in quantum theory is a vast and multi-
faceted subject, considered in numerous books and articles (quite a few cited in
this study). Several important topics will, unfortunately, be bypassed here, including
those concerning such mathematical features of quantum measurements as pure vs.
mixed states, or positive operator-valued measures (POVMs). A further discussion
of quantum measurement is offered in later chapters. Quantum measurement may
be said, à la Wheeler, to be a measurement without measurement. As explained at
the outset of this study, the term “measurement” is a remnant of classical physics,
inherited by it from a still earlier history, which can be traced in particular to the rise
of geometry in ancient Greece, without claiming it to be the origin, if there is such a
single origin, of the idea of measurement. As understood here, a quantum measure-
ment does not measure some preexisting property of reality. An act of quantum
23 Bohr says, for example, that “the concept of stationary states may indeed be said to possess,
within its ﬁeld of application, just as much, or, if one prefers, as little ‘reality’ as the elementary
particles themselves. In each case are concerned with expedients which enable us to express in
a consistent manner essential aspects of the phenomena” (Bohr 1987, v. 1, p. 12). That may be
close to the present view. The statement still appears, however, more likely to imply that either
concept is an idealization but not that of the concept of the elementary particle or quantum object,
as an idealization, applied only at the time of measurement. In commenting on the complexities of
Bohr’s argument in his reply to EPR (Bohr 1935), Arthur Fine asks: “But should we say that an
electron is nowhere at all until we are set up to measure its position, or would it be inappropriate
(meaningless?) even to ask?” (Fine 2020). In the present view, an electron, or what is idealized,
is simply not assumed to have existed (that is, the corresponding is idealization is not assumed to
apply) before the interaction between the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum
phenomena and the measuring instrument, and this idealization is always introduced by us after
this interaction. A similar view appears to be associated with Bohr in (D’Ariano et al 2017): “Bohr
would have said that there is no particle before we reveal it [by an experiment]: only the outcome
of an experiment is real” (p. 155). Bohr could have said it, but he did not, at least not expressly.
On the other hand, I don’t think that Bohr would subscribe to the second part of this statement.
As indicated above and as will be discussed in detail in Chap. 6, he appears to have seen quantum
objects as real, and only claimed that one cannot unambiguously refer to their properties but only
to the effects of their interaction with measuring instruments. Quantum objects are entities of the
RWR-type. Bohr would, of course, have agreed with the view expressed by (D’Ariano et al 2017)
on the same occasion that “only the performed tests and their outcome have the objectivity status”
(p. 155).

2.6 Measurement, Idealization, and Quantum Indeﬁnitiveness
67
measurement establishes quantum phenomena by an interaction between the instru-
ment and the quantum object, or, in the present view, the ultimate, RWR-type, phys-
ical reality, which, in this interaction, create a quantum phenomenon, as a classical
entity, and a quantum object, as an RWR-type entity, or what is so idealized. My
emphasis reﬂects the fact that, although our decision concerning which measure-
ment to perform plays a key role in establishing what can be observed and then
predicted, it cannot control the outcome of a measurement, such as the value of
the observed variable, or the outcome of the predicted measurement when the latter
is performed. Any such outcome is always a product of the interaction between
the ultimate physical reality responsible for quantum phenomena, the reality that
exists independently, and the measuring instruments. Then what is so observed, as
the data or information, always after this interaction, can be measured classically,
just as what is observed in classical physics, where, however, what is so measured
could be associated with the object itself for all practical purposes. As concerns the
data or information thus registered, always as classical, a quantum measurement is a
number-generating process, creating new numbers, probabilistically predictable by
means of quantum theory, such as QM or QFT, on the basis of numbers generated
in the same way by a previous measurement. According to Bohr:
This necessity of discriminating in each experimental arrangement between those parts of the
physical system considered which are to be treated as measuring instruments and those which
constitute the objects under investigation may indeed be said to form a principal distinction
between classical and quantum-mechanical description of physical phenomena. It is true
that the place within each measuring procedure where this discrimination is made is in both
cases largely a matter of convenience. While, however, in classical physics the distinction
between object and measuring agencies does not entail any difference in the character of the
description of the phenomena concerned, its fundamental importance in quantum theory …
has its root in the indispensable use of classical concepts in the interpretation of all proper
measurements, even though the classical theories do not sufﬁce in accounting for the new
types of regularities with which we are concerned in atomic physics. In accordance with
this situation there can be no question of any unambiguous interpretation of the symbols
of quantum mechanics other than that embodied in the well-known rules which allow us to
predict the results to be obtained by a given experimental arrangement described in a totally
classical way. (Bohr 1935, p. 701)
Before I discuss the signiﬁcance of this elaboration for understanding the idealiza-
tion of physical reality in RWR-type interpretations, I would like to address two
common misunderstandings to which this and related statements by Bohr have often
led. First, Bohr’s statement may suggest that, while observable parts of measuring
instruments are described by means of classical physics, the independent behavior
of quantum objects is described or represented by means of quantum–mechanical
formalism. This type of view has been adopted by some, for example, as noted earlier,
Dirac (1930, 1958) and von Neumann (1932), and in part under the impact of their
books, especially that of von Neumann, is sometimes referred to as “the Copen-
hagen interpretation.” It was not, however, Bohr’s view, at least after he revised
his Como argument, which, as noted, entertained (still ambivalently) this type of
view and had inﬂuenced others, including Dirac and von Neumann, in this regard.
Bohr’s Como argument might, however, have been in turn inﬂuenced by Dirac’s

68
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
paper on transformation theory (Dirac 1927), which adopted this view (Plotnitsky
2009, pp. 191–218). Bohr does say above that the observable parts of measuring
instruments are described by means of classical physics and that the classical theo-
ries cannot sufﬁce to account for quantum phenomena. But he does not say that the
independent behavior of quantum objects is described by the quantum–mechanical
formalism. His statement only implies that quantum objects cannot be treated classi-
cally, for if they could be, classical theories would sufﬁce in accounting for the new
types of regularities in question. The “symbols” of quantum–mechanical formalism
are assumed here, as elsewhere in Bohr, only to have a probabilistically or statistically
predictive role.
The difference of this view of Bohr from that of Dirac or von Neumann, and those
who have followed them is worth a brief further commentary. Thus, von Neumann,
taking Schrödinger’s equation as a postulate, deﬁnes, ontologically, the independent
development of a quantum system, postulated to be classically causal, in terms of the
so-called unitary evolution, followed by a von Neumann–Lüders measurement. Von
Neumann even speaks of this evolution as “thermodynamically reversible,” which
implies a physical ontology (von Neumann 1932, p. 418). This is a (non-falsiﬁable)
ontological postulate, which is not necessary, insofar as Schrödinger’s equation could
be seen, as it was by Bohr or is here, only as part of the probabilistically predictive
machinery of QM. A “unitary evolution” deﬁned by Schrödinger’s equation, is, in
the RWR or related views, not a physical process, which understanding would also
allow one to avoid some of the difﬁculties von Neumann has under his assumptions,
including in using his language. Thus, it is difﬁcult to speak of operators as measuring
quantities, as von Neumann does in considering the intervention of measurement into
the unitary evolution deﬁned by Schrödinger’s equation (e.g., von Neumann 1932,
p. 347). In the present view, or that of Bohr, the intervention, while its outcome can be
probabilistically predicted mathematically by QM, cannot itself be represented math-
ematically by QM, and von Neumann’s argument shows the difﬁculties of getting
around the possibility that it might not. I shall discuss this aspect of Bohr’s view
in Chap. 6. For the moment, in Bohr’s or the present view, Schrödinger’s equation
(cum Born’s rule) establishes an “expectation-catalog” for the outcome of possible
future measurements at any future point in time based on the outcome of an already
performed measurement (Schrödinger 1935, p. 154). Once a new measurement is
made, the equation, using the data obtained in this measurement, will deﬁne a new
expectation-catalog, for which any data obtained prior to this measurement is no
longer of any use.24
24 See note 13 above. I have discussed the difﬁculties of von Neumann’s argument in (Plotnitsky
2009, pp. 205–214). See (D’Ariano 2020), for a critique of von Neumann’s unitarity ontology,
especially on its non-falsiﬁable nature. The article put into question, “the ontology of the unitary
realization of quantum transformations,” is introduced by von Neumann but used more gener-
ally (D’Ariano 2020, p. 1925). D’Ariano’s conclusion is as follows: “Finally, we have said that
most interpretations of [quantum] theory (many-world, relational, Darwinism, transactional, von
Neumann–Wigner, time-symmetric,…) are indeed interpretations of the unitarity-purity dogma,
and not genuine interpretations of the theory strictly speaking. Such interpretations … still play a
role as models, helping our conceptual understanding and intuition. However, they should not be

2.6 Measurement, Idealization, and Quantum Indeﬁnitiveness
69
Bohr’s insistence on the indispensability of classical physical concepts in consid-
ering measuring instruments is often misunderstood as well, in particular by disre-
garding that measuring instruments contain both classical and quantum strata. Even
though what is observed as phenomena in quantum experiments is beyond the
capacity of classical physics to account for them, the classical description can and,
in order for us to be able to give an account of what happens in quantum experi-
ments, must apply to the observable parts of measuring instruments. The instruments,
however, also have a quantum stratum, through which they interact with quantum
objects or, in the present view, the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for
quantum phenomena, which interaction would not be possible without this quantum
stratum. This interaction is quantum and thus cannot be observed as such or, in
RWR-type interpretations, represented. It is “irreversibly ampliﬁed” to the classical
level of observable effects, say, a spot left on a silver screen (e.g., [Bohr 1987, v. 2,
p. 73]).25
taken too seriously. This is the main lesson of Copenhagen” (D’Ariano 2020, p. 1932). D’Ariano
is right to trace these ontological interpretations to the unitarity-purity dogma, which he shows to
be unnecessary, also by deriving quantum theory (admittedly, only in ﬁnite dimensions), by associ-
ating to it a Hilbert space (as von Neumann does), but by using different postulates, in his “minimal
interpretation.” (Elsewhere, in applying the formalism to the problem of consciousness, he also
proposes a different, discrete or “atomic” non-unitary evolution of pure states [also D’Ariano and
Faggin 2021].) D’Ariano only needs, in addition to a Hilbert space and a tensor product of Hilbert
spaces, two additional postulates (vs. four of von Neumann), one of which is a form of Born’s
rule. Physics, he argues, does not require the unitarity-purity dogma, as the black-hole information
paradox and other features of higher-lever quantum theory or potentially quantum gravity suggest
as well (D’Ariano 2020, pp. 1925–1926). He is also right to see it as a lesson of Copenhagen.
In Bohr’s and the present view (which I am not attributing to D’Ariano), the main interpretative
postulate, assuming the formalism of quantum theory, in either inﬁnite or ﬁnite dimensions, or
even QFT is as follows. No structure, for example, an axiomatic one, pertaining to the formalism
is assumed or even is, in principle, allowed to have an ontological, realist, signiﬁcance. Obviously,
other postulates would be necessary for deriving quantum theory (in ﬁnite or inﬁnite dimensions).
What is put into question here is the ontological nature of any structure within the formalism or any
postulate concerning the relationships between such structures, apart from a classical ontology of
measuring instruments or phenomena to which such structures might relate, via Born’s or analogous
rule. I am, again, not attributing this (strong RWR-type) position to D’Ariano. In contrast, however,
to von Neumann’s axioms, the axioms proposed by D’Ariano are not ontological, and hence consis-
tent with the RWR view. They are, he argues, also falsiﬁable, as opposed to “the unitarity-purity
dogma,” which is not. In any event, in Bohr or the present view, as a strong RWR view, any such
structure could only be assumed to have a probabilistically predictive signiﬁcance and is thus part
of the symbolic and, hence, nonontological probabilistic machinery of quantum theory. No onto-
logical interpretation of the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena
is accordingly possible under this assumption, which is, admittedly, not falsiﬁable either, but is
practically justiﬁable. This is the main lesson of “Bohr’s Copenhagen,” deﬁned by the spirit of
reality without realism.
25 The physical nature of this “ampliﬁcation” is a separate matter and is part of the problem,
commonly, including by this author, seen as unsolved (although there are claims to the contrary, for
example, on lines of the consistent histories approach), of the transition from the quantum to the
classical, which and related subjects, such as “decoherence,” are beyond my scope here. One could
attempt to formalize this situation, as, for example, in (Ozawa 1997). One considers a compound
quantum system, QO + QI, consisting of the quantum object under investigation, QO and the

70
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
The situation under discussion is sometimes referred to as the arbitrariness of the
“cut” or, because the term cut [Schnitt] was favored by Heisenberg and von Neumann,
the “Heisenberg-von Neumann cut.” As Bohr noted, however, while “it is true that the
place within each measuring procedure where this discrimination [between the object
and the measuring instrument] is made is … largely a matter of convenience,” it is
true only largely, but not completely. This is because, as he said on the same occasion,
“in each experimental arrangement and measuring procedure we have only a free
choice of this place within a region where the quantum–mechanical description of
the process concerned is effectively equivalent with the classical description” (Bohr
1935, p. 701).26 In other words, the ultimate constitution of the physical reality
responsible for quantum phenomena, including quantum objects (in the present view
deﬁned as an idealization applicable only at the time measurement) observed in
measuring instruments is never on the measurement side of the cut. Neither are
quantum strata of the instruments through which the latter interact with this reality. At
one end, then, the effects observed in quantum experiments, as quantum phenomena,
canberepresentedbymeansofclassicalphysicalconcepts.Indeed,classicalconcepts
are necessary already in order to establish the peculiar features of these effects and
to ascertain their quantum emergence, which is beyond the grasp of these concepts.
(This is, as noted, why classical physics cannot predict them either, for if it could, as a
realist theory, represent this emergence as well.) This necessity of classical concepts
and yet their inability to grasp the ultimate nature of reality responsible for quantum
processesorallowroomforthelawsofquantumtheoryhasbeenandremainadifﬁcult
point to confront. This difﬁculty was emphasized by Heisenberg in his unpublished
response to EPR’s paper, based on the concept of the shifting cut (Heisenberg 1935)
and elsewhere (e.g., Heisenberg 1962, p. 56). Heisenberg’s response was written
before Bohr’s reply to EPR, and inﬂuenced it, arguably especially Bohr’s passage
under discussion, as their correspondence indicates, although Heisenberg’s views
were in turn inﬂuenced by Bohr’s earlier writings (e.g., Plotnitsky 2009, pp. 309–
310). Heisenberg’s view expressed there and his understanding of the cut appear to be
somewhat different from that of Bohr (Plotnitsky 2009, pp. 309–310). Heisenberg’s
response was, however, never ﬁnished, perhaps because of Bohr’s parallel work on
his reply and its quick publication, within only a few weeks after EPR’s paper. This
makes it difﬁcult to assess Heisenberg’s ultimate view there, as opposed to that of
quantum part, QI, of the instrument I, QO + QI, which is isolated during the (short) time interval
when the quantum interaction in question takes place. The rest of the instrument, I, performs the
measurement, a pointer measurement, on QI, after the interaction has taken place. In realist schemes,
such as that of Ozawa, the evolution of t QO + QI, the unitary evolution operator, U(t) = e−it H,
where H = HQO + HQI + HQOQI is the Hamiltonian representing the internal behavior of the
subsystems involved and HQOQI the interaction between them. In Bohr’s and the present view,
as RWR views, no element of the formalism represents the ultimate nature of reality responsible
for quantum phenomena, including its stratum involved in the interaction between QO and QI,
responsible for the effects observed. Any such element only serves as part of the mathematics of
QM that, with the help of Born’s or analogous rule, predicts such effects.
26 This could be seen as a manifestation of Bohr’s correspondence principle, which says that in the
classical limit the predictions of quantum and classical theory should coincide, even though the
phenomena considered are still quantum and can exhibit quantum effects.

2.6 Measurement, Idealization, and Quantum Indeﬁnitiveness
71
Bohr in his replay. Both, however, are manifestly based on the stratiﬁed structure of
reality deﬁning quantum phenomena, which is the main point of my discussion at
the moment.27
It might be opportune to brieﬂy comment on Schrödinger’s cat-paradox from the
perspective here outlined. His thought experiment is as follows:
One can even set up quite ridiculous cases. A cat is penned up in a steel chamber, along
with the following device (which must be secured against direct interference by the cat): in
a Geiger counter there is a tiny bit of radioactive substance, so small, that perhaps in the
course of the hour one of the atoms decays, but also, with equal probability, perhaps none; if
it happens, the counter tube discharges and through a relay releases a hammer which shatters
a small ﬂask of hydrocyanic acid. If one has left this entire system to itself for an hour,
one would say that the cat still lives if meanwhile no atom has decayed. The ψ-function
of the entire system would express this by having in it the living and dead cat (pardon the
expression) mixed or smeared out in equal parts. (Schrödinger 1935, p. 157)
In RWR-type interpretations, there is no superposition of the states of the cat, but
only a superposition of state vectors, which allows us to predict the 50% probability
of the quantum radioactive decay while the cat is in the box and hence for either
outcome once we open the box. In fact, Schrödinger pretty much says as much, in
part given that (which is often forgotten) his thought experiment is introduced in
explaining the difﬁculty or even impossibility of assuming that variables considered
are “blurred” (Schrödinger 1935, pp. 156–157). QM, in these interpretations, tells
us nothing about the cat inside the box, which (unlike the radioactive decay) may
be considered a classical macro object, whose behavior, as a cat, is not described by
QM. Indeed, in these interpretations, QM does not describe the (RWR-type) reality
responsible for the decay either but only predicts the probability of its occurrence. So,
one could consider the cat as a (quantum) object under investigation in Bohr’s scheme
here outlined, in which case the cat could not be represented or even conceived of
as such since we can only conceive of and experience cats classically. In RWR-type
interpretations, QM does not represent cats as quantum objects either, any more than
electrons: it only predicts the effects that quantum objects can have on the classical
world as experience it, effects deﬁning quantum phenomena, such as the one created
when we open the box. Once we do so, there is a classical state of the reality of the
observable part of the instrument, which includes the cat, as either dead or alive.
Now, in the present view, if not that of Bohr (or that of Heisenberg or von
Neumann), a quantum object, while still an RWR-type idealization, is different from
that of the ultimate, RWR-type, reality that is responsible for both quantum objects
and quantum phenomena, and is assumed to have an independent existence. While
a measuring instrument, which is, in its observable part, a classical object, or, at the
other pole, the ultimate constitution of the reality considered, are assumed to be inde-
pendent, a quantum object can, in view of these considerations, only be rigorously
deﬁned by a measurement and its setup, including the cut, and thus by our obser-
vation of the outcome of this measurement. By the same token, the corresponding
27 An argument concerning the stratiﬁed character of the reality deﬁning quantum phenomena,
without adopting the RWR view was proposed in (Rovelli 1996).

72
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
idealization, say, an electron, only applies after the interaction between this reality
and the measuring instrument has taken place, and the exact time of this interaction or
its duration cannot be exactly known. Accordingly, there is no independent behavior
of quantum objects either: there is only the interaction between the ultimate (RWR-
type) nature of reality and measuring instruments, the interaction of which allows
one to deﬁne quantum objects. As discussed in Chap. 6, this interaction actually takes
place before the measurement qua measurement itself, which pertain to the state of
the quantum stratum of the instrument after this interaction, and no longer to the state
of the quantum object, which, or what is so idealized, thus no longer exists either
in the present view (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 57). It is this state, rather than the state of
quantum object or the independent reality with which the instrument had interacted
but no longer does that is then “irreversibly ampliﬁed” to the macroscopic, classical
level of observable effects, such as a spot left on a silver screen. If one assumes the
independent existence of quantum objects, then one can say, as Bohr does, that “the
particle [the quantum object] is already on its way from one instrument to another,”
the statement that, again, appears to suggest that Bohr assumes the independent exis-
tence of quantum objects (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 57). What is considered as a quantum
object in a given experiment can be different in each case, including possibly some-
thing that, if considered by itself, could be viewed as classical, as in the case of
Carbon 60 fullerene molecules, which were observed as both classical and quantum
objects (Arndt et al. 1999). The quantum nature of any quantum object is still deﬁned
by its microscopic constitution, with which elementary particles are associated. The
ultimate, RWR-type reality itself responsible for this situation is, again, assumed
here to have an independent existence and is always, in any possible experiment, on
the other side of the cut.28
The following question might, then, be asked. If a quantum object is an idealiza-
tion that only refers to what exists is as deﬁned by an experiment or measurement,
rather than to something that exists independently, could one still speak of the same
quantum object, say, the same electron, in two or more successive measurements?
Consider (speaking ﬁrst in more conventional terms) two position measurements, the
ﬁrst deﬁned by a slit in a diaphragm through which an electron, emitted from some
source, may be assumed to be registered to pass by some counter, and the second
deﬁned by a collision between it and a silver bromide screen at some distance from the
diaphragm. Each of these two measurements deﬁnes an electron, with the same mass
and charge, in two different positions at two different moments in time. As explained
later, the case can be given a strictly RWR interpretation, insofar as all these proper-
ties (mass, charge, and position) are, physically, those of measuring devices, assumed
to be impacted by quantum objects, rather than of these objects themselves, placed
beyond representation or conception. For the moment, the question is: Do these two
measurements register the same electron, or can the corresponding idealization refer
to the same quantum object? Rigorously, if the idealization of quantum objects is
28 The concept “quantum object” could be deﬁned otherwise, as they would be in a different inter-
pretation of QM or an alternative theory of quantum phenomena, as for example, on more realist
lines, in (Jaeger 2014), via Abner Shimony’s concept of “quantum indeﬁniteness” (Shimony 1988).

2.6 Measurement, Idealization, and Quantum Indeﬁnitiveness
73
only applicable, as it is here, at the time of measurement, then a prediction based on
a given measurement and the new measurement based on this prediction could only
concern a new quantum object, arising in the interaction between the ultimate consti-
tution of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena and measuring instruments,
and not an object that we measured earlier in making a prediction. Accordingly,
in the present view, rigorously, one deals with two different quantum objects, two
different electrons, for example. To consider them as the same electron is, however,
a permissible idealization in low-energy (QM) regimes, an idealization ultimately
statistical in nature, because a collision with the screen, is not guaranteed, although
the probability that it will not is low. Nevertheless, one could, within these limits,
speak of the transition between (physical) states of the same quantum object, the
states deﬁned in terms of the effects observed in measuring instruments.
On the other hand, as discussed in Chap. 8, speaking of the same electron in
any two successive measurements in high-energy (QFT) regimes is meaningless,
which further justiﬁes the present concept of a quantum object and the tripartite
idealization scheme, as outlined here. The concept of quantum ﬁeld, considered
in Chap. 8, responds to this situation, also allowing one, applying the concept of
quantum ﬁeld (which is assumed to exist independently and thus is not a quantum
object in the present deﬁnition), to see measurement in low-energy (QM) regimes
as a limit case. The interaction between measuring instruments and quantum ﬁelds
are, then, manifested in registering two quantum objects of the same type (or a
quantum object and nothing) in two successive measurements, and speaking of the
same quantum objects in two successive measurements is a statistically permissible
idealization.
As noted from the outset of this study, the epistemological cost of the RWR view
is not easily absorbed by most physicists and philosophers, and to some, beginning,
famously, with Einstein, is unacceptable. This is not surprising because the features
of quantum phenomena that are manifested in many famous experiments and that led
to RWR views defy many assumptions concerning nature commonly considered as
basic. These assumptions, arising, again, due to the neurological constitution of our
brain, have served us for as long as human life, and within certain limits, are unavoid-
able, although, while fully respected by classical physics, their scope, as noted, was
already challenged by relativity. QM has made this challenge much greater. The
same neurological constitution may also prevent us from conceiving of the ulti-
mate (RWR-type) nature of physical reality responsible for quantum phenomena.
Thus, it is humanly natural and even unavoidable to assume that something happens
between observations. The sense that something happened is one of the most essential
elements of human thought, and in a certain sense deﬁnes it, especially as concerns
temporality. However, in the RWR view, the expression “something happened” is
ultimately inapplicable to the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for
quantum phenomena. According to Heisenberg:
There is no description of what happens to the system between the initial observation and the
next measurement. …The demand to “describe what happens” in the quantum-theoretical
process between two successive observations is a contradiction in adjecto, since the word
“describe” refers to the use of classical concepts, while these concepts cannot be applied in

74
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
the space between the observations; they can only be applied at the points of observation.
(Heisenberg 1962, pp. 57, 145)
The same would apply to the word “happen” or “system,” or any word we use, what-
ever concept it may designate, including reality, although when “reality” refers to
that of the RWR-type, it is a word without a concept attached to it. As Heisenberg
says: “But the problems of language are really serious. We wish to speak in some
way about the structure of the atoms and not only about ‘facts’—the latter being,
for instance, the black spots on a photographic plate or the water droplets in a cloud
chamber. However, we cannot speak about the atoms in ordinary language” (Heisen-
berg 1962, pp. 178–179). Nor is it possible in terms of ordinary concepts, from which
ordinary language is indissociable, or, in the RWR view, even in terms of physical
concepts, assuming the latter can be entirely dissociated from ordinary concepts.29
This is a formidable problem even if one adopts the strong RWR view. The term
“reality” in the phrase “reality without realism” does not pose a difﬁculty here,
because this term has no concept associated with it, making it akin to a mathematical
symbol. Of greater difﬁculty are expressions like “quantum objects interact with each
other,” used for example, in considering the EPR experiment and entanglement, or
“the interaction between the independent RWR-type reality and a measuring instru-
ment,” which refer to something between or before observations. One can handle
this difﬁculty as follows in the RWR view. Although one can provisionally speak of
a “relation” between two or more quantum objects, including the quantum strata of
measuring instruments, there is no term or concept, such as “interaction” or “rela-
tion,” or “taking place,” applicable to what “takes place.” Any rigorous statements
can only concern observable events, with which, moreover, and only with which the
concept of a quantum object is associated. Accordingly, in this view, one cannot rigor-
ously speak of an interaction between quantum objects and between experiments,
with the concept quantum objects applicable, again, only at the time of measurement
in the present interpretation. One can only speak of two quantum objects associated
with two measurements performed initially and then two quantum objects associ-
ated with two measurements performed subsequently. These measurements may be
related in one way or another, for example, in terms of entanglement, and predicted
accordingly, in the case of entanglement by using the concept of an entangled state
in the formalism. I shall consider this aspect of the situation in detail in Chaps. 6 and
7, in the context of the EPR-type experiments, entanglement, and quantum correla-
tions, and in Chap. 8 in the context of the concept of virtual particles. Mathematical
concepts are, in Heisenberg’s view, a possible exception, a possibility that I shall
address presently.
Before I do so, I would like to restate the quantum indeﬁnitiveness postulate,
deﬁned in the Preface, which is a consequence of the RWR view and which especially
reﬂects the situation just considered. It dictates the impossibility of making deﬁnitive
statements of any kind, including mathematical ones, concerning the relationship
between any two individual quantum phenomena or events, indeed to deﬁnitively
29 Heisenberg’s view of language invites a more extended treatment, which is beyond my scope.
For a helpful analysis, see (Camilleri 2011, pp. 152–171).

2.6 Measurement, Idealization, and Quantum Indeﬁnitiveness
75
ascertain the existence of any such relationship. It does allow for making deﬁnitive
statements concerning individual phenomena or events, deﬁned by measurements,
and statements concerning the relationships between multiple events, statements
statistical in nature. It only concerns events that have already happened, rather than
possible future events, in which case one can make probabilistic statements, on
Bayesian lines.
Precluding the possibility of any mathematical connections between individual
events makes the postulate stronger than Heisenberg’s claim, just cited. While
prohibiting common language and in effect a physical description of what “happens”
between quantum experiments, this claim in principle allows for the mathematical
representation of what the ultimate constitution of physical reality, including, in
Heisenberg’s view in his later works, in terms of elementary particles deﬁned mathe-
matically through symmetry groups. The words “happens” or even “physical” need,
accordingly, no longer apply to this representation. As Heisenberg said on an earlier
occasion, mathematics is “fortunately” free from the limitations of ordinary language
and concepts:
It is very difﬁcult to modify our language so that it will be able to describe these atomic
processes, for words can only describe things of which we can form mental pictures, and
this ability, too, is a result of daily experience. Fortunately, mathematics is not subject to
this limitation, and it has been possible to invent a mathematical scheme—the quantum
theory [e.g., QM]—which seems entirely adequate for the treatment of atomic processes.
(Heisenberg 1930, p. 11)
Admittedly, this freedom is gained at the cost of an enormous reduction of our
representational phenomenal thinking from which mathematics was born, in part by
way of this reduction, but only in part, because, as noted at the outset of this chapter,
mathematics is also and even primarily deﬁned by its concepts, which need not be
reductive, and, more often than not, are not. In physics, however, or in mathematics
itself, mathematics enables us to relate to things in nature and mind which are beyond
the reach of phenomenal thinking or all other thinking, including mathematical. In
quantum theory it does so by enabling us to estimate probabilities or statistics of
quantum events, to which Heisenberg refers here by speaking of this scheme, QM,
as “entirely adequate for the treatment of atomic processes.” At the time, Heisenberg,
adopting the RWR view, used this freedom to construct QM as a theory only designed
to predict the probabilities or statistics of events observed in measuring instruments.
It is equally fortunate that nature allows us, in our interaction with it, just to have
such a scheme, for the fact of its freedom from the limitations of common language
and concepts, or in its abstract nature, even physical concepts, does not guarantee
that it will work in physics. But it does in QM or QFT, making them, as I argue,
fundamentally mathematical in this respect. In contrast, in his later writings, in part
in view of QFT, Heisenberg assumed the possibility of a mathematical representation
of the ultimate constitution of reality, while excluding physical concepts (at least in
their customary sense found in classical physics or relativity) as applicable to this
constitution (e.g., Heisenberg 1962, pp. 145, 167–186). Heisenberg, as noted, speaks
of this representation in terms of symmetry groups and deﬁnes elementary particles
accordingly, without considering them as particles in a physical sense. The concept of

76
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
an elementary particle can be given a mathematical sense insofar as the corresponding
representation of the group is irreducible (Wigner 1939; Newton and Wigner 1949).
Heisenberg even suggests that Kant’s “thing-in-itself is for the atomic physicist, if
he uses this concept at all, ﬁnally a mathematical structure; but this structure is—
contrary to Kant—indirectly deduced from experience [rather than is given to our
thought a priori, as in Kant]” (Heisenberg 1962, p. 83).
In any event, such was the case for Heisenberg, given that, while there were others
at the time or since who adopted this view, it was not universal as a philosophical view,
although, as stated from the outset of this study, the practice of theoretical physics,
especially QFT and elementary particle, has been deﬁned by working primarily with
abstract mathematical structures, beginning with Heisenberg’s discovery of quantum
mechanics. Bohr, for one, rejected the possibility of a mathematical representation
of quantum objects and behavior, or the reality they idealize, along with a physical
one, at least in his ultimate, strong RWR-type interpretation. Bohr often speaks of
this reality as being beyond our phenomenal intuition, also involving visualization,
sometimes used, including by Bohr, to translate the German word for intuition,
Anschaulichkeit (e.g., [Bohr 1987, v. 1 p. 51, 98–100, 108; v. 2, p. 59]). It is clear,
however,that,apartfromtheComolecture,Bohrsawtheultimatenatureofthisreality
as being beyond any representation or even conception, including a mathematical
one, at least as things stand now.
Indeed, notwithstanding its dominant role in modern physics, ampliﬁed and even
made unique in quantum theory, it is, as noted in the Preface, not clear why math-
ematics, which is the product of the same human thinking as ordinary language or
physical concepts are, should be able to represent how nature ultimately works at its
very small (or very large) scales. It is not clear either that, in contrast to its capacity to
do so at the scales handled by QFT, mathematics will enable us to predict phenomena
shaped by the workings of nature far at the smaller scales, such as Planck’s scale,
although the current consensus appears to be that it should be able to do so. But
a consensus is not always a guarantee. Bohr, in speaking of “the special role …
played by mathematics in development of [all] logical thinking” and “invaluable
help [offered] by its well-deﬁned abstractions” in quantum theory, nevertheless,
added: “Still, … we should not consider pure mathematics as a separate branch
of knowledge, but rather as a reﬁnement of general language, supplementing it with
appropriate tools to represent relations for which ordinary verbal expression is impre-
cise and cumbersome” (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 68). This reﬁnement can take us very far
from ordinary language and concepts, a distance that is, again, manifested in the
mathematics of QM and QFT, as Bohr was of course aware, but it would still reﬂect
its human nature. Is there any mathematics other than human, given that the math-
ematics done by computers is still an extension of human mathematics? It is of
course possible to assume, as it has been sometimes, that mathematics is something
trans-human, for example, something that extraterrestrials would possess or could
understand, as opposed to being seen, as here, as a reﬁnement of human thinking and
language. These views will, however, be put aside here. There may also be trajectories
in human thinking beyond those related to “general language” or, as it might be more
accurate to say, general human thinking and language that led to the emergence of

2.6 Measurement, Idealization, and Quantum Indeﬁnitiveness
77
mathematics, for example, trajectories extending from philosophical thinking, admit-
tedly in turn the product of human thinking in general, but already reﬁned logically
and conceptually to be closer to mathematics.30 In any event, the deeper meaning or
implications of Bohr’s statement is that mathematics is still human, which is also a
philosophical position concerning mathematics adopted in this study. As such, even
mathematics may not ultimately be suited, because nothing human can, to deal with
the ultimate constitution of nature, either in terms of representing or conceiving of
it, in accord with the U-RWR view, or even in predicting probabilistically, as QM or
QFT does, the outcome of the events considered, without offering a representation
or conception of how they come about.31 I am not saying that we cannot go further
with our fundamental physical theories and their mathematics; quite the contrary,
especially as concerns the role of mathematics there, building on quantum theory,
which is the afﬁrmation of mathematics and mathematical thinking in physics. This
thinking is all the more remarkable because, beginning with Heisenberg’s discovery
or even Bohr’s 1913 atomic theory, it connects us, by means of mathematics, to that
which may be beyond the reach of thought.
2.7
Conclusion
As, I hope, the discussion in this chapter makes clear and, as I also hope, the rest of
this study will conﬁrm, the RWR view does not preclude the advancement of thought
and knowledge in mathematics, science, or philosophy, in all of which the RWR view
may apply. What changes is the character of our thinking and knowledge. They now
include the assumption that there is something that is beyond knowledge or even
thought, not only now but possibly ever, while at the same time being responsible,
as its effects, for what we can think, know, or represent at the level of observed
phenomena, in quantum physics and, in the U-RWR view, in all physics. To handle
these effects one needed new experiments and new theories, such as QM and QFT,
which also required and created new mathematics, and one will continue to need them
to advance physics. Physics, theoretical, and experimental require much more than
RWR-type thinking, which would have never been sufﬁcient to create QM or QFT,
30 The origin of geometry as born, as a single event, from philosophy in ancient Greece, was
considered by Edmund Husserl, in philosophical rather than strictly historical terms, in one of his
last works, “The Origin of Geometry” (Husserl 1970). Husserl similarly contemplated the origin of
arithmetic in his ﬁrst major work, Philosophy of Arithmetic (Husserl 2003). The singular nature of
the origin of geometry or its necessary emergence from philosophy was unlikely historically, and
Husserl’s argument could be challenged on Husserl’s own terms (e.g., Derrida 1989). It is possible to
argue (an angle not considered by Jacques Derrida) that the emergence of philosophy was preceded
by some form of mathematical thinking, even if not technical mathematics. The subject would,
however, require a separate discussion.
31 This argument is different from Eugene Wigner’s much discussed argument for “the unreasonable
effectiveness of mathematics in the natural sciences” (Wigner 1960). This effectiveness is not
unreasonable, especially in classical physics (e.g., Plotnitsky 2011a). By contrast in question in the
present argument are the limits of this effectiveness.

78
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
deﬁned most fundamentally by their extraordinary mathematics. RWR-type thinking
may, however, be helpful and possibly even necessary for advancing physical theories
or their interpretations. Thus, as discussed in Chap. 4, although RWR-type thinking
could not do so on its own accord, this thinking compelled Heisenberg to search for
and discover the mathematics of QM. As Bohr said:
This [RWR-type] argumentation does of course not imply that, in atomic physics, we have no
more to learn as regards experimental evidence and the mathematical tools appropriate to its
comprehension. In fact, it seems likely that the introduction of still further abstractions into
the formalism will be required to account for the novel features revealed by the exploration
of atomic processes of very high energy. (Bohr 1987, v. 3, p. 6)
The history of high-energy physics and QFT has conﬁrmed this assessment, made
in 1958, and continues to do so, without, thus far, contradicting Bohr’s argumen-
tation referred to here or the RWR view, in which this argumentation is based. So
has the history of QM during the same period. It is true that, unlike mathematical
breakthroughs in QFT, such as those that led to the standard model, there have been
no major changes in the mathematics of QM. Even so, the exploration of quantum
correlations from the 1960s on and the rise of quantum information theory have
been major developments, which opened new possibilities for the future of quantum
theory. It is also possible that quantum information theory will lead to new math-
ematical innovations, conceivably in helping to bring quantum theory and gravity
together. Of course, a relative newcomer to this project, quantum information theory
has many competitors in pursuing this task. It is difﬁcult to predict, on either exper-
imental or theoretical grounds, which current theory or approach, if any, is a viable
starting point on this road or what kind of trajectory will lead to such a theory. It is
equally difﬁcult to predict what kind of theory, if found, such a theory will be. It may
reveal itself to be neither realist nor of the RWR type, weak or strong. Such a view is
difﬁcult to imagine, given that the strong RWR view assumes that the ultimate consti-
tution of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena, in the Q-RWR view, or, in
the U-RWR view, the ultimate constitution of nature in general is beyond thought.
What, then, could such an alternative be apart from one or another form of realism,
if deﬁned, as here, by assuming that the reality considered is at least conceivable?
One might, however, be reluctant to exclude this possibility. Nobody had expected
or imagined anything like the physical reality that relativity and quantum physics
made us think as possible or even assume to exist. And yet, here we are.
References
Aaronson, S.: Quantum Computing since Democritus. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
(2013)
Allahverdyan, A.E., Balian, R., Nieuwenhuizen, T.M.: A sub-ensemble theory of ideal quantum
measurement processes. Ann. Phys. (2016). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aop.2016.11.001
Arndt, M., Nairz, O., Voss, J., Keller, C., van der Zouw, G., Zeilinger, A.: Wave particle duality of
C60. Nature 401, 680–682 (1999)

References
79
Berthoz, A.: The Brain’s Sense of Movement, Trans. Weiss, G. Harvard University Press, Cambridge
(2000)
Berthoz, A.: La Décision. Odile Jacob, Paris (2003)
Bohr, N.: Can quantum-mechanical description of physical reality be considered complete? Phys.
Rev. 48, 696–702 (1935)
Bohr, N.: Causality and complementarity. In: Faye, J., Folse, H.J. (eds.) The Philosophical Writing
of Niels Bohr, Volume 4: Causality and Complementarity, 1999, pp. 83–91. Ox Bow Press,
Supplementary Papers, Woodbridge, CT, USA (1937)
Bohr, N.: The causality problem in atomic physics. In: Faye, J., Folse, H.J. (eds.) The Philosophical
Writings of Niels Bohr, Volume 4: Causality and Complementarity, 1999, pp. 94–121. Ox Bow
Press, Supplementary Papers, Woodbridge, CT, USA (1938)
Bohr, N.: Niels Bohr: Collected Works, 10 vols. Elsevier, Amsterdam (1972–1996)
Bohr, N.: The Philosophical Writings of Niels Bohr, 3 vols. Ox Bow Press, Woodbridge (1987)
Borel, E.: La logique et l’intuition en mathématique. Revue De Métaphysique Et De Morale 15(3),
273–283 (1907)
Born, M., Jordan, P.: Zur Quantenmechanik. Z. Phys. 34, 858–888 (1925)
Butterﬁeld, J., Isham, C.J.: Spacetime and the philosophical challenge of quantum gravity. In:
Callender, C., Huggett, N. (eds.) Physics Meets Philosophy at the Planck Scale: Contemporary
Theories of Quantum Gravity, 2021, pp. 33–89. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2001)
Cabello, A.: Interpretations of quantum theory: a map of madness. In: Lombardi, O., Fortin, S.,
Holik, F., López, C., What is Quantum Information? pp. 138–144. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge (2017)
Camilleri, K.: Heisenberg and the Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics: The Physicist as
Philosopher. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2011)
Cartwright, N.: How the Laws of Physics Lie. Oxford University Press, Oxford (1983)
Cartwright, N.: The Dappled World: A Study of the Boundaries of Science. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge (1999)
D’Ariano, G.M.: Physics without physics. Int. J. Theor. Phys. 56(1), 97–138 (2017)
D’Ariano, G.M.: Causality re-established. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A 376, 20170313 (2018). https://
doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2017.0313
D’Ariano, G.M.: No puriﬁcation ontology, no quantum paradoxes. Found. Phys. 50, 1921–1933
(2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10701-020-00398-6
D’Ariano, G.M., Chiribella, G., Perinotti, P.: Quantum Theory from First Principles: An Informa-
tional Approach. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2017)
D’Ariano, G. M., Faggin, F.: Hard problem and free will: an information-theoretical approach.
arXiv:2012.06580v2 [quant-ph] (2021)
D’Ariano, G. M., Manessi, F., Perinotti, P.: Determinism without causality. Physica Scripta T 63
14013 (9pp) (2014). https://doi.org/10.1088/0031-8949/2014/T163/014013
Dauben, J.F.: Georg Cantor: His Mathematics and Philosophy of the Inﬁnite. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, NJ (1990)
De Finetti, B.: Philosophical Lectures on Probability, Trans. Hosny, H. Springer, Berlin (2008)
Deleuze, G., Guattari, F.: What is Philosophy? Trans. Tomlinson, H., Burchell, G. Columbia
University Press, New York (1994)
Derrida, J.: Edmund Husserl’s “The Origin of Geometry”: An Introduction, Trans. Leavy, J.
University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, NA (1989)
Dirac, P.A.M.: The physical interpretation of the quantum dynamics. Proc. R. Soc. London A 113,
621–641 (1927)
Dirac, P.A.M.: The Principles of Quantum Mechanics. Clarendon, Oxford (1930)
Dirac, P. A. M.: The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, 4th ed, rpt. 1995. Clarendon, Oxford (1958)
Doxiadis, A., Mazur, B.: Circles Disturbed: The Interplay of Mathematics and Narrative. Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ (2012)
Doya, K., Ishii, S., Pouget, A., Rao, R.P.N. (eds.) Bayesian Brain: Probabilistic Approaches to
Neural Coding. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA (2007)

80
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
Einstein, A.: Physics and reality. J. Franklin Inst. 221, 349–382 (1936)
Einstein, A. Autobiographical Notes, Trans., Schilpp, P. A. Open Court , La Salle, IL (1949)
Einstein, A., Podolsky, B., Rosen, N.: Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of Physical Reality be
Considered Complete? In: Wheeler, J.A., Zurek, W.H. (eds.) Quantum Theory and Measurement,
1983, pp. 138–141. Princeton, NJ, USA, Princeton University Press (1935)
Falcon, A.: Aristotle on causality. In Zalta, E.N. (ed.) The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Spring 2015 ed.) (2015). http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2015/entries/aristotle-causality/
Fine, A.: The Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen argument in quantum theory. In: Zalta, E.N. (ed.) Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2020 Edition) (2020). https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/
sum2020/entries/qt-epr/.
Frigg, R.: Theories and Models. Acumen, Slough (2014)
Frigg,R.,Hartmann,S.:Modelsinscience.In:Zalta,E.N.(ed.)StanfordEncyclopediaofPhilosophy
(Fall 2012 Edition). http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2012/entries/models-science/
Fuchs, C.A.: On participatory realism. arXiv:1601.04360v3 [quant-ph] 28 Jun 2016
Fuchs, C.A., Mermin, N.D., Schack, R.: An introduction to QBism with an application to the locality
of quantum mechanics. Am. J. Phys. 82, 749–754 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1119/1.4874855
Galison, P.: Image and Logic: A Material Culture of Microphysics. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, IL (1997)
Gray, J.: Plato’s Ghost: The Modernist Transformation of Mathematics. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NY (2008)
Hacking,I.:RepresentingandIntervening,IntroductoryTopicsinthePhilosophyofNaturalScience.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1983)
Hacking, I.: The Social Construction of What? Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA (2000)
Hájek, A.: Interpretation of probability. In: Zalta, E.N. (ed.) Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Winter 2014 edition) (2014). http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2012/entries/probability-int
erpret/
Healey, R.: The Quantum Revolution in Philosophy. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2019)
Heisenberg, W.: Quantum-theoretical re-interpretation of kinematical and mechanical relations. In
Van der Waerden, B.L. (ed.) Sources of Quantum Mechanics, rpt. 1968, 261–277. Dover, New
York (1925)
Heisenberg, W.: The physical content of quantum kinematics and mechanics. In: Wheeler, J.A.,
Zurek, W.H. (eds.) Quantum Theory and Measurement, 1983, pp. 62–84. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, NJ (1927)
Heisenberg, W.: The Physical Principles of the Quantum Theory, Trans. Eckhart, K., Hoyt, F.C, rpt.
1949. Dover, New York, NY (1930)
Heisenberg, W.: Ist eine deterministische Ergänzung der Quantenmechanik möglich? Archive for
the history of quantum physics (microﬁlm 45, section 11). (E. Crull &G. Bacciagaluppi, English
Trans.) (1935). http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/8590/1/Heis1935_EPR_Final_translation.pdf
Heisenberg, W.: Physics and Philosophy: The Revolution in Modern Science. Harper & Row, New
York, NY (1962)
Heisenberg, W.: Quantum theory and its interpretation. In: Rozental, S. (ed.) Niels Bohr: His
Life and Work as Seen by his Friends and Colleagues, pp. 94–108. North-Holland, Amsterdam,
Netherlands (1967)
Heisenberg, W.: Encounters with Einstein, and other Essays on People, Places, and Particles.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ (1989)
Husserl, E.: The origin of geometry, in Husserl, E., The Crisis of European Sciences and Tran-
scendental Phenomenology: An Introduction to Phenomenological Philosophy, Trans. Carr, D.).
Northwestern University Press, Evanston, 353–378 (1970)
Husserl, E.: Philosophy of Arithmetic: Psychological and logical investigations with supplementary
texts from 1887–1901 Husserliana: Edmund Husserl – Collected works (Book 10), Trans. Willard,
D. Springer, Berlin (2003)
Jaeger, G.: Quantum Objects: Non-local Correlations, Causality and Objective Indeﬁniteness in the
Quantum World. Springer, New York, NY (2014)

References
81
Jaynes, E.T.: Probability Theory: The Logic of Science. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
(2003)
Kant, I.: Critique of Pure Reason, Tran. Guyer, P., Wood, A.W. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge (1997)
Khrennikov, A.: Interpretations of Probability. de Gruyter, Berlin (2009)
Khrennikov, A.: Quantum probabilities and violation of CHSH-inequality from classical random
signals and threshold type detection scheme. Prog. Theor. Phys. 128, 31–58 (2012). https://doi.
org/10.1143/PTP.128.31
Ladyman, J.: Structural realism. In: Zalta, E.N. (ed.) Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (2016).
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2016/entries/structural-realism/
Latour, B.: Pandora’s Hope: Essays on the Reality of Science Studies. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA (1999)
Newton, T.D., Wigner, E.: Localized states for elementary systems. Rev. Mod. Phys. 21, 400–406
(1949)
Ozawa, M.: An operational approach to quantum state reduction. Ann. Phys. 259, 121–137 (1997).
https://doi.org/10.1006/aphy.1997.5706
Palmquist,S.:Kantiancausalityandquantumquarks:thecompatibilitybetweenquantummechanics
and Kant’s phenomenal world. Theoria 77, 283–302 (2013)
Pincock, C.: Mathematics and Scientiﬁc Representation. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2012)
Plato: The collected dialogues of Plato. In: Hamilton E., Cairns, H. (eds.) Princeton University
Press, Princeton, NJ (2005)
Plotnitsky, A.: Epistemology and Probability: Bohr, Heisenberg, Schrödinger and the Nature of
Quantum-Theoretical Thinking. Springer, New York, NY (2009)
Plotnitsky, A.: On the reasonable and unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics in classical and
quantum physics. Found. Phys. 41, 466–491 (2011a). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10701-010-9442-2
Plotnitsky, A.: ‘Dark materials to create more worlds’: on causality in classical physics, quantum
physics, and nanophysics. J. Comput. Theor. Nanosci. 8(6), 983–997 (2011b)
Plotnitsky, A.: Bohr and Complementarity: An Introduction. Springer, New York, NY (2012)
Plotnitsky, A.: The Principles of Quantum Theory, from Planck’s Quanta to the Higgs Boson: The
Nature of Quantum Reality and the Spirit of Copenhagen. Springer/Nature, New York, NY (2016)
Plotnitsky, A.: “Comprehending the connection of things”: Bernhard Riemann and the Architecture
of mathematical concepts. In: Ji, L., Yamada, S., Papadopoulos, A. (eds.) From Riemann to
Differential Geometry and Relativity, pp. 329–363. Springer, Berlin (2017)
Plotnitsky, A.: On the concept of curve: geometry and algebra, from mathematical modernity
to mathematical modernism. In Dani, S.G., Papadopoulos, A. (eds.), Geometry in History.
Springer/Nature, Berlin, pp. 153–212 (2019)
Plotnitsky, A.: The ghost and the spirit of Pythagoras: the twentieth and twenty-ﬁrst century mathe-
matics between and beyond geometry and algebra. In: Sriraman, B. (ed.) Handbook in the History
and Philosophy of Mathematics. Springer/Nature, Berlin (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
030-19071-2_7-1
Plotnitsky, A., Khrennikov, A.: Reality without realism: on the ontological and epistemological
architecture of quantum mechanics. Found. Phys. 25(10), 1269–1300 (2015). https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10701-015-9942-1
Poincaré, H.: The Foundations of Science: Science and Hypothesis. University Press of America,
The Value of Science, Science and Method, Lanham, MD (1982)
Pólya, G.: Mathematics and Plausible Reasoning, Volume 1: Induction and Analogy in Mathematics,
rpt. 1990. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ (1958)
Popper, K.: Realism and the Aim of Science: From the Postscript to The Logic of Scientiﬁc
Discovery (1st ed.). Routledge, London (1983)
Redhead, M.: Incompleteness, Nonlocality, and Realism. Oxford University Press, Oxford (1989)
Riemann, B.: On the hypotheses that lie at the foundations of geometry. In: Pesic, P. (ed.) Beyond
Geometry: Classic Papers from Riemann to Einstein, 2007, pp. 23–40. Dover, Mineola, NY
(1854)

82
2
Fundamentals of the RWR View
Riemann, B.: The mechanism of the ear (translation of Mechanik des Ohres), by Cherry, D.,
Gallagher, R., Sigerson, J. Fusion 6(3), 1984, 31–38 (1866)
Ross, D., Spurrett, D.: Notions of cause: Russell’s thesis revisited. Br. J. Philos. Sci. 58, 45–76
(2007)
Rovelli, C.: Relational quantum mechanics. Int. J. Theor. Phys. 35(8), 1637–1678 (1996)
Ruetsche, L.: Interpreting Quantum Theories. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2011)
Russell, B.: On the notion of cause. Proc. Aristotel. Soc. New Series 13, 1–26 (1913)
Schrödinger, E.: The present situation in quantum mechanics. In: Wheeler, J.A., Zurek, W.H. (eds.)
Quantum Theory and Measurement, 1983, pp. 152–167. Princeton University Press, Princeton
(1935)
Schrödinger, E.: Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics: Dublin Seminars (1949–1955) and Other
Unpublished Essays. Ox Bow Press, Woodbridge, CT (1995)
Shimony, A.: The reality of the quantum world. Sci. Am. 258(1), 46–53 (1988)
Smolin, L.: Einstein’s Unﬁnished Revolution: The Search for What Lies Beyond the Quantum.
Penguin, New York, NY (2018)
Sorkin, R.D.: Spacetime and causal sets. In: D’Olivo, J.C. et al. (eds.) Relativity and Gravitation:
Classical and Quantum, 1991, pp. 150–173. World Scientiﬁc, Singapore (1991)
Spekkens, R.W.: Evidence for the epistemic view of quantum states: a toy theory. Phys. Rev. A 75.3
032110 (2007)
Spekkens, R.W.: Quasi-quantization: classical statistical theories with an epistemic restriction. In
Chiribella, G., Spekkens, R.W. (eds.) Quantum Theory: Informational Foundations and Foils.
Springer/Nature, New York, pp. 83–136 (2016)
Svozil,
K.:
Physical
(A)Causality:
Determinism,
Randomness,
and
Uncaused
Events.
Springer/Nature, Berlin (2018)
Timpson, C.: Quantum Information Theory and the Foundations of Quantum Mechanics. Oxford
University Press, Oxford (2016)
Van Fraassen, B.: Scientiﬁc Representation: Paradoxes of Perspective. Oxford University Press,
Oxford (2008)
Von Neumann, J.: Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (Trans. Beyer, R.T.), rpt.
1983. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ (1932)
Werner, R.F.: Comment on ‘What Bell did’. J. Phys. A 47, 424011 (2014)
Wheeler, J.A.: The Participatory Universe. Science 81 2(5), 66–67 (1981)
Wheeler, J.A.: Law without law. In: Wheeler, J.A., Zurek, W.H. (eds.) Quantum Theory and
Measurement, pp. 182–216. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ (1983)
Wheeler,J.A.:Information,physics,quantum:thesearchforlinks.In:Zurek,W.H.(ed.)Complexity,
Entropy, and the Physics of Information, pp. 3–28. Addison-Wesley, Redwood City (1990)
Wigner, E.P.: On unitary representations of the inhomogeneous Lorentz group. Ann. Math. 40,
149–204 (1939)
Wigner, E.P.: The unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics in the natural sciences. Commun. Pure
Appl. Math. 13, 1–14 (1960). https://doi.org/10.1002/cpa.3160130102
Wilczek, F.: In Search of Symmetry Lost. Nature 423, 239–247 (2005)
Wilson, A.: The Nature of Contingency: Quantum Physics as Modal Realism. Oxford University
Press, Oxford (2020)
Wittgenstein, L.: Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (Trans. Ogden, C.K.), rpt. (1985). Routledge,
London (1924)

Chapter 3
Bohr’s Breakthrough: Quantum Jumps,
Quantum States, and Transitions
Without Connections
That this insecure and contradictory foundation was sufﬁcient to
enable a man of Bohr’s unique instinct and sensitivity to
discover the principal laws of the spectral lines and of the
electron shells of the atoms, together with their signiﬁcance for
chemistry, appeared to me as a miracle—and appears to me a
miracle even today. This is the highest musicality in the sphere
of thought.
—Albert Einstein, Autobiographical Notes (Einstein 1949,
pp. 42–43; translation modiﬁed).
Abstract The chapter considers Bohr’s 1913 atomic theory and takes advantage
of its key ideas to deﬁne the physical concept of quantum state (which is different
from the mathematical concept of “quantum state,” as a vector in a Hilbert space,
in the formalism of QM) and the concept of transitions between quantum states
in accordance with the RWR view. Instead of representing the motion of electrons
and predicting, even if only probabilistically, their future states on the basis on this
representation, as in the previous, classical, electron theory, Bohr’s theory and then
QM were concerned with transitions between states of quantum objects. This was a
radical conceptual shift. These transitions, observed only in measuring instruments,
were conceived by Bohr as strictly discontinuous without allowing one to represent or
even conceive how they come about, which made them “transitions without connec-
tions.” After a general introduction given in Section 3.1, Section 3.2 considers the
structure of Bohr’s concept of a “quantum jump,” leading to the concept of transi-
tions between quantum states as “transitions without connections.” Sections 3.3 and
3.4 discuss the key physical and philosophical features and implications of Bohr’s
approach, as inaugurating the RWR view.
Keywords Bohr’s 1913 theory · Quantum jumps · Quantum postulates · Quantum
states · Transitions without connections
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
A. Plotnitsky, Reality Without Realism,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-84578-0_3
83

84
3
Bohr’s Breakthrough: Quantum Jumps, Quantum States …
3.1
Introduction
Bohr’s (1913) atomic theory (hereafter Bohr’s theory), initially dealing with the
hydrogen atom, was introduced in Bohr’s paper, “On the Constitution of Atoms
and Molecules,” the ﬁrst part of his 1913 “trilogy,” eventually published together
in his 1924 book The Theory of Spectra and Atomic Constitution (Bohr 1924).1
While Bohr’s work built on previous, already revolutionary, discoveries of Planck,
Einstein, and Ernest Rutherford, it made new radical assumptions, reﬂected in its
key postulates concerning the behavior of both light and, especially, electrons, which
made his paper an inaugural event in the history of the RWR view. In accord with
my general agenda in this study, I will, in this chapter, be primarily concerned with
the conceptual fundamentals of Bohr’s thinking and its signiﬁcance for quantum
theory, QM and QFT, now, as shaped by the RWR view, which Bohr’s (1913) theory
inaugurated. My historical account of Bohr’s theory and its development prior to
QM will be governed by this aim.2
Bohr’s theory aimed to remedy the difﬁculties of his mentor Rutherford’s “plan-
etary model” of the atom, with electrons orbiting atomic nuclei. Although a revolu-
tionary and important conception, this model was inconsistent with classical electro-
dynamics, which would dictate that the electrons would nearly instantly spiral down
into the nucleus, and hence that atoms would not be stable, while they are manifestly
stable. Bohr’s theory avoided these difﬁculties, by means of radical new postulates,
based on Planck’s and Einstein’s quantum theories, based on the possibility of the
discontinuous emission of light in the form of light energy quanta, hν, eventually
understood as photons, the hypothesis proposed by Einstein in 1906. Curiously,
Bohr did not use the photon hypothesis, which he was reluctant to accept until the
early 1920s, when the particle behavior of photons was established by Compton’s
experiment, which ﬁndings, ﬁnally, convinced Bohr. This is, however, a secondary
matter, given that Bohr’s theory did not depend on whether one treated photons as
particles or as quanta of energy, and all of his theory’s key features would have
equally applied if he had accepted the photon hypothesis at the time. Making his
own audacious move, Bohr postulated both the so-called stationary states of elec-
trons in the atom, at which they could remain in orbital motion, and discontinuous
“quantum jumps” between stationary states, resulting in the emission or from the
absorption of Planck’s quanta of radiation, without electrons radiating continuously
while remaining in orbit. Accordingly, Bohr’s theory was no less in conﬂict with
classical electrodynamics than Rutherford’s model was. In addition, again, in contra-
diction to the laws of classical electrodynamics, Bohr postulated that there would
exist a lowest energy level at which electrons would not radiate, but would only
1 My designation “Bohr’s theory” includes its subsequent development, including in dealing with
more complex atoms (in considering which the theory encountered difﬁculties), by Bohr and others,
Arnold Sommerfeld in particular, until Heisenberg’s discovery of QM in 1925.
2 Among helpful accounts are (Kragh 2012), which offers a comprehensive treatment of Bohr’s
atomic theory in its historical development, and (Folse 2014), a more philosophical treatment.

3.1 Introduction
85
absorb, energy.3 Bohr abandoned, as, in his view, hopeless at the time, an attempt
to offer a mechanical explanation for such transitions, as opposed to the stationary
states themselves, thus in accord with the weak RWR view (there is no evidence that
he entertained the strong RWR view at this point). Stationary states, he said, “can
be discussed by help of the ordinary mechanics, while the passing of the system
between different stationary states cannot be treated on that basis” (Bohr 1913, p. 7).
Bohr’s theory was radical and appeared to be pretty unnatural at the time. It was a
quantum jump from the orbit of classical theory toward quantum theory and nonre-
alism, a metaphor of which Bohr was undoubtedly aware. It took another decade
before Heisenberg abandoned a classical treatment of stationary states as orbits,
the concept that he saw as having its limitations from the very beginning (Heisen-
berg 1962, p. 41). For one thing, these orbital motions were unobservable. All that
one could observe in a laboratory, as Bohr likely did in Rutherford’s laboratory,
were discrete phenomena, such as those corresponding to an electron’s energy or
quanta of radiation, observed as spectra. (In certain circumstances, one can observe
continuous spectra in quantum physics, which are, however, ultimately manifes-
tations of the underlying quantum phenomena.) Orbits were remnants of classical
thinking. One does not need them. But it took Heisenberg to abandon them and
treat all quantum phenomena in a suitably quantum way, including by understanding
a quantum measurement as the establishment of a new phenomenon observed in a
measuring instrument rather than measuring, in the way one does in classical physics,
a property of the quantum object considered. Heisenberg also developed an entirely
new mathematics, never previously used in physics (Heisenberg 1925). Both Bohr’s
theory and QM predicted the probabilities or statistics of transitions between them,
but unlike Bohr’s theory, which treated stationary states classically, Heisenberg’s
matrix mechanics did not treat the behavior of electrons in stationary states. Dirac’s
q-number scheme and then Schrödinger’s equation were able to do so, also in prob-
abilistically or statistically predictive terms, although Schrödinger initially aimed
at a representational and, moreover, classically causal treatment of the behavior of
electrons in terms of waves.
The history leading from Bohr’s theory to QM was, of course, not so simple:
it was not a single “quantum jump” from one state of quantum theory to another.
This history contained several developments during the intervening decade, some of
which were radical and akin to quantum jumps of their own. Three contributions are
especially worth noting, not only given their importance in their own right but also
their signiﬁcance in the history of the RWR view, because they reﬂected quantum
phenomena that challenged realism.
The ﬁrst was Louis de Broglie’s 1923 theory of matter waves, which conjectured
that the same type of wave–particle duality that Planck and Einstein assumed in
the case of radiation would apply to other elementary constituents of nature, such
3 Bohr’s 1913 postulates should be distinguished from Bohr’s related but more general concept
of “the quantum postulate,” essentially combining QI (quantum individuality) and QD (quantum
discreteness) postulates, introduced, along with the concept of complementarity, in 1927, following
the discovery of QM, although the quantum postulate concerned quantum phenomena themselves
and did not depend on QM (Bohr 1987, v. 1, pp. 52–53).

86
3
Bohr’s Breakthrough: Quantum Jumps, Quantum States …
as electrons. The conjecture was soon experimentally conﬁrmed by the discovery of
electrons’diffractionincrystals.Thepresenceofthesewave-likeaspectsofelectrons’
behavior did not imply that electrons could now be treated merely as waves, any more
than photons could be treated merely as particles. Both aspects of quantum behavior
were equally unavoidable, but they manifested themselves in different and indeed
mutually exclusive circumstances. The situation was ultimately handled by means of
complementarity, although, while commonly invoked as an example of complemen-
tarity, wave–particle complementarity is a more complex matter discussed in Chap. 6.
Bohr generally avoids speaking of it. In any event, de Broglie’s theory posed major
difﬁculties for representing the behavior of quantum objects, given that we cannot
conceive of entities that are both continuous and discrete.
The second discovery was the 1925 discovery of spin by Ralph Kronig, George
Uhlenbeck, and Samuel Goudsmit. Spin has no classical counterpart and is, thus,
especially ﬁtting for the RWR view, which, however, took a while to adopt. Initially,
the idea, manifestly classical in nature, that an electron is somehow “rotating”
deterred both Heisenberg and Wolfgang Pauli, whose criticism stopped Kronig from
publishing his discovery, ﬁrst published by Uhlenbeck and Goudsmit. Spin is only
manifested as a number, which is the same for each particle of a given type, in certain
speciﬁc effects of the interaction between a quantum object and a measuring instru-
ment, effects properly predicted by QM (by using a ﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert space
over C). It is impossible to conceive of a rotation that would manifest itself in these
effects.
The third discovery, actually preceding that of spin, was that of the Bose–Einstein
statistics, based on the fact that one cannot treat any two photons having equal energy
as being two distinct identiﬁable objects. The radical nature of this discovery was
initiallyunderappreciatedbyEinstein,whohelpedSatyendraNathBosetopublishhis
paper, although Einstein took advantage of Bose’s work in his own work on the Bose–
Einstein statistics and the Bose–Einstein condensate. In any event, this feature and the
concept of the indistinguishability of particles radically changed our understanding of
the nature of quantum objects versus classical ones, with major implications for QFT,
which, as discussed in Chap. 8, brought even more radical changes to this concept.
“Particles” did not behave like “particles,” a situation that became already apparent
earlier because of wave–particle duality, but that was made more pronounced by
Bose’s discovery. This case is different from that of Einstein’s relativity, where, as
discussed in Chap. 2, while the relativistic motion with velocities close to the speed of
light (deﬁned by Lorentz’s velocity addition formula) was beyond our phenomenal
intuition, it still allowed for a representation by means of mathematized physical
concepts. By contrast, in Bose’s theory, the behavior of photons in a photon gas was
not given a representation, but only the statistical counting for predicting a future state
ofthegas.Bose’spaperalsorederivedPlanck’slawbyusingthisnew(Bose–Einstein)
statistics (Bose 1924). Bose’s counting was incompatible with the assumption of
distinguishability of individual objects, an assumption considered basic at the time.
Pauli’s exclusion principle, in which spin ﬁgures are signiﬁcant (although Pauli
missed on discovering spin), contributed to this new situation, although its main

3.1 Introduction
87
implications, such as the Fermi–Dirac statistics, became apparent after the discovery
of QM.
Bose’s paper, thus, manifested the situation that has been confronted and debated
in quantum physics ever since, and that is central to my argument in this study. This
situation is deﬁned by two fundamental (and perhaps ultimately insurmountable)
splits between the mathematics of quantum theory and physical reality: the ﬁrst is
that between this mathematics and the nature of the physical reality responsible for
observedphenomena(whicharerepresentationallyconnectedinclassicalphysicsand
relativity), and the second between this mathematics and the observed phenomena
themselves, described by classical physics, which could not, however, predict them.
Nor, it follows, could classical physics account for how quantum phenomena come
about, for if it could, it would then be able to predict them. The mathematics of
quantum theory would only predict, probabilistically or statistically, the data thus
observed without having any physical connection to these data. As was indicated
earlier and as discussed in detail in Chap. 6, the probabilistic or statistical connec-
tions between QM, or QFT, and quantum phenomena are essentially human because
they are deﬁned only by assignments of probabilities, which assignments are always
human, even in classical physics. There, however, they or the relationships between
classicaltheoriesandclassicalphenomenamaybeassumedtobephysicallygrounded
because classical physics may be assumed to represent the behavior of the systems
considered. In QM or QFT, at least in RWR-type interpretations, this assumption is
not possible, which precludes one from knowing or even conceiving of how these
relationships and, hence, our assignments of probabilities are grounded in our inter-
actions with nature, as they must be as effects of these interactions. But we do know
the mathematics of QM or QFT and that this mathematics allows us to correctly
assign these probabilities or statistics.
As the intervening history, exempliﬁed by these discoveries (and there were
several other relevant developments, including Heisenberg’s work in the old quantum
theory), would demonstrate, Heisenberg’s thinking leading to him to his discovery
of QM was far from merely an extension of Bohr’s thinking in his 1913 theory.
Bohr’s theory was, nevertheless, the most decisive event of the history leading to
QM and beyond, certainly as concerns the RWR view. On the mathematical side,
QM was the greatest event in this history, although it was a more collective effort, with
Born, Jordan, Dirac, Schrödinger, and Heisenberg himself, adding to Heisenberg’s
initial work. With Dirac’s introduction of QED and especially his relativistic equa-
tion for the electron, a new dimension, that of multiplicity, was added to the RWR
view, bringing together the irreducible unthinkable and the irreducibly multiple. One
might, however, still see Dirac’s theory as an extension of Bohr’s concept of quantum
jumps, if one understands this concept, as I shall do here, as that of transitions without
connections between quantum states or events.
The remainder of this chapter proceeds as follows. The next section, Sect. 3.2,
considers the structure of Bohr’s concept of a quantum jump, leading to the concept of
transitions between quantum states as “transitions without connections.” Sections 3.3
and 3.4 discuss the key features and implications of Bohr’s approach, as inaugurating
the RWR view.

88
3
Bohr’s Breakthrough: Quantum Jumps, Quantum States …
3.2
What is a Quantum Jump?: Quantum States
and Transitions Without Connections
The deeper meaning and signiﬁcance of Bohr’s concept become more apparent if
one properly considers its structure as a concept, deﬁned by its various components,
a structure imperfectly conveyed by the term “quantum jump.” First of all, stationary
states are not really stationary. “Stationary” only meant that the electrons remained
in their orbits with the same energy, and were in the same “energy state,” while
continuously changing their position or their “position state” along each orbit. On
the other hand, the electrons would discontinuously, by quantum jumps, change their
energy states, or their other states, by moving from one orbit to another. Bohr’s theory
abandoned the aim of physically representing such transitions, as neither the time nor
direction of each jump could be explained, although it could be predicted probabilis-
tically or statistically. This makes the term “jump” misleading as suggesting some
representation of what happens. Electrons do not jump: quantum states (as physical
states) discontinuously change, and no representation of how they do this is avail-
able. What was responsible for these changes was assumed to be real but its reality
was assumed to be at least beyond representation. It was a reality without realism, in
accord, at this stage, at least with the weak RWR view, although intimating the strong
RWR view, insofar as no concept of how these transitions appeared to be possible
to form either. The same situation was eventually found in the case of electrons in
stationary states. Electrons were not moving in orbits around nuclei: quantum states
associated with them were changing, with these changes ultimately only observable
in discrete phenomena.
I here take advantage of an angle on the development of quantum theory suggested
by Laurent Freidel (Freidel 2016), although not in connection with Bohr’s theory,
which, I would argue, inaugurates this change, especially in its RWR potential, not
considered by Freidel. Freidel’s main focus is Born and Jordan’s paper, which gave
Heisenberg’s new mechanics its proper matrix form and which Freidel (rightly) sees
as underappreciated (Born and Jordan 1925). Freidel notes that, instead of repre-
senting the motion of electrons in terms of oscillators and predicting, even if only
probabilistically, their future states on the basis on this representation, as in the
previous, classical, electron theory of Hendrik Lorentz and his followers, quantum
theory was most essentially concerned just with transitions between states, which
Freidelseesasadeepconceptualshift.Thesetransitions,manifested,asbecameeven-
tually apparent, only as observed in measuring instruments, as quantum phenomena,
were conceived by Bohr as strictly discontinuous, “quantum,” without allowing one
to represent or even conceive of how they come about, which makes these transitions
“transitions without connections.” This, in effect RWR, view, ultimately the strong
RWR view, of these transitions deﬁnes its signiﬁcance for this study. Freidel, by
contrast, still speaks (perhaps only loosely) of processes of such transitions and is
describing these processes. Bohr’s concept was the ﬁrst instance of the use of the

3.2 What is a Quantum Jump?: Quantum States and Transitions Without Connections
89
concept of RWR type in physics, a concept never entertained or accepted as perma-
nent by either Planck or Einstein at the time, and ultimately grounding Einstein’s
discontent with QM.
The probabilistic dimensions of Bohr’s theory have rarely been focused on, but
they were important, just as they became in QM, which extended Bohr’s concept
of these transitions between stationary states to those between all quantum states.
The mathematics of QM was far beyond that of Bohr’s theory, but conceptually QM
(at least in the RWR view, assumed by Heisenberg in his derivation of QM) was an
extension of Bohr’s theory of quantum jumps, deﬁned strictly as transitions between
states without representing them, speciﬁcally in terms of the motion of electrons.
Hence, these transitions may be seen as “transitions without connections,” keeping
in mind the overall structure of this concept, especially insofar as these transitions
can only be observed in measuring instruments, as effects of their interactions with
quantum objects. These effects represent quantum discreteness, as that of quantum
phenomena, deﬁned by these effects. By contrast, quantum objects or their quantum
states cannot be observed and, in the RWR view, represented or known or even
conceived of; only their effects on measuring instruments can be observed, making
the transitions in question transitions between such effects, from one measurement
to another. This view emerged later, beginning with Heisenberg’s understanding
that his “scheme” of QM, “reduced all interactions between atoms and the external
world … to transition probabilities,” that is, between quantum objects and measuring
instruments deﬁning quantum phenomena (Heisenberg, Letter to Ralph Kronig, 5
June 1925; cited in Mehra and Rechenberg 2001, v. 2, p. 242; emphasis added).
This implies the redeﬁnition quantum measurement as establishing such phenomena,
ratherthanmeasuringthepropertiesofquantumobjects,avieweventuallycrystalized
in Bohr’s ultimate, strong RWR-type interpretation.
The situation invites a new concept of physical state implicit in Bohr’s work, in
contradistinction to classical mechanics and relativity, where the concept of state is
coextensivewiththeconceptofmotion,withinthesamemathematicalrepresentation,
and where it can, by the same token, be deﬁned independently of our interaction with
the object considered. By contrast, quantum states cannot be unambiguously consid-
ered apart from the interaction between quantum objects and measuring instruments,
and are deﬁned strictly in terms of effects of these interactions on these instruments.
As explained in Chap. 1, both concepts, quantum objects and quantum states, are
idealizations that are due to the RWR-type reality (a concept that is also an idealiza-
tion) ultimately responsible for these effects, by interacting with the quantum strata of
measuring instruments. This interaction is quantum but it leads to effects observed in
the classical strata of measuring instruments, effects that deﬁne quantum phenomena.
In the present interpretation, this interaction gives rise to quantum objects, deﬁned, as
an idealization, on the basis of these effects at the time of measurement, for example,
as electrons, photons, and so forth, although quantum objects need not be elementary.
This means that a “quantum jump” or any transition between quantum states in effect
refers to a measurement that, in general, involves a new quantum object, arising in the
interaction between the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum
phenomena and measuring instruments, and not an object that we measure before

90
3
Bohr’s Breakthrough: Quantum Jumps, Quantum States …
a quantum jump happened. As explained in Chap. 2, however, in low-energy (QM)
quantum regimes, considered by Bohr or Heisenberg, viewing these two quantum
objects as the same object is a statistically permissible idealization. The concept of
transitions without connection between quantum states, as manifested in the corre-
sponding effects on measuring instruments, is fully compatible with and even ﬁtting
to this view, because, technically, they only deal with measurements associated with
two quantum states, rather than with two quantum objects. This situation is given a
better grounding by the concept quantum ﬁeld, introduced in Chap. 8.
Heisenberg, adopting the RWR view (in its weak version), abandoned the asso-
ciation of stationary states with orbits or, more generally, any quantum behavior
represented by a geometrical mechanical picture, and gave a rigorous mathematics,
in particular algebra, to this new physics, the mathematics of QM. As will be seen
in Chap. 4, however, this algebra also leads to a new form of geometry. This move
revealed that the most essential feature of Bohr’s theory was its concept of the tran-
sitions between stationary states, rather than the orbital picture of stationary states.
According to Heisenberg (in his later account of this history), the proper quantum
features of Bohr’s theory just outlined, “had to be interpreted as a limitation to the
concept of the electronic orbit” (Heisenberg 1962, p. 41). In Heisenberg’s scheme,
there were only states and transitions between them, and probabilities of these tran-
sitions, which QM could predict, without representing either these states or these
transitions. If one were to use the language of Bohr’s theory, in Heisenberg’s theory,
therewereonlyquantumstatesandquantumjumpsbetweenthem.Thiswasadecisive
shift in our understanding of the nature of physical reality, which laid the foundation
for Bohr’s interpretation of quantum phenomena and QM, which reached its ultimate,
strong RWR form by the late 1930s. This is where Bohr was ultimately led by the
trajectory initiated by the concept of quantum jumps of his 1913 theory, a trajectory
that was given a new impetus by Heisenberg’s discovery of QM.
3.3
“This Insecure and Contradictory Foundation”: Bohr’s
1913 Theory as an RWR-Type Theory
Already Bohr’s 1913 theory, however, abandoned classical causality and, as a conse-
quence determinism, was dealing with the transitions between stationary states.
While determinism was not possible on experimental grounds (which is still the case),
these discrete transitions could in principle, as was hoped at the time, be assumed to
be underlain by a classically causal process. The situation became more acute with
QM, and it has not changed since. As noted, in Bohr’s scheme neither the time of the
emission of an energy quantum (when jumping to a lower energy state) nor direction
of a quantum jump (either up or down) was determinable. There was no mechanical
law for these transitions. This worried most at the time, including both Rutherford (on
reading of Bohr’s paper, which he published nevertheless) and Einstein (on reading
its published version), but evidently not Bohr or, later, Heisenberg. At least both had

3.3 “This Insecure and Contradictory Foundation” …
91
reasons overriding such concerns, very good reasons, for they led to their remarkable
inventions. They were greatly helped by the fact that, regardless of the absence of a
mechanical law and, thus, from the classical viewpoint, mysteriously, one could still
mathematically estimate probabilities of transitions between states, which Bohr’s
theory was able to do and Heisenberg’s QM could do even better. Accordingly, one
could focus not on discrete (or, as Schrödinger tried later, continuous, wave-like)
quantum objects and their behavior, as one would in classical physics, but on discrete
states of these objects and probabilities of predicting the transitions between these
states. In yet another audacious move, Bohr dissociated the frequency of the light
emitted by the atom from the frequency at which the electron orbited the atom. In
Bohr’s theory, the electron would absorb or emit energy only by changing its orbital
state from energy E1 to energy E2. The frequency of the absorbed or emitted energy
was deﬁned in accordance with Planck’s and Einstein’s rule as hν = E1 – E2. In
order, however, to get his theory to correspond with the experimental data (spectral
lines) in question, Bohr combined this postulate with another quantization postulate,
which allowed that energies for orbiting electrons were whole number multiples of
h multiplied by half of the ﬁnal orbital frequency, E = 1
2nhν. It was thus half of
the energy, E = nhν, that Planck, in deriving his black-body radiation law assumed
for his oscillators. These two assumptions, combined with classical formulas that
related the frequency of an orbit to its energy, gave Bohr the Rydberg frequency
rules for hydrogen spectral lines, well established by then. In Bohr’s scheme, only
certain frequencies of light could be emitted or absorbed by a hydrogen atom, in
correspondence with the Rydberg rules. Bohr’s theory was a more radical departure
from classical electrodynamics than Einstein’s work ever dared to be. According to
A. Douglas Stone:
Bohr did something so radical that even Einstein, the Swabian rebel, had found it inconceiv-
able: Bohr dissociated the frequency of the light emitted by the atom from the frequency
at which the electron orbited the atom. In the Bohr formula, [hν = E1–E2], there are two
electron frequencies, that of the electron in its initial orbit and that of the electron in its ﬁnal
orbit; neither of these frequencies coincides with the frequency, ν, of the emitted radiation.
This was a pretty crazy notion to a classical physicist, for whom light was created by the
acceleration of charges and must necessarily mirror the frequency of the charge motion.
Bohr admitted as much: “How much the above interpretation differs from an interpretation
based on the ordinary electrodynamics is perhaps most clearly shown by the fact that we
have been forced to assume that a system of electrons will absorb radiation of a frequency
different from the frequency of vibration of electrons calculated in the ordinary way” (Bohr
1913, p. 149). However, he noted, using his new rule, “obviously, we get in this way the
same expression for the kinetic energy of an electron ejected from an atom by photo-electric
effect as that deduced by Einstein.” (Bohr 1913, p. 150) (Stone 2015, pp. 177–178)
Bohr’s theory proved to be correct. In essence, Bohr’s postulates have remained
part of quantum theory. They were given a more rigorous physical meaning by
Bohr’s interpretation of QM and quantum phenomena, beginning with Bohr’s 1927
concept of the quantum postulate (Bohr 1987, v. 1, p. 53). Bohr eventually recon-
ceived quantum discreteness strictly in terms of quantum phenomena, rather than the
Democritean atomicity of quantum objects themselves. While the view of quantum
theory as a probabilistic or statistical theory predicting the transitions between states

92
3
Bohr’s Breakthrough: Quantum Jumps, Quantum States …
was there to stay and while it still governs quantum theory, the idea of orbits for
stationary states soon ran into major difﬁculties (such as some of these orbits falling
into the nucleus). Accordingly, as I argue here, the most essential part of Bohr’s
theory was his concept of transitions, as transitions without connections, between
stationary states, a concept that Heisenberg extended to that of transitions between
quantum states in general, without giving a classical-like geometrical representation
to any of them. This was yet to come. In the meantime, Einstein, convinced by major
experimental conﬁrmations (e.g., the Pickering–Fowler spectrum), accepted Bohr’s
theory and used it in his important 1916 papers, in which he rederived Planck’s
law yet again (Einstein 1916a, b). Conceptually, however, Bohr’s theory could not
satisfy Einstein any more than later on QM could. His predilection for a classical-
like ﬁeld theory might well have played a role. At the time he was also working
and publishing on his general relativity (completed in 1915), a theory of continuous
ﬁelds, an ideal never relinquished by Einstein (Einstein 1949, pp. 83–85). According
to George Hevesy, Einstein himself had “similar ideas, but did not dare to publish
them” (Stone 2015, p. 178). As Stone notes: “Bohr’s atomic theory was hardly the
new mechanics for which Einstein had been searching. There was still no underlying
principle to replace classical mechanics, just another ad hoc restriction on classical
orbits, a variant of Planck’s desperate hypothesis” (Stone 2005, p. 178).
Bohr’s theory was clearly much more, and more radical, than a variant of Planck’s
hypothesis, as Einstein realized. First of all, there was in fact an underlying prin-
ciple—that of transitions without connections between quantum states—to replace
classical mechanics as a theory of (trajectories of) motions of physical objects. Things
were only to get worse, as far as Einstein was concerned, with only a few glimmers
of hope with de Broglie’s theory and then Schrödinger’s wave mechanics, to quickly
ﬁzzle. Einstein, as noted in the Introduction, never abandoned his “search for a more
complete conception,” ideally a realist ﬁeld theory, which would avoid probability at
the ultimate level (Einstein 1936, p. 375, 1949, pp. 83–85). He never accepted that
Bohr’s type of thinking (either in his 1913 theory or in his interpretation of QM)
was based on anything more than “insecure and contradictory foundations,” even
in praising Bohr’s (1913) theory. According to Einstein’s comment made 30 years
later:
That this insecure and contradictory foundation was sufﬁcient to enable a man of Bohr’s
unique instinct and sensitivity to discover the principal laws of the spectral lines and of the
electron shells of the atoms, together with their signiﬁcance for chemistry, appeared to me
as a miracle—and appears to me a miracle even today. This is the highest musicality in the
sphere of thought. (Einstein 1949, pp. 42–43; translation modiﬁed)
Although beautiful and reﬂecting the magnitude of Bohr’s achievement in a way
that was undoubtedly gratifying to Bohr, the comment still reﬂects Einstein’s unease
concerning the “foundations” on which Bohr built his theory. These foundations
never became secure for, or even accepted as foundations by, Einstein, even though
he admitted that QM was a consistent and impressive theory that “seized hold of a
beautiful element of truth about nature”:

3.3 “This Insecure and Contradictory Foundation” …
93
There is no doubt that quantum mechanics has seized hold of a beautiful element of truth
and that it will be a touchstone for a future theoretical basis in that it must be deducible as a
limiting case from that basis, just as electrostatics is deducible from the Maxwell equations
of the electromagnetic ﬁeld or as thermodynamics is deducible from statistical mechanics. I
do not believe that quantum mechanics will be the starting point in the search for this basis,
just as one cannot arrive at the foundations of mechanics from thermodynamics or statistical
mechanics. (Einstein 1936, p. 361)
For Bohr, by contrast, his 1913 theory proved only to be the ﬁrst step on a road
toward making these foundations logical and secure in his interpretation of quantum
phenomena and QM. While they may not have been entirely secure initially, the
foundations of Bohr’s theory were not contradictory. They were only in conﬂict with
classical physical theories and realist philosophical imperatives.
3.4
“Symbols Taken from the Mechanics,” the Choice
of the Observer, and the Being of the Photon
As Bohr observed a few months before Heisenberg’s discovery, quantum processes
“cannot be estimated within the ordinary space–time description” (Letter to Heisen-
berg, 18 April 1925, Bohr 1972–1996, vol. 5, pp. 79–80), a statement that Heisenberg
must have taken to heart given that it literally deﬁnes his approach. In a letter to Born,
Bohr goes further:
[Quantum experiments] preclude the possibility of a simple description of the physical
occurrences [at the quantum level] by means of visualizable pictures. . . . [S]uch pictures
are of even more limited applicability than is ordinarily supposed. This is of course almost
a purely negative assertion, but I feel that . . . one must have recourse to symbolic analogies
to an even greater extent than hitherto. Just recently I have been racking my brain to dream
up such analogies. (Letter to Born, 1 May 1925, Bohr 1972–1996, vol. 5, p. 311)
The ultimate symbolic analogy, indeed the symbolic theory, that Bohr wanted
was provided by Heisenberg’s new mechanics, about to be discovered then. Bohr’s
well-known, even best known, sentence in his ﬁrst 1913 paper merits additional
attention in this context, because of his appeal to “symbols taken from [classical]
mechanics”: “While, there obviously can be no question of a mechanical foundation
of the calculation given in this paper, it is, however[,] possible to give a very simple
interpretation of the result of the calculation on p. 5 [concerning stationary states]
by help of symbols taken from the mechanics” (Bohr 1913, p. 15; emphasis added).
The sentence is famous for its ﬁrst part: “there obviously can be no question of a
mechanical foundation of the calculation given in this paper.” This statement radi-
cally challenges the applicability of classical causality and in the ﬁrst place realism
to quantum jumps. Heisenberg echoes this statement in his paper introducing QM:
“a geometrical interpretation of such quantum-theoretical phase relations by analogy
with those of classical theory seems at present scarcely possible” (Heisenberg 1925,
p. 265). Heisenberg’s paper is, however, also a response to Bohr’s sentence as a
whole, and Heisenberg’s approach is a full-scale (rather than limited, as in Bohr’s

94
3
Bohr’s Breakthrough: Quantum Jumps, Quantum States …
theory) enactment of the program implicit in this sentence, even if Bohr might not
have fully realized these implications or their scale at the time. As, however, Bohr
immediately grasped in assessing Heisenberg’s discovery, Heisenberg’s approach
enabling it amounted to taking “symbols... from the ordinary mechanics,” where
they represent classical physical variables (such as position and momentum) and
equations connecting these symbols, and giving a very different mathematical form
to these variables and a new physical meaning to the resulting mathematical scheme.
In Heisenberg’s theory, these symbols became (unbounded) inﬁnite matrices with
complex elements, replacing real functions of coordinates and time, as in classical
physics. It was a combination of these symbols, a combination deﬁned by formally
classical equations, that became the architecture of QM. Physically, these new vari-
ables were linked to the probabilities or statistics of the occurrences of certain observ-
able phenomena, manifested in atomic spectra, instead of describing the motion
of quantum objects on the model of classical mechanics. Heisenberg’s “new kine-
matics,” as he called it, was nothing else. Accordingly, Heisenberg’s mechanics was
symbolic mechanics, as Bohr had referred to it (as he later also did to Schrödinger’s
version), thus echoing his earlier thinking concerning his 1913 atomic theory, and
extending it to his interpretation of QM, and to his philosophical thinking in general.
Bohr offers a helpful elaboration in his 1929 article, echoed in his 1937 remark,
cited earlier, to the effect that “an artiﬁcial word like ‘complementarity’ which does
not belong to our daily concepts serves only … to remind us of the epistemological
situation …, which at least in physics is of an entirely novel character” (Bohr 1937,
p. 87). He says:
Moreover, the purpose of such a technical term [as complementarity] is to avoid, so far
as possible, a repetition of the general argument as well as constantly to remind us of the
difﬁculties which, as already mentioned, arise from the fact that all our ordinary verbal
expressions bear the stamp of our customary forms of perception, from the point of view of
which the existence of the quantum of action is an irrationality. Indeed, in consequence of
this state of affairs even words like “to be” and “to know” lose their unambiguous meaning.
In this connection, an interesting example of ambiguity in our language is provided by the
phrase used to express the failure of the [classically] causal mode of description, namely,
that one speaks of a free choice on the part of nature. Indeed, properly speaking, such a
phrase requires the idea of an external chooser, the existence of which, however, is denied
already by the use of the word nature. We here come upon a fundamental feature in the
general problem of knowledge, and we must realize that, by the very nature of the matter,
we shall always have last recourse to a word picture, in which the words themselves are not
further analyzed. (Bohr 1987, v. 1. pp. 19–20)
Bohr’s “example” is not accidental and has its history beginning with the ques-
tion “How does an electron decide what frequency it is going to vibrate at when
it passes from one stationary state to the other?” asked by Rutherford in his initial
response to Bohr’s paper (A Letter to Bohr, 20 March 1913, reproduced in “The
Rutherford Memorial Lecture,” Bohr 1987, v. 3, p. 41). Rutherford and others, in
particular Dirac (who even spoke of an electron as having a “free will”), used such
expressions without any further explanation, even though they might have been aware
of the pitfalls of doing so. By contrast, Bohr’s use of “a free choice on the part of
nature” and similar locutions must, at least after his 1927 discussion with Einstein

3.4 “Symbols Taken from the Mechanics,” …
95
at the Solvay Conference in Brussels, be considered with this passage in mind.
Heisenberg offered a penetrating response to Dirac’s appeal to “choice on the part
of nature,” which Heisenberg questioned, on experimental grounds, in the course of
a discussion that took place at the same conference. Dirac’s comment implied the
classically causal nature of independent quantum behavior undisturbed by observa-
tion in accord with his transformation-theory paper (Dirac 1927) and Bohr’s Como
argument, which appears to have been inﬂuenced by that paper. Dirac also helped
Bohr to edit the Como lecture. Dirac, as noted in Chap. 2, adopted his view in his
classic book, published soon after the Como lecture (Dirac 1930), as did von Neuman
(1932), arguably inﬂuenced by both Bohr’s Como argument. By contrast, Heisen-
berg’s uncertainty-relations paper (Heisenberg 1927), which used the mathematics
of Dirac’s transformation theory, was ambivalent as concerned the assumption that
the independent behavior of quantum objects was classically causal. On the occasion
under discussion, Heisenberg, referring to this paper, expressed a view that was closer
to Bohr’s post-Como thinking, which no longer made this assumption. Heisenberg
said (according to the available transcript):
I do not agree with Dirac when he says that in the [scattering] experiment described nature
makes a choice. Even if you place yourself very far from your scattering material and if you
measure after a very long time, you can obtain interference by taking two mirrors. If nature
had made a choice, it would be difﬁcult to imagine how the interferences are produced.
Obviously we say that nature’s choice can never be known until the decisive experiment
has been done; for this reason we cannot make any real objection to this choice because the
expression “nature makes a choice” does not have any physical consequence. I would rather
say, as I have done in my latest paper [on the uncertainty relations], that the observer himself
makes the choice because it is not until the moment when the observation is made that the
“choice” becomes a physical reality. (Bohr 1972–1999, v. 6, pp. 105–106)
The technical details of the experiment are not important at the moment, apart
from noting the signiﬁcance of scattering experiments in the development of QM.
The experiment itself here mentioned is essentially equivalent to the double-slit
experiment. The crucial point is that one in effect deals here with the complementary
character of certain quantum experiments and with our choice of which of the two
mutually exclusive or complementary experiments we want to perform, rather than
with a choice of nature. Without realizing it, Heisenberg described the so-called
delayed choice experiment of Wheeler (Wheeler 1983, pp. 190–192; Plotnitsky 2009,
pp. 65–69). Heisenberg also suggested that in considering quantum phenomena only
what has already occurred as the outcome of a measurement could be assigned the
status of reality, which view eventually came to deﬁne Bohr’s concept of phenomenon
(e.g., Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 64).
Bohr’scommentcitedabovewaswrittenin1929,followingtheSolvayConference
and further exchanges, and it refers speciﬁcally to his article, “The Quantum of
Action and the Description of Nature” (Bohr 1987, v. 1, pp. 92–101). At stake is
not merely stressing the metaphorical or “picturesque,” rather than physical use of
expressions like “a choice on the part of nature,” but, as Heisenberg’s remark makes
clear, also a deeper philosophical point, which eventually made Bohr either avoid
speaking in these terms or to qualify their metaphorical use. In the RWR view, toward

96
3
Bohr’s Breakthrough: Quantum Jumps, Quantum States …
which Bohr begins to move in this article, the ultimate constitution of the reality
responsible for quantum phenomena is assumed to have an independent existence,
without our being able to represent or even conceive of the ultimate character in this
existence, including by means of such terms or concepts as to “be” or to “know,”
or “reality.” These terms or concepts, invoked by Bohr in his elaboration, are not
accidental. They are common in our everyday language but, as Bohr implies, they
refer to philosophical problems that have been the subject of profound philosophical
reﬂections from the pre-Socratics to Heidegger and beyond. These problems acquired
radically new dimensions with quantum theory.
Bohr is reported to have replied, after the rise of quantum physics but before
quantum mechanics, to H. Høffding’s question “Where can the photon be said to
be?” with “To be, to be, what does it mean to be?” (cited in Wheeler and Ford 1998,
p. 131). Bohr might have been echoing the most famous sentence of Shakespeare’s
Hamlet, “To be, or not to be, that is the question,” (Act 3, ll. 1749), realizing that in
quantum physics one might want to or even must ask ﬁrst “What does it mean to be?”
Høffding’s and Bohr’s questions are still unanswered and, in Bohr’s ultimate, RWR-
type views are rigorously unanswerable, or even unaskable when it comes to quantum
objects, such as photons. Quantum objects are idealizations (still beyond represen-
tation or conception), in the present interpretation, ultimately only applicable at the
time of measurements, even if Bohr himself did not go that far. One not only cannot
say or think anything about what they are or where they are independently of observa-
tions, but one cannot even apply such names as photons, electrons, and so forth apart
from measurements and effects observed in them. According to Bohr, such questions
as “Where can something be said to be?” or “When had something happened?” can
only be rigorously asked about quantum phenomena, observed in measuring instru-
ments. Nature has no photons or electrons, any more than being or reality, including
that of the RWR type, all of which are human concepts, admittedly created by our
biological and neurological nature, and thus by nature, which, however, is not the
same as to say that nature uses these concepts through us. Nature, however, allows
us to use our concepts, physical, philosophical, and mathematical, and sometimes
our daily concepts, in considering or interactions with it by means of our technology,
beginning with that of our bodies. It is also this interaction that enables us to idealize
some part of the constitution of nature, even its ultimate constitution, as a reality
without realism.
Under these assumptions, what is “sometimes picturesquely described as a ‘choice
of nature’ [between different measurement outcomes]” will be given by Bohr a
different meaning as well. As he says in 1954, “needless to say, such a phrase implies
no allusion to a personiﬁcation of nature, but simply points to the impossibility of
ascertaining on accustomed lines directives for the course of a closed indivisible
phenomenon” (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 73). In other words, it points to the impossibility of
a classically causal or any representation, or even conception of the ultimate nature
of reality, RWR, ultimately responsible for each quantum phenomenon, because
this reality can never be extracted from this enclosure of phenomena observed in
measuring instruments. In fact, while each phenomenon (by this point, in Bohr’s
sense) is closed and indivisible insofar as the quantum object involved cannot be

3.4 “Symbols Taken from the Mechanics,” …
97
considered apart from it, there is no “course” of a phenomenon, but only discrete
transitions, “quantum jumps,” from one phenomenon to another. Quantum objects
could, however, be related or, in the present view, deﬁned in terms of certain effects
observed in measuring instruments, effects that do not always allow us to distinguish
some of these objects, speciﬁcally elementary particles, from one another in their
individual characteristics. Photons or electrons could be distinguished by such local
effects like position, momentum, or energy, but not by their permanent character-
istics, such as charge, mass, or spin, even though these characteristics, too, can, in
the RWR view, only be manifested in effects observed in measuring instruments.
Thus, rigorously, one only speak of a charge measurement of an electron, but not a
measurement of an electron’s charge.
This, more radical, understanding was yet a decade away in 1929, by which
time, however, Bohr already managed to overcome the difﬁculties of using classical
causality that plagued the Como argument of 1927. By 1928 or even already in 1927,
following his exchanges with Einstein at the Solvay conference, Bohr returns to
Heisenberg’s approach that led to Heisenberg’s discovery QM and his own initial
understanding of the theory. Although the road ahead was to be long and difﬁcult,
the trajectory leading toward Bohr’s ultimate, strong RWR interpretation of quantum
phenomena and QM was now ﬁrmly established.
3.5
Conclusion
I close this chapter with Shakespeare’s Hamlet, a connection brought in by Høffding’s
questionorratherBohr’scounterquestion—“Tobe,tobe,whatdoesitmeantobe?”—
a very human question. But then, there are no questions other than human. Science,
too, is human. It is a human project, even when it is concerned with nature apart from
humanity. Even if one accepts that computers could do science on their own, it would
still be a continuation of the previous human project of science, at least insofar as
remains science. While, however, we cannot prevent science from being human, we
should be concerned with making it “all too human” (Nietzsche 1996), by grounding
it too much in extraneous philosophical principles or even, as Nietzsche would see
it, prejudices, rather than in what physics must test, subjecting “everything to the
inexorable test of experiment,” to adopt Heisenberg’s expression in his assessment
of Bohr’s philosophy (Heisenberg 1967, p. 95). Nietzsche even summons physics
against our philosophical prejudices, realism and (classical) causality, among them,
anywhere: “Therefore: long live physics! And even so what compels us to turn to
physics—our honesty,” which helps us to combat our prejudices (Nietzsche 1974,
p. 266). In other words, Nietzsche urges us to subject all our assumptions, as hypoth-
esis, in any domain, to “the inexorable test of experiment.” When it comes to realism
and classical causality, which Nietzsche questioned in the domain of human thinking
and action, quantum physics would be the kind of physics Nietzsche wants to cele-
brate here. Coincidentally, the ﬁrst ever university course on Nietzsche was taught
in Copenhagen by Georg Brandes, a friend of Bohr’s father. Bohr greatly admired
Brandes.

98
3
Bohr’s Breakthrough: Quantum Jumps, Quantum States …
A few decades before Nietzsche, Riemann, an important inﬂuence on Bohr,
including, as discussed in Chap. 6, in Bohr’s thinking leading him to complemen-
tarity, issued a similar warning in commenting on a possible role in physics of his
rethinking of the foundations of geometry in his Habilitation lecture, as part of
the passage cited in the Introduction: “Investigations like the one just made here
[concerning geometry], which begin with general concepts, can … serve to insure
that [developing new physics] is not hindered by unduly restricted concepts and that
progress in comprehending the connection of things is not obstructed by traditional
prejudices,” such as those of Euclidean geometry or Newtonian physics (Riemann
1854, p. 33). This progress can, of course, also be obstructed by newly formed
prejudices. Nevertheless, new experimental ﬁndings and new unhindered theoretical
concepts are our best allies in our struggle against our prejudices in comprehending
the connection of things, as both Bohr’s discovery of his 1913 atomic theory and
Heisenberg’s discovery of QM teach us.
This, of course, also means that one can equally question the RWR thinking
advocated by this study. But it does not mean that the only alternative is a return to
realist thinking. As yet unknown and even unimagined alternatives may await, hard
as they are to expect, if you believe Sydney Coleman: “if thousands of philosophers
spent thousands of years searching for the strangest possible thing, they would never
ﬁnd anything as weird as quantum mechanics” (cited in Randall 2005, p. 117).
Perhaps poets can do better. Shakespeare may be given the last word:
Horatio: O day and night, but this is wondrous strange!
Hamlet: And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.
There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
Than are dreamt of in your philosophy.
The Tragedy of Hamlet, Prince of Denmark (Act I.4, 165–166)
Some editions have “our philosophy.” “Your philosophy” makes Hamlet more
suspicious of philosophy. It makes him more akin to a physicist, perhaps, even a
quantum physicist, who can only estimate the probabilities of future events deﬁned
by experiments he stages at the castle of Elsinore. Physics helps us to discover these
things and helps philosophy to understand them, and keeps its honesty, as Nietzsche
said. “And therefore, long live physics!” Hamlet, a play (it may be shown) with
many transitions without connections, takes place in Denmark, too. “To be, to be,
what does it mean to be?”—Bohr asked. Quantum physics changed not only possible
answers to this question, but also what it means to ask them. This may also be a lesson
for our philosophy when it deals with the human world. Bohr certainly thought so,
as is testiﬁed to by his famous image: “one must never forget that in the drama of
existence we are ourselves both actors and spectators” (Bohr 1987, v. 1, p. 119, v.
2, p. 81). We are, as Bohr clearly implies, equally both in staging and observing
quantum experiments. Many of them, beginning with those of Rutherford, which led
to Bohr’s 1913 theory, and ending (for now) with those, such as the discovery of the
Higgs boson, in LHC, have been nothing less than dramatic.

References
99
References
Bohr, N.: On the constitution of atoms and molecules (Part 1). Phil. Mag. 26(151), 1–25 (1913)
Bohr, N.: The Theory of Spectra and Atomic Constitution. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK (1924)
Bohr, N.: Causality and complementarity. In: Faye, J., Folse, H.J. (eds.) The Philosophical
Writing of Niels Bohr, Vol 4, Causality and Complementarity, 1999, pp. 83–91. Ox Bow Press,
Supplementary Papers, Woodbridge, CT, USA (1937)
Bohr, N.: Niels Bohr: Collected Works, 10 vols. Elsevier, Amsterdam, Netherland (1972–1996)
Bohr, N.: The Philosophical Writings of Niels Bohr, 3 vols. Ox Bow Press, Woodbridge, CT, USA
(1987)
Born, M., Jordan, P.: Zur Quantenmechanik. Z. Phys. 34, 858–888 (1925)
Bose, S.N.: Plancks Gesetz und Lichtquantenhypothese. Z. Phys. 26, 178–181 (1924)
Dirac, P.A.M.: The physical interpretation of the quantum dynamics. Proc. Royal Soc. London A
113, 621–641 (1927)
Dirac, P.A.M.: The Principles of Quantum Mechanics. Clarendon, Oxford, UK (1930)
Einstein, A.: Strahlungs-emission und -absorption nach der Quantentheorie, Physikalische
Gesellschaft. Verhandlungen 18, 318–323 (1916a)
Einstein, A.: Zur Quantentheorie der Strahlung. Physikalische Gesellschaft Zurich 18, 173–177
(1916b)
Einstein, A.: Physics and reality. J. Franklin Inst. 221, 349–382 (1936)
Einstein, A.: Autobiographical Notes (tr. Schilpp, P. A.). Open Court, La Salle, IL, USA (1949)
Folse, H.J.: The methodological lesson of complementarity: Bohr’s naturalistic epistemology.
Physica Scripta T163 (2014). http://m.iopscience.iop.org/1402-4896/2014/T163
Freidel, L.: On the discovery of quantum mechanics by Heisenberg, Born, and Jordan (Unpublished)
(2016)
Heisenberg, W.: Quantum-theoretical re-interpretation of kinematical and mechanical relations. In
Van der Waerden, B.L. (ed.) Sources of Quantum Mechanics, rpt. 1968, pp. 261–277. Dover,
New York, NY, USA (1925)
Heisenberg, W.: The physical content of quantum kinematics and mechanics. In: Wheeler, J.A.,
Zurek, W.H. (eds.) Quantum Theory and Measurement, 1983, pp. 62–84. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, NJ, USA (1927)
Heisenberg, W.: Physics and Philosophy: The Revolution in Modern Science. Harper & Row, New
York, NY, USA (1962)
Heisenberg, W.: Quantum theory and its interpretation. In: Rozental, S. (ed.) Niels Bohr: His
Life and Work as Seen by his Friends and Colleagues, pp. 94–108. North-Holland, Amsterdam,
Netherlands (1967)
Kragh, H.: Niels Bohr and the Quantum Atom: The Bohr Model of Atomic Structure 1913–1925.
Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK (2012)
Mehra, J., Rechenberg, H.: The Historical Development of Quantum Theory, 6 vols. Springer,
Berlin, Germany (2001)
Nietzsche, F.: The Gay Science (tr. Kaufmann, W.), Vintage, New York, NY, USA (1974)
Nietzsche, F.: Human, All Too Human: A Book for Free Spirits (tr. M. Fabet, M., Lehman, S.),
Lincoln, NE, USA: Bison Books (1996)
Plotnitsky, A.: Epistemology and Probability: Bohr, Heisenberg, Schrödinger and the Nature of
Quantum-Theoretical Thinking. Springer, New York, NY, USA (2009)
Randall, L.: Warped Passages: Unraveling the Mysteries of the Universe’s Hidden Dimensions.
Harpers Collins, New York, NY, USA (2005)
Riemann, B.: On the hypotheses that lie at the foundations of geometry. In: Pesic, P. (ed.) Beyond
Geometry: Classic Papers from Riemann to Einstein, 2007, pp. 23–40. Dover, Mineola, NY, USA
(1854)
Stone, A.D.: Einstein and The Quantum: The Quest of The Valiant Schwabian. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, NJ, USA (2015)

100
3
Bohr’s Breakthrough: Quantum Jumps, Quantum States …
Von Neumann, J.: Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (tr. R. T. Beyer). Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ, USA , Princeton, NJ, rpt. 1983 (1932)
Wheeler, J.A.: Law without law. In: Wheeler, J.A., Zurek, W.H. (eds.) Quantum Theory and
Measurement, pp. 182–216. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, USA (1983)
Wheeler, J.A., Ford, K.: Geons, Black Holes, and Quantum Foam: A Life in Physics. W. W. Norton,
New York, NY, USA (1998)

Chapter 4
“The Heisenberg Method”: Algebra,
Geometry, and Probability in Quantum
Mechanics
Perhaps the success of the Heisenberg method points to a purely
algebraic method of description of nature, that is, to the
elimination of continuous functions from physics. Then, however,
we must give up, in principle, the space–time continuum.
—Albert Einstein, “Physics and Reality” (1936)
Abstract This chapter reconsiders, from the RWR viewpoint, Heisenberg’s
discovery of QM and QM itself, in terms of two diagrams:
QUANTUMNESS →PROBABILITY →ALGEBRA
and
QUANTUMNESS →PROBABILITY →ALGEBRA →GENERALIZED GEOMETRY.
The ﬁrst arrow, QUANTUMNESS→PROBABILITY represents the fact that the phys-
ical character of quantum phenomena implies that our predictions concerning them
are irreducibly probabilistic or statistical. This in turn implies, deﬁning the math-
ematical character of Heisenberg’s approach and QM, the second arrow, PROBA-
BILITY→ALGEBRA, that QM is primarily algebraic, in contrast to more geometrical
classical or relativistic theories, reﬂecting Einstein’s assessment of “the Heisenberg
method” as “algebraic.” This assessment, however, requires qualiﬁcations, which
shed new light on the relationships between algebra and geometry in physics, repre-
sented in the second diagram. This diagram entails a new concept of geometry,
“generalized geometry,” part of “modernist mathematics,” explained in this chapter
as well. Section 4.1 offers an introduction to the chapter. Section 4.2 discusses
the formalism of QM and the role of fundamental physical principles in Heisen-
berg’s derivation of this formalism. Section 4.3 revisits Heisenberg’s discovery of
QM. Section 4.4 considers the relationships between algebra and geometry in this
discovery. Section 4.5 addresses the role of algebra and geometry in modernist
mathematics and physics.
Keywords Algebra · Geometry · Heisenberg method · Hilbert space · Matrix
mechanics · Modernist mathematics · Noncommutativity
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
A. Plotnitsky, Reality Without Realism,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-84578-0_4
101

102
4
“The Heisenberg Method”: Algebra, Geometry, and Probability …
4.1
Introduction
This chapter reconsiders, from the RWR viewpoint, the key features of Heisenberg’s
discovery of QM, and of QM itself, in terms of two diagrams:
(QPA) QUANTUMNESS →PROBABILITY →ALGEBRA
and
(QPGG) QUANTUMNESS →PROBABILITY →ALGEBRA →GENERALIZED GEOMETRY.
The ﬁrst arrow, QUANTUMNESS→PROBABILITY, represented the fact that the
physical character of quantum phenomena implies that our predictions concerning
them are irreducibly probabilistic or statistical. This fact in turn implies, deﬁning the
mathematical character of Heisenberg’s approach and QM, and the second arrow,
PROBABILITY→ALGEBRA, that QM is primarily algebraic, in contrast to more
geometrical classical or relativistic theories. This arrow reﬂects Einstein’s assess-
ment of “the Heisenberg method” as “algebraic.” Einstein’s assessment, however,
requires qualiﬁcations, which also shed new light on the relationships between
algebra and geometry in physics, represented in the second diagram, which, however,
entails a new concept of geometry, “generalized geometry.” This concept emerged
in “modernist mathematics,” which, as explained in this chapter, deﬁned twentieth-
and twenty-ﬁrst-century mathematics and physics, including both relativity and
quantum theory, in the latter case, beginning with Heisenberg’s discovery of QM, in
conjunction with the RWR view.
Section 4.2 discusses the mathematical formalism of QM and of the role of funda-
mental principles in Heisenberg’s derivation of this formalism. Section 4.3 revisits
Heisenberg’s discovery of QM. Section 4.4 considers the relationships between
algebra and geometry in this discovery, as complicating Einstein’s assessment of
Heisenberg’s method as algebraic. Section 4.5 addresses the role of algebra and
geometry in modernist mathematics and physics.
4.2
Quantum Mechanics as a Fundamental Theory:
Principles, Postulates, and Formalism
For nearly a century now, since the publication of von Neumann’s The Mathematical
Foundation of Quantum Mechanics (von Neumann 1932), QM (and subsequently
QED and QFT) most commonly use as their mathematical formalism the Hilbert-
space formalism over complex numbers, C. There are other versions, some more
abstract ones, such as those of C*-algebras and, more recently, sheaf theory and

4.2 Quantum Mechanics as a Fundamental Theory: Principles …
103
category theory, all of which are, thus far, generally, albeit not always entirely, equiva-
lent mathematically. Hilbert-space formalism remains dominant, however. It is worth
summarizing the key features of this formalism and how it is used:
(1)
The Hilbert space (over C), used in QM, is an abstract vector space of any
dimension, ﬁnite or inﬁnite (in QM countably inﬁnite), which possesses the
structure of an inner product that allows lengths and angles to be measured,
analogously to a n-dimensional Euclidean space (which is a Hilbert space over
real numbers, R);
(2)
The feature of that formalism, arguably most crucial for QM and never used
in physics previously, is the noncommutativity of the Hilbert-space operators,
also referred to as “observables,” which are mathematical entities associated,
in terms of probabilistic or statistical predictions, with physically observable
quantities, by means of 3);
(3)
The presence of Born’s rule or an analogous rule (such as von Neumann’s
projection postulate or Lüder’s postulate), which is added to the formalism
and establishes the relation between “quantum amplitudes,” associated with
complex Hilbert-space vectors as complex entities and probabilities as real
numbers, by using square moduli or, equivalently, the multiplication of these
quantities and their complex conjugates (technically, these amplitudes are ﬁrst
linked to probability densities);
(4)
The probabilities involved are nonadditive: the joint probability of two or more
mutually exclusive alternatives in which an event might occur is, in general,
not equal to the sum of the probabilities for each alternative, as in classical
probability theory; instead, it obeys the law of the addition of amplitudes for
these alternatives, to the sum of which Born’s rule is then applied.
While keeping in mind alternative postulates just mentioned, I shall primarily
refer to Born’s rule from now on. In technical terms, Born’s rule is deﬁned as follows.
First, in the case of a self-adjoint Hilbert-space operator A (⟨Av, w⟩= ⟨v, Aw⟩,
for all vectors in this space) with a discrete spectrum, Born’s rule states that, if a
physical observable associated with A is predicted by means of a (normalized) wave
function |ψ ⟩, then the outcome, when measured, will be one of the eigenvalues λ of
A; the probability that it will correspond to a given eigenvalue λi is equal to ⟨ψ|Pi|ψ⟩,
where Pi is the projection onto the eigenspace of A corresponding to λi. When this
eigenspace is one-dimensional and spanned by the normalized eigenvector |λi⟩, Pi
= |λi⟩⟨λi|, so the probability ⟨ψ|Pi|ψ⟩= ⟨ψ|λi⟩⟨λi|ψ⟩. The probability amplitude
is ⟨λi|ψ⟩, and Born’s rule means that the corresponding probability is the square
of the amplitude or is the amplitude multiplied by its own complex conjugate, or Pi
= ⟨λi|ψ⟩2. If the spectrum has a continuous part, then the spectral theorem (which
deals with cases when a linear operator or matrix can be diagonalized) tells us that
there exists a projection-valued measure Q, called the spectral measure of A. In
this case, the probability that the measurement outcome lies in a measurable set
M is ⟨ψ|Q(M )|ψ⟩. In the simplest case, when ψ is a wave function for a point
particle in position space, the probability density function p (x, y, z) for predicting
a measurement of the position at time t1 equals to |ψ(x, y, z, t1|2. Born’s rule could

104
4
“The Heisenberg Method”: Algebra, Geometry, and Probability …
be generalized for POWM (positive operator-valued measures), the values of which
are positive semideﬁnite operators in a Hilbert space.
Although Born’s or analogous rules are, as deﬁned by the complex conjugation,
connected rather naturally mathematically to the formalism of QM, they are, never-
theless, added to this formalism rather than derived from it. We do not know why
these postulates work, which makes it tempting to argue that why they work is the
greatest mystery of QM. But then we do not know why the formalism works either.
There is neither one without the other.1
The features just outlined were, however, not initially assumed, but, beginning
with Heisenberg, were inferred from certain physical features of quantum phenomena
and principles arising from these features. While Heisenberg’s mathematical scheme,
matrix mechanics, was not formally deﬁned by him as a Hilbert-space formalism,
which was introduced by von Neumann soon thereafter, it essentially amounted to
a Hilbert-space formalism, especially in Born and Jordan’s full-ﬂedged formulation
of matrix mechanics (Born and Jordan 1925). (Heisenberg initially did not use the
term matrix mechanics.) As a physical theory, QM, was developed by Heisenberg as
a principle rather than constructive theory, in the sense of Einstein, explained below.
It might be noted ﬁrst that, similarly to the case of the term of concept, as discussed
in Chap. 2, although one could sometimes surmise the meaning of the term principle
from its use, it is rarely deﬁned or explained in physical or philosophical litera-
ture. Thus, his title notwithstanding, Heisenberg did not do so in his ﬁrst book, The
Physical Principles of the Quantum Theory (Heisenberg 1930). Nor did Dirac, in
his Principles of Quantum Mechanics, ﬁrst published in the same year (Dirac 1930).
Terms like “principle,” “postulate,” and “axiom,” are often used in physics somewhat
indiscriminately, and it is difﬁcult to entirely avoid overlapping between the concepts
designated by these terms, or those designated as “laws,” especially because physical
principles often derive from (or give rise to) postulates or laws. Thus, conservation
laws are sometimes seen as conservation principles. These terms are usually better
clariﬁed in mathematics. Thus, Euclid distinguished between “axioms” and “postu-
lates.” Axioms were thought to be something manifestly self-evident, such as the
ﬁrst axiom of Euclid (“things equal to the same thing are also equal to each other”).
A postulate, by contrast, is postulated, in the sense of “let us assume that A holds”
and see what follows from it according to established logical rules. Euclid’s postu-
lates may be thought of assumptions necessary and sufﬁcient to derive the truths
of geometry, of which one might already be intuitively persuaded. The famous ﬁfth
1 There have been attempts to provide reasons for Born’s rule (or equivalent rules) by using, presum-
ably, more basic principles or postulates, rather than seeing it as a primary postulate, beginning with
Andrew Gleason’s celebrated theorem, a remarkable mathematical result (Gleason 1957). I shall
put these attempts aside, because, while some of them are conceptually important, none of them
(to my knowledge) derives Born’s rule from the formalism of QM. In one form or another, Bohr’s
rule, or some equivalent rule, is still an additional independent postulate. Its origin and necessity
is, again, in the circumstance that, on the one hand, QM is an irreducibly probabilistic theory for
all quantum systems, no matter how elementary, and probabilities are real numbers, while, on the
other hand, all current versions of the formalism of QM (for both continuous and discrete variables)
are over C.

4.2 Quantum Mechanics as a Fundamental Theory: Principles …
105
postulateisacaseinpoint.ItdeﬁnesEuclideangeometryalone,whichinpartexplains
millennia of attempts to derive it as a theorem.
Given that my subject is physics, I shall primarily refer to postulates, assumed
on the basis of experimental evidence (as it stands now and hence as potentially
refutable) and often grounding principles, as “empirically discovered … general
characteristics of natural processes … that give rise to mathematically formulated
criteria which the separate processes or the theoretical representations of them have
to satisfy” (Einstein 1919, p. 228). It is not easy to speak of axioms in the sense just
deﬁned in physics, although the term is used by physicists, as it was by Hardy (2001)
or D’Ariano (2020), in the latter case following von Neumann’s use of axioms in
von Neumann (1932). In von Neumann’s case, the use of axioms is motivated by his
aim to establish, in the words of his title, “the mathematical foundations of quantum
mechanics.” Little has the self-evidence of axioms even in classical mechanics, and
most of the uses of the term “axiom” in physics are closer to that of “postulate,” as
just deﬁned. For example, von Neumann’s assumption of Hilbert spaces over C as
deﬁning the formalism of QM is a postulate in this sense, grounded in the already
establishedmathematicsofQM,ratherthan,asinHeisenberg,establishedonthebasis
of certain grounding physical principles, “empirically discovered … general char-
acteristics of natural processes.” Von Neumann also postulated that Schrödinger’s
equation represented the independent behavior (a unitary evolution) of a quantum
system. This, as discussed in Chap. 2, is a nonfalsiﬁable ontological postulate, which
has been often adopted but the efﬁcacy of which can be questioned (D’Ariano 2020).
Bohr, more careful and etymologically attuned than most in using his terms,
preferred both postulates, such as the quantum postulate of the Como lecture (Bohr
1987, v. 1, pp. 52–53), and principles, such as the correspondence principle. As will
be seen, in Heisenberg’s hands, the correspondence principle gave rise to a mathe-
matically expressed postulate. Complementarity, I would argue, functions more as a
concept than a principle in Bohr, although it is sometimes referred to (although not
so much by Bohr himself) as a principle. “First principles” commonly refer, from
Plato and Aristotle on (e.g., Aristotle, Metaphysics 1013a14-15, Aristotle 1984, v.
2, p. 1601), as they will do here, to foundational assumptions that are not deduced
from any other assumptions, in this case, akin to axioms in mathematics. Einstein’s
concept of a “principle theory,” corresponds to the use of principles by Bohr and
Heisenberg, and some quantum-information theorists, as in D’Ariano et al. (2017),
discussed in Chap. 9.
According to Einstein: “constructive theories [aim at] build[ing] up a picture of
the more complex phenomena out of the materials of a relatively simple formal
scheme from which they start out” (Einstein 1919, p. 228). “A relatively simple
formal scheme” represents, in a mathematically idealized way, a more, or even the
most, elementary underlying reality responsible for these phenomena. Einstein’s
example of a constructive theory in classical physics was the kinetic theory of gases,
which “seeks to reduce mechanical, thermal, and diffusional processes to movements
of molecules—i.e., to build them up out of the hypothesis of molecular motion,”
described by the laws of classical mechanics (Einstein 1919, p. 228). The assump-
tion that this motion obeys the laws of classical mechanics was in effect abandoned

106
4
“The Heisenberg Method”: Algebra, Geometry, and Probability …
by Planck’s black-body radiation theory, which inaugurated quantum physics. It was,
however, Einstein who was the ﬁrst to realize the incompatibility between Planck’s
quantum hypothesis and this assumption, still made by Planck himself (Einstein
1906). As noted in Chap. 3, a derivation of Planck’s law by using a proper statis-
tical counting (the Bose–Einstein statistics) was given by Bose (1924), conﬁrming
the difﬁculty of a physical representation of the behavior of photons compatible
with our phenomenal intuition (Bose 1924). In any event, one could build quantum
theory independently of constructing any scheme representing an underlying phys-
ical reality. Instead, as Heisenberg did in the case of QM, or Bohr in the case of his
1913 atomic theory, on which Heisenberg built, one can develop quantum theory as
a principle theory. The quantum behavior of photons requires QED, which was born,
with Dirac, as a principle theory as well (Plotnitsky 2016, pp. 207–225). Neither
theory required a realist and classically causal representation of the behavior of
individual quantum objects, including the ultimate individual constituents of matter,
elementary particles. On the other hand, none of them excluded a realist or classi-
cally causal interpretation of this behavior either. Only determinism was excluded
on experimental grounds.
In contrast to constructive theories, principle theories, according to Einstein,
revealing the Kantian genealogy of his distinction, “employ the analytic, not the
synthetic, method. The elements which form their basis and starting point are not
hypothetically constructed but empirically discovered ones, general characteristics
of natural processes, principles that give rise to mathematically formulated criteria
which the separate processes or the theoretical representations of them have to
satisfy” (Einstein 1919, p. 228). Thermodynamics, Einstein’s example of a classical
principle theory (parallel to the kinetic theory of gases, as a constructive theory), is
a principle theory because it “seeks by analytical means to deduce necessary condi-
tions, which separate events have to satisfy, from the universally experienced fact that
perpetual motion is impossible” (Einstein 1919, p. 228). I would add the following
qualiﬁcation, which is likely to have been accepted by Einstein: Principles are not
empirically discovered but are formulated on the basis of empirically established
evidence.The formulations deﬁning principle theories are synthetic, constructed
already by virtue of the role mathematics plays in them. This construction is, of
course, different from the construction of “the materials of a relatively simple formal
scheme” deﬁning a constructive theory because it only has to satisfy the mathemati-
cally formulated criteria or postulates established by principles, but not to represent
a more fundamental reality deﬁning the phenomena considered. “The impossibility
of perpetual motion” could hardly be seen as empirically given; it was formulated, as
a principle, on the basis of empirically established evidence. Principles, thus, need
not have the self-evidence of axioms or, at least initially, the assumptive character
of postulates, although, once introduced, they may function as or lead to postulates
from which a given theory is built by means of logical deductions. One might, as I
would like to do here, amplify this understanding of principles by seeing them as a
foundation and guidance for inventing and building new theories.
Einstein’s language of “theoretical representations of natural processes” is shaped
by his realist thinking, grounding his view of both constructive and principle theories.

4.2 Quantum Mechanics as a Fundamental Theory: Principles …
107
One can, however, think, along RWR lines, of principle theories that satisfy the math-
ematically formulated criteria supplied by principles without assuming a theoretical
representation of the ultimate nature of the reality considered, although one would
need such a representation at other levels of this reality. This is the case I argue
for QM, which explains my appeal to Einstein’s distinction between constructive
and principle theories as my starting point. Einstein’s 1919 paper, introducing this
distinction, was written before QM. One could, however, see Bohr’s (1913) atomic
theory as a principle theory, which adopted the RWR view in the case of quantum
jumps.
An appeal to principles need not imply that there is some permanent, Platonist,
metaphysical essence to them, although there are those who take this view of prin-
ciples. In the present view, one is not dealing here with a Platonist mimesis of some
primordial or eternal original forms, but rather with thinking of principles, no matter
how fundamental, in the way William James thinks of the truth of an idea, and a
principle is always based in an idea or concept (also in the sense deﬁned in Chap. 2):
“Truth HAPPENS to an idea. It BECOMES true, is MADE true by events” (James
1978, p. 73). Principles change as our experimental ﬁndings and theories change
(without asymptotically converging to some unique set of principles, thus, again,
assuming their metaphysical permanence or essence), and we cannot always antic-
ipate or control these changes. A theory could be deduced, in one way or another,
from a set of ﬁrst principles (and other assumptions), but it cannot be conﬁrmed by
them; it can only be conﬁrmed or refuted by experiments the outcomes of which
the theory predicts, or falsiﬁed by experimental ﬁndings. The principles of QM
replaced, within a new scope, some among the main principles of classical physics,
which continue to remain operative within the proper scope of classical physics and
some of them extend to QM and QFT. There could also be such changes within the
same physical scope, as in the case of general relativity theory vs. Newton’s theory
of gravity. Some principles of quantum theory have been abandoned or modiﬁed
and new principles have been added, both in view of extending the scope of the
theory to QFT and within the scope of QM itself. On the other hand, certain among
these principles, such as the quantum probability or statistics (QP/QS) principle,
have remained in place throughout the history of quantum theory. This is also true as
concerns the quantum discreteness (QD) and quantum individuality (QI) principles
and the postulates they lead to in RWR-type and certain other interpretations, but,
unlike the QP/QS principle, these principles have been seen as not fundamental but
as possibly circumventable when assuming QM or QFT to be a correct theory of
quantum phenomena. In the RWR view, they are fundamental. But that does not
mean that they, or the QP/QS principle, may not be abandoned at some point, as
many, beginning, with Einstein, have hoped and still do.
While, however, I shall discuss the principles that grounded Heisenberg’s inven-
tion of QM, I shall not be concerned with the question of a derivation of QM from
ﬁrst principles, apart from emphasizing the role of conceptual invention, such as that
of a new type of physical variables, matrix variables, by Heisenberg. I have consid-
ered this subject previously, from Heisenberg’s invention of QM to reconstruction
projects in quantum information theory (Plotnitsky 2016, pp. 68–98, 238–248). I

108
4
“The Heisenberg Method”: Algebra, Geometry, and Probability …
shall discuss the latter projects in Chap. 9. Instead, as stated at the outset, I would
like to reconsider, on RWR lines, Heisenberg’s approach in terms of two diagrams
QUANTUMNESS →PROBABILITY →ALGEBRA
and
QUANTUMNESS →PROBABILITY →ALGEBRA →GENERALIZED GEOMETRY
The
ﬁrst
arrow,
QUANTUMNESS→PROBABILITY,
captures
the
epistemological-experimental structure of Heisenberg’s approach. It represents
the fact that the quantumness of physical phenomena, that is, the character of phys-
ical phenomena known as quantum, implies, in accord with the QP/QS principle,
that our predictions concerning them are irreducibly probabilistic or statistical.
This is the case even in dealing with quantum phenomena resulting from what is
assumed to be elementary individual quantum behavior, such as that of elementary
particles. As indicated in Chap. 2, this fact is not in itself sufﬁcient to deﬁne quantum
phenomena, which are assumed in this study to be characterized by the following
set of interrelated features: (1) the role of h, (2) the irreducible role of measuring
instruments in deﬁning quantum phenomena, (3) discreteness, (4) complementarity,
(5) entanglement, (6) quantum nonlocality, and (7) the irreducibly probabilistic or
statistical nature of quantum predictions. “Discreteness” plays a special role in the
present context, coupled to the individuality or even uniqueness of each quantum
phenomenon, in accord with the QD and QI postulates (Bohr 1987, v. 1, p. 53).
Quantum phenomena are individual and discrete in relation to each other, which
is, again, not the same as the atomic, Democritean, discreteness of elementary
quantum objects, such as elementary particles (e.g., Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 33). As
explained in Chap. 8, their character as elementary could be ascertained on the
basis of effects such objects have on measuring instruments, keeping in mind
that some particles originally considered elementary can reveal themselves to be
composite, as it happened in the case of hadrons that were found to be composed of
quarks and gluons. The QPA structure would hold for most of realist and classically
causal interpretations of quantum phenomena and QM, possibly, in contrast to the
RWR view, under the assumption of a continuously connected underlying reality.
Probability always concerns discrete events, which may or may not be connected
by a classically causal process. In the RWR view, they are not and one only deals
with probabilities of transitions, transitions without connections, between quantum
events observed in measuring instruments. As stated from the outset, that we can
only make probabilistic or statistical predictions concerning all phenomena thus far
known as quantum is an experimentally established, “objective,” fact because the
repetition of identically prepared quantum experiments in general leads to different
outcomes. This difference cannot be diminished (beyond the limits deﬁned by
Planck’s constant, h) by improving the precision of our measuring instruments, as

4.2 Quantum Mechanics as a Fundamental Theory: Principles …
109
is manifested in the uncertainty relations, which would remain valid even if we had
perfect instruments.
The situation just outlined in turn implies, deﬁning the theoretical character of
the second arrow of QPA diagram, PROBABILITY→ALGEBRA, that our theories
concerning these phenomena, quantum theories, are fundamentally algebraic, in
contrast to more geometrical classical or relativistic theories. This implication is
reﬂected in Einstein’s assessment of “the Heisenberg method” as essentially alge-
braic (Einstein 1936, p. 375). This is a more complex claim than it might appear,
beginning with the fact that this distinction is not unconditional, because quantum
theories do have geometrical aspects. Conversely, geometrical physical theories, such
as classical physics and relativity, have algebraic aspects. Accordingly, Einstein’s
assessment requires qualiﬁcations, considered in detail below. Nevertheless, this
assessment helps, in part against Einstein’s own grain, to understand the relation-
ships between algebra and geometry in physics, or in mathematics. In particular,
the following diagram obtains, keeping in mind that a new concept of geometry is
involved, deﬁned by what I shall call “spatial algebra:”
QUANTUMNESS →PROBABILITY →ALGEBRA →GENERALIZED GEOMETRY(QPAGG).
More precisely the chain is: QUANTUMNESS→PROBABILITY→ALGEBRA→
SPATIAL ALGEBRA→GENERALIZED GEOMETRY, but it is a “return of geom-
etry” via algebra that is most crucial. Accordingly, I shall speak of QPAGG. This is
mostly a mathematical matter, and probabilistic predictions themselves are, while
involving this generalized geometry, still essentially algebraic. Accordingly, the QPA
diagram is part of the QPAGG diagram.
Probability theory has been primarily algebraic, too. Its origin, in the work of
Gerolamo Cardano, Blaise Pascal, and Pierre Fermat coincides with the emergence
of algebra. As Ian Hacking argued in explaining why the theory emerged in the
seventeenth century rather than earlier, some form of algebra was necessary for it
(Hacking 2006). Analytic geometry and calculus were introduced around the same
time, the ﬁrst by Fermat and Descartes, and the second by Newton and Gottfried
Leibniz (although Fermat also made important contributions to the development
of calculus). They, too, were the product of the algebraization of mathematics, a
deﬁning feature of the mathematics and physics of modernity (roughly from the
sixteenth century on), even though geometry had continued to dominate both until
the nineteenth century.
The situation is, however, more complex. There have been “returns of geometry,”
even parallel ones, in both theories, probability theory and then QM, due to the
fact that analysis came to play a major role in both from their inception. In QM,
where analysis, including complex analysis, was never any less important that in
classical physics and relativity, functional analysis came to play a key role, as it did
in probability theory. Hilbert spaces of QM are those of square-integrable complex
functions (over C), and in effect the concept itself of Hilbert space (although the term
was not used by them) was introduced by Hilbert and Erik I. Fredholm in the theory

110
4
“The Heisenberg Method”: Algebra, Geometry, and Probability …
of integral equations. Eventually, this concept become part of functional analysis,
which was, as noted in Chap. 2, the main ﬁeld of Bohr’s brother, Harald, who was
at Göttingen during that time. So, (Niels) Bohr could easily consult Harald on all
mathematicalmattersrelatedtoquantummechanics,althoughplentyofmathematical
expertise was available in Copenhagen, given the presence there of Hendrik Kramers,
Oscar Klein, or Léon Rosenﬁeld (all Bohr’s assistants at various points), or of course
Heisenberg. The concept of Hilbert space was then used by von Neumann to recast
the formalism of QM, although in effect it was in place already in Heisenberg’s and
Schrödinger’s work. QM was an eigenvalue theory of Hermitian operators.
In a parallel development, probability theory, too, came to use spatialized mathe-
matical concepts, such as “probability space,” introduced by Andrei N. Kolmogorov
as part of his axiomatization of probability theory (Kolmogorov 1956). This concept
follows the concepts of “space” developed in functional analysis and measure theory
(which Kolmogorov used to axiomatize probability theory). It should be kept in mind
that quantum-mechanical probability is not Kolmogorovian (at least in most views).
The Hilbert spaces of QM are not the spaces of probabilities, which would have to
be over R, but spaces, over C, which allow one to establish probability (density)
amplitudes. One then needs Born’s or analogous rule to get to probabilities.
The algebra of probability in classical statistical physics, the primary domain of
using probability in classical physics, was commonly, as in the kinetic theory of gases,
underlain by a geometrical picture of the behavior of the individual constituents of the
systems considered, assumed to follow the laws of classical mechanics. By contrast,
as became apparent earlier on, in quantum physics, even individual objects, no matter
how elementary, and their behavior and the events they give rise to had to be treated
probabilistically. One needed, accordingly, to ﬁnd a new theory, representational or
not, to make correct predictions concerning them, a task that quantum theory pursued
from its inception. As discussed in Chap. 3, Bohr’s (1913) theory offered a new way
of thinking about quantum phenomena in the case of transitions, quantum jumps,
between stationary states (still represented geometrically, as orbits). The theory was
deﬁned by a shift from considering, even probabilistically, the motion of electrons, to
predicting the probabilities of transitions between quantum states, without providing
a physical mechanism for these transitions, thus making them transitions without
connections. Heisenberg extended this thinking by making QM fully a theory of
such transitions and, mathematically, transition probabilities between all quantum
states, without offering any geometrical representation of the behavior of electrons
in stationary states, which became merely energy states.
Heisenberg’s use of his matrix variables, in retrospect as operators in linear vector
spaces (inﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert spaces over C), as the main part of the mathe-
matical machinery of predicting such transition probabilities, deﬁned the algebraic
nature of “the Heisenberg method.” This was in contrast to Schrödinger’s method
in his wave mechanics, accompanied by a geometrical conception of the ultimate
constitution of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena in terms of a contin-
uous vibrational process, which, initially, did not involve probabilities, at least, not
fundamentally. This conception was never worked out by Schrödinger to accord
with the experimentally established discrete features of quantum phenomena. On the

4.2 Quantum Mechanics as a Fundamental Theory: Principles …
111
other hand, these were physical and mathematical demands of accounting for these
features, against the grain of his agenda, that led Schrödinger to a mathematically
equivalent scheme. Probability was made fundamental by several subsequent inves-
tigations, most especially Born’s probabilistic interpretation of the wave function. I
shall discuss Schrödinger’s work in Chap. 6. My main point at the moment is that
Schrödinger’s equations themselves (especially, his time-dependent equation) may
be seen, as they came to be by Bohr and Heisenberg, in RWR-terms, as a prob-
abilistically predictive mathematical technology, which did not represent the ulti-
mate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena. In any event,
Schrödinger’s “geometrical” method proved to be unable to provide a true alter-
native to the Heisenberg “algebraic” method, as Einstein, who initially welcomed
Schrödinger’s wave mechanics as such an alternative, came to realize long before
his assessment of the Heisenberg method in 1936.
4.3
From Geometry to Algebra, and from Algebra
to Geometry
Heisenberg’s discovery and then Bohr’s interpretation of QM were grounded in three
main principles leading to the corresponding postulates, building on those of Bohr’s
(1913) theory, with Bohr’s principle of complementarity added in 1927 (although
this study views complementarity primarily as a concept rather than a principle).2
These postulates were as follows:
(1)
The postulate of quantum discreteness, the QD postulate, according to which
all observable quantum phenomena are individual and discrete in relation to
each other (which is different from the discreteness of quantum objects);
(2)
The postulate of the probabilistic or statistical nature of quantum predictions,
the QP/QS postulate, maintained, in contrast to classical physics, even in
considering individual quantum objects, and accompanied by the nonaddi-
tive character of quantum probability and rules, such as Born’s rule (a version
of which was used in Heisenberg’s derivation), for predicting them; and
(3)
The correspondence postulate, based in Bohr’s correspondence principle,
which, as initially understood by Bohr, required that the predictions of quantum
theory must coincide with those of classical mechanics in the classical limit, but
was given by Heisenberg a mathematical form, postulating that the equations
and variables of QM convert into those of classical mechanics in the classical
limit.
Implicit in Heisenberg’s approach, especially given the QD postulate, was the
quantum individuality (QI) postulate. The postulate ﬁrst appeared explicitly, even if
2 A view of Bohr’s interpretation of QM as a principle theory was suggested in Bub (2000), which,
however, does not consider Bohr’s interpretation as an RWR-type interpretation, and does not
distinguish between Bohr’s different interpretations. As indicated above, a principle theory or
interpretation may be realist.

112
4
“The Heisenberg Method”: Algebra, Geometry, and Probability …
not under this name, in Bohr’s “quantum postulate,” introduced in his Como lecture
of 1927 and grounding his ﬁrst interpretation of quantum phenomena and QM. The
earlier form of this postulate was implicit in Bohr’s (1913) quantum postulates,
used by Heisenberg in his derivation of QM. Applying Bohr’s concept of transitions
without connections to all quantum states (rather than only stationary states), Heisen-
berg was not concerned with representing or even predicting, either (ideally) exactly
or probabilistically, the motion of electrons, in effect abandoning the very concept of
motion as applicable to electrons. He was only concerned with predicting the prob-
abilities of discrete transitions between the quantum states of electrons, transitions
without connections.
He added a new twist: “What I really like in this scheme is that one can really
reduce all interactions between atoms and the external world … to transition proba-
bilities” (Heisenberg, Letter to Kronig, 5 June 1925; cited in Mehra and Rechenberg
2001, v. 2, p. 242). By speaking of the “interactions between atoms and the external
world,” this statement suggests that QM was only predicting the effects of these inter-
actions observed in measuring instruments. This procedure, thus, replaced measure-
ment in the classical sense (of measuring some pre-existing properties of quantum
objects) with establishing, by using measuring instruments, quantum phenomena,
which can be treated classically without classically measuring the properties of
quantum objects. This view, not found in Bohr’s (1913) theory, was adopted by
Bohr, to the point of becoming the single deﬁning feature of his interpretation in all
of its versions. As discussed in Chap. 2, in Bohr’s interpretation, the classical treat-
ment of the observed parts of measuring instruments meant that the data registered,
as part of quantum phenomena, in these instruments, could be measured as clas-
sical properties just as one measures such properties in classical physics. Measuring
instruments were also assumed to contain a quantum stratum through which they
interacted, quantumly, with quantum objects, which stratum or this interaction were
places beyond representation and, in Bohr’s ultimate interpretation, conception. My
point at the moment is that the key ingredients of this view of quantum measurement
are found in Heisenberg’s thinking leading him to his discovery of QM. None of these
ingredients were, by contrast, considered by Schrödinger, who was not concerned
with measurement at all, in his approach to his wave mechanics, in contrast to his
later papers (Schrödinger 1935a, b, 1936), which offered a subtle analysis of quantum
measurement.
One can also view Heisenberg’s approach in quantum-informational terms,
discussed in Chap. 9. While one could not say that this approach was, technically,
quantum-informational, it could be viewed as quantum-informational in spirit, and
conversely, quantum information theory as Heisenbergian in spirit (Plotnitsky 2002,
2016, pp. 72–73). The reason for this view is that the quantum-mechanical situation,
as Heisenberg conceived of it, was deﬁned by:
(A)
certain already obtained information, derived from spectral lines (due to the
emission of radiation by the electron), observed in measuring instruments; and

4.3 From Geometry to Algebra, and from Algebra to Geometry
113
(B)
certain possible future information, to be obtainable from spectral lines to be
observed in measuring instruments and, hopefully, predictable in probabilistic
or statistical terms by the mathematical formalism of a quantum theory.
Heisenberg’s aim was to develop such a formalism, without assuming that it
neededtorepresentaspatiotemporalprocessconnectingthesetwosetsofinformation
orhoweachcomesabout,arepresentationthatHeisenbergthoughtof,echoingBohr’s
assessment of quantum jumps (Bohr 1913, p. 15), as “scarcely possible” at the time
(Heisenberg 1925, p. 265). This information is, in each case, determined by what
type of experiment one decides to perform, rather than by arbitrarily selecting one
or another pre-existing properties of physical reality. As became quickly apparent,
the formalism entailed this aspect of the situation in view of the noncommutativity
of the operators associated with the variables deﬁning such alternative decisions,
such the position Q and momentum P operators, and the corresponding equation,
PQ −QP ̸= 0, through which QM connects to the uncertainty relations.
Heisenberg’s theory was, thus, dealing with quantum information deﬁned by a
particular structure of bits of classical information obtainable in measuring instru-
ments, the structure physically described by classical physics, but not predictable
by it. Because this structure was deﬁned by the effects of the interactions between
quantum objects and measuring instruments, the theory was still concerned with
quantum objects or the reality thus idealized, although this reality was not represented
by the theory and could be beyond representation or even conception. Heisenberg did
not make deﬁnitive claims in this regard, and, as indicated in Chap. 2, he eventually
adopted the view that this reality could be represented mathematically, without using
physical concepts, at least as such concepts are understood in classical physics or
relativity.
The correspondence principle, made into the mathematical correspondence postu-
late, motivated Heisenberg’s decision to retain the equations of classical mechanics,
while introducing different variables to enable correct predictions for all energy
levels of electrons. The correspondence with classical theory could be maintained
because new variables could be replaced by conventional classical variables in the
classical limit, as in the case of large quantum numbers, when the electrons were far
away from the nuclei and when classical concepts, including orbits, could apply. The
electrons’ behavior itself is still quantum and could have quantum effects. The old
quantum theory was deﬁned by the strategy of retaining, on realist lines, the variables
of classical mechanics while adjusting the equations to achieve better predictions.
Heisenberg’s reversal of this strategy was unexpected, as was a radical change in the
role of these equations: they no longer represented the motion of electrons, but served
as mathematical means for probabilistic or statistical predictions concerning effects
of the interaction between quantum objects and measuring instruments. Heisen-
berg was initially concerned with spectra, so the objects interacting with measuring
instruments were photons assumed to be emitted by electrons.
Heisenberg’s new variables were, unlike his equations, completely independent of
any classical theory. They were inﬁnite unbounded matrices with complex elements,
although it is not clear that he initially thought of them as matrices, rather than, as he

114
4
“The Heisenberg Method”: Algebra, Geometry, and Probability …
called them, (double indexed) “ensembles of quantities” (Heisenberg 1925, p. 263).
Their multiplication, which Heisenberg, who was famously unaware of the existence
of matrix algebra and reinvented it, had to deﬁne to use them in his equations, is in
general not commutative. Such mathematical objects had never been used in physics
previously. Technically, tensors of the second rank, used in relativity, are matrices,
and, accordingly, in general they do not commute. This noncommutativity, however,
does not play the same role in relativity, and it did not attract attention. It is only
with QM that noncommutative mathematics becomes used physics in an essential
way. In fact, while matrix algebra, in ﬁnite and inﬁnite dimensions, was developed
in mathematics by then, unbounded inﬁnite matrices, used by Heisenberg and then
by Born and Jordan, had not been previously studied. As became apparent later, such
matrices are necessary to derive the uncertainty relations for continuous variables.
The Hilbert-space formalism of QM was, as noted, introduced by von Neumann
shortly thereafter. There are further details: for example, as unbounded self-adjoint
operators, these matrices do not form an algebra with respect to the composition as a
noncommutative product, although some of them satisfy the canonical commutation
relation. These details are, however, secondary. Most crucial is that the concept was
used in a radically new, essentially (weak) RWR-type, way. Heisenberg’s variables
were algebraic entities enabling probabilistic or statistical predictions concerning
quantum phenomena, observed in measuring instruments, without providing a math-
ematically idealized representation of the spacetime behavior of quantum objects
responsible for these phenomena. It was a new way of using and, given its purely
abstract nature (rather than a representational relation to physical objects and their
behavior), a new way of inventing mathematics in physics.
In his 1925 paper, Heisenberg began his derivation of QM with an observation
that reﬂected a radical departure from the classical ideal of continuous mathematical
representation of individual physical processes. He said: “in quantum theory it has
not been possible to associate the electron with a point in space, considered as
a function of time, by means of observable quantities. However, even in quantum
theory it is possible to ascribe to an electron the emission of radiation” [the effect of
which is observed in a measuring instrument] (Heisenberg 1925, p. 263; emphasis
added). As explained in Chap. 2, referring to what happened between experiments,
via a classical concept of emission, this statement would pose difﬁculty for the RWR
view (Heisenberg 1962, pp. 178–179). These considerations were, however, to come
later. Also, a measurement could associate an electron with a point in space, with QM
capable of predicting the probability for ﬁnding its position in given area. But it is not
possible to do so by linking this association to a function of time (as a real variable)
representing the continuous motion of this electron, as in classical mechanics, which
would then allow one to predict this position ideally exactly. Matrix mechanics did
not offer a treatment of electrons in stationary states, only in which one could speak
of the position of an electron in an atom. An instantly repeated measurement could
give the value, the same value, of its position, which instant repetition is, however, an
idealization (e.g., Schrödinger 1935a, pp. 158–159). Schrödinger’s time-dependent
equation made it possible to predict a (physical) quantum state, for any variable, such
as position, momentum, or energy, including for electrons in stationary states. I here

4.3 From Geometry to Algebra, and from Algebra to Geometry
115
understand the situation in accordance with the RWR-type concept of a quantum
state deﬁned in Chap. 3 as manifested only in its effects observed in measuring
instruments, rather than in the way Schrödinger initially conceived of this situation,
as against his 1935 paper just cited.
In his paper, Heisenberg states next: “In order to characterize this radiation we
ﬁrst need the frequencies which appear as functions of two variables. In quantum
theory these functions are
v(n, n −α) = 1

h{W(n) −W(n −α)}
and in classical theory in the form.
v(n, α) = av(n) = a

h(dW

dn)” (Heisenberg 1925, p. 263).
This difference, central to Bohr’s (1913) theory, leads to the difference between
classical and quantum theories as regards the combination relations for frequencies,
which, in the quantum case, correspond to the Rydberg–Ritz combination rules,
reﬂecting “the discrepancy between the calculated orbital frequency of the electrons
and the frequency of the emitted radiation,” which, as discussed in Chap. 3, was a key
new feature of Bohr’s theory, incompatible with classical electrodynamics (Heisen-
berg 1925, p. 263). However, “in order to complete the description of radiation [in
conformity, by the correspondence principle, with the classical Fourier representa-
tion of motion] it is necessary to have not only frequencies but also the amplitudes”
(Heisenberg 1925, p. 263). On the one hand, then, the equations of QM must formally
contain amplitudes as well as frequencies. On the other hand, these amplitudes could
no longer serve their classical physical function (as part of a continuous represen-
tation of motion) and were instead related to discrete transitions between stationary
states. In Heisenberg’s theory and in QM since then, these “amplitudes” are no longer
amplitudes of physical motions, but are instead formal mathematical entities, “prob-
ability (density) amplitudes,” linked, via Born’s rule, to the probabilities of transi-
tions between stationary states, manifested in the spectral data observed in quantum
experiments. As explained above, in the language of Hilbert-space formalism, the
probability amplitude is just ⟨λi|ψ⟩(λi is an eigen value and ψ is the wave function)
and Born’s rule says that the corresponding probability is the square of the ampli-
tude or is the amplitude multiplied by its own complex conjugate, or Pi = ⟨λi|ψ⟩2.
This makes the term “amplitude” symbolic, as these amplitudes are not anything
physical, as amplitudes would be in classical physics, say, in a Fourier representa-
tion, formally or, again, symbolically used by Heisenberg (Bohr 1987, v. 1, p. 18). In
commenting on linear superposition in quantum mechanics in his classic book, Dirac
emphasized this difference: “the superposition that occurs in quantum mechanics is
of an essentially different nature from any occurring in the classical theory” (Dirac
1958, p. 14). In RWR-type interpretations, this superposition is not physical: it is
only mathematical. In classical physics the mathematics of (wave) superpositions
represent physical processes; in QM, at least in RWR-type interpretations, it does

116
4
“The Heisenberg Method”: Algebra, Geometry, and Probability …
not. The corresponding probabilities were derived by Heisenberg by a form of Born’s
rule, which he postulates for this limited case.3 Heisenberg then argues as follows:
The amplitudes may be treated as complex vectors, each determined by six independent
components, and they determine both the polarization and the phase. As the amplitudes are
also functions of the two variables n and α, the corresponding part of the radiation is given
by the following expressions:
Quantum-theoretical:
Re

A(n, n −α)eiω(n,n−α)t
Classical:
Re

Aα(n)eiω(n)αt
(Heisenberg 1925, p. 263).
The problem—a difﬁcult and, “at ﬁrst sight,” even insurmountable problem—is
that “the phase contained in A would seem to be devoid of physical signiﬁcance
in quantum theory, since frequencies are in general not commensurable with their
harmonics” and, as a result, “a geometrical interpretation of such quantum-theoretical
phase relations in analogy with those of classical theory seems at present scarcely
possible” (Heisenberg 1925, pp. 263–265). If one wants to have a geometry here, a
new, quantum-theoretical, form of geometry, the geometry of Hilbert spaces over C
becomes necessary. This geometry is, however, no longer analogous to the geometry
used in classical theory (or relativity) insofar as its aim now is to predict the probabili-
ties of the outcomes of quantum experiments and not to represent how these outcomes
come about. As discussed in Chap. 3, this incommensurability, which is in irreconcil-
able conﬂict with classical electrodynamics, was one of the most radical features of
Bohr’s (1913) atomic theory, on which Heisenberg builds. His strategy, too, is based,
just as Bohr’s was, on the shift from calculating the probability of ﬁnding a moving
electron in a given state to calculating the probability of an electron’s transition from
one state to another, without describing the physical mechanism responsible for this
transition. Heisenberg’s theory is more in harmony with this approach because there
are no longer orbits, where the classical approach would still apply.
Heisenberg says next: “However, we shall see presently that also in quantum
theory the phase has a deﬁnitive signiﬁcance which is analogous to its signiﬁcance
in classical theory” (Heisenberg 1925, p. 264; emphasis added). “Analogous” could
only mean here that, rather than being analogous physically, the way the phase enters
3 Born begins his paper with a reference to Heisenberg, but notes that a version of his rule “has
so far been applied exclusively to the calculation of stationary states and vibration amplitudes
associated with transitions [between such states]” (Born 1926a, p. 863). Born extends the idea to all
QM—the discovery that justly, although belatedly (in 1954), brought him a Nobel Prize. The right
formula itself (Born’s ﬁrst paper on the subject (Born 1926a) did not use square moduli) famously
occurred in a footnote (Born 1925, p. 865, note). This extension was crucial. It gave the probabilistic
character of the formalism a much greater generality and transformed, to Schrödinger’s chagrin,
our understanding to the wave function.

4.3 From Geometry to Algebra, and from Algebra to Geometry
117
mathematically is analogous to the way the classical phase enters mathematically in
classical theory, in accordance with the mathematical form of the correspondence
principle, now the correspondence postulate, insofar as quantum-mechanical equa-
tions are formally the same as those of classical physics. Heisenberg only considered
a toy model of an anharmonic quantum oscillator, and thus needed only a Newto-
nian equation for it, rather than the Hamiltonian equations required for a full-ﬂedged
theory, developed by Born and Jordan (Born and Jordan 1925; Born et al. 1926).
As Heisenberg explains, if one considers a given quantity x(t) [a co-ordinate as a
function of time] in classical theory, this can be regarded as represented by a set of
quantities of the form
Aα(n)eiω(n)αt,
which, depending on whether the motion is periodic or not, can be combined into a
sum or integral which represents x(t):
x(n, t) =
+∞

−∞
Aα(n)eiω(n)αt
or.
x(n, t) =
+∞

−∞
Aα(n)eiω(n)αtdα
(Heisenberg 1925, p. 264).
Heisenberg next makes his most decisive and most extraordinary move. He notes that
“a similar combination of the corresponding quantum-theoretical quantities seems
to be impossible in a unique manner and therefore not meaningful, in view of the
equal weight of the variables n and n −α.” However, he says, “one might readily
regard the ensemble of quantities A (n, n −α)eiω(n, n −α)t [an inﬁnite square matrix]
as a representation of the quantity x(t)” (Heisenberg 1925, p. 264). The arrangement
of the data into these ensembles, in effect square tables (although it is not clear that
Heisenberg thought about them in this way, unlike Born, who on reading Heisen-
berg’s paper, realized that they were matrices), was a remarkable way to handle the
transitions between stationary states. In retrospect, once one deals with the transi-
tions between stationary states, matrices appear naturally, with rows and columns
linked to these states, respectively. This naturalness, however, became apparent, or
one might say, became natural, only in retrospect.
At the time, it was an extraordinary guess, and a great conceptual invention, not
unmotivated, but little prepared by the preceding history of physics. However, it does
not by itself establish an algebra of these arrangements, for which one needs to ﬁnd
rigorous rules for adding and multiplying these elements. Otherwise, Heisenberg

118
4
“The Heisenberg Method”: Algebra, Geometry, and Probability …
cannot use these variables in the equations of his new mechanics. For a quantum-
theoretical version of the classical equation of motion considered, which would
apply (no longer as an equation of motion) to these variables, Heisenberg needed
to construct the powers of such quantities, beginning with x(t)2, which was actually
all he needed. The answer in classical theory is obvious and, for the reasons just
explained, obviously unworkable in quantum theory, where, Heisenberg proposed,
“it seems that the simplest and most natural assumption would be to replace classical
[Fourier] equations … by
B(n, n −β)eiξ(n,n−β)t =
+∞

−∞
αA(n, n −α)A(n −α, n −β)eiω(n,n−β)t
or
=
+∞

−∞
A(n, n −α)A(n −α, n −β)eiω(n,n−β)dα” (Heisenberg 1925, p. 265).
This is the main mathematical postulate, the (matrix) multiplication postulate, of
Heisenberg’s theory, “an almost necessary consequence of the frequency combi-
nation rules” (Heisenberg 1925, p. 265). Although it is commutative in the case
of x2, this multiplication is in general noncommutative, expressly for position and
momentum variables, and Heisenberg, without quite realizing it, used this noncom-
mutativity in solving his equation, as Dirac was the ﬁrst to notice (Mehra and Rechen-
berg 2001, v. 4, p. 129). Heisenberg spoke of his new algebra of matrices as the “new
kinematics.” This was not the best choice of term because his new variables were
no related to motion as the term kinematic would suggest, one of many, historically
understandable, but potentially confusing terms. Planck’s constant, h, which is a
dimensional, dynamic entity, has played no role thus far. Technically, as Einstein
was to lament later, the theory wasn’t even a mechanics: it did not offer a representa-
tion of individual quantum processes, but only predicted, probabilistically or statis-
tically, what is observed in measuring instruments. This assessment may, however,
depend on how one understands mechanics as a mathematical-experimental theory.
Bohr, accordingly, spoke of Heisenberg’s discovery as inaugurating “a new epoch of
mutual stimulation of mathematics and mechanics” (Bohr 1987, v. 1, p. 51).
That in general his new variables did not commute, PQ–QP ̸= 0, was, again, an
especially novel feature of Heisenberg’s theory, deﬁning its algebraic structure. This
feature proved to be momentous physically. Most famously, it came to represent the
uncertainty relations constraining certain simultaneous measurements, such as those
of the momentum (P) and the co-ordinate (Q), associated with a given quantum
object in the mathematical formalism of QM and (correlatively) the complementary
character of such measurements. Their noncommutative nature was, initially, off-
puttingforsome,includingHeisenberghimselfandPauli,althoughnotforDirac,who
immediately realized its centrality, nor for Born and Jordan (Plotnitsky 2009, pp. 90,
111, 116). In retrospect, given the nature of the situation to which Heisenberg’s new
mechanics responded, this noncommutativity is not surprising. While one should,

4.3 From Geometry to Algebra, and from Algebra to Geometry
119
again, be cautious about a retrospective sense of things, it is worth considering the
physical reasons for this noncommutativity from a later vantage, that of Schwinger’s
comments in his unpublished lecture, cited at length in Schweber (1994). Schwinger
notes a commonly stated physical feature corresponding to this noncommutativity: if
one measures two physical properties in one order, and then in the other, the outcome
would in general be different. But his aim is to explain the reasons for why this is
the case, which is why his comments are of interest here. He says:
Once we recognize that the act of measurement introduces in the [quantum] object of
measurement changes which are not arbitrarily small, and which cannot be precisely
controlled … then every time we make a measurement, we introduce a new physical situation
and we can no longer be sure that the new physical situation corresponds to the same physical
properties which we had obtained by an earlier measurement. In other words, if you measure
two physical properties in one order, and then the other, which classically would absolutely
make no difference, these in the microscopic realm are simply two different experiments …
So, therefore, the mathematical scheme can certainly not be the assignment, the associ-
ation, or the representation of physical properties by numbers because numbers do not have
this property of depending upon the order in which the measurements are carried out. …
We must instead look for a new mathematical scheme in which the order of performance of
physical operations is represented by an order of performance of mathematical operations.
(Cited in Schweber 1994, p. 361)
Thelastsentenceisnotentirelyprecise:mathematical operations,includingmulti-
plication (commutative or not), upon any quantities or symbols, are not physical
measurements, which are, on the other hand, not mathematical, at least not inherently.
This is an important point, of which Schwinger was undoubtedly aware. I shall return
to it presently. The passage contains echoes of Bohr’s writings, especially in invoking
“changes that cannot be controlled.” As Bohr said in the Como lecture: “It must not
be forgotten… that in the classical theories any succeeding observation permits a
prediction of future events with ever increasing accuracy, because it improves our
knowledge of the initial state of the system. According to the quantum theory, just the
impossibility of neglecting the interaction with the agency of measurement means
that every observation introduces a new uncontrollable element” (Bohr 1987, v. 1,
p. 68). Classically, one can continue to perform measurements of both the position
and the momentum of an object at any point along its continuous and (classically)
causally determined trajectory. This is not possible in quantum measurements, even
if one assumes that such a trajectory is possible for a quantum object (as for example,
one does in Bohmian mechanics). Heisenberg made the same point in his uncertainty
relations paper and elsewhere (Heisenberg 1927, p. 36; 1930, pp. 66, 72–77). So did
Schrödinger in his cat paradox paper (Schrödinger 1935a, pp. 152, 54, 57–158). The
role of “the ﬁnite [and hence never arbitrarily small] and uncontrollable interactions
between the object and the measuring instruments” was emphasized by Bohr in his
reply to EPR (Bohr 1935, pp. 697, 700).
Schwinger’s reasoning was not the same as that of Heisenberg in his discovery
of QM. The considerations invoked by Schwinger emerged later. Indeed, the type
of thinking described by Schwinger is more in accord with quantum-informational
approaches to deriving quantum theory, in ﬁnite dimensions, from the (formalized)

120
4
“The Heisenberg Method”: Algebra, Geometry, and Probability …
structure of quantum measurements, as discussed in Chap. 9. The noncommutativity
of his matrix variables was not Heisenberg’s starting point but a consequence of the
multiplicationruleforhismatrices,whichheneededtoestablishtobeabletousethem
in his equations, formally borrowed from classical physics, by the correspondence
principle or, again, in this case the correspondence postulate. Thus, the structure of his
mathematics scheme was partly borrowed from classical physics and partly invented
by ﬁnding the variables needed and constructing their algebra. That Heisenberg did
not know about the existence of matrix algebra and reinvented it is a testimony to
his mathematical creativity. However, even if he knew about it, he would still have
had to invent how to relate this algebra to the probabilities or statistics of quantum
predictions, in the absence, assumed by him, of a representation of the behavior of
quantum objects responsible for quantum phenomena.
The main difﬁculty, shown by Schwinger’s comments, is that, given this situation,
any mathematical scheme deﬁning the formalism of quantum theory requires mathe-
matics that does not appear to be representationally connected, in the way it would be
in classical physics or relativity, to the “measurement algebra,” as Schwinger came
to call it (Schwinger 2001; Jaeger 2016). Consider Schwinger’s statement: “The
order of performance of physical operations is represented by an order of perfor-
mance of mathematical operations.” But, if one follows Bohr, as Schwinger appears
to do, these physical operations are measurements, with their outcomes, manifested
in measuring instruments, measurements predicted by means of these mathematical
operations, rather than represented by then in the way they would be in classical
physics. Schwinger’s argument, which, again, follows that of Bohr, is in accord with
the view of quantum measurement adopted here: a quantum measurement is not a
measurement of some pre-existing quantity of the quantum object considered but an
establishment of a new quantum phenomenon, an entirely “new physical situation,”
as Schwinger says. Inthepresent view, moreover, eventhequantumobject considered
is deﬁned by this measurement. Accordingly, the term “represented” (perhaps only
loosely used by Schwinger) is not strictly accurate insofar as there is no homomor-
phic, let alone isomorphic, mapping from the algebra of QM, “the new mathematical
scheme,” to this measurement algebra. One needs additional elements of structure to
arrive at this scheme and to relate it to measurements and their structure, “algebra,”
to the degree that they form an algebra, a point I shall address presently.
The assessment just given reﬂects a very different understanding of the structure
of quantum measurements from that of assuming that the noncommutative nature of
the multiplication of the operator variables involved, PQ −QP ̸= 0, represents the
order of performance of physical operations. Schwinger might have agreed with this
understanding (and as I said, he might have used the term “representation” loosely
in this lecture, never published by him), given his afﬁnities with Bohr, who would
virtually certainly have agreed with this view. This understanding arises from the
key premise of Schwinger’s or, again, Bohr’s argument: “Once we recognize that
the act of measurement introduces in the [quantum] object of measurement changes
which are not arbitrarily small, and which cannot be precisely controlled … then
every time we make a measurement, we introduced a new physical situation and
we can no longer be sure that the new physical situation corresponds to the same

4.3 From Geometry to Algebra, and from Algebra to Geometry
121
physical properties which we had obtained by an earlier measurement.” By the QI
postulate, each quantum measurement is a unique and unrepeatable event deﬁning a
new physical situation. As such, each new measurement, M2 at a later moment in time
t2, even of the same variable, unavoidably, in Schrödinger’s terms, requires a new
expectation-catalog, enabled by QM, cum Born’s rule, and the data obtained in this
measurement. This new measurement, as a new unique event, even if one measures
the same variable, say, the position, makes the previous expectation-catalog, deﬁned
by previous measurement, M1, at time t1 (which could have been used for predicting
possible outcomes of M2) meaningless as concerns possible predictions after M2 is
made.
If one considers the case of the measurement of two complementarity variables,
say, the position and the momentum, associated with a quantum object, the case,
in which the noncommutative algebra of the quantum-mechanical formalism comes
into play, the situation is as follows. These measurements, observed in the measuring
instruments used, are mutually exclusive as concerns the possibility of performing
both simultaneously, by virtue of the uncertainty relations, which are experimentally
established laws independent of any theory, reﬂected in the corresponding comple-
mentary quantum phenomena. If the ﬁrst measurement, M1, at time t1, is that of
a co-ordinate (observed in a measuring instruments), one can make predictions, by
using QM cum Born’s rule, concerning the probability or statistics of a future position
measurement at any future moment in time, tn, but can make no predictions whatso-
ever concerning future momentum measurements at any future moment in time. But
if we then make the momentum measurement (in the same direction), say, M2, at
time t2, our earlier predictions concerning the position measurement become mean-
ingless as no longer veriﬁable, while this new measurement precludes making any
predictions concerning future position measurements. One can only make predictions
concerning future momentum measurements, concerning the value of the momentum
with a given probability within a certain range.
The noncommutativity of the corresponding operator variables, Q and P, is just
part of the mathematics that enables either prediction, rather than representing this
situation of measurement, or this “algebra of measurement,” to the degree that one
could speak of algebra here, rather than of the “structure” of measurement, deﬁned
by this situation or by quantum measurement in general. It is true that, if in the experi-
ment with the initial preparation of measuring instruments at time t01, one makes ﬁrst
the position measurement, M1Q, at time t11 and then the momentum measurement,
M2P at time t21 and then, with the same initial preparation of measuring instruments
at time t02 (which preparation is possible because we can control the instruments
classically) reverse the order of the quantities we measure, by ﬁrst measuring the
momentum, M1P, at time t12 and then the position at time t22, M2Q, the outcome will
be different. The double indexing of time is necessary because each set of measure-
ments happens at a different set of time intervals and in fact requires a different
quantum object, a point that as will be seen in Chap. 7, becomes important in consid-
ering the EPR experiment and Bohr’s reply to EPR. This situation is the physical
meaning of Schwinger’s appeal to two different situations of measurements, the

122
4
“The Heisenberg Method”: Algebra, Geometry, and Probability …
meaning deﬁned by the fact that each situation consists of two separate measure-
ments. One is dealing with two pairs of different physical entities, (M1Q, M2P) and
(M1Q, M2P) observed in measuring instruments, and not with performing a reverse
(“algebraic”) operation with different outcomes on the same two entities, M1 and
M2, as one would mathematically in noncommutative algebra, with M1 M2 ̸= M2
M1. Of course, PQ −QP ̸= 0, for all complementary variables considered, but this
mathematical fact only pertains to the formalism of QM, enabling probabilities and
statistics of predictions, correctly estimated by QM, by using these Ps and Qs and
not to measurements. These variables are, at least in the RWR view, independent
of the physical quantities measured, while the latter are, conversely, independent of
any speciﬁc theory, as are, again, the uncertainty relations.4 This independence is
key to Bohr’s interpretation, especially in its ultimate version as a strong RWR-type
interpretation, and as will be seen in Chap. 6, missing this independence can lead to
misunderstanding Bohr’s argumentation. As, however, I have argued from the outset
of this study, this independence was part of the new way in which mathematics was
used by Heisenberg, thus transforming the nature of theoretical physics.
4.4
How Algebraic is the Heisenberg Algebraic Method?
The preceding discussion suggests that, whether one accepts or not Einstein’s skep-
tical attitude toward “the Heisenberg method” and, by the time of Einstein’s (1936)
assessment, to QM, exploring his characterization of both as algebraic helps one
better to understand Heisenberg’s thinking, leading him to his discovery of QM and
QM itself. According to Einstein:
[P]erhaps the success of the Heisenberg method points to a purely algebraic method of
description of nature, that is, to the elimination of continuous functions from physics. Then,
however, we must give up, in principle, the space–time continuum [at the ultimate level of
reality]. It is not unimaginable that human ingenuity will some day ﬁnd methods which will
make it possible to proceed along such a path. At present however, such a program looks
like an attempt to breathe in empty space. (Einstein 1936, p. 378)
4 Because the interference of measurement cannot, in principle, be neglected in considering quantum
phenomena, some of these considerations would still apply even if one assumes, as some interpre-
tations of QM or alternative theories, such as Bohmian mechanics, do, that quantum objects do
possess such properties as position and momentum, independently. As stated from the outset of
this study, in classical physics the interference of measurement may be assumed to be “arbitrarily
small,” both the position and the momentum can always be measured and deﬁned simultaneously
at any given point and predicted ideally exactly at any future point. This is not so in Bohmian
mechanics, even though it is realist and classically causal in its representation of quantum objects
and behavior, because it is grounded in the assumption that a measurement actually disturbs the
objects and, as a result, changes the pre-existing position or the momentum of this object, which is
why the uncertainty relations still apply and the predictions of Bohmian mechanics (an expressly
Einstein-nonlocal theory) are the same as those of QM. Moreover, in classical mechanics it is, in
principle, possible (for individual or small system) to repeat a given physical situation exactly with
the same outcome of any measurement or sequence of measurements in any given order, which is,
in general, not possible in quantum physics.

4.4 How Algebraic is the Heisenberg Algebraic Method?
123
For Heisenberg, or for Bohr, this method, once introduced by Heisenberg, was
more like a breath of fresh mountain air. Einstein, as noted, admitted, on the same
occasion “that there is no doubt that quantum mechanics has seized hold of a beautiful
element of truth and that it will be a touchstone for a future theoretical basis in that
it must be deducible as a limiting case from that basis.” But he also reiterated, in
accord with the assessment of the Heisenberg method just cited, that he did “not
believe that quantum mechanics will be the starting point in the search for this basis,
just as one cannot arrive at the foundations of mechanics from thermodynamics
or statistical mechanics” (Einstein 1936, p. 361). Earlier, he referred to QM as a
magical trick, “Jacob’s pillow” of Göttingen and Copenhagen: it was not “the real
thing” and did “not really bring us any closer to the secret of the ‘old one,’” who,
Einstein, equally unhappy with the recourse to probability in dealing even with
the simplest possible systems, added in his famous pronouncement, “at any rate
is... not playing at dice” (Born 2005, p. 88). Einstein meant nature, but using God
helped to immortalize his statement, one especially famous but still one of those
of rhetorical gestures common to Einstein, like that describing QM above, as “an
attempt to breathe in empty space.” Einstein was, again, most concerned with the
absence of realism in considering the ultimate constitution of nature, while realizing
that the irreducible recourse to probability would be automatic as a result. By 1936,
Einstein’s hopes for Schrödinger’s wave mechanics as a more geometrical alternative
have been long abandoned. Accordingly, the proper basis for his “search for a more
complete conception,” which he could not “forego,” had to be elsewhere (Einstein
1936, pp. 361, 375).
He might have been right as concerns the type of theory he wanted, a more
geometrical theory on the model of Maxwell’s electrodynamics, as a classical ﬁeld
theory, and then his own general relativity, grounded in Riemannian geometry, which
gave a realist mathematical idealization of gravity. Such a theory is unlikely to emerge
from QM or QFT. Neither of these two theories is, however, “a description of nature,”
because, at least in the RWR view, neither offers a representation of the ultimate
constitution of nature, which was Einstein’s imperative for a fundamental theory.
Accordingly, Einstein would not have viewed, and had not viewed, QM or QFT as a
proper “method” of the description of nature, and one can understand why he did not
believe that either theory offered a “useful point of departure for future development,”
which he associated with such a description (Einstein 1949, p. 83).
It is not coincidental either that Einstein’s (1936) paper was published in the
immediate wake of the EPR paper, which argued for the incompleteness, or else
nonlocality of QM, and Bohr’s reply, which, as discussed in Chap. 7, Einstein misread
as allowing for nonlocality (as an action at distance). EPR’s argument and related
arguments by Einstein gave new impetus to his vision. This vision and the hope for its
eventual fulﬁllment, the Einsteinian hope, have inspired and guided many physicists
and philosophers and still do even in the face of the fact that QM and QFT have
remained our standard theories of quantum phenomena in the corresponding energy
regimes. One the other hand, we still don’t have a quantum theory of gravity, which is
one of the reasons (albeit far from the only one) that keeps alive the Einsteinian hope,

124
4
“The Heisenberg Method”: Algebra, Geometry, and Probability …
against the Heisenberg method, with general relativity as the main theory supporting
this hope.
It is worth reiterating that, Einstein, who was, as discussed in Chap. 2, no naïve
realist, was aware that, just as general relativity was, a theory of the kind he wanted
would be a (suitably mathematized) conceptual idealization. In his view, however, a
fundamentaltheorywouldnotbepossibleapartfromsuchconcepts,orinhislanguage
“a free conceptual construction,” which deﬁned his realism as conceptual (Einstein
1949, p. 47). The main problem of the Heisenberg method for Einstein was that it
only provided the algebra of probabilities for the outcomes of quantum experiments,
without a proper realist idealization, essentially geometrical in character (it contains
algebra, such as that of tensor calculus, as well), provided by general relativity. Or
so it appeared before singularities entered the theory within merely a year from the
discovery of the theory with Karl Schwarzschield’s 1916 work, although it took much
longer to accept them as a permanent feature of the theory. Einstein, ever a thinker of
continuity, never quite reconciled to the idea of singularities, and thought they should
ultimately be avoided. Would he have been convinced by the current evidence and
Roger Penrose’s (1965) proof (a decade after Einstein’s death in 1955), for which
Penrose was awarded the 2020 Nobel prize in physics, that singularities of black holes
were a consequence of general relativity, without any esoteric assumptions made in
previous demonstrations (Penrose 1965)? It took nearly another half a century to
show their actual existence in nature. Penrose shared the prize with Andrea Ghez
and Reinhard Genzel, who experimentally conﬁrmed the existence of a massive black
hole (or what is generally assumed to be one) at the center of the Milky Way. It is,
again, difﬁcult to know, assuming that such a theory is possible at all, how far we are
from quantum gravity, which, as a quantum theory, could be the ultimate triumph
of the Heisenberg method, or whether a theory bringing gravity into harmony with
other fundamental forces will be conversely more akin to general relativity, and thus
a fulﬁlment of the Einsteinian hope, or be something else altogether.
All our physical theories, however, from Kepler and Galileo on, have been deﬁned
by the interplay of algebra and geometry, equally found in general relativity and
QM or QFT. Accordingly, while Einstein’s assessment of the Heisenberg method
and QM is not out of place, it requires a more careful examination, giving it a
greater complexity than Einstein’s brief statement conveys, a complexity that also
brings geometry back into the Heisenberg method and QM or QFT. The Heisenberg
method might have been fundamentally algebraic, and, as an RWR-type method, it
excluded realism, even though it could not preclude realism as in principle possible
by means of other theories or by means of alternative interpretations of QM. This
method, however, did not exclude geometry. Instead, it brought with it a new way of
geometrical thinking and new form of geometry, that of Hilbert spaces, of ﬁnite and
inﬁnite dimensions (over C), to fundamental physics. By doing so, it led to a new
synergy of algebra and geometry in physics, a synergy by then already in place in
mathematics itself.
Some qualiﬁcations of Einstein’s assessment are immediately necessary in view
of the basic mathematical structure of QM or QFT. Thus, in saying that “we must
give up, in principle, the space–time continuum,” Einstein must have had in mind the

4.4 How Algebraic is the Heisenberg Algebraic Method?
125
spacetime continuum in representing the ultimate character of physical reality by a
geometrical theory, such as Maxwell’s electrodynamics, as a classical ﬁeld theory,
and then general relativity, grounded in Riemannian geometry of differential mani-
folds. Einstein was of course aware that the idea that this character may be discrete
had been around for long time by then. As discussed in the Introduction, it was, in
particular, proposed as a possibility by Riemann as early as 1854 in his Habilita-
tion lecture, which Einstein new well. Riemann brought it up, on Kantian lines, in
connection with the difference between our continuous phenomenal representation
of physical space and “the reality underlying space,” which may be discrete. A subtler
part of Riemann’s argument, which still has signiﬁcance for fundamental physics,
such as quantum gravity, concerned the difference between the discrete and contin-
uous nature of the reality underlying space in the inﬁnitely small. If it is discrete
then the ground of the metric relation of the corresponding manifold is given by
the mathematical concept of this manifold itself. On the other hand, if it is contin-
uous, this ground is given by the concept of phenomena justiﬁed by experience and
deﬁned by the physical principles arising from these phenomena, principles that may
be modiﬁed or changed in view of new evidence. Einstein’s general relativity is a
manifestation of the second case, both as an example of this grounding in general and
as an example of a change in these physical principles vis-à-vis those of Newton’s
theory of gravity.
In the RWR view, because the ultimate constitution of physical reality responsible
for quantum phenomena is beyond representation and even conception, this constitu-
tion may not be seen as either continuous or discrete, any more than either spatial or
temporal. Discreteness only pertains to quantum phenomena, observed in measuring
instruments, insofar as each quantum phenomena is assumed to be singular (by the
QI principle) and discrete in relation to any other quantum phenomena (by the QD
principle). On the other hand, each phenomenon is perceived and described clas-
sically in continuous space and time as they are considered in classical physics or
relativity. Accordingly, the spacetime continuum is retained at this level. Continuity
is also a mathematical feature of the formalism of QM, which relates to discrete
phenomena by predicting the probabilities or statistics of their occurrence. RWR-
type interpretations, again, strictly maintain the difference between the discreteness
of quantum phenomena, deﬁned by what is observed in measuring instruments, and
the discreteness of quantum objects, given that, in these interpretations, quantum
objects cannot be described or even thought of as discrete, particle-like, entities, any
more than continuous, wave-like, entities.
This situation gives a greater complexity and, with it, geometry to “the algebraic
method” of QM or QFT. It is true that the continuous functions (over R) used in clas-
sical physics or relativity (for variables such as position or momentum) are replaced
by operators and their algebra in Hilbert spaces over C. As explained in more detail
below, however, Hilbert spaces are geometrical concepts, rigorously deﬁned by what
I call spatial algebra, and the distance (or norm), which this algebra establishes, is
essential to the use of Hilbert spaces in QM. Hilbert spaces give one the possibility
to think geometrically, by using both the rigor of spatial algebra and our phenomenal
geometrical intuition as heuristic help and guidance, as discussed in detail below.

126
4
“The Heisenberg Method”: Algebra, Geometry, and Probability …
QFT may deal with Hilbert spaces whose continuity is denser than that of regular
continua such as the (real number) spacetime continuum of classical physics or rela-
tivity. Besides, continuous functions are retained, because these Hilbert spaces are
those of continuous functions, considered as inﬁnite-dimensional vectors in dealing
with continuous variables such as position and momentum, although these variables
themselves are represented by operators. The nature of these functions (as those of
complex variables) and their role in QM is of course different from those of classical
physics and relativity. Born and Jordan developed a differential calculus, “symbolic
differentiation,” as they called it, for matrices used in quantum mechanics (Bohr and
Jordan 1925, p. 862; Mehra and Rechenberg 2001, v. 3, p. 69). So did Dirac in his ﬁrst
paper on quantum mechanics (Dirac 1925). In the style of Leibniz, this differentiation
was deﬁned algebraically by using the noncommutation rules. It enables one to retain
the differential equations of classical mechanics and their accompanying machinery,
such as and in particular the Poisson bracket, while using new quantum variables, as
Hilbert space operators. The quantum-mechanical analogue of the Poisson bracket
is the expression.
2πi
h (pq −pq),
as Dirac was ﬁrst to realize. Dirac’s starting point, again, in the style of Leibniz, was
the quantum-mechanical analogue of the rule for the differential of the product of
two functions, which may be seen as a linear operator and which may be suitably
quantized (Dirac 1925).
These functions, vectors, are those of complex (rather than, as in classical physics,
real) variables and the vector spaces that they comprise or associated objects, such
as operator algebras, have special properties, such as noncommutativity. The most
famous example is Schrödinger’s wave function, ψ, which proved to correspond to
no physical waves, as Schrödinger initially hoped it would (hence, its name wave
function), but only to a distribution of probability densities, which may be seen
as wave-like in its discrete pattern. Born, in his initial probabilistic interpretation
of the wave function states the case as follows: “[T]he motion of particles follows
the probability law but the probability itself propagates [in a wave-like manner]
according to the law of [classical] causality” (Born 1926b, p. 804; 1949, p. 103).
First, if one adopts Heisenberg’s or already Bohr’s (1913) view, the probability law
in question concerns not the motion of particles but the discrete transitions between
quantum states associated with particles. Born adopted this view in his earlier papers
on matrix mechanics (Born and Jordan 1925; Born et al. 1926), and in his paper on
the probabilistic interpretation of the wave function. So, the appeal to the motion of
particles can be misleading. The second part of Born’s formulation was important,
even though it was somewhat vague as well, forgivably, as we are in 1926. One
cannot speak of a propagation of probability otherwise than metaphorically. All one
can claim is a wave-like, but discrete pattern, to the distribution of probabilities.
Probabilities do not propagate: they are assigned by us, as human agents, to the

4.4 How Algebraic is the Heisenberg Algebraic Method?
127
outcomes of certain possible future experiments on the basis of certain other previ-
ously performed experiments and the use of QM, and they discontinuously change
with each new measurement. In Bohr’s or the present view what Born refers to here
as the law of causality is not the law of classical causality but the law according to
which these probabilities, as discrete “expectation-catalogs,” are given by the wave
function cum Born’s rule. From this viewpoint, one can discard the idea of waves in
quantum theory altogether. There are no waves, but only, in certain speciﬁed cases,
correlated patterns predictable by QM.
4.5
Geometry and Algebra in Modernist Mathematics
and Physics
Rather than being merely algebraic, then, as Einstein saw it, “the Heisenberg method”
exhibitscomplexrelationshipsbetweenalgebraandgeometry,whichisnotsurprising
given the mathematics he used, some of which he, again, reinvented, unaware of its
existence. The complexity and sometimes tensions accompanying these relationships
can, however, be traced all the ways to the ancient Greeks, beginning at least with
the Pythagoreans’ discovery of incommensurable entities, such as the diagonal and
the side of the square, a discovery that occurred at the intersection of arithmetic and
geometry. It would not be possible to trace this longer history here, in particular,
in the history of classical physics, contemporaneous with the rise of algebra. Thus,
Descartes’s analytic geometry was one of the deﬁning events in the history of these
relationships in mathematics and physics, and interplay of algebra and geometry in
Kepler’s, Galileo’s, and Newton’s theories was equally exemplary of this interplay.
I shall only consider, as especially pertinent to this chapter, a more recent history of
these relationships in modernist mathematics, which characterizes most of the mathe-
matics of thetwentiethandtwenty-ﬁrst century. Thedevelopment of this mathematics
was in part and even most fundamentally deﬁned by its divorce from physics, specif-
ically classical physics (as there was no other at the onset of this development), and
its move toward its independent and, in this sense, abstract nature. This mathematics
was, nevertheless, adopted, including in its newly found abstractness, by relativity
and, in an especially new way (allowing for the RWR view), quantum theory, and
was then reciprocally shaped by this new physics in geometry, functional analysis,
group theory, and other ﬁelds.
“Modernist” is not a common term in referring to mathematics or science. It has
been standard in designating an aesthetic category, describing certain artistic devel-
opments of the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century, represented by such ﬁgures as
James Joyce, Franz Kafka, and Virginia Woolf, in literature; Pablo Picasso, Wassily
Kandinsky, and Paul Klee, in art; and Arnold Schoenberg, Anton Webern, and Igor
Stravinsky in music. On occasion, although not commonly, it has been applied to the
philosophy of the same period, such as that of Friedrich Nietzsche, Edmund Husserl,

128
4
“The Heisenberg Method”: Algebra, Geometry, and Probability …
and Martin Heidegger. Contemporary mathematics and physics, speciﬁcally rela-
tivity and quantum theory, or earlier theories, such as thermodynamics, had a signif-
icant impact on modernist literature and art, and (although not quite as extensively)
vice versa. The subject would require a separate treatment. In considering mathe-
matics and science, “modern,” has been used more commonly, but usually with a
different periodization. In mathematics, “modern” tends to refer to the mathematics
that had emerged in the nineteenth century, with such ﬁgures as Karl Friedrich Gauss,
Niels Henrik Abel, Augustine-Louis Cauchy, and Évariste Galois, while in physics
it refers to all mathematical-experimental physics, from Galileo and Descartes on.
This characterization is in accord with an understanding of modernity as a broad
cultural category, although still linked to the history of mathematics and science.
Modernity refers to the period of Western culture extending from about the sixteenth
century to our own time: we are still modern, although during the last ﬁfty years or so,
modernity entered a new stage, postmodernity, shaped by the rise of digital informa-
tion technology.5 Modernity is deﬁned by several interrelated transformations, some-
times known as revolutions, although each took a while. Among them are scientiﬁc
(deﬁned by the new cosmological thinking, beginning with the Copernican helio-
centric view of the Solar system, and the introduction of physics as a mathematical-
experimental science by Kepler, Descartes, Galileo, and Newton); industrial or, more
broadly, technological (deﬁned by the transition to the primary role of machines in
industrial production and beyond); philosophical-psychological (deﬁned by the rise
of the concept of the individual human self, beginning with Descartes’s concept of
the Cogito); economic (deﬁned by the rise of capitalism); and political (deﬁned by
the rise of Western democracies). One might add to this standard list the mathemat-
ical revolution, rarely discussed as such, although sometimes considered as part of
the scientiﬁc revolution.
Although algebra was crucial to modern mathematics and physics, geometry
remained dominant for a long time and has never lost its signiﬁcance. Thus,
while the laws of classical mechanics, embodied in its equations, are algebraic,
they are grounded in a geometrical picture of the world, including the motion of
bodies, such as, paradigmatically, planets moving around the Sun. Modern geomet-
rical thinking had continued to deﬁne physics, including relativity (although it has
modernist aspects), until QM, in which algebra came to play a dominant role.
After the discovery of relativity and quantum theory, the term “classical physics”
was adopted for the preceding physics, still considered modern by virtue of its
mathematical-experimental character. I also adopt the designation “modern” for the
mathematics emerging at the same time. If modernity is scientiﬁc, it is because it is
also mathematical.
Modernist mathematics and physics are, by contrast, essentially twentieth-
century developments, extending modern mathematics and science in new directions.
Arguably the most prominent recent example of using the term modernism in refer-
ring to mathematics is Jeremy Gray’s Plato’s Ghost: The Modernist Transformation
5 Some postmodernist philosophical thinking was, however, shaped by modernist developments in
mathematics and science and their epistemological underpinnings (e.g., Lyotard 1984).

4.5 Geometry and Algebra in Modernist Mathematics and Physics
129
of Mathematics (Gray 2008). The book covers developments in mathematics (such
as topology, set theory, abstract algebra, and rethinking the foundations of geometry)
that had reached their modernist stage around 1900. Gray characterizes modernist
mathematics most essentially by movement toward the independence of mathematics
from physics and, thus, from relation to nature, physis, a feature difﬁcult to deny
in mathematical modernism. By contrast, new (modernist) physics, relativity and
quantum theory, that was developed during the same period not only never divorced
itselffrommathematics,butalso,ironically,dependedonmathematics,suchasthatof
tensor calculus in relativity and Hilbert spaces in QM, that emerged as a result of this
divorce. Gray focuses primarily on calculus and geometry, with Hilbert’s Founda-
tions of Geometry (Hilbert 1999) as, arguably, the conceptual center of his argument,
and on post-Cantorian foundations of mathematics, which had a major impact on the
mathematics of continuity and analysis, areas where Hilbert, again, was a key ﬁgure.
Gray gives far less attention to algebra, including its role in modernist geometry and
topology, and, as a result, what I see as the Pythagorean aspects of modernism (Plot-
nitsky 2020). He bypasses Hilbert’s invention of a Hilbert space (even though, as
noted, Hilbert did not use the term, introduced by von Neumann), a return of geom-
etry, in its new incarnation, to analysis and then QM and QFT. Hilbert, who also
made major mathematical contributions to general relativity, becomes a uniquely
important ﬁgure in this history. His student Weyl is the only one who comes close,
given his major contributions to all ﬁelds just mentioned. It is hardly coincidental that
Hilbert develops the concept of Hilbert space, especially in its geometrical aspects,
on the heels of his work on the foundations of geometry, which helps one to properly
think about this concept or its predecessors, such as vector spaces, and conversely,
adds new dimensions to our understanding of geometry. This reciprocity was not
lost on von Neumann, also in connection with QM, which he formalized in terms of
Hilbert space in the late 1920s, thus thinking about it geometrically.
I shall understand modernist mathematics by the new complexity of relationships
between geometry and algebra in it, along with the trend toward independence of
mathematics from its connections to the representation of natural objects and thus
physics. On the other hand, modernist physics, such as relativity and QM, can adopt
this mathematics and thus make it part of physics. This view does not exhaust the
development of mathematics during that period, not all of which is modernist by any
deﬁnition I am familiar with.
While realizing that mathematics itself or its basic ﬁelds cannot be given a single
deﬁnition, I shall merely state an understanding of these ﬁelds, which is sufﬁcient for
my purposes and is, I would contend, in accord with how they are generally viewed.
I understand algebra as the mathematical formalization of the relationships between
symbols, arithmetic as dealing speciﬁcally with numbers, geometry as the mathe-
matical formalization of spatiality, especially in terms of measurement, and topology
as the mathematization of the structure of spatial or spatial-like objects apart from
measurements, through their continuity or discontinuity. The corresponding math-
ematical ﬁelds are algebra, number theory, geometry and topology. Analysis deals

130
4
“The Heisenberg Method”: Algebra, Geometry, and Probability …
with questions of limit, and related concepts, such as continuity, change, differentia-
tion, integration, and so forth. There are multiple intersections between these ﬁelds,
and ﬁelds that branch off these basic ﬁelds.
Deﬁning algebra as the mathematical formalization of the relationships between
symbols makes it part of all modern mathematics. Ancient Greek geometry was
more self-contained, although one ﬁnds elements of proto-algebraic symbolism there
and, of course, in ancient Greek mathematics in general, especially at later stages
of its development, as in Diophantus (third century AD), who shares the honor of
“the father of algebra” with Muhammad ibn M¯us¯a al-Khw¯arizm¯ı (eighth to ninth
century). Geometrical and topological mathematical objects always have algebraic
components, while algebraic objects may, but need not, have geometrical or topo-
logical components. The term algebra carries other meaning, such as that (standing
at the origins of algebra as a mathematical discipline) of algebra as the study of alge-
braic equations, or referring to algebraic structures such as groups. All these forms
of algebra are important to mathematical modernism, even in ﬁelds like geometry
and topology. It is not only a matter of having an algebraic component as part of
the mathematical structure of geometrical or topological objects but also of deﬁning
these objects algebraically.
An emblematic case of the role of algebra in modernist mathematics is algebraic
topology, which also led to category theory, used in quantum information theory, as
discussed in Chap. 9. As part of topology, algebraic topology does have an earlier
history, extending from Leibniz, with Leonhard Euler as the main precursor before
the rise of the discipline as such with Riemann, Poincaré, and others. General or
point-set topology, a major part of mathematical modernism as well, has a much
longer history, arguably, extending, at least proto-mathematically, to Plato and Aris-
totle, and (e.g., Thom 1988; Papadopoulos 2019). What makes algebraic topology a
mathematical discipline is the fact that one can associate algebraic structures (initially
numbers, eventually groups and other abstract algebraic structures) to the architecture
of spatial objects that are invariant under continuous transformations, independently
of their geometrical properties, such as those associated with measurements. This
makes topology topo-logy versus geo-metry. While keeping in mind this difference
between topology and geometry, and referring to each separately whenever neces-
sary, I shall group them together here under the rubric of geometry as the mathematics
of spatiality.
Is, then, modernist geometry, and indeed modernist mathematics in general,
divorced from its connections to nature and physics, a form of algebra, on the model
of its famous Cartesian predecessor, analytic geometry, in some of its areas accompa-
nied by the rise of the RWR view of the ultimate nature of reality, both in mathematics
itself and in the use of this new algebra in physics? It is tempting to argue such a case,
and the present author has done so previously, even if in a qualiﬁed way, in part in
conjunction with the Heisenberg method in QM (Plotnitsky 2019). Here, however,
I take a different view, which is more nuanced and more faithful to the richness
and complexity of modernist mathematics, or mathematics in general, as well as its
use in physics (Plotnitsky 2020). This view is based on the interplay of geometry
and algebra in mathematics and physics. I want to place “the Heisenberg method”

4.5 Geometry and Algebra in Modernist Mathematics and Physics
131
in this more complex historical and conceptual landscape, making as much a new
geometrical as new algebraic, as well as a new epistemological, RWR-type, method
in physics.
Even at the most immediate level, geometry has retained its signiﬁcance in
modernist mathematics on several counts, two of them in particular. First, the algebra
deﬁning modernist geometrical and topological objects has a special form that may
be called “spatial algebra,” which, from the other side of the same coin, may be seen
as a new form of geometry. Indeed, its genealogy includes such developments as
projective geometries, geometries in dimensions higher than three, and discrete and
ﬁnite geometries. Spatial algebra arises from algebraic structures that mathemati-
cally deﬁne geometrical or topological objects and reﬂect their proximity to R3 and
mathematical objects there, which are more (but still not entirely) accessible to our
phenomenal intuition. This proximity may be left behind in rigorous mathematical
deﬁnitions and treatments of such objects, beginning with R3 itself. The same type of
algebra may also be used to deﬁne mathematical objects that are no longer available
to our phenomenal intuition. Among examples of such objects are, again, a projective
space (a set of lines through the origin of a vector space, such as R2 in the case of the
projective line, with projective curves deﬁned algebraically, as algebraic varieties)
and an inﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert space, the points of which are typically square-
integrable functions or inﬁnite series, although a Euclidean space of any dimension
is, technically, a Hilbert space, too. In sum, spatial algebra is an algebraization of
spatiality that makes it rigorously mathematical, topologically or geometrically (as
opposed to something that is phenomenally intuitive as spatial) even in the case of
more conventional spatial objects in R3.
In addition, which is the second count on which spatial algebra retains it connec-
tion to geometrical or topological thinking (including when it is more qualitative in
character), analogies with R 3 and corresponding visualizations continue to remain
useful and even indispensable, and perhaps unavoidable. Thus, the analogues of
the Pythagorean theorem or parallelogram law in Euclidean geometry, which holds
in inﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert spaces, are important, including in applications to
physics, especially quantum theory, the mathematical formalism of which is, again,
based in Hilbert spaces over C. Indeed, our thinking concerning geometrical and
topological objects is not entirely translatable into algebra. This was well understood
by Hilbert in his axiomatization of Euclidean geometry, although this axiomatiza-
tion had and was deﬁned by a spatial-algebraic character (Hilbert 1999). One can
gain further insight into this situation by considering the principle, due to Joseph
Silverman and John Tate, “Think Geometrically, Prove Algebraically,” introduced in
their book on “the rational points of elliptic curves” (a manifestly modernist subject,
part of arithmetic algebraic geometry):
It is also possible to look at polynomial equations and their solutions in rings and ﬁelds
other than Z or Q or R or C. For example, one might look at polynomials with coefﬁcients
in the ﬁnite ﬁeld Fp with p elements and ask for solutions whose co-ordinates are also in
the ﬁeld Fp. You may worry about your geometric intuitions in situations like this. How
can one visualize points and curves and directions in A2 when the points of A2 are pairs
(x, y) with x, y∈F p ? There are two answers to this question. The ﬁrst and most reassuring

132
4
“The Heisenberg Method”: Algebra, Geometry, and Probability …
is that you can continue to think of the usual Euclidean plane, i.e., R2, and most of your
geometric intuitions concerning points and curves will still be true when you switch to co-
ordinates in Fp. The second and more practical answer is that the afﬁne and projective planes
and afﬁne and projective curves are deﬁned algebraically in terms of ordered pairs (r, s) or
homogeneous triples [a, b, c] without any reference to geometry. So in proving things one can
work algebraically using co-ordinates, without worrying at all about geometrical intuitions.
We might summarize this general philosophy as: Think Geometrically, Prove Algebraically.
(Silverman and Tate 2015, p. 277)
Afﬁne and projective planes and curves can in principle be deﬁned without any
reference to our phenomenal intuition, which grounds the geometrical thinking
referred to by Silverman and Tate, rather than spatial algebra, which deﬁnes them
rigorously. Even in these more intuitively accessible cases, we think algebraically,
too, by using spatial algebra, except possibly in dealing with low-dimensional topo-
logical and geometrical objects. I would argue, however, that spatial algebra is still
irreducible there because one commonly converts topological operations into alge-
braic ones. This conversion, in low dimensions, was essential to the origin of alge-
braic topology, even in dealing with two-dimensional manifolds, such as Riemann
surfaces. Most three-dimensional manifolds, such as three-dimensional surfaces,
are beyond visualization. Certain more recent developments of low-dimensional
topology, following, among others, William Thurston’s pioneering work from the
1970s on, or knot theory, may be seen as a more purely geometrically or topologi-
cally oriented trend that counters modernist algebraization, because our phenomenal
geometrical intuitions could be used directly and even with fuller mathematical rigor,
analogously to Euclidean geometry. Riemann used them in this way, as diagrams in
his papers indicate. The use of such diagrams as mathematical objects (rather than
auxiliary visual tools) is part of this trend, as are, by now ubiquitous, digital topo-
logical and geometrical objects or videos. Along with the use of digital technology
in other areas of mathematics (chaos theory pictures, computerized mathematical
proofs, and so forth), this use may be seen as belonging to a new stage of mathe-
matics, which some might want to see as “postmodern.”6 They may also be seen as
a digital or digitally visualized return of geometry. Thurston was one of the pioneers
of the use of digital technology in low-dimensional topology. Still, this turn to more
immediate visualizable thinking in low dimensional topology and geometry, however
digitally helped, is only partial because the algebraic structures, such as homotopy
and cohomology groups, associated with these topological objects remain crucial.
Some of the most powerful tools of algebraic topology have been developed in this
ﬁeld. Low-dimensional topology and geometry have played an important role in
string and brane theories in physics. One should be careful, however. The so-called
“string theory in low dimensions” does deal with three-dimensional manifolds. But
it also deals with four or even six-dimensional manifolds, objects far beyond any
geometrical visualization, which string theory uses, helped by digitally created two-
dimensional images of such objects as Calabi–Yau manifolds, the actual dimension
6 The reason for using this denomination is that, as noted, during the last 50 years or so, modernity
entered a new stage, known as postmodernity, deﬁned by the rise of digital information technology
(Lyotard 1984).

4.5 Geometry and Algebra in Modernist Mathematics and Physics
133
of which is six. The subject, which can only be mentioned in passing here, is a
powerful illustration of the modernist complexity of the interplay of algebra, geom-
etry, and topology, and of mathematics and physics, regardless of the controversies
accompanying string theory as a viable physical theory.
It is also true that a mathematician can develop and use intuition in dealing with
discrete geometries, say, that of the Fano plane of order 2, which has the smallest
number of points and lines (seven each). However, beyond the fact that they are
made in the two-dimensional regular plane, the diagrammatic representations of the
Fano plane are still difﬁcult to think of as other than spatial algebra, in this case
combinatorial. Euclidean intuitions are limited even when we deal with algebraic
curves in the Euclidean plane, let alone in considering curves and other objects of
ﬁnite or projective geometries, abstract algebraic varieties, Hilbert spaces, the spaces
of noncommutative geometry, or geometric groups, a great example of the reversed
extension of spatial algebra to algebraic objects themselves.
That said, however, these geometrical intuitions remain indispensable, thus giving
the situation a further complexity. Tate’s “think geometrically” may even be read as
giving geometry a greater creative signiﬁcance, although proving anything requires
thinking, too. Our geometrical thinking shapes our practice of spatial algebra and
other areas of abstract algebra, for example, when dealing with such objects as
ideals of rings, even apart from algebraic geometry where manifolds or schemes are
constructed of ideals (maximal or prime respectively) of commutative rings. For the
moment, however, I would like to emphasize the creative role of geometrical thinking,
in its Euclidean intuition and in spatial algebra. This thinking may need algebra to
achieve the necessary mathematical rigor—Prove algebraically!—but it is crucial to
mathematical thought whenever spatial algebra enters—Think geometrically!
Dirac, one of the greatest algebraic virtuosi of quantum theory, was, nevertheless,
fond of referring to geometrical thinking in QM and QFT (e.g., Farmelo 2005). It
is difﬁcult to surmise what Dirac, famous for his laconic style, exactly had in mind.
If, however, one is to judge by his writings, they appear to suggest that at stake
are the algebraic properties and relations modeled on those found in geometrical
objects, deﬁned by algebraic structures, in short, spatial algebra. His often-noted
fondness for projective geometry, which appears to have helped him to appreciate
the algebraic noncommutativity of QM, discovered by Heisenberg, supports this
argument. Notwithstanding his insistence on the role of geometry in Dirac’s thinking,
Oliver Darrigol’s analysis of this thinking shows the signiﬁcance of spatial algebra
there (Darrigol 1993). This is, however, more indicative of the complexity of the
relationships between geometry and algebra, and new ways in which geometry and
geometrical thinking work, or return, in modernism, under discussion in this chapter.
Thus, Darrigol says: “Roughly, Dirac’s quantum mechanics could be said to be
to ordinary mechanics what noncommutative geometry is to intuitive geometry”
(Darrigol 1993, p. 307). Noncommutative geometry, however, the invention of which
was in part inspired by QM, is made a geometry by its spatial algebra (Connes 1994,
p. 38; Plotnitsky 2009, pp. 112–113). One encounters similar appeals to geometrical
thinking in referring to transfers of geometrical methods to spatial algebraic or just
algebraic objects (thus making them spatially algebraic), such as in dealing with

134
4
“The Heisenberg Method”: Algebra, Geometry, and Probability …
groups and group representations in QM and QFT, initially developed in a more
geometrical context beginning with Sophus Lie and Felix Klein or in using the idea
of metrics in geometric group theory.
And yet, it would be misleading to think of both the mathematics of quantum
theory or noncommutative geometry as only algebra, even as only spatial algebra,
which, again, is never only algebra but is also geometry in its structure and in the
thinking it requires alike. It is possible that Dirac had in mind this aspect of the math-
ematics of QM and QFT. A Hilbert space is still, mathematically, a space and has its
geometry, which we must think, again, by using both our Euclidean geometrical intu-
ition as a heuristic guidance and our technical geometrical thinking by using spatial
algebra, but as spatial algebra, in quantum theory, or of course in mathematics. At
least, this appears how Dirac himself was thinking in his work, often proceeding
from the mathematics of the formalism to physical discovery, most famously, in
his discovery of Dirac’s equation, invented from formal (spatial-algebraic) consid-
erations (e.g., Plotnitsky 2016, pp. 214–226). As became clear with Heisenberg’s
invention of QM, the Hilbert spaces of quantum-mechanical formalism are both
the product and, once adopted, the mathematical technology of this thinking. Dirac
arguably represents the greatest example of this thinking when it proceeds from
mathematics to physics, more so than Heisenberg himself, who, while an inspiration
for Dirac, was proceeding more from physics to mathematics.
Feynman, who was awarded a Nobel prize for his work on the renormalization
of QED, instructively commented on the decisive role of visual intuition in thinking
about quantum objects and behavior, conﬁrming the signiﬁcance of intuitive geomet-
rical thinking in physics (Schweber 1994, pp. 465–466). Feynman invokes “a half-
assedly thought out pictorial semi-vision thing,” to which is he is “trying … to bring
birth and clarity” in his creative process, thus thinking spatially and even geometri-
cally (Schweber 1994, p. 466). Think geometrically! The proof in physics is not the
same as in mathematics, but still: Prove algebraically! Obviously, apart from the fact
that one’s creative process could be different, such anecdotal evidence hardly sufﬁces
for any deﬁnitive claim. Feynman’s account, however, appears to be in accord with
current neurological and cognitive-psychological research, as just mentioned, which
suggests the dependence of our spatial intuition, including visualization, on two-
and three-dimensional phenomenality. This was in part why Kant thought of this
intuition, which he saw as that of Euclidean three-dimensional spatiality, as given
to us a priori. The claim that this intuition is entirely Euclidean or that it is a priori
has been challenged. On the other hand, its three-dimensional character appears to
be reasonably certain. This is, however, a separate subject.
Be it is it may on this score, my argument here is different. It concerns the joint role
of visual geometrical intuition (regardless on its general cognitive or neurological
status) and formal geometrical thinking in working with the mathematical formalism
of QM or QFT, and not imagining or imaging quantum objects and behavior, which,
in the present view, are beyond mathematical representation. On the other hand,
Feynman’s path integral formulation of QM and then QFT would illustrate my
point because of its manifested geometrical aspects, of both types, spatial-algebraic

4.5 Geometry and Algebra in Modernist Mathematics and Physics
135
and intuitive. This formulation was an alternative, although mathematically equiva-
lent, way of calculating probabilities of quantum events by the standard procedures
explained earlier (using the so-called probability amplitudes), without necessarily
representing or even forming a conception of quantum objects and behavior. The
geometry of this formulation is also more expressly linked to analysis. It is possible
that Feynman himself connected his formulation to his heuristic visualization of
quantum objects and behavior described above, regardless of which type of interpre-
tation he had in mind, which is a complex issue that need not be addressed here. One
must, however, be careful in avoiding loose but not uncommon formulations that a
particle found ﬁrst at point X and then at point B takes all possible paths, sometimes
seen even as a manifestation of the principle “anything that can happen does happen,”
unless one qualiﬁes that this does not refer to what happens in the same experiment.
If one still uses this classical (and ultimately inapplicable) language, a particle can
“jump” quantumly from one such paths to another in the way it cannot happen if one
deals with a classical motion, which is one of the (many) reasons why such pictures
or ultimately any visualizations are inapplicable here. Besides, in high-energy (QFT)
regimes a particle of a given type, say, an electron can “jump” to become a positron or
a photon, which will then be registered at point Y. Accordingly, in these regimes, even
speaking of registering the same electron at point Y is meaningless, which support
the present interpretation, according to which any quantum object is an idealization
applicable only at the time of a measurement. QM or QFT make these predictions by
using the mathematics of Hilbert spaces, a mathematics that is geometrical, begin-
ning with the fact that the concept of distance can be deﬁned there, via the concept of
norm, even though it needs algebra as well. But then, so does, in one way or another,
all geometry.
This joint, spatial-algebraic and intuitive, geometrical thinking is found in math-
ematics itself, to one degree or another, when one deals with geometry or topology.
Consider Weyl’s argument leading him to his deﬁnition of a Riemann surface
as a manifold (a deﬁnition not expressly given by Riemann, who was, however,
undoubtedly aware that Riemann surfaces were manifolds):
[O]ne’s intuitive grasp of an analytic form [an analytic function to which a countable number
of irregular elements have been added] is greatly enhanced if one represents each element of
the form by a point on a surface F in space in such a way that the representative points cover
F simply and so that every analytic chain of elements of the form becomes a continuous
curve on F. To be sure, from a purely objective point of view, the problem of ﬁnding a
surface to represent the analytic form in this visual way may be rejected as nonpertinent; for
in essence, three-dimensional space has nothing to do with analytic forms, and one appeals
to it not on logical-mathematical grounds, but because it is closely associated with our
sense perception. To satisfy our desire for pictures and analogies in this fashion by forcing
inessential representation of objects instead of taking them as they are could be called an
anthropomorphism contrary to scientiﬁc principles. However, these reproaches of the pure
logicians are no longer pertinent if we pursue the other approach, already hinted at, in which
the analytic form is a two dimensional manifold to which all the ideas of continuity that we
meet in ordinary geometry may be applied. To the contrary, not to use this approach is to
overlook one of the most essential aspects of the topic. (Weyl 2013, pp. 16–17)

136
4
“The Heisenberg Method”: Algebra, Geometry, and Probability …
Weyl’s own approach is grounded in the joint way of thinking geometrically, but
using both our geometrical intuition (ordinary geometry, including its ideas of conti-
nuity) and the concepts and techniques of geometry deﬁned by spatial algebra, which
is, again, still geometry. The second is represented by the fact that “the concept
‘two dimensional manifold’ or ‘surface’ will not be associated with points in three-
dimensional space; rather it will be a much more general abstract idea,” a spatial-
algebraic one (Weyl 2013, p. 17). In this regard Weyl follows Riemann. Admittedly,
Weyl deals with (topologically) two-dimensional objects, Riemann surfaces. The
point is, however, more general and applies to all manifolds, over R and C, or to
algebraic varieties over ﬁnite ﬁelds, F p, which are represented strictly in terms of
spatial algebra. Weyl’s argumentation would of course also apply to Hilbert spaces
over C.
The question of continuity in modernist mathematics and physics naturally ﬁts
into this conceptual and epistemological architecture as well. According to Gray,
one of the characteristic features, and for him the most important one, of modernist
mathematics, is its separation from its connections to nature and physics, emerging
from what he calls “the crisis of continuity,” most especially in analysis, but clearly
also elsewhere in modernist mathematics. As he says: “This is the widespread feeling
among mathematicians around 1900, documented in many sources, that the basic
topic of analysis, continuity, was profoundly counterintuitive. This realization marks
a break with all philosophy of mathematics that present mathematical objects as
idealizations from natural ones: it is characteristic of modernism” (Gray 2008, p. 20).
These claims require qualiﬁcations. First of all, mathematics separated, abstracted,
itself from representing natural objects and thus also from physics much earlier,
already with the Pythagoreans, or during modern times, with the rise of algebra,
especially the study of algebraic equations, pursued largely apart from physics. On
the other hand, it is true that geometry and analysis, Gray’s main context in this
statement, had kept close relationships to representing nature and physics. It is also
easier to argue this type of case in its disciplinary sense, insofar as the possibility
of this separation was used to ground the disciplinary ﬁeld of mathematics. The
drive toward this independence had been emerging in modern mathematics from
the 1800s on. With mathematical modernism, however, this drive reached the stage
of breaking with representing (mathematically idealizing) natural objects in most
areas of mathematics, including geometry and analysis, especially following the rise
of Cantor’s set theory, perhaps the most signiﬁcant event leading to “the crisis of
continuity” invoked by Gray, not the least as concerns the separation of the concept
of continuity in mathematics from our phenomenal intuition of continuity.
It might be added that the continuum is a mathematical concept that poses major
and even insoluble problems topologically. These problems emerged with Cantor’s
discovery of the multiplicity of inﬁnities, the inﬁnity of inﬁnities, and his continuum
hypothesis, and became especially dramatic with Gödel’s incompleteness theorems
and Cohen’s proof of the undecidability of the continuum hypothesis. These ﬁndings
made us realize that we do not and cannot know how a continuous line, straight or
curved (which does not matter topologically), is constituted by its points. Quantum
theory, beginning with Planck’s discovery of it in 1900, contributed to this crisis, in

4.5 Geometry and Algebra in Modernist Mathematics and Physics
137
QM through complex relationships between mathematical continuity and physical
discontinuity, as discussed above.
Weyl responded to this crisis of continuity in his 1918 The Continuum (Weyl
1928), followed closely by his 1918 classic Time Space Matter (Weyl 1952), shaped
by modernist mathematics as well, by which point quantum theory (not yet QM)
enters his thinking concerning the subject and its role in physics (Weyl 1952, p. 23).
According to Weyl: “the conceptual world of mathematics is so foreign to what the
intuitive continuum presents to us that the demand for coincidence between the two
must be dismissed as absurd” (Weyl 1928, p. 108). “Coincidence” is, however, not
the same as “relations,” which are unavoidable, at least insofar as it is difﬁcult to think
of continuity spatially apart from our phenomenal intuition. Weyl’s point concerning
the world of mathematics as foreign to our ordinary phenomenal intuition applies far
beyond the idea of continuity. On the other hand, modernist physics, such as relativity
and quantum theory, was able to take advantage of this divorce of mathematics
from ordinary phenomenal intuition. Weyl indeed added to his statement just cited:
“Nevertheless, those abstract schemata supplied us by mathematics must underlie
the exact sciences of domains of objects in which continua play a role” (Weyl 1928,
p. 108).
This statement was most likely made with Einstein’s relativity, a fundamentally
continuous theory, in mind, as Weyl’s next book, Time Space Matter, was already in
the works. QM was still a few years away, although the old quantum theory already
broke with classical physics on the account of continuity, a point Weyl did not fail
to note in Space Time Matter (Weyl 1952, pp. 97–98). Eventually, Weyl came to
play a major role in the development of QM, ﬁrst, assisting Schrödinger’s work on
his equation. Weyl also made several important contributions of his own, especially
as concerns the role of group theory in QM and QFT, such as the concept of gauge
symmetry, central for particle physics and the standard model. His 1931 book, The
Theory of Groups and Quantum Mechanics (Weyl 1931), had a shaping inﬂuence in
this area. Weyl’s view under discussion at the moment retains a modernist twist given
that the abstract schemata used in relativity, special and general, and QM are divorced
from our phenomenal intuition. Both used modernist geometry, respectively, that
of Riemannian geometry (Minkowski’s spacetime of special relativity is a pseudo-
Riemannian manifold) and that of inﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert spaces, and group
theory plays a key role in both. There was, however, a crucial difference.
Relativity still did this in a representational (realist) way, which was, again, a
permissible idealization, even in the U-RWR view, but in this view, under the assump-
tion that it is still underlain by the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for
the phenomena considered which is beyond conception. This was possible because,
as discussed in Chap. 2, in this case, the break from our phenomenal intuition need
not entail a divorce from realism by means of mathematized physical concepts. As
indicated earlier, the discovery of singularities in general relativity introduced new
complexities as early as 1916, but these complexities did not appear threatening to
the representational nature of the theory and were expected to be resolved in one way
or another. Einstein, again, believed that such solutions could be avoided physically,
a view that became progressively more difﬁcult to sustain given the development

138
4
“The Heisenberg Method”: Algebra, Geometry, and Probability …
of the physics of collapsing stars, in the extreme case, black holes, the existence of
which is pretty much universally accepted now. On the other hand, black holes are
quantum objects.
In any event, in contrast to relativity, QM, at least in RWR-type interpretations,
such as the one, of the weak RWR type, implicitly adopted by Heisenberg (as he
did not offer an interpretation of QM as such), used modernist mathematics, that
of Hilbert spaces over C, for providing probabilistic predictions of the outcomes of
quantum experiments, without providing a representation of the ultimate nature of
reality responsible for these events, even a purely mathematical one in the absence
of a physical one, by means of physical concepts, such as motion. The latter possi-
bility has been entertained, including by Heisenberg in his later work or in certain
(“ontic”) forms of structural realism (Ladyman 2016). QM, in RWR-type interpre-
tations, used “abstract schemata” of modernist mathematics in a radically new way
and by doing so established a new type of relationship between the mathematics of
a physical theory and the experimental data considered. By using the geometry of
Hilbert spaces over C, and the algebra of the operators there, QM was able to connect,
on RWR-lines, to a reality that is beyond representation and even thought, and thus
cannot be given a geometry, any more than algebra. This was the mathematical
nature of the Heisenberg method. It only enabled him to establish such connections
in terms of probabilistically or statistically predicting effects of the ultimate consti-
tution of reality (or part of it) upon the world we can observe and represent, effects
manifested in quantum phenomena. But this was no small achievement. Indeed, as I
argue, it changed the nature of fundamental physics, theoretical and experimental. It
made theoretical physics the creation of abstract mathematical concepts, predicting
physical phenomena without representing how they comes about, and it made exper-
imental physics the creation of new technology through which such phenomena
could be constructed, without an aim to reach the ultimate nature of physical reality
responsible for them either, as in classical physics.
4.6
Conclusion
While continuing the project of modern post-Galilean physics as a mathematical-
experimental science, Heisenberg’s thinking that led him to his discovery of QM was
a radically new way of relating mathematics, moreover, a mathematics of an entirely
new type in physics, and the experiment. To better illustrate the mathematical nature
of his thinking, let us imagine for the moment that the data that led Heisenberg to his
invention of QM, were given to a mathematician on the cutting edge of mathematics
at the time, say, a doctoral student of Hilbert, somebody like Emmy Noether or von
Neumann, who would, however, be unfamiliar with the old quantum theory or even
classical physics. This is not true historically as concerns either von Neumann or
Noether, both of whom by that time had made major mathematical contributions
to general relativity and proved her celebrated theorems, discussed in Chap. 8, or
arguably most students of Hilbert, given his own interest in contemporary physics,

4.6 Conclusion
139
including the old quantum theory, which was widely discussed in Göttingen at the
time. Born was a major presence there, and Heisenberg (at the time of his invention of
QM), Pauli, and Jordan were Born’s postdoctoral students. Accordingly, the relation-
ships between mathematics and physics, including in their modernist manifestations,
were at the center stage at Göttingen, which was the center stage of mathematical
modernism. Nevertheless, let us imagine such a mathematician.
This mathematician would then have been asked to develop a mathematics that
would enable one to predict, probabilistically, these data, a mathematics it follows
independent of physics, just a technology of human predictions of a certain type
of data. This would have been a formidable problem, especially in the absence of
physics, although, as things actually happened, physics (as it existed then) was almost
more inhibiting than helpful in solving it. The mathematician needed not to think
in terms of describing mathematically some classical-like objects and motion, as
a physicist would be likely to do, but only to predict, again, probabilistically, the
patterns in question, observed in spectra. The mathematician only needed to ﬁnd the
mathematics that predicts them in terms of their probability distribution. Assuming
the invented mathematics would be the same of that of QM (for it could in principle be
somethingelse),thismathematicianwouldneedtomaketwoextraordinaryguesses—
one truly extraordinary and, with the ﬁrst guess in hand, the other, somewhat less
so. The ﬁrst guess is that one needs a Hilbert space over C, which is difﬁcult, but for
the like of Noether or von Neumann, who would, for example, have been familiar
with Fourier’s analysis (again, separating it from physics), is not unimaginable. As
Schwinger noted in the passage cited above, given the data in question, “the mathe-
matical scheme [of QM] can certainly not be the assignment, the association, or the
representation of physical properties by numbers,” especially by real numbers (Cited
in Schweber 1994, p. 361). But even complex numbers would not represent the phys-
ical properties of quantum objects, except that, in my fable, no physical properties
of anything connected to the date in question would be at stake, only a mathematical
connections of two sets of data or information. The second guess would have been
Born’s rule, and while still not easy, would be almost natural because probabilities
are real numbers, and when moving from complex to real numbers, the square moduli
of complex numbers is the most obvious way to do so. Such a mathematician could
have thought of von Neumann’s projection postulate as well.
The reason that I brought up this fable is that it is not that far from how Heisen-
berg made his discovery of QM. In effect, he had to suspend, to “forget,” classical
physics or the old quantum theory to arrive at his new mathematical scheme. His
physics was deﬁned by ﬁnding the mathematics probabilistically predicting the data
or information in question, that of hydrogen spectra. The correspondence postulate
enabled him to use the already available equations of classical mechanics. Still, he
reinvented, along the lines of my fable, matrix algebra used as variables in these
equations, which enables these predictions. This was a radical transformation of
fundamental physics, enabled by a new, essentially mathematical, way of thinking,
deﬁned by one’s invention of a new predictive mathematical scheme, rather than by
ﬁnding the mathematics that would represent the physical reality considered, which
could be nontrivial as well, as in Einstein’s general relativity. This was Heisenberg’s

140
4
“The Heisenberg Method”: Algebra, Geometry, and Probability …
revolution, with which, in Bohr’s words, “a new epoch of mutual stimulation of
mechanics and mathematics has commenced:”
It will interest mathematical circles that the mathematical instruments created by the higher
algebra play an essential part in the rational formulation of the new quantum mechanics.
Thus, the general proofs of the conservation theorems in Heisenberg’s theory carried out by
Born and Jordan are based on the use of the theory of matrices, which go back to Cayley and
were developed especially by Hermite. It is to be hoped that a new era of mutual stimulation
of mechanics and mathematics commenced. To the physicists it will at ﬁrst seem deplorable
that in atomic problems we have apparently met with such a limitation of our usual means of
visualization. This regret will, however, have to give way to thankfulness that mathematics
in this ﬁeld, too, presents us with the tools to prepare the way for further progress. (Bohr
1987 v. 1, p. 51)
“Visualization” here is, again, also a translation of German Anschaulichkeit, which
has a general meaning of phenomenal intuition, beyond which quantum objects and
behavior were placed as a result. While a new era of mutual stimulation of, and
the new, RWR-type, relationships between physics and mathematics are clearly at
stake, Bohr speaks a “mutual stimulation of mechanics and mathematics” because
the difference between classical and quantum physics concerned most essentially
individual quantum objects and their behavior. The corresponding mathematical
theory in classical physics, a theory mathematically representing individual classical
objects and their behavior, is classical mechanics. In quantum mechanics, which
considers individual quantum objects and behavior, mathematics plays an essen-
tially different role, at least in RWR-type interpretations, such as the one assumed
by Bohr here, because, to return to Bohr’s formulation in the same article, “Atomic
Theory and Mechanics,” “in contrast to ordinary [classical] mechanics, the new
quantum mechanics does not deal with a space–time description of the motion of
atomic particles” and thus does not offer a mathematical representation of the ulti-
mate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena (Bohr 1987, v.
1, p. 48). QM, in RWR-type interpretations, introduced a new form of relationships
between the mathematics of QM and the data considered, which compelled Bohr
to speak of this mechanics as symbolic, while conﬁrming the fundamental role of
mathematics in this new physics.
As far as the physicists’ attitude is concerned, the subsequent history has proven
that Bohr was too optimistic. Discontent with “the limitation” in question has never
subsided. Einstein, again, was in the forefront of this resistance. He did not ﬁnd
satisfactory or even acceptable this state of affairs as concerns physics or this type
of the relationships between mechanics, or physics in general, and mathematics, and
he never stopped seeing this limitation as anything less than deplorable. Schrödinger
was quick to join Einstein, followed by most physicists and philosophers, all guided,
as was Einstein, by the hope, the Einsteinian hope, that a future theory will return
us to the realist form of the relationships and mutual stimulation (which cannot be
denied) of physics, including mechanics, and mathematics. This is still our own
situation, one hundred years since Bohr’s comments, and whether the future will
lead to a fulﬁllment of the Einsteinian hope or will leave the Heisenberg method in
place remains as uncertain as ever.

4.6 Conclusion
141
Whatever the future holds, as stated from the outset of this study, the Heisenberg
method, its algebra and geometry, made quantum mechanics the most mathematical
physical theory ever, because it provided no mechanics for the ultimate constitu-
tion of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena. In the RWR view, there is
no such mechanics, which, however, makes mathematics all the more necessary in
dealingwithquantumphenomena.Therearetheexperimentaltechnologyofquantum
physics and the mathematics of quantum theory, QM and QFT, and the rules through
which we relate this mathematics to quantum phenomena, created by this technology,
in predicting, probabilistically or statistically, the outcome of our experiments mani-
fested in these phenomena. No other predictions are experimentally possible, at least
as things stand now. By bringing together geometry, algebra, and the unthinkable,
the Heisenberg method is a Pythagorean method, which, as will be discussed in
Chap. 6, contains the unthinkable as well, in the form of “alogon,” as the ancient
Greeks called it. The RWR unthinkable is, however, a new and radical form of the
unthinkable, unlike anything ever contemplated by the Pythagoreans or by anyone
else before QM, but Pythagorean nevertheless.
References
Aristotle: The Complete Works of Aristotle (ed. J. Barnes). Princeton University Press, Princeton,
NJ, USA (1984)
Bohr, N.: On the constitution of atoms and molecules (Part 1). Phil. Mag. 26(151), 1–25 (1913)
Bohr, N.: Can quantum-mechanical description of physical reality be considered complete? Phys.
Rev. 48, 696–702 (1935)
Bohr, N.: The Philosophical Writings of Niels Bohr, vol. 3, Ox Bow Press, Woodbridge, CT, USA
(1987)
Born, M.: Zur Quantenmechanik der Stoßvorgänge. Z. Phys. 37, 863–867 (1926a)
Born, M.: Quantenmechanik der Stoßvorgänge. Z. Phys. 38, 803–827 (1926b)
Born, M.: Natural Philosophy of Cause and Chance. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK (1949)
Born, M.: The Einstein-Born Letters (tr. Born, I.), Walker, New York, NY, USA (2005)
Born, M., Jordan, P.: Zur Quantenmechanik. Z. Phys. 34, 858–888 (1925)
Born, M., Heisenberg, W., Jordan, P.: On quantum mechanics. In: Van der Waerden, B.L. (ed.)
Sources of Quantum Mechanics, 1968, pp. 321–385. Dover, New York, NY, USA (1926)
Bose, S.N.: Plancks Gesetz und Lichtquantenhypothese. Z. Phys. 26, 178–181 (1924)
Bub, J.: Quantum mechanics as a principle theory. Studies in the History and Philosophy of Modern.
Physics 31(1), 75–94 (2000)
Connes, A.: Noncommutative Geometry (tr. Berberian, S. K.). Academic Press, San Diego, CA,
USA (1994)
D’Ariano, G.M.: No puriﬁcation ontology, no quantum paradoxes. Found. Phys. 50, 1921–1933
(2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10701-020-00398-6
D’Ariano, G.M., Chiribella, G., Perinotti, P.: Quantum Theory from First Principles: An Informa-
tional Approach. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK (2017)
Darrigol, O.: From c-Numbers to q-Numbers: The Classical Analogy in the History of Quantum
Theory. University of California Press, Berkeley, CA, USA (1993)
Dirac, P.A.M.: The fundamental equations of quantum mechanics. In: van der Warden, B.L. (ed.)
Sources of Quantum Mechanics New York, 1968, pp. 307–320. Dover, NY, USA (1925)
Dirac, P.A.M.: The Principles of Quantum Mechanics. Clarendon, Oxford, UK (1930)

142
4
“The Heisenberg Method”: Algebra, Geometry, and Probability …
Dirac, P.A.M.: The Principles of Quantum Mechanics (4th edn), rpt. 1995. Clarendon, Oxford, UK
(1958)
Einstein, A.: Theorie der Lichterzeugung und Lichtabsorption.Annalen der Physik 20, 206 (1906)
Einstein, A.: What is the theory of relativity? In: Einstein, A. (ed.) Ideas and Opinions, 1954,
pp. 227–231. Bonanza Books, New York, NY, USA (1919)
Einstein, A.: Physics and reality. J. Franklin Inst. 221, 349–382 (1936)
Einstein, A.: Autobiographical Notes (tr. Schilpp, P. A.), Open Court, La Salle, IL, USA (1949)
Farmelo, G.: Dirac’s hidden geometry. Nature 437, 323 (2005)
Gleason, A.: Measures on the closed subspaces of a Hilbert Space. Indiana Univ. Math. J. 6(4),
885–893 (1957). https://doi.org/10.1512/iumj.1957.6.56050.MR0096113
Gray, J.: Plato’s Ghost: The Modernist Transformation of Mathematics. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NY, USA (2008)
Hacking, I.: The Emergence of Probability: A Philosophical Study of Early Ideas about Probability,
Induction and Statistical Inference, 2nd edn. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK (2006)
Hardy, L.: Quantum mechanics from ﬁve reasonable axioms, arXiv:0101012v4 [quant-ph] (2001)
Heisenberg, W.: Quantum-theoretical re-interpretation of kinematical and mechanical relations. In
Van der Waerden, B.L. (ed.) Sources of Quantum Mechanics, rpt. 1968, pp. 261–277. Dover,
New York, NY, USA (1925)
Heisenberg, W.: The physical content of quantum kinematics and mechanics. In: Wheeler, J.A.,
Zurek, W.H. (eds.) Quantum Theory and Measurement, 1983, pp. 62–84. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, NJ, USA (1927)
Heisenberg, W.: The Physical Principles of the Quantum Theory (tr. Eckhart, K., Hoyt, F.C.), rpt.
1949. New York, NY, USA, Dover (1930)
Heisenberg, W.: Physics and Philosophy: The Revolution in Modern Science. Harper & Row, New
York, NY, USA (1962)
Hilbert, D.: Foundations of Geometry (tr. Unger L., Bernays, P.), Open Court, La Salle, IL, USA
(1999)
Jaeger, G.: Grounding the randomness of quantum measurement. Philosoph. Trans. Royal So. A
(2016). https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2015.0238
James, W.: The Meaning of Truth. MA, USA, Harvard University Press, Cambridge (1978)
Kolmogorov, A.: Foundations of the Theory of Probability. Chelsea, New York, NY, USA (1956)
Ladyman, J.: Structural realism. In: Zalta, E.N. (ed.) Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (2016).
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2016/entries/structural-realism/
Lyotard, J-F.: The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge (tr. Bennington, G., Massumi,
B.). University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, MN, USA (1984)
Mehra, J., Rechenberg, H.: The Historical Development of Quantum Theory, 6 vols. Springer,
Berlin, Germany (2001)
Papadopoulos, A.: Topology and biology: from Aristotle to Thom. In: Dani, S.G., Papadopoulos,
A. (eds.) Geometry in History, pp. 89–128. Springer/Nature, Berlin, Germany (2019)
Penrose, R.: Gravitational collapse and space-time singularities. Phys. Rev. Lett. 14(3), 57–59
(1965). https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.14.57
Plotnitsky, A.: Quantum atomicity and quantum information: Bohr, Heisenberg, and quantum
mechanics as an information theory. In: Khrennikov, A. (ed.) Quantum Theory: Reexamination
of Foundations 2, pp. 309–342. Växjö University Press, Växjö, Sweden (2002)
Plotnitsky, A.: Epistemology and Probability: Bohr, Heisenberg, Schrödinger and the Nature of
Quantum-Theoretical Thinking. Springer, New York, NY, USA (2009)
Plotnitsky, A.: The Principles of Quantum Theory, from Planck’s Quanta to the Higgs Boson: The
Nature of Quantum Reality and the Spirit of Copenhagen, New York, NY, USA: Springer/Nature
(2016)
Plotnitsky, A.: On the concept of curve: Geometry and algebra, from mathematical modernity to
mathematical modernism. In Dani, S.G., Papadopoulos, A. (eds), Geometry in History, pp. 153–
212. Springer/Nature, Berlin, Germany (2019)

References
143
Plotnitsky, A.: The ghost and the spirit of Pythagoras: the twentieth and twenty-ﬁrst century math-
ematics between and beyond geometry and algebra. In: Sriraman, B. (ed), Handbook in the
History and Philosophy of Mathematics. Springer/Nature, Berlin, Germany (2020). https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-19071-2_7-1
Schrödinger, E.: The present situation in quantum mechanics. In: Wheeler, J.A., Zurek, W.H. (eds.)
Quantum Theory and Measurement, 1983, pp. 152–167. Princeton University Press, Princeton,
NJ, USA. Princeton (1935a)
Schrödinger, E.: Discussion of probability relations between separated systems. Proc. Cambridge
Philos. Soc. 31, 555–563 (1935b)
Schrödinger, E.: Discussion of probability relations between separated systems. Proc. Cambridge
Philos. Soc. 32, 446–452 (1936)
Schweber, S.S.: QED and the Men Who Made It: Dyson, Feynman, Schwinger, and Tomonaga.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, USA (1994)
Schwinger, J.: Quantum Mechanics: Symbolism of Atomic Measurement. NY, USA, Springer, New
York (2001)
Silverman, J., Tate, J.: Rational Points on Elliptic Curves. Springer, Heidelberg, Germany (2015)
Thom, R.: Les intuitions topologiques primordiales de l’aristot´elisme. Revue Thomiste 3(88),
393–409 (1988)
Von Neumann, J.: Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (tr. Beyer, R. T.) 1983.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, USA. Princeton, NJ, rpt. (1932)
Weyl, H.: The Continuum: A Critical Examination of the Foundation of Analysis, (tr. Pollard, S.,
Bole, T.) 1994. Mineola, NY, USA: Dover, rpt. (1928)
Weyl, H.: Theory of Groups and Quantum Mechanics (tr. Robertson, H.). Dover, rpt., Mineola, NY,
USA 1984 (1931)
Weyl, H.: Space Time Matter (tr. Brose, H. L.). Dover, Mineola, NY, USA (1952)
Weyl, H.: The Concept of a Riemann Surface (tr. MacLane, G. L.). Dover, Mineola, NY, USA
(2013)

Chapter 5
Schrödinger’s Great Guess: The
Time-Dependent Wave Equation
Schrödinger: If all this damned quantum jumping were really
here to stay, I should be very sorry that I ever got involved with
quantum theory.
Bohr: But the rest of us are extremely grateful that you did. Your
wave mechanics has contributed so much to mathematical
clarity and simplicity that it represents a gigantic advance over
all previous forms of quantum mechanics.
—From the conversation between Bohr and Schrödinger (1926),
reported in Werner Heisenberg, Physics and Beyond:
Encounters and Conversations (Heisenberg 1971, p. 76)
Abstract This chapter discusses Schrödinger’s time-dependent equation and its
mathematical features. The time-dependent equation and its derivation have been
given less attention in the literature, in contrast to his time-independent equation
and its derivation, which, along with Schrödinger’s program for wave mechanics,
have been discussed extensively. The present approach to his time-dependent equa-
tion is new because it focuses on those features of the equation that emerge against
Schrödinger’s own grain. Section 5.2 revisits Schrödinger’s derivation of his time-
independent equation. Section 5.3 considers Schrödinger’s derivation of his time-
dependent equation. Section 5.4 comments on Dirac’s equation in connection with
Schrödinger’s time-dependent equation, which is the nonrelativistic limit of Dirac’s
equation.
Keywords Complex wave function · Dirac’s equation · Eigenvalue (proper value)
problem · Quantum jumps · Schrödinger’s time-dependent equation ·
Schrödinger’s time-independent equation · Wave mechanics
5.1
Introduction
This chapter considers Schrödinger’s time-dependent equation and its mathematical
features, in particular the ﬁrst-order derivative in time and the complex wave function,
and their signiﬁcance and implications, especially those that, against Schrödinger’s
own grain, invite an RWR-type interpretation. Schrödinger’s derivation of this equa-
tion or, given that, just as that of Heisenberg’s matrix mechanics, it was not strictly
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
A. Plotnitsky, Reality Without Realism,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-84578-0_5
145

146
5
Schrödinger’s Great Guess: The Time-Dependent Wave Equation
derived but partially guessed (as was also the case with his time-independent equa-
tion), the emergence of this equation no less remarkable than that of Heisenberg’s
matrix mechanics. Schrödinger’s time-dependent equation and its discovery have
been given less attention in literature, in contrast to his time-independent equation and
its derivation, which, along with Schrödinger’s program for wave mechanics, were
discussed more extensively, and were previously considered for the RWR perspec-
tive by the present author (Plotnitsky 2016, pp. 84–99).1 Nevertheless, it is helpful
to revisit, ﬁrst, this program, which I do in Sect. 5.2. Schrödinger’s derivation of
his time-dependent equation is considered in Sect. 5.3. Section 5.4 comments on
Dirac’s equation in connection with Schrödinger’s time-dependent equation, which
is the nonrelativistic limit of Dirac’s equation.
5.2
“The Wave Radiation Forming the Basis
of the Universe” Versus Quantum Discontinuity
About half a year after its discovery by Heisenberg, QM was co-discovered by
Schrödinger in early 1926, in a different mathematical form, or so it appeared before
themathematicalequivalenceofbothmechanicswasestablished.Incontrasttothatof
Heisenberg, Schrödinger’s approach was based on realist principles, with the aim of
ﬁnding a physical description and mathematical representation of the reality respon-
sible for quantum phenomena in undulatory or wave terms. Hence, he characterized
his theory as a wave mechanics. Indeed, initially Schrödinger did not use the term
“quantum mechanics.” This use was adopted later, after both theories were shown,
by, among others, Schrödinger himself, to be mathematically equivalent. While, as
noted earlier, the initial demonstrations of this equivalence, that by Schrödinger
included, did not have the kind of mathematical rigor as had that by von Neumann
in the 1930s, which ﬁnalized the matter, this equivalence was pretty much taken
for granted a few months after Schrödinger’s discovery in 1926. Initially, however,
his theory had appeared to offer an alternative account of the same phenomena.
Schrödinger made a revealing comment in his paper on the Bose–Einstein theory,
written just before he commenced his work on his wave mechanics and inspired,
1 Thus, while J. Mehra and H. Rechenberg, in their classic study, in which Schrödinger and wave
mechanics was given more space than any other subject (close to a thousand pages!), discuss his
time-dependent equation and note its signiﬁcance, especially its introduction of the complex wave
function, their analysis is brief and does not address the deeper physical and philosophical aspects
of this equation (Mehra and Rechenberg 2001, v. 5, pp, 786–88, 796–797). Schrödinger’s paper
“Quantisierung als Eigenwertproblem 4” [Quantization as a Problem of Proper Value 4], which
offers his derivations of his time-dependent equation, was recently addressed in more detail in
(Karam 2020), focusing primarily on the role of the complex wave function there and Schrödinger’s
attitude toward it. The paper does not, however, consider the role of the ﬁrst-order time derivative in
Schrödinger’s equation either, which is equally important and is essentially linked to the complex
wave function. Even more crucial is the nature of this derivation, as discussed here (but not addressed
by Ricardo Karam or others who commented on the subject), as essentially a guess, rather than a
logical deduction.

5.2 “The Wave Radiation Forming the Basis of the Universe” …
147
as was his approach to wave mechanics, by De Broglie’s theory of matter waves.
Schrödinger envisioned there a picture of the ultimate physical reality in which a
moving particle would appear “as nothing more than a kind of ‘white crest’ on the
wave radiation forming the basis of the universe” (Schrödinger 1926, p. 95; cited in
Mehra and Rechenberg 2001, p. 435).
The phrase is remarkable in reﬂecting a major philosophical ambition, a philo-
sophical ambition in physics. It is true that Schrödinger was greatly interested in
philosophy, both European, in particular that of Baruch Spinoza and Arthur Schopen-
hauer, and Indian, and engaged in extensive reading in philosophy before and during
his work on his wave mechanics. The connections between these philosophical
systems or Schrödinger’s philosophical interest and his work on wave mechanics
is a complex issue, which will be put aside because it is tangential to my argu-
ment.2 By a philosophical ambition, I refer to the ontological nature of his project
in its speciﬁc physical and mathematical character, in particular his equations (time-
independent and time-dependent) as, in his words, “a continuum-theory,” as against
matrix mechanics as “a theory of a discontinuum” (Schrödinger 1982, p. 45). Both
of Schrödinger’s assessments would require qualiﬁcations of the type considered in
Chapter 4 in assessing Einstein’s view of the Heisenberg method as fundamentally
algebraic. These qualiﬁcations would, however, not undermine Schrödinger’s point
concerning the nature of wave mechanics as an attempt at an (idealized) represen-
tation of the continuous physical reality responsible for quantum phenomena. One
might, it is true, argue that the main shared trend of his philosophical interests and
his philosophy of wave mechanics is the question of continuity, including that of
consciousness (e.g., Mehra and Rechenberg, v. 5, pp. 405–410). It does not appear
to me, however, that this fact is especially helpful in understanding his work on
wave mechanics, which, “the continuum-theory” as it might be, was as inextricably
tied to its mathematical structure as was, as “a theory of discontinuum,” matrix
mechanics. Accordingly, I would argue that, just as in the case of Heisenberg’s work
on QM, as considered in Chap. 4, one can explore more directly the relationships
between the philosophical nature of Schrödinger’s wave mechanics and its physical
and mathematical structure. This is what I shall attempt to do here.
The essentially discrete nature of quantum phenomena was in the way of fulﬁlling
Schrödinger’s ambition. De Broglie’s theory appeared to offer a pathway, and it
was both a major inspiration for wave mechanics and a major technical help in
inventing it. As is clear from his notebooks, Schrödinger initially derived his (time-
independent) equation more directly by using de Broglie’s formulas for matter waves.
His ﬁrst published paper replaced this derivation with the one based on the concept
of eigenvalue, announced by its title “Quantization and a Problem of Proper Values”
2 Michel Bitbol’s book offers a helpful discussion of connections between modern philosophy
(of Hume, Kant, and Schopenhauer) and Schrödinger’s philosophy of QM, including as against
that of the main representatives of the Göttingen–Copenhagen circle, Bohr and Heisenberg in
particular, whose views are given a subtler treatment than is customary, even if bypassing the more
radical aspects of their thinking, such as those of the RWR type (Bitbol 1996). Bitbol also notes the
stratiﬁcations and changes in Bohr’s approach to complementarity, which I shall discuss in Chaps. 5
and 6 (Bitbol 1996, pp. 213–219).

148
5
Schrödinger’s Great Guess: The Time-Dependent Wave Equation
(Schrödinger 1982, pp. 1–12).3 As he said in his note in his article which considered
both theories and their mathematical equivalence: “My theory was inspired by L.
de Broglie … and by brief, yet inﬁnitely far seeing remarks by A. Einstein [in his
work on the Bose–Einstein theory, which used de Broglie’s theory]. I did not at all
suspect any relations to Heisenberg’s theory at the beginning, by what appeared to
me as a very difﬁcult method of transcendental algebra, and by the want of intuitive
visualization (Anschaulichkeit)” (Schrödinger 1982, p. 46, n.1; translation modi-
ﬁed). Schrödinger was right on both points, in particular, on the second, because, as
discussed in Chap. 4, Heisenberg’s theory, accompanied by the (weak) RWR view of
the reality ultimately responsible for quantum phenomena, offered no representation
of the behavior of quantum objects in space and time. Schrödinger’s ambition was
to remedy this deﬁciency, and to do so by means of a continuous, wave, mechanics.
The situation may be seen in the following terms, taking Bohr’s 1913 theory and his
concept of “quantum jumps,” the inaugural event of both quantum theory as leading
to QM and of the RWR view, as the grounding event of both approaches, proceeding
in the opposite direction from it. Heisenberg extended the idea of quantum jump to
the relationships (which one could predict probabilistically, in accord with what was
actually observed), between all quantum states or events: in his theory there were,
in quantum physics, no other connections, especially, by deﬁnition, continuous and
classical causal, between them. Schrödinger, by contrast, aimed to eliminate quantum
jumps through a wave process, continuously and classically causally (thus without
the recourse to probability) connecting all quantum events. Hence, as he said in his
famous conversation with Bohr, discussed in closing this chapter: “If all this damned
quantum jumping were really here to stay, I should be very sorry that I ever got
involved with quantum theory” (Heisenberg 1971, p. 76).
As often happens, the task, hardly assumed to be simple by Schrödinger, proved
to be even more difﬁcult than it appeared and ultimately became insurmountable.
“This damned quantum jumping” was there to stay and still are with us. Schrödinger
never managed to reconcile his program with the observed discreteness of quantum
phenomena, which is, again, not the same as discreteness of quantum objects or the
ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena, assumed
to be continuous by Schrödinger. The fact that the wave function had to be consid-
ered not in three-dimensional physical space but in the conﬁguration space of higher
dimensions, meant that it had to have an indirect relation to whatever continuous
physical processes were there. Aware of the difﬁculties of attributing physical reality
to the waves in the conﬁguration space, Schrödinger thought of such waves “as some-
thing real in a sense, and the constant h universally determined their frequencies or
theirwavelengths”(SchrödingertoWilhelmWien,February22,1926,citedinMehra
and Rechenberg 2001, v. 5, p. 536). In other words, one needed to ﬁnd a relationship
and, hopefully, a representational correspondence between these waves in conﬁgu-
ration space and some physical vibrations—correspondence, but not identiﬁcation,
for which one could not hope.
3 Schrödinger’s papers of wave mechanics were reprinted in this collection, originally published in
1928, which I shall cite in this chapter.

5.2 “The Wave Radiation Forming the Basis of the Universe” …
149
The waves in conﬁguration space alarmed Einstein, who initially welcomed
Schrödinger’s theory, especially as a constructive geometrical theory, as against
Heisenberg’s principle algebraic one. This discontent was not helped by the math-
ematical equivalence of both schemes, which further suggested that Schrödinger’s
mechanics might not have been the alternative Einstein hoped for. These features of
Schrödinger’s wave mechanics added to Einstein’s discontent with QM in general,
a discontent ultimately shared by Schrödinger after his hopes for a proper wave
mechanics as a physical theory failed to materialize. Born’s probabilistic interpreta-
tion of the wave function later in 1926 resolved the problem of waves in the conﬁgu-
ration space in QM, but hardly in accord with Schrödinger’s aims for wave mechanics
(Born 1926a, b). The probabilistic or statistical nature of QM, not initially a feature
of Schrödinger’s theory, proved to be another major obstacle to his agenda. This
feature was never accepted as fundamental by Schrödinger either, any more than by
Einstein. Both saw this feature as an indication that a better theory should be found,
possibly, as discussed in Chap. 2, by means of new representational concepts. As
noted earlier, the factors just mentioned do not in principle exclude the possibility of
a continuous and classically causal representation of the ultimate constitution of the
reality responsible for quantum phenomena. Schrödinger’s theory, however, proved
not to be such a theory that was able to do so. Schrödinger was aware of the prob-
lems his program faced and he commented on them throughout his papers of wave
mechanics and his correspondence, still for a while hoping to resolve them.
Proving, by, among others, Schrödinger himself, that both matrix and wave-
mechanical formalism were mathematically equivalent or transformable into each
other (and were then uniﬁed in the transformation theory of Dirac and Jordan in 1927
and especially by von Neumann’s Hilbert space formalism) resolved the puzzle of
why these, seemingly so different, schemes were in complete agreement as concerns
theirpredictions.Thisresolutionwas,forthoseoftheGöttingen–Copenhagenpersua-
sion, a further sign of difﬁculties for Schrödinger’s physical program. Heisen-
berg’s approach naturally accommodated both quantum discreteness and probability,
indeed, as discussed in Chap. 4, assuming both as postulates (the QD and the QP/QS
postulates), without making underlying physical assumptions of the type made by
Schrödinger. Schrödinger was, again, well aware of this difference, and instruc-
tively commented on it in his 1926 article on the mathematical equivalence of both
mechanics, while still retaining his hopes for wave mechanics at the time. As he said:
Considering the extraordinary differences between the starting-points and the concepts of
Heisenberg’s quantum mechanics and of the theory which has been designated “undulatory”
or “physical” mechanics and has been lately describe here [in Annalen der Physik], it is very
strange that these two new theories agree with one another with regard to the known facts,
where they differ from the old quantum theory. I refer, in particular, to the peculiar “half-
integralness” which arises in connection with the oscillator and the rotator. That is really very
remarkable, because starting-points, presentations, methods, and in fact the whole mathe-
matical apparatus appear fundamentally different. Above all, however, the departure from
classical mechanics in the two theories seems to occur in diametrically opposing directions.
In Heisenberg’s work the classical continuous variables are replaced by systems of discrete
numerical quantities (matrices), which depend on a pair of integral indices, and are deﬁned
by algebraic equations. The authors themselves [Heisenberg, Born, and Jordan] describe the

150
5
Schrödinger’s Great Guess: The Time-Dependent Wave Equation
theory as a “true theory of a dis-continuum.” On the other hand, wave mechanics shows just
the reverse tendency; it is a step from classical point-mechanics toward a continuum-theory.
In place of a process described in terms of a ﬁnite number of dependent variables occurring
in a ﬁnite number of total differential equations, we have a continuous ﬁeld-like process
in conﬁguration, which is governed by a single partial differential equation, derived from
the principle of action. This principle and this differential equation replace the equations of
motion and the quantum conditions of the older “classical quantum theory.” (Schrödinger
1982, pp. 45–61)
Schrödinger was about to show that the mathematical apparatus of each theory is in
fact translatable into that of the other, which makes physical and conceptual differ-
ence all the more striking, ultimately not in favor of his own program, although that
did not appear to Schrödinger to be the case at the time. In Heisenberg’s theory, in
the language of Hilbert-space formalism, operators were time-dependent, while state
vectors were not, as they were to become in Schrödinger’s time-dependent equation
in a few months, a major advance, crucial to all subsequent quantum theory. For
the reasons explained in Chap. 4, Schrödinger’s assessment of the matrix mechanics
requires qualiﬁcation, both as concerns the mathematical continuities the theory
involves and, most crucially, the fact that the “dis-continuum” in question refers
only to the discreteness of quantum phenomena, rather than to any description of
the behavior of quantum objects, which behavior Schrödinger wanted to replace
with undulatory processes. One of the problems of his project, perhaps its greatest
problem, was that he could not account for this discreteness in terms of wave prop-
agation, but could only predict them by using the waves, the “symbolic waves” (as
Born and then Bohr came to seem them), in the conﬁguration space of a quantum
system. This space in general has a larger number of dimensions (in the case of
continuous variables considered by Schrödinger, an inﬁnite number of dimensions)
than the three-dimensional physical space in which quantum behavior was assumed
to occur.
Schrödinger’s appeal to the difference between the concepts, physical and math-
ematical, of the two theories merits registering here, given this study’s emphasis on
the roles of both concepts and mathematics in quantum theory. Their mathematical
concepts proved to be essentially linked, indeed were parts of the same overall mathe-
matical framework, eventually given a Hilbert-space version by von Neumann, who
as noted earlier, also gave a fully rigorous proof of the mathematical equivalence
of both formalisms. Their physical concepts were ultimately irreconcilable, which
was one of Schrödinger’s points. His description of his mechanics as a “physical”
mechanics is worth registering, too. It reﬂects an accord with Einstein’s view that
Heisenberg’s theory was not even properly mechanics, insofar as, while providing
correct probabilistic predictions, it did not, and did not aim to, represent the ulti-
mate nature of reality responsible for quantum phenomena. This, in Einstein’s view,
shared by Schrödinger, should be the task of a fundamental theory, the task that wave
mechanics pursued. Schrödinger’s article, however, clearly indicated that, despite the
problems yet to be resolved, his hopes for his wave mechanics did not diminish, now
allowing for working with either or both “very similar analytical mechanisms,” that
of Heisenberg or his own (Schrödinger 1982, p. 61). This was early in the game,

5.2 “The Wave Radiation Forming the Basis of the Universe” …
151
and wave mechanics was still a work in progress. In particular, his time-dependent
equation was yet to be introduced (Schrödinger 1982, p. 103).
The future proved to be less charitable to Schrödinger’s physical program than he
had hoped, in a few years making him abandon his project for wave mechanics, and
eventually to assess QM itself, especially as interpreted on RWR lines, as “a doctrine
born of distress” in his cat-paradox paper (Schrödinger 1935, p. 154). Schrödinger
saw QM, if not as necessarily incomplete, as was argued in EPR’s paper, to which his
cat-paradox paper responded, but then as “perhaps after all only a convenient calcu-
lational trick” (Schrödinger 1935, p. 167). EPR’s paper gave Schrödinger, just as it
did to Einstein, new hopes that an alternative theory might be necessary, although,
as indicated in Chap. 2, Schrödinger returned to his initial approach in the 1950s
(Schrödinger 1995). I shall discuss EPR’s paper and Bohr’s reply (not much appreci-
ated and perhaps not fully understood by either Einstein or Schrödinger) in Chap. 7.
Assuming QM to be only a convenient calculational trick requires assuming that
any theory of quantum phenomena can provide more than probabilistic calculations,
which remains an open question. Besides, as I argue here, calculations are not to be
disparaged, as there is no theoretical physics apart from calculations. I am not saying
that Schrödinger aimed to do so, his appeal to a trick notwithstanding. Furthermore,
calculations, while they can be divorced from realism, need not be divorced from
concepts, as Schrödinger’s derivation of both of his equations demonstrates.
In deriving them, he made, against his own grain, several mathematical adjust-
ments, either in order to bring his calculation in accord with the experiment or for
purely mathematical reasons, that were in effect in conﬂict with or at least posed difﬁ-
culties for his agenda, and brought his mathematics closer to Heisenberg’s physics,
including as concerns discreteness and probability. This was, again, further conﬁrmed
by Born’s probabilistic interpretation of the wave function, again, never welcomed
by Schrödinger. Indeed, it became quickly apparent that one could establish from
within Schrödinger’s scheme all the key features that grounded Heisenberg’s matrix
mechanics and helped, via the correspondence principle, to derive it, as discussed in
Chap. 4. Bohr, as noted, spoke of “the symbolic character of Schrödinger’s method,”
sharedbyitwiththematrixtheory,referringby“method”toSchrödinger’sformalism,
interpreted accordingly, rather than to the wave-like physical ontology aimed by
Schrödinger. Bohr said:
The symbolic character of Schrödinger’s method appears not only from the circumstance
that its simplicity, similarly to that of the matrix theory, depends essentially upon the use
of imaginary arithmetic quantities. But above all there can be no question of an immediate
connection with our ordinary conceptions because the ‘geometrical’ problem represented by
the wave equation is associated with the so-called co-ordinate space, the number of dimen-
sions of which is equal to the number of the degrees of freedom of the system, and, hence
in general greater than the numbers of dimensions of ordinary space. Further, Schrödinger’s
formulation of the interaction problem, just as the formulation offered by matrix theory,
involves a neglect of the ﬁnite velocity of propagation of the forces claimed by relativity
theory. (Bohr 1987, v. 1, pp. 76–77)
The use of complex numbers never quite satisﬁed Schrödinger either, any more
than did Born’s probabilistic interpretation, tied to this use (e.g., Schrödinger 1982,

152
5
Schrödinger’s Great Guess: The Time-Dependent Wave Equation
pp. 61, 123, 206). As will be seen, however, just as in Heisenberg’s scheme, their
role is irreducible given how the ultimate mathematical structure of Schrödinger’s
scheme turned out. Schrödinger came to accept this role along with the complex wave
function, at least at certain stages of his thinking, but never without ambivalence (e.g.,
Schrödinger 1928). While this role was related to the nonrelativistic nature of his
mechanics, it was also to affect the relativistic theory, QED, beginning with Dirac’s
equation.
In retrospect, this view of Schrödinger’s theory as “symbolic” and, as a result,
RWR-type interpretations of Schrödinger’s mathematics are not surprising, given the
mathematical equivalence of both theories. However, just as in Heisenberg’s case,
considered in Chap. 4, it is Schrödinger’s thinking in deriving his formalism and its
mathematical features in question that is my main interest in this chapter. Unlike in
Heisenberg’s derivation, where these features were in accord with physical principles
and assumed by Heisenberg from the start, in Schrödinger these features proved
to undermine or even ultimately defeat his realist physical program, not the least
as a fundamentally continuous theory. It is from this perspective of Schrödinger’s
mathematicsagainstSchrödinger’sphysics,orthatpartofhisphysicsthatwasdeﬁned
by his program for wave mechanics, that I would like to consider Schrödinger’s
time-dependent equation, and its mathematical features, in particular the ﬁrst-order
derivative in time and the complex wave function deﬁning its structure, and their
physical and philosophical implications.
5.3
From “The Amplitude Equation” to “The Real Wave
Equation” to the Time-Dependent Equation
Schrödinger’s time-dependent equation was introduced in the fourth installment of
his “Quantisierung als Eigenwertproblem” [Quantization as a Problem of Proper
Value]. Schrödinger opens by explaining the necessity of a time-dependent wave
equation. The original wave equation, the ﬁrst of which (5.1) contains the second-
order derivative in time and the second one (5.1′) contains no time at all, while being
no less general that the ﬁrst.
He writes:
∇2ψ −2(E −V )
E2
∂2ψ
∂t2 = 0
(5.1)
or
∇2ψ + 8π2
h2 (E −V )ψ = 0,
(5.1′)
whichformsthebasis forthere-establishmentofmechanicsattemptedinthisseriesofpapers,
suffers from the disadvantage that it expresses the law of variations of the “mechanical ﬁeld
scholar” ψ, neither uniformly nor generally, and is valid … with a deﬁnite E-value inserted,
for processes which depend on the time exclusively through a deﬁnite periodic factor:

5.3 From “The Amplitude Equation” to “The Real Wave Equation” …
153
ψ ∼real part of

e± 2πi Et
h

(5.2)
Equation (5.1) is thus not really any more general than Eq. (5.1′), which takes account
of the circumstances just mentioned and does not contain time at all.
Thus, when we designated Eq. (5.1) or (5.1′), on various occasions, as “the wave equa-
tion”, we were really wrong and would have been more correct if we had called it a “vibration-
” or “amplitude-” equation. However, we found it sufﬁcient, because to it is linked the Sturm–
Liouville proper value problem—just as in the mathematically strictly analogous problem
of the free vibrations of strings and membranes—and not to the real wave equation.
As to this, we have always postulated up till now that the potential energy V is a pure
function of co-ordinate s and does not depend explicitly on time. There arises, however, an
urgent need for the extension of the theory to nonconservative systems, because it is only
in this way that we can study the behavior of a system under the inﬂuence of prescribed
physical forces, e.g., a light wave, or a strange atom ﬂying past. Whenever V contains the
time explicitly, it is manifestly impossible that Eq. (5.1) or (5.1′) should be satisﬁed by a
function ψ, the method of dependence of which on time is given by (5.2). We then ﬁnd that
the amplitude equation is no l onger sufﬁcient and that we must search for the real wave
equation. (Schrödinger 1982, pp. 102–103)
Schrödinger then derives the real wave equation for a conservative system by ﬁrst
replacing (5.2) with:
∂2ψ
∂t2 = −4π2E2
h2
ψ
(5.3)
and then by eliminating E from (5.1′) and (5.3) by differentiation, obtains the
equation:

∇2 −8π2
h2 V
2
ψ + 16π2
h2
∂2ψ
∂t2 = 0
(5.4)
which would be “satisﬁed by every ψ which depends on the time as in (5.2), though
with E arbitrary, and consequently also by every ψ which can be expanded in a
Fourier series with respect to the time (naturally with functions of the co-ordinates
as coefﬁcients)” and which is “thus evidently the uniform and general wave equation
for the ﬁeld scalar ψ” (Schrödinger 1982, p. 103). The fourth order of the equation
does not pose serious mathematical problems in itself. Schrödinger also notes that
“if V does not contain time, one can, proceeding from (5.4), apply (5.2), and then
split up the operator as follows:

∇2 −8π2
h2 V + 8π2
h2 E

∇2 −8π2
h2 V −8π2
h2 E

ψ = 0′′
(5.4′)
Schrödinger (1982, p. 103).
This means that the decomposition into the original second-order Eq. (5.1′) is
obtainable. “Thus,” Schrödinger says, “we see that the wave Eq. (5.4), which contains

154
5
Schrödinger’s Great Guess: The Time-Dependent Wave Equation
in itself the law of dispersion, can really stand as the basis of the theory previ-
ously developed for conservative systems” (Schrödinger 1982, p. 103). Schrödinger,
however, does not proceed to developing such a theory, by “generaliz[ing] it for the
case of a time varying potential function,” for the following reason:
[This generalization] demands caution, because terms with a time derivative of V might
appear, about which no information can be given to us by Eq. (5.4), owing to the way we
obtained it. In actual fact, if we attempt to apply Eq. (5.4) as it stands to non-conservative
systems,wemeetwithcomplications,whichseemtoarisefromtheterm∂V/∂t.(Schrödinger
1982, p. 104).
At this point Schrödinger changes course:
Therefore, in the following discussion, I have taken a somewhat different route, which is
much easier for calculations, and which I consider justiﬁed in principle.
We need not raise the order of the wave function to four, in order to get rid of the energy
parameter. The dependence of ψ on the time, which must exist if (5.1′) is to hold, can be
expressed by
∂ψ
∂t = ±2πi
h Eψ
(5.3′)
as well as by (5.3). We thus arrive at one of the two equations:
∇2ψ −8π2
h2 V ψ ∓4πi
h
∂ψ
∂t = 0
(5.4′′)
We will require the complex wave function ψ to satisfy one of these two equations. Since the
conjugate complex function ψ will then satisfy the other equation, we may take the real part
of ψ as the real wave function (if we require it). In the case of a conservative system, (5.4′′)
is essentially equivalent to (5.4) as the real operator may be split into the product of the two
conjugate complex operators if V does not contain time. (Schrödinger 1982, p. 104)
This is hardly only “a somewhat different route.” It is a radically new way of
dealing with the problem at hand and quantum theory. This is a remarkable moment
in the history of QM, although rarely, if ever, seen as such, or even discussed at all.
Thus, Mehra and Rechenberg merely say that “it was possible to write, for the time-
dependent equations by considering the fact that the time dependence of the wave
function might be expressed not by the second-order differential equation (5.3) but by
a linear relation (5.3′). … The price one had to pay was that the wave function ψ …
deﬁnitively became a complex object” (Mehra and Rechenberg 2001, v. 5, p. 789). Is
it a price to pay or a major beneﬁt for the future of QM? Schrödinger clearly thought
the ﬁrst. He speaks of “a certain crudeness in the use of a complex wave function”
and, again, sees it merely as a calculational tool, with a proper theory requiring a
real wave function of “probably the fourth order” (Schrödinger 1982, p. 122–123).
On the other hand, subsequent history proves the second for both the complex wave
function and the ﬁrst-order derivative in time (on which Mehra and Rechenberg
do not comment at all), and not only for calculations enabling correct predictions
but also conceptually. For this might well be how our interactions with nature via
mathematics and experimental technology work in the case of quantum phenomena.

5.3 From “The Amplitude Equation” to “The Real Wave Equation” …
155
The ﬁrst-order derivative in time and the complex wave function are fundamentally
related to probability, as was discovered by Born, which was, again, not something
that Schrödinger wanted, as he often said. Schrödinger’s time-dependent equation
preserves the probability current, just as does Dirac’s equation, whose nonrelativistic
limit is Schrödinger’s time-dependent equation.
Mehra and Rechenberg do not consider how this relation, “for computational
purposes,” comes about. Nor do they ask what does it mean to be “correct in prin-
ciple,” as Schrödinger says. Rather than a deduction, this relation may be seen as
a guess demanded by calculational purposes, not unlike Heisenberg’s guess of his
matrix variables. Is there a more rigorous derivation, or does a right guess sufﬁce?
There is no simple answer to this question. It is worth nothing, however, that, although
we have different derivations of Schrödinger’s time-dependent equation, we do not
appear to have a fully rigorous derivation of it, or his time-independent equation or of
QM for continuous variables in general.4 As it happened, mathematical and specif-
ically calculational demands led to a major discovery that was consistent with the
mathematical structure of the theory being developed but was not derived from this
structure, while decisively advancing the theory itself. That was already true in the
case of Schrödinger’s time-independent equation, which, too, was mainly guessed,
certainly initially, as is clear from Schrödinger’s notebooks. It is, however, difﬁcult
to see his derivation of it in his published articles as a fully rigorous deduction from
ﬁrst principles either.
He appears to have proceeded roughly as follows. De Broglie’s formula for the
speed of the phase wave of an electron, adjusted for the speed of the electron in the
electric ﬁeld of a hydrogen nucleus, is inserted into the classical relativistic wave
equation. Since de Broglie’s formula conveys both the particle and the wave aspects
of the behavior of quantum objects, the nature of the equation changes. (One must
of course keep in mind that de Broglie’s waves are not the same as Schrödinger’s
standing wave, which his time-independent equation describes.) Unfortunately, the
resulting equation, now known as the Klein–Gordon equation (which Schrödinger
appears to be the ﬁrst to have written), does not work for a relativistic electron because
the predictions one makes by using it are in conﬂict with experimental results. One
needs Dirac’s equation to make correct relativistic predictions. However, if one drops
terms that are small in the nonrelativistic limit, one arrives, yet again, (essentially
by way of a guess!) at a different equation, (5.1) or (5.1′) above. The resulting equa-
tion happens to offer correct predictions in the nonrelativistic case. Accordingly,
Schrödinger’s time-independent equation becomes even more of a guess, albeit a
correct guess, which would need to be justiﬁed otherwise or even require that the
equation be derived otherwise. This is what Schrödinger attempted to do in his ﬁrst
published paper on the subject, which derives his equation differently. Eventually,
Dirac showed Schrödinger’s (time-dependent) equation to be the nonrelativistic limit
ofhisequation,whichstraightenedoutthedifﬁcultyofconnectingawrongrelativistic
equation to the right nonrelativistic one. As discussed below, this was an important
4 The case of deriving QM for discrete variables (which may be considered more rigorous but which
has its complexities as well) will be considered in Chap. 9.

156
5
Schrödinger’s Great Guess: The Time-Dependent Wave Equation
point of Dirac’s argument concerning his equation. By that time, Schrödinger’s time-
dependent and time-independent equations were ﬁrmly established as the correct
nonrelativistic equations for the electron, essentially, again, as mathematical postu-
lates of QM, rather than deductions from ﬁrst principles, as Heisenberg said about
the equations of QM in general at the time (Heisenberg 1930, p. 108).
Schrödinger’s new derivation was also more representative of his program for
a wave mechanics. Schrödinger now viewed the problem of quantization as an
eigenvalue problem, treated by variational methods, with atomic spectra derived
accordingly from his equation. As is clear from his notebooks, Schrödinger’s alter-
native derivation was linked to and possibly motivated by the fact that some of
the predictions based on his wave equation coincided with those of Bohr’s and
Sommerfeld’s theory, which used a classical-like Hamiltonian approach. Schrödinger
explained these relationships in a way that led him to the derivation of his equation
found in his ﬁrst paper. He did so by replacing—again, without a rigorous theo-
retical justiﬁcation from ﬁrst principles—the mechanical Hamilton–Jacobi equation
H(q, (q, ∂S/∂q) = E with a wave equation by substituting S = K ln c (where K
is a constant that has a dimension of action). This step led him, via a mechanical-
optical analogy, to the equation and then to the right time-independent equation for
the nonrelativistic hydrogen atom (5.1) or (5.1′). Schrödinger’s key step—made via
the mechanical-optical analogy and the connections between the principle of least
action in mechanics and Fermat’s principle in optics—was to give to S the wave form
by putting in S = K ln c. One thus also replaces the deterministic mechanics of the
particle motion with amplitudes and then probabilities, although Schrödinger did not
realize this at the time.
Schrödinger extended his program in his second and third papers, which, as Mehra
and Rechenberg note, “establishe[s] the foundations and the deﬁnite outlines of
what was later [in his paper] called ‘wave mechanics’” (Mehra and Rechenberg
2001, v. 5, p. 533). I shall only comment on a few key points here. The program
was still to be enacted through the mechanical-optical analogy, which accompa-
nied the Hamilton–Jacobi framework for classical mechanics since Hamilton’s work.
Schrödinger wanted to “throw more light on the general correspondence which exists
between the Hamilton–Jacobi differential equation of a mechanical problem and
the ‘allied’ wave equation,” Schrödinger’s time-independent equation (Schrödinger
1982, p. 16). The mathematical procedures used in the ﬁrst paper were declared
“unintelligible” and “incomprehensible.” It becomes clear from his papers on wave
mechanics and from his correspondence that Schrödinger continued to adjust his
theory and expected that some changes of the physical concepts involved were likely
to be necessary in order to preserve the character of the theory as he envisioned it.
As his conclusion, cited below, to the fourth installment of his program indicates, he
thought that such further adjustments will still be necessary even after the formalism
of his wave mechanics was essentially established with his time-dependent equation.
It would perhaps be more accurate to say that the subsequent history proved that this
formalism was, thus, essentially established, because Schrödinger himself did not
quite see it as ﬁnalized, especially in view of his use of the complex wave function.
The situation was not destined to change, however, including as concerns this use,

5.3 From “The Amplitude Equation” to “The Real Wave Equation” …
157
unhappily for Schrödinger but with great beneﬁts for QM. Schrödinger aimed at a
wave-like deterministic picture, but arrived elsewhere.
This “arriving elsewhere” from his physical program of capturing, by means of
his wave-mechanics, “the wave radiation forming the basis of the universe,” is the
story of Schrödinger’s project. This story was manifested in particular in his moves
made from within his mathematics without a proper physical justiﬁcation from within
his representational program. That is not to say that these moves were not justiﬁed
otherwise. The ultimate justiﬁcation is in their mathematical structures that lead to
the agreement of the predictions with the experiment enabled by these structures,
as Heisenberg, again, said concerning the derivation of the formalism, by that time
(1930), including Schrödinger’s time-dependent equation (Heisenberg 1930, p. 108).
In other words, the ultimate justiﬁcation of such moves is in the possibilities of calcu-
lations created by them. Some of these moves are dictated by the inner mathemat-
ical demands but are not rigorously derived from the formalism, as in the case of
Schrödinger’s introduction of his ﬁrst-order derivative in time and the complex wave
function in his time-dependent equation. The necessary calculations would not be
possible without getting rid of the energy parameter in the time-independent equa-
tion. However, doing so in a way that would be justiﬁed from within his program,
would require an equation (likely that of the fourth order) that Schrödinger could not
properly establish, in in view the difﬁculties mentioned above. As he said in closing
his article:
[T]here is no doubt a certain crudeness in the use of a complex wave function. If it were
unavoidable in principle, and not merely a facilitation of calculations, this would mean that
there are in principle two wave functions, which must be used together to obtain information
on the state of the system. This somewhat unacceptable inference admits, I believe, of the
very much more congenial interpretation that the state of the system is given by a real
function and its time derivative. Our inability to give more accurate information about this is
ultimately connected to the fact that, in the pair of equations (5.4′′), we have before us only
the substitute—extraordinarily convenient for the calculations, to be sure—for the real wave
equation of probably the fourth order, which, however, I have not succeeded in forming for
the non-conservative [time-dependent] case. (Schrödinger 1982, p. 123)
There might be some doubt, however, given that one might ﬁnd, and not a few,
Bohr, for one, had found, in this use a form of reﬁnement of the mathematics of
quantum theory. This use one has “a certain crudeness” only if one assumes, as
Schrödinger did, that it is merely a substitute for a proper mathematical represen-
tation of the physical reality responsible for quantum phenomena. Otherwise, the
predictions made by means of this function were, and still are, in exact correspon-
dence with what is observed. There was not yet a probabilistic interpretation of the
wave function, which gives one less, if any, hope that the same function could be
used for representing and predicting the behavior of electrons ideally exactly, as
Schrödinger wanted in setting up his program. Was “a real wave equation,” able to
provide such representation and predictions, possible? Perhaps. Is it still possible?
Perhaps, although at present it appears unlikely in the framework of QM or QFT. In
any event, Schrödinger never found such an equation. His substitute, extraordinarily
convenient for calculations, derived by a “somewhat unacceptable inference” may

158
5
Schrödinger’s Great Guess: The Time-Dependent Wave Equation
in fact be, against Schrödinger’s hope expressed here, “unavoidable in principle.”
Moreover, by virtue of its mathematical features, taken beyond their calculational
function, it offered new pathways for conceptual thinking concerning QM and QFT,
which retains these features. Mathematics led our thinking in the mathematical-
experimental project of modern physics to a new theory, QM, but in a different way,
along a different path.
This unexpected destination did not satisfy Schrödinger himself, who, while
accepting QM as an effective calculational technology, came to repudiate it concep-
tually. In his cat-paradox paper, he described it as “a doctrine born of distress,” in
part, again, as “perhaps [he was wise to qualify] after all only a convenient calcu-
lation trick,” which, however, “today … has attained inﬂuence of unprecedented
scope over our basic attitude toward nature” (Schrödinger 1935, pp. 154, 167). As
discussed earlier, one might doubt Schrödinger’s claim concerning the scope of
this inﬂuence. Most physicists and philosophers then and since took Einstein’s and
Schrödinger’s view of the theory, rather than that of Bohr, as Bohr acknowledged
(Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 65). Schrödinger’s assessment, however, would have applied to
the Göttingen–Copenhagen circle, clearly on his mind.
Be that as it may on this score, calculations and the ways of calculations are,
as I argue in this study, not separate from concepts, mathematical, physical, and
philosophical, and may give rise to these concepts, just as reciprocally, concepts can
lead to new ways of calculations. And sometimes either can happen against the grain
of our aims and agendas. This was the case in Schrödinger’s work. His calculations
were continually bringing him to other places than he wanted to reach, ultimately
landing his mathematics far from its intended destination. Schrödinger discovered
new territories in his journey, sometimes by trying to escape them and yet landing
somewhere else than he aimed to land.
It is true, that the mathematics of QM leaves open the question concerning the
ultimate nature of physical reality and our interaction with it by means of mathe-
matics and experimental technology, the interactions that ground the concepts and
calculations of any theory, and hence also the possibility of alternative theories of this
reality. Schrödinger came to strongly doubt, as did Einstein, that QM could serve as
a starting point for developing such as a theory, or be interpreted in conformity with
this imperative, although such interpretations have been proposed. These considera-
tions, however, do not affect my argument that new theories, and their new concepts
may (it need not always happen in this way) emerge independently, or against the
grain, of their intended physical or mathematical aims and procedures. This was the
case in Heisenberg’s invention of his new variables and (in this case, against his
own grain) in Schrödinger’s invention of both of his equations. Bohr’s concept of
“quantum jumps” was even more radical in this respect, going against all preceding
assumptions concerning how nature works. It brought physics to an entirely new and
even previously unimaginable place, although in this case mathematics did not play
the kind of role it did in the case of Heisenberg’s, Schrödinger’s, and Dirac’s work.
That does not mean that these inventions come from nowhere, but only that they
come not only from within a given theory (established or being developed) but also
from other trajectories of thought, some of which are difﬁcult and even impossible

5.3 From “The Amplitude Equation” to “The Real Wave Equation” …
159
to track. “Their ultimate justiﬁcation,” as Heisenberg said, “lies in the agreement
of [their] predictions with the experiment,” and thus in the calculations they enable
(Heisenberg 1930, p. 108). Apart from these calculations, these predictions are not
possible. But calculations also lead to new concepts, theories, and interpretations, to
new ways of thinking.
5.4
From Schrödinger to Dirac
Dirac’s thinking concerning the free relativistic electron was based in the funda-
mental principles of both relativity and quantum theory, with those of quantum theory
being represented Schrödinger’s time-dependent equation. The ﬁrst-order derivative
in time was to play a key role in Dirac’s theory. Dirac’s starting point, shaped by the
mathematical character of his thinking, was that, in order to satisfy, and to mathe-
matically express, the physical principles of both theories, the equation he needed
had to have certain speciﬁc mathematical features. One of them, in accordance with
the principles of QM, as manifested in Schrödinger’s time-dependent equation, was
the ﬁrst-order derivative in time. By symmetry, required by special relativity, this
equation would then, now unlike Schrödinger’s time-dependent equation, also have
to have the ﬁrst-order derivative in spatial coordinates. Then the right variables that
satisfy this equation needed to be found. Dirac accomplished both tasks.
Dirac followed Heisenberg’s ﬁrst paper on QM (Heisenberg 1925), discussed in
Chap. 4, insofar as his aim was the invention of a consistent mathematical scheme
by means of which one could predict, probabilistically or statistically, the outcomes
of relevant experiments. Dirac, as is well known, read Heisenberg’s paper very
carefully earlier and used its key ideas, in particular, the noncommutative nature of
Heisenberg’s formalism, in developing his own version of QM (Dirac 1925). Dirac’s
theory, thus, conformed to the QD postulate, applied to observed high-energy
quantum phenomena, the QP/QS postulate. Dirac also adopted a form of the
correspondence postulate, deﬁned by the fact that his equation should convert into
Schrödinger’s equation in the nonrelativistic limit. In Heisenberg, this correspon-
dence was between the equations of QM and those of classical mechanics, and it was
more automatic because his equations were formally the same as those of classical
mechanics. Only his variables were different. By contrast, Dirac’s equation not only
used different variables but was also not formally the same as either any classical
equation or Schrödinger’s equation. Dirac used the mathematical correspondence
postulate in his earlier work on quantum mechanics, inspired by Heisenberg’s paper.
Indeed, while Heisenberg was the ﬁrst to convert Bohr’s correspondence principle
into a mathematical postulate, it was Dirac who appears to have been the ﬁrst to
expressly formulate this postulate. In his ﬁrst paper on quantum mechanics, he said:
“The correspondence between the quantum and classical theories lies not so much
in the limiting agreement when h = 0 as in the fact that the mathematical operations
on the two theories obey in many cases the same [formal] laws” (Dirac 1925,
p. 315). Dirac’s equation was a new equation even formally. Both the equations

160
5
Schrödinger’s Great Guess: The Time-Dependent Wave Equation
and the variables in it were new. Accordingly, proving that his equation would
convert into Schrödinger’s time-dependent equation in the nonrelativistic limit was
mathematically more difﬁcult to prove than in Heisenberg’s case.
As against Heisenberg, who, at least in his paper introducing QM, adopted a form
of RWR view, Dirac, as mentioned, appears to have always retained the view that he
introducedinhispaperontransformationtheory(Dirac1927).Accordingtothisview,
the probabilistic or statistical nature of quantum predictions is due to our interference
into quantum processes by measurement, while the undisturbed behavior of quantum
objects is classically causal and is represented by the formalism of quantum theory.
Dirac never addressed the difﬁculties that this claim entails, for example, the role of
complex variables in the formalism, which one cannot directly associate with what
occurs in space and time. Whatever Dirac’s own views might have been, however,
his formalism is open to an RWR-type interpretation, as discussed in relation to QFT
in Chap. 8.
Dirac’s starting point, as that of others, in particular, Oscar Klein, who were
pursuing a relativistic extension of QM at the time, was that, in accordance with
the principles of special relativity theory, time and space must enter symmetrically
and be interchangeable. This feature is not found in Schrödinger’s time-dependent
equation, which contained the ﬁrst derivative of time and the second derivatives of
coordinates, although the equation is consistent with relativity, because it satisﬁes
the locality principle (which prohibits an action at a distance). On the other hand, by
consistency with QM, the equation Dirac needed must have been ﬁrst-order linear
in time, just as Schrödinger’s time-dependent equation was.
Remarkably, given the naturalness of this logic, it appears that only Dirac thought
of the situation in this way at the time. His famous conversation with Bohr reﬂects
this fact:
Bohr: What are you working on?
Dirac: I am trying to get a relativistic theory of the electron.
Bohr: But Klein already solved that problem. (Dirac 1962)
Dirac disagreed, and, for the reasons just explained, it is clear why he did and
why Bohr should have known better. If Schrödinger’s time-dependent equation was
correct, as it was surely assumed to be by Bohr, the Klein–Gordon equation, to which
Bohr referred, was unlikely to be right because it contains the second-order deriva-
tive in time and thus would not to give Schrödinger’s equation as its nonrelativistic
limit. Bohr of course changed his mind after Dirac’s discovery, and subsequently saw
Dirac’s theory of the electron as a conﬁrmation of the principles of quantum theory
that he advocated, including along RWR lines. The Klein–Gordon equation is rela-
tivistic and symmetrical in space and time with both variables entering via the second
derivative,
∂2
∂t2 , ∂2
∂x2
i . One can derive the continuity equation from it, but the proba-
bility density is not positive deﬁnite. Nor, again, does it give one Schrödinger’s time-
dependent equation in the nonrelativistic limit. Schrödinger, who, as noted, appears
to be the ﬁrst to have written down the Klein–Gordon equation in the process of his
discovery of his wave mechanics, abandoned it in view of this latter fact. Schrödinger

5.4 From Schrödinger to Dirac
161
manipulated the equation to derive, essentially by a guess, his time-independent
equation. Later on, he established his time-dependent equation by considerations,
discussed above, which no longer had anything to do with the Klein–Gordon equa-
tion and which led Schrödinger to the ﬁrst-order derivative in time and the complex
wave function, both features found in Dirac’s equation. Dirac’s equation, a kind of a
square root of the Klein–Gordon equation, converts into Schrödinger’s equation in
the nonrelativistic limit, which was a major factor in Dirac’s thinking. Technically,
at its immediate nonrelativistic limit, Dirac’s equation, which contains spin automat-
ically, converts into Pauli’s spin-matrix theory, while Schrödinger’s equation, which
does not contain spin, is the limit of Pauli’s theory, if one neglects spin (Pauli 1927).
As those of Heisenberg’s matrix mechanics, Dirac’s new variables, guessed or
just about by Dirac as well, proved to be noncommuting matrix-type variables, but
of a more complex character, involving the so-called spinors and the multicompo-
nent wave functions, the concept discovered by Pauli in his nonrelativistic theory of
spin (Pauli 1927). Just as Heisenberg’s matrices, Dirac’s spinors had never been used
in physics previously, although they were introduced in mathematics by William C.
Clifford about ﬁfty years earlier (following the work of Hermann Grassmann on exte-
rior algebras). And just as Heisenberg in the case of his matrix variables, Dirac, too,
was unaware of the existence of spinors and reinvented them. His equation enabled
him to answer, for the relativistic electron, the question, “What is the probability of
any dynamical variable at any speciﬁed time having a value laying between any spec-
iﬁed limits, when the system is represented by a given wave function ψn?” which the
Klein–Gordon theory could only answer for “the position of the electron … but not
[for] its momentum, or angular momentum, or any other dynamic variable” (Dirac
1928, pp. 611–612). Given my main concern here, that of the signiﬁcance of the
key mathematical features of Schrödinger’s time-dependent equations, I shall put
aside Dirac’s derivations of his equation, which I discussed from the RWR perspec-
tive elsewhere (Plotnitsky 2016, pp. 201–225). I shall address the implications of
Dirac’s theory itself, in particular the discovery of antimatter as a consequence of
his equation in considering QFT and the question of elementary particles in Chap. 8.
It is, however, difﬁcult to bypass one key aspect of this discovery. Dirac’s equa-
tion contained a major difﬁculty, or what appeared as such when the equation was
introduced, a difﬁculty inherited from the Klein–Gordon equation. According to
Dirac:
[Either equation] refers equally well to an electron with charge e as to one with charge – e. If
one considers for deﬁnitiveness the limiting case of large quantum numbers one would ﬁnd
that some of the solutions of the wave equation are wave packets moving in the way a particle
of – e would move on the classical theory, while others are wave packets moving in the way
a particle with charge e would move classically. For this second class of solutions W has a
negative value. One gets over the difﬁculty on the classical theory by arbitrarily excluding
those solutions that have a negative W. One cannot do this on the quantum theory, since in
general a perturbation will cause transitions from states with W positive to states with W
negative. Such a transition would appear experimentally as the electron suddenly changes
its charge from –e to e, a phenomenon which has not been observed. The true relativi[stic]
wave equation should thus be such that its solutions split up into two non-combining sets,
referring respectively to the charge –e and the charge e. …

162
5
Schrödinger’s Great Guess: The Time-Dependent Wave Equation
The resulting theory is therefore still only an approximation, but it appears to be good
enough to account for all the duplexity phenomena without arbitrary assumptions. (Dirac
1928, p. 612)
Dirac’s theory inherits this (second) problem of the Klein–Gordon theory because,
as noted, mathematically Dirac’s equation may be seen as a “square root” of the
Klein–Gordon equation, which means that every solution of Dirac’s equation is a
solution of the Klein–Gordon equation. The opposite is not true, which reﬂects the
fact that the Klein–Gordon equation ultimately does not work. The difﬁculty does
not appear in the low-energy regime, or rather, it disappears at the low energy limit,
because Dirac’s equation converts into Schrödinger’s equation, where this problem
does not arise. In commenting on the problem in his Chicago lectures, Heisenberg
ampliﬁed Dirac’s assessment: “The classical theory could eliminate this difﬁculty
by arbitrarily excluding the one sign, but this is not possible to do according to the
principles of quantum theory. Here spontaneous transitions may occur to the states of
negative value of energy E; as these have never been observed, the theory is certainly
wrong. Under these conditions it is very remarkable that the positive energy-levels (at
least in the case of one electron) coincide with those actually observed” (Heisenberg
1930, p. 102; emphasis added).
“Certainly right” would have been a better assessment, admittedly difﬁcult
initially. Dirac’s theory proved to be better than it appeared at the time of its introduc-
tion, even to its creator. It has proven to be right (to the ﬁrst order of approximation,
with the well-known difﬁculties arising at higher orders of approximation where the
inﬁnities occur, requiring renormalization). What was wrong was the understanding
of nature in high-energy quantum regimes at the time. That, in general, a perturbation
will cause transitions from states with positive E to states with negative E, and that
such a transition would appear experimentally as the electron suddenly changes its
charge from −e to e, is what actually happens, as was experimentally established in
a year or so. (The energy itself is of course always positive.) This feature is inherent
in all high-energy quantum processes, and is a reﬂection of the fact that particles
are born and disappear, and transform into each other in these regimes. Antimatter
was staring into the physicists’ eyes. It took, however, a few years to realize that it
was antimatter and that this type of transition, eventually understood in terms of the
creation and annihilation of particles, deﬁned all high-energy quantum physics.5
In spite of the elegant simplicity of its compact form,
iγ · ∂ψ = mψ,
reproduced on the plate in Westminster Abbey commemorating Dirac, Dirac’s
equation encodes a complex Hilbert-space machinery. The equation, as introduced
5 Later on, Dirac lost this conﬁdence in QED. This was not because he lost his faith in the funda-
mental principles of quantum theory, but rather because of the theory’s inability to give these prin-
ciples a proper (which for Dirac also meant elegant) mathematical expression. However, inelegant
and even messy, and to some mathematically questionable (especially because of its dependence
on renormalization), as it might be, QED and then QFT, proved to be a remarkable success, with
QED being the best experimentally conﬁrmed theory ever.

5.4 From Schrödinger to Dirac
163
by Dirac, was.

βmc2 +
3

k=1
αk pkc

ψ(x, t) = iℏ∂ψ(x, t)
∂t
The new mathematical elements here are the 4 × 4 matrices αk and β and the
four-component wave function ψ. The Dirac matrices are all Hermitian,
α2
i = β2 = I4
(I4 is the identity matrix), and they mutually anticommute:
αiβ + βαi = 0
αiα j + α jαi = 0
The above single symbolic equation unfolds into four coupled linear ﬁrst-order
partial differential equations for the four quantities that make up the wave function.
The matrices form a basis of the corresponding Clifford algebra. One can think of
Clifford algebras as quantizations of Grassmann’s exterior algebras, in the same way
that the Weyl algebra is a quantization of symmetric algebra. p is the momentum
operator in Schrödinger’s sense, but in a more complicated Hilbert space than in
standard quantum mechanics. The wave function ψ (t, x) takes value in a Hilbert
space X = C4 (Dirac’s spinors are elements of X). For each t, y (t, x) is an element of H
= L2 (R3; X) = L2 (R3) ⊗X = L2 (R3) ⊗C4. This mathematical architecture allows
one to predict the probabilities of quantum-electrodynamical (high-energy) events,
which, as explained in detail in Chap. 8, have a greater complexity than low-energy
events.
Beginning with Heisenberg, inventing or ﬁnding new matrix-type variables or,
more generally, Hilbert-space operators became the deﬁning mathematical element
of quantum theory. The current theories of weak forces, electroweak uniﬁcations, and
strong forces (QCD) were all discovered by ﬁnding such variables. This is correlative
to establishing the transformation group, a Lie group, of the theory and ﬁnding repre-
sentations of this group in the corresponding Hilbert spaces. This is true for Heisen-
berg’s matrix variables as well, as was discovered by Weyl and Eugene Wigner, who
introduced the Heisenberg group. In modern elementary-particle theory, irreducible
representations of groups correspond to elementary particles, the idea that was one
of Wigner’s major contributions to quantum physics (Wigner 1939; Newton and
Wigner 1949). This was how Murrey Gell-Mann discovered quarks, because at the
time there were no particles corresponding to the irreducible representations (initially
there were three of those, corresponding to three quarks) of the symmetry group of
the theory, the so-called SU (3). It is the group of all rotations around the origin in
three-dimensional space, R3, rotations represented by all three-by-three orthogonal
matrices with their determinant equal to one. (This group is noncommutative.) The

164
5
Schrödinger’s Great Guess: The Time-Dependent Wave Equation
electroweak group that Gell-Mann helped to ﬁnd as well involves SU (2), the group
of two by two matrices with the determinant 1.
Finally, in one those wonderful ironies with which physics is replete, the devel-
opment of QFT also resurrected the Klein–Gordon equation as one of its impor-
tant tools, as the equation obeyed by the components of all free quantum ﬁelds.
The equation describes spinless relativistic particles, usually composite ones, like
the pion. However, because the Higgs boson is a spin-zero particle, it is the ﬁrst
elementary particle to be described by the Klein–Gordon equation. No less than
Dirac’s, or Schrödinger’s equation, or the use of group theory (which accompanies
all these equations in quantum theory), the Klein–Gordon equation, which—it is
worth reiterating—helped Dirac’s work on his equation, brought together calcula-
tions and concepts, calculations leading to new concepts and new concepts enabling
new calculations, in QFT theory.
5.5
Conclusion
Schrödinger’s time-dependent equation, I have argued here, is an extraordinary
example of the interplay of calculations and the invention of concepts, the complex
wave function among them. While he acknowledged and appreciated the power of
his calculations, Schrödinger himself was not happy with these concepts. They were,
however, a great gift of his thought to quantum theory, including eventually QED.
Bohr said as much in his famous conversation with Schrödinger at Bohr’s home in
Copenhagen in August of 1926, as reported by Heisenberg. Schrödinger, in defending
his “continuum theory” questioned the idea of quantum jumps:
Schrödinger: Surely you realize that the whole idea of quantum jump is bound to end up
in nonsense. Is this jump supposed to be gradual or sudden? If it is gradual, the orbital
frequency and energy of the electron must change gradually as well. But in this case, how do
you explain the persistence of ﬁne spectrum lines? On the other hand, if the jump is sudden
… then we must ask ourselves precisely how the electron behaves during the jump. Why
does it not emit a continuous spectrum, as electromagnetic theory demands? And what laws
govern its motion during the jump? In other words, the whole idea of quantum jump is sheer
fantasy.
Bohr: What you say is absolutely correct. But it does not prove that there are no quantum
jumps. It only proves that that we cannot imagine them, that the representational concepts
with which we describe events of daily life and experiments in classical physics are inade-
quate when it comes to describing quantum jumps. Nor should we be surprised to ﬁnd it so,
seeing that the processes involved are not the objects of direct experience. … We have known
what Planck’s formula means for twenty-ﬁve years. And, quite apart from that, we can see
the inconstancies, the sudden jumps in atomic phenomena quite directly, for instance when
we watch sudden ﬂashes of light on a scintillation screen or the sudden rush of an electron
through a cloud chamber. You cannot simply ignore these observations and behave as if they
did not exist at all.
Schrödinger [conceding as much, although not yet quite his hopes of his program of
wave mechanics]: If all this damned quantum jumping were really here to stay, I should be
very sorry that I ever got involved with quantum theory.

5.5 Conclusion
165
Bohr: But the rest of us are extremely grateful that you did. Your wave mechanics has
contributed so much to mathematical clarity and simplicity that it represents a gigantic
advance over all previous forms of quantum mechanics. (Heisenberg 1971, pp. 73–76)
Bohr’s argument concerning quantum jumps is in accord with the argument of
this study: they represent a physical concept (as deﬁned in Chap. 2) that reﬂects the
ultimate nature of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena as a reality without
realism, and hence cannot be captured by a daily concept, any more than anything that
happened between experiments. As discussed in Chaps. 3 and 4, from where Bohr
stood by that time, all quantum transitions were in effect quantum jumps, “transitions
without connections,” between quantum states. As Bohr argued later, “experiments
in quantum physics” are equally deﬁned by classical physical concepts, as a reﬁne-
ment of our daily concepts, a reﬁnement no longer possible, in the RWR view, for
representing the ultimate constitution of reality responsible for quantum phenomena.
Bohr’s comments here contain the kernel of his future RWR-type interpretation, even
though such key ingredients as the uncertainty relations, complementarity, or even
Born’s probabilistic interpretation of the wave function were not yet in place. On
the other hand, as noted, Bohr’s brief and ambivalent return to a partial realism,
still different from Schrödinger’s program, for one thing, because Bohr retained
quantum jumps, in the Como lecture was inﬂuenced by wave mechanics, vis-à-vis
his preceding position, essentially shaped by Heisenberg’s approach.
Bohr was just as much grateful for the concepts (no longer daily concepts!) arising
from Schrödinger’s formalism, the complex wave function in particular, as for its
extraordinary calculational power. While Schrodinger had perhaps fewer things to
regret than he thought, no qualiﬁcations are necessary concerning Bohr’s feelings.
Schrödinger’s formalism was a gift to Bohr’s work on his interpretation of quantum
phenomena and QM. It would not be the same without Schrödinger’s thinking, which
led Schrödinger, even in part against his own grain, to “a gigantic advance over all
previous forms of quantum mechanics.” It was another triumph of mathematics in
quantum theory.
References
Bitbol, M.: Schrödinger’s Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics. Kluwer, Dordrecht, Netherland
(1996)
Bohr, N.: The Philosophical Writings of Niels Bohr, vol. 3. Ox Bow Press, Woodbridge, CT, USA
(1987)
Born, M.: Zur Quantenmechanik der Stoßvorgänge. Z. Phys. 37, 863–867 (1926a)
Born, M.: Quantenmechanik der Stoßvorgänge. Z. Phys. 38, 803–827 (1926b)
Dirac, P.A.M.: The fundamental equations of quantum mechanics. In: van der Warden, B.L. (ed.)
Sources of Quantum Mechanics New York, 1968, pp. 307–320. Dover, NY, USA (1925)
Dirac, P.A.M.: The physical interpretation of the quantum dynamics. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 113,
621–641 (1927)
Dirac, P.A.M.: The quantum theory of the electron. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 177, 610–624 (1928)
Dirac, P.A.M.: Report KFKI-1997–62, Hungarian Academy of Science (1962)

166
5
Schrödinger’s Great Guess: The Time-Dependent Wave Equation
Heisenberg, W.: Quantum-theoretical re-interpretation of kinematical and mechanical relations. In
Van der Waerden, B.L. (ed.) Sources of Quantum Mechanics, pp. 261–277. Dover, New York,
NY, USA. Reprint 1968 (1925)
Heisenberg, W.: The Physical Principles of the Quantum Theory (tr. Eckhart, K., Hoyt, F.C.). Dover,
New York, NY, USA (rpt. 1949) (1930).
Heisenberg, W.: Physics and Beyond: Encounters and Conversations. G. Allen & Unwin, London,
UK (1971)
Karam, R.: Schrödinger’s original struggles with a complex wave function. Am. J. Phys. 88, 433
(2020). https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0000852
Mehra, J., Rechenberg, H.: The Historical Development of Quantum Theory, vol. 6. Springer, Berlin,
Germany (2001)
Newton, T.D., Wigner, E.: Localized states for elementary systems. Rev. Mod. Phys. 21, 400–406
(1949)
Pauli, W.: Zur Quantenmechanik des magnetischen Elektrons. Z. Phys. 43, 601–625 (1927)
Plotnitsky, A.: The Principles of Quantum Theory, from Planck’s Quanta to the Higgs Boson: The
Nature of Quantum Reality and the Spirit of Copenhagen. Springer/Nature, New York, NY, USA
(2016)
Schrödinger, E.: Zur Einsteinschen Gastheorie. Physicalische Zeitschrift 27, 95–101 (1926)
Schrödinger, E.: Four Lectures on Wave Mechanics. Blackie & Son, London, Glasgow, UK (1928)
Schrödinger, E.: The present situation in quantum mechanics. In: Wheeler, J.A., Zurek, W.H. (eds.)
Quantum Theory and Measurement, 1983, pp. 152–167. Princeton University Press, Princeton,
NJ, USA (1935)
Schrödinger, E.: Collected Papers on Wave Mechanics (tr. J. F. Shearer). Chelsea, New York, NY,
USA (1982)
Schrödinger, E.: Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics: Dublin Seminars (1949–1955) and Other
Unpublished Essay. Ox Bow Press, Woodbridge, CT, USA (1995)
Wigner, E.P.: On unitary representations of the inhomogeneous Lorentz group. Ann. Math. 40,
149–204 (1939)

Chapter 6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical
Law: “A Radical Revision of Our
Attitude Toward the Problem of Physical
Reality”
It is just this entirely new situation as regards the description of
physical phenomena that the notion of complementarity aims at
characterizing.
—Niels Bohr, “Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of
Physical Reality Be Considered Complete?” (1935) (Bohr 1935,
p. 700).
Abstract The chapter considers Bohr’s thinking leading him to “a radical revision of
our attitude toward the problem of physical reality” and to his ultimate, strong RWR-
type, interpretation, and his key concepts, complementarity and phenomena, which
shaped this interpretation. Complementarity was central to all versions of Bohr’s
interpretation, but the concept was revised by Bohr in his ultimate interpretation.
The concept of phenomena was new. After a general introduction in Section 6.1,
Section 6.2, by way of a prologue, considers Bohr’s controversial appeal to the
“irrationality” brought into quantum physics by Planck’s discovery of the quantum
of action, h. Section 6.3 outlines Bohr’s ultimate, strong RWR-type, interpreta-
tion. Section 6.4 discusses the structure of quantum measurement as an entangle-
ment between the quantum object considered and the measurement instrument used.
Section 6.5 is devoted to an analysis of complementarity. Section 6.6 considers the
concept of probabilistic causality (in the absence of classical causality) and relates
this concept to complementarity, which Bohr saw as a “generalization of causality.”
Keywords Discreteness · Causality · Complementarity · Entanglement ·
Individuality · Phenomenon · Quantum objects · Quantum causality · Quantum
measurement · Reality · Reality without realism · Uncertainty relations
6.1
Introduction
I borrow the phrase “the character of physical law” in my title from Feynman’s title
of his book On the Character of Physical Law (Feynman 1965). There are several
reasons for doing so. First of all, Bohr’s concepts, such as and in particular that of
complementarity, were designed to “provide room,” a conceptual space, for laws of
quantum physics as different from those of classical physics or relativity, but fully
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
A. Plotnitsky, Reality Without Realism,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-84578-0_6
167

168
6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical Law …
consistent with “the basic principles of science,” a task that led Bohr to the strong
RWR view by the late 1930s. This task, however, also required him to reassess the
character of physical law in classical physics and relativity vis-à-vis those of quantum
physics, for it was not only a question of replacing old laws with new ones, but also
that of properly delimiting old laws in view of new ones. Accordingly, a reassessment
of the character of physical law in general was at stake. As Bohr said:
It is only the mutual exclusion of any two experimental procedures, permitting the unam-
biguous deﬁnition of complementary physical quantities, which provides room for new
physical laws the coexistence of which might at ﬁrst sight appear irreconcilable with the
basic principles of science. It is just this entirely new situation as regards the description of
physical phenomena that the notion of complementarity aims at characterizing. (Bohr 1935,
p. 700)1
While the ﬁrst sentence is not the easiest sentence to parse, its meaning is clear: the
unambiguous deﬁnition of complementary physical quantities, such as those associ-
ated, respectively, with the position and momentum measurement, requires consid-
ering the measuring procedures by which they are determined, and thus two mutually
exclusive phenomena, as deﬁned by Bohr’s concept of complementarity. Otherwise,
the new physical laws, such as and in particular, the uncertainty relations, would
appear to be in an irreconcilable conﬂict with the basic principles of science. The
same argument applies to Bohr’s other key concepts, especially that of phenomena,
and for his interpretation, ultimately of the strong RWR-type, with which the concept
of complementarity, used by Bohr earlier, was brought into accord. His concept of
phenomena was introduced along with his ultimate interpretation.
Feynman’s discussion of QM in his book is also famous for his pronouncement
that “nobody understands quantum mechanics” (Feynman 1965, p. 129). Feynman
clearly refers as much to quantum phenomena as to QM. It is not so difﬁcult to
understand, and Feynman certainly did, QM as a mathematical theory predicting
quantum phenomena. QFT is more complex mathematically, but Feynman, who
won his Nobel prize for the renormalization of QED, was certainly among those who
understood its mathematics best. It is, however, a different question why either theory
works, and works so well, and this question is indissociable from understanding
quantum phenomena. While I do not think that Feynman’s statement is literally
true, it suggests the possibility of the RWR view of quantum phenomena and QM
or QFT. If one adopts this view, it is, by deﬁnition, impossible to understand the
ultimate nature of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena and, thus, why
QM or QFT work. I do not attribute this view to Feynman, who never appeared to
comment on this possibility. On the other hand, his dissertation director, Wheeler,
for whom Bohr has often served as an inspiration, was open to the RWR view and
might have even adopted a form of this view, at least at some points of his life-
long engagement with quantum theory, a form of this view. Just as those of Bohr,
1 Sometimes, Bohr also used the term “complementarity” to designate his overall viewpoint on
or his interpretation of quantum phenomena and QM. For clarity, however, I shall, in referring
to this interpretation, speak of Bohr’s interpretation (in one or another of its versions), and by
complementarity only refer to the concept of complementarity.

6.1 Introduction
169
Wheeler’s views changed, sometimes signiﬁcantly. Wheeler’s own versions of the
RWR view, in particular, as deﬁned by his concept of “participatory universe,” were
different from those of Bohr, especially Bohr’s ultimate version of it. The degree of
this difference, or proximity, would depend on an interpretation of Wheeler’s views
and concepts, that of a participatory universe in particular (e.g., Wheeler 1981, 1983,
1990). Of course, it would also depend on an interpretation of Bohr’s interpretation
(in its various versions), which, too, may be different from that offered in this study.
There are different forms of the RWW view and the corresponding interpretations
of quantum phenomena and quantum theory. Thus, as stated from the outset of this
study, even Bohr’s ultimate interpretation, with which I will be especially concerned
in this chapter, is different from the one offered in this study, even both are of the
strong RWR-type and are close in some of their key aspects, because the present
interpretation builds on Bohr’s ultimate interpretation. Arguably, the most signiﬁcant
difference is, again, that in the present interpretation the concept of a quantum object
is an idealization applicable only at the time of measurement, which does not appear
to be the case in any of Bohr’s interpretations, except by implication. In addition,
as discussed in Chap. 8, this concept of a quantum object is linked by this study to
the concept of quantum ﬁeld, which, while physical and quantum, is not a quantum
object. No concept of quantum ﬁeld of this type is considered by Bohr either, even
though the genealogy of this concept still extends from Bohr’s concept of a quantum
jumps as transition without connections, discussed in Chap. 3, and tangentially on
Bohr and Rosenfeld’s analysis of measurement in quantum ﬁeld theory (Bohr and
Rosenfeld 1933, 1950).
Bohr’s key concepts, such as complementarity and phenomena, will also be
primarily considered here as they ﬁgure in his ultimate interpretation, in the case
of his concept of phenomena by deﬁnition, because it was introduced by Bohr as
part of this interpretation. This interpretation may be seen as Bohr’s response to the
demand, stated by him (twice) in his 1935 reply to EPR, for “a radical revision of our
attitude toward the problem of physical reality,” in view of the character of quantum
phenomena (Bohr 1935, pp. 697, 702). As discussed in Chap. 7, Bohr’s interpretation
in his reply was still short of his ultimate interpretation.
I have considered different versions of Bohr’s interpretation in detail in (Plot-
nitsky 2012), and shall only comment on some of them here. That Bohr has never
commented on these changes is of some interest. Thus, in referring to his earlier
publications in his reply to EPR, Bohr says: “I shall therefore be glad to use this
opportunity to explain in somewhat greater detail a general viewpoint, conveniently
termed ‘complementarity,’ which I have indicated on various previous occasions”
(Bohr 1935, p. 696). This is not entirely accurate. His reply to EPR went beyond
merely explaining his previous views in “somewhat greater detail,” although the
signiﬁcance of complementarity in quantum theory was indeed underappreciated by
EPR. In particular, Bohr’s statement, accompanied by a reference to his 1931 Atomic
Theory and the Description of Nature (now Bohr 1987, v. 1), cannot apply to the
Como lecture. It can, on the other hand, nearly apply to “The Quantum of Action
and the Description of Nature,” contained in that volume, or to Bohr’s “Introduc-
tory Survey” there and in and the last article in the volume (both dated 1929). Still,

170
6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical Law …
his reply to EPR introduces further changes that helped Bohr to reach his strong
RWR view shortly thereafter. I am hesitant to assume that Bohr aimed to develop
a synthesis of his various views, as Bitbol argues in considering different versions
of complementarity or rather different instantiations of the concept, rightly empha-
sizing their difference (Bitbol 1996, pp. 213–219). There does not appear to me to be
much evidence in Bohr’s published work or his Nachlass that he ever aimed at such
a synthesis, especially given the signiﬁcance of some of the changes of his views.
It appears to me more likely that he saw his different interpretations and different
version of complementarity as manifestations of a broader philosophical way of
thinking, which need not imply that this way of thinking is a synthesis of these mani-
festations. In any event, Bohr’s thinking eventually led him to his ultimate, strong
RWR-type, interpretation. This interpretation also establishes a different relation-
ship between Bohr’s thought and Kant’s philosophy than those proposed by Bitbol
more recently (Bitbol 2019). Bitbol, in my view, makes Bohr too much of a Kantian.
By contrast, my reading of Bohr suggests that, while, as suggested earlier, there is
a Kantian vein in Bohr’s thinking, one might see their relationship as that of both
proximity and difference, even as both a close proximity and yet a radical difference.
The radical nature of this difference arises by virtue of placing the ultimate nature
of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena not only beyond knowledge, as
Kant would, but also beyond conception, at least as things stand now.
The chapter will proceed as follows. The next section, Sect. 6.2, offers, by way
of a prologue, a discussion Bohr’s appeal to the “irrationality” brought into quantum
physics by Planck’s discovery of the quantum of action, h, the concept that is part of
the genealogy of the concept of the unthinkable adopted by this study, a genealogy
extending, through the idea of the irrational or (the irrational is a Latin term) for
the ancient Greeks the incomprehensible (alogon) to pre-Socratic and speciﬁcally
Pythagorean thinking. Section 6.3 outlines Bohr’s ultimate, RWR-type, interpreta-
tion. Section 6.4 discusses Bohr’s understanding of quantum measurement as an
entanglement between the quantum object considered and the measuring instrument
used. Section 6.5 is devoted to complementarity. Section 6.6 introduces the concepts
of probabilistic causality and quantum causality (in the absence of classical causality)
in connection with complementarity.
6.2
From the Irrational to the Unthinkable,
from the Pythagoreans to Bohr
I would like ﬁrst, by way of a prologue, to discuss one, sometimes controver-
sial, aspect of Bohr’s argumentation (found in several on his works), his appeal
to the irrationality found in quantum theory. Beginning with the Como lecture,
which introduced both complementarity and his ﬁrst full-ﬂedged interpretation of
quantum phenomena and QM, Bohr sees this irrationality as unavoidable, “inherent,”
in quantum theory given the role of Planck’s quantum of action, h, in quantum

6.2 From the Irrational to the Unthinkable, from …
171
phenomena (Bohr 1987, v. 1, p. 54). Bohr’s appeal to the irrationality of quantum
theory, especially as something inherent in it, has more often been criticized, even
by Bohr’s advocates, than carefully considered in relation to Bohr’s argumentation.
By contrast, I shall argue here that this appeal is a reﬂection of Bohr’s thinking
and gives it an additional, Pythagorean, angle, on this thinking. The genealogy of
this concept in Bohr appears to be mathematical by virtue of its connection to the
concept of an irrational number, which is one of several mathematical concepts (that
of a Riemann surface is another) that shaped Bohr’s thinking concerning quantum
phenomena. There is, thus, also yet another type of connection between mathe-
matics and theoretical physics, the type deﬁned by translating abstract mathemat-
ical concepts, unconnected to physics, into physical concepts, which might have
mathematical components unrelated to the mathematical concepts thus translated.
As noted earlier, Bohr’s Como argument, retreated to a more realist view from
the (weak) RWR-type view that Bohr adopted in the wake of Heisenberg’s discovery
of QM in 1925, represented by his statement at the time that “in contrast to ordinary
mechanics, the new quantum mechanics does not deal with a space–time descrip-
tion of the motion of atomic particles” (Bohr 1987, v. 1, p. 48; emphasis added).
While, however, assuming that the independent behavior of quantum objects could
be represented (moreover, classically causally) by the mathematical formalism of
QM, with the recourse to probabilistic considerations only introduced by measure-
ment, the Como lecture was ambivalent concerning this assumption (Bohr 1987, v.
1, p. 52). Thus, Bohr maintained that “radiation in free space as well as isolated
material particles are abstractions, their properties … being deﬁnable and observ-
able only through their interactions with other systems” (Bohr 1987, v. 1, pp. 57,
76). It is not easy to reconcile this claim with the view that the independent behavior
of quantum objects is represented by QM. In any event, Bohr was never satisﬁed
with the lecture and famously delayed and even tried to avoid its publication. By
the time it was ﬁnally published Bohr had changed his views under the impact of
the discussion with Einstein that took place at the Solvay Conference in Brussels
just one month after the Como Conference (Bohr 1987, v. 2, pp. 41–47). Perhaps
not coincidentally, the 1931 republication of the Como lecture in (Bohr 1987, v. 1,
pp. 52–91) dates the lecture 1927, which is when it was given, and not 1928, when
it was published. Bohr’s next published article, “The Quantum of Action and the
Description of Nature” (Bohr 1987, v. 1 pp. 92–101), manifested this change and
was a key step on the trajectory leading Bohr to his ultimate interpretation, with the
help of his subsequent exchanges with Einstein.2
Bohr’s invocation of the “irrationality” introduced by h was another symptom
of his ambivalence attitude toward his realist argument in the Como lecture. This
invocation occurs immediately before Bohr introduces complementarity, which he
2 My quotations from the Como lecture follow the published version. Although one cannot be
certain how deﬁnitively it represents Bohr’s views presented in Como, it appears to be as deﬁnitive
as any available drafts of the lecture. It was so treated by Bohr in his “Introductory Survey” to
Atomic Theory and the Description of Nature, published in 1931 (Bohr 1987, v. 1, pp. 9–15). For
the history and drafts of the article, beginning with the draft of the lecture, and commentaries by J.
Kalckar, see volume 5 of Bohr’s collected works (Bohr 1972–1996).

172
6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical Law …
connects to this irrationality. Bohr speaks of it as “inherent” in “the quantum postu-
late,” symbolized by h. The quantum postulate is a new concept, different from
(although related to) the quantum postulates of his 1913 theory. The quantum postu-
late deﬁned any “atomic [quantum] process,” or in terms of Chap. 3, any transition
between quantum states, rather than only between stationary states as in his 1913
theory. As Bohr says:
Notwithstanding the difﬁculties which, hence, are involved in the formulation of the quantum
theory, it seems … that its essence may be expressed in the so-called quantum postulate,
which attributes to any atomic process an essential discontinuity, or rather individuality,
completely foreign to the classical theories and symbolized by Planck’s quantum of action.
(Bohr 1987, v. 1, p. 53)
This somewhat hesitant, and yet necessary, “or rather” introduces one of the
most essential features of quantum phenomena, making each strictly individual—
unique and unrepeatable—alongside their equally necessary essential discontinuity,
discreteness, relative to each other. This study makes the ﬁrst feature the quantum
individuality, QI, postulate, and the second the quantum discreteness, QD, postulate.
Both features will, by the late 1930s, be reinterpreted by Bohr in terms of his concept
of phenomena, deﬁned strictly by what is observed in measuring instruments (e.g.,
Bohr 1937, 1938, 1987, v. 2, p. 64). This reinterpretation makes this discontinuity
or discreteness and this individuality refer to that between phenomena in Bohr’s
sense, rather than to the conventional, Democritean, atomicity of quantum objects,
thus positioning the ancient Greek part of the genealogy of Bohr’s thinking between
the physics of the ancient Greek atomists and the mathematics of the Pythagoreans.
Quantum objects (or in the present view, the ultimate, RWR-type, reality, which
deﬁnesquantumobjects,stillasRWR-typeidealizationsapplicableonlyatthetimeof
measurement) are unobservable and unrepresentable, either as discrete or as contin-
uous, and in the strong RWR view, are inconceivable. The kernel of the idea is,
however, found already in the Como lecture, which, its realist dimensions notwith-
standing, grounds Bohr’s interpretation (in any version) in the irreducible role of
measuring instruments in the constitution of quantum phenomena and, thus, in the
impossibility of disregarding this role in the way it is possible to do, for all practical
purposes, in classical physics or relativity.
Bohr’s appeal to the symbolic nature of h reﬂects his view of all quantum–mechan-
ical formalism as symbolic—a view developed following Heisenberg’s introduction
of his matrix formalism, but equally applied by Bohr to Schrödinger’s formalism,
including in the Como lecture. As discussed in Chap. 2, this formalism is symbolic
because, while it is formally analogous to or even adopts the equations of classical
mechanics, it does not describe the physical behavior of quantum objects in space
and time, but only serves to predict the outcomes of quantum experiments, mani-
fested in measuring instruments. Similarly, Planck’s quantum of action (symbol-
izing the quantum postulate) is symbolic because it is not seen as implying the
discrete and indivisible, “atomic,” character of quantum objects themselves. The
discreteness, again, pertains only to quantum phenomena, deﬁned by effects of the
interactions between quantum objects and measuring instruments, effects registered

6.2 From the Irrational to the Unthinkable, from …
173
in measuring instruments. The effects are always individually discrete, and in this
sense are particle-like (i.e., analogous to the interaction of particle-like objects with
measuring instruments in classical physics). Under certain circumstances, they may
also be collectively wave-like, by virtue of exhibiting certain wave-like patterns, such
as the interference pattern in the double-slit experiment in the corresponding setup.
These patterns, however, are composed of discrete individual events or effects. Bohr
introduces “the inherent ‘irrationality’” of the quantum postulate as follows:
[The quantum postulate] implies a renunciation as regards the [classically] causal space–time
co-ordination of atomic processes. Indeed, our usual description of physical phenomena is
based entirely on the idea that the phenomena concerned may be observed without disturbing
them appreciably. … Now, the quantum postulate implies that any observation of atomic
phenomena will involve an interaction with [between a quantum object and?] the agency of
observation not to be neglected. Accordingly, an independent reality in the ordinary physical
sense can neither be ascribed to the phenomena nor to the agencies of observation. After all,
the concept of observation is in so far arbitrary as it depends upon which objects are included
in the system to be observed. Ultimately, every observation can, of course, be reduced to
our sense perceptions. The circumstance, however, that in interpreting observations use has
always to be made of theoretical notions entails that for every particular case it is a question
of convenience at which point the concept of observation involving the quantum postulate
with its inherent “irrationality” is brought in. (Bohr 1987, v. 1, pp. 53–54)
“Arenunciationasregardsthe[classically]causalspace–timeco-ordinationofatomic
[quantum] processes” implies that spacetime coordination can only be applied to
observed atomic (quantum) phenomena, which would, again, make it difﬁcult to
assume, as Bohr does in the Como lecture, the classically causal nature of these
processes considered independently, with probability introduced only by acts of
measurement. The RWR view is much more in accord with this renunciation. As
explained in Chap. 2, the “cut” between the observed quantum phenomena and the
ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for them is a matter of convenience
only within a certain limit: it could only be made in the region where the quantum
and classical predictions coincide (Bohr 1935, p. 701). This restriction, however,
does not affect the fact that “the quantum postulate and its inherent ‘irrationality’”
do have to be brought into any possible observation.
Why does the quantum postulate contain this inherent irrationality and what is
the meaning of this irrationality? Bohr’s use of quotations marks indicates that one
has to be careful in interpreting it. As noted, Bohr’s appeals to “irrationality” have
been used against him by his critics and have troubled even some of his advo-
cates. I would argue, however, that this criticism is misplaced and is a result of
misunderstanding Bohr’s meaning. First of all, this “irrationality” is clearly not any
“irrationality” of QM, which Bohr always saw as a rational theory, beginning with
Heisenberg’s discovery of it, characterized by Bohr “the rational formulation of the
new quantum mechanics” (Bohr 1987, v. 1, p. 48; emphasis added). Bohr’s phrase
also, and I suspect, deliberately, echoes Newton’s characterization of his mechanics
as “rational” in the Principia (Newton 1999). This echo implies that, although QM
does not represent the physical processes considered in space and time, it is, as a
physical theory, as rational as is classical mechanics, or relativity, or as is mathematics
that deals with irrational numbers. However, in contrast to classical mechanics or

174
6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical Law …
relativity, QM is a rational theory of something, speciﬁcally, the ultimate nature of the
reality responsible for quantum phenomena, that is “irrational” in the sense of being
inaccessible to a (logical) representation or even thought itself, in contrast to classical
physics or relativity, where the ultimate constitution of the reality considered is ratio-
nally representable. This “irrationality” is that of the RWR-type reality ultimately
responsible for quantum phenomena, which can be rationally handled (in terms of
probabilistic or statistical prediction) by a rational physical theory, such as QM. If,
however, one makes realist assumptions, “the quantum of action … appears as an
irrational element” (Bohr 1931, p. 458). Hence, one encounters a boundary, “cut,”
up to a point (but, again, only up to a point) arbitrarily placed, between the world of
observed phenomena and the RWR-type reality that, while beyond rational thought, is
ultimately responsible for these phenomena, described by means of classical physics.
This argumentation helps us better to understand Bohr’s often-cited (reported)
statement, apparently in response to the question “whether the algorithm of quantum
mechanics could be considered as somehow mirroring an underlying quantum
world”: “There is no quantum world. There is only an abstract quantum-physical
description. It is wrong to think that the task of physics is to ﬁnd out how nature is.
Physics concerns what we can say about nature” (reported in Petersen 1985, p. 305).
As I said, one must exercise caution in considering such extemporaneous comments,
especially when they are reported. It is not known, for example, what else Bohr
said then, as he might have done, or what he actually had in mind in making or
supporting (as he would do in his writing) this statement. With these qualiﬁcations
and Bohr’s written works in mind, the statement may be read not as denying the
existence of a reality ultimately responsible for quantum phenomena but, on RWR
lines, as denying the applicability of any conceivable description or conception to this
reality, such as that of “the quantum world.” “An abstract quantum-physical descrip-
tion,” essentially a mathematical description provided by QM, does not represent this
reality or quantum phenomena, which belong to the world we observe classically,
but only provides a set of procedures, algorithms, for predicting, probabilistically,
the outcomes of quantum experiments. Accordingly, the last two sentences would
apply to quantum physics. The statement could still apply more generally if read on
Kantian lines or, more radically, by adopting the U-RWR view, insofar as we cannot
assume that phenomena described by these theories or these theories themselves
represent the ultimate constitution of nature, or “how nature is.” This reading, too, is
supported by statements found in Bohr’s published writings. Thus, he said: “we meet
[in quantum physics] in a new light the old truth that in our description of nature the
purpose is not to disclose the real essence of the phenomena but only to track down,
so far as it is possible, relations between the manifold aspects of our experience”
(Bohr 1987, v. 1, p. 18).
According to Bohr, writing a few years after the Como lecture, by which time he
is on his way to his RWR-type interpretation, “the quantum of action, which appears
as an irrational element from the point of view of the classical mechanical physics,
taken together with the existence of elementary particles, forms the foundation of
atomic physics” (Bohr 1931, p. 458; emphasis added). Bohr’s qualiﬁcation “taken
together with the existence of elementary particles” is important, for it is the existence

6.2 From the Irrational to the Unthinkable, from …
175
of quantum objects that is ultimately responsible for quantum irrationality. As he
explained in the “Introductory Survey,” to his Atomic Theory and the Description
of Nature, the situation had emerged already in his 1913 atomic theory. He said: “A
conscious resignation in this respect [as concerns a classically causal description of
quantum phenomena] is already implied in the form, irrational from the point of
view of the classical theories, of those postulates, … upon which the author [Bohr]
based his application of the quantum theory to the problem of atomic structure”
(Bohr 1987, v. 1, p. 7; emphasis added). Later in the same article, he added, again
invoking the irrationality of the quantum of action:
Moreover, the purpose of such a technical term [complementarity] is to avoid, so far as
possible, a repetition of the general argument as well as constantly to remind us of the
difﬁculties which, as already mentioned, arise from the fact that all our ordinary verbal
expressions bear the stamp of our customary forms of perception, from the point of view of
which the existence of the quantum of action is an irrationality. Indeed, in consequence of
this state of affairs, even words like “to be” and “to know” lose their unambiguous meaning.
(Bohr 1987, v. 1, pp. 19–20)
Bohr’s appeal to the irrational is, thus, deﬁned by the difference between the ratio-
nality of a theory and the irrationality of that which this theory rationally deals with,
by this time approaching the strong RWR view, suggested by his claim that “even
words like ‘to be’ and ‘to know’ lose their unambiguous meaning” when applied to
the ultimate nature of reality responsible for quantum phenomena.
Bohr’s invocation of “irrationality” also suggests an analogy with and, I would
argue, is derived from the concept of irrational numbers in mathematics. The
Pythagoreans, who discovered the (real) irrationals, could not ﬁnd an arithmetical,
as opposed to geometrical, form of representing them, because their arithmetic was
strictly that of rational numbers. The ancient Greek term “alogon,” used in this
connection, is better rendered as “incomprehensible” (by logical thought) rather
than as irrational, which is a Latin word. The analogy is reinforced by the role of
complex numbers in the mathematical formalism of QM. Complex numbers, such as
i (√−1), are irrational in the strict sense, that is, insofar as they cannot be represented
by fractions or any combination of real numbers, although they are solutions of alge-
braic equations with real coefﬁcients. Although in mathematics the term “irrational
numbers” is usually reserved for real irrationals rather than complex numbers, Bohr
appears to have thought of complex numbers as “irrational” in both the mathemat-
ical and epistemological sense. In both cases (real irrational and complex numbers)
we deal with the solutions of polynomial equations that do not belong to the ﬁeld
in which the equations themselves are deﬁned, as in the case of x2 + 1 = 0, the
solutions of which are ±i. (The ﬁeld of complex numbers has no further algebraic
extension: it is algebraically closed.) In mathematics itself the status and legitimacy
of complex numbers was under debate for a long time, which is why they were
called “imaginary numbers,” the term now reserved for complex numbers that have
no real component. At stake is the impossibility of representing or even conceiving
of something that is nevertheless essentially related to a given, rationally formulated,
theoretical framework, the situation also deﬁning QM. The solution of its equations
or, more accurately, what these solutions relate to (the ultimate, RWR-type, nature of

176
6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical Law …
reality responsible for quantum phenomena) is beyond the representational capacity
of the theory and even beyond the reach of thought altogether. This relation is possible
only via probabilistic predictions concerning what is observed in measuring instru-
ments impacted by quantum objects. As Bohr said, amplifying the parallel between
complex numbers and QM, and connecting them, as they are in QM, the “symbols
(used in the quantum–mechanical formalism), as indicated already by the use of
imaginary numbers, are not susceptible to pictorial representation,” and ultimate to
any representation or even conception (Bohr 1972–1996, v. 7, p. 314). Even if they
were susceptible to it, it would not ultimately matter, because the formalism does
not, in RWR-type interpretations, represent the ultimate nature of reality responsible
for quantum phenomena.
The situation, thus, exhibits a parallel with the case of the diagonal of the square
in Pythagorean mathematics, especially given that our relationships to the ultimate
natureofrealityresponsibleforquantumphenomenainQMarestrictlymathematical.
The parallel merits a brief commentary as an instructive case of the Pythagorean
spirit of QM, which I invoked in connection with Heisenberg’s invention of it in
Chap. 4. The Pythagoreans’ incommensurables must have been on Bohr’s mind,
not the least because in both cases one deals with the problem of measurement,
with the mathematics and physics of measurement. As noted from the outset of this
study, the latter concept acquires a radically new meaning in quantum physics, as
against classical physics. One can no longer speak of measuring anything in the
ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena but only
of constructing these phenomena by means of the interactions between this reality
and measuring instruments and then measuring what is observed, as part of these
phenomena, classically. Admittedly, this meaning emerged only with Bohr’s ultimate
interpretation and his concept of phenomena in the later 1930s. Earlier, even though
the role of the measuring instruments was still seem as irreducible, Bohr’s view
contains the remnants of the classical understanding of measurement.
This meaning of measurement makes the connections between quantum measure-
ment and the incommensurables of the ancient Greek mathematics even more perti-
nent. The deliberate nature of this analogy in Bohr is conﬁrmed by the fact that Bohr
expressly reﬂected on these connections between the mathematical and quantum-
theoretical concepts of the irrational, via the idea of a Riemann surface (which
was part of the genealogy of complementarity) in his ﬁnal interview, on which I
shall comment later in this chapter. It is true that in QM we deal with physical
and not mathematical reality. At stake, however, is also a difference from classical
physics or relativity, where mathematics functions representationally and related to
measurement in its conventional sense of measuring the properties of the ultimate
constitution of the reality responsible for classical or relativistic phenomena. For the
Pythagoreans,too,numbersorgeometricalentitieswoulddescribetheultimatenature
of the reality, material, or spiritual, of the world, and measure this nature. QM no
longer offers either algebraic or geometrical means of representing this irrationality.
One can only, by using the geometry of Hilbert spaces (over C) relate, probabilis-
tically, to its effects on what is observed and classically measured in measuring
instruments. The irrationality is that of the unrepresentable or inconceivable nature

6.2 From the Irrational to the Unthinkable, from …
177
of the ultimate constitution of reality, while the geometry is that of the Hilbert space.
Although this geometry no longer represents the incommensurable, thus, leaving it
incomprehensible, it relates to it by means of the algebra of probability, enabled by
the relationships between the geometry and algebra of Hilbert space, cum Born’s
rule, added to but, because it ultimately amounts to the complex conjugation, related
to this algebra. This is the Pythagorean logos of QM, a logos elevated to the RWR
thinking: it is a logos that contains the alogon, the unthinkable, within it.
In ancient Greek mathematics, the problem was resolved geometrically by a new
theory of proportion, accommodating both commensurable and incommensurable
magnitudes. The arithmetical problem, that of rigorously deﬁning irrational numbers,
was only resolved, by essentially modern mathematical means, in the nineteenth
century, after more than 2000 years of effort, with Richard Dedekind and others. In
view of the undecidability of Cantor’s continuum hypothesis, however, this problem
may still be ultimately unresolvable. It remains to be seen whether quantum–mechan-
ical “irrationality” will ever be resolved by discovering a way to represent the ultimate
constitution of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena. Besides, not everyone
sees this situation as a problem that needs to be resolved. Bohr did not. On the other
hand, one could not exclude that the quantum irrationality will be resolved by way
of establishing a realist, rather than RWR-type, theory of quantum phenomena.
For Bohr, then, QM was a rational theory of something that is irrational in the
sense of being inaccessible to a representation or knowledge, or even to thought.
QM was a replacement, necessary in the case of quantum phenomena, of a rational
representational theory, classical mechanics, with a rational probabilistically or
statistically predictive theory (Bohr 1987, v. 1, p. 48). Thus, QM is both a reversal of
what happened in the crisis of the incommensurable in ancient Greek mathematics,
which compelled it to move from arithmetic to geometry, in their theory of measure-
ment, and a new form of the relationship between geometry and measurement, which
relates a mathematical continuity to a physical discontinuity in terms of probabilities.
“Thought … is the measure of the Universe,” the greatest gift of Prometheus
and the highest ambition of measurement, Percy Bisshe Shelley says in Prometheus
Unbound (II, iv. 73). He actually says: “He [Prometheus] gave man speech, and
speech created thought,/Which is the measure of the Universe” (II, iv. 73). Even
assuming that such an ontological or anthropological primacy of language is possible
(which is doubtful), it would not affect my point. If, to return to Heisenberg’s argu-
ment, “we cannot speak about the atoms in ordinary language,” we cannot think of
atoms in terms of ordinary concepts either, concepts from which ordinary language
is indissociable (Heisenberg 1962, pp. 178–179). In the RWR view, we cannot speak
of them even in terms of physical concepts, assuming that they can be dissociated
from ordinary concepts. Language and thought are indissociable from and shape each
other even in mathematics, although the latter has the capacity, at least in principle,
of representing physical (or mental) reality apart from ordinary or physical concepts.
This capacity is, however, disabled by the RWR view. The phrase “Thought … is
the measure of the Universe” echoes Protagoras’s “man is the measure of all things,”
but gives it the Pythagorean meaning of a logos that must contain the alogon within
it, because, as the poem also says, “the deep truth is imageless” (II, iv. 116). Human

178
6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical Law …
thought is only the measure of all things that it can actually think, even if, as in
Kant, only as things-in-themselves, which it cannot know. In QM, or QFT, in strong
RWR-type interpretations, beginning with that of Bohr, the ultimate nature of reality
is beyond being only imageless. It is unthinkable, even in terms of abstract algebraic
structures (which do not depend on images), at least as things stand now. While,
however, the thought of the unthinkable is still only a thought, it is a testimony to
thought’s capacity to think beyond itself. Without this capacity thought could never
be a true measure of the Universe, the Universe that we may ultimately not be able
to measure.
6.3
Bohr’s Ultimate Interpretation: Phenomena
and Reality Without Realism
Bohr’s ultimate interpretation was ﬁrst presented in Bohr’s (1937) article, “Causality
and Complementarity” (Bohr 1937), impacted by the Bohr-EPR exchange and
building Bohr’s argument in his reply (Einstein et al. 1935; Bohr 1935).3 Bohr does
not use the language of reality without realism, but his understanding of quantum
measurement, as deﬁned by the irreducible role of the interactions between quantum
objects and measuring instruments in the constitution of quantum phenomena, clearly
amounts to the strong RWR view. According to Bohr:
The renunciation of the ideal of causality in atomic physics which has been forced on us is
founded logically only on our not being any longer in a position to speak of the autonomous
behavior of a physical object, due to the unavoidable interaction between the object and the
measuring instruments which in principle cannot be taken into account, if these instruments
according to their purpose shall allow the unambiguous use of the concepts necessary for the
description of experience. In the last resort an artiﬁcial word like “complementarity” which
does not belong to our daily concepts serves only brieﬂy to remind us of the epistemological
situation here encountered. (Bohr 1937, p. 87)
I shall discuss complementarity, which does more than serve as such a reminder,
including in allowing “the unambiguous use of the concepts necessary for the descrip-
tion of experience,” in Sect. 6.5. The concept of causality that grounds this ideal of
causality is clearly that designated here as “classical causality.” It is deﬁned by the
claim that the state, X, of a physical system is determined, in accordance with a law,
at all future moments of time once it is determined at a given moment of time, state
A, and A is determined in accordance with the same law by any of the system’s
previous states. This assumption, thus, implies a concept of reality, which deﬁnes
this law and makes this concept of causality ontological. By contrast, in accordance
with Bohr’s statement, RWR-type interpretations are not classically causal because
of the absence of realism, necessary for such a law, in considering the behavior of
quantum objects.
3 The argument was then presented (without essential changes) in subsequent communications
beginning with the so-called Warsaw lecture (Bohr 1938).

6.3 Bohr’s Ultimate Interpretation: Phenomena and Reality Without Realism
179
Along with several other Bohr’s statements, considered earlier (e.g., Bohr 1987,
v. 2, p. 62), Bohr’s (1937) statement, cited above, concerning the impossibility of
accessing the ultimate nature of physical reality responsible for quantum phenomena,
may be read as making claim that is stronger than a claim merely pertaining to
his interpretation of the situation. Instead, such as access would be “in principle
excluded” by quantum phenomena for any theory or analysis (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 62).
This stronger claim is also suggested by an earlier statement in the same article to the
effect that the uncertainty relations would “preclude the possibility of a future theory
taking both attributes [at stake in the uncertainty relation] into account on the lines
of the classical physics” (Bohr 1937, p. 86). Could the uncertainty relations preclude
this possibility for any future theory, even assuming that the uncertainty relations
remain in place as pertaining to quantum phenomena themselves? In the present
view, it is difﬁcult to exclude such a possibility. In any event, both statements just
cited and similar statements by Bohr are viewed in this study as pertaining to Bohr’s
interpretation, and all Bohr’s philosophical positions are seen as manifestations of his
interpretation, from1937on, inits ultimateRWR-typeversion. Inthepresent view, all
philosophical positions, the present one included, concerning quantum phenomena
and quantum theory are interpretations, only practically justiﬁed, regardless of how
those who hold these positions see them.
Bohr’s ultimate interpretation was his response to the task announced in his 1935
reply to EPR (still alongside the same appeal to “a ﬁnal renunciation of the clas-
sical ideal of causality”) of “a radical revision of our attitude toward the problem of
physical reality” in view of the nature of quantum phenomena (Bohr 1935, p. 697).
A revision of an attitude toward the problem of physical reality is not the same as a
revision of a given concept of reality, a point to which I shall return in closing this
chapter. Bohr, however, clearly undertook such a revision, by adopting the strong
RWR view, as conﬁrmed by the passage under discussion and other key statements
representing his views considered in this study, such as, again, that “in quantum
mechanics, we are not dealing with an arbitrary renunciation of a more detailed anal-
ysis of atomic phenomena but with a recognition that such an analysis is in principle
excluded” (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 62). Bohr’s position, stated his 1937 “Causality and
Complementarity,” cited above, represents the strong RWR view, placing the ulti-
mate nature of reality responsible for quantum phenomena beyond conception. For,
if, as Bohr says there, we are no “longer in a position to speak of the autonomous
behavior of a physical object, due to the unavoidable interaction between the object
and the measuring instrument,” this behavior must also be beyond conception. If we
had such a conception, we would be able to say something about this behavior. It is
true that there is a difference between forming some conception of this reality and
forming a rigorous conception that would enable us to provide a proper representa-
tion of it. Bohr, however, clearly makes a strong claim, without such qualiﬁcations,
that implies the impossibility of any such conception: we are no longer in a position
to speak of the autonomous behavior of quantum objects at all.
As indicated in Chap. 2, given that there is no deﬁnitive statement to that effect on
Bohr’s part, it is a matter of an interpretation whether for Bohr our inability to do so
only (A) characterizes the quantum–mechanical situation as things stand now, while

180
6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical Law …
allowing that quantum phenomena or whatever may replace them will no longer
require this assumption and thus will no longer make RWR-type interpretations
viable; or more strongly (B) reﬂects the possibility that this reality will never become
available to thought. (B) might be suggested some of his stronger statements, such
as those just considered, to the effects that a conception of the ultimate character of
reality responsible for quantum phenomena “in principle excluded” for any theory
now or in the future. In any event, it may be safely assumed that in his ultimate
interpretation,Bohratleastadopts(A),andIshallassumethishere,althoughvirtually
all of my argument would equally apply if he adopted (B). As explained earlier,
the qualiﬁcation “as things stand now” still applies to (B). It applies, however, not
because the unthinkable nature of the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible
for quantum phenomena as deﬁned by (B) becomes available to thought, which it
cannot, by deﬁnition, under (B). It applies because a return to realism in quantum
theory or whatever might replace it is possible, either on experimental or theoretical
grounds. This will make (B), or (A), obsolete even for those who hold it because
there is no physical theory to justify it. The U-RWR view of all physics or even all
human thinking about nature in its ultimate constitution may still be assumed. It will
just not be necessary or desirable in physics because a realist view will be practically
justiﬁed. No other justiﬁcation than practical is, again, assumed as possible in this
study for a physical theory or even physical phenomena, in which case our claims
may have a broader scope, even, for all practical purposes, a universal scope. At the
moment, however, the RWR view, either (A) or (B), may be practically justiﬁed in
an interpretation of quantum phenomena and QM or QFT.
Bohr’s ultimate interpretation is grounded, along with complementarity (adjusted
to this interpretation), in a new concept, that of phenomena, deﬁned strictly in terms
of effects observed in measuring instruments as a result of their interaction with
quantum objects (Bohr 1937, 1938). As I have argued here, in Bohr’s ultimate inter-
pretation or the one adopted here, a quantum measurement is not a measurement of
some pre-existing property of the quantum object considered (or, in the present view,
the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena, as well
as quantum objects at the time of measurement). Instead, a quantum measurement,
establishes, creates, a quantum phenomenon, whose observed physical properties
can then be classically measured. As Bohr explained later (in 1949):
I advocated the application of the word phenomenon exclusively to refer to the observations
obtained under speciﬁed circumstances, including an account of the whole experimental
arrangement. In such terminology, the observational problem is free of any special intricacy
since, in actual experiments, all observations are expressed by unambiguous statements
referring, for instance, to the registration of the point at which an electron arrives at a
photographic plate. Moreover, speaking in such a way is just suited to emphasize that the
appropriate physical interpretation of the symbolic quantum-mechanical formalism amounts
onlytopredictions,ofdeterminateorstatisticalcharacter,pertainingtoindividualphenomena
appearing under conditions deﬁned by classical physical concepts [describing the observable
parts of measuring instruments]. (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 64; emphasis added)
Referring to “observations” is precise, because only the classically observed prop-
erties of measuring instruments affected by these observations could be measured.

6.3 Bohr’s Ultimate Interpretation: Phenomena and Reality Without Realism
181
(Here, by “quantum measurement” I refer to this whole process.) As deﬁned by “the
observations [already] obtained under speciﬁed circumstances,” phenomena refer to
events that have already occurred and not to possible future events predicted on the
basis of previous events deﬁned by already established phenomena. This is a crucial
point, including, as discussed in Chap. 7, in considering EPR-type experiments.
Bohr sometimes speaks of a phenomenon as deﬁned by two measurements (the ﬁrst
of which is sometimes referred to as a preparation, although both instruments need
to be prepared in accordance with what type of measurement we decide to perform):
The essential lesson of the analysis of measurements in quantum theory is thus the emphasis
on the necessity, in the account of the phenomena, of taking the whole experimental arrange-
ment into consideration, in complete conformity with the fact that all unambiguous interpre-
tation of the quantum mechanical formalism involves the ﬁxation of the external conditions,
deﬁning the initial state of the atomic system concerned and the character of the possible
predictions as regards subsequent observable properties of that system. Any measurement
in quantum theory can in fact only refer either to a ﬁxation of the initial state or to the test
of such predictions, and it is ﬁrst the combination of measurements of both kinds which
constitutes a well-deﬁned phenomenon. (Bohr 1938, p. 101)
This statement need not mean that Bohr’s concept of phenomenon applies to two
measurements, or, and in particular, that it can refer to a prediction, which is why
Bohr’s speaks of “the test of … predictions,” that is, already performed experiments.
The point is that, if we want to establish and communicate our ﬁndings, we must
specify two measurements and the instruments prepared accordingly: the ﬁrst is the
initial, actual, measurement or phenomenon and the second is a, possible, future
measurement or phenomenon that would enable us to verify our probabilistic predic-
tion, or our statistical predictions, after repeating the experiments many times. As
Bohr said in the same article, in, essentially, deﬁning his concept of a phenomenon:
“It is certainly far more in accordance with the structure and interpretation of the
quantum mechanical symbolism, as well as with elementary epistemological princi-
ples, to reserve the word phenomenon for the comprehension of the effects observed
under givenexperimental conditions”(Bohr 1938, p. 105). This stronglysuggests that
a phenomenon is deﬁned by an already performed measurement, as an effect of the
interactions between quantum objects and the apparatus, but never by a prediction.
Then, the ﬁrst description above is contextualized as referring to “that all unam-
biguous interpretation of the quantum mechanical formalism involves the ﬁxation
of the external conditions, deﬁning the initial state of the atomic system concerned
and the character of the possible predictions as regards subsequent observable prop-
erties of that system.” The second refers to the test of any such prediction. One
needs both arrangements and both phenomena (deﬁned when both measurements
are performed) to test our predictions, in quantum physics, in repeated experiments,
because our predictions are in general probabilistic or statistical.
Referring, phenomenologically, to observations explains Bohr’s choice of the
term “phenomenon.” This “idealization of observation” (Bohr 1987, v. 1, p. 55) is
the same as that of classical physics, which allows one to identify phenomena with
the physical objects (here measuring instruments), because our observation does not
interfere with their behavior, in contrast to the way an observation by means of a

182
6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical Law …
measuring instrument interferes with the (RWR-type) ultimate constitution of the
reality responsible for a phenomenon thus observed. On the other hand, given that
a quantum object is, in the present view, an idealization applicable only at the time
of measurement, it is a product of this interference rather than something that is
interfered with, as is the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum
phenomena.
Quantum discreteness, too, is that of phenomena, rather than the Democritean
atomic discreteness of the ultimate constitution of the RWR-type reality respon-
sible for quantum phenomena or of quantum objects, which are beyond conception
and cannot be seen either as continuous or as discrete (Bohr 1987, v. 2, pp. 32–34).
Around the time when he introduced his concept of phenomena, Bohr also introduced
a concept of “atomicity,” pertaining to quantum phenomena rather than quantum
objects (Bohr 1938, p. 94, 1987, v. 2, p. 34). This concept is essentially equivalent
to that of phenomenon and only highlights some aspects of the latter concept, as
discussed in detail in (Plotnitsky 2012, pp. 138–150). Brieﬂy, it transfers to the level
of observable phenomena, manifested in measuring instruments, the key “atomic”
features of quantum physics—discreteness, discontinuity, individuality, and atom-
icity as indivisibility—previously associated with quantum objects. “Atomicity” is
thus a feature of physically complex and divisible entities, and not of physically indi-
visible entities, such as elementary particles. It is possible that when Bohr refers to
atomic (rather than quantum) phenomena in his later works, he also has this atomicity
in mind, rather than only phenomena considered in quantum physics.4
In Bohr’s ultimate strong RWR-type interpretation, no physical quantities are
assumed to correspond to properties of quantum objects, even at the time of measure-
ment. This is the case even in considering single properties, rather than only certain
joint properties, not attributable simultaneously by virtue of the uncertainty rela-
tions. Bohr’s earlier views (even after the Como lecture, for example, in his reply to
EPR) allowed for this type of attribution of properties at the time of measurement
and only then and under the constraints of the uncertainty relations, thus, still in
accord with the assumption that such properties cannot be considered independently
of measurements. Even this, less radical, view still implied that the physical state
4 While the genealogy of Bohr’s concept of phenomenon appears to have been more conventional,
extending from Kant’s philosophy, Bohr’s concept of atomicity is unusual and its genealogy is
less clear. An intriguing possibility is Alfred North Whitehead’s concept of atomism in his 1929
Process and Reality (Whitehead 1929), although there is no evidence that this concept was familiar
to Bohr. Whitehead’s overall ontological position is different from that of Bohr. Whitehead’s discrete
atomicity of experience is underlain by the continuous ultimate reality, linked to potentiality. By
contrast, as a strong RWR-type interpretation, Bohr’s ultimate interpretation, which grounds his
concept of atomicity, precludes any ontological conception, discrete or continuous, of this reality
and does not appeal to potentiality, unlike Heisenberg in his later works, although Heisenberg’s
concept of potentiality is not the same as that of Whitehead (Heisenberg 1962). Accordingly, while
Whitehead’s ontological scheme has been applied to QM or QFT, it is difﬁcult to transfer it to
Bohr’s interpretation, or even see them as philosophically proximate. See, for example, (Epperson
2012) on the connections between Whitehead’s philosophy and quantum theory, although the book,
I would argue, misrepresents Bohr’s views, especially in their radical (RWR) aspects, where he
differs from Whitehead most.

6.3 Bohr’s Ultimate Interpretation: Phenomena and Reality Without Realism
183
of an object cannot be deﬁned on the model of classical physics. This is because
classical physics requires an unambiguous determination of both conjugate quanti-
ties for a given object at any moment of time and independently of measurement,
which is no longer possible in quantum physics because of the uncertainty relations.
In Bohr’s ultimate interpretation, however, an attribution even of a single property to
any quantum object is never possible—before, during, or after measurement. Even
when we do not want to know, say, the momentum of a quantum object and thus need
not worry about the uncertainty relations, the position of this object itself is never
determinable. The uncertainty relations remain valid, of course, as do other standard
laws, such as conservation laws. But all these laws now apply to the corresponding
(classical) variables of measuring instruments impacted by quantum objects. Thus,
in the case of the uncertainty relations, one can either prepare our instruments to be
able to measure a change of the momentum of certain parts of them or to locate the
spot that registers an impact of a quantum object, but never both. The uncertainty
relations are correlative to the mutually exclusive nature of these arrangements, in
accord with Bohr’s concept of complementarity, as discussed in Sect. 6.5.
It also follows that, while predicting, probabilistically or statistically, the data
physically observed as part of phenomena, the formalism of QM is, in Bohr’s
interpretation, entirely dissociated in physical terms from phenomena themselves,
described by classical physics. In other words, the relevant mathematical elements
of the formalism of QM are merely our means, our symbolic means, of predicting
the probabilities or statistics of the data to be observed, as part of possible future
phenomena and experiment or experience associated with it. They have no physical
correspondence with anything observed as part of such possible future phenomena,
given that these data and phenomena are described by classical physics, thus using
real functions and quantities. By contrast, the formalism of QM only uses complex
entities (Hilbert-space vectors, operators, and so forth), supplemented by Born’s or
analogous rules, to connect them to the probabilities or statistics, which are real
numbers, of quantum events.
This aspect of Bohr’s concept of phenomenon and Bohr’s interpretation—a disso-
ciation of the abstract symbolic formalism of QM, its abstraction, from the classical
physical description of phenomena and the data observed there, which the formalism
predicts in probabilistic or statistical terms—as well as, in part correlatively, the role
of human agents in Bohr’s interpretation are worth considering further, because they
are easy to miss or misunderstand. Difﬁculties of reading Bohr on both points (or
in general) are not uncommon and in part have to do, as Bohr’s noted, “the inefﬁ-
ciency of expression which must have made it very difﬁcult to bring out the essential
ambiguity involved in a reference to physical attributes of objects when dealing
with phenomena where no sharp distinction can be made between the behavior of
the objects themselves and their interaction with the measuring instruments” (Bohr
1987, v. 2, p. 61). The aspects of Bohr’s concept of phenomena and his interpretation
under discussion at the moment are clearly related to this RWR-type epistemology, in
the way that I shall now clarify. Admittedly, this remains a matter of interpretation of
Bohr’s interpretation. That does not mean, however, that one cannot advocate one’s
interpretation, such as the one proposed here, on the basis of Bohr’s writings, which

184
6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical Law …
are not always adequately considered in making claims concerning Bohr’s views
or his interpretation, including as concerns different versions of this interpretation,
the existence of which, often disregarded, I have emphasized from the outset of this
study.
Obviously, all of Bohr’s interpretations, including his ultimate, strong RWR-type,
interpretation (on which I focus here), establish an essential connection between the
formalism of QM and the data observed in quantum experiments and thus phenomena
in Bohr’s sense, a concept that is part of his ultimate interpretation. The question is
the nature of this connection, as deﬁned by the nature of QM as a symbolic theory in
Bohr’s understanding (found in all of his interpretations), as discussed here and in
Chap. 2 (Sect. 2.5). It is symbolic because, as emphasized here, unlike those of clas-
sical mechanics or relativity, the mathematical symbols, comprising the formalism of
QM, do not represent or have any physical contact with “what we have done and what
we have learned” in quantum experiments themselves, explaining which implies that
“the account of the experimental arrangement and the results of the observation must
be expressed in unambiguous language with suitable application of the terminology
of classical physics” (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 39). This account represents unambiguously
communicable experimental “facts,” such as spots on a photographic plate. While the
formulation just cited ostensible refers to the Como argument, which indeed intro-
duced this point, Bohr’s careful expression is clearly inﬂected by his subsequent
thinking, leading to his concept of phenomenon and strong RWR-type interpretation
in place at the time of this article, “Discussion with Einstein,” written in 1949. As
the preceding discussion in this chapter explains, in Bohr, the nature of the contact
between the (symbolic) formalism of QM and phenomena and hence these, classi-
cally explainable, “facts” is as follows. The classical explanations thus used only
refer to these “facts,” as phenomena manifested in the observable parts measuring
instruments. These instruments, again, also have quantum strata through which they
interact with quantum objects or the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible
for quantum phenomena. Both phenomena and the observable parts of measuring
instruments are treated classically, but the quantum–mechanical formalism and its
symbols do not represent, and in fact have no connections whatsoever to, this classical
treatment. They are only used for predicting the data or information thus observed,
which information is classical in nature, although its structure cannot be predicted by
classical physics. In Bohr’s or the present interpretation, the symbols of QM, which
belong, along with QM itself, to our thinking, only relate to the probabilities of the
outcomes of quantum experiments, via Born’s rule, added, as a separate postulate, to
the formalism. These symbols do not in any way represent “what we have done and
what we have learned” in quantum experiments in considering which “the account of
the experimental arrangement and the results of the observation must be expressed
in unambiguous language with suitable application of the terminology of classical
physics.” Thus, while, of course, these symbols, too, can be unambiguously commu-
nicated, as can any mathematical symbols, they have nothing to do with the results of
the observation, which are communicated between different human agents “in terms
of in unambiguous language with suitable application of the terminology of classical
physics.” For one thing, QM only predicts, by using its symbols, the probabilities or

6.3 Bohr’s Ultimate Interpretation: Phenomena and Reality Without Realism
185
statistics of the outcomes of possible future experiments, and does not at all relate to
what has already happened.
This situation is clearly illustrated by Bohr’s statement, cited in Chap. 2, in his
reply to EPR: “In accordance with this situation [that at stake in QM] there can be no
question of any unambiguous interpretation of the symbols of quantum mechanics
other than that embodied in the well-known rules which allow us to predict the results
to be obtained by a given experimental arrangement described in a totally classical
way” (Bohr 1935, p. 701; emphasis added). Obviously, given their strictly predictive
roles, these symbols—“embodied in the well-known rules which allow us to predict
[these] results” but not in these classically-described results themselves—in no way
represent the classical and in part daily-language or narrative accounts of “what we
have done and what we have learned” (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 39). These accounts, again,
only pertain to the outcome of quantum experiments, and they can be communicated
unambiguously, as can, again, be the formalism of QM, as an abstract mathematical
scheme enabling these predictions. This unambiguous communication is the meaning
of objectivity for Bohr (1987, v. 2, pp. 68–69, v. 3, p. 7).
It might be added that, in this view, the symbols of QM for Bohr are not that far
from what they are for QBism, insofar as they enable probability assignments by
human agents, albeit for Bohr more likely (in the present interpretation expressly)
reﬂecting statistical predictions of QM, given that, as noted in Chap. 2, Bohr appears
to have been inclined to the statistical view of QM and in any event had never
invoked a Bayesian view. These symbols could, however, also be interpreted on
QBist lines, the relations of these symbols to classically observed phenomena in
Bohr’s sense will be the same. This is manifested, for example, in the QBist view of
quantum states, as, mathematically, state vectors in the Hilbert space formalism of
QM, as part of such probability assignments by human agents and thus belonging
to a mental, rather than physical, reality. These symbols, in the QBist view, enable
one to predict the probabilities of what is expected to be observed in future quantum
experiments on the basis of what has been observed in previously performed quantum
experiments. Nobody, however, in the Göttingen-Copenhagen circle ever believed
that these symbols have any other role, even before Born’s papers on the proba-
bilistic interpretation of the wave function (Born 1926a, b). As explained in Chap. 4,
Heisenberg, in his paper introducing QM, already used in this way the corresponding
elements of the formalism (there was no language of quantum states then) and, in
effect as another postulate, a version of Born’s rule for a limited case of transi-
tions between stationary states of electrons in atoms. It is only from in the late
1950s, following Bohmian mechanics, spontaneous collapse theories, many worlds
interpretations, and so forth, and, along different lines, Bell’s theorem and related
developments, that realist views of the formalism of QM or other quantum theories
gained more currency in foundational discussions, even though realism as such was
preferred by most, beginning with Einstein, all along. QBism is one of the nonre-
alist views that emerged following quantum information theory, where, too, realist
views, for example, via many worlds interpretation, remain wide spread. I mean
“nonrealist” in the present deﬁnition, given that, as noted earlier, QBists themselves
sometimes speak of QBism as a form of realism, Fuchs, in particular, in terms of

186
6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical Law …
“participatory realism,” via Wheeler (Fuchs 2016). According to the present deﬁni-
tion, however, their view is a form of the RWR view, insofar as QBism does not aim
to provide a representation of the ultimate character of the reality responsible for
quantum phenomena but (while assuming this reality) only to estimate (subjective)
probabilities of quantum events manifested in observed quantum phenomena. It is
true that Bohr would emphasize that, just the outcomes of experiments, the use of the
symbols of the formalism should be communicable unambiguously (now, again, as
parts of our mental reality) in order to maintain the status of QM as a mathematical-
experimental science, rather than emphasize, as QBists do, the subjective aspects
of probability assignments by human agents. He did not, however, disregard the
latter, on which I shall comment presently. But then, QBists, at least some of them,
might agree with the pertinence of this communicational aspect of scientiﬁc prac-
tice, notwithstanding the subjectivity of our probabilistic assignments concerning
outcomes of possible experiments (e.g., Pienaar 2020).5
The subjectivity or human nature of our probability assignments is not in conﬂict
with the unambiguous communication of them or the outcomes of the experiments
leadingtoorconﬁrmingtheseassignments.Whilewealwayscan,bydecision,control
the setups of our tests, we can never control their outcomes, especially in quantum
physics, where, in general, we can only predict them probabilistically or statisti-
cally, even in dealing with the most elementary individual quantum processes. As
noted earlier, however, for Bohr this fact also helps to ensure the objectively veri-
ﬁable nature of our experiments, the setups of which but not their outcome we can
control. It also helps to maintain the disciplinary character of QM (or QFT) as a
5 Intriguingly, in his lucid reﬂections on the differences between QBism and the Copenhagen inter-
pretation, Mermin, while extracting a few potentially relevant statements from Bohr’s writings,
refrains from offering a sustained reading of these statements as grounded in Bohr’s argumentation.
Mermin focuses on other versions of the Copenhagen interpretation (manifestly different from that
of Bohr), such as that of Lev Landau and Alexander Lifshitz, and on the ideas of Bell and Rudolf
Peierls, whom Mermin proclaims to be his heroes (Mermin 2016, pp. 232–248). In the absence of a
real reading of Bohr or, for that matter, Schrödinger, neither of which is offered by Mermin, it is not
clear why, like Peielrs and Bell (who, as discussed below, is hardly sympathetic to Bohr’s view),
“Bohr and Schrödinger … might have found a common ground in QBism,” as Mermin “like[s] to
think” (Mermin 2016, p. 246). While acknowledging Bohr’s signiﬁcance for QBism, Mermin and
most other advocates of QBism, such as Fuchs, dissociate it from Bohr’s interpretation (it appears,
in any of its versions, which, are, however, not always properly distinguished in these arguments,
often having difﬁculties with reading Bohr as well), in part, one might surmise, in response to claims
that QBism is not essentially different from Bohr’s interpretation or the Copenhagen interpretation.
One can readily concede that most of such claims, often arising from negative views of QBism and
Bohr alike, are not based on careful assessments of either QBism or Bohr, or adequately discrim-
inating between different versions of “the Copenhagen interpretation.” While it may well be true
that Bohr’s views, at any stage of his work, are different from those of QBism (which has evolved
as well), I shall, apart from indicating several relevant points, put aside the subject of QBism as
such, given that my main concern is Bohr’s thinking and not QBism. Accordingly, my comments
should not be seen as a criticism of QBism, with which I have more sympathy than with most other
currently advanced views of quantum phenomena and quantum theory. On the other hand, as their
works addressing Bohr cited here manifest, QBists, as many others, have difﬁculties (acknowledged
by them) in reading Bohr and, I would argue, sometimes miss subtler aspects of his argumentation,
such as those under consideration at the moment.

6.3 Bohr’s Ultimate Interpretation: Phenomena and Reality Without Realism
187
mathematical-experimental science. The world does what it does and tests us in our
experiments, even as we test it through these experiments, and the world may do so
in deﬁance of our subjective expectations. While the outcomes of quantum measure-
ments, as phenomena in Bohr’s sense, are personal experiences by human agents,
they are not always only that, because they can be and commonly are unambiguously
communicated as part of the scientiﬁc practice, although they need not necessarily be.
They can also become part of permanent records, existing independently, although,
again, only a personal experience can assign meaning to these records, including as
records, or use language in the ﬁrst place. It is true that, because QM is not only
indeterministic but is also not a classically causal theory, probability plays a more
fundamental role in it. But, as QBists contend as well, as does, again, this study
(in adopting the U-RWR view), deterministic predictions, predictions with prob-
ability one, including in classical physics and relativity, are still only predictions
and not statement concerning reality. In addition, as discussed in Sect. 6.6, quantum
phenomena bring new complexities to such predictions, making it even more difﬁcult
to assume that they correspond to any physical reality at the time of prediction, as
opposed to the reality of our thought.
Science is a human enterprise. But sharing and communicating our estimates of
possible events and experiences is also human, and doing so is helpful and even
unavoidable in human life. Science capitalizes on this fact and on the possibility
that the communication involved may be made unambiguous, helped by the use
of mathematical symbols, central to modern physics, from Galileo on. As Bohr
says: “Just by avoiding the reference to the conscious subject which inﬁltrate daily
language, the use of mathematical symbols secures the unambiguity of deﬁnition
required for objective [unambiguously communicable] description” (Bohr 1987, v. 2,
p. 68). This statement conﬁrms that for Bohr mathematical symbols do not represent
a ‘classical physical explanation... of what we have done and what we have learned,”
which would entail a reference to the conscious subject and additional explanations,
by using common language, even in the mathematical aspects of physics. This is the
case even in classical physics and relativity, but in quantum physics, in Bohr’s view,
the use of mathematical symbols has no representational connections to observations
possible in classical physics and relativity.
With these considerations in mind, one can also better understand, Bohr’s famous
drawing of quantum experiments, depicting heavy, unmovable measuring instru-
ments with traces of their interactions with quantum objects, without any depiction
of what happens between experiments, thus representing the RWR view (e.g., Bohr
1987, v. 2, pp. 48–49, 54). The absence of any human agent in this drawing need
not mean that human observers are not involved or, in the ﬁrst place, do not stage
these experiments, as, in Bohr’s apt locution, “actors as well as spectators” (Bohr
1987, v. 1, pp. 119, v. 2, p. 11). This absence only means that what is so staged and
observed does not depend on any particular observer or a group of observers, as far
as what is relevant for physics is concerned. Beyond physics, an individual human
subject could and in fact always does experience such observable phenomena quite
uniquely. Bohr’s readers could be seen as representing such observers, as observers
of physical phenomena, which was likely intended by Bohr. Or more accurately, what

188
6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical Law …
is so observed is unambiguously communicable, which enables different observers
to repeat the same experiments with the same outcomes, conﬁrming the same statis-
tics of predictions. Bohr does say that “the appropriate widening of our conceptual
framework [in either relativity or QM] [does not] imply any appeal to the observing
subject, which would hinder unambiguous communication of experience” (Bohr
1987, v. 3, p. 7). That might appear to justify claims that Bohr’s interpretation disre-
gards human agents. But this is not the case. To say that a conceptual framework of
a theory does not imply any appeal to the observing subject does not mean that there
are no observing subjects, whose presence is clearly suggested by the reference to
“communication of experience,” or that these subjects do not play their role in using
this framework or in experiences associated with it. Whose experience or a commu-
nication between whom, would it be otherwise? It is an experience (either of a given
experiment and its outcome or a given theoretical argument) of an observing subject
communicated to other observing subjects. Bohr often refers to “experience” rather
than only to an experiment, including in several passages cited by this study (e.g.,
Bohr 1937, p. 87, 1987, v.1, pp. 12–18, v. 2, p. 57, v. 3, p. 7). These are not casual uses
of the word “experience.” This is suggested in particular by the passage, cited earlier,
to the effect that “in our description of nature the purpose is not to disclose the real
essence of the phenomena but only to track down, so far as it is possible, relations
between the manifold aspects of our experience” (Bohr 1987, v. 1, p. 18). Bohr’s
uses of words are rarely casual. This communication must be unambiguous for the
conceptual framework used to conform to the requirement of modern physics as a
mathematical-experimental science of natural phenomena, which are, as phenomena,
experienced by human agents. While we, as humans, use physical theories and assign
probabilities, we must share their veriﬁcation in order for a physical theory, such as
QM, to be a mathematical-experimental science.
At the same time, there could be plenty of individual factors, some of which are
unconscious,thateachofusbringinobservingquantumphenomenaregistered(asthe
same material, physical features) in measuring instruments, which instruments and
registrations are independent of us, once the devices used are set up by us or others.
Our interpretation of them and our predictions concerning future experiments do of
course depend on us. Such considerations or Bayesian priors that they may determine
may affect our estimates of future events in physics as well. We are, however, better or
even best off, as things stand now, by betting on the probabilistic or statistical predic-
tions by using QM or QFT. If we bet otherwise, we are certain to lose or at least not
to win at least in a long run, just as we are if we bet on outcomes different from those
deﬁned by classical physics or relativity. These theories, however, allow us to bet,
ideally, with certainty, while QM gives us better probabilistic or statistical bets, even
ideally, science always aims at betting on the best and most consistent predictions,
exact if possible (which still remain predictions and not reality) or probabilistic or
statistical. Quantum physics, as all physics, also aims, experimentally, at betting on
the best measurements on which these predictions are based, measurements that are
made or used by human agents or possibly technological agents. The latter can make
measurements or even make predictions, but, at least thus far, both need to be set up
by human agents. Science is about giving us better bets or, if possible, best bets, if

6.3 Bohr’s Ultimate Interpretation: Phenomena and Reality Without Realism
189
one wants to speak in these terms. Bohr does not use them, but his argument is in
accord with this view.
In one of his passages, Bohr conﬁrms the essential role of human decisions,
invoking a parallel with art. He says: “even in written papers, where we have the
possibility of reconsidering every word, the question whether to let it stand or change
it demands for its answer a ﬁnal decision essentially equivalent to improvisation”
(Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 79). Bohr, famous for his tendency of endlessly reconsidering
every word of his papers, including, one surmises in writing this very sentence,
undoubtedly thought here of his own practice. But the point is general and implies an
essential individuality, singularity of experience and decisions, akin to that of art. And
yet, a scientiﬁc paper, experimental or theoretical, must contain an unambiguously
communicable stratum, even though any reading, or writing, of it also has personal
experiential elements, some of which may not be communicable. This double char-
acter of scientiﬁc practice is also found in the case of mathematical papers, where,
as Bohr noted in the statement cited above, from the same essay, “avoiding the refer-
ence to the conscious subject which inﬁltrate daily language, the use of mathematical
symbols secures the unambiguity of deﬁnition required for objective [unambigu-
ously communicable] description” (Bohr 1987, v. p. 68). Avoiding the reference to
the conscious subject does not mean that there are no conscious (or unconscious)
subjects between whom mathematics is communicated unambiguously, and whose
experience of mathematics also has individual aspects, some of which may not be
communicable.
Pauli argued, in part in juxtaposing his view to Bohr, that a measuring instrument
can or even must be seen as an extension of the agent using it, rather than something
independent, a view adopted by QBism as well, again, as against that of Bohr (e.g.,
Fuchs 2016, 2017).6 At one level this is true: it is true as concerns any given case of
measurement as an actual experience, and it is doubtful that Bohr would deny this.
On the other hand, as Bohr’s drawings show as well, a measurement device has to
be made by somebody, usually by somebody else, as a material object in order for
others (or of course its makers) to have this actual experience. In this respect they
are separate, at least insofar as there are other human beings around, some of whom
could repeat the experiment and have the corresponding experience, different overall.
If there are no longer any humans or their equivalents, such as computers or robots
using these instruments, then there are no instruments either, even things previously
built as such instruments. In fact, there are no “things” either, which is true for robots
and computers in any event, unless they are assumed to have or to be eventually able
to acquire consciousness or experiences of the type we do. If one adopts the U-RWR
view,asBohrappearstohavedone,orevenifoneadoptsKant’sview,ourphenomenal
experience of measuring instruments as heavy solid physical bodies may not corre-
spond to what they or anything solid (or liquid or gaseous, as parts of our measuring
6 I have considered Pauli’s views, including in juxtaposition to those of Bohr, elsewhere (Plotnitsky
2013, 2016a, pp. 174–176). On the other hand, Pauli is not a Bayesian and his view of probability
and statistics in quantum theory is actually closer to that of Bohr or the one adopted in this study
(Plotnitsky 2016a, pp. 174–176).

190
6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical Law …
devices may be) actually are. On the other hand, the U-RWR view still allows us to
treat them as such, as we, it appears, must do in order for the experiments and our
experiences deﬁned by and deﬁning them to be possible at all. These are manmade
devices, as Bohr’s drawings, again, depict them, including often noted heavy bolts, by
which they are attached to the ground. Such bolts must be made by somebody. They
can become part of the experience and thus of our phenomenal worlds, and in this
sense become subjective, but still they are different from any subjective probability
assignments, insofar as there are human beings around, because we make probability
assignments by our thought, while these devices are made by “our hands.” This is
what Bohr means. There must, again, be somebody in order to experience measuring
instruments as heavy solid entities pictured in Bohr’s drawings, although evolution-
arily all animals on this planet would experience them as something solid (although
not as measuring instruments). Experientially, the devices and the agents—techni-
cally, the phenomenal representation of devices and the experience of the agents,
deﬁned by their bodies and brains, but phenomenal in nature—are essentially and
irreducible connected. These devices are, however, not merely one with the agent,
as Pauli and his followers, including QBists, thought, because they could be used by
others. Bohr’s concept of phenomenon reﬂects this double nature or structure of the
quantum–mechanical situation.7
One could speak, in accord with Pauli’s view, of the indivisibility of the agent’s
experience in the case of Bohr’s phenomena, the experience of phenomena by human
agents, in each given case. In Bohr’s or the present view, however, this indivisibility
of the (human) agent’s experience is still underlain by the indivisibility of each
phenomena in Bohr’s sense, which is a different type of indivisibility of wholeness.
7 Curiously, in contrast to Pauli or QBism, Rovelli faults Bohr for giving too much space to human
subjects, which is equally problematic, but from the other side of the issue (e.g., Rovelli 2021,
pp. 139–141). Rovelli’s, essentially realist, relationist approach, which he developed in numerous
articles and presented in several popular books, such as (Rovelli 2021), is very different from
QBism, as he stresses, correctly, although his analysis of QBism is not entirely accurate (Rovelli
2021, pp. 65–7, 87). It is not the place to discuss Rovelli’s overall relationist approach. It is clear,
however, that his view is in a radical conﬂict with the present view or set of assumptions, or
those of Bohr, whose views Rovelli’s is trying to adapt to his own, an adaptation in which the key
aspects of Bohr’s views, often problematically glossed by Rovelli, are lost (Rovelli 2021, pp. 139–
141). “Phenomena are action by one part of the natural world upon another part of the natural
world,” Rovelli asserts against Bohr, for whom quantum “phenomena” are observed in measuring
instruments by human agents (Rovelli 2021, p. 141). Actions are only phenomena when we observed
them, and they may also be ascribed to the natural world by us, as conception applicable apart from
observation, but just as “reality,” “action” is only a human word, that, just as “something happened,”
could only be applicable to what is observed in an experiment. Bohr knew all this, which is why
he said what he said. At the very least, Rovelli should have distinguished between phenomena and
objects, which he could have done with the help of Bohr, on whom he comments, if not Kant, whom
he does not mention. Rovelli never deﬁnes “phenomena,” even though he speaks of “phenomenal
reality” and “phenomenal realism” (Rovelli 2021, pp. 144–149). Admittedly, this is a popular book,
aimed at a broad readership, which make a philosophical rigor difﬁcult, although it could have been
more careful even as a popular book. The problems just indicated, however, tangibly reﬂect Rovelli’s
philosophical views, also found in his technical works and often equally problematic there.

6.3 Bohr’s Ultimate Interpretation: Phenomena and Reality Without Realism
191
This indivisibility is that of the behavior of quantum objects and measuring instru-
ments, deﬁned by “our not being any longer in a position to speak of the autonomous
behavior of a physical object, due to the unavoidable interaction between the object
and the measuring instruments” (Bohr 1937, p. 87). Bohr manifestly differentiates
them from classically deﬁned or experienced “objects” observed, as phenomena in
Bohr’s sense, in measuring instruments, or measuring instruments themselves. In
Bohr’s or the present view, as the RWR view, quantum objects are never part of any
experience qua human phenomenal experience. They only have effects on measuring
instruments and, through them, on our experience. In the present view, although,
again, not that of Bohr, quantum objects are, moreover, idealizations applicable at
the time (in fact after) measurements and, hence, in this experience. But they are
never experienced. Only phenomena are, but phenomena are deﬁned by classical
objects emerging in measuring instruments under the impact of quantum objects or
the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum objects and quantum
phenomena. Furthermore, as discussed in Sect. 6.4, by the time of our observation
of a given phenomenon, as the outcome of the measurement performed, and thus by
the time of our experience, the quantum object under investigation is no longer there,
being either destroyed or on its way elsewhere, possibly to some future measurement
and thus a possible future experience.
If one extends the RWR view to the U-RWR scope, a scope that Bohr appears
at least to allow for and the present study assumes, the ultimate constitution of the
reality responsible for any physical phenomena is always a reality without realism
and as a result cannot be assumed to be classically causal. Some physical phenomena,
however, such as those considered in classical physics and relativity, allow the reality
responsible for them to be treated in realist and classically causal ways, in some cases
also allowing for ideally exact or deterministic predictions. Accordingly, on this point
in afﬁnity with the QBist view (without, again, equating Bohr’s or the present view,
as the RWR view, with QBism), one, in doing physics, never ultimately deals with
anything other than measurements of or predictions concerning observed phenomena
(which corresponds to one’s experience), rather than with the ultimate constitution of
the reality responsible for them. This is, again, the case even when these predictions
are with probability one, which are, under certain circumstances, also possible in
quantum physics, because, in either view, such predictions do not mean that one
ever establishes the reality thus predicted, even that of phenomena, to which one can
have an access. Predictions only belong to our mental reality and are never part of a
physical reality, only measurements are. Quantum physics, if interpreted in accord
with the Q-RWR view, helps to bring about the U-RWR view of all physics.

192
6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical Law …
6.4
What Does a Measurement Measure and What Does
Quantum Theory Predict?
As Bohr came to realize in the wake of the EPR experiment, a quantum measurement
has a subtler nature, which is parallel to that of EPR-type measurements even in the
standard case of quantum measurement. In any quantum experiment, the object under
investigationandthemeasuringinstrumentbecomeentangledasaresultoftheirinter-
action with each other.8 More accurately, entanglement is a feature of the formalism
of QM which reﬂects the feature of quantum phenomena that is deﬁned by this inter-
action and that distinguishes quantum phenomena from classical ones (although, as
discussed earlier, it is not clear whether it does so uniquely). For simplicity, however,
I shall refer by the term entanglement to this situation as a whole and speak of the
entanglement between the objects and the instrument.
Yet further qualiﬁcations are necessary given the concept of quantum objects
in the interpretation adopted here, as an idealization only applicable at the time of
measurement. As a result, when one makes a prediction based on a given measure-
ment, it can only concern a new possible quantum object, deﬁned by the interaction
between the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena
and a measuring instrument used, and not an object that we measure in order to
make the prediction. As explained in Chap. 2, however, in QM or low-energy QFT,
although not in high-energy QFT, assuming that our predictions concern the same
quantum object as registered by the initial measurement, on the basis of which these
predictions are made, is a permissible idealization.
In any event, in the RWR view (in either version), any rigorous statements can
only refer to observable events, with which the idealization of a quantum object is
associated, while one cannot ultimately speak of the interaction between quantum
objects between experiments. One can only speak of two quantum objects associated
with the measurement or measurements performed initially and then two quantum
objects associated with two measurements performed subsequently. Quantum entan-
glement can, however, be deﬁned in terms of such measurements, the outcomes of
which QM properly predicts. The concept is explained in detail in the next chapter.
It sufﬁces to say here, with the qualiﬁcations just given in mind, that an entangle-
ment between two quantum objects, S1 and S2, forming an EPR pair, allows one
by means of a measurement performed on S1 to make predictions, with probability
one, concerning S2. In the present view, S2 is only deﬁned once the corresponding
measurement is performed, but not when the prediction concerning it is made, which
make it even more difﬁcult and indeed rigorously impossible to speak of any inde-
pendent properties of S2, however, predicted, because there is no S2, in the ﬁrst
place, until it is measured. Importantly, however, there is the independent, RWR-
type, reality, ultimately responsible for the existence of S2, when it is measured, and
secondly, even then S2 is still an RWR-type entity, which means that no physical
properties can be attributed to it as such. These properties could only be attributed
8 See (Haroche 2001) and (Haroche and Raimond 2006), for experimental illustrations of this point,
although these works do not consider the implications of this entanglement discussed here.

6.4 What Does a Measurement Measure and What Does …
193
to the measuring instrument used. As predictions at a distance, these predictions
are “quantum-nonlocal,” a concept explained in Chap. 7. As I argue here, following
Bohr, all quantum predictions are predictions at a distance and, in this sense, are
quantum-nonlocal, without, however, entailing any instantaneous transmission of
physical inﬂuences between such events, “a spooky action at a distance” [spukhafte
Fernwirkung], famouslyinvokedbyEinstein, deﬁninginterms of this study, Einstein-
nonlocality (Born 2005, p. 155). Einstein-locality would prohibit such an action, as
would relativity, although Einstein-locality, sometimes referred to as the locality
principle, is independent of relativity.
The interaction between the object and the measuring instrument, or the quantum
stratum of the instrument, leading to their entanglement is not a measurement in
the sense of giving rise to an observable quantity: this interaction occurs before the
measurement takes place, or rather before the outcome of this interaction is regis-
tered as a quantum phenomenon. This interaction is part of a quantum measurement,
as deﬁned by Bohr and here, which is not a measurement of a pre-existing property
of the quantum object or, in the present view, the ultimate constitution of the reality
responsible for both quantum objects and quantum phenomena. A quantum measure-
ment establishes a quantum phenomenon manifested in a measuring instrument, to
which, or the data found in it, a measurement in the sense of measuring a physical
property can then apply. In Bohr’s earlier views (including in his reply to EPR) such
properties could still be attributed to quantum objects at time of measurement, which,
as explained, became no longer possible in his ultimate strong RWR-type interpre-
tation. Once performed, the measurement, say, that of momentum (manifested only
as a property of the instrument), disentangles the object and the instrument, with the
observed outcome “irreversibly ampliﬁed” to the level of the classically observed
stratum of the apparatus (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 73). This outcome is deﬁned by the
quantum stratum of the apparatus after this interaction, rather than by the object. It is,
as Schrödinger explains in his cat-paradox paper, this disentangling that enables one
to predict the probability that the momentum measurement at a given future moment
in time will be within a certain range (Schrödinger 1935, pp. 162–163). Alternatively,
if the initial measurement was that of the position, one could predict the probability
that the position measurement at a given future moment in time will locate the trace of
the interaction between the object and the instrument within a certain area. Quantum
phenomena are never entangled. In the present view, not even quantum objects are
entangled because they are idealizations only applicable at the time of measure-
ment and thus always irreducibly associated with quantum phenomena. Rigorously
speaking, two initial measurements associated with S1 and S2 lead to the situa-
tion in which possible future measurements can be handled by the mathematics of
entangled states in the formalism of QM and the expectation catalogs they enable.
Accordingly, only quantum states, ψ-functions, can be entangled. If one assumes an
independent existence of quantum objects between measurements, which is possible
even in RWR-type interpretations (as in that of Bohr, for example), then one could
say that they become entangled, although, if one adopts an RWR-type interpreta-
tion, the nature of the reality deﬁning this entanglement is beyond representation

194
6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical Law …
or knowledge or even conception, even conception expressed by a phrase “some-
thing happened.” ψ-functions never represent either the ultimate, RWR-type, reality
responsible for quantum phenomena or quantum phenomena and thus the outcomes
of measurements. They do not represent these outcomes even if one adopts a realist
view of ψ-functions as representing what happens between measurements, because
one needs Born’s rule added to the formalism to predict the probabilities (and only
them) of these outcomes, described by classical physics.
Now, according to Bohr’s remarkable observation, in effect describing quantum
measurement as entanglement:
After a preliminary measurement of the momentum of the diaphragm, we are in principle
offered the choice, when an electron or photon has passed through the slit, either to repeat
the momentum measurement or to control the position of the diaphragm and, thus, to make
predictions pertaining to alternative subsequent observations. It may also be added that
it obviously makes no difference, as regards observable effects obtainable by a deﬁnitive
experimental arrangement, whether our plans of considering or handling the instruments are
ﬁxed beforehand or whether we prefer to postpone the completion of our planning until a
later moment when the particle is already on its way from one instrument to another. (Bohr
1987, v. 2, p. 57)9
If, then, a measurement is always made after the object has left the location
of the measurement, what does this measurement measure? How does it create the
corresponding phenomenon? It “measures” the quantum state of the quantum stratum
of the instrument, which interacted with the object in the past (however recently, but
always in the past!), by amplifying this state to the classical level of observation, by
registering the corresponding state of the measuring instrument.10 This ampliﬁcation
leads to the phenomena in which the outcome of a measurement is registered. What
will be registered is either the change in the momentum of certain observed parts of
the apparatus or the position of one or another trace of this interaction, say, a spot on
a silver screen, given that both can never be registered in the same arrangement, as
reﬂected by the uncertainty relations. Such concepts as momentum or position can
only rigorously apply at this classical level in the RWR view, adopted by Bohr by
the time of this statement (in 1949).
This situation is consistent with the present interpretation, according to which a
quantum object is an idealization only applicable at the time of measurement, insofar
9 This observation, as Wheeler notes, anticipates the delayed choice experiment (Wheeler 1983,
pp. 182–192).
10 This point appears to have been missed either in commentaries on Bohr or by treatments of
quantum measurement elsewhere. Subtle as it is, Schrödinger’s analysis of quantum measurement
in his cat-paradox paper does not consider it (Schrödinger 1935, pp. 158–159). Neither does Ozawa
(1997), discussed in Chap. 2 (note 25), an analysis that is expressly realist and implies that the
measured quantity is attributed to the object at the time of measurement. Von Neumann’s analysis
comes close, but, while it is possible that von Neumann realized this point, he did not comment on
it, and some of his statements appear to attribute the measured quantity to the object at the time
of measurement (Von Neumann 1932, pp. 355–356). On the other hand, this aspect of quantum
measurement supports the point, made by von Neumann and others, that, for idealized measure-
ments, an instantly repeated measurement will give one the same result as the initial measurement
(Von Neumann 1932, pp. 214–215; Schrödinger 1935, pp. 158–160).

6.4 What Does a Measurement Measure and What Does …
195
as one refers by measurement, as Bohr does, to the overall process in question, as
leading to the emergence of an observed phenomenon: the interaction between the
quantum object and the quantum stratum of the instrument, and the ampliﬁcation of
the resulting quantum state of this stratum (after this interaction and hence no longer
in the presence of the quantum object) to the classical level of the observed stratum of
the instrument, in which stratum the outcome is registered. Even though the quantum
object is no longer there (or no longer exists) when the corresponding phenomenon
is established and an observation and possibility a measurement of some observed
quantity takes place, one might still see this quantum object as, by its interaction
with the quantum stratum of this instrument, responsible for the effect observed. It
follows that, a quantum object or what is so idealized, while still assumed to exist at
the time of a measurement, only exists in the past of an observed quantum event. An
observed effect could also be that of the measurement of the charge, mass, or spin of
an electron. These quantities will be the same for all electrons and will deﬁne them
as electrons, in the present view at the time of measurement. Such quantities as the
position, velocity, momentum, or energy registered in a measurement will of course
be different.
One might assume that, say, because of the exchange of momenta between the
object and the instrument, the momentum of the object will correspond to the differ-
ence between two momentum measurements of the instrument before and after the
interaction with the object. Physically, however, one never measures that momentum,
given that the object has already left the location of the instrument and that one could
have performed instead of the position measurement after it did. In any event, one
can ascertain, regardless of an interpretation: (a) that one can perform either of
the two complementary measurements concerning the state of the quantum stratum
of the instrument, with the outcome ampliﬁed to the classical level of the observ-
able part of this instrument; and correlatively (b) the quantum-nonlocal nature of
quantum predictions, because by changing one’s decision which measurement to
perform after the interaction in question, one can make two alternative predictions
concerning distant future events, to which one is not physically connected at the time
of either measurement.
Thus, using the measurement of the state of the apparatus, one can predict, at
a distance, by means of a ψ-function (cum Born’s rule), a possible outcome of a
future measurement of either variable, without “in any way disturbing the system,”
just as in any EPR-type experiment (Einstein et al. 1935, p. 138). It is true that there
was an interaction between the object and the instrument before that measurement.
But this is also the case for the two objects of the EPR pair, which have been in an
interaction, entangling them. In a standard measurement, the probability of such a
prediction will not be equal to one, as it would be in the case of the EPR-type experi-
ments, which possibility, however, requires qualiﬁcations, discussed below. Besides,
as Bohr realized, with some simple additional arrangements one can, at least in prin-
ciple, reproduce the EPR case in considering the standard quantum measurement
(Bohr 1938, pp. 101–103, 1987, v. 2, p. 60). It might seem, then, that, in either the
standard or the EPR case, because either of the two complementary quantities could
be predicted at a distance for one quantum object by an alternative measurement on

196
6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical Law …
another quantum object, the ﬁrst object at a distance can be assigned both quanti-
ties, as, in EPR’s language, “elements or reality” “without in any way disturbing” it
(Einstein et al. 1935, p. 138). This was, essentially, EPR’s argument, although the
possibility of predicting either quantity with probability one in the EPR experiment
strengthened their case that QM is incomplete. EPR also argued that an alternative,
even the only alternative to this incompleteness, in the case of the EPR experiments,
would be that QM is Einstein-nonlocal, because a measurement on one object would
alternatively deﬁne the state of reality at a distance (Einstein et al. 1935, p. 141). As,
however, should already be apparent and as will be discussed in detail in Chap. 7,
this is not necessarily the case, because, in any actual experiment, only one of these
quantities could be so predicted. There is no experiment that would allow one to
physically realize the prediction of both quantities for the same object. At the same
time, there is no need to assume that our predictions are Einstein-nonlocal by virtue
of determining the quantity in question at a distance, because, even if one can predict
this quantity with probability one, one could still measure the complementary quan-
tity and thus establish a different element of reality from the one predicted (Einstein
et al. 1935, p. 138). A measurement performed on one quantum object cannot be
claimed to deﬁne an element of reality pertaining to another, spatially separated,
quantum object, by means of a prediction with the probability one. A prediction
even with probability one is, again, still only a prediction. It does not deﬁne the
element of reality thus predicted, because an alternative, complementary, measure-
ment on the object for which the original variable was predicted, would establish
a different state of reality, which would disable the possibility of a veriﬁcation of
the original prediction. Accordingly, there is no rigorous basis for assuming that this
prediction established the reality it predicts. In classical physics these limitations do
not apply because we can always measure and predict, and simultaneously verify our
predictions for conjugate variables (such that of position and that of momentum). The
conjugate variables of classical physics are not the same as complementary variables
of quantum physics, a fact not always sufﬁciently appreciated (Schwinger 1994).
The outline just given is only a sketch that requires a proper argument, to be
offered in Chap. 7. The main point at the moment is that, even in a standard quantum
measurement, one must always consider not only the object under investigation as
in classical physics (where one can disregard the role of measuring instruments), but
a composite entangled quantum system, consisting of the object and the quantum
stratum of the instrument.11 In each EPR-type experiment at the last stage of the
experiment, when one of the two possible EPR predictions is made, one deals with
two combined systems, each consisting of an object and an instrument, the ﬁrst
associated with an actual (already performed) measurement and the other with a
possible future measurement, concerning which one makes a prediction, and thus
with four systems in total. The analysis of quantum measurement just given conﬁrms,
11 The signiﬁcance of considering composite systems in quantum theory was emphasized in
D’Ariano’s recent works (some of which are cited in this study), in contrast to other quantum-
informational approaches to quantum foundations. Schrödinger, actually, suggested that this might
be necessary in the end of the cat-paradox paper (Schrödinger 1935, p. 167).

6.4 What Does a Measurement Measure and What Does …
197
however, that Bohr’s ultimate interpretation has a complex conceptual structure. This
architecture is not always properly considered by commentators, which often leads to
a misunderstanding of Bohr’s statements and concepts, because they lose their proper
meaning if considered apart from this structure. I discuss next Bohr’s most famous
concept, complementarity, introduced in the Como lecture, but redeﬁned by Bohr’s
subsequent interpretations, ﬁnally, by his ultimate, strong RWR-type, interpretation.
6.5
Complementarity
As stated in the preface, deﬁned arguably most generally, complementarity is
characterized by
(a)
a mutual exclusivity of certain phenomena, entities, or conceptions; and yet
(b)
the possibility of considering each one of them separately at any given point;
and
(c)
the necessity of considering all of them at different moments of time for a
comprehensive account of the totality of phenomena that one must consider in
quantum physics.
The concept was never given by Bohr a single deﬁnition of this type. However,
this deﬁnition may be surmised from several of Bohr’s statements, such as: “Evi-
dence obtained under different experimental conditions cannot be comprehended
within a single picture, but must be regarded as complementary in the sense that only
the totality of the phenomena [some of which are mutually exclusive] exhaust the
possible information about the objects” (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 40; emphasis added). In
classical mechanics, we can comprehend all the information about each object within
a single picture because the interference of measurement can be neglected, which
is a permissible idealization even in the U-RWR view: this assumption allows one
to (ideally) identify the phenomenon considered with the object under investigation
and to establish the quantities deﬁning this information, such as the position and the
momentum of each object, in the same experiment. In quantum physics, this inter-
ference cannot be neglected and indeed deﬁnes any quantum phenomenon, which
leads to different experimental conditions for each measurement on a quantum object
(assumed to be prepared in some way, by a previous event, such as an emission of
this object by some device) and their complementarity, in correspondence with the
uncertainty relations. This is, again, keeping in mind that, while in the present view,
a quantum object is an idealization that only applies at the time of measurement,
speaking of the same quantum object in the case of these two measurements is a
permissible idealization in QM (although no longer in QFT). The situation implies
two incompatible pictures of what is observed, as phenomena, in measuring instru-
ments. Hence, the possible information about a quantum object, the information
to be found in measuring instruments, could only be exhausted by the mutually
incompatible evidence obtainable under different experimental conditions.

198
6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical Law …
On the other hand, once made, either measurement, say, that of the position, will
provide the complete actual information about the system’s state, as complete as
possible, at this moment in time. One could never obtain the complementary infor-
mation, provided by the momentum measurement, at this moment in time, because
to do so one would need simultaneously to perform a complementarity experiment
on it, which is never possible. In fact, as noted, if one repeats the ﬁrst, position,
measurement in a new experiment with the same initial preparation, the outcome,
observed after the same time interval after the preparation, will be different.
It follows that one cannot assume that two complementary measurements repre-
sent parts of the same whole, of the same single reality. Each measurement establishes
the only reality there is, and the alternative decision would establish a different reality,
at all three levels of idealization assumed here—the ultimate nature of the reality
responsible for quantum phenomena, quantum objects, and quantum phenomena
themselves, even though in the ﬁrst two cases this reality is each time unknowable
and even unthinkable. It may still be assumed to be each time different because each
of its effects, observed as a phenomenon, is different and indeed unique, by the QI
postulate. Rather than arbitrarily selecting one or other part of a pre-existing phys-
ical reality, as is ideally possible in classical physics, our decisions concerning which
experiment to perform establish the single reality which deﬁnes what type of quantity
(although not its value, which can only be predicted probabilistically or statistically)
can be observed or predicted and precludes the complementary alternative.
Accordingly, parts (b) and (c) of the above deﬁnition of complementarity are
as important as part (a), and disregarding them can lead to a misunderstanding of
Bohr’s concept. That we have a free (or at least sufﬁciently free) choice as concerns
what kind of experiment we want to perform is in accordance with the very idea
of experimentation in science, including in classical physics (Bohr 1935, p. 699).
However, contrary to the case of classical physics or relativity, implementing our
decision concerning what we want to do will allow us to make only certain types
of possible predictions and will irrevocably exclude certain other, complementary,
types of possible predictions. We actively shape what will happen, deﬁne the course
of reality.
Complementarity is, thus, a reﬂection of the fact that, in a radical departure from
classical physics or relativity, the behavior of quantum objects of the same type, say,
electrons, or, again, the ultimate nature of reality responsible for quantum phenomena
handled by such concepts as electrons, is not governed by the same physical law,
especially a representational physical law, in all possible contexts, speciﬁcally in
complementary contexts. This leads to incompatible observable physical effects in
complementary contexts. On the other hand, the mathematical formalism of QM
offers correct probabilistic or statistical predictions of quantum phenomena in all
contexts, in RWR-type interpretations, under the assumption that the ultimate nature
of reality responsible for quantum phenomena is beyond representation or even
conception.12
12 This situation is also responsible for what is known as “contextuality,” which I considered from
the RWR perspective in (Plotnitsky 2019). I give a brief summary. The concept of contextuality

6.5 Complementarity
199
Speaking of a physical law here requires caution, because, in RWR-type interpre-
tations, there is no physical law representing this behavior, or, again, in the present
interpretation, representing the ultimate nature of physical reality that will, in a
measurement, give rise to the quantum object or what is so idealized. One might
speak, with Wheeler, of “law without law” (Wheeler 1983), along with, and as an
effect of, “reality without realism,” a connection to which I shall return in closing
this chapter.
The analysis of complementarity just given is shaped by Bohr’s ultimate, strong
RWR-type interpretation, as conﬁrmed by the statement cited above, which dates
from his 1949 “Discussion with Einstein on Epistemological Problems in Atomic
Physics” (Bohr 1987, v. 2, pp. 33–66), by which point this interpretation was in
place for over a decade. It took Bohr a previous decade (1927–1937) to arrive at
both this interpretation and this deﬁnition of the concept, from that point on instan-
tiated in terms of complementary phenomena in Bohr’s sense, deﬁned by what is
observed in measuring instruments. I would like to emphasize, following the argu-
ment of Chap. 2, that Bohr’s complementarity is a new physical concept, although,
as all concepts, it has its history, in physics and beyond, and had undergone devel-
opment and changes in Bohr’s own work.13 Unlike the adjective “complementary,”
the noun complementarity has not been used and was introduced by Bohr, which
was introduced by Simon Kochen and Ernst Specker, and developed, following it, Bell’s theorem,
and related ﬁndings (discussed in Chap. 7) during the last half century, primarily dealing with the
Bohm version of the EPR experiment for discrete variables and ﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert spaces.
The primary reason for this is that the (idealized) thought-experiment proposed by EPR, which
deals with continuous variables, cannot be physically realized because the EPR-entangled quantum
state is not normalizable, although this fact does not affect the fundamentals of the case. Bohm’s
version of the EPR experiment, which deals with discrete variables, could and has been performed,
conﬁrming the existence of quantum correlations. These correlations can be ascertained experimen-
tally, apart from QM. I summarize the Kochen–Specker theorem, following Held (2018) , apart from
considerations involving Gleason’s theorem. The Kochen–Specker theorem considers the following
three assumptions of the hidden variable theories: (1) value deﬁnitiveness: all observables deﬁned
for a QM system have deﬁnite values at all times; (2) noncontextuality: if a QM system possesses a
property (corresponding to a value of an observable), then it does so independently of a measurement
context, i.e., independently of how that value is measured; and (3) projector operator representation:
assuming the standard association of properties of a quantum system with and projection operators
on the corresponding Hilbert space, there is a one-to-one correspondence between properties of a
quantum system and projection operators on this Hilbert space. Noncontextuality, as formulated in
(2) is in accord with Einstein’s concept of reality used in his EPR-type arguments, while complemen-
tarity implies the dependence of all QM-quantities on their measuring contexts, mutually exclusive
in the case of complementarity variables. The Kochen–Specker theorem says that holding all three
assumptions is incompatible with QM (assuming the dimension of the corresponding Hilbert space
is three or higher). If one assumes an RWR-type interpretation, contextuality is automatic, given
complementarity, with (3) retained. Locality (the sense of precluding an action at a distance) is
preserved as well.
13 Among the works addressing a more general philosophical background of the concept of comple-
mentarity and Bohr’s thinking in general, are Faye (1991), Folse (1985), Honner (1987), and
Murdoch (1987). See also a comprehensive volume of essays (Faye and Folse 2019). These studies
offer important reﬂections on Bohr’s thinking, and engaging with them in more detail would enrich
the present discussion. On the other hand, while some of them offer readings of Bohr’s interpre-
tation of quantum phenomena and QM similar to the one presented by this study, including in its

200
6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical Law …
is a reﬂection of the fact that it is a concept in the sense deﬁned in Chap. 2. Using
it as a noun also distinguishes it from the use of complementary as an adjective,
as in James, to which use Bohr’s concept is sometimes compared and even traced,
questionably in my view (Plotnitsky 2016a, pp. 116–117). Most crucial, however,
is the speciﬁcity of the structure of Bohr’s concept, beginning, again, with the fact
that parts (b) and (c) arise from physical considerations. Equally important, are the
probabilistic or statistical, or correlatively, mathematical, aspects of it, which give the
concept its quantum-theoretical speciﬁcity. When complementarity applies to predic-
tions concerning (complementary) experimental arrangements, in which the corre-
sponding measurements occur, this application is probabilistic or statistical. It was
quantum physics that made the concepts of complementarity and phenomenon, in the
speciﬁcity of their architecture, necessary for Bohr, although his thinking concerning
quantum physics also helped him to deﬁne more general philosophical aspects of
complementarity, thus, establishing a potential for deﬁning it as a philosophical
concept.14 It is, accordingly, not surprising that Bohr speaks of complementarity as
“an artiﬁcial word” that “does not belong to our daily concepts.” It is a physical
concept, eventually linked to Bohr’s ultimate, strong RWR-type, interpretation of
quantum phenomena and QM.
This connection to Bohr’s interpretation deﬁnes the speciﬁcity of complemen-
tarity as quantum-theoretical concept, at any stage of Bohr’s understanding of it. It
is difﬁcult to grasp complementarity as a concept apart from these connections. This
may explain (although one cannot be certain) why Einstein, who, as discussed in
Chap. 7 misread Bohr on some of the key points of his interpretation, in particular,
as concerns Bohr’s view of the Einstein-locality of QM in his reply to EPR, had
difﬁculties with complementarity, admitting that he was “unable to attain... the sharp
formulation... [of] Bohr’s principle of complementarity” (Einstein 1949b, p. 674).
As discussed in Chap. 7, Bohr’s argument in his reply, misread by Einstein, is essen-
tially grounded in complementarity and Bohr’s contention that EPR disregarded this
role. It would, accordingly, be difﬁcult to understand Bohr’s reply without properly
considering complementarity as a concept or the principle that gives rise to this
concept. Bohr’s concept, however, has posed difﬁculties for many others, even for
nonrealist aspects, these readings do not really amount to treating Bohr’s interpretation as an RWR-
type interpretation, especially as a strong RWR-type interpretation. In addition, while indebted to
Bohr, this study departs from Bohr’s view in several key respects. It also pursues a broader set of
agendas, such as those concerning QFT or quantum information theory, and the role of mathematics
in quantum theory.
14 The deﬁnition of complementarity given above is more general, rather than only deﬁning it as
a quantum-theoretical concept. This deﬁnition allows for applications of the concept elsewhere in
physics and beyond physics. Bohr and others inspired by him, such as Pauli, Karl Gustav Jung,
and Max Delbrück, proposed using the concept in psychology, biology, and philosophy, where the
concept has become a subject of renewed attention recently, as part of the general surge of interest
in the use of quantum–mechanical-like modeling (Haven and Khrennikov 2016). These extensions
are beyond my scope here. See Pauli (1994, pp. 149–164), on connections between quantum theory
and psychology. See also (Plotnitsky 2012, pp. 157–166)), (Wang and Busemeyer 2015), and (Faye
and Folse 2019). On applying complementarity in biology in Bohr’s works, see (Bohr 1987, v. 2,
pp. 3–12; Bohr 1962, Bohr 1987, v. 3, pp. 23–29).

6.5 Complementarity
201
those sympathetic to his views, especially when it comes to the relationships between
the whole and its parts. As noted, complementarity prevents us from ascertaining the
“whole” composed from the complementary “parts,” in conﬂict with the conven-
tional understanding of parts (always) complementing each other within a whole. At
any moment of time only one of these parts and not the other could be ascertained.
This part is the only “whole” at this moment of time. Consider Bell’s comments on
complementarity, reﬂecting his general discontent with Bohr’s views:
[Bohr] seemed to revel in contradiction, for example, between ‘wave’ and ‘particle.’ … Not
to resolves these contradictions and ambiguities, but rather to reconcile us to them, he put
forward a philosophy which he called ‘complementarity.’ … There is very little I can say
about ‘complementarity.’ But I wish to say one thing. It seems that Bohr used this word
with the reverse of its usual meaning. Consider for example the elephant. From the front
she is head, trunk, and two legs. From the sides she is bottom, tail, and two legs. They
supplement one another, they are consistent with one another and they are all entailed by
the unifying concept ‘elephant.’ It is my impression that to suppose Bohr used the word
‘complementarity’ in this ordinary way would have been regarded by him as missing his
point and trivializing his thought. He seems to insist rather that we must use in our analysis
elements which contradict one another, which do not add up or derive from a whole. By
‘complementarity’ he meant, it seems to me, the reverse: contradictoriness. … Perhaps he
had a subtle satisfaction in the use of a familiar word with the reserve of its familiar meaning.
(Bell 2004, p. 190)
My concern is not Bell’s general discontent with Bohr’s views. Bell does not
favor not only them but also QM itself. This attitude is, however, legitimate. Bell
even admits, grudgingly, on an earlier occasion (Bell is less charitable to Bohr in
his later articles), that Bohr’s view could correspond to the ultimate character of
physical reality, still misreading Bohr by attributing to him the claim that “there is no
reality below some ‘classical’ ‘macroscopic’ level,” (Bell 2004, p. 154). Bohr never
made such a claim and, as the preceding discussion here makes clear, his argument
does not imply it either. Bell, as he acknowledged, had difﬁculties in understanding
Bohr’s argument and, on one occasion, in considering a passage from Bohr’s reply
to EPR (Bohr 1935, p. 700), says that “he has very little idea what this means” (Bell
2004, p. 155). Understanding this passage, explained in Chap. 7, would be difﬁcult
apart from considering Bohr’s argument preceding it (from which the meaning of
this passage derives). Bell does not do so, thus making it difﬁcult to assess his claims
concerning Bohr’s statements in this passage because the meaning of these state-
ments is deﬁned by Bohr’s preceding argument. Indeed, Bell truncates the passage
in quoting it by omitting, among other things, Bohr’s statement on complementarity,
crucial to the argument of his reply. As discussed in Chap. 7, Bohr’s argument is based
in his view that EPR disregard to the role of complementarity, a role indispensable
for the understanding of the EPR experiment.
In any event, Bell’s comments on complementarity in the passage cited here are
beside the point, even apart from his attempt to psychologize Bohr’s thinking. Bell is
not incorrect in saying that “to suppose Bohr used the word ‘complementarity’ in this
ordinary way would have been regarded by him as missing his point and trivializing
his thought.” It would have been, because it would indeed both miss his meaning
and trivialize his thought. Besides, as noted, while “complementary” as an adjective

202
6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical Law …
is a familiar word, “complementarity” was never used as a noun before Bohr. Also,
as explained below, Bohr’s treatment of the question of “particles and “waves” in
quantum theory is a more complex matter than Bell makes it appear, which compels
Bohr to avoid speaking of wave–particle complementarity. Complementarity is, I
argue, a new physical concept, which must be understood in the speciﬁc sense Bohr
gives it. There is no point in attempting to relate it to a meaning it may be given in
our daily life, as Bell does, by deﬁning complementary parts as adding up to a whole.
This is what Bohr wants to avoid. The reason is that he needed complementarity as
a new concept, which “does not belong to our daily concepts,” introduced in order
to account for the epistemological situation deﬁned by quantum phenomena (Bohr
1935, p. 700, 1937, p. 87). It is not, as Bell suggests, some “subtle satisfaction in
the use of a familiar word with the reverse of its familiar meaning.” Bell, to his
credit, does qualify by “perhaps,” but even this qualiﬁed surmise is hardly pertinent.
There is no evidence that Bohr ever had such a satisfaction. Besides, even if he had,
it is irrelevant in assessing his concept in its meaning and signiﬁcance. There is
plenty of evidence for his physical reasons for deﬁning complementarity in the way
he did, such as the uncertainty relations, the double-slit and other iconic quantum
experiments, or the EPR experiment. Complementarity was introduced in the spirit
of resolving contradictions, and not reveling in them, as it “seemed” to Bell. Bohr’s
concept of complementary “parts” that do not add up to a “whole” aims to do just
that. One always deals with individual, each time unique, quantum phenomena, some
of which are complementary. These phenomena are never parts of any whole beyond
themselves.
As indicated earlier, part of the genealogy of the concept of complementarity is
Bohr’s early interest (before he began to study physics) in a complementarity-like
way in which a Riemann surface allows one to remove ambiguity and properly deﬁne
functions of complex variables, such as ƒ(z) = √z. It is ambiguous, and hence not
properly deﬁnable, when considered on the complex plane, as √z has two meanings,
but is well deﬁned on the corresponding Riemann surface, because it has a single
meaning on each of the two separate sheets of it. Bohr reﬂected on this genealogy of
complementarity, also bringing together the mathematical and quantum-theoretical
concepts of the irrational he used in accord with the analysis given in Sect. 2.1 of
this Chap. 2, in his ﬁnal interview and in the picture that he drew on the blackboard
in the course of this interview. First, Bohr commented on the time before his interest
in physics took over:
At that time I really thought to write something about philosophy, and that was about this
analogy with multivalued functions. I felt that the various problems in psychology—which
were called big philosophical problems, of the free will and such things—that one could
really reduce them when one considered how one really went about them, and that was done
on the analogy to multivalued functions. If you have square root of x, then you have two
values. If you have a logarithm, you have even more. And the point is that if you try to say
you have now two values, let us say of square root, then you can walk around in the plane,
because, if you are in one point, you take one value, and there will be at the next point a
value which is very far from it and one which is very close to it. If you, therefore, work in a
continuous way, then you—I am saying this a little badly, but it does not matter—then you
can connect the value of such a function in a continuous way. But then it depends what you

6.5 Complementarity
203
do. If in these functions, as the logarithm or the square root, they have a singular value at
the origin, then if you go round from one point and go in a closed orbit and it does not go
round the origin, you come back to the same (value). That is, of course, the discovery of
Cauchy. But when you go round the origin, then you come over to the other (value of the)
function, and that is then a very nice way to do it, as Dirichlet (Riemann), of having a surface
in several sheets and connect them in such a way that you just have the different values of
the function on the different sheets. And the nice thing about it is that you use one word for
the function, f (z). Now, the point is, what is the analogy? The analogy is that you say that
the idea of yourself is singular in our consciousness—do you think it works; am I doing it
sufﬁciently loud? Then you ﬁnd—now it is really a formal way—that if you bring this idea
in, then you leave a deﬁnite level of objectivity or subjectivity. For instance, when you have
to do with the logarithm, then you can go around; you can change the function as much as
you like; you can change it by 2π; when you go one time round a singular point. But then
you surely, in order to have it properly and be able to draw conclusions from it, will have to
go all the way back again in order to be sure that the point is what you started on.—Now I
am saying it a little badly, but I will go on.—That is then the general scheme, and I felt so
strongly that it was illuminating for the question of the free will, because if you go round,
you speak about something else, unless you go really back again (the way you came). That
was the general scheme, you see. (Bohr 1962, Session 5)
There are of course important differences between the two concepts. In the case
of Riemann’s surface, we have two mutually exclusive mathematical representa-
tions. In quantum theory, complementarity means that each complementary situa-
tion or context exhibits a different behavior of quantum objects of the same type,
while the formalism of quantum mechanics predicts this behavior in both and indeed
all contexts, admittedly in two mathematically different ways as well. In addition,
these predictions are probabilistic or statistical, which is obviously not a feature of
Riemann’s concept. Nevertheless, this is a remarkable example of a translation of a
mathematical concept into a physical one.
Bohr’s ﬁrst speciﬁc instance of complementarity was introduced, along with
the concept itself, in the Como lecture, as the complementarity of spacetime
co-ordination and the claim of causality:
On one hand, the deﬁnition of the state of a physical system, as ordinarily understood [i.e.,
in classical mechanics], claims the elimination of all external disturbances. But in that case,
according to the quantum postulate, any observation will be impossible, and, above all, the
concepts of space and time lose their immediate sense. On the other hand, if in order to make
observation possible we permit certain interactions with suitable agencies of measurement,
not belonging to the system, an unambiguous deﬁnition of the state of the system is naturally
no longer possible, and there could be no question of causality in the ordinary [classical] sense
of the word. The very nature of the quantum theory thus forces us to regard the space-time co-
ordination and the claim of causality, the union of which characterizes the classical theories,
as complementary but exclusive features of the description, symbolizing the idealization of
observation and deﬁnition respectively. … Indeed, in the description of atomic phenomena,
the quantum postulate presented us with the task of developing a “complementarity” theory
the consistency of which can be judged only by weighing the possibility of deﬁnition and
observation. (Bohr 1987, v. 1, pp. 54–55; emphasis added)
These formulations are short of rigorously deﬁning complementarity as a concept
and conveying its proper architecture, as it was eventually worked out by Bohr.
In particular, it is not clear what complementary means here beyond “exclusive,”

204
6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical Law …
corresponding, in terms of the deﬁnition of Bohr’s concept in his ultimate form given
above, to: (a) (a mutual exclusivity of certain phenomena, entities, or conceptions).
Parts (b) (the possibility of considering each one of them separately at any given
moment of time) and (c) (the necessity of considering all of them at different moments
of time for a comprehensive account of the totality of phenomena that one must
consider in quantum theory) of the concept that came to deﬁne it later are not stated
in the lecture. While (c) appears to be implied and to be the reason why Bohr sees
spacetime coordination and the claim of causality not only as “mutually exclusive”
but also as “complementary,” (b), which became central for deﬁning the concept later
on, does not ﬁgure in the lecture at all. Indeed, the complementarity of spacetime
co-ordination and the claim of causality makes it difﬁcult to rigorously deﬁne this
feature. Bohr is correct in saying that “[the quantum postulate] implies a renunciation
as regards the causal space–time co-ordination of atomic processes” (Bohr 1987, v. 1,
p. 53). But then, if the spacetime coordination and [classical] causality are mutually
exclusive, what does causality mean, including as “symbolizing the deﬁnition”? In
what sense is this causality physical, as Bohr appears to imply. None of this is, I
would argue, worked out in the lecture.
The use of “disturbance,” although properly handled by Bohr here, requires careful
attention to avoid confusion as well. In his later writings, Bohr warned against using
the language of “disturbing phenomena by observation” in considering quantum
phenomena, along with “creating physical attributes of atomic objects by measure-
ment” (Bohr 1938, p. 104, 1987, v. 2, p. 64, 73). It is worth registering both careful
distinctions between phenomena and objects, implied but not made as sharply in
the Como lecture, and between observation and measurement, within the concept of
“quantum measurement” as deﬁned in this study, following Bohr. To reiterate the
main point, a “measurement,” is deﬁned by the establishment of a new quantum
phenomena that we observe in the instruments used and that allows us to measure
(classically) physical properties of the observable parts of said measuring instru-
ments. These instruments also have quantum strata through which they interact
with quantum objects or the physical reality ultimately responsible for quantum
phenomena. No creation of physical attributes of atomic objects by measurement is
possible in the strong RWR view adopted by Bohr at this point by 1937, because in
this view no physical attributes could be assigned to quantum objects even at the time
of measurement. All physical properties considered are only those observed, as parts
of phenomena, in measuring instruments. Bohr’s preferred term becomes “interfer-
ence”: measuring instruments interfere with quantum objects, or in the present view,
with the ultimate reality responsible for quantum phenomena, a reality that at the time
of a measurement manifests itself as a quantum object. Bohr still (rightly) retains
“interaction.”
In any event, the Como argument, which never satisﬁed Bohr, even though he
republished the lecture without changes later in Atomic Theory and the Description
of Nature, now Volume 1 of (Bohr 1987), was revamped by Bohr after his discus-
sion with Einstein in Brussels in 1927, mentioned above. The main casualty of this
revamping was the complementarity of the spacetime co-ordination and the claim of
causality. It disappeared from Bohr’s writings after the Como lecture, along with and

6.5 Complementarity
205
correlatively to the key realist part of Bohr’s argument, classical causality. Begin-
ning with his next article “The Quantum of Action and the Description of Nature,”
published in 1929 (Bohr 1987, v. 1, pp. 92–101), Bohr abandoned the idea that the
independent behavior of quantum objects is classically causal, although, as noted,
the idea itself has appealed to others, Dirac and von Neumann (Dirac 1958; von
Neumann 1932) in particular, and continues to do so, and is often associated with the
Copenhagen interpretation, as discussed in (Plotnitsky 2009, pp. 202–218). By the
time of his reply to EPR, Bohr, speaks of “a ﬁnal renunciation of the classical ideal
of causality” (Bohr 1935, p. 697). Eventually Bohr came to see complementarity as
“a rational generalization of the... ideal of causality,” which is very different from
maintaining classical causality, even if only as complementary to something else,
such as spacetime co-ordination (Bohr 1937, pp. 84–85, 1987, v. 2, p. 41). I discuss
this generalization in the next section.
Wave–particle complementarity, with which the concept of complementarity is
often associated, had not played a signiﬁcant, if any, role in Bohr’s thinking, espe-
cially after the Como lecture. Bohr thought deeply, even before QM, about the
problem of wave–particle duality, as it was known then. De Broglie’s formulas for
matter waves (in which wave-properties could be understood, as they were by Bohr,
symbolically rather than physically even in the Como lecture) and Schrödinger’s
wave mechanics, rather than only his equation (which, too, could be and were by
Bohr, in the Como lecture, interpreted symbolically) might have affected Bohr’s
initial thinking concerning complementarity. Bohr used de Broglie’s formulas in
his elegant elementary derivation of the uncertainty relations in the Como lecture
(Bohr 1987, v. 2, pp. 57–60). Bohr was, however, always aware of the difﬁculties
of applying the concept of physical waves to quantum objects or of thinking in
terms of the wave–particle duality as the assumption that both types of nature and
behavior pertain to the same individual entities, such as each photon or electron itself,
considered independently.
The wave–particle duality was thought of as representing the same thing in two
different ways. By contrast, complementarity refers to two different, incompatible,
things, like two different effects of an electron on a measuring instrument, but not
two features of the electron itself, a major difference. The “both” (both types of
properties) of the wave–particle duality is the opposite of complementarity, based
on “either or” (either one or the other type of effects). Bohr’s ultimate solution to
the dilemma of whether quantum objects are particles or waves was that they were
neither. Instead, either “picture” refers to one of the two mutually exclusive sets of
discrete individual effects of the interactions between quantum objects and measuring
instruments, particle-like, which may be individual or collective, or wave-like, which
are always collective, but still composed of discrete individual effects.
An example of the latter is “interference” effects, composed of a large number
of discrete traces of the collisions between the quantum objects and the screen in
the double-slit experiment in the corresponding setup (when both slits are open and
there are no means to know through which slit each object has passed). These two
sets of effects may be seen as complementary, also when it comes to calculating the
probabilities or statistics for each set of events, or, if one takes a Bayesian view, for

206
6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical Law …
each event of each set. Bohr’s thinking took advantage of the fact these two types of
effects are always mutually exclusive and require mutually exclusive experimental
setups to be observed. Bohr, again, did use the idea of symbolic waves as related to
probability or statistics of quantum predictions, in accordance with Born’s interpre-
tation (e.g., Bohr 1935, p. 697). As explained in Chap. 4, however, speaking of waves
in this context requires caution. The concept is best understood as, in Schrodinger’s
terms, deﬁning the character of “expectation-catalogs” concerning possible discrete
events.
In Bohr’s post-Como argumentation, the concept of complementarity becomes
primarily exempliﬁed by complementarities of spacetime co-ordination and the
application of momentum or energy conservation laws, correlative to the uncer-
tainty relations, in effect as complementarities of phenomena observed in measuring
instruments and thus in effect in accord with Bohr’s concept of phenomena, intro-
duced a decade later. Technically, the uncertainty relations, qp ∼= h (where q is
the coordinate, p is the momentum in the corresponding direction), only prohibit
the simultaneous exact measurement of both variables, which is always possible, at
least ideally and in principle, in classical physics, and allows one to maintain clas-
sical causality there. Even this statement needs further explication, however, and the
physical meaning of the uncertainty relations is much deeper in Bohr’s interpreta-
tion and a complex subject in its own right with a long history.15 First of all, the
uncertainty relations are not a manifestation of the limited accuracy of measuring
instruments, because they would be valid even if we had perfect measuring instru-
ments. In classical and quantum physics alike, one can only measure or predict
each variable within the capacity of our measuring instruments. In classical physics,
however, one can, again, in principle measure both variables simultaneously within
the same experimental arrangement and improve the accuracy of this measurement
by improving capacity of our measuring instruments, in principle indeﬁnitely. The
uncertainty relations preclude us from doing so for both variables in quantum physics
regardless of this capacity. The uncertainty relations make each type of measurement
complementary to the other, in conformity with the deﬁnition of complementarity
given above, which deﬁnition, however, also implies that each by itself could be
measured ideally exactly, just it can be in classical physics. According to Bohr: “we
are of course not concerned with a restriction as to the accuracy of measurement, but
with a limitation [in accord with complementarity] of the well-deﬁned application
of space–time concepts and dynamical conservation laws, entailed by the necessary
distinction between measuring instruments and atomic objects” (Bohr 1937, p. 86,
1987, v. 3, p. 5 and v. 2, p. 73).
In Bohr’s view, moreover, one not only cannot measure both variables simulta-
neously but also cannot deﬁne them simultaneously. It follows, that one cannot ever
deﬁne such elements alternatively for the same quantum object. One always needs
15 See Hilgevoord and Ufﬁnk (2014) for a useful, although one-sided survey. The uncertainty rela-
tions remain a subject of ongoing foundational discussions. Among standard technical treatments
(both, ultimately, on realist lines) are Ozawa (2003) and Shilladay and Bush (2006). See also Peres
1993, p. 93), which is close to Bohr’s view (Plotnitsky 2016a, p. 133).

6.5 Complementarity
207
two objects to deﬁne both variables. If, after determining, say, the position of the
electron, emitted from a source, at time tm after the emission, we want to determine
the momentum, we need to repeat the same, identically prepared, emission (from the
same source) of another electron, and then measure its momentum after the same
time tm after the emission. The uncertainty relations apply to these two measurements
on two different quantum objects, still with further qualiﬁcations explained below,
actually, to two sets of multiple experiments of both kinds (e.g., Peres 1993, p. 93).
In the present view, at stake are two different interactions with the different, RWR,
type reality responsible for each set of phenomena and measurements, each of which
deﬁnes two different quantum objects, electrons, in each of these two experiments.
Within each, it is, again, permissible, as a statistical idealization, to speak of the
emitted and the measured electron as the same electron, or assume that the measured
electron was emitted from the source. This assumption, however, is only statistically
justiﬁed, rather than guaranteed, and it no longer holds even statistically in QFT.
Probabilistic or statistical considerations are unavoidable in considering both the
uncertainty relations, which is commonly recognized, and complementarity, which
is usually overlooked. According to Bohr, however: “the statistical character of the
uncertaintyrelationsinnowayoriginatesfromanyfailureofmeasurementtodiscrim-
inate within a certain latitude between classically describable states of the objects,
but rather expresses an essential limitation of applicability of classical ideas to the
analysis of quantum phenomena,” a limitation deﬁned by complementarity (Bohr
1938, p. 100). There is no contradiction between this statement and the fact that
quantum phenomena are described classically, because the statement only says that
their ultimate nature and emergence cannot be analyzed classically. The predictions
involved will still be probabilistic or statistical, reﬂecting the probabilistic or statis-
tical nature of the uncertainty relations and complementarity, which may be seen,
as Bohr argued, as a “generalization of the very ideal of causality” (Bohr 1937,
pp. 84–85, 1987, v. 2, p. 41). In RWR-type interpretations, this nature is in conﬂict
with classical causality, rather than only determinism, which deﬁnes all quantum
predictions on experimental grounds. Bohr never explained what he had in mind
in speaking of this generalization. It can, however, be understood by means of the
concept of quantum causality, sketched in Chap. 2. I shall now discuss this concept
in detail.
6.6
Causality and Complementarity
ThetitleofthissectionrepeatsthatofBohr’sarguablyﬁnalandtheshortestexposition
of his interpretation of quantum phenomena and QM in “Causality and Complemen-
tarity” (Bohr 1987, v. 3, pp. 1–7). It was published in 1958, thus, after Einstein’s death
(in 1955), but is still written in Einstein’s shadow, which never left Bohr’s thought.
The article contains, it appears, for the ﬁrst time in Bohr, a view of causality appli-
cable in quantum physics, as opposed to classical causality to which, as discussed in
this study, Bohr had previously referred by causality. Notably, this is the case in his

208
6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical Law …
“Causality and Complementarity” (Bohr 1937), where causality referred to classical
causality, renounced in view of “our not being any longer in a position to speak
of the autonomous behavior of a physical object, due to the unavoidable interaction
between the object and the measuring instrument,” which by the same token, entails a
“renunciation of the ideal of causality in atomic physics” (Bohr 1937, p. 87). A view
of causality suggested by Bohr, even if without deﬁning the corresponding concept
of causality, is akin to and is, arguably, the ﬁrst intimation of the concept proba-
bilistic and quantum causality I shall deﬁne in this section, and it is also connected,
as this concept is, to both the arrow of time (“the irreversibility of the recordings”)
and complementarity. Bohr says:
Although, of course, the classical description of the experimental arrangement and the irre-
versibility of the recording concerning the atomic objects ensure a sequence of cause and
effect conforming with elementary demands of causality, the irrevocable abandonment of the
ideal of determinism ﬁnds striking expression in the complementary relationships governing
the unambiguous use of the fundamental concepts on whose unrestricted combination the
classical physical description rests [a combination no longer possible in quantum physics].
Indeed, the ascertaining of the presence of an atomic particle in a limited space-time domain
demands an experimental arrangement involving a transfer of momentum and energy to
bodies such as ﬁxed scales and synchronized clocks, which cannot be included in the descrip-
tion of their functioning, if these bodies are to fulﬁll the role deﬁning the reference frame.
Conversely, any strict application of the law of conservation or momentum and energy to
atomic processes implies, in principle, a renunciation of detailed space-time coordination of
the particles. (Bohr 1987, v. 3, pp. 4–5)
One must keep in mind that “the classical description of the experimental arrange-
ment” assumes that the instruments themselves used also have a quantum stratum,
through which they interact with quantum objects. (This passage conﬁrms that, unlike
the present view in which quantum objects are only assumed to exist at the time of
measurement, Bohr assumes the independent existence of quantum objects.) There
is no conﬂict here with Bohr’s previous appeal to the renunciation of “the classical
ideal of causality,” as classical causality, because the view of causality thus suggested
is not classical and, thus, does not conform to this ideal. This renunciation is now
replaced with “the irrevocable abandonment of the ideal of determinism,” which is
in effect the same or correlative ideal, because in considering individual or simple
classical systems both ideals coincide. On the other hand, while, given an earlier
comment in the article (Bohr 1987, v. 3, p. 4), Bohr must have had the connections
between causality, thus understood, and probability in mind, he nevertheless only
speaks of “ensur[ing] a sequence of cause and effects conforming with the elemen-
tary demands of causality,” rather than deﬁnes a concept of causality that conforms
to these demands. Quantum causality, as a form of probabilistic causality, is such a
concept.
The concept of quantum causality was introduced by this author previously (Plot-
nitsky 2011, 2016a, pp. 203–207). The present deﬁnition, however, reﬁnes and
explores new dimensions of this concept, and grounds it in a more general concept
of probabilistic causality. As sketched in Chap. 2, quantum causality is deﬁned as
follows. An actual event that has happened determines which events may or (in
view of complementarity) may not happen and be predicted with one probability

6.6 Causality and Complementarity
209
or another, which is not the same that any of them will happen. This event, A, at
time t0 deﬁnes certain possible, but only possible future events, say, X, at time t1.
The concept can be automatically transferred to or, more accurately, is a version of
a more general concept of probabilistic causality in the U-RWR view of any phys-
ical phenomena, in part in accord (there are differences discussed below) with the
concept of “causality” proposed in D’Ariano (2018), D’Ariano et al. (2014). In the
case of individual or simple (nonchaotic) classical or relativistic systems, proba-
bilistic causality reduces to classical causality and, correlatively, determinism. The
temporal precedence of A and the corresponding (local) arrow of time is crucial to
quantum causality. All such predictions are quantum-nonlocal, are predictions at a
distance, but they respect Einstein-locality, which prohibits any action at a distance.
It follows, however, that quantum causality does so without, as in the case of classical
causality, deﬁnitively establishing, or rather (since it would already be deﬁnitively
established in advance) being deﬁnitively connected to any future state of the system
considered. As indicated earlier, one can at t1 perform an alternative, in particular,
complementary measurement and thus, by an alternative decision, establish an event,
Y, and a reality different from the one predicted, X, even if this prediction was made
with probability one. In classical mechanics all quantities that could pertain to a given
system can, at least in principle, be established simultaneously, and, correlatively,
the role of measuring instruments in this determination can be disregarded, allowing
one to treat these quantities as properties of the objects considered, as always deter-
minable simultaneously. Only the temporal precedence of A vis-à-vis either X or Y is
deﬁnitive. Quantum causality allows one to relate actual events in terms of statistical
correlations, such as those of EPR-type between them, which events are, however, are
speciﬁcally prepared by repeated initial measurements. By the quantum in deﬁnitive-
ness postulate, no deﬁnitive relationships between any two actual events, events that
have already occurred, could be established. As noted in Chap. 2, quantum causality
may be seen as a symbolic version of causality, just as QM itself may be seen, as it
was by Bohr, as symbolic because it deploys the symbols of classical mechanics for
a very different, fundamentally probabilistic, theory.
Thus, while classical causality is ontological or realist, quantum causality is prob-
abilistic and as such is epistemological, as deﬁned by our knowledge of past events
and probabilities we assign to future events. It enables one to relate to physical reality
at the level of observable phenomena rather than to represent the ultimate nature of
realityresponsibleforthesephenomena.Itpertainsstrictlytoourinteractionswiththe
world by means of experimental technology, in which each event or phenomenon is
uniquely deﬁned as such, rather than by a measurement of some pre-existing proper-
ties of the object or of the ultimate constitution of reality considered to be responsible
for it, especially as deﬁned by a classically causal process found in classical physics
or relativity. Quantum causality, thus, essentially depends on this concept of event
or phenomenon, which is strictly in accord with Bohr’s concept of phenomenon, and
thus the concept of quantum measurement as establishing such phenomena, rather
than a measurement of a pre-existing property of the object, as in classical physics or
relativity. Quantum causality has to do with our probabilistic knowledge concerning

210
6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical Law …
possible future event on the basis of our determinate knowledge, obtained in measure-
ment, concerning past events, but the recourse to probability deﬁned by it is not due
to insufﬁcient knowledge concerning how quantum events come about. Any deﬁni-
tive knowledge we have is no longer knowledge of how these events come about,
as no knowledge or even conception concerning it is possible at all. The knowledge
deﬁning quantum causality only concerns the data obtained in already performed
experiments (or quantum events that may be seen as experiments “performed” by
nature) and predictions concerning future events. Hence, the recourse to probability
is not due to the lack of knowledge concerning this reality. It is due to nature itself,
or the nature of our interactions with nature.
In situations governed by classical causality what has happened determines, by
means of a given law, what will happen, thus, in principle, connecting all events
involved in a single causal chain or network, even though, due to a lack of knowl-
edge of how this happens, our predictions could still be probabilistic or statistical.In
dealing with individual or small system such predictions could be ideally exact or
deterministic, determined by our measurement in the classical sense of measuring the
properties of the objects considered. As explained earlier, classical causality does
not imply that any such event is a cause of other events, but only that the law in
question determines with certainty what happens in all of the events considered.
The cause or (as they may be multiple) causes that deﬁne this law and thus governs
this process as an effect or a set of effects may be something else. While actually
establishing such (always assumed) causes, as discussed in Chap. 2, may pose prob-
lems, these difﬁculties do not undermine the determination of events with certainty
in advance. In classical mechanics, when dealing with an individual or small systems
(apart from chaotic ones), such laws also allow one to make (ideally) exact, deter-
ministic predictions concerning future events or trace past events on the basis of
the complete information concerning a given event, which information is always
ideally possible to obtain. In other classically causal cases, our predictions can only
be probabilistic or statistical, but only because the complete relevant information
is not available, while the classically causal architecture deﬁning the phenomena
considered is assumed. By contrast, quantum causality determines, by our decision,
what may (or may not) happen, as an “effect,” an effect without a classical cause or
causes, although not necessarily what will happen, possibly, and in the RWR view
deﬁnitively, in the absence of the underlying classical causal connections between
events. Correlatively, there is no longer measurement in the classical sense, but only
in the sense of creating phenomena, containing data or information, a measurement
as a number or bit generation, a quantum computer created by our interaction with
nature.
It is instructive to consider with the concept of quantum causality in mind, the case
of predictions with “probability equal to unity.” As discussed in the next chapter, such
predictions deﬁne EPR’s argument, based on their criterion of reality: “If, without
in any way disturbing a system, we can predict with certainty (i.e., with probability
equal to unity) the value of a physical quantity, then there exists an element of physical
reality corresponding to this physical quantity” (Einstein et al. 1935, p. 138). One
mightaskﬁrst:Whatdoesitmeantopredictwithprobabilityequaltounityinphysics?

6.6 Causality and Complementarity
211
It means that one assumes that, if one measures what is so predicted, the measurement
will conﬁrm the prediction. But does the predicted quantity correspond to an element
of physical reality, unless the measurement is performed? Technically, this is not so
even in classical physics or relativity. An outside interference could change the reality
thus predicted. It is also difﬁcult and even impossible to obtain the predicted value
by a measurement exactly. These qualiﬁcations, however, do not pose difﬁculties for
using EPR’s criterion, given that by virtue of classical causality what one predicts,
even as a distant event, is bound to happen (short of outside interference), regardless
of what initial measurement we decide to perform, because all possible measurable
quantities are determined in advance within the same experimental arrangement.
The situation is fundamentally different in the case of quantum phenomena
because of the irreducible role of measuring instruments and complementarity,
leading to the circumstances, considered here, deﬁning all quantum predictions,
including those with probability equal to unity. By quantum causality, it is our deci-
sion concerning what measurement to perform that deﬁnes what might happen with
one probability or the other, in general not equal to one, while an alternative, comple-
mentary, measurement would deﬁne an incompatible expectation-catalog. One might
add, along Bayesian lines, that predictions of anything with any probability are only
meaningful insofar as those who made them or know of them are still alive. Suppose
that one had predicted, on the basis of the position measurement at time t1, a future
value of the position of an object at time t2 with probability equal to unity, by means
of a measurement performed on a different quantum object and thus without in any
way disturbing the ﬁrst one, which is ideally possible in EPR-type experiments. This
prediction can then be conﬁrmed, ideally, by the corresponding position measure-
ment at t2. However, measuring at t2 the value of the complementary variable, that
of momentum, will make it impossible to assign the position variable to the object at
t2, even though if we had measured the position, the outcome would correspond to
our prediction. Once such alternative measurement is performed, there is no exper-
iment that could allow us to make this assignment, as opposed to classical physics,
where one can, in principle, measure both variables simultaneously, within the same
experimental arrangement, and assign both properties to the object independently of
measurements. A prediction with probability equal to unity is meaningful only if it is
in principle veriﬁable, which cannot be assured in considering quantum phenomena,
as could be in classical physics. In quantum physics, establishing any measurable
quantity unavoidably interferes with the object or the ultimate constitution of the
reality responsible for quantum phenomena, and one can always interfere differently
fromthewaynecessaryforverifyingagivenpredictionandthusprecludeestablishing
the predicted quantity as representing an element of reality.16 Thus, in the case of
quantum phenomena, a prediction with probability equal to unity, even ideally, only
16 As noted earlier, that a prediction with probability one is not the same as establishing the reality
of what is so predicted has been stressed by QBists, but primarily on the grounds of the subjective
nature of Bayesian probability, rather than the reasoning used here (e.g., Fuchs et al. 2014; Mermin
2016, pp. 243–244; Fuchs 2016).

212
6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical Law …
accords with quantum causality and not, as in classical physics or relativity, with clas-
sical causality (which also insures determinism in the case of individual or simple
systems). Such a prediction also remains fully compatible with the requirements of
relativity or more generally Einstein-locality. It is, however, a reﬂection of quantum
nonlocality (as deﬁned in Chap. 7), insofar as the corresponding predictions can
be made, as in EPR-type experiments, concerning spatially separated objects, as
predictions at a distance, without an action at a distance.
With the concept of quantum causality in hand, one can give meaning to Bohr’s
view of complementarity as a generalization of causality, of “the very ideal of
causality” (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 41). On the one hand, “our freedom of handling the
measuring instruments, characteristic of the very idea of experiment” in all physics,
our “free choice” concerning what kind of experiment we want to perform is essen-
tial (Bohr 1935, p. 699). On the other hand, as against classical physics or relativity,
implementing our decision concerning what we want to do will allow us to make only
certaintypesofpredictionsandwillexcludethepossibilityofcomplementary typesof
predictions. Complementarity generalizes causality, because it deﬁnes which events
can or cannot be probabilistically or statistically predicted by our decision concerning
which experiment to perform, without, however, being ever deﬁnitively established
as future events. Hence, this generalization of causality excludes classical causality.
In addition to Bohr’s remarkable anticipation, in 1958, to which the present view
of quantum causality is indebted, several concepts of probabilistic and quantum
causality were proposed in quantum information theory (e.g., Hardy 2010; Brukner
2014; D’Ariano 2018). Some philosophical treatments of causality considered the
roleofprobabilityincausalityaswell,asnotedbyD’Ariano(e.g.,Salmon1998;Pearl
2000; D’Ariano 2018). D’Ariano deﬁnes causality in general (at least in physics) by
means of this type of concept (D’Ariano 2018; D’Ariano et al. 2014). Classical
causality or determinism (the term used, equivalently, by D’Ariano and coworkers)
is a special case of causality in his probabilistic sense, which may allow, as in classical
mechanics, for ideally exact predictions. This limit is equally in place the case in of
quantum causality or, more generally, probabilistic causality, as deﬁned here.17
This is an important concept. Just as the present concept of quantum or proba-
bilistic causality, this concept tells us that our understanding of physics (classical,
relativistic, or quantum) changes once we see the world in terms of probability, as, in
Jaynes’s title phrase, “the logic of science” (Jaynes 2003). This is also something that
both D’Ariano and coworkers’ and the present view shares with the Bayesian view,
such as that of QBism (Jaynes was a Bayesian). Of course, in quantum physics,
we cannot do otherwise, at least thus far. This perspective, however, changes our
view of all physics, even if it is classically causal or deterministic, in part because
probability is indissociable from temporality and the arrow of time. The work of
D’Ariano and coworkers is an important contribution to this philosophy, in their
17 An example of a toy theory (very difﬁcult mathematically) that is deterministic but not causal
in D’Ariano’s sense is offered in D’Ariano et al. (2014). This theory is manifestly not classical.
Indeed, such a theory cannot in principle be classical, because in the case of individual classical
systems determinism and classical causality (as the classical limit of the concept of causality as
deﬁned by D’Ariano et al. or quantum causality, as deﬁned here) coincide.

6.6 Causality and Complementarity
213
case (or that of QBism) as part of the quantum-informational philosophy. The latter
also plays an important role in the present view, which arises from the history of
quantum theory and the RWR view, beginning with Bohr 1913 theory and Heisen-
berg’s thinking leading him to his discovery of QM. On the other hand, as noted in
Chap. 4, Heisenberg’s thinking could be seen as quantum-informational in spirit, and
quantum information theory as Heisenbergian in spirit.
In my view, however, there is a question that needs to be considered—that of the
idea of cause, to which the present concept of probabilistic or quantum causality, does
not appeal, unlike, expressly, that of D’Ariano and coworkers. This question arises
in considering the relationships between the preparation, the event designated above
as A, and the observation, the event designated above as X, as those of cause and
effect. This question is also pertinent to Bohr’s view of causality, just discussed, as
deﬁned by a “sequence of cause and effect conforming with the elementary demands
of causality” (Bohr 1987, v. 3, p. 5). According to D’Ariano and coworkers: “The
preparation [A] plays the role of the cause and the observation that of the effect [X]”
(D’Ariano et al 2014, p. 5). The question is: In what sense is this a cause-effect
relationship and, if so, whether it can be guaranteed?
Ironically, this question arises because of the irreducible role of measurement
in quantum phenomena, as deﬁning each phenomena qua phenomena, rather than
measuring any pre-existing property of a quantum system considered, a view consis-
tent with their argumentation and enabling them to speak of the preparation as the
cause of the observation. As discussed in Chap. 2, it is not always (and, as Hume
already argued, perhaps ultimately never) possible to ascertain that any given event,
A, is actually the cause of any other event, X, even if one assumes classical causality
or a (deterministic) law that allows us to predict X, on the basis of A, with proba-
bility one. The existence of a classical cause or set of causes of X is assumed (even
by Hume), but it may not be possible for us to claim this status for a given entity
preceding X. In quantum physics, on the other hand, our intervention, as a prepara-
tion, deﬁnes quantum phenomena and as a result affects the course of reality, and
prevents determinism, because in general our predictions, even concerning the most
elementary quantum systems, do not have probability one. But, can one still speak
of the preparation as the cause of the observation?
First of all, one cannot be certain that X will happen because of A in any individual
case. One could only ascertain statistically that if one repeats A that X will in general
happen, which would deﬁne causality as a statistical concept at least in the case of
quantum phenomena, as D’Ariano and coworkers might accept, although they do not
qualify the situation in this way. More importantly, as explained above, even when
our prediction concerning X can be made, at time t0, on the basis of the measurement
(preparation) A, with probability one, as in EPR-type experiments, one can always
make an alternative, complementary, measurement at time t1 which will disable the
original prediction and deﬁne a different event or reality Y at t1. Unlike in classical
physics, one cannot assume, at least in the RWR view (and D’Ariano and coworkers
do not assume this either), that the system in question can simultaneously possess
both quantities in the way it would in classical physics, or Bohmian mechanics. One
cannot see A as the cause of Y, which, while an observation in its own right in its

214
6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical Law …
local environment, would no longer be an observation with the preparation A, as
X would be. But, once Y is deﬁned, X is no longer possible. All these events or
phenomena, A, X, and Y, are effects of the interactions, at the time of measurement,
between measuring instruments and quantum objects, or the ultimate constitution of
the reality responsible for quantum phenomena. One cannot, however, say either that
our preparation of measuring instruments is a cause of “effects” observed because
the outcome is deﬁned by this interaction, rather than by this preparation, and is
never guaranteed.
If one retains here the term cause, there is only a possible cause, or better, a
cause of the possible. Perhaps, one could also speak of “causality without causes.”
This statement could also in principle apply in classically causal or deterministic
situations. There, however, a cause or a set of causes is always assumed, even if it
is unknown or even unknowable, but not unthinkable, as it is in the present view of
probabilistic or quantum causality as a strong RWR view. Hence, the expression of
causality without causes is more ﬁtting in considering quantum phenomena, because
this causality without causes is a consequence of the ultimate constitution of the
reality responsible for quantum phenomena as a reality without realism. For the
moment, it does not appear that the cause-effect relationships between the preparation
and observation are guaranteed (even, it follows, when one deals with EPR-type
predictions with probability one), which make it difﬁcult to see the preparation as the
cause of the observation, because the outcome of an observation could be determined
otherwise than by the preparation. The preparation is a “cause” of probable events
of observation, but observations may not be its effects. It is of some interest that
these complexities were also not addressed by Bohr in his view, considered above,
of quantum measurement as “conforming with elementary demands of causality,”
given that these complexities reﬂect the considerations he used his earlier arguments.
These arguments, however, did not refer to probabilistic forms of causality, but were
considered as implying a renunciation of classical causality. In fairness, Bohr’s 1958
articleisasummationofBohr’sviewsratherthanafull-ﬂedgedargument.D’Ariano’s
“causality principle: The probability of preparations is independent of the choice of
observations” (D’Ariano 2018, p. 6) would fully still apply, also as correlative to
(Einstein) locality. I am not sure either that “causality principle” is the best term given
the aspects of the situation just considered and the history of the phrase from Kant
on (apart from the use of causality in relativity, which is, however, not probabilistic).
The present view avoids an appeal to causes, even though it cannot quite avoid an
appeal to causality, as a causality without causes.
What remains in place is the temporal precedence of A relative to either X or Y.
Either measurement or event, X or Y, would respect this precedence, as it cannot
precede A, and thus the arrow of time, inherent in and crucial to D’Ariano’s concept
of causality. This precedence is equally inherent and crucial to quantum causality,
as deﬁned here, or assuming the corresponding concept of probabilistic causality, in
the U-RWR view. If one adopts this concept, then, while probabilistically relating
A and X, one need not speak of A or the preparation as a cause. One could still
speak of both A and X, or any quantum event, as an effect of the interaction between
measuring instruments and quantum objects, or the ultimate constitution of the reality

6.6 Causality and Complementarity
215
responsible for quantum phenomena. For the reasons just explained, however, this
effect is without an ascertainable cause either. So is X. While A enables us, and only
us, probabilistically to predict X, it is not the cause of X in the present view.
Inthis view, as anRWR-typeview, thearrowof time, alongwithquantumcausality
itself, is only manifested classically in observable phenomena. D’Ariano, on the other
hand, appears to see the arrow of time as found in the ultimate workings of reality
responsible for quantum (or classical) phenomena (D’Ariano 2018). What can, in the
RWR view, be objectively ascertained is that the ultimate nature of reality responsible
forquantumphenomenaissuchthatallourinteractionswithit,onallscales,bymeans
of experimental technology entail the arrow of time, which quantum causality reﬂects
in the case of quantum phenomena. As indicated earlier, however, the present view
does not imply that at the ultimate level of reality there is no change or multiplicity
but only permanence and oneness, sometimes suggested in literature, as in (Barbour
1999), although Julian Barbour revised his position in (Barbour 2020). In the RWR
view, this concept would not apply to the ultimate constitution of reality any more
than those of change or motion, or any other concepts, such as space or time, or
the arrow of time. By the same token, as stated, the equations of QM or QFT, such
as Schrödinger’s or Dirac’s equation, are not equations of the motion of quantum
objects, which are, in the present view, deﬁned only at the time of measurement.
They only provide (with the help of Born’s or rule) expectation-catalogs concerning
the outcomes of future experiments, which implies the arrow of time. Accordingly,
their formal time reversibility, sometimes used to argue against the arrow of time or
even temporality, has no physical signiﬁcance.18 Rigorously, what is reversible is not
time but the value of the parameter t, which refers to measurements, which respect
the arrow of time as “the irreversibility of recordings” (Bohr 1987, v. 3, p. 5).
In the U-RWR view, this argumentation is extendable to all physics. In the U-
RWR view, the ultimate constitution of nature, at least as considered in physics, is
always a reality without realism, while allowing that, in considering some physical
phenomena, such as those of classical physics and relativity, the reality responsible
for them could be treated in realist terms, for all practical purposes within the scope
of these theories. By the same token, the relationships between all phenomena or
events are probabilistic, deﬁned by probabilistic causality, underlain by the ultimate
constitution of nature, as a reality without realism, while the connections between
certain physical phenomena, such as those of classical physics and relativity, can
be treated in a classically casual way. In some cases, as in considering individual
or small systems in classical mechanics or relativity, this treatment also allows for
ideally exact or deterministic predictions. Accordingly, in the U-RWR view, one, in
doing any physics (which in this respect becomes no different from QM or QFT in
the Q-RWR view), never ultimately deals with anything other than measurements
of and predictions concerning certain observed phenomena, rather than representing
18 While I brieﬂy mention a few works, it is not my aim to assess these views or the question of time
in general. See Emery et al. (2020) for a basic review and references, which, however, bypasses
entirely anything akin to the RWR view and the impact it has on this question, which is, I argue,
signiﬁcant. There are arguments for the arrow of time, based on realist and classically causal views,
such as offered in (Ungar and Smolin 2014) based on Smolin’s earlier work.

216
6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical Law …
the ultimate reality responsible for them, even when these predictions are predictions
with probability one. The possibility of such predictions, even in classical physics or
relativity, still does not mean that we determine the ultimate constitution of nature,
and as discussed above, in the case of quantum phenomena, such predictions, while
possible, bring with them new complexities. A prediction does not deﬁne a physical
reality, only a measurement does.
From this perspective, just as in the case of Schrödinger’s and Dirac’s equations,
the formal time reversibility of the equations of classical mechanics and relativity,
again, often used to argue against the arrow of time or even temporality in general,
has no physical signiﬁcance, either. The difference, which is of course important, is
the possibility of, in general, assuming both classical causality and, for all practical
purposes, ideally exact predictions in classical mechanics (of individual or simple
systems) and relativity, while the predictions of QM and QFT are, in general, proba-
bilistic even in considering the most elementary quantum objects. There is, however,
no time reversibility or backward-in-time causality, sometimes claimed on the basis
of the formal structure of the equations of classical physics and relativity, or again,
those of QM and QFT. First of all, there is, thus far, no experimental evidence to
support such claims. There are hypothetical arguments that are legitimate if one
assumes a realist view vs. the RWR view of these theories. Among them is the exis-
tence of closed time loops in Kurt Gödel’s solutions of the equations of general
relativity (“Gödel’s metric”), Kip Thorne’s wormhole “time-machines,” the hypo-
thetical existence of tachyons (particles that travel only faster than light in a vacuum,
which is not technically forbidden by relativity), and a few others. It is, however,
a different question how compelling these arguments are and to whom, even under
the assumption of realism. While most realist arguments against retroaction in time
do not rule it out, even in these arguments, the problems of the assumption remain
serious on well-known logical and physical grounds. Its main appeal appears to be
that it may solve certain (sometimes presumed rather than real) problems of QM or
QFT, or some versions of quantum gravity, all of which are hypothetical in any event.
By contrast, the RWR view, of either Q or U type, again, rules out retroaction in
time and backward-in-time causality automatically, given the status of all physical
theories in this view and the (probabilistic) nature of causality it assumes. The arrow
of time itself is, however, only manifested classically, as an objective experimental
fact, in observable phenomena, as an effect of our interactions with the ultimate
nature of reality by means of experimental technology, beginning with our bodies
and brains.
QMbroughtwithitboththeroleofconsciousnessandwhatmaybecalled“futural”
temporality, associated with the arrow of time, in deﬁning our predictions concerning
quantum events in accord with quantum causality. With each new experiment, we
deﬁne anew what may or may not happen, and with a quantum theory in hand,
the probabilities of such possible events, even if not what is bound to happen,
which would amount to classical causality and, again, the corresponding concept
of measurement. That does not mean that the concept of past is lost in dealing with
quantum phenomena: the past is deﬁned by measurements performed in the past, just
as the present is deﬁned by the measurement performed at a given present (“now”)

6.6 Causality and Complementarity
217
moment and possible future moments are deﬁned by possible future measurements.
All of these events or expectations pertain to the corresponding quantum phenomena,
at which level our phenomenal and physical concepts apply. Records of the past
are always classical, while predictions concerning the future are always quantum-
theoretical. These records are part of the spatial–temporal continuum of our experi-
ence, where we can also use clocks (or rods) in the way we do in classical physics or
relativity, keeping in mind that relativity changes the behavior of rods and clocks
depending on their local frame of reference, thus precluding the possibility of
the universal clock. But our classical concepts, including time, cannot, in RWR-
type interpretations, apply to the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for
quantum phenomena.
The irreducible discreteness of quantum phenomena, and, in the strong RWR
view, the impossibility of assuming a continuous and especially classically causal
process of linking them, place time “out of joint,” technically, vis-à-vis any concept
of time, but in any event time that can be measured by clocks in the way it is in
classical physics or relativity and registered by our consciousness as such. In quantum
physics, “time is out of joint,” as Hamlet famously said (“Time is out of joint. O cursed
spite/That ever I was born to set it right” [Hamlet, I.v. 190–192]). Unlike, however, in
Shakespeare’s play, where this statement refers to a single juncture of the narrative, in
quantum physics, in narratives of quantum physics, this statement applies every time
the concept of time applies. To “set it right” means something very different from
restoring the spacetime continuum to the ultimate constitution of reality, because,
in RWR-type interpretations, quantum events cannot be considered as connected by
any continuous spatiotemporal process. In the strong RWR view, no concept of time
can ultimately apply to this constitution, any more than any other concept, such as
“constitution.” “Reality” itself is, again, a name without a concept associated to it.
What allows us to “set it right” is quantum causality.
At the same time, the fact that QM, or QFT, only predicts future phenomena or
events rather than traces any past events, determined only by irreversible measure-
ments, suggests local “time arrows,” perhaps also indicating a global “time arrow”
for the available world-manifold, say, the observable universe, assuming the latter
is quantum in its ultimate constitution, or if one adopts the U-RWR view, even
otherwise. I shall mention this as a possibility because this constitution is currently
unknown and such a concept (sporadically entertained in modern cosmology) may
not be applicable: we do not have a microscopic gravity theory, which may prove not
to be quantum. I shall, accordingly, limit myself to the arrows of time in quantum
physics.
If one adopts the RWR view, one can, again, only speak of time and time arrows
as effects manifested in quantum phenomena, and not as pertaining to the ultimate
nature of reality responsible for these effects. The concept of time cannot apply to
this reality anymore than any other concept, such as space or motion. This reality
is that of matter (which is ultimately beyond conception), while time belongs to
thought, possibly only to conscious thought, from which, moreover, the time used
in physics, the time deﬁned by clocks, is constructed by idealization, as Einstein
recognized. From this, RWR-type, perspective, claims, made by, famously, Einstein

218
6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical Law …
and others, to the effect that such concepts as “now,” “before,” and “after” only
belong to consciousness and not to physical reality, may be correct, but not because
the equations of classical physics, relativity, or quantum theory, as mathematically
not sensitive to such concepts, represent physical reality. It is, in the RWR view,
because the ultimate nature of physical reality cannot be represented either by these
concepts or by these equations, while any actual application of these equations in
classical physics, relativity, and especially quantum physics, to physical phenomena
observed always involves these concepts and with them the arrow of time, along with
the necessary use of consciousness.
The ultimate “temporality,” if the term applies, of the unconscious may, however,
be unthinkable in this sense. Sigmund Freud’s German term for the unconscious is
das Unbewusste, literally the unknowable. The unthinkable? Quite possibly, even
if not for Freud himself! The time of consciousness, conceptualized by Husserl’s
phenomenology as a linear sequence of presences (Now B would be constituted
by the retention of Now A and the protention of Now C) may be affected, from
the unconscious, by what may be called time-unthinkable, which may even be as
responsible for these conscious sequences as it is for their disruption by random
events,akintowhathappensinthecaseofquantumphenomena.AsDerridaobserved:
“the temporality to which [Freud] refers [in the case of the unconscious] cannot be
that which leads itself to a phenomenology of consciousness or of [now] and one may
indeed wonder by what right all that is in question here should still be called time,
now, anterior present, delay, etc.,” in short any name we associate with Husserlian
and related forms of temporality (Derrida 1974, p. 67). If so, there is a parallel
between two situations, that of phenomena of consciousness and that of quantum
phenomena, or if one adopts the U-RWR view, all physical phenomena, in the nature
of their emergence.19 In addition, Husserl’s model of temporal succession, of the
present or “now” in the ﬁrst place, is at most an idealization of experience and is not
experience itself. The time used in physics, measured and, as Einstein argued, deﬁned
by clocks, is still idealized from this model, essentially by mathematizing Husserl’s
19 This parallel should not confused with von Neumann’s “psycho-physical parallelism” (Von
Neumann 1932, pp. 428–421) and related concepts, which are, in the ﬁrst place, related to conscious-
ness. Apart from this brief comment, still dealing only with time-unthinkable, I put aside the appli-
cation of quantum or quantum-like (physically, mathematically, or philosophically) theories and
concepts, including those of Bohr, such as complementarity or phenomena, to human thinking or
social phenomena in such ﬁelds as consciousness studies, cognitive psychology, or economics. This
is a different subject that I have considered elsewhere (e.g., Plotnitsky 2016b, 2021). See Khren-
nikov (2015) for an argument for a quantum-like view of conscious–unconscious dynamics, and
(D’Ariano and Faggin 2021) for an application to this problematic of D’Ariano and coworkers’
quantum-informational framework of operational quantum theory, discussed in Chap. 9. The article
does not address the question of temporality or presence. It is of some interest that, apart from
those by the present author, most works on the subject, with (Khrennikov 2015) being a rare excep-
tion, deal primarily and even exclusively with consciousness, which, while essential, especially
as concerns our experience of the present or “now,” is a very limited part of thinking. However
critically one might see Freud’s psychoanalytic theory, he deserves credit for his realization that
our thinking is primarily unconscious and, as such, it may not be governed by the same temporality
as our conscious thinking. As our dreams, memories, and other manifestations of the unconscious
tell us, the unconscious may adopt a variety of temporal or atemporal modes.

6.6 Causality and Complementarity
219
concept, as Weyl argued (Weyl 1952, pp. 7–10). This idealization has served physics
well from Galileo or even Aristotle to Einstein and beyond, including in quantum
physics. While, however, the latter uses clocks and the corresponding concept of
time in dealing with quantum phenomena, in the RWR view, this or any conception
of time cannot apply to the ultimate constitution reality responsible for them.
The U-RWR view extends this view to the ultimate constitution of nature as
responsible for all physical phenomena. Consider the claim that the (known) Universe
is about 13.8 billion years old, a time arrow extending from the Big Bang. Is this
claim, which is classical, objective? Yes, but only in the following sense. There is
something existing or real in the constitution of the Universe that in the interaction
with our measuring instruments, beginning with our bodies and brains, in this case
especially clocks, allows us to make this claim, as objectively communicable and
veriﬁable. But the physical reality that is ultimately responsible for the possibility
of doing so is, in the RWR view, beyond our capacity to know or even to conceive
of. This assumption does not require the U-RWR view of this ultimate constitution,
but only the Q-RWR view, if the origin of the Universe is quantum, as it appears to
be, at least at this point, even if not without some dissenting views. Such concepts
as space and time, as all concepts that we can form, even those that place certain
entities, such as a reality without realism, beyond conception, are human, due to our
evolutionary biological and neurological nature. They need not and, in the RWR view,
do not belong to the independent physical constitution of the Universe to the degree
one can, again, use any of these terms, “reality,” “entity,” “independent,” “physical,”
“constitution,” or “universe,” and one ultimately cannot, given that they are human
terms, too, as is the RWR view.
6.7
Conclusion: Law Without Law, Reality Without
Realism, and It Without Bit
If combined with the RWR view, complementarity may, I have argued here, be
related to Wheeler’s idea of “law without law” (Wheeler 1983). On the one hand,
complementarity as a concept may be seen as a reﬂection of the fact that the behavior
of quantum objects of the same type, say, electrons, is not governed by the same
physical law, especially a representational one, in complementary contexts. In the
present view, one would speak of the ultimate character of reality responsible for
quantum phenomena and, along with them and thus at the time of measurement,
quantum objects, which would allow one to keep the relational structure of Bohr’s
concept as pertaining to quantum phenomena. On the other hand, in RWR-type
interpretations, there is no physical law representing this character, given that, in
these interpretations, it is beyond representation or even conception. Hence, it is
ﬁtting to speak of law without law, thus connecting it to reality without realism, and,
I shall now suggest, to “it without bit.”

220
6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical Law …
Wheeler eventually linked this “law without law” to quantum information theory,
which he helped to usher in, along with Feynman, his student. It was Feynman, too,
who gave his lectures on “the character of physical law” with which I started this
chapter. The lectures were given in 1965, and thus decades before quantum informa-
tion theory or the idea of quantum computing was suggested by several ﬁgures, such
as, in addition to Feynman, Paul Benioff, and Yuri Manin. As noted in Chap. 4, it
became apparent already with Heisenberg’s thinking, leading him to his discovery of
QM, that quantum objects, in their interactions with measuring instruments, create
speciﬁcally organized, including, in certain circumstances, complementary, struc-
tures of information, composed of classical bits, and allow one to use theories, such
as QM, to predict this information. The very nature of quantum measurement, as
understood in this study, is deﬁned by this situation, making the data observed in
quantum phenomena generated by a quantum computer created by our interaction
with nature. The ultimate constitution of matter is, to adopt Wheeler’s famous maxim
(even if not quite his meaning), “it from bit,” in the present, even if not Wheeler’s
view, as “it” inferred from “bit” (Wheeler 1990, p. 3). The present view, it follows,
also makes this it “it without bit,” while, at the same time, no bit is possible without
this “it.” According to Wheeler:
[E]very it—every particle, every ﬁeld of force, even the spacetime continuum itself—derives
its function, its meaning, its very existence entirely—even if in some contexts indirectly—
from the apparatus elicited answers to yes or no questions, binary choices …, bits. It from
bit symbolizes the idea that every item of the physical world has at bottom—at a very
deep bottom, in most instances—an immaterial source and explanation; that what we call
reality arises in the last analysis from the posing of yes-no questions and the registering of
equipment-evoked responses; in short, that all things physical are information-theoretic in
origin and this is a participatory universe. (Wheeler 1990, p. 5)
In Bohr’s ultimate view or the present view, as the strong RWR view, this is only
true insofar as all things in physics are human, and, in the ﬁrst place, insofar as any
speciﬁc concept designated “reality” is inferred from such responses to the questions
posed by thought. There are no responses, any more than questions, other than those
belonging to thought. The term “reality,” deﬁned as a reality without realism, has no
concept associated with it, and the strong RWR view implies that no such a concept
can, in principle, be formed. Still, however, this concept without a concept is human
and is inferred by thought from phenomena observed in measuring instruments: it is
a product of the interaction among matter (as a reality without realism), thought, and
technology. Bohr is reported to have said: “We must never forget that ‘reality’ too
is a human word” (Kalckar 1967, p. 234). As I qualiﬁed earlier, one should always
be cautious concerning such reported statements, especially in Bohr’s case. This
statement is, however, consistent with Bohr’s argumentation in his writings, just as it
is with the RWR view. This would still be true even if there is no concept associated
to reality or any other word, such as “it”, difﬁcult as it may be to use a word, even
“it,” unlike, a mathematical symbol without a concept. Even to deprive a word of a
concept is still human, however.
Wheeler’s “it-from-bit” manifesto was inspired by Bohr, whom Wheeler cited
at the outset. Wheeler’s very deﬁnition of “it from bit” may be seen as a variation

6.7 Conclusion: Law Without Law, Reality Without Realism …
221
of Bohr’s view, with which I began this study, of the irreducible role of measuring
technology (the “apparatus” invoked by Wheeler) and the constitution of quantum
phenomena and information it contains, and a derivation of the existence of quantum
objects from the character of this information. It is a separate question whether
Wheeler’s view converges with that of Bohr or diverges from it, as in my view, it
ultimately does. The reason for this assessment is that one could think of “it from
bit” in more than one way, in particular, in the following two ways. The ﬁrst is
that of “it” as deﬁned by or even created by “bit,” which appears to be closer to
Wheeler’s own meaning, correlative to his concept of “a participatory universe,” to
which he refers next in his manifesto as well. He says: “It from bit symbolizes the
idea that every item of the physical world has at bottom—at a very deep bottom,
in most instances—an immaterial source and explanation; that what we call reality
arises in the last analysis from the posing of yes–no questions and the registering
of equipment-evoked responses; in short, that all things physical are information-
theoretic in origin and this is a participatory universe” (Wheeler 1990, p. 5). This
may still be somewhat ambiguous, because Wheeler might mean that “all things
physical are information-theoretic in origin” only insofar as they are constructed by
us, even if constructed as unconstructible, which would be true in Bohr’s and the
present view. I am willing to grant that this may have been Wheeler’s meaning, even
though he does not elaborate on this point. This would bring him closer to Bohr. In
this case, “it” as inferred from “bit,” which is also the reading of “it” as that which,
while giving rise to “bit,” is beyond our capacity to deﬁne or even think it (a pronoun
that is difﬁcult to avoid). This will make the word “it” inapplicable either. In the
RWR view, this “it,” while real, is beyond thought, and as such, cannot be called “it,”
any more than anything else, including reality, unless one deﬁnes it, as in the phrase
reality without realism, as a word without a concept associated to it. This will make
this “it” “it without bit.”
Wheeler invokes Bohr at the outset of his “it-from-bit” manifesto: “The overar-
ching principle of 20th-century physics, the quantum—and the principle of comple-
mentarity that is the central idea of the quantum—leaves us no escape, Niels Bohr
tells us, from ‘a radical revision of our attitude as regards physical reality’” (Wheeler
1990, p. 4). The phrase is used twice, with a minor variation, by Bohr in his reply
to EPR, on the second occasion, cited by Wheeler, by way or establishing a parallel
revision of our concept of physical reality in general relativity (Bohr 1935, p. 697,
702). This revision of attitude led Bohr to his ultimate, RWR-type, interpretation,
in part in responding to Einstein’s questioning of QM, in particular in EPR’s paper,
Bohr’sreplytowhichiscitedbyWheeler.InRWR-typeinterpretations,QMisincom-
patible with the concept of a proper, “complete” in a realist sense, physical theory
advocated by Einstein and deﬁning his discontent with QM. This is because QM
offerednorepresentationor evenconceptionof thebehavior of theultimateindividual
constituents of nature and, correlatively, no deterministic predictions concerning this
behavior in the way classical mechanics or relativity did. As such it was not in accord
with Einstein’s concepts of the completeness of a fundamental theory, which I call
“Einstein-completeness.” For Einstein, QM was at most a correct statistical theory of
ensembles. QM may, however, be seen, as it was by Bohr, as complete in a different

222
6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical Law …
sense, which I call Bohr-complete. It is as complete as nature allows our theory of
(nonrelativistic) quantum phenomena to be, as things stand now. This is a broader
concept, with Einstein-completeness being a special case, which would apply in
classical physics or relativity.
As discussed in the Introduction, Einstein admitted that “the belief that [QM]
should offer an exhaustive [complete] description of individual phenomena” by only
providing statistical predictions concerning the outcome of repeated experiments was
“logically possible without contradiction,” but found this belief “so very contrary to
[his] scientiﬁc instinct that [he could not] forego the search for a more complete
conception” (Einstein 1936, p. 375). He did not believe either that QM or QFT could
provide a proper starting point for ﬁnding such as theory (Einstein 1949a, p. 83).
And yet, QM and QFT remain our standard theory of quantum phenomena to this
day.
Perhaps, then, the question is not what we require from a fundamental theory,
unless experimental evidence leads to such requirements (which was not the reason
for Einstein’s view), but what a fundamental theory, either one already in place or
one we need to develop, requires from us. One of the things it may require is a change
of our attitude toward problems, such as that of physical reality, that we confront.
I would argue, given Bohr’s customarily careful way of expressing his points, that
his invocation of “attitude” in speaking of “a radical revision of our attitude toward
the problem of physical reality” (Bohr 1935, p. 697; emphasis added) need not mean
that one should necessarily adopt any particular concept of reality, even though Bohr
did adopt an RWR-type one, as against a realist one. More important is our attitude
itself toward this problem or other problems: we should not be bound by previously
established views, no matter how ingrained or cherished, and be ready to change our
ways of thinking, including the RWR view, if physics requires it.
References
Barbour, J.B.: The End of Time: The Next Revolution in Physics. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
UK (1999)
Barbour, J. B. The Janus Point: A New Theory of Time, Basic Books, New York (2020)
Bell, J.S.: Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK (2004)
Bitbol, M.: Schrödinger’s Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics. Kluwer, Dordrecht, Netherland
(1996)
Bitbol, M.: On Bohr’s transcendental research program. In: Faye, J., Folse, H. (eds) Niels Bohr and
the Philosophy of Physics: Twenty-First-Century Perspective, pp. 47–66. Bloomsbury, London,
UK (2019)
Bohr, N.: Space–time continuity and atomic physics (Bristol lecture). In: Bohr, N. (eds.) Niels Bohr:
Collected Works, 10 vols, 1972–1996, vol. 6, pp. 361–370. Elsevier, Amsterdam, Netherland
(1931)
Bohr, N.: Can quantum-mechanical description of physical reality be considered complete? Phys.
Rev. 48, 696–702 (1935)

References
223
Bohr, N.: Causality and complementarity. In: Faye, J., Folse, H.J. (eds.) The Philosophical Writings
of Niels Bohr, Volume 4: Causality and Complementarity, Supplementary Papers, 1999, pp. 83–
91. Ox Bow Press, Woodbridge, CT, USA (1937)
Bohr, N.: The causality problem in atomic physics. In Faye, J., Folse, H.J. (eds.) The Philosophical
Writings of Niels Bohr, Volume 4: Causality and Complementarity, Supplementary Papers, 1999,
pp. 94–121. Ox Bow Press, Woodbridge, CT, USA (1938)
Bohr, N.: Interview with Thomas Kuhn, Aage Petersen, and Eric Rüdinger, 17 November 1962. In:
Niels Bohr Archive, Copenhagen and American Institute of Physics, College Park, MD, USA
(1962)
Bohr, N.: The Philosophical Writings of Niels Bohr, 3 vols., Ox Bow Press, Woodbridge, CT, USA
(1987)
Bohr, N.: Niels Bohr: Collected Works, 10 vols. Elsevier, Amsterdam, Netherland (1972–1996)
Bohr, N., Rosenfeld, L.: On the question of the measurability of electromagnetic ﬁeld quantities.
In: Wheeler, J.A., Zurek, W.H. (eds.) Quantum Theory and Measurement, 1983, pp. 479–522.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, USA (1933)
Bohr, N., Rosenfeld, L.: Field and charge measurements in quantum electrodynamics. In: Wheeler,
J.A., Zurek, W.H. (eds.) Quantum Theory and Measurement, 1983, pp. 523–534. Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ, USA (1950)
Born, M.: Quantenmechanik der Stoßvorgänge. Z. Phys. 38, 803–827 (1926a)
Born, M.: Zur Quantenmechanik der Stoßvorgänge. Z. Phys. 37, 863–867 (1926b)
Born, M.: The Einstein-Born Letters (trans. Born, I.). Walker, New York, NY, USA (2005)
Brukner, C.: Quantum causality. Nat. Phys. 10, 259–263 (2014)
D’Ariano, G.M.: Causality re-established. Philos. Trans. Royal Soc. A 376, 20170313 (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2017.0313
D’Ariano,G.M.,Faggin,F.:Hardproblemandfreewill:aninformation-theoreticalapproach(2021).
arXiv:2012.06580v2 [quant-ph], 28 Jan 2021
D’Ariano, G.M., Manessi, F., Perinotti, P.: Determinism without causality. Physica Scripta T63,
14013 (9pp) (2014). https://doi.org/10.1088/0031-8949/2014/T163/014013
Derrida, J.: Of Grammatology (trans. Spivak, G.C.). Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore,
MD, USA (1974)
Dirac, P.A.M.: The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, rpt 1995, 4th edn. Clarendon, Oxford, UK
(1958)
Einstein, A.: Physics and reality. J. Franklin Inst. 221, 349–382 (1936)
Einstein, A.: Autobiographical Notes (trans. Schilpp, P.A.). Open Court, La Salle, IL, USA (1949a)
Einstein, A.: Remarks to the essays appearing in this collective volume. In: Schilpp, P.A. (ed.)
Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist, 1949, pp. 663–688. Tudor, New York, NY, USA (1949b)
Einstein, A., Podolsky, B., Rosen, N.: Can quantum-mechanical description of physical reality be
considered complete? In: Wheeler, J.A., Zurek, W.H. (eds.) Quantum Theory and Measurement,
1983, pp. 138–141. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, USA (1935)
Emery, N., Markosian, N., Sullivan, M.: “Time”, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Zalta, E.N.,
ed.), 2020 Edn. Winter (2020). https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2020/entries/time/
Epperson, M.: Quantum Mechanics and the Philosophy of Alfred North Whitehead. Fordham
University Press, New York, NY, USA (2012)
Faye, J.: Niels Bohr: His Heritage and Legacy. An Anti-Realist View of Quantum Mechanics.
Kluwer, Dordrecht, Netherland (1991)
Faye, J., Folse H. (eds.) Niels Bohr and the Philosophy of Physics: Twenty-First-Century
Perspective. Bloomsbury, London, UK (2019)
Feynman, R.: The Character of Physical Law, Reprint 1994. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA
(1965)
Folse, H.J.: The Philosophy of Niels Bohr: The Framework of Complementarity. North Holland,
Amsterdam, Netherland (1985)
Fuchs, C.A.: On participatory realism (2016). arXiv:1601.04360v3 [quant-ph], 28 June 2016

224
6
Niels Bohr and the Character of Physical Law …
Fuchs, C. A., Nowithstanding Bohr, Reasons for QBism. Mind and Matter, Volume 15, Number 2,
245-300 (2017)
Fuchs, C.A., Mermin, N.D., Schack, R.: An introduction to QBism with an application to the locality
of quantum mechanics. Am. J. Phys. 82:749–754 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1119/1.4874855
Hardy, L.: A formalism-local framework for general probabilistic theories, including quantum
theory (2010). arXiv:1005.5164 [quant-ph]
Haroche, S.: Entanglement and decoherence in cavity quantum electrodynamics experiments. In:
Gonis, T., Turchi, P.E.A. (eds.) Decoherence and Its Implications in Quantum Computation and
Information Transfer, 2001, pp. 211–223. IOS Press, Amsterdam, Netherlands (2001)
Haroche, S., Raimond, J.-M.: Exploring the Quantum: Atoms, Cavities, and Photons. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, UK (2006)
Haven, E., Khrennikov, A. (eds.) The Palgrave Book of Quantum Models in Social Science:
Applications and Grand Challenges, pp. 335–357. Palgrave-MacMillan, London, UK (2016)
Heisenberg, W.: Physics and Philosophy: The Revolution in Modern Science. Harper & Row, New
York, NY, USA (1962)
Held, C.: The Kochen-Specker theorem. In: Zalta, E.N. (ed.) Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(2018). https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2018/entries/kochenspecker/
Hilgevoord, J., Ufﬁnk, J.: The uncertainty principle. In: Zalta, E.N. (ed.) Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy, Spring, 2014 edn. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2014/entries/qt-uncertainty/
Honner, J.: The Description of Nature: Niels Bohr and the Philosophy of Quantum Physics.
Clarendon, Oxford, UK (1987)
Jaynes, E.T.: Probability Theory: The Logic of Science. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK (2003)
Kalckar, J.: Niels Bohr and his youngest disciples. In: Rozental, S. (ed.) Niels Bohr: His Life and
Work as Seen by his Friends and Colleagues. North-Holland, Amsterdam, Netherland (1967)
Khrennikov, A.: Quantum-like model of unconscious-conscious dynamics. Front. Psychol. 6, Art.
N 997 (2015)
Mermin, N.D.: Why Quark Rhymes with Pork: And Other Scientiﬁc Diversions. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK (2016)
Murdoch, D.: Niels Bohr’s Philosophy of Physics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK
(1987)
Newton, S.I.: The Principia: Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy (trans. Cohen, I.B.,
Whitman, A.). University of California Press, Berkeley, CA, USA (1999 [1687])
Ozawa, M.: An operational approach to quantum state reduction. Ann. Phys. 259, 121–137 (1997).
https://doi.org/10.1006/aphy.1997.5706
Ozawa, M.: Universally valid reformulation of the Heisenberg uncertainty principle on noise and
disturbance in measurements. Phys. Rev. A67, 042105 (2003)
Pauli, W.: Writings on Physics and Philosophy. Springer, Berlin, Germany (1994)
Pearl, J.: Causality: Models, Reasoning and Inference. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK (2000)
Peres, A.: Quantum Theory: Concepts and Methods. Kluwer, Dordrecht, Netherland (1993)
Petersen, A.: The philosophy of Niels Bohr. In: French, A.P., Kennedy, P.J. (eds.) Niels Bohr: A
Centenary Volume, pp. 133–151. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, USA (1985)
Pienaar, J.: Extending the agent in QBism. Found. Phys. 50, 1894–1920 (2020). https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10701-020-00375-z
Plotnitsky, A.: Epistemology and Probability: Bohr, Heisenberg, Schrödinger and the Nature of
Quantum-Theoretical Thinking. Springer, New York, NY (2009)
Plotnitsky, A.: ‘Dark materials to create more worlds’: on causality in classical physics, quantum
physics, and nanophysics. J. Comput. Theor. Nanosci. 8(6), 983–997 (2011)
Plotnitsky, A.: Bohr and Complementarity: An Introduction. Springer, New York, NY, USA (2012)
Plotnitsky, A.: “It’s best not to think about it at all-like the new taxes”: reality, observer, and
complementarity in Bohr and Pauli. In: Khrennikov, A., Atmanspacher, H., Migdal, A., Polyakov,

References
225
S. (eds.) Quantum Theory: Reconsideration of Foundations, vol. 6, pp. 22–47. American Institute
of Physics, Melville, NY, USA (2013)
Plotnitsky, A.: The Principles of Quantum Theory, from Planck’s Quanta to the Higgs Boson: The
Nature of Quantum Reality and the Spirit of Copenhagen. Springer/Nature, New York, NY, USA
(2016a)
Plotnitsky, A.: The visualizable, the representable, and the inconceivable: realist and non-realist
mathematical models in physics and beyond. Philosophical Trans. Royal Soc. A 374(1) (2016b).
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2015.0101
Plotnitsky, A.: Spooky predictions at a distance: reality, complementarity and contextuality in
quantum theory. Philosophical Trans. Royal Soc. A 377, 20190089 (2019). https://doi.org/10.
1098/rsta.2019.0089
Plotnitsky, A. On “Decisions and Revisions Which a Minute Will Reverse”: Consciousness, The
Unconscious and Mathematical Modeling of Thinking. Entropy, 23, 1026 (2021). https://doi.org/
10.3390/e23081026
Rovelli, C.: Helgoland: Making Sense of the Quantum Revolution. Riverhead, New York, NY, USA
(2021)
Salmon, W.: Causality and Explanation. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK (1998)
Schrödinger, E.: The present situation in quantum mechanics. In: Wheeler, J.A., Zurek, W.H. (eds.)
Quantum Theory and Measurement, 1983, pp. 152–167. Princeton University Press, Princeton,
NJ, USA (1935)
Schwinger, J.: Quantum uncertainty principle: no Loopholes. Science 264, 1830 (1994)
Shilladay, C., Busch, P.: Complementarity and uncertainty in Mach-Zehnder interferometry and
beyond. Phys. Rep. 435, 1–31 (2006)
Ungar, R.M., Smolin, L.: The Singular Universe and the Reality of Time: A Proposal in Natural
Philosophy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK (2014)
Von Neumann, J.: Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (trans. Beyer, R.T.), rpt. 1983.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ (1932)
Wang, Z., Busemeyer, J.: Reintroducing the concept of complementarity into psychology. Front.
Psychol. 6, 1822 PMCID: PMC4661229 (2015). https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01822
Weyl, H.: Space Time Matter (trans. Brose, H.L.). Dover, Mineola, NY, USA (1952)
Wheeler, J. A.: The participatory universe. Science 81 2(5), 66–67 (1981)
Wheeler, J.A.: Law without law. In: Wheeler, J.A., Zurek, W.H. (eds.) Quantum Theory and
Measurement, pp. 182–216. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, USA (1983)
Wheeler,J.A.:Information,physics,quantum:thesearchforlinks.In:Zurek,W.H.(ed.)Complexity,
Entropy, and the Physics of Information, pp. 3–28. Addison-Wesley, Redwood City, CA, USA
(1990)
Whitehead, A.N.: Process and Reality: An Essay in Cosmology, rpt. 1978. Free Press, New York,
NY, USA (1929)

Chapter 7
“Without in Any Way Disturbing
the System”: Reality, Probability,
and Nonlocality, from Bohr to Bell
and Beyond
If, without in any way disturbing a system, we can predict with
certainty (i.e., with probability equal to unity) the value of a
physical quantity, then there exists an element of physical reality
corresponding to this physical quantity.
—Albert Einstein, Boris Podolsky, and Nathan Rosen, “Can
Quantum-Mechanical Description of Physical Reality be
Considered Complete?” (1935) (Einstein et al. 1935, p. 138)
From our point of view we now see that the wording of the above
mentioned criterion of physical reality proposed by Einstein,
Podolsky, and Rosen contains an ambiguity as regards the
meaning of the expression “without in any way disturbing a
system.
—Niels Bohr, “Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of
Physical Reality be Considered Complete?” (1935) (Bohr 1935,
p. 700)
Abstract While continuing the exploration of Bohr’s thinking, this chapter aims to
contribute to the ongoing task of clarifying the relationships among reality, proba-
bility, and nonlocality in quantum theory from the RWR viewpoint. The history of
these relationships was inaugurated by EPR’s 1935 paper, “Can Quantum–Mechan-
ical Description of Physical Reality be Considered Complete?” By considering a
thought experiment, the EPR experiment, EPR argued that QM is either incomplete
or nonlocal, in the sense of allowing an instantaneous action at a distance, “a spooky
action at a distance,” as Einstein called it. Their argument was challenged by Bohr
in his reply under the same title. The exchange decisively shaped the subsequent
debate concerning the subject, rekindled by Bell’s theorem and related ﬁndings.
After a brief introduction (Sect. 7.1), Sect. 7.2 offers an outline of the problem-
atic considered in this chapter. Section 7.3 focuses on completeness, and Sect. 7.4 on
(non)locality,viathedifferencebetween“Einstein-nonlocality”and“quantumnonlo-
cality.” Section 7.5 discusses quantum correlations in the context of Bell’s theorem
via Fine’s and Mermin’s works. Section 7.6 considers the relationships between
complementarity and entanglement via Schrödinger’s discussion of entanglement, a
concept that he introduced.
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
A. Plotnitsky, Reality Without Realism,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-84578-0_7
227

228
7
“Without in Any Way Disturbing the System”: Reality …
Keywords Bohr-completeness · Einstein-completeness · Einstein-nonlocality ·
Entanglement · EPR experiment · Quantum correlations · Quantum ignorance ·
Quantum nonlocality
7.1
Introduction
While continuing this book’s exploration of Bohr’s thinking, this chapter also aims
to contribute to our understanding of the relationships among reality, probability,
and nonlocality in quantum theory, by considering them from the RWR viewpoint.
Although there are earlier indications of the signiﬁcance of the question of locality
in quantum theory, including at the earlier stages of the Bohr–Einstein debate (e.g.,
Bohr 1987, v. 2, pp. 52–58), the history of this question may be seen as inaugurated in
1935 by EPR’s paper, “Can Quantum–Mechanical Description of Physical Reality be
Considered Complete?,” via the question of the completeness of QM (Einstein et al.
1935). It took a few decades, until the 1960s, for the question of nonlocality to take
the center stage in the debate concerning quantum foundations, in the wake of Bell’s
and the Kochen–Specker theorems and related ﬁndings. The question of probability
entered into this problematic in an indirect way because the EPR experiment deals
with, and EPR’s argument depends on, predictions with probability equal to unity.
As discussed in Chap. 6, however, such predictions pose additional complexities in
the case of quantum phenomena. These complexities were, Bohr argued, underap-
preciated by EPR but assisted Bohr in his counterargument in his reply, published
under the same title soon thereafter (Bohr 1935).
EPR proposed a concept of reality based on the following “reasonable” or “suf-
ﬁcient” criterion, equally applicable, they believed, in both classical and quantum
theory: “If, without in any way disturbing a system, we can predict with certainty (i.e.,
with probability equal to unity) the value of a physical quantity, then there exists an
element of physical reality corresponding to this physical quantity” (Einstein et al.
1935, p. 138). In order for a theory to be complete, according to EPR’s, now “nec-
essary” criterion, “every element of the physical reality must have a counterpart in
the physical theory” (Einstein et al. 1935, p. 138). The theory would then represent
every such element in a realist way and, as a result, predict every future element
with a probability equal to unity and thus establish it as real, on the model of clas-
sical mechanics (for individual or small, nonchaotic, systems). It would predict, with
certainty, what would happen to the system considered as an individual system,
barring possible outside interferences, from which the system could, however, be
ideally isolated. By using the famous thought experiment, the EPR experiment, EPR
argued that QM is either incomplete by their criterion, because it could not predict
all that was possible to ascertain as real, or else is nonlocal in the sense of allowing
an instantaneous action at a distance, or, in the present deﬁnition, Einstein-nonlocal.
EPR’s argument was challenged by Bohr, on both counts, completeness and nonlo-
cality, Bohr-completeness and Einstein-nonlocality. Bohr argued that this “criterion
of reality … contains—however cautious its formulation may appear—an essential

7.1 Introduction
229
ambiguity when it is applied the actual problem with which we are here concerned”
(Bohr 1935, p. 697). It followed that QM was in fact able to predict all that one
could ascertain as real in the case of quantum phenomena, or at least that EPR
did not demonstrate otherwise. EPR did, however, change the nature of the debate
concerning quantum theory, although took a while and a few other events for this
change to become fully manifested, sometimes in the 1960s. Einstein and Bohr were
no longer part of this debate by then, but the shadow of their debate, including their
exchange concerning the EPR experiment, has continued to spread over this debate
during the last half-century and still does.
Section 7.2 offers a general outline of the problematic considered in this chapter.
Section 7.3 focuses on the question of completeness and Sect. 7.4 on the question
of (non)nonlocality, via the difference between Einstein-nonlocality (an action at a
distance) and quantum nonlocality (predictions at a distance). Section 7.5 discusses
quantum correlations in the context of Bell’s theorem via Fine’s and Mermin’s works.
Section 7.6 considers the relationships between complementarity and entanglement
via Schrödinger’s discussion of entanglement in his 1935 papers, including the cat-
paradox paper (Schrödinger 1935a), written in response to EPR’s paper.
7.2
Confronting EPR: Completeness, Complementarity,
and Quantum Nonlocality
Neither EPR’s article nor Bohr’s reply spoke of “correlations” and “entanglement.”
The concept of entanglement was introduced, in German (Verschränkung) and
English, by Schrödinger in three papers, including his cat-paradox paper, written
in response to EPR’s paper (Schrödinger 1935a, b, 1936), discussed in the ﬁnal
section of this chapter. The language of correlations came into prominence, in the
wake of Bell’s and the Kochen–Specker theorems, in the 1960s.
In view of these theorems and related ﬁndings, the main focus of the debate
concerning quantum foundations during the last half-century shifted to the ques-
tion of locality of QM or quantum phenomena themselves, rather than that of the
completeness of QM, although this assessment may depend on one’s concept of
completeness. This concept may, for example, be realist, as was that of Einstein,
representing, ideally (classically) causally, the behavior of the ultimate constitu-
tion of the physical reality considered, which I term Einstein-completeness. QM, in
RWR-type interpretations, such as that of Bohr, is manifestly Einstein-incomplete
because it places the ultimate constitution of physical reality responsible for quantum
phenomena beyond representation or even conception. On the other hand, QM may
be argued to be, in terms on this study, Bohr-complete, a broader conception, with
Einstein-completeness being a special case, found in classical physics and relativity:
QM is as complete as nature allows our theories of quantum phenomena to be, as
things stand now, insofar as it predicts all that is possible to predict in accordance
with quantum experiments. Even this Bohr-completeness was, however, questioned

230
7
“Without in Any Way Disturbing the System”: Reality …
by EPR. They argued that QM could not predict all elements of reality that could be
established as such in considering any individual quantum systems, no matter how
elementary, unless one allows for Einstein-nonlocality, an instantaneous transmis-
sion of physical inﬂuences between spatially separated physical systems, famously
called by Einstein “a spooky action at a distance” [spukhafte Fernwirkung] (Born
2005, p. 155). Bohr contested this argument on both counts, by arguing that QM
could in fact predict all that was possible to ascertain as real, that is, all elements of
reality that could be unambiguously deﬁned, without violating Einstein-locality.
Einstein’ssentence,wherethephrase“aspookyactionatadistance”occurs,merits
a full citation: “I cannot seriously believe in [QM] because the theory cannot be recon-
ciled with the idea that physics should represent a reality in time and space, free from
spooky actions at a distance” (Born 2005, p. 155). This combination is also known as
“local realism.” Relaxing either requirement was unacceptable to Einstein. For Bohr,
by contrast, only Einstein-locality was required, but not a spacetime representation of
the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena, even in
considering the individual behavior of quantum objects, no matter how elementary.
Such a representation is required for Einstein-completeness, but is not necessary for
Bohr-completeness, although EPR and Einstein in his other arguments concerning
EPR-type experiments, again, claimed that QM is Bohr-incomplete as well.
What is known, more generally, as the principle of locality states that no instan-
taneous transmission of physical inﬂuences between spatially separated physical
systems (“action at a distance”) is allowed or that physical systems can only be
physically inﬂuenced by their immediate environment. While relativity conforms
to locality and gave rise to the concept, locality is independent of relativity theory.
First of all, it is independent of the concepts with which it is associated in relativity,
in particular the Lorentz invariance of special relativity. For one thing, the Lorentz
invariance is violated in general relativity, where it is only inﬁnitesimally valid, while
locality is strictly maintained there. Secondly, relativity prohibits a propagation of
physical inﬂuences not only instantaneously but faster than the (ﬁnite) speed of light
in a vacuum, a requirement that could, in principle, be violated (as a different speed
limit on physical action may be discovered), while still allowing for Einstein-locality.
Einstein’s “spooky action at a distance,” too, refers to an instantaneous action, which
is in conﬂict with relativity, but is not deﬁned by it. Accordingly, while the Einstein-
localityofQMwouldimplythatitisincompliancewiththerequirementsofrelativity,
it may be a deeper fact, as Bell’s and the Kochen–Specker theorems indicate. The
compatibility with relativity does, however, imply locality. In his reply to EPR, Bohr
argued for the compatibility of quantum phenomena and QM, at least in his (RWR-
type) interpretation and hence abandoning realism, for “all exigencies of relativity
theory” and thus for its Einstein-locality (Bohr 1935, p. 701n). Hence, the inference
that QM or nature itself is Einstein-nonlocal may be avoided, although this infer-
ence and the corresponding interpretations of the EPR-type experiments or quantum
correlations have been adopted.
In all of his arguments concerning the subject, Einstein only considered locality
or nonlocality in this sense, as against “quantum nonlocality,” the term never used
by Einstein. It was introduced, along with several deﬁnitions of it, in the wake of

7.2 Confronting EPR: Completeness, Complementarity …
231
Bell’s theorem. I shall adopt the following deﬁnition, which takes advantage of the
fact that one might in the case of quantum phenomena speak of “spooky predictions
at a distance,” without assuming a spooky action at a distance (e.g., Plotnitsky 2009,
pp. 269–271, 315, 2012, pp. 128–130, 2016, pp. 33–34, 136–137, 148, 2019a, 2020).
There are, experimentally conﬁrmed, statistical correlations between certain, specif-
ically prepared, distant quantum events, correlations properly predicted by QM (cum
Born’s or a similar rule). In some idealized cases of this type, such as that of the EPR
experiment, involving a pair of spatially separated quantum systems (S1, S2), one can
also predict with certainty certain measurable quantities for one of them, S2, on the
basis of measurements performed on the other, S1. These predictions are “spooky”
insofar as, against classical physics or relativity, there is, at least in RWR-type inter-
pretations, no story to be told and no concept to be formed of how these correlations
or, in the ﬁrst place, quantum phenomena come about or why these predictions are
possible. At the same time, these predictions need not entail a spooky action at a
distance or Einstein-nonlocality, including in the EPR-type cases, where they are
possible with certainty. As discussed in Chap. 6, all quantum predictions, including
in standard cases of measurement, are predictions at a distance, without implying an
action at a distance. I deﬁne “quantum nonlocality” as the existence of such related
or correlated distant quantum events and the possibility of predicting, it follows, at
a distance, these relations or correlations.
At the same time, as discussed later in this chapter, it is impossible to ascertain that
the relationships between any single pair of events, associated with the EPR-type
pair (S1, S2), involved in the EPR experiment or quantum correlations of the type
considered in Bell’s and the Kochen–Specker theorems, are Einstein-local. This fact
is in accord with the quantum indeﬁnitiveness postulate, which precludes making
deﬁnitive statements of any kind, concerning the relationship between any two indi-
vidual quantum phenomena or events, and even to ascertain the existence of any
such relationship. The postulate, thus, also precludes one from ascertaining that the
relationships between any two quantum events, each deﬁned only as something, an
event, that has already happened, is either Einstein-local or Einstein-nonlocal, in the
EPR-type situation, or otherwise. The postulate allows statements concerning the
relationships between multiple events, in this case statements statistical in nature,
such as those that correspond to correlations between distant events in the case of
quantum entanglement, and as such, are in accord with quantum nonlocality, as
deﬁned here, which only concerns predictions at a distance, and not relationships
betweenindividualevents.Thepostulateonlyappliestostatementsconcerningevents
that have already happened, rather than possible future events, in which case one
can make probabilistic statements, on Bayesian lines, concerning individual future
events. The concept of locality or nonlocality, Einstein or quantum, only pertains
to actual events, as that which has already happened, and not possible events and
predictions concerning possible events.
Quantum nonlocality is sometimes deﬁned differently, for example, in terms of
violations of Bell’s or related inequalities, or still by other mathematical features,

232
7
“Without in Any Way Disturbing the System”: Reality …
dealing with the data obtained in corresponding experiments.1 These features need
not be those of QM, given that these inequalities pertain to these data as such.
Such deﬁnitions, however, still leave space for their physical interpretation, and
quantum nonlocality, as just deﬁned, provides one such interpretation, among other
possible interpretations, some of which interpret quantum nonlocality in terms of
Einstein-nonlocality. On the other hand, interpretations of quantum phenomena and
QM, such as those of the RWR-type, which only entail quantum nonlocality in the
present or similar deﬁnitions and avoid Einstein-nonlocality, show that the latter is
not necessarily a feature of quantum phenomena or QM, while quantum nonlocality
may be.
It is true that predictions at a distance and correlations between distant events
are also possible, without violating Einstein-locality, in classical physics. This
circumstance may compel one to argue that quantum nonlocality may not be
signiﬁcant for deﬁning the difference between classical and quantum correlations.
This type of argument was suggested by Khrennikov under the headings “elimi-
nating the issue of quantum nonlocality,” while arguing that the difference between
classical and quantum correlations is essentially deﬁned by the discreteness of
quantum phenomena and complementarity (Khrennikov 2019a, 2020a, b, c). These
two features are indeed crucial in considering quantum correlations or quantum
phenomena, in the ﬁrst place, and they are not found in classical physics. It can
easily be shown, however, that both features are correlative to quantum nonlocality,
as deﬁned here. The reasons are as follows.
First of all, as explained in Chap. 6 (Sect. 6.4), discreteness, complementarity,
and quantum nonlocality are essentially connected already in the standard quantum
measurement. This is because either of the two complementary measurements (say,
that of position and that of momentum) can be set up, so as to enable the corre-
sponding types of predictions, after the object has left the location of measurement
and, hence, is at a distance at the time of the prediction. At the same time, each such
measurement in principle precludes the other (and the corresponding prediction) in
the same experimental arrangement and even for the same quantum object. As also
explained there, this situation is deﬁned by the entanglement between the object
and the instrument and thus is, in effect, equivalent to an ERP-type situation, apart
from the fact that in the standard case such predictions are, in general, not with the
probability one. This, however, does not affect their essential character as deﬁned
by discreteness, complementarity, and quantum nonlocality. By contrast, in classical
physics, one can always measure and predict both variables in the same experimental
arrangement, and always with probability one in the case of individual or simple
(nonchaotic) classical systems. (In quantum theory, this is only possible in special
situations, such as those of the EPR type, and then with qualiﬁcations, discussed
in Chap. 6 and further considered below.) This is because both measurements are
connected by a continuous and classically causal process, which can be assumed to
be observable without disturbing it appreciably, thus also allowing one to assume
1 The literature on the subject is extensive, and my limits here only allow me to mention a very
small portion of it.

7.2 Confronting EPR: Completeness, Complementarity …
233
that all physical properties considered could be assigned to the object itself. There
is neither discreteness akin to that of quantum phenomena nor complementarity,
which is due to the irreducible role of measurement instruments in the constitution
of quantum phenomena, thus, always, in principle, different from quantum objects.
(In the present view, moreover, the concept of a quantum object only applies at the
time of measurement.) Quantum predictions concern discrete events, which cannot,
at least in RWR-type interpretations, be connected by a continuous and classically
causal process. This makes them, as always predictions at a distance, essentially
different from classical predictions, including those that are ostensibly at a distance,
ostensibly, because of the continuous and classical causal connections between clas-
sical events. It could be added that, while, under the assumption of such continuous
or classical causal connections between quantum phenomena, there is no longer real
discreteness, complementarity is still retained, as it is, along with the uncertainty
relations, in Bohmian mechanics. The latter is, however, Einstein-nonlocal.
Complementarity remains in place insofar as quantum measurements and predic-
tions are deﬁned, as they are in the case of quantum phenomena, by the irreducible
role of measuring instruments. This is also true in EPR-type experiments, when our
predictions concerning one system, are made, at a distance, by performing measure-
ments on another system, with which the ﬁrst system has previously interacted. It
is, accordingly, not surprising that its role, along with and correlatively to that of
measuring instruments, which is subtler, but still essential, in the case such predic-
tions, grounds Bohr’s reply to EPR, who, Bohr argued, did not sufﬁciently appreciate
this role. As discussed below, EPR’s criterion of reality in effect presumes and their
argument is based in the possibility of assigning both complementary properties to
the same quantum object in the same experimental arrangement, which possibility
is precluded by complementarity. This assumption, Bohr argues, makes this crite-
rion, which they assume to be equally applicable in classical and quantum physics,
ambiguous when applied to quantum phenomena.
For a classical parallel with the EPR experiment, consider the prediction, with
probability one, enabled by the momentum conservation law, of the momentum of a
classical object, S2, on the basis of the measurement performed on another classical
object, S1, after both objects collided and exchanged their momentum. Nothing,
however, prevents one, in principle, from measuring, along with its predicted
momentum, the position of S2, or of S1, and thus simultaneously predict and then
measure both the position and the momentum of S2, in a single measuring arrange-
ment. This is possible because, the physical state of either object may be assumed
to be determined by a continuous trajectory in space and time represented by the
equations of classical mechanics, with the deﬁnitive values of both the position and
the momentum of the objects assigned, as independent “elements of reality,” at each
point. When dealing with processes in which the velocities are slow relative to the
speed of light, one need not worry about constraints imposed by relativity. (Rela-
tivity itself, however, preserves the features just described of the physical reality it
considers.)S1 andS2 eachhaveahistoryofacontinuous motionaftertheirinteraction.
This enables one to establish all measurable quantities, “elements of reality,” asso-
ciated with S2 and deﬁning its behavior, by measuring them on S1, within the same

234
7
“Without in Any Way Disturbing the System”: Reality …
single measuring arrangement. There are classical systems, such as those considered
in classical statistical physics or chaos theory (or just a tossed coin), the behavior of
which, due to their mechanical complexity, cannot be predicted deterministically and
which may exhibit statistical correlations of some sort. This behavior is, however,
classically causal and is underlain by the behavior of their individual constituents in
the way just explained.
The situation is essentially different in the case of quantum phenomena, espe-
cially in RWR-type interpretations (even though the momentum conservation law
still applies, of course). First, especially, again, in these interpretations, in consid-
ering any EPR pair (S1, S2), one cannot assume a continuous process for either system
after their interaction in view of the uncertainty relations. This impossibility is correl-
ative, by the QD postulate, to the discreteness of quantum phenomena. Secondly, now
in any type of interpretation, by virtue of the irreducible role of measuring instru-
ments and, correlatively, complementarity, one can only measure on S1 and hence
predict, at a distance, for S2 only one of the two complementary quantities in ques-
tion. At the same time, one also has a choice or can make a decision to predict either
one of the two, which, however, irrevocably precludes the possibility of predicting
the other on S2. It follows that, in contrast to classical physics, we are “not dealing
with a single speciﬁed experimental arrangement, but are referring to two different,
mutually exclusive, arrangements,” which fact also requires two different EPR pairs
to enact each situation (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 57). (Technically, Bohr’s statement refers
to a different experiment, the photon-box experiment, proposed by Einstein, but
it equally applies to the EPR experiment, clearly on Bohr’s mind at this point, in
1949.) As discussed below, by assuming the ﬁrst fact (that we always have a choice
or decision which type of measurement to perform), while disregarding the signif-
icance of the second (that we are dealing with two different, mutually exclusive,
arrangements), EPR concluded that QM is either incomplete, even Bohr-incomplete,
or else Einstein-nonlocal. Bohr, by contrast, by taking into account both facts, coun-
terargued that QM is both Bohr-complete (as complete as any theory of quantum
phenomena can be, as things stand now) and Einstein-local. While possible, the
predictions with probability one in question in the EPR experiment do not establish
a reality. Only measurements do. But quantum measurements, in contrast to classical
ones, are deﬁned by the irreducible role of measuring instruments in them and by
complementarity. At the moment in time for which the prediction is made, one can
always measure a quantity complementary to a predicted one, and thus disable the
possibility of establishing the reality corresponding to this prediction. By contrast, in
classical physics, the reality of both elements can always be assumed independently
of observation and then be measured within the same experimental arrangement.
It follows that the quantum-nonlocal nature of quantum predictions deﬁnes them
and, once the corresponding measurements are performed, any possible reality
involved, such that observed in quantum correlations, as essentially different from
classical predictions or classical correlations. This difference is manifested in the
statistical numerical data involved, such as that considered in Bell’s and the Kochen–
Specker theorems. It is also, by the same token, clear that, because of the irre-
ducible role of measuring instruments in the constitution of quantum phenomena,

7.2 Confronting EPR: Completeness, Complementarity …
235
the quantum-nonlocal nature of quantum predictions is correlative to the fundamental
discreteness of quantum phenomena and complementarity.
EPR’s paper considered an individual quantum system, S2, prepared in a particular
way, as one of the two systems (which have previously interacted with each other,
but are spatially separated), forming an EPR pair (S1, S2). EPR argued that, by
means of this preparation, it was possible to establish as real both “elements of
reality,” associated with two complementary variables, such that of position and
that of momentum, pertaining to S2 by performing measurements on S1 and, thus,
without “in any way disturbing” S2, by predicting (by using QM) each the value
of each variable with the probability equal to unity, in accord with their criterion
of physical reality (Einstein et al. 1935, p. 138). On the other hand, QM had no
means to do so because it could only predict one or the other of these variables in
any given experiment. Hence, it was Bohr-incomplete, by EPR’s criteria or reality
and completeness, unless, EPR argued in closing, their criterion of reality would
not apply (as too restricted), in which case, however, Einstein-locality would be
violated (Einstein et al. 1935, p. 141). Accordingly, it could have been expected that
an Einstein-complete theory, fully representing the behavior of individual quantum
system, should be possible. Bohr, again, contested this argument by counterarguing
that QM could, in fact, predict all that is possible to predict, all “elements of reality”
that could be unambiguously deﬁned, without violating Einstein-locality.
Einstein admitted that Einstein-nonlocality could be avoided if one assumed that
QM is only a statistical theory that does not provide a representation of, nor ideally
exact or deterministic predictions concerning, the behavior of the ultimate individual
constituents of nature of the type found in classical mechanics or classical electro-
magnetic theory and relativity. Einstein was not willing to accept this alternative for
a complete theory, even as only Bohr-complete, either, because it was in conﬂict
with his conviction that a fundamental physical theory should do both, describe indi-
vidual fundamental constituents considered so as to predict them ideally exactly, in
other words be Einstein-complete as well as Einstein-local, thus guaranteeing local
realism. For one thing, why QM was able to make its statistical predictions remained
unexplained, as against, for example, classical statistical physics, where the behavior,
predictable statistically, of the systems considered is underlain by the behavior of
their individual constituents governed by classical mechanics. For Einstein, as noted,
this aspect of QM made the theory more akin to magic than science (e.g., Born 2005,
pp.155,205;Einstein1949a,p.81).Moreimportantly,Einsteinalwaysargued,justas
EPR did initially, that, if Einstein-locality is assumed, QM was still Bohr-incomplete
because could not predict all that was possible to establish as real, “without in any
way disturbing the system,” in considering individual quantum systems.
Most of the key ﬁndings and arguments involved in more recent debates, following
Bell’s theorem, deal with discrete variables and Bohm’s version of the EPR experi-
ment. There are conceptual reasons for this shift, on some of which I shall comment
in Chap. 9. The main reason appears to be that the thought experiment proposed by
EPR cannot be performed in a laboratory. Bohm’s version of the EPR experiment can
and has been performed, conﬁrming the existence of quantum correlations, which

236
7
“Without in Any Way Disturbing the System”: Reality …
can be ascertained experimentally, apart from QM or any quantum theory.2 Among
the best known of these ﬁndings are those of Daniel M. Greenberger, Michael Horne,
Anton Zeilinger, and Lucien Hardy, and, from the experimental side, Alain Aspect’s
experiment and related experimental work, such as that by Zeilinger and his group
(Aspect et al. 1982; Greenberger et al. 1989, 1990; Hardy 1993).3 The advent of
quantum information theory, in part stimulated by these ﬁndings, gave this problem-
atic further prominence and signiﬁcance. The meaning of these ﬁndings, beginning,
again, Bell’s and the Kochen–Specker theorems, or indeed the EPR experiment and
Einstein’s and Bohr’s arguments concerning it, and their implications continue to
be debated. While I shall by and large bypass these debates here, some of their key
aspects will be addressed in Sect. 7.5 in considering Fine’s and Mermin’s arguments
concerning quantum correlations and Bell’s theorem.4 I shall argue that the key issues
at stake in EPR-type experiments concerning discrete variables are not different from
those at stake in the EPR original experiment.5
2 There are experiments (those involving photon pairs produced in parametric down conversion)
that statistically approximate the EPR experiment for continuous variables. I shall not consider
these experiments here, but they are consistent with the present argument. They also reﬂect the fact
that the EPR thought experiment is a manifestation of correlated events for identically prepared
experiments with EPR pairs on the model of the Bell–Bohm version of the EPR experiment. The
analysis of the Bell–Bohm experiment, too, involves further subtleties, such as those concerning
“degrees” in which one can assess these correlations and, thus, quantum nonlocality, which are
related to the strict numerical limits on Bell’s and related inequalities, extensively discussed in
recent literature (see, for example, Bub 2016 and references there).
3 I only cite some key earlier experiments. There have been numerous experiments performed since,
some in order to ﬁnd loopholes in these and subsequent experiments.
4 The literature dealing with these subjects is nearly as immense as that on interpretations of QM,
and indeed most of the latter literature in recent decades involves and is even deﬁned by these
subjects. Among the standard treatments are (Bell 2004; Cushing and McMullin 1989; Ellis and
Amati 2000). Mermin offers a particularly lucid treatment (Mermin 1990, pp. 81–185). See also
(Brunner et al. 2014), for a more recent assessment of Bell’s theorem. It should also be kept in
mind that there are realist and classically causal views of quantum entanglement and correlations,
either in realist interpretations of QM, such as the many worlds interpretation, or in alternative
theories, such as Bohmian mechanics, or theories in which the reality handled by QM is underlain
by a deeper reality (within the scope of QM), such as that of classical random ﬁelds (Khrennikov
2012; Plotnitsky and Khrennikov 2015). So-called superdeterminism is another realist view, which
explains away the complexities discussed here by denying an independent decision of performing
one or the other EPR measurements (e.g., t’Hooft 2001, 2018). These views, however, can be put
aside here because they either allow for Einstein-nonlocality or, if they claim Einstein-locality,
they leave no space for the concept of quantum nonlocality, because all events are assumed to be
connected by continuous and classically causal processes.
5 I have considered Bohr’s reply in detail previously (Plotnitsky 2009, pp. 237–312, 2012, pp. 107–
136, 2016, pp. 136–154). The present discussion, however, modiﬁes these treatments on several key
points, in part in view of some of the overall argument of this study, which offers a new interpretation
of quantum phenomena and QM. The exchange and Bohr’s reply has of course been extensively
discussed in literature, including in most studies of Bohr cited in Chap. 6, although not from the
RWR-type perspective, and some of them misread Bohr’s argument by assuming that it allowed
for Einstein-nonlocality, a misreading that, as discussed below, is found in Einstein’s comments on
Bohr’s reply. I also consider and emphasize the role of probability in the EPR experiments, which
is rarely done, in part because EPR predictions are with probability equal to unity, which tends to

7.3 “Can Quantum–Mechanical Description of Physical …
237
7.3
“Can Quantum–Mechanical Description of Physical
Reality be Considered Complete?”: The EPR
Experiment, Measurement, and Complementarity
Bohr, as noted, contested EPR’s argumentation by analyzing the irreducible role
of measuring instruments and complementarity in quantum phenomena, including
those of the EPR type, even though the latter allow for predictions with certainty
without physical, “mechanical,” interference, by means of measuring instruments,
with the objects concerning which these predictions were made (Bohr 1935, p. 700).
This role, Bohr argued, was underappreciated by EPR. This analysis allowed him to
conclude that QM “would seem to fulﬁll, within its scope, all rational demands for
completeness,” at least Bohr-completeness (Bohr 1935, pp. 696, 700n; 1987, v. 2,
p. 57). Bohr also argued that QM need not entail a violation of Einstein-locality by
virtue of the compatibility of his argument with “all exigencies of relativity theory,”
which implies Einstein-locality (Bohr 1935, p. 701n).
Bohr’s interpretation in his reply was different from his ultimate interpreta-
tion, which no longer allowed for an assignment of elements of reality to quantum
objects even at the time of measurement. Such elements could only be assigned to
measuring instruments themselves and then only as a result of performed measure-
ments, deﬁning quantum phenomena, and not on the basis of prediction even with
probability equal to unity. This assumption implies an outright rejection of EPR’s
criterion of reality. This could be questionable if one assumed this criterion to be
valid in considering quantum phenomena or QM. Given, however, that Bohr, in his
reply, argued that this criterion was ambiguous and, hence, not valid as such (unless
signiﬁcantly qualiﬁes), this was not an issue for Bohr’s ultimate view, assuming,
of course, that one accepts Bohr’s argument, as Bohr himself obviously did. In his
reply, however, in part in counterarguing EPR’s argument in terms closer to their
own, the assignment of elements of reality to quantum objects was possible at the
time of measurement and even on the basis of a prediction “with probability equal to
unity.” The second type of assignment required signiﬁcant qualiﬁcations, explained
below, considered by Bohr but not taken into account by EPR. Brieﬂy, such an
assignment was assumed by Bohr to be ideally guaranteed in the future, if and only
if, which is the main qualiﬁcation in question (suggested by the discussion given
in Sect. 6.6. of Chap. 6), the corresponding measurement could still be performed
and when it was performed, but not at the time when the prediction was made.
Both types of assignment still implied that the properties of quantum objects could
not be considered independently of their interaction with measuring instruments.
Bohr also assumes, as do EPR, that quantum objects (while, for Bohr but not EPR,
still beyond representation or even conception) exist independently of measurement.
Accordingly, in considering Bohr’s argument, I will follow this assumption, although
obscure this role. See (Fine 2020), for a general outline and references from a perspective different
from that of this study.

238
7
“Without in Any Way Disturbing the System”: Reality …
I shall, when relevant, explain how the situation appears in the present interpretation,
which assumes that quantum objects are deﬁned only at the time of measurement.
Bohr, again, only argued for (along with Einstein-locality) Bohr-completeness of
QM, that is, that it was able to predict all that is possible unambiguously to deﬁne
as elements of reality in considering quantum phenomena. This was, however, all
that he needed to do, because EPR argued that QM was not even Bohr-complete.
They contended that it was possible to establish, in accordance with their criterion
of reality, the “elements of reality” by ascribing deﬁnite values corresponding to
both complementary variables pertaining to a given quantum system, S2, of the
EPR pair (S1, S2) by means of predictions (by using QM for predicting each such
element separately) with probability equal to unity, by means of a measurement on
S1, spatially separated from S2, and thus without “in any way disturbing” S2. On the
other hand, this ascription is never possible in considering the state of a quantum
system in the formalism of QM. My emphasis on “establish” reﬂects a key point of
EPR’s argument, explained below, which has to do with counterfactual aspects of this
argument, insofar as these elements of reality could only be predicted alternatively
but not simultaneously. Contending that both such variables could be established for
an individual quantum object would make QM incomplete, unless EPR’s criterion
of reality is modiﬁed and, as a result, Einstein-nonlocality is allowed, and would
make it reasonable to believe that a more complete, in effects, Einstein-complete
theory is possible (Einstein et al. 1935, p. 141). By considering the irreducible role
of measuring instruments in the constitution of quantum phenomena, including those
of the EPR type, and complementarity, Bohr argued that EPR’s claim, based on their
criterion of reality, that one could so establish all elements of reality considered
was not sustainable in view of “the essential ambiguity” of their criterion of reality
in considering quantum phenomena. On the other hand, he also argued, Einstein-
locality could still be maintained (Bohr 1935, p. 701). This would also mean that
an Einstein-complete local theory (local realism) may not be possible, even if not
outright impossible. It is a matter of interpretation whether Bohr adopted the ﬁrst,
more cautious view, suggested by his phrasing in his reply that “would seem to
fulﬁll, within its scope, all rational demands for completeness” (emphasis added), or
the second, more prohibitive view, suggested by some of his statements elsewhere.
This study, again, adopts the ﬁrst view. Either way, if as Bohr argued, QM in fact
predicted all that was possible to establish as real, it could have been considered
as Bohr-complete, as well as, as discussed in the next section, Einstein-local. As
explained there as well, Einstein had misread Bohr’s argument by assuming that
Bohr preserved the Bohr-completeness of QM by allowing Einstein-nonlocality, an
alternative viewed by Bohr as impermissible as by Einstein, but entertained by some.
As indicated above, an EPR prediction concerning quantum object S2 of the EPR
pair (S1, S2) is enabled by performing a measurement on another quantum object,
S1, with which S2 has previously been in interaction (the interaction that entangled
S1 and S2) but from which S2 is spatially separated at the time of the measurement
on S1. Speciﬁcally, once S1 and S2, are separated, QM allows one to simultaneously
assign both the distance between the two objects and the sum of their momenta,
because the corresponding Hilbert-space operators commute. With these quantities

7.3 “Can Quantum–Mechanical Description of Physical …
239
in hand, by measuring either the position or the momentum of S1, one can predict
exactly either the position or the momentum for S2 without physically interfering
with it, which, EPR assumed, implies that one can simultaneously assign to S2 both
quantities as elements of reality, without in any way disturbing S2. Bohr explains
the case in a note at the outset of his reply via so-called “transformation theorems,”
a more general feature of the formalism, which grounds the mathematics of EPR’s
argument (Bohr 1935, pp. 697–698, n.). According to Bohr:
The deductions contained in the article cited [EPR’s paper] may in this respect be considered
as an immediate consequence of the transformation theorems of quantum mechanics, which
perhaps more than any other feature of the formalism contribute to secure its mathematical
completeness and its rational correspondence with classical mechanics. In fact, it is always
possible in the description of a mechanical system, consisting of two partial systems (1) and
(2), interacting or not, to replace any two pairs of canonically conjugate variables (q1p1),
(q2p2) pertaining to systems (1) and (2), respectively, and satisfying the usual commutation
rules
[q1 p1] = [q2 p2] = ih/2π,
[q1q2] = [p1 p2] = [q1 p2] = [q2 p1] = 0,
by two pairs of new conjugate variables (Q1P1), (Q2P2) related to the ﬁrst variables by a
simple orthogonal transformation, corresponding to a rotation of angle in the planes (q1q1),
(p1p2)
q1 = Q1 cos θ −Q2 sin θ
p1 = P1 cos θ −P2 sin θ
q2 = Q1 cos θ + Q2 sin θp2 = P1 cos θ + P2 sin θ
Since these variables will satisfy analogous commutation rules, in particular
[Q1P1] = ih/2π,
[Q1P2] = 0
it follows that in the description of the state of the combined system, deﬁnite numerical
values may not be assigned to both Q1 and P1, but that we may clearly assign such values
to both Q1 and P2. In that case, it further results from the expressions of these variables in
terms of (q1p1) = (q2p2), namely,
Q1 = q1 cosθ + q2 sinθ P2 = −p1 sinθ + p2 cosθ
that a subsequent measurement of either q2 or p2 will allow us to predict the value of q1 or
p1, respectively. (Bohr 1935, pp. 696–697, note)
Bohr discusses an (idealized) physical model of the quantum–mechanical state of
the two free particles, a state, mathematically expressed by EPR, later in his reply
(Bohr 1935, p. 699). The question is that of what is possible to establish as real in
the EPR experiment and whether QM predicts all that is thus possible to establish.
EPR argue that QM does not, while Bohr argues that it does. When one considers a
single system S, one makes measurement of a given variable, say, that of position, Q,

240
7
“Without in Any Way Disturbing the System”: Reality …
and then associates a wave-function with it so as to be able to predict, with a given
probability, the value that the variable will be within a given range, in this case, a
certain area. In the EPR case, because of the entanglement of S1 and S2, one can, after
both systems are entangled, associate a wave-function for either variable, P or Q, with
S2 so as to predict, moreover, with probability equal to unity, the value of either of the
two complementary quantities associated with each variable for S2 by measuring the
same variable on S1. As discussed in Chap. 6, however, in fact one similarly makes
either prediction in the standard case of quantum measurement, because the apparatus
could be set up for either measurement after the object already left the location of the
apparatus. These predictions, however, will not be with probability one. The situation
is subtler in the present interpretation, because one cannot speak of the interactions
between two quantum objects, as deﬁned in and by measurement, even if quantum
objects are still beyond conception. As explained earlier, however, our instruments
can be prepared so that such measurements, each deﬁning the corresponding quantum
object, are possible. This is better exempliﬁed in the Bohm–Bell version of the EPR
experiment for discrete variables, in which case the ﬁrst step already prepares the
situation in such a way that the subsequent measurements on two quantum objects,
deﬁned by these measurements, are simultaneously possible. These qualiﬁcations,
however, do not affect the overall situation of the EPR experiment as considered
here.
“The authors [EPR],” Bohr said in his reply, “therefore want to ascribe an element
of reality to each of the quantities represented by such variables. Since, moreover, it is
a well-known feature of the present formalism of quantum mechanics that it is never
possible, in the description of the state of a mechanical system, to attach deﬁnite
values to both of two canonically conjugate variables, [EPR] consequently deem this
formalism to be incomplete, and express the belief that a more satisfactory theory
can be developed” (Bohr 1935, p. 696). EPR’s actual argument was more elaborate.
They derived a contradiction between the assumption that QM is complete (Bohr-
complete) and the assumption of the impossibility of attaching deﬁnite values to both
variables in question, which, since this impossibility is inherent in QM, implies that
QM, while correct, is incomplete, unless it is nonlocal. Essentially, however, this
conclusion is the same as stated by Bohr. Even though one can predict (exactly) the
two quantities considered only alternatively, EPR still contended that both quantities
corresponded to the elements of reality jointly pertaining to S2, according to their
criterion, which did not require simultaneity of such measurements or predictions.
This requirement would, in their view, imply Einstein-nonlocality (Einstein et al.
1935, p. 141). EPR disallowed this possibility, as did Bohr, although, it has been
assumed by some as the way of resolving the difﬁculty. Later arguments by Einstein
(who was unhappy with the exposition of EPR’s paper) were more streamlined, but
not essentially different, except for adding that, if one assumed that, if assumed to be
only a statistical theory of ensembles, QM could be considered Einstein-local. That,
however, would still leave it Bohr-incomplete, because Einstein continued to argue,
along the lines of EPR’s argument, that, assuming Einstein-locality, QM could not
predict all that was possible to establish as real, “without in any way disturbing the
system,” for individual quantum systems.

7.3 “Can Quantum–Mechanical Description of Physical …
241
Bohr counterargued that, contrary to EPR’s assumption, the situation deﬁned by
the EPR experiment, does not allow one to dispense with the role of measuring
instruments. This is not because the system in question, S2 is in any way physical,
“mechanically,” disturbed, but because this role entails limitations on the types of
measuring arrangements used in determining the quantities in question, even when
our predictions concerning, S2, are made by means of a measurement on another
quantum system, S1, with which S2 has previously interacted, and thus, “without in
anywaydisturbing,” S2. Theselimitations result from“aninﬂuenceontheverycondi-
tions which deﬁne the possible types of predictions [concerning S2, by measurements
performed on S1]” (Bohr 1935, p. 700). Taking this inﬂuence (which is, again, not a
physical inﬂuence on S2!) into account, which EPR failed to have done, both revealed
“essential ambiguity” of their criterion of reality in the case of quantum phenomena,
and allowed Bohr to argue that QM is both Bohr-complete and Einstein-local.
Both EPR and Bohr assume, then, that the EPR experiment for (S1, S2) can be set
in two alternative ways so as to predict, with probability equal to unity, either one or
the other complementary measurable quantities for S2 on the basis of measuring the
corresponding quantities for S1. Let us call this assumption “assumption A.”
EPR infer from this assumption that both of these quantities can be assigned to
S2, even though it is impossible to do so simultaneously, in view of the uncertainty
relations for the corresponding measurements on S1. This makes QM incomplete (by
EPR’s criterion) because it has no mechanism for this assignment, unless one assumes
that EPR’s criterion is too restrictive, as against assuming that such quantities can
only be assumed to be real if they are measured or predicted simultaneously. The latter
assumption, EPR contend, allows for Einstein-nonlocality (Einstein et al., p. 141).
Let us call this inference “inference E” (for Einstein).
Bohr argued that, while assumption A is legitimate, inference E is unsustainable
because a realization of the two situations necessary for the respective assignments
of these quantities would, in effect, involve two incompatible experimental arrange-
ments and, thus, one might add (Bohr did not expressly say this), would require two
different quantum objects, and two different EPR pairs to be prepared. There is no
physical situation in which this joint assignment is possible for the same object. If
one has made the EPR prediction, say, for variable P with probability equal to unity,
based on the measurement of the same variable on the ﬁrst object, S11, for the second
object, S12, of a given EPR pair, (S11, S12), an alternative EPR measurement and
prediction for a complementary variable Q, can no longer be made for the same pair.
In order to measure and predict the complementary variable, Q, one would need to
prepare a different EPR pair (S21, S22), to make the corresponding measurement on
S21 so this variable could be predicted for S22. I designate this inference as “inference
B” (for Bohr).
One can diagrammatically represent the situation as follows. Let X and Y be two
complementary variables (which while formally similar to, are physically different
from the conjugate variables in classical mechanics) in the Hilbert-space formalism
(XY −YX ̸= 0) and x and y the corresponding physical measurable quantities (ΔxΔy
≈h); (S1, S2) of the EPR pair of quantum objects; and p the probability of prediction,

242
7
“Without in Any Way Disturbing the System”: Reality …
via the wave function, Ψ 1 or Ψ 2, associated with S2, of either x or y, on the basis of
two alternative measurements of either x or y performed on S1. Then:
The EPR experiment in EPR’s view:
S1
S2
x1 ψ1 (with p = 1) →x2
y1 ψ2 (with p = 1) →y2
EPR admit that x1 and x2 are, and because of the uncertainty relations, could only
be, measured alternatively by “disturbing” S1. But, because either x2 or y2 can be
assigned to S2 “without in any way disturbing it,” EPR argue that both x2 or y2 could
be established as elements of reality pertaining to S2, it follows, at the time of either
prediction, and by implication in general.
The EPR experiment in Bohr’s view:
S11
S12
x11 ψ1(with p = 1) →x12
S21
S22
y21 ψ1(with p = 1) →y22
The ﬁrst diagram is, I argue, impossible to realize physically. The second can be
physically realized, and it is that of a complementarity, which may, against EPR’s own
grain, be called “the EPR complementarity.” This complementarity can be described
as follows. Once one type of measurement (say, that of variable x) is performed
on S11, enabling the corresponding prediction on S12, we irrevocably cut ourselves
off from any possibility of making the alternative, complementary, measurement y
on S11, and, thus, from the possibility of ever predicting the second variable for
S12 (Bohr 1935, p. 700). This fact is a manifestation of both complementarity and
quantum causality. As Bohr stressed in his reply, stemming from “our freedom of
handling the measuring instruments, characteristic of the very idea of experiment” in
all physics, our “free choice” concerning what kind of experiment we want to perform
is essential to complementarity (part (b) of the main deﬁnition of complementarity
given in Chap. 6) (Bohr 1935, p. 699). The expression “free choice” or its equivalents,
such as “freedom of choice,” are repeated throughout his reply (Bohr 1935, pp. 699–
701). However, as against classical physics or relativity, implementing our decision
concerning what we want to do will only allow us to make certain types of predictions
and will exclude the possibility of certain other, complementary, types of predictions,
predictions at stake in the EPR experiment. In this sense, complementarity is, again,
a generalization of causality, deﬁned in Chap. 6 as quantum causality, in the absence
of classical causality and, in the ﬁrst place, realism, because it deﬁnes what may or
may not happen (which is, again not the same as will or will not happen) as a result
of our decision concerning which experiment to perform. In the EPR case, according
to Bohr:

7.3 “Can Quantum–Mechanical Description of Physical …
243
[By measuring the position of the ﬁrst particle of a given EPR pair] we have by [the very
procedure necessary to do so] cut ourselves off from any future possibility of applying the
law of conservation of momentum to the system consisting of the diaphragm and the two
particles and therefore have lost our only basis for an unambiguous application of the idea
of momentum in predictions regarding the behavior of the second particle. Conversely, if
we choose to measure the momentum of one of the particles, we lose … any possibility
of deducing from the behavior of this particle [its] position … relative to the rest of the
apparatus, and have thus no basis whatever for predictions regarding the location of the
other particle. (Bohr 1935, p. 700)6
Accordingly, it is only possible to establish both quantities for two EPR pairs,
(S11, S12) and (S21, S22), but never for one, and it is not possible to maintain that if
we had predicted the second quantity, instead of the ﬁrst one, for S12, it would be
the same, even ideally, as it is for S22. There is simply no way to deﬁne that variable
for S12, except, by a measurement and thus by disturbing S12, which defeats the
very purpose of EPR’s argument. Moreover, doing so no longer allows one to ever
verify the original prediction, thus requiring one to further qualify EPR’s criterion
of reality, a qualiﬁcation that, as will be seen, is crucial in considering locality. By
prediction, this could only be done on S22, that is, by preparing another EPR pair and
performing a measurement of y on S21, which will, however, irrevocably prevent us
from establishing x for S22. It is only possible to establish both quantities for two EPR
pairs, (S11, S12) and (S21, S22), and never for one. This is one of the deepest aspects
of complementarity, and as discussed in Chap. 6, the analogous complementary
situation obtains in the case of the standard measurement, as Bohr’s reply shows
(Bohr 1935, pp. 697–699). If we repeat the experiment for yet another pair, (S31,
S32), so as to make predictions concerning the position of S32, we can, again, make
such a prediction exactly, but the outcome of the measurement on S32 will not in
general be the same as for S12 or S22, because the corresponding measurements on
S11, S12, and S13 will be different. Once we perform both types of measurement for
a large number of pairs, we will have statistically correlated measurements, akin in
spin measurements of the Bell-Bohm type, to which the preceding argument would
apply as well.
Bohr does not explain the situation in terms of two different objects and EPR
pairs necessary in order to make both EPR predictions. This is, however, at least
an implication of his argument, given his insistence in his reply and elsewhere that
“in the problem in question we are not dealing with a single speciﬁed experimental
arrangement, but are referring to two different, mutually exclusive, arrangements”
(Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 57, 60, 1937, p. 86). Bohr expressly “stages” the EPR case by
the double-slit arrangement for two systems considered to shows the necessity of
two such mutually exclusive arrangements (Bohr 1935, pp. 699–700). This fact was
underappreciated, if realized at all, by EPR. In view of the necessity of these two
arrangements and their mutual exclusivity, the second quantity in question cannot in
principle be assigned to the same quantum object, once the ﬁrst is assigned, although
6 For a discussion of Bohr’s “staging” of the EPR experiment, as a double-slit thought experiment,
in a measuring arrangement described in this passage, see (Plotnitsky 2009, pp. 294–301). See also
(Bacciagaluppi 2015), for a different perspective.

244
7
“Without in Any Way Disturbing the System”: Reality …
we can always make an alternative choice in selecting a measuring arrangement and
thus measuring or predicting the other complementary variable in question. The joint
assignment is not possible even if one accepts EPR’s criterion of reality, whereby
such an assignment is made on the basis of a prediction, unless we add the context of
measurement to this criterion. This is, in effect, what Bohr says, with the implication
that the second, complementary, quantity can no longer be assigned because it can
no longer be predicted.7 The second prediction is not possible once an experiment
enabling the ﬁrst prediction is performed, because the ﬁrst object S1 is no longer
available for the second prediction. The simultaneous assignment of both quantities
is precluded by the uncertainty relations, as recognized by EPR. They, however,
aim to circumvent this limitation by arguing that both variables could be assigned
at any point, even though only one of them could be measured or predicted. Bohr
counterargues that the uncertainty relations and complementarity, both deﬁned by
the irreducible role of measuring instruments, preclude one from ever assigning both
quantities to any quantum object, even in the EPR case. One of the deep implications
here, in part, against EPR’s view of the situation, is, again, that, unlike a classical
measurement, quantum measurement is an establishment of a new phenomenon and
not a measurement of a property of the object considered or in the present view of
the ultimate constitution of reality responsible for quantum phenomena (and at the
time of measurement, quantum objects). A quantum phenomenon is a classically
observable effect of the interaction between this object or this constitution and the
instrument used, and all physically observable and measured properties considered
are those of phenomena.
It is never possible, on experimental grounds, to coordinate two experiments
measuring or predicting quantities that are subject to the uncertainty relations on two
different objects so as to make it possible to consider (in the way it can be done in
classical mechanics) both as identically prepared objects. We can only control the
identical preparation of the physical state of the observable parts of the measuring
apparatus involved because this state is (physically) classical, but not the state of the
objects during the measurement and hence the outcome of the predictions we make
on the basis of this measurement. In the EPR case, we can predict with a probability
equal to unity the ﬁrst quantity in question, say, the value of the position variable,
for the second object, S12, of a given EPR pair (S11, S12). We can then predict the
second quantity, the value of the momentum variable, for the second object, S21,
of, unavoidably, another, “identically prepared,” EPR pair (S21, S22). We cannot,
however, coordinate these predictions in such a way that they could be considered
as pertaining to two identically prepared objects in the way it could be done in clas-
sical physics. This is not possible, because the necessary intermediate measurements
would, in general, give us different data. Were we to repeat the measurement and the
7 This fact was emphasized, on realist lines by Philippe Grangier (e.g., Farouki and Grangier 2019)
and, in a series of articles (discussed earlier in this chapter) arguing against the idea of quantum
nonlocality, by Khrennikov (2019a, b, 2020a, b, c), which includes (Khrennikov 2020a, b) an
exchange with the present author, on lines of this chapter, in (Plotnitsky 2019b, 2020). This chapter,
however, signiﬁcantly revises my earlier arguments.

7.3 “Can Quantum–Mechanical Description of Physical …
245
prediction of the ﬁrst pair of quantities, those of the position variables for, respec-
tively, S21 and S22, we could still make our prediction with the probability unity, but
the outcome would, in general, not be the same as in the case of the ﬁrst pair (S11,
S12). One can predict the outcome of a given EPR experiment with a probability
equal to unity but one cannot repeat such an experiment so as to predict with a
probability equal to unity the same value of the corresponding outcome.8 We can
only coordinate such measurements and predictions statistically, and thus establish
the EPR correlations (for continuous or discrete variables). This does not help EPR,
since their argument de facto presupposes exact rather than statistical coordination
of such variables as belonging to the same, or an identically prepared, object of the
same, or an identically prepared, EPR pair. Masked as it may be by the predictions
with a probability equal to unity involved in the EPR experiment, the probabilistic or
statistical nature of quantum predictions is still essential. Bohr concludes his analysis
of EPR’s argument concerning the incompleteness of QM as follows:
From our point of view we now see that the wording of the above mentioned criterion of
physical reality proposed by Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen contains an ambiguity as regards
the meaning of the expression “without in any way disturbing a system.” Of course, there
is in a case like that just considered no question of a mechanical disturbance of the system
under investigation [the second object of the EPR pair considered] during the last critical
stage of the measuring procedure. But even at this stage there is essentially the question of an
inﬂuence on the very conditions which deﬁne the possible types of predictions regarding the
future behavior of the system. Since these conditions constitute an inherent element of the
description of any phenomenon to which the term “physical reality” can be properly attached,
we see that the argumentation of the mentioned authors does not justify their conclusion that
quantum-mechanical description is essentially incomplete. On the contrary this description,
as appears from the preceding discussion, may be characterized as a rational utilization of
all possibilities of unambiguous interpretation of measurements, compatible with the ﬁnite
[quantum] and uncontrollable interaction between the object and the measuring instruments
in the ﬁeld of quantum theory. In fact, it is only the mutual exclusion of any two experimental
procedures, permitting the unambiguous deﬁnition of complementary physical quantities,
which provides room for new physical laws the coexistence of which might at ﬁrst sight
appear irreconcilable with the basic principles of science. It is just this entirely new situation
as regards the description of physical phenomena that the notion of complementarity aims
at characterizing. (Bohr 1935, p. 700; Bohr’s emphasis)
This elaboration, especially Bohr’s claim that “the essential ambiguity” of EPR’s
criterion pertains to “the meaning of the expression ‘without in any way disturbing
a system,’” have presented difﬁculties for many readers, as did his reply overall.
Einstein,Schrödinger,andBellhadproblemswithboth,inthelattercase,asdiscussed
in Chap. 6, in expressly in dealing with this passage (Bell 2004, pp. 155–156). Bohr
acknowledged these difﬁculties and the main reason for them, essentially related
to the RWR-type epistemology of his argument: “I am deeply aware of the inefﬁ-
ciency of expression which must have made it very difﬁcult to bring out the essential
ambiguity involved in a reference to physical attributes of objects when dealing
8 That the ideal experiment proposed by EPR cannot be performed does not diminish this point,
which, however, will be reﬂected in the actual experiments statistically approximating the EPR
experiment. See note 2 above.

246
7
“Without in Any Way Disturbing the System”: Reality …
with phenomena where no sharp distinction can be made between the behavior of
the objects themselves and their interaction with the measuring instruments” (Bohr
1987, v. 2, p. 61). In other words, at least part of the difﬁculty is expressing efﬁciently
Bohr’s RWR view, which does not allow one to speak unambiguously, and ultimately
at all, of the reality ultimately responsible for quantum phenomena apart from its
effects on measuring instruments. The elaboration and Bohr’s meaning in this clause,
however, pose no special difﬁculties given the preceding analysis. Once one quantity
in question is established (even on the basis of a prediction, in accordance with EPR’s
criterion of reality, with suitable qualiﬁcations) for S12 of (S11, S12), we cannot ever
establish the second quantity involved without measuring and hence disturbing S12.
Only one of these quantities could be established for S12 without disturbing it, but
once it is established, never the other quantity without disturbing it. We can establish
such an alternative quantity without disturbing it only for a different quantum object,
S22, via a different EPR pair (S21, S22), by a measurement of a complementary type
on S21. These two determinations cannot, however, be coordinated so as to assume
that both quantities could be associated with the same object of the same EPR pair.
The coordination of such events could only be statistical, in which case, as Einstein
acknowledged, the Einstein-locality of QM would be maintained as well. Hence, we
cannot establish both quantities for the same system “without in any way disturbing
it,” as EPR claim. The only way to do so would be to perform a measurement on
it and thus disturb it. This measurement would, however, annul the determination
of the ﬁrst quantity, made on the basis of a prediction on the ﬁrst object of the
corresponding EPR pair, because there will be no way to ever verify this prediction,
which could only be done by measuring the ﬁrst quantity. As will be seen, these
circumstances also allow one to keep Einstein-locality intact. Thus, the ambiguity
in question indeed relates to the clause “without in any way disturbing the system,”
which, if one wants to apply it unambiguously, requires qualiﬁcations explained here
but not provided by EPR. As Bohr noted earlier in his reply:
In the phenomena concerned we are not dealing with an incomplete description characterized
by the arbitrary picking out of different elements of physical reality at the cost of [sacriﬁcing]
other such elements [for a given quantum object], but with a rational discrimination between
essentially different experimental arrangements and procedures which are suited either for
an unambiguous use of the idea of space location, or for a legitimate application of the
conservation theorem of momentum. Any remaining appearance of arbitrariness concerns
merely our freedom of handling the measuring instruments, characteristic of the very idea
of experiment. (Bohr 1935, p. 699; emphasis added)
Any attempt to apply both elements is ambiguous, and complementarity provides
a necessary disambiguation, in correspondence with the uncertainty relations. In
sum, there is no way to ever establish both complementary quantities for the same
quantum object, S2, of any EPR pair, (S1, S2), even alternatively (by prediction)
without disturbing it, which means that QM predicts all that is possible in principle
to establish as real, and thus is Bohr-complete. I am not claiming that Bohr’s argument
in principle precludes some future theory from providing a more complete, possibly
an Einstein-complete, account of the ultimate nature of physical reality responsible
for quantum phenomena. While, as explained in Chap. 6, some of Bohr’s statements

7.3 “Can Quantum–Mechanical Description of Physical …
247
may suggest that this is not possible, these statements are viewed here as repre-
senting Bohr’s ultimate, RWR-type, interpretation of quantum phenomena and QM,
a view that leaves this possibility open. I do argue, however, that Bohr’s argument
in his reply does successfully counter EPR’s argument that QM is either not Bohr-
complete, by virtue of failing to predict all “elements of reality” that are possible
to establish as real, or else Einstein-nonlocal, because the determination of these
elements as real proposed by EPR could not be sustained in view of “the essen-
tial ambiguity” of their criterion of reality. The qualiﬁcations, necessary to apply
EPR’s criteria unambiguously, amount to the fact that both quantities in question can
never be predicted, even by two different measurements on S1, for the same quantum
object, S2, or the same EPR pair. This fact, as I shall argue next, disables not only
EPR’s argument concerning the Bohr-incompleteness of QM, but also their claim
concerning its Einstein-nonlocality as the only alternative.
Before I consider this subject, I note that the argument given thus far could be
transferred, with a few easy adjustments, to Bohm’s version of the EPR experiment
and spin variables (such as measuring spin in a given direction). In this case, too, there
is the EPR complementarity insofar as any assignment of the complementary spin-
direction quantity to the same quantum object becomes impossible, once one such a
quantity is assigned. An assignment of the other would require an alternative type of
measurement, mutually exclusive with the ﬁrst, on the ﬁrst object of a given pair, and
hence, another identically behaving EPR-Bohm pair, which cannot be guaranteed.
Nothing other than statistical correlations between such assignments is possible,
which also allows for their Einstein-locality.
7.4
Einstein-Locality and Quantum Nonlocality in the EPR
Experiment
EPR noted a possible objection to their argument by requiring that “two or more
physical quantities can be regarded as simultaneous elements of reality only when
they can be simultaneously measured or predicted,” in, they clearly imply, the same
location (Einstein et al., p. 141).9 They, however, see this as implying Einstein-
nonlocality:
One could object to this conclusion on the grounds that our criterion of reality is not sufﬁ-
ciently restrictive. Indeed, one would not arrive at our conclusion if one insisted that two
or more physical quantities can be regarded as simultaneous elements of reality only when
they can be simultaneously measured or predicted. On this point of view, since either one
or the other, but not both simultaneously, of the quantities P and Q can be predicted, they
9 As has been noted by several authors, Schrödinger arguably the ﬁrst of them (Schrödinger 1935a,
p. 160), one could simultaneously make the position measurement on S1 and the momentum
measurement on S2, and thus simultaneously predict (ideally exactly) the second variable for each
system, the momentum for S1 and the position for S2. This determination, however, is not simul-
taneous in the same location, and measuring the complementary variable instead of the predicted
one in either location would deﬁne a different reality.

248
7
“Without in Any Way Disturbing the System”: Reality …
are not simultaneously real. This makes the reality of P or Q depend upon the process of
measurement carried out on the ﬁrst system, which does not disturb the ﬁrst system in any
way. No reasonable deﬁnition of reality could be expected to permit this. (Einstein et al.
1935, p. 141)
This conclusion is not sustainable either, however. Einstein-nonlocality would
indeed follow if one assumes, as EPR do, that the measurement, say, of P, on S1 ﬁxes
the actual physical state itself of S2 by a spooky action at a distance, rather than, as
Bohr argues, only deﬁnes a prediction, with probability equal to unity, at a distance
concerning such a state, as a possible physical state, by ﬁxing the conditions of this
prediction. On later occasions, Einstein also argued that, under the ﬁrst, EPR-type,
assumption, one is left with a paradoxical situation insofar as, if QM is complete, two
mutually incompatible states could be assigned to the same distant quantum object,
S2, by different measurements performed on S1 (e.g., Born 2005, p. 205). This is
why EPR contend that, if QM is complete by this more restricted criterion, then the
physical state of S2, could be determined by a measurement on a spatially separated
S1, in violation of Einstein-locality. If it is Einstein-local, their argument, based on
their criterion of reality, showed, they believed, that it is incomplete, the argument
challenged by Bohr, as discussed in Sect. 7.3.
Einstein thought that Bohr accepted the alternative of Einstein-locality versus
completeness (Bohr-completeness), and retained completeness by allowing for
Einstein-nonlocality.Einstein,however,misunderstoodBohr’sargumentation,which
only allows for a prediction, and not action, at a distance, and thus only for quantum
nonlocality but not Einstein-nonlocality. Einstein presented Bohr’s argument as, in
his words, “translated into [Einstein’s] own way of putting it.” It is not entirely
clear whether Einstein’s actually referred to Bohr’s reply, although this was the
only place where Bohr presented his full analysis of the EPR experiments and his
counterargument to EPR. According to Einstein:
Of the “orthodox” quantum theoreticians whose position I know, Niels Bohr’s seems to me
to come nearest to doing justice to the problem. Translated into my own way of thinking, he
argues as follows.
If the partial systems A [S1 in present notation] and B [S2] form [after their interaction] a total
system which is described by its -function /(AB), there is no reason why any mutually
independent existence (state of reality) should be ascribed to partial systems A and B viewed
separately, not even if the partial systems are spatially separated from each other at the
particular time under consideration. The assertion that, in the latter case, the real situation
B could not be (directly) inﬂuenced by any measurement taken on A is, therefore, within the
framework of quantum theory, unfounded and (as the paradox shows) unacceptable.
By this way of looking at the matter, it becomes evident that the paradox forces us to
relinquish one of the following assertions:
(1)
The description by means of the -function is complete.
(2)
The real states of spatially separated objects are independent of each other.
On the other hand, it is possible to adhere to (2), if one regards the -function as the
description of a (statistical) ensemble of systems (and therefore relinquishes [1]). However,
this view blasts the framework of the “orthodox quantum theory.” (Einstein 1949b, pp. 681–
682)

7.4 Einstein-Locality and Quantum Nonlocality in the EPR Experiment
249
This may have been the argument of some of the “orthodox” quantum theoreti-
cians. It was, however, not Bohr’s argument, certainly, as must be apparent from
the preceding discussion, not in his reply, but also, to my knowledge, not anywhere
else, including in his “Discussion with Einstein,” originally published in the same
(“Schilpp”) volume. It might be that Einstein’s “translation” refers to what Bohr
says on the subject there. The article, however, only offers a sketch of his argument,
which still offers no statement that support Einstein’s “translation” (Bohr 1987, v.
2, pp. 59–61). Bohr never says anywhere in his writings, and certainly, again, not
in his reply, that “there is no reason why any mutually independent existence (state
of reality) should be ascribed to partial systems A and B viewed separately, not
even if the partial systems are spatially separated from each other at the particular
time under consideration.” On the contrary, their independent existence is central
for his argument, including in the context of Einstein-locality, because his argument
depends on the fact that one can perform an alternative complementary measurement
on each. Nor does he ever say that “the real situation B” could ever “be (directly)
inﬂuenced by any measurement taken on A,” via an action at a distance. He only
allows that “the real situation in B” could be predicted at a distance, which, again,
does not make it real. It is true that the entanglement brings new complexity to the
relationships between the -function /(AB), and our knowledge concerning each
system separately, complexities discussed in Sect. 7.6. As explained in Chap. 6, an
entangled system cannot be measured as such, which, however, need not mean there
is “no reason why any mutually independent existence (state of reality) should be
ascribed to partial systems A and B viewed separately, not even if the partial systems
are spatially separated from each other at the particular time under consideration.”
A measurement that can always be performed on each is the reason why they should
be and are by Bohr ascribed a mutually independent existence, at the time of a
measurement. It is also true that in the present view, it is meaningless to speak of
a quantum system apart from measurement. This, however, is also not the same as
saying the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena
or, at the time, of observation, quantum systems, is Einstein-nonlocal. In any event,
this was not Bohr’s view, according to which the independent existence is ascribed
to quantum objects, even though no properties can be ascribed to them apart from
measurement.
It is also true that, as indicated in Sect. 7.2, once the measurements in question
(or any two measurements) on A and B are actually performed, deﬁning the corre-
sponding actual events, one cannot, in accord with the quantum indeﬁnitiveness
postulate, make deﬁnitive statements concerning a relationship between these two
individual events, or any two individual events, or even to ascertain the existence of
any such relationship. The postulate, it follows, also precludes one from ascertaining
that the relationship between these two events is either Einstein-local or Einstein-
nonlocal, any two events that have already occurred. It does not follow, however, that
a prediction concerning B by means of a measurement performed on A determines (in
an Einstein-nonlocal way, by an action at a distance) the real situation B at the time
of this prediction or at any moment in time. Only a measurement on B does. Such
a measurement may conﬁrm this prediction. On the other hand, the complementary

250
7
“Without in Any Way Disturbing the System”: Reality …
measurement on B, which can always be performed, may prevent and in principle
disable conﬁrming it.
In any event, nothing in Bohr’s reply or elsewhere in his writings gives any
support to Einstein’s “translation” of Bohr’s argument, the essential basis of which,
the roles of measuring instruments and complementarity, is not even mentioned
by Einstein. Beginning with bypassing these roles and ending with claiming that
Einstein-nonlocality was acceptable to Bohr, Bohr’s argument is lost in Einstein’s
“translation.” This “translation” reads Einstein’s own reasoning into Bohr’s very
different reasoning, which “ensures the compatibility between [his] argument and
all exigencies of relativity theory” and thus Einstein-locality (Bohr 1935, p. 701n).10
Einstein’s conclusion, based on this reasoning, which is, again, not that of Bohr,
conﬁrms that for Einstein, while consistent with Einstein-locality, the statistical
alternative, as a form of Bohr-completeness, is unacceptable. The “completeness”
assumed here is clearly Einstein-completeness. In Bohr or the present view, the
statistical alternative does not mean relinquishing (1), if by “complete” one means
Bohr-completeness. Does “this view blasts the framework of the ‘orthodox quantum
theory’”? It depends on what one means by the “orthodox quantum theory” or inter-
pretation of QM. Even if one assumes that the wave-function provides a complete
account (I shall explain my emphasis presently) of individual quantum systems, one
could still see QM as Bohr-complete, while not Einstein-complete. One could do so,
for example, on Bayesian, such as QBist, lines, by viewing QM as theory providing
probabilistic predictions concerning quantum phenomena associated with individual
quantum systems, without providing a representation or description (hence, I speak
of “account” above) of these systems or the constitution of the reality responsible for
these phenomena. The term “description” is itself a problem, even in Bohr’s reply,
which perhaps should have avoided the temptation of repeating EPR’s title, “Can
Quantum–Mechanical Description of Physical Reality be Considered Complete?”
In fact, in his reply, Bohr argues that QM provides a complete, as complete as
10 This type of misreading of Bohr’s argument is not uncommon. For example, Fine suggests the
same type of reading, even if without seeing it as deﬁnitive, in a somewhat tortured argument, not
always based on careful reading of what Bohr actually said, including on the point in question
(Fine 2020). The view of Bohr’s statement “an inﬂuence on the very conditions which deﬁne the
possible types of predictions, regarding the future behavior of the system [S2]” as implying Einstein-
nonlocality appears to be responsible for Fine’s remarks that Bohr in commenting on the exchange
in his “Discussion with Einstein” (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 60), “unfortunately, … takes no notice of
Einstein’s later versions of the argument and merely repeats his earlier response to EPR” (Fine
2020). While Bohr did not expressly comment on these later arguments by Einstein in this article,
he was undoubtedly familiar with them, and several of his elaborations, indirectly relate to these later
arguments and Bohr’s familiarity with them (e.g., Bohr 1987, v. 2, pp. 62–65). In fact, however, if
one adopts the type of reading of Bohr’s reply offered here, Bohr’s counterargument would equally
counter these later arguments. See note 11 below. Fine concludes that “it is difﬁcult to know whether
a coherent response can be attributed to Bohr reliably that would derail EPR,” referring to others
who made attempts to that effect “on Bohr’s behalf” (Fine 2020). I argue here for the coherence
of this response. Bohr’s carefulness and caution may make his writing inefﬁcient, as he, again,
acknowledges (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 60), but they also give coherence to his arguments, including
that of his reply to EPR.

7.4 Einstein-Locality and Quantum Nonlocality in the EPR Experiment
251
possible or Bohr-complete, account insofar as it predicts all that is possible to ascer-
tain as real. It does not, however, in Bohr’s or the present view, as the RWR view,
provide a description or representation of the ultimate constitution of physical reality
responsible for quantum phenomena, and thus for what could be so ascertained.
There is a difference between deﬁning the state of a physical object by a prediction
with probability equal to unity and establishing such a state as possible on the basis
of such a prediction. In Bohr’s argument in his reply, physical states of quantum
objects cannot be seen as ﬁnally determined, even when we have predicted them
exactly, unless the actual measurement is made. Their predicted determination may,
however, be seen as in principle assured insofar as such a measurement could in
principle be performed so as to yield the predicted value. This last requirement in
turn becomes a necessary qualiﬁcation of EPR’s criterion of reality in the case of
quantum phenomena. This is because, as explained, the measurement of the alter-
native quantity, Q, on S2 would irrevocably disable any possible veriﬁcation of the
original prediction. It is crucial, and again, central to complementarity, that it is
always possible to perform this alternative measurement. This is one of the reasons
why the assumption of the independent (RWR-type) reality responsible for quantum
phenomena or something in nature idealized as this reality (in Bohr in terms of
quantum objects existing independently) is important for Bohr’s analysis of the EPR
experiment and of the question of Einstein-locality there. That the present interpre-
tation assumes that a quantum object is an idealization only applicable at the time of
measurement does not change this assumption as such and does not affect my argu-
ment at the moment. This independence ensures the possibility of this measurement.
Unless either measurement that corresponding to the prediction or the alternative
one is performed, and the corresponding quantum object is established, it is mean-
ingless to speak of the physical reality, that of P or that of Q, associated with S2.
However, once this alternative measurement is performed, the original prediction
becomes meaningless as in principle unveriﬁable. Hence, QM could not be shown
to be Einstein-nonlocal by EPR’s logic, any more than it can be shown to be Bohr-
incomplete by their logic, which does not of course mean that either case cannot be
made by a different argument. As noted earlier and as discussed in the next section,
once this measurement is performed and becomes an event, one cannot deﬁnitively
say that, in a given individual case, the relationship between the two events, deﬁned
by the two measurements in question, is either (Einstein) local or nonlocal. This is in
accord with the quantum indeﬁnitiveness postulate, which precludes any deﬁnitive
statements concerning the relationships between any two individual quantum events.
All deﬁnitive claims concerning quantum events are statistical. These considerations,
however, do not affect my argument, which only concerns predictions at a distance,
because they do not imply that a prediction concerning S2 by means of a measure-
ment performed on S1 determines (by an action at a distance) any element of reality
associated with S2 at the time of this prediction or at any moment in time.
The argument here offered complicates speaking, as is common, of entangled
objects as forming “an indivisible whole.” Bohr never does so, although his reply to
EPR has, again, been misread in this way, by confusing Bohr’s use of this language
for describing a phenomenon in his sense as forming an indivisible whole with the

252
7
“Without in Any Way Disturbing the System”: Reality …
quantumobject considered. Bohr’s concept of phenomenonwas introducedlater. But,
if one applies this concept to Bohr’s argument in his reply to EPR, a measurement
performed on S1 forms an indivisible whole composed of S1 and the measuring instru-
ment used, but this wholeness does not in any way involve S2. It only enables one to
make a prediction concerning S2 and a corresponding possible future phenomenon.
A predicted measurement outcome is, however, not a phenomenon, only a measure-
ment conﬁrming this prediction is. Hence, a measurement on S2 would establish its
own phenomenon, with its own indivisible wholeness between S2 and the measuring
instrument. Accordingly, measuring on S2 the variable, Q, complementary to the
predicted one, P, will deﬁne a reality alternative to the predicted one and will disable
this prediction even if it is made with a probability equal to unity.
This is why Bohr argued that it was not a question of a physical, “mechanical,”
inﬂuence of the measurement on S1 upon the physical state of affairs concerning S2,
which is another indication that Einstein-locality is on his mind throughout. As he
says: “of course there is in [the EPR] case no question of a mechanical disturbance
of the system [object] [S2] under investigation during the last critical stage of the
measuring procedure” (Bohr 1935, p. 700). Contrary to a common misunderstanding
(including, again, by Einstein) of Bohr’s argument, this is not a physical inﬂuence, at
a distance, of the measurement performed on S1 on the spatially separated situation
of S2, although this measurement deﬁnes our predictions, “spooky predictions at a
distance,” concerning the corresponding future measurement on S2. Bohr makes this
point very clear: Even though there is no physical or mechanical disturbance, “even
at this stage [when one makes a measurement on S1 in order to make a prediction
concerning S2] there is essentially the question of an inﬂuence on the very conditions
which deﬁne the possible types of predictions, regarding the future behavior of the
system [S2]” (Bohr 1935, p. 700). The inﬂuence in question is, thus, deﬁned, locally,
by ﬁxing the conditions concerning the type of possible predictions concerning S2
by making the corresponding measurement on S1, which in principle excludes an
alternative EPR measurement on S1 and thus the conditions necessary for making an
alternative EPR prediction for S2. This inﬂuence, thus, concerns the local conditions
of the measurement on S1 and, correspondingly, the prediction, the only possible
prediction by virtue of this measurement, concerning S2. (“Local” merits an excessive
emphasis here.) It concerns the determination of one possible experimental setup, as
opposed to the other possible setup, and it is never possible to combine both setups.
Onceoneofthetwopossiblesetupsisinplaceanddeﬁnesthemeasurementontheﬁrst
object, any determination of the second quantity becomes impossible. An alternative
arrangement,whichwouldmakethistypeofdeterminationpossible,wouldinevitably
involve a different quantum object. One’s decision locally, in the location of S1,
inﬂuences what kind of predictions, in the location of S1, concerning S2 are possible,
even though we do not interfere with S2. Bohr takes the Einstein-locality requirement
as given, just as Einstein does.11 Rather than revealing QM to be (Bohr) incomplete
11 Einstein’s subsequent arguments of the EPR type are sometimes viewed as offering a stronger
or even different case by focusing more sharply on the question of locality (e.g., Einstein 1936;
Born 2005, pp. 166–170, 204–205, 210–211; Einstein 1949a, pp. 77–85; and, in commenting on

7.4 Einstein-Locality and Quantum Nonlocality in the EPR Experiment
253
or (Einstein) nonlocal, as EPR argue, in Bohr’s view, the EPR experiment conﬁrms
that “the ﬁnite interaction between object and measuring agencies conditioned by
the very existence of the quantum of action entails—because of the impossibility of
controlling the reaction of the object on the measuring instruments if these are to serve
their purpose—the necessity of a ﬁnal renunciation of the classical ideal of causality
and a radical revision of our attitude towards the problem of physical reality” (Bohr
1935, p. 697). EPR’s argument and related arguments by Einstein deserve much
credit for revealing that, as manifested in quantum phenomena, physical reality is,
while Einstein-local, quantum-nonlocal. It is the reality of quantum correlations.
7.5
Quantum Nonlocality and Quantum Correlations
It is instructive to compare the present, strong RWR-type, view of quantum nonlo-
cality and quantum correlations with two approaches to the subject, via Bell’s
theorem, that by Fine (1989) and that by Mermin (1990). I shall mostly focus on
Fine’s argument because of important differences, along with proximities, between
his and the present view. By contrast, Mermin’s view is primarily signiﬁcant because
it conﬁrms the present concept of quantum nonlocality deﬁned by predictions at a
distance without an action at a distance, along with the fact that the relationships
between two events of any individual pair of events involved cannot be ascertained
to be either Einstein-local or Einstein-nonlocal. This is, however, in accord with the
quantum indeﬁnitiveness postulate, which precludes any statements concerning, or
even assuming the existence of, any relationship between any two individual quantum
events, events, again, that have already occurred.
Fine does not speak in terms of realism or the lack thereof. His primary focus is on
“indeterminism”: the “undetermined” nature of individual quantum events, including
those comprising correlated multiplicities of them. Fine’s concept of “undetermined
events” is, thus, in accord with this study’s deﬁnition of indeterminacy (given in
Chap. 2) as a more general category, with randomness deﬁned as a speciﬁc form
of indeterminacy, when no probability is assigned to a possible future event. Both
concepts thus only refer to possible future events, rather than events that have already
happened, which makes them determined. Although, as I said, I prefer the view
of individual quantum events as strictly random and hence the statistical (RWR)
Bohr’s view, Einstein 1949b, pp. 681–682). I would argue, however, that, while these arguments
may have streamlined EPR’s argument, they still make their case in terms of the alternative between
Einstein-locality and Bohr-completeness along the lines of EPR’s argument. The above discussion of
Einstein’s misunderstanding of Bohr’s argument in the Schilpp volume conﬁrms this view (Einstein
1949b, pp. 681–682). In other words, these arguments do not make an essentially different case.
Einstein never claimed otherwise. Instead, he thought that these arguments brought into a sharper
focus the essential features of his view. This may be. The point remains, however, that these argu-
ments never consider—any more than EPR’s argument does—that the alternative determinations
of one or the other complementary variable can never be established for the same (distant) quantum
object. A new EPR pair is required to do so.

254
7
“Without in Any Way Disturbing the System”: Reality …
interpretation of correlations, my argument in this section equally applies to prob-
abilistic, such as Bayesian, interpretations of correlations. Coupling indeterminism
to “nonessentialism,” as juxtaposed to a certain, realist, form of “explanationism,”
brings Fine’s view closer to the RWR-view, including in Bohr’s reply to EPR, to
which Fine refers (Fine 1989, pp 184–185). While, however, Fine sees Bohr’s anal-
ysis of measurement in the EPR case, in Bohr’s reply as a “whole different topic”
(Fine 1989, p. 184n2), it is, as my discussion here suggests, fundamentally related
to the question of correlations.12 According to Fine:
If we adopt an indeterminist attitude to outcomes of a single, repeated measurement, we see
each outcome as undetermined by any factor whatsoever. Nevertheless we are comfortable
with the idea that, as the measurements go on, the outcomes will satisfy a strict probabilistic
law. For instance, they may be half positive and half negative. How does this happen? What
makes a long run of positives, for example, get balanced off by the accumulation of nearly
the very same number of negatives? If each outcome is really undetermined, how can we
get any strict probabilistic order? Such questions can seem acute, deriving their urgency
from the apparent necessity to provide an explanation for the [statistically!] strict order of
the pattern, and the background indeterminist premise according to which there seems to be
nothing available on which to base an explanation (Fine 1989, p. 191).
My added brackets highlights the essentially statistical, in contrast to classically
causal, nature of this order, deﬁned by the informational structure of the observed
data. Fine then contests the explanationist attitude, which is essentially realist in the
present deﬁnition:
Once we accept the premise of indeterminism, we open up the idea that sequences of individ-
ually undetermined events can nevertheless display strict probabilistic patterns. When we go
on to wed indeterminism to rich probabilistic theory, like the quantum theory, we expect the
theory to ﬁll in the details of under what circumstances particular probabilistic patters will
arise. The state/observable formalism of the quantum theory, as is well known, discharges
these expectations admirably. The indeterminism opens up the space of possibilities. It makes
room for the quantum theory to work. The theory speciﬁes the circumstances under which
patterns of outcomes will arise and which particular ones to expect. It simply bypasses the
question of how any pattern could arise out of undetermined events, in effect presupposing
that this possibility is among the natural order of things. …What then of correlations?
Correlations are just probabilistic patterns between two sequences of events. If we treat the
individual events as undetermined and withdraw the burden of explaining why a pattern
arises from each of two sequences, why not adopt the same attitudes towards the emerging
pattern between the pairs of outcomes, the pattern that constituted the correlation? Why,
from an indeterminist perspective, should the fact that there is a pattern between random
sequences require any more explaining than the fact there is a pattern internal to the sequences
themselves? (Fine 1989, pp. 191–192)
As Fine’s formulation suggests, “the quantum theory,” insofar as it “speciﬁes the
circumstances under which patterns of outcomes will arise,” must also involve the
12 In his survey of the EPR argument, cited above (Fine 2020) and his related writings (e.g., Fine
1996, 2007), Fine separates Bohr’s argument in his reply from the subject of correlations as well.
As I argue here, implicit as the subject is there, Bohr’s reply tells us a great deal about correlations
or entanglement, by virtue of his RWR-type understanding of the EPR experiment. In contrast to
Fine, this point is, as will be seen, realized by Mermin.

7.5 Quantum Nonlocality and Quantum Correlations
255
speciﬁcation of the corresponding experimental arrangements, which in the present
deﬁnition of a quantum theory, referring to its mathematical formalism, is part of
an interpretation. In any event, the existence of correlations is independent of any
theory. In Fine’s view, then, the quantum theory is “bypass[ing] the question of how
any pattern [including any pattern deﬁning correlations] could arise out of undeter-
mined events, in effect presupposing that this possibility is among the natural order
of things.” This view is thus that of renouncing the demand for an explanation or
knowledge of how correlations or any quantum data, and thus quantum phenomena,
come about. This is different from the RWR view, especially, the strong RWR view,
and the corresponding interpretation of quantum phenomena, according to which
an explanation or knowledge, or even a conception of how correlations or quantum
phenomena in the ﬁrst place come about, is not possible or, in Bohr’s words, is
“in principle excluded,” at least as things stand now (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 62). This
is, again, keeping in mind that here this statement and, thus, the difference of the
present and Fine’s view, only refers to the present interpretation or related interpre-
tations rather than implying (as it may in Bohr), the impossibility in principle in
any such explanation or conception, now or ever. The nature of future individual
quantum events, which then become correlated events, as undetermined, is part of
this view as well. For, while the combination of individual indeterminacy and collec-
tive statistical correlations may be especially striking, it is equally legitimate to ask
why such individual events are undetermined, for example, in view of correlations,
which suggest strict indeterminacy of individual events as little as this indeterminacy
suggests correlations.
Fine’sandthepresentpositionagreeontwokeycounts.First,asthisstudyhasdone
from the outset, Fine takes for granted both the nature and structure, the informational
structure, of quantum phenomena and that QM predicts this structure, correlations
included, in accord with the available experimental evidence. Secondly, as this study
does, Fine rejects the essentialist (realist) attitude toward explanation (Fine 1989,
p.193).Healsostatesreasonsforthisrejectionandfortakingcorrelationsforgranted:
There was a time when we did not know this [that correlational patterns may arise between
the matched events in EPR-type sequences], when the question of whether the theory was
truly indeterminist at all was alive and subject to real conjecture. Foundational work over
the parts ﬁfty years, however, has pretty much settled that issue (although, of course, never
beyond any doubt). The more recent work related to EPR and Bell’s theorem has shown,
speciﬁcally (although again, not beyond all doubt), that the correlations too are fundamental
and irreducible, so that the indeterministic ideal extends to them as well. It is time, I think, to
accept the ideals of order required by the theory. It is time to see patterns between sequences
as part of the same natural order as patterns internal to sequences themselves.
A nonessentialist attitude toward explanation can help us make this transition, for it leads us
to accept that what requires explanation is a function of the context of inquiry. (Fine 1989,
p. 193)
As Fine explains:
The search for “inﬂuences” or for common causes is an enterprise external to the quantum
theory. It is a project that stands on the outside and asks whether we can supplement the
theory in such a way as to satisfy certain a priori demands on explanatory adequacy. Among

256
7
“Without in Any Way Disturbing the System”: Reality …
these demands is that stable correlations require explaining, that there must be some detailed
account for how they are built up, or sustained, over time and space. In the face of this
demand, the [en]tangled correlations of the quantum theory [which resist or even defy such
explanations] can seem anomalous, even mysterious. However, this demand represents an
explanatory ideal rooted outside the quantum theory, one learned and taught in the context
of a different kind of physical thinking. (Fine 1989, p. 192)
Both Heisenberg and Bohr rejected such classical demands already at the time of the
discovery of QM. In fact, correlational patterns, too, entered the theory virtually from
its emergence. The interference pattern observed in the double-slit experiment, “the
greatest of all quantum conundrums,” as Mermin calls it, is a correlational pattern,
and Mermin expressly relates it to EPR-type correlations (Mermin 1990, p. 108).
Fine is prudent to note that there are still doubts that “foundational work over the
parts ﬁfty years, however, has pretty much settled that issue” or that “the more recent
work related to EPR and Bell’s theorem has shown … that the indeterministic ideal
extends to [correlations] as well.” His elegant formulation, however, also reﬂects
the fact that he underestimated these doubts. They have never subsided in the way
Fine appears to believe and are still wide spread now, 20 years after Fine stated his
position.
According to Fine, the quantum theory should “specify the circumstances under
which patterns of outcomes will arise and which particular ones to expect,” even as
it “simply bypasses the question of how any pattern could arise out of undetermined
events” (Fine 1989, p. 191). As noted, in the present deﬁnition of quantum theory,
this speciﬁcation would belong to an interpretation rather than the theory, as they
appear to do, along with the formalism, in Fine’s view. This difference does not
affect the fundamentals of the situation, however. In Bohr’s and, following Bohr,
the present view, these circumstances deﬁne quantum phenomena, which are inde-
pendent of any particular theory, especially as far as its mathematics is concerned,
although not of theoretical considerations in general, for example, insofar as spec-
ifying these circumstances involves classical physics. These are the circumstances
that compel those who adopt the RWR view, beginning with Bohr, to go beyond
merely“bypass[sing] thequestionofhowanypatterncould ariseoutofundetermined
events,” and to adopt interpretations in which an explanation or even conception of
howcorrelationsorquantumphenomena,intheﬁrstplace,comeaboutis“inprinciple
excluded.” These interpretations respond to the quantum-nonlocal nature of quantum
correlations between spatially separated quantum events and to the capacity of QM
to predict them, while avoiding Einstein-nonlocality. Fine clearly sees correlations
as Einstein-local. On the other hand, he appears to dismiss “nonlocality,” perhaps
too easily, although it is possible that he is only rejecting essentialist attempts at
explaining the quantum-nonlocal aspects of correlations (Fine 1989, pp. 184–190,
194). He extensively commented on the subject elsewhere (e.g., Fine 1996, 2020).
Mermin’s conclusion of his analysis of correlations (an analysis that also offers an
elegant proof of Bell’s theorem) sheds an additional light on the situation. It reveals
a subtle nuance of quantum nonlocality, a nuance consistent with the strong RWR
view and the quantum indeﬁnitiveness postulate. According to Mermin:

7.5 Quantum Nonlocality and Quantum Correlations
257
[It] is wrong to apply to individual runs of the experiment the principle that what happens at
A does not depend on how the switch is set at B. Many people want to conclude from this that
what happens at A does depend on how the switch is set at B, which is disquieting in view
of the absence of any connections between the detectors. The conclusion can be avoided,
if one renounces the Strong Baseball Principle, maintaining that indeed what happens at A
does not depend on how the switch in set at B, but that this [independence] is only to be
understood in its statistical sense, and most emphatically cannot be applied to individual
runs of the experiment. To me this alternative conclusion is every bit as wonderful as the
assertion of mysterious [spooky] action at a distance. I ﬁnd it quite exquisite that, setting
quantum metaphysics entirely aside, one can demonstrate directly from the data and the
assumption that there are no mysterious actions at a distance, that there is no conceivable
way consistently to apply the Baseball Principle [what happens at A does not depend on how
the switch in set at B] to individual events. (Mermin 1990, p. 109)
This view is consistent or even equivalent to the difference between the Einstein-
nonlocality of spooky action at a distance and quantum nonlocality of spooky predic-
tions at a distance. While this type of claim concerning individual quantum events
may appear “disquieting,” it should not be surprising. The impossibility of deﬁni-
tively claiming the relationships between any two single events at A and B to be
either independent or dependent in this way would be a consequence of the quantum
indeﬁnitiveness postulate, which precludes any claims concerning the relationships
between any two individual quantum events, including either the existence or absence
of Einstein-nonlocal connections between them. Quantum nonlocality is a statistical
concept.
Similarly, in the double-slit experiment, that “greatest of all quantum conun-
drums” (Mermin 1990, p. 108), in the noninterference setup, with the counters
installed, a single detection of, say, an electron near a given slit does not guar-
antee that this electron passed through that slit, as opposed to the other slit or, in
principle, both slits, although if the slits are sufﬁciently far apart, the last assumption
would imply a violation of relativity and thus Einstein-nonlocality. As just explained,
however, one cannot, by the quantum indeﬁnitiveness postulate, ascertain the locality
or nonlocality of the connections between two individual events, in this case the ﬁrst
being an emission of the electron from the source before it reaches the diaphragm
with the slit and the second the detection of the electron near the slit. Statistically,
however, passing of electrons through one or another slit could be ascertained, with
all individual traces on the screen with which electron collide still discrete in both
setups. On the other hand, one cannot similarly statistically claim that the electrons
are passing through both slits in the alternative (interference-pattern) setup, in parallel
with Mermin’s argument under discussion. For one thing, we have no means for such
a detection; we only make this assumption on the basis of the interference or correla-
tional pattern observed. More importantly, if the distance between the source and the
diaphragm is sufﬁciently long or the slits are sufﬁciently far apart, this assumption
would imply a deﬁnitive violation of relativity and thus of Einstein-locality statisti-
cally, in multiple events. Accordingly, it is more suitable to assume that electrons,
statistically, pass through either one slit or the other, without our being able to know
through which in each case. All the traces detected on the screen are discrete: they
are detections of single collisions. In the present interpretation, there are no electrons

258
7
“Without in Any Way Disturbing the System”: Reality …
passing through the slits, but only when they are detected by a counter, or collide
with the screen. The language of electrons passing through the slits or whatever
else happens between what is actually observed in the instruments is the remnant of
classical physics, based on our general phenomenal intuition of how things behave
around us, no longer applicable to what “happens” between observations. An elec-
tron cannot be assigned a classical motion, suggested by the word “passing,” or
“happenings.” What one instead has are speciﬁable, now classically, experimental
settings and, when observed, corresponding speciﬁable phenomena and the rule for
predicting them, different for these settings (especially, when they are complemen-
tary) for predicting them probabilistically by means of QM or QFT, cum Born’s
rule, or possibly some alternative theories. The EPR-type experiments for discrete
variables, such as spin (not found in classical physics), are arguably more suited to
exemplify this situation, but it deﬁnes all quantum phenomena and how QM or QFT
works in predicting them.
The RWR view, then, especially the strong RWR view, equally handles the inde-
terminate nature of individual quantum events and correlations between certain
sequences of quantum events. One cannot predict these correlations correctly on
the basis of the data observed in one detector: “There is no way to infer from the data
at one detector how the switch was set in the other. Regardless of what is going on
in detector B, the data for a great many runs at detector A is simply a random string
of R’s [red signals] and G’s [green signals]” (Mermin 1990, p. 107). One can only
predict them correctly if we know both settings. If, however, somebody, unbeknown
to us, will change the setting in one detector, for example, and in particular, to regis-
tering a complementary spin direction, our predictions will no longer correspond to
what is actually observed, and there would be no way to conﬁrm them. As discussed
earlier, this circumstance is important for understanding the role of complementarity
in EPR-type experiments and is central to Bohr’s reply to EPR. The violation of Bell
and related inequalities can also be linked to these circumstances and thus to comple-
mentarity, as is clear, for example, from Fine’s argument in the article discussed here
(Fine 1989, pp. 177–180). Accordingly, there is no experimental basis to ascertain
that any quantum object can be assigned both “elements of reality,” one found in one
setting and the other in the other, before the detector ﬂashes. As Mermin notes, the
EPR-Bohr exchange “could be stated quite clearly” in terms of his thought experi-
ment, “a direct descendant of the rather more intricate but conceptually similar” EPR
experiment, and the analysis given here conﬁrms (Mermin 1990, pp. 90–91).
7.6
Complementarity and Entanglement: Quantum
Knowledge and Quantum Ignorance, with Bohr
and Schrödinger
I have argued in this chapter that the EPR experiment, deﬁned by the entanglement
of two objects considered, manifests not only one of the deepest aspects of quantum
phenomena or QM, which is commonly recognized, but also of complementarity, as a

7.6 Complementarity and Entanglement: Quantum Knowledge …
259
quantum-theoretical concept, which is rarely noted. Entanglement is a characteristic
feature of quantum physics, and some, including Schrödinger, who introduced the
term have argued that it is the single feature of quantum physics deﬁning its difference
from classical physics. Technically, entanglement is a feature of the formalism of QM
that reﬂects the feature of quantum phenomena that fundamentally (if perhaps not
uniquely) distinguishes them from classical ones. While keeping this mathematical
aspect of the concept in mind throughout, I shall, as I did in Chap. 6, by the term
entanglement understand, as Schrödinger did, this situation as a whole and continue
to speak, as Schrödinger did as well, of the entanglement between two or more
quantum objects or the object and the instrument in quantum measurement. In other
words, I shall, following Schrödinger, understand by “entanglement” the concept
that represents this mathematical-experimental situation.
I would like now to consider the relationships between complementarity and
entanglement in more detail, also, as the title of this section suggests, as the rela-
tionships between knowledge and ignorance in quantum theory. Complementarity
and Bohr’s analysis of the EPR experiment or quantum phenomena in general may
be primarily linked to knowledge, and entanglement and Schrödinger’s analysis of
it primarily to ignorance. Primarily does not means exclusively. It is instead a matter
of relative and sometimes delicate balance of knowledge and ignorance, reﬂected in
each concept and the relationships between them. As discussed earlier, Schrödinger
remained unhappy with QM, which he still saw in his cat-paradox paper as “perhaps
after all only a convenient calculational trick” (Schrödinger 1935a, p. 167). Unlike
Bohr, he saw EPR’s paper as making more apparent (even if not decisively proving)
that an alternative, better theory could be developed. He was wise, as ever, to say
“perhaps.” His discontent, however, did not prevent him from offering a profound
analysis of entanglement and of QM in these papers.
As discussed in Chap. 6, the entanglement between the object under investi-
gation and the measuring instrument is essential to the standard case of quantum
measurement and is connected to the role of complementarity there. This interaction
allows one, by decision, to measure and then predict the outcome of a future possible
measurement of either of the two complimentary variables (such as the position or
the momentum) after this interaction had already taken place and the object left
the location of the instrument. This fact shows that all quantum predictions are in
effect predictions at a distance and, hence, are quantum-nonlocal, without, however,
entailing a violation of Einstein-locality. Before returning to these connections in
my conclusion, I would like to discuss Schrödinger’s analysis of entanglement in his
responsetoEPR’spaperinthreepapers,includinghiscat-paradoxpaper(Schrödinger
1935a, b, 1936).
As noted, Schrödinger introduced the term entanglement in the ﬁrst place, in both
German [Verschränkung] and English, with the German term, arguably conveying
his meaning better. Just as is complementarity, however, entanglement is an “artiﬁcial
word which does not belong to our daily concepts,” to adopt Bohr’s characterization
of complementarity cited earlier (Bohr 1937, p. 87). Accordingly, the connection of
the quantum-theoretical meaning of either term, English or German, to its meaning
in daily language is essentially irrelevant. Entanglement is a quantum-theoretical

260
7
“Without in Any Way Disturbing the System”: Reality …
concept in the sense deﬁned in Chap. 2. In this case, however, the mathematics of
QM is more essential than in the case of complementarity, where, however, mathe-
matics is more signiﬁcant than it is commonly assumed, because it is necessary for
complementary predictions.
Schrödinger’s papers also suggested yet another quantum postulate, inherent in
EPR-type situations or even in quantum phenomena in general, in part by virtue of
complementarity, but not expressly deﬁned thus far. This postulate may be called the
irreducible ignorance (II) postulate: it states that any possible knowledge of quantum
phenomena entails an essential element of ignorance concerning it in relationships
very different from the way knowledge and ignorance are related (as they are) in
classical physics. In the classical theory, as classically causal, the recourse to prob-
ability, while reﬂecting our ignorance concerning the systems considered, is only
a practical expedient due to the insufﬁcient, but in principle possible, knowledge
concerning these systems. By contrast, in quantum physics, at least in RWR-type
interpretations, to return to Bohr’s formulation, “the recourse to probability laws
is [due to] the inability of the classical frame of concepts to comprise the peculiar
feature of indivisibility, or ‘individuality,’ characterizing the elementary processes”
(Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 34). In other words, our ignorance is fundamental. It has to do
not with the, in practice, insufﬁcient knowledge concerning the state of the physical
reality responsible for quantum phenomena, but is an effect of this reality itself as
ultimately unavailable to knowledge or even conception. This situation, however,
and thus the II postulate allow for and are correlative to quantum causality, which is
fundamentally (rather than only practically) probabilistic.
According to Schrödinger, in the case of a quantum entanglement between two
quantum systems, the “best possible knowledge of a whole does not necessarily
include the same for its parts. … The whole is in a deﬁnite state, the parts taken
individually are not” (Schrödinger 1935a, p. 161). “Knowledge” here refers to
expectation-catalogs we can form, to “our questions about the future”:
Whenever one has a complete expectation-catalog—a maximal total knowledge—of a ψ-
function for two completely separate bodies, or, in better terms, for each of them singly,
then one obviously has it also for the two bodies together, i.e., if one imagines that neither
of them singly but rather the two bodies together make up the object of interest, of our
questions about the future. … But the converse is not true. Maximal knowledge of a total
system does not necessarily include total knowledge of all its parts, not even when these
are fully separated from each other and at the moment are not inﬂuencing each other at all.
(Schrödinger 1935a, p. 160)
Hence, an entanglement makes our ignorance irreducible as well. “Ignorance” is,
too, no longer due to our insufﬁcient possible knowledge of the ultimate constitution
of the reality considered but rather is due to the impossibility, in principle, of such
a knowledge. This is true, as things stand now, even in some realist interpretations
of QM, although not in such alternative theories as Bohmian mechanics in which
the classical epistemology of knowledge and ignorance it retained (the mathematics
is different from that of classical mechanics), in Bohmian mechanics at the cost of
Einstein-nonlocality. RWR-type interpretations make this nature of quantum igno-
rance automatic. Indeed, as interpretations, they respond to this nature. Quantum

7.6 Complementarity and Entanglement: Quantum Knowledge …
261
correlations are linked to our ignorance, and conversely our ignorance is deﬁned
by quantum correlations, which are quantum-informational in nature. Consider, the
double-slit experiment “the greatest of all quantum conundrums,” as Mermin, again,
calls it, as a manifestation of a quantum correlational pattern (Mermin 1990, p. 108).
There must be a lack of knowledge, an ignorance, concerning through which slit
each particle passes, for the correlational (interference) pattern to emerge. Although
the language of “loss of knowledge” is used sometimes, this lack of knowledge is, at
least in RWR-type interpretations, not a loss in knowledge that one could in principle
have. All knowledge one can possibly have is that concerning what happened in each
initial measurement (which prepares each object considered) and what may happen
in the future when the object hit the screen, the future probabilistically estimated by
QM. If we have or even could in principle have the knowledge through which slit
each objects passed, we have a new measurement situation in which the correlation
pattern disappears, although the (always multiple) phenomena considered are still
quantum in their physical nature and could only be predicted by means of a quantum
and not classical theory.
Any actual information already available (through measurement) or obtainable in
the future (as reﬂected in our predictions) that we can in principle have concerning
quantum phenomena is always classical, but its structure—organization—and the
way we obtain it is different in quantum physics. There are things that we don’t
know in advance in classical physics, but these are things that could in principle be
known, in the present or in the future. Not so in quantum physics, at least in certain
interpretations, where our ignorance is not about such things, but about things that
cannot be known or conceived of, which makes the term “things” inapplicable, even
as “things-in-themselves” in Kant’s sense. The latter, as discussed earlier, cannot be
known but still could be conceived of: they could still be thought. Quantum ignorance
is more radical; it is the ignorance of the unthinkable. According to Schrödinger, then:
When two systems, of which we know the states by their respective representatives, enter
into temporary physical interaction due to known forces between them, and when after a
time of mutual inﬂuence the systems separate again, then they can no longer be described
in the same way as before, viz. by endowing each of them with a representative of its own.
I would not call that one but rather the characteristic trait of quantum mechanics, the one
that enforces its entire departure from classical lines of thought. By the interaction the two
representatives [the quantum states] have become entangled. Another way of expressing the
peculiar situation is: the best possible knowledge of a whole does not necessarily include
the best possible knowledge of all its parts, even though they may be entirely separate and
therefore virtually capable of being ‘best possibly known,’ i.e., of possessing, each of them,
a representative of its own. The lack of knowledge is by no means due to the interaction
being insufﬁciently known—at least not in the way that it could possibly be known more
completely—it is due to the interaction itself. (Schrödinger 1935b, p. 555)
Schrödinger’s point that “the lack of knowledge is by no means due to the inter-
action being insufﬁciently known—at least not in the way that it could possibly
be known more completely—it is due to the interaction itself” represents the situ-
ation concerning the nature of knowledge and information in quantum theory as
just outlined. At least in the present view (which or something akin to which is
assumed by Schrödinger here, even if with a negative attitude toward it), this lack

262
7
“Without in Any Way Disturbing the System”: Reality …
of knowledge is a reﬂection of the fundamental nature of our ignorance concerning
the ultimate nature of reality responsible for quantum phenomena and, thus, for this
entanglement. As just stated, this is not ignorance due to the lack of knowledge that
could at least in principle be obtained, a secret that could in principle be discovered
one day, and so forth. It cannot because it may not even be possible to conceive
of what we are ignorant about. In strong RWR interpretations, even a conception of
how the situation that gives rise to entanglement comes about is not possible, because
the conception of how quantum phenomena come about is not possible. But then,
as I argue here, all quantum phenomena involve and are deﬁned by entanglement.
Our ignorance of the ultimate nature of the physical reality responsible for quantum
phenomena and all physical phenomena (if one adopts the U-RWR view, as I do here)
is insurmountable in principle. It precludes us from assuming that it is in principle
possible to know or conceive of this reality. This is what makes this reality a reality
without realism. The qualiﬁcation “ultimate” is, again, essential. We can think and
know a great deal about the reality formed by effects of the ultimate reality that is
beyond the reach of thought. It is worth recapitulating how the situation appears in
the present interpretation, in which one can only speak of quantum objects at the
time of measurement.
First, it, again, follows that one cannot rigorously speak of the interaction between
quantum objects as an event that occurred before an experiment, because one cannot
rigorously speak of what happens between experiments in general. This includes
the case when one of these entities is the quantum part of a measuring instrument
that has “interacted” with the quantum object under investigation, which interactions
precedes the measurement as such, deﬁned by the ampliﬁcation of the quantum state
of this part to the level of observation. Any rigorous statements can only refer to
observable phenomena, which deﬁne all possible events and with which the corre-
sponding quantum objects are associated, as suitable idealizations. In this view, in the
situation considered by Schrödinger, there are only two quantum objects associated
with the measurement or measurements performed initially and then two quantum
objects associated with two measurements performed subsequently. Quantum entan-
glement can be deﬁned in terms of such measurements. The entanglement between
two quantum objects, S1 and S2, say, forming an EPR pair (or, again, the interac-
tion between them, handled by the mathematics of entanglement), allows one by
means of a measurement performed on S1 to make predictions, with probability one,
concerning S2. S2 is only deﬁned once the corresponding measurement is performed,
but not when the prediction concerning it is made, which makes it impossible to speak
of any independent properties of S2, however predicted, because there is no S2, in
the ﬁrst place, until the corresponding measurement is performed. There is only the
independent, RWR-type, reality which is responsible for the appearance of S2 when
this measurement is performed, and then, S2 is still an RWR-type entity, which means
that no physical properties can be attributed to it as such even at the time of measure-
ment. These properties could only be attributed to the measuring instruments. As
predictions at a distance, these predictions are quantum-nonlocal, while remaining
Einstein-local.

7.6 Complementarity and Entanglement: Quantum Knowledge …
263
As explained in Chap. 6, quantum phenomena are never entangled. Nor, in the
present view, are quantum objects, as a concept or idealization only applicable at the
time of measurement and thus always linked to quantum phenomena. So, one cannot
speak even of their existence between experiments. Rigorously, two initial measure-
ments associated with S1 and S2 lead to the situation of the state of the ultimate,
RWR-type, reality or the quantum ﬁeld, in which possible future measurements can
be handled by the mathematics of entangled states and expectation catalogs they
enable. One can speak of this reality in the cases of entanglement as an “entangled”
reality insofar as our measurements of its effects are handled by the mathematics of
entanglement, which thus also gives this mathematics a fundamental role, on which I
shall comment below. Quantum states, ψ-functions, are rigorously deﬁned as entan-
gled, again, making our ignorance irreducible. We cannot assume that it is in principle
possible to know the ultimate character of reality one or another effect of which we
canpredict.Weareirreduciblyignorantofit.Ifoneassumes,asSchrödinger(orBohr)
does, an independent existence of quantum objects between measurements, then one
could say that they become entangled. In RWR-type interpretations, however, such
as that of Bohr, the nature of the reality deﬁning this entanglement is still beyond
representation or even conception.
As Bohr said in commenting on EPR’s paper, “the issue is of a very subtle char-
acter and is suited to emphasize how far, in quantum theory, we are beyond the
reach of pictorial visualization” and ultimately any representation or even concep-
tion (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 59). Bohr and Schrödinger exchanged letters on some aspects
of EPR’s article and Bohr’s reply (published in October 1935), while Schrödinger
was ﬁnishing his cat-paradox paper, published in November (Schrödinger, Letter to
Bohr, 13 October 1935; Bohr, Letter to Schrödinger, 26 October 1935, in [Bohr
1972–1996, v. 7, pp. 503–509, 511–512]). This exchange, however, concerned
primarily Bohr’s views rather than those of Schrödinger. Bohr does not appear to
have expressly commented on Schrödinger’s papers or addressed entanglement as a
concept. I surmise, however, that Bohr would have agreed that these papers imply
that entanglement and complementarity are essentially connected.
As stated above, as related to “questions about the future,” any possible knowledge
at stake in Schrödinger’s argument is probabilistic or statistical (Schrödinger 1935a,
p.160).Thisistheonlyknowledgethewavefunctionprovides,bywayofexpectation-
catalogs, and when it comes to predictions, any particular complementarity is, too,
a complementarity of expectation-catalogs. (Complementary measurements do give
us deﬁnitive knowledge, but generally not concerning the same quantum object.)
I am, of course, not saying that entanglement and complementarity are the same
but only that they are subtly related to each other. Conceptually, they both radically
put into question the relationships the whole and the parts, as we understand them
in classical physics or daily life. Indeed, analogously (but, again, not identically) to
complementarity it is not clear in what sense the combined system in question here is
the whole of its two parts. Schrödinger explains this in terms of expectation catalogs
in his cat-paradox paper:

264
7
“Without in Any Way Disturbing the System”: Reality …
This is the point. Whenever one has a complete expectation-catalog—a maximal total knowl-
edge—of a ψ-function for two completely separate bodies, or, in better terms, for each of
them singly, then one obviously has it also for the two bodies together, i.e., if one imagines
that neither of them singly but rather the two bodies together make up the object of interest,
of our questions about the future.
But the converse is not true. Maximal knowledge of a total system does not necessarily
include total knowledge of all its parts, not even when these are fully separated from each
other and at the moment are not inﬂuencing each other at all. Thus it may be that some
part of what one knows may pertain to relations or stipulations between the two subsystems
(we shall limit ourselves to two), as follows: if a particular measurement on the ﬁrst system
yields this result, then a particular measurement on the second the valid expectation statistics
are such and such, but if the measurement in question on the ﬁrst system should have that
result, then some other expectation holds for that on the second; should a third result occur
for the ﬁrst, then still another expectation applies to the second; and so on, in the manner
of a complete disjunction of all possible measurement results which the one speciﬁcally
contemplated measurement on the ﬁrst system can yield. In this way, any measurement
process at all or, what amounts to the same, any variable at all of the second system can be
tied to the not yet known value of any variable at all on the ﬁrst, and of course vice versa
also. If that is the case, if such conditional statements occur in the combined catalog, then
it cannot possibly be maximal with regard to the individual systems. For the content of two
maximal individual catalogs would by itself sufﬁce for a maximal combined catalog; the
conditional statement could not be added on. (Schrödinger 1935a, p. 160)
One can see here some elements of Bohr’s reply to EPR insofar as no
more complete knowledge than provided by QM is possible. I shall consider
Schrödinger’s comments, thus grounded, on the EPR experiment below. For the
moment, Schrödinger continues:
These conditional predictions, moreover, are not something that has suddenly fallen in here
from the blue. They are in every expectation-catalog. If one knows the ψ-function and makes
a particular measurement and this makes a particular result, then one again knows the ψ-
function,voilàtout.It’sjustthatforthecaseunderdiscussion,becausethecombinedsystemis
supposed to consist of two fully separated parts, the matter stands out as a bit strange. For thus,
it becomes meaningful to distinguish between measurements on the one and measurements
on the other subsystem. This provides to each full title to a private maximal catalog; on the
other hand it remains possible that a portion of the attainable combined knowledge is, so
to say, squandered on conditional statements, that operate between the subsystems, so that
the private expectancies are left unfulﬁlled—even though the combined catalog is maximal,
that is even though the ψ-function of the combined system is known.
Let us pause for a moment. This result in its abstractness actually says it all: Best possible
knowledge of a whole does not necessarily include the same for its parts. Let us translate
this into terms of Sect. 9 [describing “the ψ-function as description of state”]. The whole is
in a deﬁnite state [ψ-function], the parts taken individually are not.
“How so? Surely a system must be in some sort of state.” “No. State is ψ-function, is maximal
sum of knowledge. I didn’t necessarily provide myself with this, I may have been lazy. Then
the system is in no state.”
“Fine, but then too the agnostic prohibition of questions is not yet in force and in our case I
can tell myself: the subsystem is already in some state, I just don’t know which.”
“Wait. Unfortunately no. There is no ‘I just don’t know.’ For as to the total system, maximal
knowledge is at hand ...”
The insufﬁciency of the ψ-function as model replacement [for classical theory] rests solely
on the fact that one doesn’t always have it. If one does have it, then by all means let it serve

7.6 Complementarity and Entanglement: Quantum Knowledge …
265
as description of the state. But sometimes one does not have it, in cases where one might
reasonably expect to. And in that case, one dare not postulate that it “is actually a particular
one, one just doesn’t know it”; the above-chosen standpoint forbids this. “It” is namely a sum
of knowledge; and knowledge, that no one knows, is none—. (Schrödinger 1935a, p. 161)
The last case is, of course, decisive in conveying the fact that the ultimate nature
of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena is deﬁned by ignorance and not
knowledge, and thus is subject to the II postulate, to which the concept of reality
without realism responds, as an interpretation of the quantum–mechanical situation
in general. Schrödinger says next:
That a portion of the knowledge should ﬂoat in the form of disjunctive conditional statements
between the two systems can certainly not happen if we bring up the two from opposite ends
of the world and juxtapose them without interaction. For then indeed the two “know” nothing
about each other. A measurement on one cannot possibly furnish any grasp of what is to
be expected of the other. Any “entanglement of predictions” that takes place can obviously
only go back to the fact that the two bodies at some earlier time formed in a true sense one
system, that is were interacting, and have left behind traces on each other. If two separated
bodies, each by itself known maximally, enter a situation in which they inﬂuence each other,
and separate again, then there occurs regularly that which I have just called entanglement of
our knowledge of the two bodies. The combined expectation-catalog consists initially of a
logical sum of the individual catalogs; during the process it develops [classical] causally in
accord with known law (there is no question whatever of measurement here). The knowledge
remains maximal, but at its end, if the two bodies have again separated, it is not again split
into a logical sum of knowledges about the individual bodies. What still remains of that may
have becomes less than maximal, even very strongly so. — One notes the great difference
over against the classical model theory, where of course from known initial states and with
known interaction the individual end states would be exactly known. (Schrödinger 1935a,
p. 161)
The passage conﬁrms and ampliﬁes my argument as concerns the difference,
“the great difference,” of the lack of knowledge or the nature of our ignorance in
quantum and classical physics, as reﬂected, perhaps most dramatically, in the concept
of entanglement. In quantum theory, our ignorance of the ultimate nature of reality is
insurmountable in principle, at least in RWR-type interpretations. Complementarity
and entanglement are manifestations of this insurmountable “it” or, as the case may
be, “not even it” or, as I said, “it without bit,” from the structure of the “bits” of infor-
mation (classical in character) found in measuring instruments. How the situation in
which “the maximal knowledge of a total system does not necessarily include the
total knowledge of its parts” emerges, the ultimate nature of the reality responsible
for it, is something that is ultimately impossible to know or even conceive of. The
idea that this is not “one but rather the characteristic trait of quantum mechanics,
the one that enforces its entire departure from classical lines of thought” literally
“haunts” Schrödinger’s articles on entanglement: “best possible knowledge of the
whole does not include best possible knowledge of its parts—and that is what keeps
coming back to haunt us” (Schrödinger 1935a, p. 166, b, p. 555; emphasis added).
I end my discussion of Schrödinger with his elegant commentary of the EPR exper-
iment, as “a simple ‘pointed’ example” of his argumentation, which also shows the
mathematics of entanglement at work. He says:

266
7
“Without in Any Way Disturbing the System”: Reality …
For simplicity, we consider two systems with just one degree of freedom. That is, each of them
shall be speciﬁed through a single coordinate q and its canonically conjugate momentum p.
The classical picture would be a point mass that could move only along a straight line, like
the spheres of those play things on which small children learn to calculate. p is the product
of mass by velocity. For the second system we denote the two determining parts by capital Q
and P. As to whether the two are “threaded on the same wire” we shall not be at all concerned,
in our abstract consideration. But even if they are, it may in that case be convenient not to
reckon q and Q from the same reference point. The equation q = Q then does not necessarily
mean coincidence. The two systems may in spite of this be fully separated.
In [EPR’s] paper, it is shown that between these two systems, an entanglement can arise,
which at a particular moment, can be compactly shown in the two equations: q = Q and p =
−P. That means: I know, if a measurement of q on the system yields a certain value, that a
Q-measurement performed immediately thereafter on the second will give the same value,
and vice versa; and I know, if a p-measurement on the ﬁrst system yields a certain value, that
a P-measurement performed immediately thereafter will give the opposite value, and vice
versa.
A single measurement of q or p or Q or P resolves the entanglement and makes both systems
maximally known. A second measurement on the same system modiﬁes only the statements
about it, but teaches nothing more about the other. So one cannot check both equations in
a single experiment. But one can repeat the experiment ab ovo a thousand times; each time
set up the same entanglement; according to whim check one or the other of the equations;
and ﬁnd conﬁrmed that one which one is momentarily pleased to check. We assume that all
this has been done.
If for the thousand-and-ﬁrst experiment one is then seized by the desire to give up further
checking and then measure q on the ﬁrst system and P on the second, and one obtains
q = 4; P = 7;
can one then doubt that
q = 4; p = −7
would have been a correct prediction for the ﬁrst system, or
Q = 4; P = 7;
a correct prediction for the second? Quantum predictions are indeed not subject to test as to
their full content, ever, in a single experiment; yet they are correct, in that whoever possessed
them suffered no disillusion, whichever half he decided to check. There’s no doubt about it.
Every measurement is for its system the ﬁrst. Measurements on separated systems cannot
directly inﬂuence each other—that would be magic. Neither can it be by chance, if from a
thousand experiments it is established that virginal measurements agree.
The prediction catalog q = 4, p = −7 would of course be hypermaximal. (Schrödinger
1935a, pp. 163–164)
This is the essence of quantum predictions: “Quantum predictions are indeed
not subject to test as to their full content, ever, in a single experiment; yet they are
correct, in that whoever possessed them suffered no disillusion, whichever half he
decided to check. There’s no doubt about it.” We can bet on them, just as we can bet
with them. But we need the mathematics of QM to do so. Indeed, Schrödinger also
notes here a crucial point discussed above but missed by EPR: “So one cannot check

7.6 Complementarity and Entanglement: Quantum Knowledge …
267
both equations in a single experiment.” One needs two separate experiments and two
EPR pairs to check and in the ﬁrst place to make both predictions. The calculations
involved, which include the entangled state constructed by EPR
|ψ⟩=
∞∞
¨
−∞−∞
A(x1, x2)|x1⟩|x2⟩dx1dx2
(with A, which cannot be separated into a function of x1 and x2, assumed to be
Dirac’s delta function δ(x1 −x2)), and other mathematics used in considering the
EPRexperiment(which,again,cannotbeperformedinalaboratorybecausetheabove
state is not normalizable) were not as simple at the time as Schrödinger might have
them appeared to be in this passage. Obviously, they would now be a routine exercise
in an undergraduate course on QM, and of course nowhere near the complexities of
the present-day quantum theory, such as QFT, or mindboggling calculations related to
the entangled entropy of black holes, using just about the most complex mathematics
found in fundamental physics.
My point here is that the calculations necessary for handling the EPR experiment
return us to the irreducible role of mathematics in quantum theory, for one thing, given
the ψ-function, even if were only mentioned, and it was far from merely mentioned by
Schrödinger or here. Every time it is even mentioned, the whole mathematical archi-
tecture of QM enters the argument. The ψ-function, Schrödinger’s great invention,
especially the complex ψ-function is the part of genealogy of both QED and QCD,
and thus of the standard model. For the moment, there is no entanglement without
it, and it is through the ψ-function, the main vehicle of knowledge, the irreducible
probabilistic knowledge, and ignorance in QM (if also through the fact we cannot
always have the ψ-function) that we know that in quantum physics “the maximal
knowledge of a total system does not necessarily include the total knowledge of its
parts.”
As discussed in Chap. 5, Bohr eventually came to realize that the standard situation
of quantum measurement is essentially connected to the EPR experiment because
the quantum object under investigation and the quantum part of the measuring instru-
ment, interacting with this object, are entangled. It is true that in the standard case,
probabilities of our predictions are, in general, not equal to one. This, however,
does not affect the essential aspects of the situation. Besides, as Bohr also came
to realize, one can reproduce the EPR situation by making the quantum object and
the quantum part of the instrument as forming the EPR pair, by the set of simple
additional measurements for q1−q2 and p1 + p2, both of which can be accurately
measured,andbyusingthesemeasurementstomaketheEPR-typepredictions,which
are ideally exact (Bohr 1938, pp. 101–104, 1987, v. 2, pp. 59–60).
Most crucial, however, is the fact of the initial entanglement in question between
the object considered and the measuring instrument involved. It is this entanglement
that enables any possible predictions concerning the outcome of a future experiment

268
7
“Without in Any Way Disturbing the System”: Reality …
on the basis of the data obtained in this measurement, deﬁned by this entangle-
ment, which entanglement always preceded the outcome registered in the observed
part of the instrument. We can decide on the arrangement for registering a given
measurement, say, either that of the position or that of the momentum, before this
outcome is registered, but we can also do this after the interaction entangling the
object and the instrument had taken place and the object has left, after this inter-
action, the location of the instrument. This, as explained, means that we actually
register the outcome associated with the quantum part of the instrument and not with
the object which is by this point elsewhere, while our prediction will pertain to the
interaction (within the same structure) between the object and another instrument.
This is strictly parallel to the EPR experiment in which, after the interaction between
two objects, S1 and S2, that entangles them, we can decide to perform either the
position or the momentum measurement on S1 and make a prediction, with prob-
ability equal to unity, concerning the outcome of the corresponding measurement
on S2, “without in any way disturbing” it. The same, however, is in effect true in
the standard measurement because if we make, as we always can, one or the other
arrangement after the object left the location of the initial interaction, we make our
prediction concerning the object, at a distance, without in any way disturbing it. EPR
concluded on this basis that one can assign both quantities to S2 or else that we must
assume Einstein-nonlocality, a conclusion challenged by Bohr in the way considered
in this chapter.
Allquantumpredictions,eventhestandardones,are,then,predictionsatadistance
without in any way disturbing the system, without, however, need to assume any
action at a distance and thus Einstein-nonlocality. On the other hand, unlike in
classical physics (where we can predict distance events within a classically causal
process), we can never either measure or, accordingly, predict both quantities simul-
taneously, by virtue of the uncertainty relations, a fact acknowledged by EPR. This,
again, does not in principle preclude classical causality (found, for example, in
Bohmian mechanics, which is, however, Einstein-nonlocal), but it does not require it
or realism in the ﬁrst place, thus allowing for RWR-type interpretations of the situa-
tion, while preserving Einstein-locality. There is only quantum nonlocality deﬁned by
the prediction at a distance, with probability one, but with the qualiﬁcations discussed
earlier, insofar as an alternative measurement on S2, which is always possible, will
disable the possibility of verifying this prediction and thus the assignment of the
quantity predicted. In classical physics, these complexities do not arise because
both quantities can be assigned to the object considered as possessed by this object
independently, as a permissible idealization even in the U-RWR view.
Accordingly, although ingenious, EPR’s contrivance in designing the EPR exper-
iment to make predictions on the basis of performing a measurement on a different
quantum object so as not to interfere with the object in question merely reﬂects the
way quantum measurements and predictions always work. It took, however, the EPR
experiment and EPR’s paper to make Bohr realize this fact, even though Bohr some-
times claimed that EPR’s argument contained nothing essentially new, possibly for
the reasons just outlined. On the other hand, the features of quantum measurement
just discussed were only considered in Bohr’s writings and were given a deeper

7.6 Complementarity and Entanglement: Quantum Knowledge …
269
analysis following EPR’s paper. Bohr’s thinking concerning quantum phenomena
and QM was given a new impetus by EPR’s paper, an impetus that also brought
with it revisions of his interpretation, leading him to his ultimate interpretation. This
change in Bohr’s thinking is a reﬂection of the fact that EPR’s paper compelled physi-
cists and philosophers to ask deeper questions concerning the relationships between
Einstein-locality and quantum nonlocality, complementarity and entanglement, and
knowledge and ignorance, and thus between physics and mathematics and among
physics, mathematics, and philosophy, in quantum physics.
7.7
Conclusion
The historical trajectory engendered by EPR’s paper, from Bohr’s and Schrödinger’s
responses to it to Bell’s theorem and beyond, transformed our understanding of nature
and our interactions with it in quantum physics as a mathematical-experimental
science, with mathematics assuming the primary role in this conjunction. As I
have argued, following Heidegger, from the outset of this study, from Descartes
and Galileo on, modern mathematics “is experimental because of its mathematical
project” (Heidegger 1967, p. 93). As I have also argued, however, QM and then
QFT, in RWR-type interpretations, gave mathematics a hitherto unprecedented role
in physics. Quantum entanglement is a remarkable manifestation of this role. As
such, it was yet another unintended gift to QM and the RWR view by Einstein,
who was no friend of either QM or the RWR view. It took Schrödinger, no friend
of the QM or the RWR view either, to give quantum entanglement its name and a
ﬁtting mathematical expression, and to realize its full conceptual signiﬁcance: “best
possible knowledge of the whole does not include best possible knowledge of its
parts.” In the RWR view, this classical expression or even the mathematical repre-
sentation (which is rigorous) of entanglement in the formalism of QM cannot capture
the ultimate character of the reality responsible for the phenomena associated with
entanglement, such as correlations, or for quantum phenomena in general, in the
ﬁrst place. The mathematics of QM, however, enables us to predict the outcomes of
quantum experiments, which also differentiate quantum phenomena in terms of the
effects observed, such as those of correlations.
While, at one level, a tremendous reduction of our phenomenal thinking from
which it was born, mathematics enables us to relate to things in nature and mind
which are beyond the reach of all thinking, including mathematical ones. Mathe-
matics allows our thinking to reach beyond mathematics and, again, beyond anything
that we can in principle conceive or think about, except as that which we cannot
conceive or think about, but to which we can, by mathematics, relate otherwise.
In quantum theory, mathematics allows us to estimate probabilities or statistics of
quantum events, and no other estimates are, again, empirically possible, as things
stand now. This, however, makes QM, a Bohr-complete theory of (nonrelativistic)
quantum phenomena, as complete as such a theory can be, as things stand now. This is
no small achievement. Indeed, QM is one of the greatest mathematical-experimental

270
7
“Without in Any Way Disturbing the System”: Reality …
achievements in the history of modern physics, an achievement in part made possible
by the RWR-type thinking that led to Bohr to his 1913 theory and Heisenberg to QM.
Schrödinger had always resisted the RWR view, and he never warmed up to
complementarity either. He hoped that entanglement would expunge the RWR view,
by that time, along with QM itself, as “perhaps after all only a convenient calcu-
lational trick,” from our understanding of quantum phenomena and would rekindle
a search for an alternative theory (Schrödinger 1935a, p. 167). While this search
was indeed rekindled later, in the 1960s, by related developments, such as Bell’s
and the Kochen-Specker theorem, QM or, in high-energy quantum regimes, QFT,
has remained our standard theory of quantum phenomena. For Bohr, by contrast,
the EPR experiment and, by implication, quantum entanglement were manifesta-
tions of, as he said in his reply to EPR, the “entirely new situation as regards the
description of physical phenomena that the notion of complementarity aims at char-
acterizing” (Bohr 1935, p. 700). It is a rigorous response to this situation that, he
argued, made QM a complete theory, as complete as a theory of (nonrelativistic
or low-energy) quantum phenomena, including those of the EPR-type, can be, as
things stand now. With Dirac’s introduction of QED in 1927, QFT took on high-
energy quantum phenomena. Remarkably, Yukawa published his theory of mesons
in 1935, the same year that EPR’s paper, Bohr’s reply, and Schrödinger’s cat-paradox
paper were published. 1935 was, especially in retrospect, a great year for quantum
theory.
References
Aspect, A., Dalibard, J., Roger, G.: Experimental test of Bell’s inequalities using time varying
analyzers. Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 1804–1807 (1982)
Bacciagaluppi, G.: Did Bohr understand EPR?. In: Aaserud, F., Kragh H. (eds.) One Hundred Years
of the Bohr Atom (Scientia Danica, Series M, Mathematica et physica) vol. 1, pp. 377–396. Royal
Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters: Copenhagen, Denmark
Bell, J.S.: Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK (2004)
Bohr, N.: Can quantum-mechanical description of physical reality be considered complete? Phys.
Rev. 48, 696–702 (1935)
Bohr, N.: Causality and complementarity. In: Faye, J., Folse, H.J. (eds.) The Philosophical Writings
of Niels Bohr, Volume 4: Causality and Complementarity, Supplementary Papers, 1999, pp. 83–
91. Ox Bow Press, Woodbridge, CT, USA (1937)
Bohr, N.: The causality problem in atomic physics. In Faye, J., Folse, H. J., (eds.) The Philosophical
Writings of Niels Bohr, Volume 4: Causality and Complementarity, Supplementary Papers, 1999,
pp. 94–121. Ox Bow Press, Woodbridge, CT, USA (1938)
Bohr, N.: Niels Bohr: Collected Works, vol. 10. Elsevier, Amsterdam, Netherland (1972–1996)
Bohr, N.: The Philosophical Writings of Niels Bohr, vol. 3. Ox Bow Press, Woodbridge, CT, USA
(1987)
Born, M.: The Einstein-Born Letters (tr. Born, I.). Walker, New York, NY, USA (2005)
Brunner, N., Gühne, O., Huber, M. (eds.): Special issue on 50 years of Bell’s theorem. J. Phys. A
42, 424024 (2014)

References
271
Bub, J.: The Banana World: Quantum Mechanics for Primates. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
UK (2016)
Cushing, J.T., McMullin, E. (eds.): Philosophical Consequences of Quantum Theory: reﬂections
on Bell’s Theorem. Notre Dame University Press, Notre Dame, IN, US (1989)
Einstein, A.: Physics and reality. J. Franklin Inst. 221, 349–382 (1936)
Einstein, A.: Autobiographical Notes (tr. Schilpp, P. A.). Open Court, La Salle, IL, USA (1949a)
Einstein, A.: Remarks to the essays appearing in this collective volume. In: Schilpp, P.A. (ed.)
Albert Einstein: Philosopher–Scientist, 1949, pp. 663–688. Tudor, New York, NY, USA (1949b)
Einstein, A., Podolsky, B., Rosen, N.: Can quantum-mechanical description of physical reality be
considered complete? In: Wheeler, J.A., Zurek, W.H. (eds.) Quantum Theory and Measurement,
1983, pp. 138–141. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, USA (1935)
Ellis, J., Amati, D. (eds.): Quantum Reﬂections. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK
(2000)
Farouki, N., Grangier, F. The Einstein-Bohr debate: ﬁnding a common ground of understanding,
arXiv:1907.11267 (2019)
Fine, A.: Do correlations need to be explained? In: Cushing, J.T., McMullin, E. (eds.) Philosophical
Consequences of Quantum Theory: Reﬂections on Bell’s Theorem, 1989, pp. 175–194. Notre
Dame University Press, Notre Dame, IN, USA (1989)
Fine, A.: The Shaky Game: Einstein, Realism and the Quantum Theory, 2nd edn. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, USA (1996)
Fine, A.: Bohr’s response to EPR: Criticism and defense. Iyyun Jerus. Philos. Quart. 56, 31–56
(2007)
Fine, A.: The Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen argument in quantum theory. In: Zalta, E.N. (ed.) Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2020 Edition) (2020). https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/
sum2020/entries/qt-epr/
Greenberger, D.M., Horne, M.A., Zeilinger, A.: Going beyond Bell’s theorem. In: Kafatos, M.
(ed.) Bell’s Theorem, Quantum Theory and Conceptions of the Universe, pp. 69–72. Kluwer,
Dordrecht, Netherlands (1989)
Greenberger, D.M., Horne, M.A., Shimony, A., Zeilinger, A.: Bell’s theorem without inequalities.
Am. J. Phys. 58, 1131–1142 (1990)
Hardy, L.: Nonlocality for two particles without inequalities for almost all entangled states. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 71, 1665–1668 (1993)
Heidegger, M.: What Is a Thing? (tr. Barton, WB, Jr., Deutsch, V). Gateway, South Bend, IN, USA
(1967)
Khrennikov, A.: Quantum probabilities and violation of CHSH-inequality from classical random
signals and threshold type detection scheme. Prog. Theor. Phys. 128, 31–58 (2012). https://doi.
org/10.1143/PTP.128.31
Khrennikov, A.: Get rid of nonlocality from quantum physics. Entropy 21(8), 806 (2019a). https://
doi.org/10.3390/e21080806
Khrennikov, A.: Quantum versus classical entanglement: eliminating the issue of quantum
nonlocality. arXiv:1909.00267 (2019b)
Khrennikov, A.: Two faced Janus of quantum nonlocality. arXiv:2002.01977v1 [quantum-ph]
(2020a)
Khrennikov, A.: Quantum versus classical entanglement: eliminating the issue of quantum
nonlocality. Found. Phys. 50, 1762–1780 (2020b). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10701-020-00319-7
Khrennikov, A.: Quantum postulate vs. quantum nonlocality: is [the] devil in h? arXiv:2003.057
18v1 [quantum-ph] (2020c)
Mermin, N.D.: Boojums All the Way Through: Communicating Science in a Prosaic Age.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge UK (1990)
Plotnitsky, A.: Epistemology and Probability: Bohr, Heisenberg, Schrödinger and the Nature of
Quantum-Theoretical Thinking. Springer, New York, NY, USA (2009)
Plotnitsky, A.: Bohr and Complementarity: An Introduction. Springer, New York, NY, USA (2012)

272
7
“Without in Any Way Disturbing the System”: Reality …
Plotnitsky, A.: The Principles of Quantum Theory, from Planck’s Quanta to the Higgs Boson: The
Nature of Quantum Reality and the Spirit of Copenhagen. Springer/Nature, New York, NY, USA
(2016)
Plotnitsky, A.: Spooky predictions at a distance: reality, complementarity and contextuality in
quantum theory. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A 377, 20190089 (2019a). https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.
2019.0089
Plotnitsky, A.: “Without in any way disturbing the system:” illuminating the issue of quantum
nonlocality. arXiv:1912.03842v1 [quant-ph] (2019b)
Plotnitsky, A.: “The unavoidable interaction between the object and the measuring instrument”:
reality, probability, and nonlocality in quantum physics. Found. Phys. 50, 1824–1858 (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10701-020-00353-5
Plotnitsky, A., Khrennikov, A.: Reality without realism: on the ontological and epistemological
architecture of quantum mechanics. Found. Phys. 25(10), 1269–1300 (2015). https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10701-015-9942-1
Schrödinger, E.: The present situation in quantum mechanics. In: Wheeler, J.A., Zurek, W.H. (eds.)
Quantum Theory and Measurement, 1983, pp. 152–167. Princeton University Press, Princeton,
Princeton, NJ, USA (1935a)
Schrödinger, E.: Discussion of probability relations between separated systems. Proc. Camb. Philos.
Soc. 31, 555–563 (1935b)
Schrödinger, E.: Discussion of probability relations between separated systems. Proc. Camb. Philos.
Soc. 32, 446–452 (1936)
t’Hooft, G.: Quantum mechanics and determinism. In: Frampton, P., Ng, J., (eds.) Particles, Strings,
and Cosmology, pp. 275–285. Rinton Press, Princeton, NJ, USA (2001)
t’Hooft, G.: Time, the arrow of time, and quantum mechanics (2018). arXiv:quant-ph/1804.01383

Chapter 8
“Something Happened”: The Real
and the Virtual in Elementary Particle
Physics
Something must have happened …
—Joseph Heller, Something Happened (Heller 1974)
Abstract This chapter addresses the question of elementary particles. As testiﬁed
by the persistent title, “What is an elementary particle?,” “an elementary particle” has
been a problem to which only fragments of a possible solution could be offered. At a
certain point, “a virtual particle” has become part of this problem. This chapter does
not aim to do more than consider this problem as a problem. In contrast, however,
to most approaches to this problem, realist in nature, it pursues an approach based
on the RWR view. QFT extends the RWR view on two counts. First, it does so
by joining the irreducibly unknowable or, in the strong RWR view, the irreducibly
unthinkable to the irreducibly multiple. Second, QFT requires a rethinking of what
happens between quantum experiments in high-energy regimes, which leads to the
concept of virtual particles. The ﬁrst subject is addressed in Sect. 8.2, via the concept
of a quantum ﬁeld, and the second in Sect. 8.3, which also considers asymptotic
freedom in QCD. I conclude with some philosophical reﬂections on elementary-
particle physics, initiated by Dirac’s discovery of antimatter, which Heisenberg saw
as “perhaps the biggest change of all the big changes in physics of our [twentieth]
century.”
Keywords Asymptotic freedom · Elementary particles · Feynman diagrams ·
Hadron jets · Quantum ﬁeld · Real particles · Symmetry groups · Virtual particles
8.1
Introduction
This chapter addresses the thorny subject of elementary particles from the RWR
perspective. As testiﬁed to by the persistent title, “What is an elementary particle?”
used by, among others, Heisenberg (1989, pp. 71–88) and Weinberg (1996), “an
elementary particle” has been and remains a problem to which only fragments of
possible solutions could be offered. At a certain point of this history, “a virtual
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
A. Plotnitsky, Reality Without Realism,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-84578-0_8
273

274
8
“Something Happened”: The Real and the Virtual in Elementary Particle Physics
particle” has become part of this problem, with an even greater uncertainty as to
what virtual particles might be or whether they exist at all. The existence of, as they
came to be called in contrast to virtual particles, “real particles,” including elementary
ones, is less in doubt, although whether one could know what they are is. Because I
shall primarily deal with elementary particles, by particles I shall, unless qualiﬁed,
refer to elementary particles, and when using the term without a further speciﬁcation,
refer to real particles, while specifying virtual particles. Of course, a “particle,” in the
ﬁrst place, is a problem, too, a problem that underlies that of an elementary particle
and has been around for much longer than that of elementary particles, indeed much
longer than quantum theory.
This chapter does not aim to do more than consider this problem as a problem. In
contrast, however, to most approaches to this problem, which are realist in nature,
this chapter pursues a nonrealist one, based on the strong RWR view, developed in the
preceding chapters in the case of low-energy quantum phenomena and QM (or low-
energy, nonrelativistic QFT), and extended here to high-energy regimes and QFT.1
As stated from the outset of this study, there is no single form of nonrealism, even of
the strong RWR-type, any more than a single form of realism. In particular, in contrast
to other RWR-type interpretations, including that of Bohr, the one adopted here is
characterized by a tripartite stratiﬁed view of the physical reality deﬁning quantum
phenomena. This stratiﬁcation acquires a new signiﬁcance in considering elementary
particles,especiallyinhigh-energyQFTregimes,inwhichtheparticleidentitycannot
be maintained within a single experiment. I brieﬂy reprise this stratiﬁcation here.
While still beyond knowledge or conception, quantum objects, including elemen-
tary particles, are considered as idealizations deﬁned only at the time of measure-
ment, and not as refering to something existing independently, in contrast to the ulti-
mate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena, or for quantum
objects, both at the time of measurement. This reality is assumed to exist indepen-
dently, and it will be considered in this chapter in terms of the concept quantum ﬁeld,
which is, it follows, not a quantum object, as it is some or even most deﬁnitions of a
quantum ﬁeld. Quantum phenomena are, forming an “idealization of observation,”
1 As a result, my engagement with literature on the subject will be more limited than one might
ideally prefer. On the other hand, limiting this engagement allows me to focus more sharply on my
key points, shaped by my RWR-type approach to the problem of elementary particles and related
issues of QFT. Also, while it offers a concept of quantum ﬁeld, this chapter is not, strictly speaking,
on QFT, another vast subject with extensive literature dealing with it, which, too, will only be
engaged in a limited fashion for the same set of reasons. Most sources on QFT cited here, such
as (Jaeger 2019, 2021), (Kuhlmann 2020), and (Ruetsche 2011), contain extensive bibliographies.
Among the standard technical textbooks are (Peskin and Schroeder 1995), (Weinberg 2005), and
(Zee 2010). Most works on QFT in physics and the philosophy of physics, too, adopt and primarily
consider realist views. For an extensive philosophical treatment of the concept of a particle, see,
for example Falkenburg (2007). The book traverses several territories in common with the present
study, including Bohr’s views, which are, however, given an interpretation different from the ones
(plural) considered here, in part because the present book focuses primarily on Bohr’s ultimate
interpretation, bypassed by Falkenburg, along with changes in Bohr’s view. Falkenburg appears
to read Bohr primarily in terms of his Como lecture, some of the key aspects of which were, as
discussed earlier, abandoned by Bohr.

8.1 Introduction
275
assumed to be representable, indeed by means of classical physics (Bohr 1987, v.
1, p. 55). It is important to keep in mind the concept of quantum measurement as
understood in this study, following Bohr. A quantum measurement does not measure
any properties of quantum objects or, in this stratiﬁcation, of the ultimate consti-
tution of reality responsible for quantum phenomena, or quantum objects, at the
time of measurement. A quantum measurement (technically, an observation) creates
a quantum phenomenon, deﬁned by what is observed in the measuring instrument
used. With this phenomenon in place, it is possible to measure the physical property
of this instrument, a property that is an effect, which deﬁnes this phenomenon, of the
interaction between the ultimate constitutions of the physical reality considered (and,
at the time of this interaction, the quantum object considered) and the instrument. This
property is measured in the same way as are the properties of objects in classical
physics or relativity. This is possible because measuring instruments are assumed
to be described classically, and, thus, considered as classical objects, in contrast
to quantum objects associated with each phenomenon. (Rigorously speaking, one
also measures the properties of observed phenomena in classical physics or rela-
tivity, but their objects can be identiﬁed with observed phenomena for all practical
purposes.) Measuring instruments, however, also have a quantum stratum through
which they interact with the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for, at the
time of measurement, both quantum objects, or what are so idealized, and quantum
phenomena.2
The strong RWR view and the corresponding interpretations (which may, again,
be different) of QFT imply that the question “What is an elementary particle?” has
no answer, at least as things stand now, because this view allows for no speciﬁable
concept of elementary particles or quantum objects in general, apart from in terms
of their effects on measuring instruments, which are, as just explained, rigorously
speciﬁable by means of classical physics. As noted from the outset of this study,
however, it does not follow that the ultimate nature of reality responsible for quantum
phenomena is constant or uniform. While each time unknowable or, in the strong
RWR view, unthinkable, this reality is assumed to be each time different in its ultimate
character as well as in its manifested effects, making each quantum phenomenon or
event, as such an effect, unique in turn, by the QI (quantum individuality) postulate,
as well as discrete in relation to any other quantum phenomena, by the QD (quantum
discreteness) postulate. The circumstance that one can no longer deal, as in low-
energy regimes, with particles of the same type even in the same experiment adds the
2 This last assumption poses additional complexities in high-energy quantum regimes because,
while QFT thus presupposes that the constitution of measuring instruments has quantum aspects,
it does not take these aspects into account, as Bohr noted already in 1937 (Bohr 1937, p. 88),
following his work with Léon Rosenfeld on measurement in QFT (Bohr and Rosenfeld 1933). It
is sometimes argued, via Bohr and Rosenfeld’s analysis, that this fact may be responsible for the
inﬁnities of QFT and the necessity of renormalization there. Bohr and Rosenfeld’s 1950 update of
the article, in the wake of the work of Schwinger, Feynman, Tomonaga, and Dyson, brieﬂy addresses
renormalization (Bohr and Rosenfeld 1950). I shall put these complexities aside because they do
not affect my argument here. See, however, (Plotnitsky 2016, pp. 239–246).

276
8
“Something Happened”: The Real and the Virtual in Elementary Particle Physics
dimension of the irreducibly multiple to that of the irreducibly unthinkable, deﬁning
(strong) RWR-type interpretations in all energy regimes.
In the interpretation of quantum phenomena and QFT in high-energy regimes
adopted here, the status of real and virtual particles as idealizations (as both are
assumed to be in this interpretation) is different. The idealization deﬁned by the
concept of real particles, as quantum objects, is required by these interpretations in all
energy regimes. The idealization deﬁned by the concept of virtual particles, which are
never detected by experiments and thus cannot be considered as quantum objects in
the present deﬁnition, is allowed but is not required. The circumstances that led to the
rise of the concept of virtual particles do play a major role in the present interpretation
and in most RWR-type interpretations of high-energy quantum phenomena and QFT.
The experimental data found in high-energy quantum regimes and the character
of quantum phenomena tell us that certain workings of nature that take over in
these regimes make them essentially different from low-energy quantum regimes.
This subject is addressed in Sect. 8.2, via the concept of a quantum ﬁeld. High-
energy quantum regimes and QFT also require, in part correlatively, rethinking what
“happens” between quantum experiments in these regimes, which lead to the concept
of virtual particles, keeping in mind that, as discussed in Chap. 2, the expression
“something happens” only applies provisionally in RWR-type interpretations in any
energy regimes. This subject is considered in Sect. 8.3.
The ﬁrst subject is more straightforward, although it reﬂects a radical change
in quantum physics, beginning with Dirac’s equation and the resulting discovery
of antiparticles. As stated above, in contrast to low-energy quantum regimes (QM
or QFT), in high-energy quantum regimes, an investigation of a particular type of
elementary particle unavoidably involves not only other particles of the same type,
say, electrons, but also other types of particles, such as, in QED, positrons, photons,
or electron–positron pairs, that is, dealing with the corresponding effects, even in
the same experiment. By the same token, it becomes meaningless to speak of the
same electron detected in any two successive measurements, which lends further
support to the tripartite structure of quantum measurement adopted here. While, in
the present view, assuming the identity of two successively detected quantum objects
is only a statistically permissible idealization in even low-energy quantum regimes,
this assumption is no longer possible in high-energy quantum regimes. The identity
of particles of the same type is strictly maintained, as it is in the case in QM or
low-energy QFT. Although it is also applicable even in QM or in low-energy QFT,
the concept of a quantum ﬁeld introduced here is designed to handle these new types
of effects observed in high-energy quantum regimes. As noted, rather than, as is
more common, as a quantum object, a quantum ﬁeld is deﬁned here as a form of
an independent RWR-type reality responsible for quantum phenomena and quantum
objects, in particular, elementary particles, at the time of measurement.
The second subject, that of virtual particles, is more delicate. The concept of
virtual particles is used widely, including in realist interpretations of QFT, although

8.1 Introduction
277
some realist interpretations of QFT also deny the existence of virtual particles.3 In
the RWR view, the situation is as follows. Because of certain observable effects in
high-energy (QFT) quantum regimes, the RWR view assumes that there exists a
stratum of the ultimate, RWR-type, reality responsible for these effects that allows
for treating this stratum by using the concept of virtual particles. In other words,
while, in RWR-type interpretations, still beyond knowledge or even conception, the
nature of the ultimate constitution of reality in high-energy regimes is different from
its character in low-energy regimes. This difference is responsible for new types of
effects of the interactions between measuring instruments and high-energy quantum
objects,suchasrealelementaryparticles,whichisanidealizationassumed,asdeﬁned
by these interactions, in both low- and high-energy quantum regimes in RWR-type
interpretations, in the one adopted here, again, at the time of measurements. By
contrast, the idealization based on the concept of virtual particles is not required.
That based on the concept of real particles is required because, as explained in
detail, Chap. 2, in RWR-type interpretations in any quantum regime, the character
of quantum phenomena observed in measuring instruments implies the existence of
something idealized as, among other quantum objects, real particles.
To brieﬂy recapitulate the situation, while discriminating between the object
and the measuring instrument is essential in each case, and while what is actu-
ally observed, as a quantum phenomenon, it is uniquely deﬁned, what is considered
as the measuring instrument and what is considered as the object under investi-
gation is not uniquely deﬁned. This deﬁnition depends on the position of the cut,
which allows for considerable latitude, even if not an unlimited one. In particular,
the ultimate, RWR-type, reality responsible for quantum phenomena is always on
the other side of the cut. It follows, that this reality, which is assumed to exist inde-
pendently, and the quantum object under investigation, which, or again, something
that is so idealized, is assumed to exist only when an experiment is performed, or
the corresponding idealizations, are in general different, even though some quantum
objects, such as and in particular, real elementary particles, are always on the other
side of the cut. Nevertheless, real elementary particles are still quantum objects and,
as such, in the present view, refer, as concepts or idealizations, to something that
is ascribed existence only at the time of experiment and are deﬁned (as electrons,
photons, quarks, and so forth) in terms of effects observed in measuring instruments.
In low-energy regimes and QM, it is, again, permissible, at least as statistical ideal-
ization, to assume that the same quantum object, including an elementary particle,
can be detected in two or more successive measurements. This assumption no longer
holds in high-energy (QFT) regimes. The situation in low-energy regimes (QM or
low-energy QFT) becomes, however, better understood as well by using the concept
of a quantum ﬁeld, as a limiting case.
3 See Jaeger (2019, 2021) for a realist perspective on the subject and helpful references. Both articles
also offer effective critiques of several arguments, primarily realist in nature, against the existence
of virtual particles, arguments, thus, very different from the present, RWR-type, argument. See also
Fox (2008), promptly cited by Jaeger’s article (Jaeger 2019, Ref. 1), for the debates on the subject,
again, however, not addressing the type of argument offered here.

278
8
“Something Happened”: The Real and the Virtual in Elementary Particle Physics
The case is different in the case of virtual particles. The observed (high-energy)
effects of those workings of the ultimate, RWR-type, reality that are commonly
accounted for by using the concept of virtual particles are only associated with
measurements performed on real particles, assumed to be affected, prior to these
measurements, by virtual particles. On the other hand, neither these workings them-
selves (by deﬁnition, in RWR-type interpretations) nor anything handled or idealized
by the concept of virtual particles (in any interpretation) is ever observed. Hence,
again, in the present deﬁnition of a quantum object, a virtual particle can never be
viewed as a quantum object.4 Virtual particles are idealizations that only refer to
something that happens between experiments and that is never registered in exper-
iments in the way real particles are, keeping in mind the provisional nature of the
expression “something happens” in the RWR view. This something has effects on the
outcomes of experiments, effects arising from the interaction between this something
and the workings of the ultimate, RWR-type, reality that give rise to real elementary
particles, which come into existence in quantum measurements. While, however,
assuming the existence of this something is necessary in view of these effects in,
arguably, any interpretation, this assumption does not require the concept of virtual
particles in order to account for these effects. This something could be and has been
accounted for otherwise, in contrast to real elementary particles as quantum objects
deﬁned by measurements.
It is true that using the formalism of QFT (or QM) does not strictly require the
assumptionofrealparticlesorquantumobjectsingeneraleither.For,onecanbyusing
this formalism predict, probabilistically or statistically, what will happen in future
experiments on the basis of the data obtained in previously performed experiments,
while merely assuming some form of reality as responsible for quantum phenomena,
without assuming that this reality is that of particles.5 The present interpretation
4 One might argue that we do not always register real particles either, speciﬁcally in the case quarks
and gluons, which only exist as conﬁned inside nuclei and, thus, cannot be registered as independent
quantum objects. Their reality, or again, the reality thus idealized, could, however, still be registered
inside nuclei, and it has been in famous LEP (Large Electron–Positron Collider) experiments that
established the existence of this reality and justiﬁed its idealization in terms of quarks and gluons,
via conﬁnement and asymptotic freedom. It is true that understanding and even performing these
experiments relied on the concept of virtual quarks and gluons. As will be seen, however, this does
not undermine the present argument juxtaposing real and virtual particles, because virtual quarks
and gluons have never been registered in any experiments, see also Falkenburg (2000).
5 See, for example, Ulfbeck and [Aage] Bohr (2001) and [Aage] Bohr et al. (2004). These arti-
cles target the use of the idea of particles in quantum theory, including (Niels) Bohr, mistak-
enly in my view. They disregard Bohr’s understanding, already in the Como lecture, of quantum
objects, including elementary particles, as “abstractions,” with “their properties being deﬁnable
and observable only through their interactions with other systems [measuring instruments]” (Bohr
1987, v. 1, p. 57). By contrast, Bohr’s concept of “atomicity,” essentially equivalent to his concept of
phenomena, reﬂects the fact that phenomena have features, speciﬁcally, discreteness, individuality,
and indivisibility, generally associated with atomic properties, but now no longer applied to quantum
objects, or the reality thus idealized, to which no properties of any kind are assigned. Phenomena
are not atomic, particle-like, in the physical sense because they consist of a very large number of
atoms and hence of elementary particles. It is true that, in contrast to the present view, Bohr adopted
the concept of a quantum object, including as an “elementary particle,” as an idealization applicable

8.1 Introduction
279
makes this type of assumption, while placing this reality beyond any representation
or conception. However, it also assumes the concepts of particles and elementary
particles, still as RWR-type entities, as applicable at the time of measurement. While
QM and QFT qua theories are falsiﬁable by the data observed in measuring instru-
ments, the assumption of the existence of real particles is not falsiﬁable, any more
than that of virtual particles. An interpretation of quantum phenomena is, however,
a different matter. Importantly, RWR-type interpretations do not assume a nonfalsi-
ﬁable ontology as a representation or even conception of the ultimate character of
physical reality responsible for quantum phenomena. They only assume a (classical)
ontology of quantum phenomena, while quantum objects, including real elementary
particles, still as RWR-type entities, are only assumed to be an idealization applicable
at the time of measurement.
While, however, the change in the ultimate character of reality responsible for
quantum phenomena in high-energy quantum regimes does not, in RWR-type inter-
pretations, require the idealization deﬁned by the concept of virtual particles, this
idealization may be provisionally used in these interpretations because of its prac-
tical effectiveness. I shall adopt this provisional use, while strictly distinguishing this
provisional idealization, never corresponding to quantum objects, from that deﬁned,
as an actual idealization, by the concept of real elementary particles, as quantum
objects, at the time of measurement. As explained in Sect. 8.3, in the present view,
the role of virtual particles is that of a heuristic device, akin to (which is not to say,
the same as) Feynman diagrams, which helps calculations in QFT.
8.2
Elementary Particles and Quantum Fields
Low-energy quantum regimes permit and most interpretations of quantum
phenomena and QM (or QFT in these regimes) adopt a conception of (real) elemen-
taryparticles,asquantumobjects.Thesameconceptionisalsoapplicablein,although
generally not sufﬁcient for, high-energy regimes, beginning with the circumstance
that elementary particles of the same type cannot be distinguished from each other,
while these types themselves are rigorously distinguishable. In the present interpreta-
tion, a particle, again, is only deﬁned as a quantum object by a measurement. Hence,
in this interpretation, one cannot, rigorously, speak of the same quantum object, such
as an electron, in two successive measurements, including those that may deﬁne a
given experiment. As discussed in Chap. 2, however, the assumption that it is the
independently of measurement. Even so, however, he would not ascribe to any quantum object any
physical properties, including those associated with any concept of particle, any more than that
of wave. The “elementary” and “particle” aspects of “elementary particles” only apply to certain
effects of the interaction between quantum objects (or in the present view, the ultimate constitution
of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena) and measuring instruments. See also note 4
above.

280
8
“Something Happened”: The Real and the Virtual in Elementary Particle Physics
same is a statistically permissible idealization in low energy (QM) regimes. A statis-
tical dimension of the situation is present even if one adopts a more conventional
view, in which quantum objects have an independent existence. One cannot be certain
that one encounters the same electron in an experiment designed to detect it after it
was assumed to be emitted from a source even in low-energy (QM or QFT) regimes,
although the probability that it would be a different electron is generally low. In
high-energy QFT regimes, speaking of the “same” electron detected in the course of
a given experiment involving several measurements loses its meaning altogether.
For the moment, in any quantum regime, two electrons could be distinguished
by changeable properties associated with them, such as their positions in space or
time, momentums, energy, or the directions of spins, but, in the RWR view, only as
properties manifested in measuring instruments and only at the time of measurement.
Such properties are subject to the uncertainty relations and complementarity. It is
possible to locate (and in the present view, establish) by measuring two different
electrons, as quantum objects, in separate regions in space. It is not possible to
distinguish them from each other on the basis of their mass, charge or spin. These
quantities are not subject to the uncertainty relations or complementarity. As Weyl
noted long ago, “the possibility that one of the identical twins Mike and Ike is in
the quantum state E1 and the other in the quantum state E2 does not include two
differentiable cases which are permuted on permuting Mike and Ike; it is impossible
for either of these individuals to retain his identity so that one of them will always
be able to say ‘I’m Mike’ and the other ‘I’m Ike.’ Even in principle one cannot
demand an alibi of an electron!” (Weyl 1931, p. 241).6 In RWR-type interpretations,
propertiesdeﬁningelectronsorotherelementaryparticleswithineachtypecouldonly
be associated with quantum objects (even if one assumes their independent existence
between measurements, as opposed to, as here, only at the time of measurement) by
means of the corresponding effects observed in measuring instruments and are not
attributable to these objects themselves. It is possible, however, to maintain both
the indistinguishability of particles of the same type and the strict distinguishability
of the types themselves in RWR-type interpretations because both features can be
consistently deﬁned by the corresponding sets of effects manifested in measuring
instruments.
This view is, thus, in accord with the assumption, deﬁning RWR-type interpreta-
tions that the character of elementary particles and their behavior, or of the reality
thus idealized, is beyond representation or even conception, just as is the ultimate,
RWR-type, character of the reality itself responsible for quantum phenomena. In the
present interpretation, this reality is, again, assumed to exist independently, while
elementary particles are assumed to idealize the (RWR-type) reality that exists only
at the time of measurement. An elementary particle of a given type, say, again, an
electron, is speciﬁed by a discrete set of possible phenomena or events (the same
for all electrons), observable in measuring instruments in the experiments associated
with particles of this type. An elementary particle can thus only be idealized as part of
6 The statement is cited in French (2014), which is a useful source on the subject, primarily, again,
considered from a realist perspective.

8.2 Elementary Particles and Quantum Fields
281
a composite system, consisting of the RWR-type reality it idealizes and a measuring
instrument, which system has a registered effect upon the observable, classically
describable, part of this instrument. The elementary character of a particle is deﬁned
by the fact that there is no experiment that allows one to associate the corresponding
effects on measuring instruments with more elementary individual quantum objects.
Once such an experiment becomes conceivable or performed the status of a quantum
object as an elementary particle could be challenged or disproven, as it happened
when hadrons and mesons were discovered to be composed of quarks and gluons.
If so, in the present view, this composite nature will manifest itself in a new set
of effects observed in each corresponding expriment. It is possible to treat hadrons
and mesons as elementary particles on an appropriately larger scale, where their
interior constitution can be disregarded, which makes the concept of an elementary
particle scale dependent. This dependence would be reﬂected mathematically in the
corresponding symmetry group and its irreducible Hilbert-space representation and
physically, in the set of effects observed in experiments.
It should be reiterated that the present concept of an elementary particle, deﬁned in
terms of such effects, does not imply that “elementary particles,” even if never shown
to be composite, are, or idealize, fundamental elementary constituents, “building
blocks,” of nature. This assumption is impossible in RWR-type interpretations, as is
any assumption concerning this constitution, as is applying the concepts of “elemen-
tary” or “constituents.” Nor, by the same token, is it possible to apply to elementary
particles any speciﬁable concept of a particle, any more than any other speciﬁable
concept, such as wave or ﬁeld, although, as will be explained presently, the concept
of a quantum ﬁeld could be deﬁned otherwise, as a mode of RWR-type independent
reality (rather than a quantum object) beyond the reach of all speciﬁable concepts.
In their recent book, Laurent Baulieu, John Iliopoulos, and Roland Seneor open
the chapter, entitled “What is an Elementary Particle?,” which is, as noted, a persistent
title, used by Heisenberg (1989, pp. 71–87) and Weinberg (1996), with the following
revealing remarks: “A chapter on this subject should normally begin with a deﬁnition
of what is an elementary particle. The trouble is that we have no such deﬁnition.”
They offer a sensible alternative: “We can only give a table [of elementary particles]
whose entries evolve with time and represent at any given moment, the current state
of our knowledge (or ignorance) of the structure of matter” (Baulieu et al. 2017,
pp. 625–626). Given the experimental data in question and the character of QM or
especially QFT, it indeed appears to be difﬁcult to ascertain that anything in the
ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena conforms to
any physical concept of elementary particle that we can form. If one adopts an RWR-
type interpretation, nothing does, at least as things stand now. All that is assumed in
suchinterpretationsisthatsomething,aformofreality,existsinnaturethathascertain
effects observed in measuring instruments, which represent our knowledge and which
compel us, even in low-energy (QM) regimes, to introduce, as an idealization of this
reality, the concept of elementary particles (in the present view, deﬁned only at the
time of and by measurement) as speciﬁable in terms of these effects but not in terms
of independent attributes of or entities belonging to this reality. As just explained,
invariant characteristics associated with elementary particles, such as mass, charge,

282
8
“Something Happened”: The Real and the Virtual in Elementary Particle Physics
or spin, could also be understood in terms of such effects. An entry into the table
of elementary particles and the knowledge or ignorance associated with it would,
then, only refer to effects observed on measuring instruments, while nothing can be
known or, in the strong RWR view, even thought about the nature of such entities,
or, in the present interpretation, about the ultimate, RWR-type, reality that gives rise
to them through its interaction with measuring instruments.
While most QFT conceptions of an elementary particle are transferred from QM
to high-energy quantum regimes, they are insufﬁcient in these regimes and need to be
adjusted or supplemented by additional concepts, most commonly that of a quantum
ﬁeld. The present approach follows this pattern by deﬁning the concept of quantum
ﬁeld in RWR terms. First, however, I shall explain why the concept of an elementary
particle operative in QM is insufﬁcient in high-energy regimes. This insufﬁciency
arises in view of the following situation, not found in QM (or low-energy QFT,
even though the latter introduces new features into quantum phenomena), to which
the mathematical architecture of QFT responds.7 In fact, with Dirac’s equation, it
was this architecture, discovered ﬁrst, that led to the discovery of this situation.
This discovery is a manifestation of both the general signiﬁcance of mathematics in
quantum theory, stated at the outset of this study and discussed throughout it, as an
invention of an abstract mathematical machinery not tied, as it is in classical physics
or relativity, to a physical description of reality, and speciﬁcally, Dirac’s particular
way of thinking, proceeding from mathematics to physics, more pointedly so than
that of Heisenberg, or especially (given his attachment to realist thinking) that of
Schrödinger. Still, as discussed in Chap. 5, even Schrödinger, driven by what his
theory had to predict, was manipulating mathematics by playing with its abstract
structure, akin to the way Heisenberg and Dirac did.
Speaking for the moment in classical-like terms, suppose that one arranges for an
emission of an electron, at a given high energy, from a source and then performs a
measurement at a certain distance from that source, say, by placing a photographic
plate there. The probability or, if we repeat the experiment with the same initial
conditions (deﬁned by the state of the emitting device), the statistics of the outcomes
would be properly predicted by QED. But what will be the outcome? The answer
is not what our classical or even quantum–mechanical intuition would expect. This
answer was a revolutionary discovery made by Dirac through his equation, although
it took a few years to realize what this equation implied in terms of physics.
Let us consider ﬁrst what happens if one deals with a classical object analogous
to an electron and then if one considers a nonrelativistic QM electron in the same
type of arrangement. I speak of a classical object analogous to an electron because
the “game of small marbles” for electrons was ﬁnished well before QM. An elec-
tron, say, a Lorentz electron, of a small ﬁnite radius, would be torn apart by the
force of its negative electricity. This led to treating the electron mathematically as a
dimensionless point, without giving it any physical structure, while still assigning it
7 Low-energy QFT is essential for explaining some quantum phenomena, such as the non-zero
energy of the vacuum, not explicable by QM.

8.2 Elementary Particles and Quantum Fields
283
measurable physical quantities, permanent (such as mass, charge, or spin), or vari-
ables (such as position, time, momentum, or energy). A point electron in quantum
theory is, however, a mathematical idealization, different from a point-like idealiza-
tion in classical mechanics, where the body thus idealized could still be assumed to
have spatial dimensions physically. One can take as an example of the classical situ-
ation a small ball that hits a metal plate. The place of the collision could be predicted
(ideally) exactly by classical mechanics, and we can repeat the experiment with the
same outcome on an identical or even the same object. Regardless of where we place
the plate, we always ﬁnd the same object. (It is assumed that the situation is shielded
from outside interferences.)
By contrast, if one considers an electron in the QM regime, it is, ﬁrst of all, impos-
sible, because of the uncertainty relations, to predict the place of collision exactly or
with the degree (ideally unlimited) of approximation possible in classical physics.
An (ideally) exact prediction of the position (or other variables) of a quantum object
is also possible, speciﬁcally in EPR-type experiments by means of a measurement
performed on the other particle of the (EPR) pair considered. As discussed earlier,
however, even a prediction with probability one is still a probabilistic prediction and
not a guarantee of the reality of what is predicted, because one can always perform
a complementary measurement, thus disabling any possibility of verifying such a
prediction and hence assigning the corresponding quantity. In addition, a single
emitted electron could, in principle, be found anywhere in a given area or not found
at all. Nor can an emission of an electron be guaranteed. There is a small but nonzero
probability that such a collision will not be observed or that the observed trace is not
that of the emitted electron. Finally, assuming that one observes the same electron
in two successive measurements is still an idealization in the present interpretation,
given that it deﬁnes any quantum object as an idealization applicable only at the time
of measurement. This idealization is, however, permissible in low-energy regimes.
QM gives correct probabilities or statistics for all low-energy quantum events thus far.
Once one moves to high-energy quantum phenomena, beginning with those
governed by QED, the situation is, again, different, even radically different. In a
subsequent measurement, one can ﬁnd in the corresponding region, not only an elec-
tron (or nothing), as in QM regimes, but also other particles: a positron, a photon,
an electron–positron pair. That is, in RWR-type interpretations, one can register the
events or phenomena (observed in measuring instruments) that we associate with
such entities. QED predicts which among such events can occur, and with what
probability or statistics, and just as QM, QED, in RWR-type interpretations, does so
without representing or, in the strong RWR view, allowing one to conceive of how
these events come about. The corresponding Hilbert-space machinery becomes more
complex, in the case of Dirac’s equation making the wave function a four-component
Hilbert-space vector, as opposed to a one-component or, if one considers spin, two-
component Hilbert-space vector, as in quantum mechanics, keeping in mind that
each component is inﬁnite dimensional. These four components represent the fact
that Dirac’s equation

284
8
“Something Happened”: The Real and the Virtual in Elementary Particle Physics

βmc2 +
3

k=1
αk pkc

ψ(x, t) = iℏ∂ψ(x, t)
∂t
α2
i = β2 = I4
(I4 is the identity matrix).
αiβ + βαi = 0
αiα j + α jαi = 0
is an equation for both the (free) electron and the (free) positron, including their
spins, and they can transform into each other or other particles, such as photons, in the
corresponding high-energy processes, again, transformations, in the RWR view, only
manifested in measuring instruments. By the same token, one can no longer speak of
the same electron, positron, and so forth as detected in two successive measurements
in low energy quantum regimes. In the current standard versions of QFT, the wave
functions are commonly replaced by operators (the procedure sometimes known, for
historicalreasons,as“secondquantization”):toeverypointx aHilbert-spaceoperator
acting on this space is associated, rather than a state-vector as in QM. As Kuhlman
notes: “both in QM and QFT states and observables are equally important. However,
to some extent their roles are switched. While states in QM can have a concrete spatio-
temporal meaning in terms of probabilities for position measurements, in QFT states
areabstractentitiesanditisthequantumﬁeldoperatorsthatseemtoallowforaspatio-
temporal interpretation” (Kuhlman 2020). As he qualiﬁes, however, “since ‘quantum
ﬁelds’ are operator valued it is not clear in which sense QFT should be describing
physical ﬁelds, i.e., as ascribing physical properties to points in space. In order to
get determinate physical properties, or even just probabilities, one needs a quantum
state. However, since quantum states as such are not spatio-temporally deﬁned, it
is questionable whether ﬁeld values calculated with their help can still be viewed
as local properties” (Kuhlman 2020). As will be seen, while the present RWR-type
concept of a quantum ﬁeld is physical, all calculated values are only probabilities and
all local properties are only those of the observable parts of measuring instruments,
just as in QM.
Once one moves to still higher energies governed by QFT, the panoply of possible
outcomes becomes much greater. Correspondingly, the Hilbert spaces and oper-
ator algebras involved have still more complex structures, linked to the appropriate
Lie groups and their representations, deﬁning (when these representations are irre-
ducible) different elementary particles. In the case of QED, we only have electrons,
positrons, and photons, single or paired; in QFT, depending on how high the energy
is, one can literally ﬁnd any known and possibly as yet unknown elementary particle
or combination. It is as if instead of identiﬁable moving objects and motions of the

8.2 Elementary Particles and Quantum Fields
285
type studied in classical physics, we encounter a continuous emergence and disap-
pearance, creation and annihilation, of particles, further complicated by the role of
virtual particles, or again, something in nature which compels some to introduce
the latter concept. This is still a classical-like and thus metaphoric picture, which
is ultimately inapplicable. But we have no other pictures. If one wants to convey
anything that “happens” between experiments my means of a picture or phenomenal
concepts (such as that signiﬁed by the word “happen”), rather than only use math-
ematics to predict the outcome of experiments, classical-like pictures are our only
recourse. I shall consider this aspect of the situation in the context of QFT in closing
this chapter. In the present interpretation, again, only the ultimate, RWR-type, reality
is assumed to exist independently, while each real particle only comes into existence
in a measurement. Although, like anything quantum, these transformations can only
be handled probabilistically or statistically, they also have a complex ordering to
them. In particular, in addition to various correlational patters akin to those found in
low-energy (QM) regimes, they obey various symmetry principles, especially local
symmetries. The latter have been central to QFT, not the least in leading to discoveries
of new particles, such as quarks and gluons inside the nucleus, and then various types
of them, eventually establishing the standard model of particle physics. Thus, QED
is an abelian gauge theory with the symmetry group U(1) and has one gauge ﬁeld,
with the photon being the gauge boson. The standard model is a non-abelian gauge
theory governed by the tensor product of three symmetry groups U(1)⊗SU(2)⊗
SU(3) and broken symmetries, and it has 12 gauge bosons: the photon, three weak
bosons, and eight gluons.
The role of symmetry in particle physics merits a brief detour. There are extensive
technical treatments of symmetries in QFT (e.g., Duncan 2012, pp. 414–569). The
mathematics is extraordinary and is prohibitive for nonspecialists.8 It is difﬁcult to
give a rigorous philosophical treatment of the role of symmetry in QM and QFT or
relativity, or even in classical physics, without an engagement with high-level math-
ematics, such as, in quantum theory, that of complex Hilbert-space representations
of both ﬁnite and inﬁnite dimensions of Lie groups. There are cases in which it is
possible to circumvent these difﬁculties and to convey the essential points. Consider
Noether’s celebrated theorems, which states that every differentiable symmetry of
the action of a physical system has a corresponding conservation law. There are,
however, subtle mathematical features and nuances involved, beginning with fact
that these theorems only apply to differential symmetries over physical space. The
action of a physical system is an integral over time of a Lagrangian, which allows
one to determine the system behavior by using the principle of least action (the
quantity deﬁned as the integral of the momentum over a given distance traveled by
a body). The theorems are a great application of the principle, arguably, stated ﬁrst
by Pierre Louis Maupertuis in 1774 and mathematically developed by Leonhard
Euler around the same time, and then by Joseph Louis Lagrange and Sir William
8 Wilczek’s book, discussed below, offers a helpful nontechnical treatment of symmetry in QCD
(Wilczek 2009, pp. 57–69). See Kuhlman (2020) for a philosophical introduction to the subject
which (rightly) emphasizes not only a crucial role of symmetries but also the difﬁculties just stated.

286
8
“Something Happened”: The Real and the Virtual in Elementary Particle Physics
Rowan Hamilton. Leibniz had related ideas earlier. Philosophically, the idea that
nature follows the most efﬁcient way possible can be traced to much earlier. The
proof of the theorems, while elegant, is not nearly as prohibitive as some of the
mathematics of QFT (which uses Noether’s theorems, as considered, for example, in
Duncan’s discussion of symmetries in QFT just cited). Still, one needs to be at least
an advance mathematics or physics undergraduate major to follow it. According
to Yvette Kosmann-Schwarzbach’s historically oriented account of the theorems,
technically, Noether’s ﬁrst theorem, from which the theorems related to different
conservation laws follow:
Noether’s ﬁrst theorem, a generalization of several conservation theorems that were already
known in mechanics … . She considers a multiple integral,
I =

. . .

f (x, u, ∂y
∂x , ∂2y
∂x2 , . . . )dx,
of a higher order Lagrangian f that is a function of n independent variables, x1, ..., xλ ,..., xn,
and of μ dependent variables, u1, ..., ui, ..., uμ, as well as of their derivatives up to a ﬁxed but
arbitrary order, κ. She then considers a variation of u, δu = (δui), and derives identity (3),
μ

i=1
ψiδui = δf + DivA,
wheretheψi aretheLagrangianexpressions,whichistosaythecomponentsofthevariational
derivative (Euler–Lagrange derivative) of f, and where the components Aλ of A are linear
in the variation δu and in its derivatives. The opposite of the quantity A is now called the
Legendre transform of the Lagrangian f. Here Div is the ordinary divergence,DivA =
n
λ=1
∂Aλ
∂xλ , of A = (A1, …, An) considered as a vector in n-dimensional space, and δf is the
variation of f corresponding to the variation δu of u, while the variation of x is assumed to
vanish. Identity (3) is obtained by an integration of parts. In the case where n = 1, the case
of a simple integral, Noether gives an expression for A for an arbitrary μ, ﬁrst for κ = 1,
which yields what she calls Heun’s “central Lagrangian equation,” then for an arbitrary κ,
and then she states her theorem:
I. If the integral I is invariant under a [group] Gρ, then there are ρ linearly indepen-
dent combinations among the Lagrangian expressions which become divergences—and
conversely, this implies the invariance of I under a [group] Gρ. The theorem remains valid
in the limiting case of an inﬁnite number of parameters.
Noether explains that “in the one-dimensional case,” that is, when n = 1, one obtains ﬁrst
integrals, while, “in higher dimensions,” i.e., when n > 1, “one obtains the divergence equa-
tions which, recently, have often been referred to as conservation laws.” By the “limiting
case” included in the statement of Theorem I is meant the case in which the elements of the
group depend on an inﬁnite but denumerable set of parameters, as opposed to the case dealt
with in her Theorem II. (Kosmann-Schwarzbach 2011, p. 57)
One could write a book on the history, or on the philosophy of the concept of
Lagrangian from analytical mechanics, which is part of the genealogy of Noether’s

8.2 Elementary Particles and Quantum Fields
287
theorem, to relativity (also part of this genealogy) to QM and QFT and beyond
(string theory, for example). I shall comment on the Lagrangian of QCD in closing
this chapter. For the moment, central as this mathematics, including, the Lagrangian
considered, may be for Noether’s proof and, I would surmise, her thinking, the
physical and philosophical signiﬁcance of the theorems in connecting symmetries,
and conservation laws could be understood apart from their mathematical content.
Thus, it follows from them that, for systems with suitable Lagrangian (and most
classical, relativistic, and, with some qualiﬁcations given below, quantum systems
are), the symmetry under continuous translations in time implies the conservation
of energy, the symmetry under continuous translations in space implies the conser-
vation of linear momentum, and the symmetry under continuous rotations implies
the conservation of the angular momentum. There are further nuances concerning
the relationships between symmetry and conservation principles, for example, the
fact that not all physical systems allow for a Lagrangian formulation (e.g., Wigner
1954). These nuances can, however, be put aside, because they do not affect my
point concerning the difference between symmetries in classical (or relativistic) and
quantum physics.
The description of Noether’s theorems just given is essentially linked to classical
phenomenal intuitions, some of which are reﬁned into features of these theorems,
just as they are into features of classical physics and (with limitations) relativity.
The situation is entirely different in the case of the mathematical symmetries of
QM and QFT, from the mathematical unitary transformations, to the invariance
under the Heisenberg group in QM, to the symmetry groups and their irreducible
representations (mathematically) deﬁning “elementary particles.” These symmetries
and related conservation laws are not directly manifested in the physically observed
quantum phenomena, like those related to classical and relativistic conservations laws
covered by Noether’s theorems, although they are related to quantum phenomena,
either probabilistically or otherwise. For example, all systems with a given spin
(a discrete variable) are handled by Hilbert spaces with the same ﬁnite dimension
(over C), while Hilbert spaces for continuous variables will be inﬁnite-dimensional,
possibly uncountably inﬁnite dimensional in QFT. In RWR-type interpretations,
however, these relations are between the mathematics of the theory, which does not
represent the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena,
and these phenomena. They are not deﬁned, as they would be in classical physics
and relativity, by mathematically idealized continuous, indeed differential, repre-
sentations of classical causal processes connecting phenomena, which could, for
all practical purposes be identiﬁed with the corresponding objects. This difference,
acutely realized by Heisenberg, was in part responsible for his later view, discussed
in Chap. 2, which allowed for the possibility of representing the ultimate constitu-
tion of nature, including elementary particles, in mathematical terms, in particular,
symmetries, apart from physical concepts, at least as we understand such concepts
in classical physics or relativity. The dynamical conservation laws and Noether’s
theorems, in their standard forms, still apply in QM or QFT in RWR-type interpre-
tations. They are, however, only manifested in measuring instruments. Indeed, they
expressly apply to quantum phenomena observed in measuring instruments (and

288
8
“Something Happened”: The Real and the Virtual in Elementary Particle Physics
thus can be expressed in their physical content in classical terms), but not to the
reality that connect quantum phenomena. The situation is different from many math-
ematical symmetries of QM or QFT and particle physics, or analog of Noether’s
theorem there, such as the Ward-Takahashi identity in QFT, which implies conser-
vation laws such as the conservation of electric changes relative to a change of the
phase factor in the complex ﬁeld of a particle and the associated gauge of the electric
and vector potential. These symmetries could, in the RWR view, only be related to
quantum phenomena via the probabilities or statistics of the outcomes of quantum
experiments. Thus, the Ward-Takahashi identity imposes symmetries at the level
of quantum (probability) amplitudes. These circumstances, again, make the role of
symmetries in QM and QFT difﬁcult to explain apart from the mathematics of these
theories.
The concepts (there have been quite a few) of a relativistic quantum ﬁeld respond
to the situation in QFT here outlined. Most concepts of nonrelativistic quantum ﬁelds
can be seen as limit cases of relativistic ones. Accordingly, by quantum ﬁelds I shall,
unless qualiﬁed, refer to relativistic quantum ﬁelds. These concepts were initially
developed as forms of quantization of the electromagnetic ﬁeld, again, necessary
even in low energy quantum regimes. The character and even the very possibility of
such concepts, especially as physical concepts, is a subject of seemingly interminable
debates, just as and often correlatively is the concept of elementary particles. While
there is a strong general sense concerning the mathematics involved (although the
range of speciﬁc mathematical tools offers one several choices) and while there is
a large consensus, although not a uniform one, that viable physical concepts of a
quantum ﬁeld are necessary, most of the proposals concerning such concepts are
realist.9 By contrast, I suggest a nonrealist physical concept of quantum ﬁeld deﬁned
by the strong RWR view, which is (interpretively) consistent with the mathematics
of QFT and most currently available mathematical concepts of quantum ﬁeld, such
as those, those based on the Lagrangian formulation and canonical commutation or
anticommutation relations for ﬁelds, for, respectively, bosonic and fermionic ﬁelds,
analogous to those of QM, say, for bosonic ﬁeld, φ and π:

φ(x, t), π(y, t)

= iδ3(x −y)

φ(x, t), φ(y, t)

=

π(x, t), π(y, t)

= 0
(Some of these mathematical concepts are associated or combined with physical
ones.)
As understood here, a quantum ﬁeld is not a quantum object but a particular mode
of the RWR-type reality, which, as any such mode in the present interpretation, is
9 This assessment is conﬁrmed by Kuhlmann (2020), keeping in mind that the term “nonrealist” is
sometimes used for interpretations that would qualify as realist in the present deﬁnition. Among
alternative proposals (which leave the mathematical formalism of QFT intact) is Wilczek’s concept
of “grid,” derived from the idea of the ether, which, Wilczek argues, has underappreciated features
he used in deﬁning his concept (Wilczek 2009, pp. 73–75).

8.2 Elementary Particles and Quantum Fields
289
assumed to exist independently and is manifested only by its effects on measuring
instruments, via quantum objects, such as elementary particles. A quantum ﬁeld is
independent of measurement, while quantum objects are, as concepts or idealiza-
tions, always deﬁned by measurements. These effects are more multiple than those
observed, via the corresponding quantum objects, in low energy regimes. This multi-
plicity is deﬁned by the fact that these effects correspond to elementary particles,
to which a quantum ﬁeld gives rise and which can be of various types even in a
single experiment, consisting of two or more successive measurements, with the ﬁrst
one performed on a given particle. The initial quantum object could also be a set of
elementary particles of the same or different types, with a different such set, possibly
consisting of entirely different types of particles, appearing in each new measure-
ment. As a mode of the RWR-type reality assumed to exist independently, a quantum
ﬁeld is responsible for transforming effects associated with elementary particles at
the time of measurement. These effects may be either invariant (as concerns a given
particle type), such as those associated with mass, charge, or spin, or variable, such as
those associated with position, momentum, or energy. As concerns this association,
always via real particles, as quantum objects, there is no difference from low energy
regimes; the difference is in what kind of effects are observed. These effects have a
kind of multiplicity in high-energy regimes, not found in the case of effects observed
in low-energy regimes. The multiplicities of types of elementary particles become
progressively greater in higher energy regimes. Hence, the concept of a quantum
ﬁeld just deﬁned brings together the irreducibly unthinkable, discovered by QM, and
the irreducibly multiple, discovered by QFT. It may be useful to brieﬂy comment,
by way of a contrast, on the concept of a classical ﬁeld.
A classical ﬁeld is represented, in a realist way, by a continuous (technically,
differential) manifold with a set of scalar (a scalar ﬁeld), vector (a vector ﬁeld), or
tensor (a tensor ﬁeld) variables associated with each point and the rules for trans-
forming these variables by means of differential functions, from point to point of this
manifold. One can also deﬁne it as a ﬁber bundle over a manifold with a connec-
tion. The concept of a ﬁber bundle is used in QFT, where it is associated with local
gauge symmetry, in the RWR view, without representing, any more than any part of
the mathematical formalism of QFT, any quantum physical process but only being
part of the probabilistically or statistically predictive machinery of QFT. In classical
physics or relativity, the variables in question map measurable quantities associated
with the ﬁeld, thus providing a ﬁeld ontology, which also allows for (ideally) exact
predictions concerning future events associated with this ﬁeld via measurable ﬁeld
quantities. In quantum physics, in RWR-type interpretations, this type of ontology
is impossible. One deals with a discrete manifold of phenomena and discrete sets
of quantities associated with each phenomenon, without assuming any continuous
process that would connect them. As does QM, QFT (in any regime) relates, in terms
of probabilistic or statistical predictions, the continuous, technically, differential,
mathematics to the discontinuous conﬁgurations of the observed phenomena and
data.
As discussed in Chap. 2, in considering quantum events, say, again, two successive
measurements, which register different outcomes, it is humanly natural, to assume

290
8
“Something Happened”: The Real and the Virtual in Elementary Particle Physics
that something “happened” or that there was a “change” in the physical reality respon-
sible for these events between them. However, in any interpretation, one cannot give
this happening a determined location in space and time, and in RWR-type inter-
pretations, there is nothing we can say or even think about the character of this
change, including as a “happening” or “change,” apart from its effects, which are
more multiple in high-energy regimes than in low-energy regimes. Nor can one
assume (again, in any interpretation), as one can, ideally, in low-energy regimes, that
we observe the same quantum objects in two successive measurements. For example,
it is no longer possible to think of a single electron in the hydrogen atom, as the same
electron detected (and in RWR-type interpretations, deﬁned) by different measure-
ments. Each measurement is assumed to detect a different electron, if one makes
a measurement between two measurements each of which detects an electron, this
measurement can detect a positron or a photon, or an electron–positron pair. One
could also speak of quantum ﬁelds, including in the sense deﬁned here, in QM (or
in low-energy QFT), but in a reduced form that preserves the particle identities, as
representatives of a given particle type—each photon always remains the “same”
photon (or disappears), each electron the “same” electron (or disappears), and so
forth, in the present view, again, strictly as a statistically permissible idealization
because each is only deﬁned by a measurement. In high-energy regimes, particles
transform into one another, within and beyond a given particle type. An electron
could reappear in this process, that is, be detected by a measurement, after a positron
appeared in it after the previous appearance of an electron, but these two electrons
are not the same.
In this understanding of the concept, speaking, as is common, of the quantum
ﬁeld of a particle, say, again, an electron, entails new complexities. Mathematically,
the formalism of, say, QED, allows one to make predictions concerning the elec-
tron, which, mathematically, invited one to speak of the electron as a quantum ﬁeld.
Physically, in the present understanding of a quantum ﬁeld, this only means that the
RWR-type reality deﬁning the quantum ﬁeld considered in a given experiment has
strata that enables the corresponding measurements detecting electrons or, again,
what is so idealized by us. It is not possible, however, to separate these strata from
those similarly associated with the possibility of detecting a positron or a photon in
the same experiment (in the sense of being deﬁned by the same initial measurement
or preparation), because neither of these strata as such is observed in measurement.
Only electrons, positrons, or photons are, as quantum objects, and only in terms of the
corresponding effects (deﬁning each particle or set of particles as the corresponding
idealization) observed in measuring instruments. On the other hand, it is possible, to
specify quantum ﬁelds as associated with fundamental forces and the corresponding
types of particles, ﬁeld bosons, electromagnetic (photons), weak W+, W −, and Z,
or strong (gluons), or gravitation (gravitons), in the latter case, hypothetically, given
that there is no theory of gravity as a form of QFT.
These circumstances reﬂect the fact that the present concept of a quantum ﬁeld
is a physical, rather than a mathematical, concept, which deﬁnes a quantum ﬁeld
as part of the independent reality ultimately responsible for quantum phenomena
and not as a quantum object, always dependent on an experiment. This concept

8.2 Elementary Particles and Quantum Fields
291
can, as noted, be associated with most current standard versions of a mathematical
concept of a quantum ﬁeld, deﬁned in terms of a predictive Hilbert space formalism
with a particular vector and operator structure, enabling the proper probabilistic
predictions of the QFT phenomena concerned. The operators enabling one to predict
the probabilities for the “annihilation” of some particles and “creation” of others, that
is, for the corresponding measurable quantities observed in measuring instruments,
are called annihilation and creation operators or also lowering and raising operators,
commonly designated as â and â†, each lowering or increasing the number of particles
in a given state by one. In RWR-type interpretations, these operators do not represent
any physical reality: they only enable one to calculate the probabilities or statistics of
the outcomes of experiments, just as the wave functions do in quantum mechanics.
Both, in Schrödinger’s language, provide expectation-catalogs for the outcomes of
possible experiments. Those provided by QFT give probabilities or statistics of the
appearance of quantities associated with other types of particles even in experiments
initially deﬁned by a particle of a given type. In QFT regimes, it is, again, meaningless
to ever speak of a single electron even in the hydrogen atom.10 QFT correctly predicts
these effects, probabilistically or statistically, which is, however, fully in accord with
quantum experiments in all regimes. As noted, QED is the best conﬁrmed physical
theory ever.11
The concept of a quantum ﬁeld here deﬁned does not introduce any new math-
ematics. It is not designed to do so. This concept is part of the (strong RWR-type)
interpretationofquantumphenomenaandquantumtheoryproposedbythisstudy,and
thus of how mathematics works in quantum theory, especially in the case of QFT as
different from QM, in particular, given the concept of quantum measurement and the
tripartite scheme of physical reality in this interpretation. This scheme—consisting
of (1) the ultimate constitution of physical reality, as an RWR-type reality, respon-
sible for quantum phenomena; (2) quantum objects, including elementary particles,
deﬁned by measurement as RWR-type concepts, and (3) quantum phenomena, also
deﬁned by measurement but represented classically—is redeﬁned by conﬁguring (1)
in terms of quantum ﬁelds. Indeed, while especially important to this understanding
in high-energy quantum regimes and QFT, the concept of a quantum ﬁeld proposed
10 The description just outlined is in accord with, and provides an RWR-type interpretation of,
the view, held even in realist interpretations, that the application of creation operators to quantum
states (in the mathematical sense of vectors in a Hilbert space), does not represent a physical
process of particle creation out of nothing, which would entail a violation of conservation laws.
There are various ways of handling this situation in realist interpretations, for example, in terms of
collisions (e.g., Schwinger 1970, p. 73). In the present view, this procedure and thus creation and
annihilation operators are just part of the mathematical machinery that allows us to predict the tran-
sition probability between two quantum events, which would be associated with different particles,
in the present interpretation, each deﬁned by the corresponding measurement. Any measurement
performed before the second measurement could reveal a different particle or set of particles than
that found either in the ﬁrst or in the second measurement.
11 One must keep in mind the mathematical complexities involved (those of QCD are especially
difﬁcult) and conceptual difﬁculties, some of which, such as renormalization, are still not entirely
resolved. Nevertheless, these theories work very well, not the least with the help of renormalization,
considered from the RWR perspective in (Plotnitsky 2016, pp. 239–246).

292
8
“Something Happened”: The Real and the Virtual in Elementary Particle Physics
here is applicable in all quantum regimes, to the point of compelling one to conclude
that, in quantum theory, reality without realism is the reality of quantum ﬁelds.
8.3
Virtual Particles
As noted from the outset of this chapter, while not required in RWR-type interpreta-
tions, the concept of virtual particles may be adopted by these interpretations because
of its usefulness as a heuristic device. Conventionally, the role of virtual particles is
deﬁned by their interactions, between experiments, with real particles. In the present
view, virtual particles and these interactions would represent, one might say, symbol-
ically, the ultimate, RWR-type, constitution of physical reality, prior to experiments,
which, by means of the interaction between this constitution and measuring instru-
ments, give rise to real particles as quantum objects (which virtual particles are not),
and via them, effects observed in measuring instruments. “Events” only refer to
the observations of these effects and not to what happens between experiments, as
anything associated with virtual particles does. It is true that, in certain cases, virtual
particles, if assumed to exist, can become real particles. Thus, while virtual particles
are assumed often to appear in pairs of a particle and an anti-particle, which exist for
a very short time and then mutually annihilate, there are situations, such as vacuum
decay, and Hawking radiation, and the Unruh effect when it is possible to separate
the pair by external energy so that they avoid annihilation and become real parti-
cles, which may have direct effects on measuring instruments. Such situations make
adopting the concept of virtual particles compelling, but still not imperative because
the particles thus emerging are still real particles and their emergence, manifested in
the corresponding effects observed in measurements (which and only which allow
one to speak of them as quantum objects in the present interpretation), could be
explained by means of other mechanisms. Thus, although Stephen Hawking used
the concept of virtual particle formation in his explanations of Hawking radiation,
the phenomenon itself, which is more complex and multifaceted (and has open prob-
lems associated with it), could be interpreted as arising from the production of pairs
of real particles.
Conventionally, when assumed, virtual particles are entities that are born and
disappear very quickly but exist long enough to affect quantum ﬁelds between exper-
iments and, as a result, what is subsequently observed in experiments. The concept
emerged in the perturbative QFT, which considers the birth and disappearance of real
particles, a characteristic of QFT regimes, as involving virtual particles. These inter-
actions are represented by Feynman diagrams, with virtual particles represented by
internal lines. I discussed below, from the present perspective, Feynman diagrams are
as only heuristic devices, helping calculations. In the present view, however, virtual
particles are heuristic devices as well. While virtual particles conserve energy and

8.3 Virtual Particles
293
momentum, they do not necessarily have the same mass as their real counterparts.12
They are considered “off-shell” in the standard terminology because they do not
satisfy certain standard equations (as “on-shell” objects do), for example, insofar
as they do not strictly obey the energy–momentum relation m2c4 = E2 – p2c2 and
their kinetic energy may not have the standard relationships to their velocity. The
probability amplitude for the existence of a virtual particle interferes with that for
its nonexistence, while for a real particle the cases of existence and nonexistence are
not coherent and do not interfere with each other. What is, again, signiﬁcant is that,
even though they are not observed, virtual particles serve as effective, but, again, in
RWR-type interpretations, not required, idealizations (although some among these
interpretations may adopt the concept), because of statistically ascertainable effects
on real particles and our measurements concerning the latter. Among them are (in
addition to those mentioned above as more speciﬁcally dealing with virtual particles
becoming real particles) the Lamb shift, the Casimir effect, the role of virtual gluons
in establishing the constitution of protons as comprised by quarks and gluons and in
giving the proton its mass, and asymptotic freedom. All these cases would illustrate
the difference between two idealizations, real and virtual particles, in RWR-type
interpretations. Here, I would like to focus on the case of asymptotic freedom.
Asymptotic freedom was discovered by Gross and Wilczek (1973, 1974) and
independently Politzer (1973), eventually bringing them their Nobel Prize in 2004.
Asymptotic freedom enables quantum chromodynamics (QCD), the QFT of the
strong interactions between quarks and gluons, to account for the behavior of quarks
and gluons, speciﬁcally their conﬁnement insider nuclei, thus, the impossibility of
observingthemoutsidenuclei.Thisstatementconveysthesituationinclassicalterms,
as there is no other way to speak of anything in the sense of representing by means of
language what “happens.” Mathematically, asymptotic freedom is a property of some
gauge theories that reﬂects, if one, again, speaks conventionally and, hence, classi-
cally, the “fact” that interactions between particles become asymptotically weaker
with an increase of the energy scale and a corresponding decrease of the length scale.
While quarks interact weakly at high energy scales (allowing perturbative calcula-
tions by QCD), at low energy scales, the interactions become strong, ultimately too
strong for quarks to break out of nuclei, thus conﬁning them inside nuclei. This leads
to the impossibility of observing quarks or gluons as such, as real particles, at least
not in the way other (unconﬁned) elementary particles, such as electrons, photons, or
12 There are further subtleties as concerns conservation laws, which are handled by using the uncer-
tainty relations, including those for time and energy variables, which involve subtleties of their own
because, in contrast to coordinate and momentum variables, time is not an operator but a param-
eter (e.g., Shilladay and Bush 2006). In considering virtual particles, coordinates are parameters as
well. According to Weinberg: “virtual particles … are not directly observable while they are being
exchanged, because their creation as real particles (e.g., a free electron turning into a photon and
an electron) would violate the law of conservation of energy. However, the quantum–mechanical
uncertainty principle dictates that the energy of a system that survives for only a short time must be
correspondingly highly uncertain, so these virtual particles can be created in intermediate states of
physical processes but must be reabsorbed again very quickly” (Weinberg 1977, p. 24).

294
8
“Something Happened”: The Real and the Virtual in Elementary Particle Physics
neutrinos, can be. Quark and gluons, can, however, be “observed” as real particles,
indirectly, or so it is assumed, in so-called hadron jets.
The meaning of the question (as it remains a question) of so “observing” even
real quarks and gluons either inside the nuclei or in jets remains debated on several
counts (e.g., Falkenburg 2000; Fox 2009, and further references there). I shall put
this debate by and large aside, given that my main concerns at the moment are virtual
particles and how the concept of observation is deﬁned in the RWR view, vs. more
realist views. I shall, accordingly, restrict myself to a few comments on the issue
shaped by this difference, in particular by considering Tobias Fox’s conclusion of
the article just mentioned, contrasting the case of quarks with Carl D. Anderson’s
discovery of the positron, vis-à-vis the present view. According to Fox:
Obviously, images of jet-events give an idea of a good, working particle detector but they are
not crucial for the conﬁrmation of theoretically-determined measuring values. By compar-
ison, think of the discovery of the positron by Carl D. Anderson in 1932. In his publication,
we see images of positron tracks. Since these images show that a single track is caused
by a single positron, they were key to his claim that positrons are indirectly observable….
Getting even one image of a certain particle track means the discovery of a positron by
indirect observation. And the charge-mass ratio typical for a positron can be determined
by evaluating the curvature of that track. Remember our deﬁnition [an object is indirectly
observed if the physical phenomenon created by the object is observed directly]. Anderson
observed indirectly positrons in the same way as we observe indirectly an aeroplane by
watching a vapour trail in the sky.
This type of investigation is impossible for quarks, although quark physics and quantum
chromodynamics is none the worse for this. That quarks cannot be observed has little impact
on the successful veriﬁcation of the physical entity “quarks,” if the term “entity” is understood
in its most basic sense. Many entities are not observable—forces, natural constants, ﬁelds,
virtual particles, resonance particles, as well as natural laws or terms of natural laws. …
There is a strong consensus that some objects, which are not directly observable, might be
indirectly observable. There are additionally entities that to us do not exist because, among
other reasons, they are not indirectly observable.
In the case of quarks, we have seen that they cannot be indirectly observed, even in the
comparatively evidential context of jet-events. This should be a strong hint that quarks are
in principle unobservable, although, this is not yet proved. This brings us to the debate of
scientiﬁc realism. And the indications are that quarks can only be treated as entities, similar
to other unobservable entities in science. (Fox 2009, pp. 186–187)
While Fox is right to invoke “the debate of scientiﬁc realism,” all the possibilities
here listed concerning the observability of quarks or lack thereof would still fall
within realism in the present understanding of the term. By contrast, in the present,
strong RWR, view, while there are differences between quarks or gluons and uncon-
ﬁned objects as concerns their observability or, in present terms, the emergence of
the corresponding quantum phenomena, no objects of either type are assumed ulti-
mately to exist as such. Observed quantum phenomena are assumed to exist as, to
return to Bohr’s language, “idealization of observation,” thus akin to Fox’s “direct
observation” (Bohr 1987, v. 1, p. 55). In the RWR view, however, reversing Fox’s
deﬁnition, a physical phenomenon constructed by means of our observational tech-
nology and observed directly, or, again, as an idealization of observation, establishes
a connection to an object, observed indirectly. Or rather this object is assumed, as

8.3 Virtual Particles
295
an idealization, to exist on the basis of the effect of the interaction between it and
the measuring instrument, an effect manifested in the observed parts of the instru-
ment and as such observed in this instrument directly. In the present view, moreover,
the concept of a quantum object only applies at the time of observation. The differ-
ence, then, between, say, electrons or positrons and quarks or gluons are that of the
structure of effects, traces, of the interactions between our measuring instruments
and the ultimate constitution of the reality considered, which is assumed (still an
unfalsiﬁable assumption which is only practically justiﬁed) to exist independently,
as a quantum ﬁeld. In the case of electrons or positrons, the corresponding structure
of effects allows us to associate it with (the idealization deﬁned as) real electrons
or positrons. On the other hand, given the debate considered by Fox, in the case
of quarks or gluons, the corresponding structure of effects may or may not allow
us to associate it with (the idealization deﬁned as) of quarks or gluons. Or rather
this structure of effects may or may not allow us to do so in the same way. But, “the
conﬁrmation of theoretically-determined measuring values,” still allows one to speak
of real quarks and gluons as a suitable idealization, which is not possible in the same
way in the case of virtual quarks and gluons. But then, this is not possible in the same
way for virtual electrons or positrons either. In dealing with virtual particles there is
no difference: this idealization is possible but not required in the present view, or at
least does not have the same status as that of real particles.
It is still possible, however, that we don’t need (the idealization of) even real quarks
or gluons, or need them less than (the idealization of) unconﬁned particles. All we
might need, as Gell-Mann thought initially, may be the corresponding symmetry
groups and their irreducible representation (associated with quarks) or some other
mathematical technology that enable us to predict what is observed in high-energy
QCD regimes. This is, however, the kind of mathematical technology that we always
need, along with the technology of experiments, if we want to have physics as a
mathematical-experimental science.
Withtheseconsiderationsinmind,IwouldliketodiscussWilczek’svividordinary
language account, via asymptotic freedom, of “why quarks and gluons appear (only)
as jets,” by “explain[ing] why soft radiation [which makes hadron jets out of a quark
and antiquark] is common but hard radiation [which involves intermediate gluons
and leads to an extra jet] is rare.” He says:
The two central ideas of asymptotic freedom are: ﬁrst, that the intrinsic color charge of the
fundamental particle—whether quark, antiquark, or gluon—is small and not very powerful;
second, that the cloud of virtual particles that surrounds the fundamental particle is thin
nearby but grows thicker far away. It’s the surrounding cloud [of virtual particles], not the
particle’s core charge, that makes the strong interaction strong.
Radiation occurs when a particle gets out of equilibrium with its cloud. Then rearrange-
ments that restore the equilibrium in color ﬁelds cause radiation of gluons or quark-antiquark
pairs, much as rearrangements in atmospheric electric ﬁelds cause lightening, or rearrange-
ments in tectonic plates cause earthquakes and volcanos. How can a quark (or antiquark
or gluon) get out of equilibrium with its cloud? One way is if it suddenly pops out from
a virtual photon, as happened in the experiments at LEP [Large Electron-Proton Collider]
we’ve been discussing [experiments that “showed” quarks and gluons inside nuclei]. To reach
equilibrium, the newborn quark has to build his cloud, starting from the center—where the

296
8
“Something Happened”: The Real and the Virtual in Elementary Particle Physics
small color charge initiates the process—and working its way out. The changes involved are
small and graded, so they require only a small ﬂow of energy and momentum—that is, soft
radiation. The other way a quark can get out of equilibrium with its cloud is if it’s jostled by
quantum ﬂuctuations of the gluon ﬁeld. If the jostling is violent, it can cause hard radiation.
But because the quark’s intrinsic color charge is small, the quark’s response to quantum
ﬂuctuations in the gluon ﬁeld tends to be limited, thus hard radiation is rare. That’s why
three jets are less likely than two. (Wilczek 2009, p. 56)
Amorestandard,lessvibrant,qualitativedescriptionofasymptoticfreedomwould
go roughly as follows. Virtual quark-antiquark pairs tend to screen the color charge,
similarly to the Landau pole screening of virtual charged electron–positron pairs in
vacuum in QED. In the close vicinity of a charge, the vacuum becomes polarized
because virtual particles of opposing charge are attracted to the charge and those of
the same charge are repelled, with the effect of partially canceling out the ﬁeld at any
ﬁnite distance. Approaching the central charge, the effect of the vacuum diminishes
and the effective charge increases. QCD, however, has a crucial new property: gluons
carry a color charge as well. Moreover, they do so differently because each gluon
carries both a color charge and an anti-color magnetic moment. The total effect of
polarization of virtual gluons in a vacuum is not to screen the ﬁeld but to amplify it
and change its color, the phenomenon known as antiscreening. Approaching a quark
decreases the antiscreening effect of the surrounding virtual gluons, which weakens
the effective charge with decreasing distance. Because the virtual quarks and the
virtual gluons, thus, contribute opposite effects, which effect wins out depends on
the number of different ﬂavors of quarks. For standard QCD with three colors, if
there are no more than 16 ﬂavors of quarks (including anti-quarks), antiscreening
dominates and the theory is asymptotically free. There are only six known ﬂavors of
quarks.
This description obviously bypasses the extraordinary and extraordinarily difﬁcult
mathematics, without which there would be no QCD. The following account gives a
senseofthismathematics,stillmixinginsomeverbaland,thus,classicaldescriptions.
This mixing may be unavoidable even in technical accounts, even though such verbal
descriptions may be misleading and, at least in the RWR view, are ultimately inap-
plicable. Mathematics, at least in the present view, does not describe or represent
what “happens” anymore than anything else does. It only provides correct proba-
bilistic predictions of the outcome of quantum experiments. Asymptotic freedom,
as a mathematical property of QCD, is derived by means of calculating the so-
called beta-function that represents the transformations of the coupling parameter, g,
(dependent on the energy-scale, μ) of the theory under the renormalization group:
β(g) =
∂g
∂log(μ).
The renormalization group is one of the most extraordinary concepts of QFT,
introduced by Kenneth G. Wilson, the technical description of which is formidable
and will be bypassed here. Conceptually, it is a mathematical technology, part of the
so-called effective QFTs, that enables one to properly investigate the changes of a

8.3 Virtual Particles
297
quantum system as represented (“viewed”) at different scales (e.g., Kulhmann 2020,
Sect. 2.4.). It reﬂects the changes in the underlying force laws of QFT, changes due to
the fact that the energy scale at which physical processes occur varies, with energy–
momentum and resolution distance scales obeying the uncertainty relations. Because
the underlying renormalization group, β only depends on μ implicitly through g.
This dependence on the energy scale is called “running” the coupling parameter.
Its explicit computation is difﬁcult but possible by means of various mathematical
techniques.
For sufﬁciently short distances or large values of momentum, an asymptotically
free theory allows for calculations by a perturbation theory, calculations guided (in
the present view heuristically) by Feynman diagrams. These cases are, accordingly,
more manageable by calculations than those that could deal with long-distance,
strong-coupling behavior, equally found in such theories, behavior that is assumed
to correspond to conﬁnement. The beta-function, then, describes how the coupling
constant changes with scaling of the system. In order to calculate the beta-functions,
one needs to evaluate Feynman diagrams, which is to say, the transformations in
the formalism guided by these diagrams (which in the present view, are, again, only
heuristic guides to such calculations) contributing to the event of the emission or the
absorption of a gluon by a quark. The calculation is performed by using rescaling
in position-space or momentum-space. In non-abelian gauge theories, such as QCD,
the existence of asymptotic freedom depends on the gauge groups and number of
ﬂavors of interacting particles. To the lowest nontrivial order, the beta-function in an
SU (N) (the Lie group of n × n unitary matrices with the determinate one) with nf
kind of quark-like particles is
β1(α) = α2
π
	
−11N
6
+ n f
3

.
Here α is the equivalent of the ﬁne-structure constant in the theory,
g2
(4π). Ifβ1 < 0,
the theory is asymptotically free. For SU (3), the color charge gauge group of QCD,
N = 3, and β1 < 0
n f < 33
2
Hence, for SU(3), the theory is asymptotically free if there are 16 or fewer ﬂavors
of quarks. There are, again, only six ﬂavors of quarks.
This account is, of course, still far from representing the actual mathematics of
asymptoticfreedomorQCD,whichisnecessarytoarriveatthesenumbers,themathe-
matics exempliﬁed and discovered in Gross and Wilczek’s and Politzer’s papers and
their calculations, like those of the renormalization group parameters. That these
papers get these numbers right is almost a miracle. On the other hand, quantum
theory or all modern physics, from Galileo on, is about getting “numbers” right.
The numbers in question here are those observed strictly in measuring instruments,
or inferred from those observed in measuring instruments, such as the numbers of

298
8
“Something Happened”: The Real and the Virtual in Elementary Particle Physics
colors (and colors here are only numbers) or the number of quarks, never observed
as such. No classical-like language or concepts, such as those used by Wilczek in
the above verbal account, or Feynman diagrams can represent or, in the RWR view,
allow one to even imagine anything physically corresponding to the mathematics of
asymptotic freedom. We have no representational concepts or language other than
classical-like to represent what happens in nature, with only mathematics giving
us a freedom from them, as Heisenberg argued in the case of the mathematics of
QM (Heisenberg 1930, p. 11). As discussed earlier, this mathematics itself was a
product of the historical development of mathematics deﬁned by its divorce from its
representational functioning in classical physics, which was a mathematized reﬁne-
ment of our general phenomenal thinking. This freedom may not be complete, as
we still use verbal means to help us to describe our mathematical concepts (as for
example, in Gross and Wilczek’s or Politzer’s papers on asymptotic freedom). It is,
however, sufﬁcient to circumvent the constraints of our daily phenomenal intuition
and concepts or language either in mathematics itself or in certain areas of physics,
such as relativity, where mathematics can still serve as a means of representing phys-
ical processes, or quantum theory, where it may no longer serve this purpose. It does
not in RWR-type interpretations, where it only serves to predict probabilistically the
numerical outcomes of quantum experiments, which could also allow one to estimate
other numbers, such as that of possible quarks or their ﬂavors, as just explained.
Virtual particles help such estimates but are not required for them, and no numbers
associated strictly with them are registered in any experiments, let alone any “clouds,”
so evocatively used by Wilczek’s verbal description of asymptotic freedom. Virtual
particles remain unfalsiﬁable constructs. This is the case not only because anything
that can be said or thought about them and their behavior could only be classical and
thus cannot apply to them, for this is also true about real particles or the ultimate,
RWR-type, reality of quantum ﬁelds, which are sometimes described by evocative
metaphors as well. This is also, and primarily, the case because virtual particles
neither leave any traces in measuring instruments nor are strictly necessary for the
mathematical formalism of QCD. Although, as discussed earlier, the lack of this
necessity is sometimes claimed in the case of real quarks and gluons or any real
particles, real quarks and gluons are assumed to leave such traces, even of a more
complex and qualiﬁed nature, as discussed above. Even if, in view of this more
complex nature, this assumption is questioned or even denied in some interpretations,
the ontological status of real quarks and gluons, including as concerns their impact
on observed traces, is still different from that of virtual quarks and gluons.
The irreducibly statistical nature of QCD as a quantum theory, a feature central to
this study, remains crucial in dealing with these phenomena, and it enters Wilczek’s
account, cited above. According to Wilczek (referring by “quantum mechanics” to
all quantum theory as a probabilistic or statistical theory):
The connection of our photographs [of jets] to the profundities of quantum mechanics is
even more direct. … It is simply that once more, we ﬁnd that doing the same thing over and
over again gives different results each time. We saw that before with the ultrastroboscopic
nanomicroscope that takes pictures of protons [as consisting of quarks and gluons]; we’re
seeing it now with the creative destruction machine that takes pictures of empty space [false

8.3 Virtual Particles
299
vacuum]. If the world behaves classically and [deterministically] predictably, the billion
euros invested in LEP would have underwritten a very boring machine: every collision would
justreproducetheresultoftheﬁrstone,andthere’dbeonlyonephotographtolookat.Instead,
our quantum-mechanical theories predict that many results can emerge from the same cause.
We can predict the relative probabilities of different results. Through many repetitions, we
can check those predictions in detail. In that way, short-term unpredictability can be tamed.
Short-term unpredictability is, in the end, perfectly compatible with the long-term precision.
(Wilczek 2009, p. 56)
The expression “the same cause” could, in the present view, only refer to the iden-
tical preparation of the measuring instruments used, rather than to a cause deﬁning
classical causality. By referring to our capacity to predict these probabilities, this
conclusion brings the mathematics of QCD, in its probabilistically or statistically
predictive role, into Wilczek’s verbal and, thus, conceptually classical description,
again, unavoidable in nontechnical and even technical accounts of QCD or quantum
theory in general. In the RWR view, however, such a description cannot correspond
to what “happens,” which word itself is, again, ultimately inapplicable, as Heisen-
berg argued (Heisenberg 1962, p. 57). While it may be helpful, any such description
is ultimately inadequate metaphor, even in dealing with real rather than only virtual
quantum objects. In the RWR view, even a purely mathematical representation of
what happens between experiments is not possible, although Heisenberg in the same
book (Heisenberg 1962, pp. 145, 167–186) and other later works assumed that it
is which assumption does not require the term or concept of “something happens.”
Wilczek is aware of these complexities, even if without adopting the RWR view.
His position is similar to that of Heisenberg or (ontic) structural realism, with, as
in Heisenberg, symmetry as its core. Ontic structural realism has some currency
in interpretations of QFT, including with the help of category theory, discussed in
a different context in Chap. 9 (e.g., Bain 2013). Wilczek prefaces the account of
quantum randomness and probability just cited as follow: “There is direct connec-
tion between quarks and gluons appearing in jets and asymptotic freedom. It’s easy
to explain the connection using Fourier transforms, but unfortunately Fourier trans-
forms themselves aren’t easy to explain [for a lay reader], so we won’t go there.
Here’s a word explanation that is less precise but calls for more imagination (and
less preparation)” (Wilczek 2009, p. 54). Although a beautiful piece of mathematics
and technically complex in this case (it is measured by the moments of the scaling
structure function, which is no simple matter, as Wilczek rightly states here [e.g.,
Gross andWilczek 1973, p. 3643]), theconcept is onlyasmall part of themathematics
of asymptotic freedom.
In the RWR view, especially the strong RWR view, Wilczek’s verbal “explanation”
is not only less precise but is also rigorously inapplicable, however imaginative it
might be descriptively, because this imagination can only create a classical picture
or a proto-classical one (that is, reﬁnable into a classical physical representation).
Our mathematical imagination can be free from such pictures, even if, again, not
free from pictures or daily language altogether. Thus, as discussed earlier, when one
thinks of a Hilbert space, one tends to use some geometrically thinking, to form
some, unavoidably classical, picture of spatiality, which helps our thinking, physical

300
8
“Something Happened”: The Real and the Virtual in Elementary Particle Physics
and mathematical, but is not required for proofs or calculation. In this case, however,
our geometrical intuitions are of a very limited help, while the technical aspects of
this geometry (deﬁned in Chap. 4 as spatial algebra) are essential.
The situation just discussed in connection with asymptotic freedom, thus, reﬂects
two related tensions that preoccupied this study from the outset and acquired new
dimensions in the context of the question of elementary particles. The ﬁrst, more
general, is between the abstract mathematical architecture of quantum theory and
our general phenomenal representation or, or accompanied by, a verbal descrip-
tion, always classical in nature, also applicable to the observable parts of measuring
instruments. The description of these observable parts is, in RWR-type interpre-
tations, entirely divorced from the abstract mathematics of the formalism, never-
theless, able to predict what is so observed as well as possible thus far. The second
tension is between algebra and geometry, which are more interactive, although geom-
etry still play a greater role in both our, ultimately inapplicable, verbal account of
what “happens” between experiments and in our representation of observed quantum
phenomena. (Their representation by means of classical physics would of course also
involve the algebra of classical physics.) Finally, as I argue, it is not clear that, as still
a human way of thinking, mathematics should be able to represent, however ideally,
the ultimate constitution of nature, and in the U-RWR view adopted here it cannot.
Nothing can. We are fortunate enough that it enables us to predict, in probabilistic
or statistical terms at that, quantum events.
In QCD, or QFT in general, then, the concept of virtual particles helps us to make
these predictions. It would, however, be difﬁcult to argue that it is strictly necessary
for doing so and in the present view it is not. This assessment is corroborated by
examining the nature and role of Feynman diagrams, arguably the main vehicle for
working with the concept of virtual particles. No virtual particle found in Feynman
diagrams is ever observed, unless it becomes a real particle, as it can in certain
circumstances. Consider the following simple, routinely used, Feynman diagram
(Fig. 8.1) with an electron and a positron annihilating, producing a virtual photon
that then disappears, giving birth to a quark and anti-quark, with an antiquark then
emitting a gluon.
Fig. 8.1 An electron and a
positron annihilate,
producing a virtual photon
that then disappears, giving a
birth to a quark and
anti-quark, with an antiquark
then emitting a gluon

8.3 Virtual Particles
301
Only the electron and positron, and quark and antiquark (and then gluon) involved
are observable: only they could leave traces in measuring instruments from which we
infer their existence, in the case of quarks and gluons, again, with qualiﬁcations given
earlier. The virtual photon is never observed, unless it becomes a real photon, as it can
in certain circumstances, as discussed above, keeping in mind that, in the RWR view,
all observations only pertain to quantum phenomena as deﬁned by the observable
parts of measuring instruments. No real particles as such are ever observed, and in
the present interpretation, even as unobservable as such, they are deﬁned, as an ideal-
ization, only at the time of observation. Ultimately, however, Feynman’s diagrams
are only diagrams, especially in the RWR view. They do not represent not only,
obviously, any trajectories in space and time, a concept not applicable to quantum
behavior in the ﬁrst place, but also any physical connections between these events,
as only events involving real particles could, in principle, be observed. Feynman
diagrams provide a guidance to which of such events can be observed and which
probabilities can be calculated. This guidance is helpful, sometimes exceptionally
so even to the point of being indispensable in practice, as for example, in Gross
and Wilczek’s papers on asymptotic freedom, which might not have been possible
apart from them. In principle, however, one can do without them. Schwinger, for
whom, admittedly, the idea of virtual particles was crucial, did not use Feynman
diagrams in his renormalization of QED.13 The concept of antimatter emerged from
the mathematics of Dirac’s equation, without using anything like virtual particles
either. This view of Feynman diagrams is not restricted to RWR-type interpretations
and is found elsewhere, including in realist interpretations of QFT. Some of the latter,
however, often assume the existence of virtual particles (e.g., Kaiser 2014; Meynell
2018; Jaeger 2019). RWR-type interpretations, by contrast, deprive of reality not
only Feynman diagrams but also the concept of virtual particles and behavior. Both
are heuristic tools, helping QFT calculations, admittedly, tools are different in nature.
When it comes to QFT calculations, one needs all the help one can get. The
mathematics of QFT, especially QCD, could, again, be extremely difﬁcult. Most
calculations in QCD require powerful approximation methods, such as lattice QCD,
and tremendous computer resources. The QCD Lagrangian governing the interaction
of quarks and gluons, including quark conﬁnement, may be elegant on the surface:
L = −1
4 Fα
μvFμv
α
−

n
¯ψnγ μ
∂μ −igAα
μtα

ψn −

n
mn ¯ψnψn
13 Dyson’s proof of the equivalence of Schwinger’s and Feynman’s schemes offers support for this
view of Feynman’s diagrams (Dyson 1949). This view, however, could be justiﬁed from within
Feynman’s own scheme. See Schweber (1994, pp. 474–575) for an excellent discussion of Dyson’s
contribution, although the book, intriguingly, pays next to no attention to virtual particles, either in
this discussion or in general.

302
8
“Something Happened”: The Real and the Virtual in Elementary Particle Physics
Once, however, one begins calculating, unfolding its symbols, as, in Gross and
Wilczek’sorPolitzer’sremarkablepapersonasymptoticfreedom(GrossandWilczek
1973, 1974; Politzer 1973), this elegance retreats, and, guided as one might be, as
these authors were, by Feynman’s diagram, one enters the calculational nightmares
for which QFT is famous, but from which, dreams of new theories are born.
8.4
Conclusion
In RWR-type interpretations, in high-energy (QFT) regimes, the ultimate, RWR-
type, reality, responsible for the quantum phenomena in these regimes, produces
multiple and multiply transforming effects, a form of the Heraclitean many. But,
in these interpretations, it does so in a way that we cannot know or even conceive
of, which may be seen as a radical form of the Heraclitean hidden, which “nature
loves” (Kahn 1981, Fragment X, p. 33).14 The mathematics of QFT is, just as that
of QM, a Pythagorean mixture of algebra and geometry, through which we can
probabilistically or statistically predict the effects of the unthinkable on what can
be thought and experienced as quantum phenomena. This, as I said, need not mean
that the ultimate level of reality is deﬁned by permanence or oneness, the One,
as Parmenides, another key pre-Socratic thinker, and Plato thought: the concept of
permanence is no more applicable to this “it” than that of change or any other concept,
including “something happened,” or “it,” “hidden,” or “many.” Thinking in terms of
the Heraclitean vision of the hidden, becoming, and the many are more suited to QFT
becausetheeffectsofthehidden(idealizedasunrepresentableoreveninconceivable),
effects observed in measuring instruments, are deﬁned by multiplicity and becoming.
Parmenidesand,followinghim,Platowouldhaveseenthismultiplicityandbecoming
as illusions of our senses rather than the characteristics of the ultimate nature of
reality, hidden from our senses, if for them, not, at least not entirely, from thought. In
the present, strong RWR, view one would accept their ﬁrst claim, when considering
the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena, but not
their second claim. For it does not follow that this reality is deﬁned by absolute
permanence, any more than by change, or as anything hidden because this word
implies that what is hidden might be revealed one day. Nor may it be accessible
to thought. Hence, rather than referring to something, some “secret,” that can be
revealed one day, “reality” is a name without a concept associated with it, or even a
name without a name, because it is difﬁcult for a name to avoid a concept associated
with it.
14 An appeal to the Heraclitean many in QFT is found in literature, as in Redhead (1990, p. 22),
but not, to my knowledge, along the RWR lines of bringing together the hidden, becoming, and the
multiple of QFT. Admittedly, these are English terms. Hence, I use the adjective Heraclitean, rather
than referring to anything in Heraclitus’s own thought. To what degree these terms or concepts
thus designated correspond to Heraclitus’s meaning is a separate issue, complicated by the fact we
only have famously enigmatic fragments of his writings quoted by others. My claims here strictly
concern the present view of QFT in these (English) terms, as we use them now.

8.4 Conclusion
303
Beginning with Dirac’s equation, QED and eventually QFT became far-reaching
extensions of the revolution ushered by Heisenberg’s discovery of QM, which also
initiated the RWR view of quantum phenomena. This was acutely realized by Bohr
and Heisenberg in assessing Dirac’s discovery of his equation and, as a consequence
of his equation, antimatter. Bohr spoke of “Dirac’s ingenious quantum theory of
the electron,” as “a most striking illustration of the power and fertility of the general
quantum–mechanical way of description,” which was, at this point, deﬁned by Bohr’s
ultimate, RWR-type, interpretation (Bohr 1987, v. 2, p. 64). Heisenberg, who made
major contributions to QFT, including that of nuclear forces, saw Dirac’s discovery
as even more signiﬁcant. He saw it “as perhaps the biggest change of all the big
changes in physics of our [twentieth] century. It was a discovery of utmost importance
because it changed our whole picture of matter. … It was one of the most spectacular
consequences of Dirac’s discovery that the old concept of the elementary particle
collapsed completely” (Heisenberg 1989, pp. 31–33). But it also brought with it new
ways of thinking about the problem of the elementary particles and quantum ﬁelds.
Heisenberg’s own concept of an elementary particle by this point became mathe-
matically realist, with a Platonist ﬂavor, although not strictly Platonist insofar as he
still maintained the idea of matter as deﬁning the ultimate constitution of physical
reality. Perhaps, ultimately more Pythagorean that Platonist, this concept was based
on the idea that the ultimate constitution of nature could, in principle, be represented
mathematically in the absence of physical concepts, at least as the latter was previ-
ously understood. In Bohr’s or the present view, the traces observed in measuring
instruments and associated with elementary particles, in the present view, idealized
as such (as a particle type of quantum objects), only at the time of measurement,
are messengers of the reality beyond thought, mathematical thought included. This
reality, however, has effects on that part of the world to which we can give concepts
and which we can know, because we can stage quantum experiments enabling us to
observe quantum phenomena and use the mathematics of quantum theory to predict
the outcomes of quantum experiments thus observes. That we can only do so prob-
abilistically or statistically need not be viewed as detrimental; quite the contrary,
as Wilczek suggested above, in speaking of “short-term unpredictability as, in the
end, perfectly compatible with the long-term precision,” probabilistic or statistical
in nature (Wilczek 2009, p. 56). Quantum phenomena and the mathematics of prob-
ability are great gifts to our thought, the ﬁrst a gift of nature and the second a gift of
thought to itself. Yet another gift of thought is our ability to create experimental tech-
nology that, in its interaction with nature, brings about quantum phenomena. It is true
that all these are ultimately created by nature or matter, dead and living, with living
matter giving us our brains and thus our capacity for thought. Still, working together,
matter, thought, and technology enable us to discover and connect to something in
nature that our thought may not be able to reach.

304
8
“Something Happened”: The Real and the Virtual in Elementary Particle Physics
References
Bain, J.: Category-theoretic structure and radical ontic structural realism. Synthese 190, 1621–1635
(2013)
Baulieu, L., Iliopoulos, J., Seneor, R.: From Classical to Quantum Fields. Oxford University Press,
Oxford (2017)
Bohr, N.: Causality and complementarity. In: Faye, J., Folse, H.J. (eds.) The Philosophical Writings
of Niels Bohr, Volume 4: Causality and Complementarity, 1999, pp. 83–91. Ox Bow Press,
Supplementary Papers, Woodbridge, CT, USA (1937)
Bohr, N.: The Philosophical Writings of Niels Bohr, 3 vols. Ox Bow Press, Woodbridge, CT (1987)
Bohr, N., Rosenfeld, L.: On the question of the measurability of electromagnetic ﬁeld quantities.
In: Wheeler, J.A., Zurek, W.H. (eds.) Quantum Theory and Measurement, 1983, pp. 479–522.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ (1933)
Bohr, N., Rosenfeld, L.: Field and charge measurements in quantum electrodynamics. In: Wheeler,
J.A., Zurek, W.H. (eds.) Quantum Theory and Measurement, 1983, pp. 523–534. Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ, USA (1950)
Bohr, A., Mottelson, B.R., Ulfbeck, O.: The principles underlying quantum mechanics. Found.
Phys. 34, 405–417 (2004)
Duncan, A.: The Conceptual Framework of Quantum Field Theory. Oxford University Press, Oxford
(2012)
Dyson, F.J.: The S-matrix in quantum electrodynamics. Phys. Rev. 75, 1736–1755 (1949)
Falkenburg, B.: How to observe quarks. In: Agazzi, E., Pauri, M. (eds.) The Reality of the
Unobservable, 2020, pp. 329–341. Kluwer, Dordrecht, Netherland (2000)
Falkenburg, B.: Particle Metaphysics. Springer, Heidelberg, Germany (2007)
Fox, T.: Haunted by the specter of virtual particles: A philosophical reconsideration. J. Gener.
Philos. Sci. 39, 35–51 (2008)
Fox, T.: Why quarks are unobservable. Philosophia Scientiae 13(2), 167–189 (2009). https://doi.
org/10.4000/philosophiascientiae.303
French, S.: Identity and individuality in quantum theory. In: Zalta, E. N. (ed.) Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy (2014). http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/quantum-ﬁeld-theory/
Gross, D.J., Wilczek, F.: Asymptotically free gauge theories II. Phys. Rev. D 8, 3633–3651 (1973).
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.8.3633
Gross, D.J., Wilczek, F.: Asymptotically free gauge theories II. Phys. Rev. D 9, 980–993 (1974).
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.9.980
Heisenberg, W.: The Physical Principles of the Quantum Theory, Trans. Eckhart, K., Hoyt, F.C, rpt.
1949. Dover, New York, NY (1930)
Heisenberg, W.: Physics and Philosophy: The Revolution in Modern Science. Harper & Row, New
York, NY (1962)
Heisenberg, W.: Encounters with Einstein, and other Essays on People, Places, and Particles.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ (1989)
Heller, J.: Something Happened. Knopf, New York, NY (1974)
Jaeger, G.: Are virtual particles less real? Entropy 21(2), 141 (2019). https://doi.org/10.3390/e21
020141
Jaeger, G.: Exchange forces in particle physics. Found. Phys. 51(1), 1–31 (2021). https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10701-021-00425-0
Kahn, C. (ed.): The Art and Thought of Heraclitus: A New Arrangement and Translation of the
FragmentswithLiteraryandPhilosophicalCommentary.CambridgeUniversityPress,Cambridge
(1981)
Kaiser, D.: Drawing Theories Apart: The Dispersion of Feynman Diagrams in Postwar Physics.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL (2014)
Kosmann-Schwarzbach, Y.: The Noether Theorems: Invariance and Conservation Laws in the
Twentieth Century (Trans. Schwarzbach, B.). Berlin, Germany, Springer (2011)

References
305
Kuhlmann, M.: Quantum ﬁeld theory. In: Zalta, E. N. (ed.) Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(2020). https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/quantum-ﬁeld-theory/
Meynell, L.: Picturing Feynman diagrams and the epistemology of understanding. Perspective on
Science 26, 459–481 (2018)
Peskin, M.E., Schroeder, D.V.: An Introduction to Quantum Field Theory. CRS Press, London
(1995)
Plotnitsky, A.: The Principles of Quantum Theory, from Planck’s Quanta to the Higgs Boson: The
Nature of Quantum Reality and the Spirit of Copenhagen. Springer/Nature, New York, NY (2016)
Politzer, H.D.: Reliable perturbative results for strong interactions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 30(26), 1346–
1349 (1973). https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.30.1346
Redhead, M.: A philosopher looks at quantum ﬁeld theory. In: Brown, H.R., Harré, R. (eds.)
Philosophical Foundations of Quantum Field Theory, pp. 9–24. Clarendon, Oxford (1990)
Ruetsche, L.: Interpreting Quantum Theories. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2011)
Schweber, S.S.: QED and the Men Who Made It: Dyson, Feynman, Schwinger, and Tomonaga.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ (1994)
Schwinger, J.: Particles, Sources, and Fields I. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL (1970)
Shilladay, C., Busch, P.: Complementarity and uncertainty in Mach-Zehnder interferometry and
beyond. Phys. Rep. 435, 1–31 (2006)
Ulfbeck, O., Bohr, A., A.: Genuine fortuitousness: Where did that click come from? Found. Phys.
31, 757–774 (2001)
Weinberg, S.: The search for unity: Notes for a history of quantum ﬁeld theory. Daedalus 106, 17–35
(1977)
Weinberg, S.: What is an Elementary Particle? (1996). http://www.slac.stanford.edu/pubs/beamline/
27/1/27-1-weinberg.pdf
Weinberg, S.: The Quantum Theory of Fields, Volume 1: Foundations. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge (2005)
Weyl, H.: Theory of Groups and Quantum Mechanics, rpt. 1984. Dover, Mineola, NY (1931)
Wilczek, F.: Lightness of Being: Mass, Ether, and the Uniﬁcation of Forces. Basic Books, New
York, NY (2009)
Zee, A.: Quantum Field Theory in a Nutshell. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ (2010)

Chapter 9
From Circuits to Categories in Quantum
Information Theory
The quantal features of the phenomenon are revealed in the
information about the atomic objects derived from the
observations.
—Niels Bohr, “Causality and Complementarity” (1958) (Bohr
1987, v. 3, p. 4).
Abstract The argument of this chapter builds on that of Chap. 4, by virtue of the rela-
tionships between Heisenberg’s thinking, leading him to his discovery of QM, and
reconstruction projects—projects aimed at (re)derivations of quantum theory, specif-
ically for discrete variables, from a set of basic principles—in quantum informational
theory, as exempliﬁed in the work of Hardy and Mauro D’Ariano and coworkers, and
the essential role of the situation is captured by the diagrams, introduced in Chap. 4:
QPA/QPAGG (QU ANTU M N ESS →P RO B ABI LI T Y →ALGE BRA/
QU ANTU M N ESS →P RO B ABI LI T Y →ALGE BRA →GE N E RALI Z E D GE OM ET RY)
in this work. This subject will be discussed in Sect. 9.2. Section 9.3 considers the
role of category theory in these projects and quantum information theory in general.
Finally, because more recently quantum information theorists moved beyond the
reconstruction project, I shall, by way of conclusion, comment on these new agendas
in Sect. 9.4.
Keywords Category · Category theory · Circuit · Functor · Morphism ·
Operational-probabilistic framework · Puriﬁcation · Quantum information theory ·
Reconstruction projects
9.1
Introduction
The argument of this chapter builds on that of Chap. 4, by virtue of the relationships
between Heisenberg’s thinking, leading him to his discovery of QM, and recon-
struction projects—projects aiming at the derivation of quantum theory, speciﬁcally
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
A. Plotnitsky, Reality Without Realism,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-84578-0_9
307

308
9
From Circuits to Categories in Quantum Information Theory
quantum theory in ﬁnite dimensions (QTFD) from a set of basic (ﬁrst) principles—in
quantum informational theory. These relationships are deﬁned by the shared role of
the diagrams:
QPA/QPAGG (QU ANTU M N ESS →P RO B ABI LI T Y →ALGE BRA/
QU ANTU M N ESS →P RO B ABI LI T Y →ALGE BRA →GE N E RALI Z E D GE OM ET RY)
Although Heisenberg’s originality and inventiveness in his creation of QM were
remarkable, and although it would be difﬁcult to match the outcome, the creation
of QM, his derivation of QM may not have been as rigorous a derivation from the
ﬁrst principles as some might ideally wish. The main reason is that, while borrowing
the form of equations from classical mechanics was a logical deduction of part of
the mathematical structure of QM, by the correspondence postulate, derived from
Bohr’s correspondence principle, Heisenberg essentially “guessed” the variables he
needed. As discussed in Chap. 4, this guess was not unprepared by the preceding
developments of quantum theory, from Bohr 1913 theory on. But it was ultimately a
guess, nonetheless. The derivation of QM was made more rigorous by the later work
of Born, Jordan, and Heisenberg himself; more, but not entirely (Born and Jordan
1925; Born et al. 1926). Even the derivation, using these and related developments,
especially Dirac’s work, offered by Heisenberg in his Chicago lectures (Heisenberg
1930), might still be seen as falling short of a rigorous derivation from the ﬁrst
principles. As discussed in Chap. 5, Schrödinger’s derivation of both of his equations,
time-independent and time-dependent also involved guesses at key junctures. Later
on, Dirac, too, as much guessed his spinors as deduced them from the ﬁrst principles
in deriving his equation for the relativistic electron. Heisenberg’s comment in his
Chicago lectures indicates the nature of such concerns, whether Heisenberg himself
shared them or not, given that QM itself was established, which was what counted
most then and still might do for some now. As he said:
It should be distinctly understood that this [the deduction of the fundamental equations of
QM] cannot be a deduction in the mathematical sense of the word, since the equations to be
obtained form themselves the postulates of the theory. Although made highly plausible by
the following considerations [offered in his lectures], their ultimate justiﬁcation lies in the
agreement of their predictions with the experiment. (Heisenberg 1930, p. 108)
This is an important point in the context of reconstruction projects, aiming at
rederiving quantum theory from fundamental principles or postulates. The term
axiom is used sometimes as well, but for the reasons explained in Chap. 4, I
prefer postulates, when dealing with physics. Even in the case of von Neumann’s
“axioms” (von Neumann 1932), which aims at establishing “the mathematical foun-
dation of quantum mechanics,” some of his grounding assumptions, which include
Schrödinger’s time-dependent equation, are physical postulates rather than mathe-
matical axioms. The situation also opens the question concerning which principles
or postulates are considered “natural” or “reasonable,” or what constitutes a rigorous
derivation. None of this has, thus, far been established with much consensus. One
might argue, for example, that it is not sufﬁciently ﬁrst-principle-like to see the

9.1 Introduction
309
equations of QM as postulates, and one might also prefer a less mixed derivation of
quantum theory, QM, QTFD, or QFT. On the other hand, one might also question
the necessity of a fully rigorous derivation. After all, with Heisenberg, especially as
his scheme was developed by Born and Jordan, and then differently by Dirac, QM
was established as a correct theory, as it was by Schrödinger. Then Dirac similarly
invented QED. While a derivation of QM, or QTFD, might be made more rigorous
than that offered by Heisenberg, one might also doubt that any such derivation, from
ﬁrst principles, could ever be as rigorous as “a deduction in the mathematical sense
of the word.” As Hardy suggested (Hardy 2001), it may be more a matter of what are
“reasonable” initial axioms or postulates, although such a “reasonableness” is not an
unconditional matter either.
These considerations do not, of course, diminish the signiﬁcance of this line
of research. Besides, as discussed in Sect. 9.4 below, more than merely rederiving
QTFD is at stake in these programs, in particular, a deeper understanding of quantum
phenomena and quantum theory, extendable to QFT and beyond via quantum infor-
mation theory. So far, most attempts at such derivations along the lines of quantum
information theory have concerned QTFD, if with the understanding that the prin-
ciples involved may be extended (with a possible addition of other principles) to
QM and QFT, and even to quantum gravity. Some of these efforts, however, have
afﬁnities with Heisenberg’s approach, which, as stated in Chap. 3, exhibits a spirit
of quantum informational thinking, along with the QPA/QPAGG structure:
QU ANTU M N ESS →P RO B ABI LI T Y →ALGE BRA/QU ANTU M N ESS →
P RO B ABI LI T Y →ALGE BRA →GE N E RALI Z E D GE OM ET RY
I shall, in Sect. 9.2, consider two such approaches, the ﬁrst is by D’Ariano
and coworkers, Giulio Chiribella and Paolo Perinotti (hereafter DACP), and the
second is by Hardy. Both are in accord with the QPA/QPAGG structure, although
not necessarily with the RWR view, which was central to Heisenberg’s thinking in his
derivation. Hardy, in particular, appears to want an ontological view of the ultimate
constitution of reality responsible for quantum phenomena.
Section 9.3 extends the analysis in Sect. 9.2 to consider the role of category theory
in quantum information theory, a subject that acquired prominence in recent quantum
informational approaches, in part in connection with computer science. The discus-
sion offered in this section offers a new philosophical view on the subject. This view
leads to a different, in terms of category theory, functorial, understanding of rela-
tionships between the algebraic structures deﬁned by the arrangements of circuits
(essentially measuring apparatuses), central to quantum information theory, and the
mathematical formalism of quantum theory, rather than, as has been suggested by
some quantum information theorists, by merely establishing an isomorphism or even
only homomorphism between the ﬁrst and the second structures. This new type of
relationship is dictated by the RWR view, given that, in this view, the formalism of
quantum theory, for either discrete or continuous variables, only offers probabilistic
predictions concerning quantum experiments, without offering a representation or

310
9
From Circuits to Categories in Quantum Information Theory
even conception of either quantum objects and behavior (or in the present interpreta-
tion the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena and
quantum objects, both deﬁned at the time of measurement) or measuring instruments,
circuits, described by classical physics. Hence, there can be no such isomorphism
or homomorphism. What may be possible instead is establishing what is known as
a “functor” between two multiplicities, deﬁned as “categories,” of objects and the
maps, “morphisms,” between these objects. The ﬁrst category would be deﬁned by
organized circuits and maps, “morphism,” between them, and the second (which is
already available) by Hilbert spaces over C and maps, “morphisms,” between them.
Such a functor would then relate each organized circuit to a Hilbert space. This
relation would be different from a map or morphism (isomorphism or even homo-
morphism) between organized circuits and Hilbert spaces. Instead, it would allow
one to predict, by using these Hilbert spaces (with the help of Born’s or analogous
rules), the probabilities of events observed in circuits, just as one does them now.
Section 9.4 brieﬂy assesses the future of quantum information theory beyond QM.
9.2
Circuits, Operations, and Probabilities: Quantum
Information Theories as Principle Theories
DACP’s program, developed over the last decade and presented comprehensively
in their book (D’Ariano et al 2017), belongs to the reconstructive trend in quantum
information theory, and as most of the work there, it deals with discrete variables
and the corresponding, ﬁnite dimensional, Hilbert spaces (e.g., Hardy 2001; Fuchs
2003; Chiribella and Spekkens 2016).1 This is in part because, as DACP note (a
view shared by others in this ﬁeld), “the study of ﬁnite-dimensional systems allows
one to decouple the conceptual difﬁculties in our understanding of quantum theory
from the technical difﬁculties of inﬁnite-dimensional systems” (D’Ariano et al 2017,
p. 4). DACP’s project is motivated by “a need for a deeper understanding of quantum
theory [QTFD] in terms of fundamental principles,” and by the aim of deriving QTFD
from such principles, which, the authors contend, has never been quite achieved by
their predecessors.
As elsewhere, the ﬂuctuations of terms such as principles, axioms, postulates,
commonly used in such reconstructive projects may be confusing and obscure their
common aims. DACP use the term “axioms” as well, as does Hardy. In present
terminology, established in Chap. 4, these axioms are postulates. On the other hand,
while one can surmise DACP’s understanding of the term “principle” from their
use of it, they do not deﬁne the concept of “principle” either. As in Chap. 4, I
1 These references only serve as inﬂuential examples. There have been numerous quantum informa-
tional attempts at reconstructing QTFD during the last decades. My main concerns in this chapter,
however, are the role fundamental principles and postulates considered in quantum information
theory, and the relationships among physics, mathematics, and philosophy there, from the RWR
viewpoint,ratherthanreconstructionprojectsassuch,andbothDACP’sandHardy’sworkexemplify
these concerns.

9.2 Circuits, Operations, and Probabilities: Quantum Information …
311
adopt the concept of principle deﬁned by Einstein’s view of principle theories. To
restate his deﬁnition, principle theories: “The elements which form their [principle
theories’] basis and starting point are not hypothetically constructed but empirically
discovered ones, general characteristics of natural processes, principles that give rise
to mathematically formulated criteria which the separate processes or the theoretical
representations of them have to satisfy” (Einstein 1919, p. 228). This concept is, I
would argue, in accord with DACP’s use of principles, and their derivation of QTFD,
or that of Hardy, may be seen as that of a principle theory in this sense.2
The main new feature of DACP’s approach is adding to the view of QTFD as an
extension of probability theory (a view found in earlier works and applicable to QM as
well), “the crucial ingredient of connectivity among events” by using the operational
framework of “circuits” (the term adopted in part from computer science and engi-
neering, and also used by Wheeler, including in the quantum-informational context)
and giving it a mathematics to the arrangements of circuits (D’Ariano et al. 2017,
pp. 4–5). The framework of circuits has been used by others, including by Hardy,
as considered later in this chapter. This addition allows DACP “to derive key results
of quantum information theory and general features of quantum theory [QTFD]”
without ﬁrst assuming Hilbert spaces. Unlike von Neumann, to whom DACP refer
for a contrast, Heisenberg, as we have seen, did not begin with a formalism either,
although he used the equations of classical mechanics by the correspondence prin-
ciple, made into a postulate. Thus, he arrived at his formalism from fundamental
principles or postulates, even if not fully rigorously derived it from them, by more
or less guessing new matrix variables. By contrast, von Neumann’s aim was not to
derive QM but to give a more rigorous formulation of the mathematical formalism
of it as an already existing theory. In his more recent work, referenced in Chap. 2,
D’Ariano, too, begins, axiomatically, with Hilbert spaces and their mathematical
features, such as their tensor products, but his axioms are very different from those
of von Neumann, especially, as concerns what he calls von Neumann’s “unitarity
dogma” (D’Ariano 2020).
Among the principles adopted by DACP, the puriﬁcation principle plays a unique
role as an essentially quantum principle, which distinguishes QTFD from classical
probabilistic information theories, and in its mathematical form, as a postulate, is a
form of symmetry. According to DACP: “The puriﬁcation of mixed states is specif-
ically quantum” (D’Ariano et al. 2017, p. 169). It is the single principle necessary
for establishing this distinction, which may not be surprising given the history of
quantum theory and attempts at its axiomatic derivations. Hardy’s derivation also
needed only one axiom, the continuity axiom, to do so (Hardy 2001). On the other
hand, the fact that Hardy’s continuity axiom is different from DACP’s puriﬁcation
postulate suggests that there may not be a single system of postulates or princi-
ples from which QMDT could be derived, just as QM was originally established by
Heisenberg and Schrödinger from very different principle and postulates.
2 As I said, Hardy’s use of “axioms” may be seen as somewhat different from the use of “principles”
by DACP, but these differences do not affect my argument, insofar as in both cases one deals with
the derivation of QTFD as a principle theory in Einstein’s sense.

312
9
From Circuits to Categories in Quantum Information Theory
Whether one can deﬁne quantum phenomena as deﬁnitively different from clas-
sical phenomena remains a question, as indicated in Chap. 2 in connection with
Planck’s constant, h. While this question and literature concerning it are beyond
my scope, I would like to comment on Spekkens’s work, relevant here because
it proceeds along the lines of quantum information theory. Spekkens introduced
several toy models or theories, “epirestricted theories” (so-called because of epis-
temic restrictions on classical theory, assumed as a starting point), that reproduce
many quantum phenomena and features of QM or QTFD, such as the presence of h,
the uncertainty relations, noncommuting operator observables, entanglement, or the
puriﬁcation of mixed states (Spekkens 2007, 2016; Bartlett et al. 2012). Many but
not all! These models expressly fail to reproduce some among the crucial features
of quantum theory, speciﬁcally some of those dealing with correlations and entan-
glement, such as violations of Bell’s inequalities and the existence of the Kochen–
Specker theorem. This is conceptually important because these theorems reﬂect the
essential features of quantum phenomena (in the case of Bell’s inequalities inde-
pendently of any theory, which of course must, if correct, satisfy them), including
those related to the question of quantum nonlocality vis-à-vis realism (Spekkens
2016, p. 91). Thus, whether actual quantum phenomena can be captured by models
of the type proposed by Spekkens remains an open question. According to Spekkens
himself, this is unlikely:
The investigation of epirestricted theories, therefore, need not—and indeed should not— be
considered as the ﬁrst step in a research program that seeks to ﬁnd a ψ-epistemic ontological
model [a realist model that assumes quantum states in the formalism to be epistemic, states of
knowledge] of the full quantum theory. Even though such a model could always circumvent
any no-go theorems by violating their assumptions, it would be just as unsatisfying as a
ψ-ontic model [a realist model that assumes quantum states to be ontic, states of reality]
insofar as it would need to be explicitly nonlocal and contextual. Rather, the investigation of
epirestricted theories is best considered as a ﬁrst step in a larger research program wherein
the framework of ontological models—in particular the use of classical probability theory
for describing an agent’s incomplete knowledge—is ultimately rejected, but where one holds
fast to the notion that a quantum state is epistemic. (Spekkens 2016, p. 95)
Ontologicalherehasadifferentmeaningfromtheoneassumedinthisstudy,which
is synonymous with “realist” and thus is closer to Spekkens “ontic.” As noted, the
meaning of these terms ﬂuctuates, and Spekkens’s use is somewhat uncommon. This
is, however, a secondary matter here. More pertinently, although the expression is
common in quantum information theory, viewing quantum states (state vectors in the
formalism) as “states of knowledge” could be misleading, at least, unless one refers
to this knowledge as probabilistic or statistical. Even then quantum states are only
part of the corresponding predictive machinery, in themselves they are not sufﬁcient
and one needs Born’s or related rules to obtain these probabilities or statistics. They
are not states of knowledge. States of knowledge are (mental) states of knowledge
we form using quantum states and Born’s rule. Besides, from the present, RWR-
type, perspective, in which quantum states never refer to any actual knowledge (only
obtained in measurements), our knowledge, actual or probabilistic, is incomplete
only when compared with the kind of knowledge possible in classical physics or

9.2 Circuits, Operations, and Probabilities: Quantum Information …
313
relativity, within their scope. In terms of this study, while QTFD (or QM or QFT), is
Einstein-incomplete, it is as complete as possible for a theory of quantum phenomena
to be, as things stand now, is Bohr-complete.
I am not sure whether, his skepticism concerning ontic, or in present terms, realist,
models of quantum theory and the use of classical probability (based on “an agent’s
incomplete knowledge”) notwithstanding, Spekkens would be willing to go as far as
the RWR view, especially the strong RWR view, in which, as noted, this use of prob-
ability is inapplicable by deﬁnition. It appears, however, at least to the present reader,
that his epirestricted theories and his argument suggest that the difference between
the classical and the quantum may ultimately be irreducible, even though rigorously
grounding reconstructive programs remains difﬁcult. According to Spekkens, “it may
be that there are particularly elegant axiomatic schemes that are currently in our reach
and the road to program involves temporarily setting one’s sight a bit lower,” moving
to partial reconstructive models of the kind he proposes (Spekkens 2016, p. 96). That
may be, especially in the case of continuous variables, to which Spekkens’s concept
of an epirestricted theory would apply. DACP’s or Hardy’s approach may suggest
otherwise, even while dealing only with QTFD.
There is also a question of whether such elegance should be important here. While
Dirac, famously, as a proponent of such elegance or beauty, would have thought
so, neither Heisenberg (in his derivation) nor Bohr was much worried about this
elegance. It is true that an “elegant axiomatic scheme” is not the same as the mathe-
matical beauty of physical laws, invoked by Dirac. Part of the ethos of reconstructive
projects is deﬁned by the imperative of a derivation of at least QTFD from more
natural or reasonable ﬁrst principles or postulates than those that grounded the orig-
inal derivations of QM, which were moreover, semi-intuitive or even guess-like,
by Heisenberg, Dirac, or Schrödinger, versus for example, the principles guiding
Einstein’s derivation of special relativity (Fuchs 2003). Whether, given the more
complex (physically, mathematically, and philosophically) nature of QM, this is
actually a viable comparison also remains a question, in my view. In fact, given
that relativity could be derived otherwise, it might be a question, too, how natural
Einstein’s postulates were (e.g., D’Ariano 2017, p. 124). Such concepts as reason-
able and natural are historically contingent. What now appears natural with quantum
theory (or relativity) in hand was not natural before these theories were introduced. It
is difﬁcult to be certain which trajectories will lead us there, especially if this “there”
is beyond QTFD, or QM and QFT, as it ultimately must be, for otherwise we are
already there, insofar as we have the corresponding theories in place. There may not
be one such trajectory. In the discovery of QM, there were two—Heisenberg’s and
Schrödinger’s, the ﬁrst of which appeared quite unnatural to most from the outset,
and the second quickly lost its apparent greater naturalness (as a wave mechanics).
As discussed in Chap. 5, there was, at the time, not the least for Schrödinger himself,
nothing especially natural in the complex wave function.
I now return to DACP’s derivation of QTFD and the puriﬁcation principle, which
they see as “speciﬁcally quantum.” In nontechnical terms, the puriﬁcation prin-
ciple states that “every random preparation of a system can be achieved by a pure
preparation of the system with an environment, in a way that is essentially unique”

314
9
From Circuits to Categories in Quantum Information Theory
(D’Ariano et al. 2017, p. 6). The principle originates in Schrödinger’s response, in
several papers, to the EPR paper and his concept of entanglement, as discussed in
Chap. 7 (Sect. 7.6.). According to DACP:
The puriﬁcation principle stipulates that, whenever you are ignorant about the state of a
system A, you can always claim that your ignorance comes from the fact that A is part of
a large [composite] system AB, of which you have full knowledge. When you do this, the
pure state that you have to assign to the composite system AB is determined by the state of
A in an essentially unique way.
The puriﬁcation of mixed states is a peculiar feature—surely, not one that we experience
in our everyday life. How can you claim that you know A and B if you don’t have A alone?
This counterintuitive feature has been noted in the early days of quantum theory, when Erwin
Schrödinger famously wrote: “Another way of expressing the peculiar situation is: the best
possible knowledge of a whole does not necessarily include the best possible knowledge of
all its parts.” And, in the same paper: “I would not call that one but rather the characteristic
trait of quantum mechanics, the one that enforced its entire departure from classical lines of
thought” (Schrödinger 1935, p. 555). (D’Ariano et al. 2017, p. 168)
Technically, as implied by this statement, the situation needs to be clariﬁed as regards
measurement and thus circuits, only in relation to which one can speak of any knowl-
edge or information here, actual or possible, but this subject could be put aside for the
moment. DACP’s puriﬁcation principle offers a rigorous mathematical expression of
this situation. They add, using the principle to link physics and information theory:
The puriﬁcation of mixed states is speciﬁcally quantum. But why should we assume it as a
fundamental principle of Nature? At ﬁrst, it looks like a weird feature—and it must look so,
because quantum theory itself is weird and if you squeeze it inside a principle, it is likely that
the principle looks weird too. However, on second thought one realizes that puriﬁcation is a
fundamental requirement: essentially, it is the link between physics and information theory.
Information theory would not make sense without the notions of probability and mixed state,
for the whole point about information is that there are things that we do not know in advance.
But in the world of classical physics of Newton and Laplace, every event is determined and
there is no space for information at the fundamental level. In principle, it does not make
sense to toss a coin or to play a game of chance, for the outcome is already determined and,
with sufﬁcient technology and computational power, can always be predicted. In contrast,
puriﬁcation tells us that “ignorance is physical.” Every mixed state can be generated in a
single shot by a reliable procedure, which consists of putting two systems in a pure state
and discarding one of them. As a result of this procedure, the remaining system will be a
physical token of our ignorance. This discussion suggests that, only if puriﬁcation holds,
information can aspire to a fundamental role in physics. (D’Ariano et al. 2017, p. 169)
In the present view, the puriﬁcation of mixed states is the principle arising in our
interactions with nature by means of our experimental technology, rather than of
nature itself, except insofar as we and our technologies are also nature. But then, in
the present view, there are no other principles of nature, any more than any informa-
tion, than those deﬁned by us in our interactions with nature. DACP’s formulation
of the puriﬁcation principle and their derivation of QTFD allows for an RWR-type
interpretation, and I shall interpret it in this way, without claiming DACP’s own inter-
pretation of it is of the RWR-type. I should add that the puriﬁcation principle also
reﬂects a crucial feature of quantum physics, discussed in Chap. 7 in the context of
the EPR experiment, the context of Schrödinger’s assessment cited by DACP. This

9.2 Circuits, Operations, and Probabilities: Quantum Information …
315
feature was emphasized throughout the work of D’Ariano and coworkers (but often
missed by other quantum information theorists and others). In quantum theory, we
always deal with compositions of systems, never individual systems, even in indi-
vidual measurements, in which case, the composed system consists of the quantum
objects under investigation and the measuring instruments, including their quantum
strata. These strata enable the interaction between the instruments and the quantum
objects, or in the present view, the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for
quantum phenomena.
Thinking in terms of “circuits” is close to Bohr’s thinking concerning the role of
measuring instruments in the constitution of quantum phenomena, as distinguished
from quantum objects, which give rise to quantum phenomena by interacting with
measuring instruments but which are never observable. Bohr, with the formalism of
QM in place, was primarily concerned with interpretation rather than, as DACP (or
Hardy), with giving the phenomena thus observed a mathematized structure, which
could then be used (with certain additional postulates) to derive the formalism of
QTFD. Circuits and their arrangements, too, embody those of measuring instruments
capable of detecting quantum events, and thus enabling the probabilistic predictions
of future events. Their arrangements and operations are enabled by rules that should
ideally be derived from certain sufﬁciently natural assumptions (keeping in mind
earlier qualiﬁcations concerning this naturalness). They are described classically,
and represent (in this case in the usual realist sense) the structure of quantum infor-
mation as a particular form of organization of classical information, an organization
that cannot, however, be predicted by classical physics. This organization, supple-
mented by certain additional principles, can be used, as by DACP (or Hardy), in
attempts to derive the mathematical formalism of QTFD. In fact, as discussed earlier,
Heisenberg’s derivation and then Bohr’s interpretation were similarly based on the
informational organization of the data manifested in classically observed quantum
phenomena and a set of principles, under RWR-type assumptions, although not on
the organization of measuring instruments, except implicitly, for example, in view of
complementarity, as discussed in connection with Schwinger’s argument concerning
noncommutativity in Chap. 4.
While uniquely necessary in grounding the authors’ derivation of QTFD, the
puriﬁcation postulate or principle (it functions in either capacity) is not sufﬁcient to
do so. They need ﬁve additional postulates (termed “axioms”): causality (essentially
locality), local discriminability, perfect distinguishability, ideal compression, and
atomicity of composition (D’Ariano et al. 2017, p. 6). These postulates deﬁne a large
class of classical probabilistic informational theories, while the puriﬁcation postulate
distinguishes QTFD. The appearance of these additional postulates or principles is
not surprising. Heisenberg’s grounding principles, the quantum discreteness (QD)
principle and the quantum probability or statistics (QP/QS) principle, were not sufﬁ-
cient for him to derive QM either. To do so, he needed the correspondence principle,
which gave him half of the mathematical architecture of quantum theory. The other
half was supplied by his matrix variables, not expressly derived from any speciﬁc
principle, but enabling him to bring the formalism in accord with other principles

316
9
From Circuits to Categories in Quantum Information Theory
and predict the data in question. There are, however, instructive parallels between
DACP’s and Heisenberg’s approaches. As DACP say in their earlier article:
The operational-probabilistic framework combines the operational language of circuits with
the toolbox of probability theory: on the one hand experiments are described by circuits
resulting from the connection of physical devices, on the other hand each device in the
circuit can have classical outcomes and the theory provides the probability distribution of
outcomes when the devices are connected to form closed circuits (that is, circuits that start
with a preparation and end with a measurement). (Chiribella et al. 2011, p. 3)
This is similar to Heisenberg’s thinking in his paper introducing QM, as these
classical outcomes are discrete in both cases, even though Heisenberg was dealing
with continuous variables. There are no other measurement outcomes in quantum
physics, by the QD (quantum discreteness postulate). On the other hand, as noted
above, the concept of “circuit” is closer to Bohr’s view of the role of measuring
instruments and his concept of phenomenon, deﬁned by this role. Bohr’s view was,
arguably, the ﬁrst operational view in this sense. As discussed in Chap. 4, however,
the idea that in quantum theory we only deal with transition probabilities between
the outcomes of the interactions between quantum objects and measuring instru-
ments was introduced by Heisenberg, as part of his approach to QM, and was then
adopted by Bohr. Heisenberg discovered that Bohr’s frequency rules are satisﬁed by
using, in general, noncommuting matrix variables with complex coefﬁcients, from
which one derives, by means of a Born-type rule, probabilities or statistics for transi-
tions between stationary states, manifested in spectra observed in measuring devices.
Thus, Heisenberg’s derivation depended on measuring instruments as devices with
classically describable observable parts, which are akin to “operational circuits,” in
his case dealing with continuous variables.
DACP aim to arrive at the mathematical structure of QTFD in a more ﬁrst-
principle-like way, in particular, independently of classical physics, which, because
of the correspondence principle, was central to Heisenberg. Classical physics, to
begin with, does not have discrete variables, such as spin, so there is no correspon-
dence principle as concerns them. The rules governing the structure of operational
devices, circuits, should, DACP argue, allow them to do so, because these rules
are empirical. They are, however, not completely empirical, because, as discussed
from the outset of this study, nothing ultimately ever is in physics, which is “exper-
imental because of its mathematical project” (Heidegger 1967, p. 93). In this case,
in particular, along with these rules, circuits are given a formal and, to some degree,
mathematical structure by human agents, even though this structure may be partially
deﬁned by the organization, human in turn of the experimental arrangements in
which circuits appear, for example, again, dues complementarity. The mathematized
structure of circuits becomes a necessary condition for establishing the mathematical
structure or algebra of QTFD, but it is not sufﬁcient to do so. As noted in consid-
ering Schwinger’s argument concerning quantum measurement, in Chap. 4, these
two structures are not isomorphic or even homomorphic, for one thing, given the
complexities of providing the mathematics to events of measurements, even if not to
the organization of circuits. The mathematics of the formalism may be connected,
both in terms of predictions and in terms of structure, to quantum measurement

9.2 Circuits, Operations, and Probabilities: Quantum Information …
317
and thus to the organization of circuits, but it does not mathematically represent it.
This means that additional structural entities, provided by additional postulates or
axioms, are required to reach the (Hilbert-space or other) formalism over C, while
everything necessary for representing circles is deﬁned over R. DACP’s derivation
requires enormous technical work. It is next to impossible to do it justice here, with
the preceding considerations, hopefully, sufﬁcient to explain the main gradient of
their thinking.3 I shall instead close this section by considering, also as a bridge to
the next section, the algebra of circuits in Hardy’s work.
HardyhasadifferentsetofmainassumptionsnecessarytoderiveQTFDthanthose
of DACP, but the main strategy is the same: establishing the architecture, “algebra,”
of circuits, technically of operations, that, with additional axioms, would allow one
to derive the mathematical formalism of QTFD. According to Hardy:
Circuits have:
•
A setting, s(H), given by specifying the setting on each operation.
•
An outcome set, o(H), given by specifying the outcome set at each operation (equals
o(A) × o(B) × o(C) × o(D) × o(E) in this case). We say the fragment “happened” if the
outcome is in the outcome set.
•
A wiring, w (E), given by specifying which input/output pairs are wired together.
(Hardy 2013, p. 7)
With this deﬁnition in hand, I shall comment on some of Hardy’s fundamental
assumptions discussed by him in a different paper. Hardy says:
We will make two assumptions to set up the framework in this paper. …
Assumption 9.1 The probability, Prob (A), for any circuit, A (this has no open inputs or
outputs), is well conditioned. It is, therefore, determined by the operations and the wiring of
the circuit alone and is independent of settings and outcomes elsewhere (Hardy 2010, p. 11).
This is a physical postulate, essentially that of locality, combined with probability
or statistics, along the lines of the QP/QS principle. The task now becomes how to
derive a QTFD that could correctly predict these probabilities. One needs another
assumption:
Assumption
9.2 (Operations
are
fully
decomposable)
We
assume
that
any
operation
Ad4e5... f 6
a1b2...c3
can
be
written,
…
in
a
symbolic
notation,
Ad4e5... f 6
a1b2...c3 ≡d4e5... f 6Aa1b2...c3Xa1
a1Xb2
b2. . . Xc3
c3d4Xd4
e5Xe5
... f 6Xf6. In words we will say that
any operationis equivalent to a linear combination of operations each of which consists of
an effect for each input and a preparation for each output. … We allow the possibility that
the entries in d4e5…f 6Aa1b2…c3 are negative (and this will, indeed, be the case in quantum
theory). Hence, in general, this cannot be thought of as physical mixing. … (Hardy 2010,
p. 19; emphasis added)
3 One still needs a Born-type rule for getting from the formalism (deﬁned over C) to probabilities,
which becomes an additional postulate, even if not expressly stated as a postulate, but still used as
such, in DACP’s scheme of derivation (D’Ariano et al. 2017, pp. 74–75). A version of Born’s rule
is expressly postulated, within D’Ariano’s “minimal” set of axioms versus those of von Neumann,
in D’Ariano (2020, pp. 1923–1924).

318
9
From Circuits to Categories in Quantum Information Theory
To make my main conceptual point, I only need the emphasized sentence, which
means that one aims at constructing a suitable mathematized structure for each
measuring or operational sequence. I cite the passage at a greater length to illustrate
the algebraic structure of operations in Hardy’s scheme, keeping in mind qualiﬁca-
tions made above concerning the complexity of the connections between the opera-
tions of the formalism and the operations enacted in circuits, such as those deﬁned
by the order of successive measurement and its effect on the outcomes, in corre-
spondence with noncommutativity of the corresponding operators in the formalism.
Hardy then says:
Assumption 9.2 introduces a subtly different attitude than the usual one concerning how we
think about what an operation is. Usually we think of operations as effecting a transformation
on systems as they pass through. Here we think of an operation as corresponding to a bunch
of separate effects and preparations. We need not think of systems as things that preserve
their identity as they pass through—we do not use the same labels for wires coming out as
going in. This is certainly a more natural attitude when there can be different numbers of
input and output systems and when they can be of different types. Both classical and quantum
transformations satisfy this assumption. In spite of the different attitude just mentioned, we
can implement arbitrary transformations, such as unitary transformations in quantum theory,
by taking an appropriate sum over such effects and preparation operations. (Hardy 2010,
pp. 19–20)
More natural or not, this rethinking of the concept of operation is important,
especially if one adopts an RWR-type view. An “operation” is now deﬁned in terms
of observable “effects” of the interactions between quantum objects and measuring
instruments, and not in terms of what happens, even in the course of these interac-
tions (let alone apart from them), to the quantum objects or systems, considered as
independent systems. In the present view, again, a quantum object can only be deﬁned
in and by this interaction. It is useful that we can treat classical systems in this way
as well. In the classical case, however, we can, equivalently, use a more conventional
concept of operation mentioned here, which is not the case in quantum theory. After
a technical discussion of “duotensors,” which I put aside, Hardy suggests a principle:
Physics to mathematics correspondence principle. For any physical theory, there [exist]
a small number of simple hybrid statements that enable us to translate from the physical
description to the corresponding mathematical calculation such that the mathematical calcu-
lation (in appropriate notation) looks the same as the physical description (in appropriate
notation).
Such a principle might be useful in obtaining new physical theories (such as a theory of
quantumgravity).Relatedideastothishavebeenconsideredbycategorytheorists.Acategory
of physical processes can be deﬁned corresponding to the physical description. A category
corresponding to the mathematical calculation can also be given. The mapping from the ﬁrst
category to the second is given by a functor (this takes us from one category to another).
(Hardy 2010, p. 39)
The language of correspondence should not mislead one into relating this prin-
ciple to Bohr’s correspondence principle, even in Heisenberg’s mathematical form
of his correspondence postulate. Bohr’s correspondence principle deals with the
correspondence between different physical theories (such as classical mechanics and
quantum mechanics), insofar as their predictions would coincide in the regions where
both theories could be used. By contrast, Hardy’s “hybrid” construction implies that

9.2 Circuits, Operations, and Probabilities: Quantum Information …
319
the category of physical processes could be “translated” into a proper formalism of
QTFD, which could then, in terms of its mathematical calculations, be related to what
is observed. For the reasons that I shall discuss in the next section, Hardy’s principle
may be better understood as or changed into the “physics to mathematics functori-
ality principle,” as this translation, if possible, might and, in RWR-type interpreta-
tions, must, be seen as functorial in the sense of category theory. Hardy’s suggestion
is speculative and is not really worked out. It offers, however, an inviting starting
point to address a possible role of category theory in quantum information theory
or quantum theory in general because of Hardy’s appeal to “a category of physical
processes” and a possible functor from this category to that of mathematical calcu-
lation, versus recent suggestions along these lines by those using category theory in
quantum information theory, to whom Hardy appears to refer here. As explained in
the next section, these theorists (e.g., Robert Coecke and Samson Abramsky) only
consider the second type of categories, those associated with the formalism.
Taking Hardy’s suggestion as a point of departure, I shall, in the next section,
address a possible role of category theory in the algebraization (QPA) and then re-
geometrization (QPAGG) of physics. I do so without claiming that these comments
are in accord with Hardy’s view of the situation, because they are grounded in the
RWR view. Hardy appears to prefer a realist view, “a search for what we hope to be
the correct ontology of the world” (Hardy 2011), unless he assumes, as one would in
adopting the RWR view, that the correct ontology of the world includes the strata of
reality that is beyond thought and thus beyond any ontological representation. This,
however, does not appear to be the case in Hardy, as there is no such qualiﬁcation
offered by Hardy on this occasion or elsewhere.
9.3
Thinking Categorically: From Morphisms to Functors
Category theory originated in algebraic topology in order to help study certain alge-
braic invariants, such as cohomology or homotopy groups, associated with topo-
logical spaces (MacLane 2013). It was then extensively used, especially thanks to
Alexandre Grothendieck’s work, in algebraic geometry, and eventually extended, via
topos theory, introduced by Grothendieck as well, to mathematical logic (MacLane
and Moerdijk 1994). Roughly, category theory considers multiplicities (categories)
of mathematical objects conforming to a given concept, such as the category of topo-
logical spaces or geometrical spaces (say, Riemannian manifolds), and morphisms,
also called arrows (X →Y), which are the mappings between these objects that
preserve this concept or structure. Studying morphisms allows one to learn about the
individual objects involved more than we would by considering them just in them-
selves. Thus, in geometry, one does not have to start with a Euclidean space. Instead,
the latter is just one speciﬁable object of a large categorical multiplicity, such as the
category of Riemannian manifolds, an object marked by the particularly simple way
we can measure the distance between points. Categories themselves may be viewed

320
9
From Circuits to Categories in Quantum Information Theory
as multiplicities with arrows between them, and in this case, one speaks of “functors”
rather than “morphisms.”
Now, one can more easily think of properly deﬁning mathematically the second
category in Hardy’s suggestion, say, as that of Hilbert spaces or some equivalent
mathematical structures (such as C* algebras), by means of which the mathematical
calculations in question in quantum theory, such QTFD, would be performed. On the
other hand, the ﬁrst category, that is, the structure of its objects and the morphisms
between them, is a more complex matter, as is, it follows, that of a functor between
these two categories. Hardy’s formulation—“for any physical theory, there [exist] a
small number of simple hybrid statements that enable us to translate from the physical
description to the corresponding mathematical calculation such that the mathematical
calculation (in appropriate notation) looks the same as the physical description (in
appropriatenotation)”(emphasisadded)—mightrequirequaliﬁcationasconcernsthe
meaning of the phrase “looks the same” and the relationships between “calculation”
and “description.” This formulation allows for different interpretations, especially
given that “calculation” and “description” are different concepts. In particular, in
what sense would they look the same? A similar question arises concerning his
characterization of the functor in question as “virtually direct” (emphasis added), and
even the statement “a category of physical processes can be deﬁned corresponding
to the physical description” (emphasis added).
I shall now sketch the reasons for requiring these qualiﬁcations, beginning with a
possible meaning of “physical processes” in the statement that “a category of phys-
ical processes can be deﬁned corresponding to the physical description.” “Physical
processes” may refer either to quantum processes or to circuits, which appears more
likely because “the physical description” in Hardy’s scheme is given only at the level
of circuits. This view would also be suggested by the category theorists Hardy appears
to refer to, those who work on using categories in quantum theory, speciﬁcally QTFD
(considered by Hardy), such as Abramsky, Coecke, and others (e.g., Abramsky and
Brandenburger 2011; Coecke and Kissinger 2017; Coecke 2017). Most of this work
is primarily concerned with recasting the Hilbert-space language of QTFD formalism
in a categorical framework by replacing Hilbert spaces, belonging to the category of
the ﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert spaces over C (e.g., Hasegawa et al 2008), with objects
of monoidal categories and the morphism between Hilbert spaces with morphisms
between these objects, rather than with deriving the formalism from the ﬁrst princi-
ples by using categories. There are some moves in this direction, in part following
DACP’s approach, for example, by starting with a suitable simple monoidal category
and then considering how many additional pieces of structure one needs to arrive
at QTFD (e.g., Coecke and Kissinger 2017). Essentially, however, at stake in this
and related works is a recasting of formal “compositional” systems into a categor-
ical framework (Coecke 2017), a project different from the one I am considering at
the moment. This work further testiﬁes to the dominant role of algebra in quantum
theory, even though the work just mentioned uses a lot of diagrammatic operations.
“Diagrams beat algebra,” Coecke and Kissinger say (p. 50). In reality, however, while
they make the algebra of QM easier to process for some, these diagrams still repre-
sent algebra and sometimes are in the way of geometrical thinking, say, of the type

9.3 Thinking Categorically: From Morphisms to Functors
321
found in Heisenberg and Dirac, which the Hilbert-space formalism invites. Coecke
and Kissinger’s claim that “the traditional, Hilbert-space base language of quantum
theory forms a major obstruction to discovering [the key quantum features]” is ques-
tionable, given that this is how these features were discovered in the ﬁrst place (p. 9).
It is also unclear whether their approach will be of much, if any, help in QFT, where
the Hilbert space formalism is so effective, let alone beyond. More signiﬁcantly, this
approach manifestly amounts to a representation, helpful as it may be, of logic and
so far, after two decades, it has not led to any really new physical concepts. This is
also the difference between the use of category theory in algebraic topology (where
it originated) or algebraic geometry, where this use led to an unending stream of new
concepts, and mathematical logic, even though some new concepts did emerge there
as well. I shall comment on this subject below. What is needed here is, I argue, a new
concept, that of the category of circuits, as arrangements of measuring instruments.
As Coecke and Kissinger’s title, “picturing quantum processes,” indicates and as
their argument suggests, they (and Coecke elsewhere) appear to hold a realist view
in assuming that their diagrammatic picturalism represents actual quantum behavior.
This is also suggested by their invocation of Whitehead (p. 251), whose views, as
discussed earlier (Chap. 6, n. 50) are manifestly ontological. In fairness, “quantum
processes” also refer to the formalism as such, which, however, still suggests a realist
or ontological view. For otherwise, what do “processes” mean, unless something
mental, which can be divorced from physical processes? Coecke and Kissinger do
not appear to see the situation in this way or, in any event, do not consider this
possibility. They do argue that quantum phenomena disallow local realism of the
type Einstein wanted (pp. 656–661). On the other hand, their glosses of the views
of Bohr or Heisenberg are misleading, as, for example, “any attempt to observe is
bound to disturb” (p. 396). This “summation” obliterates the complexity of Bohr’s
andHeisenberg’sthinking,giventhat,asdiscussedinthisbook,botharequitehesitant
to speak of “disturbance.” In any event, I would argue that, regardless of how much
physical reality Coecke and Kissinger believe corresponds to their “diagrammatic
picturalism,” the latter is a diagrammatic mapping of quantum formalism and not of
quantum phenomena, as effects (without classical causes), deﬁned by the ultimate
nature of physical reality responsible for them, effects that this formalism predicts. By
the same token, their scheme only offers a categorical approach to the formalism and
not to the functorial relationship between the categorical structures of the quantum
formalism and those of measurement represented by circuits. In fact, although they
maintain that observations are physically classical, their concept of circuit belongs
to their diagrammatic representation of the formalism and does not refer to the
arrangement of measuring devices, as does that of D’Ariano and coworkers. This
is a crucial difference, especially in the present set of contexts, because the view
of circuits as arrangements of measuring devices makes the situation open to an
RWR-type interpretation, even if D’Ariano and coworkers do not adopt such an
interpretation. They do not appear to take a strong stance on this point. On the other
hand, Hardy, whose scheme is also deﬁned by this type of relationship between
the formalism and classical circuits, appears, as noted, to be guided by a realist or
ontological view of the objects and behavior responsible for what is observed in

322
9
From Circuits to Categories in Quantum Information Theory
circuits, by “a search for what we hope to be the correct ontology of the world”
(Hardy 2011).
If the ultimate nature reality responsible for quantum phenomena is given a repre-
sentation, the corresponding category may need to incorporate this representation in
one way or another, by combining it with the effects of the ultimate constitution of
the reality responsible for quantum phenomena, effects, thus, manifested in circuits
and their arrangements. On the other hand, if one adopts an RWR-type view, one only
deals with the physical description of circuits, which amounts to dealing only with the
description of measuring instruments, given that the ultimate constitution of reality
responsible for quantum phenomena, is beyond representation or even conception,
and thus cannot be assumed to form a category either. Circuits and their organizations
embody the arrangements of measuring instruments capable of detecting quantum
events and enabling the probabilistic or statistical predictions of future events. These
predictions, thus, relate to structures that may be mathematizable and as such cate-
gorially, which is to say, functorially, connected with the mathematical formalism
of QTFD, which enables the necessary mathematical calculations. I speak of func-
torial connections, rather than, as Hardy does, “translations,” because, as discussed
in considering both Schwinger’s argument in Chap. 4 and DACP’s derivation of
QTFD in this chapter, one need not and, in the RWR-type view, should not expect
a representational correspondence (“translation”) between the structures of circuits
and the mathematical structures of the formalism of QTFD. For one thing, one, again,
needs a formalism, a Hilbert-space, C*-algebra, or monoidal-category-one over C,
while as classical, the data manifested in circuits is over R, and then one still needs
a Born-type rule to get to probabilities.
If one adopts the RWR view, then, one could attempt to establish a category of
circuits, each deﬁned by some sort of algebraic structure of units and operations, and
morphisms between them, and then, by using some reasonable axioms a category
of mathematical objects deﬁning the formalism, such as Hilbert spaces or some
monoidal categories, and morphism between them (along, again, with a Born-like
rule for probabilities). One would, then, connect these two categories by means of a
well-deﬁned functor. The advantage of this approach is that it preserves the role of
the mathematical structure of circuits, which are observable. The derivation of the
formalism could, then, consist in deriving the corresponding mathematical category
from the category of the circuits. The difﬁculty is, again, that there does not appear to
be a readily available categorical structure for circuits: their inherent mathematical
structures, morphisms between them, and so forth. All of these need to be deﬁned.
This is, however, also true if one adopts a more realist view, which would in any
event pertain to a representation of quantum objects and behavior by the formalism
of QTFD rather than by the mathematical description of circuits. To build up a
category of circuits, beginning with making them mathematical objects and giving
them a mathematical structure would require additional entities and postulates.
In the approach just outlined, then, it is the question of a functorial relationships
between categories, which, again, still needs to be established in the case of circuits
(Hilbert spaces, used in the formalism, form a category), in the RWR view, in the
absence of any representational mapping between the structure of circuits and the

9.3 Thinking Categorically: From Morphisms to Functors
323
formalism of QTFD, or by implication, QM or QFT. Each category could consist of
very different, but functorially related, types of mathematical objects, for example,
one (the structures deﬁning circuits) over R and the other (the formalism of QTFD)
over C. Mathematically, there are morphisms in each category, and there are functors
between categories, and the mathematical-experimental situation of quantum physics
would now be deﬁned by these functors. Hence, as I said, from this perspective,
Hardy’s “physics to mathematics correspondence principle” would, if rigorously
established, be replaced by the “physics to mathematics functoriality principle.” It
would be realized by the functorial relationships between the category based on
circuits (the objects and morphisms of which need, again, to be deﬁned) and the
category of the mathematical objects deﬁning the formalism, such as that of Hilbert
spaces over C (ﬁnite-dimensional ones in QTFD) or some other category of objects
and morphisms, still quite different from those of the ﬁrst category.
This view is also more in accord with categorical thinking in mathematics. One
of the most essential aspects of category theory, even its raison d’être, at least in
its use in algebraic topology and algebraic geometry (mathematical logic is, again,
a separate matter, although this is true there as well), consists in establishing the
relationships between multiplicities, “categories,” of objects of different types, for
example, geometrical or topological objects and algebraic objects, or between alge-
braic objects of different types, rather than directly mapping the objects of the ﬁrst
category on those of the second. The concept of category was introduced in the
ﬁeld of algebraic topology and then extended to algebraic geometry to help study
certain algebraic invariants, such as groups, associated with topological spaces. In
contradistinction to geometry, deﬁned, as a mathematical discipline, by the concept
of measurement (geo-metry), topology, as a mathematical discipline, is deﬁned by
associating an algebraic structure or a set of structures, most especially groups, such
as homotopy or cohomology groups (which came to play an important role in QFT
and then string and M-brane theories), to a topological space. The structure of a
topological space is deﬁned by its continuities and discontinuities, and not by its
geometry, even if it has a geometry, and not all topological spaces do. Insofar as one
deformsagivenﬁgurecontinuously(i.e.,insofarasonedoesnotseparatepointsprevi-
ously connected and, conversely, does not connect points previously separated), the
resulting ﬁgure or space is treated as mathematically equivalent. Thus, no matter how
much one expands or continuously (without separating connected point or joining
separated points) deforms a sphere the resulting spaces are topologically equiva-
lent, while some of these objects are no longer spheres geometrically speaking. Such
spaces are, however, topologically distinct from those of topologically deformed tori,
because spheres and tori cannot be converted into each other without disjoining their
connected points or joining the separated ones: the holes in tori make this impossible.
In algebraic topology, mathematical objects of each type are arranged in categories
and are related to one another by morphisms, while categories are related by functors.
The category of topological spaces (or its subcategory, such as that of Riemannian
manifolds) and their morphisms become related to a category of algebraic objects,
such as groups and their morphisms. The relationships between these two categories,

324
9
From Circuits to Categories in Quantum Information Theory
one topological or geometrical, and the other algebraic, allow one to extract an enor-
mous amount of information concerning topological spaces and, although this is a
subtler process, conversely, groups (through the structure of topological spaces to
which these groups are associated). The approach also led to a cascade-like emer-
gence and proliferation of new concepts, which still continues. A good categorical
approach to, and a possible derivation of, quantum theory would similarly estab-
lish the functorial relationships between two categories, one based in circuits and
the other deﬁning the formalism, keeping in mind that at least the second one also
allows one to establish a new form of geometry and, thus, extend the situation from
QPG to QPAGG.
9.4
On Quantum Information Theory Beyond
Reconstruction Projects
An important and difﬁcult question, which need not depend on a categorical formu-
lation of quantum theory, but which may be helped by it, is that of the relationship
between the structure of the circuits, deﬁned by the corresponding experimental
arrangements, and the inﬁnite-dimensional mathematical architecture of QM, or the
same relationship in QFT. Consider the double-slit experiment, say, in the inter-
ference pattern setup. It is a circuit, which embodies, as operations, preparations,
measurements, and predictions, all manifested in the emergence of the interference
pattern. I would not presume to be able to mathematize it. But it is a circuit never-
theless, a complex one, albeit child’s play in comparison to the circuitry found in
high-energy quantum physics, such as that of the Large Hadron Collider (LHC).
Such questions will, however, need to be addressed if one is to extend the programs
to derivations of QTFD to QM or to QED and QFT, or beyond. It is hardly sufﬁcient
to merely derive already established theories, or to use such informational derivation
in order to offer a critique of previous derivations, admittedly, important tasks, which
deepen our understanding of quantum theory, especially as based on the concept of
information. The ultimate value of these programs, however, lies in what they can do
for the future of fundamental physics. Thus, Hardy aims to rethink general relativity
in operational informational terms, analogous to those of QTFD, and then to reach, in
principle, quantum gravity, bypassing QFT or even QM, which would then be merely
special cases of the ultimate theory (Hardy 2007, 2010). D’Ariano and coworkers,
by contrast, appear ﬁrst to move from QTFD to QFT. In their more recent work, they
aim to develop a new approach to QFT, which, as based on the concept of quantum
cellular automata, is different from the operational framework discussed thus far, but
shares with it certain key informational features and the aim of developing QFT from
fundamental principles.

9.4 On Quantum Information Theory Beyond Reconstruction Projects
325
D’Ariano and Perinotti’s derivation of Dirac’s equation is a step in this direction,
for now in the absence of an external ﬁeld, essential to the proper QED (D’Ariano and
Perinotti 2014, 2017; D’Ariano 2017, 2020). Unlike Dirac’s own or other previous
derivations of the equation, their derivation only uses, along with other principles
(homogeneity, isotropy, and unitarity), the principle of locality, rather than special
relativity. The key principles of quantum theory and their quantum-theoretical mathe-
matical expressions and consequences remain at work throughout—the probabilistic
or statistical nature of the theory, locality, Hilbert spaces, operators, noncommuta-
tivity, the tensor structure, symmetry, group representation, and so forth (D’Ariano
and Perinotti 2014, pp. 2–3). There is some important new mathematics as well, such
as that of “quasi-isometric embedding,” a profound recent development in geometry,
primarily due to Misha Gromov and his geometric-group theory (D’Ariano and
Perinotti 2014, p. 3; D’Ariano 2017, pp. 105–107). The QCA is the quantum cellular
automaton operative at a larger scale. The derivation of Dirac’s equation is achieved
by ﬁnding Dirac’s automata, which are “obtained by locally coupling Weyl automata”
and give the Dirac equation at the relativistic limit from the informational principles
proposed, all of these principles, rather than only linearity and unitarity, which are
quantum in character (D’Ariano and Perinotti 2014, pp. 5, 6–9). This is a reﬂection
and recasting of the fact that Dirac’s spinors are composed of Weyl’s spinors.
In this regard, the situation is unavoidably parallel to deriving QTFD from a larger
(than only quantum) set of principles. Locality, homogeneity, and isotropy are addi-
tional principles here, which allow one to dispense with the principle of relativistic
(Lorenz) invariance in deriving the equation, beginning with Dirac’s original deriva-
tion. Locality merits special attention here. The locality requirement itself and the
corresponding principle are deﬁned by the requirement that the cardinality of the set,
Sg, of sites g’, interacting with the site g (both from a denumerable set G of systems,
involvedinthecellularautomatonanddescribedbyFermionicﬁeldoperators)is“uni-
formly bound over G, namely,
Sg
 ≤k < ∞for every g” (D’Ariano and Perinotti
2014, p. 2). As noted earlier, this concept or principle is more general and deeper
than the principle of (special) relativity, deﬁned the Lorentz invariance, although rela-
tivity, special or general, conforms to the principle of locality. The Lorentz invariance
emerges from this locality principle at the corresponding (relativistic) limit and the
standard (Fermi) scale of quantum ﬁeld theory, and hence of Dirac’s equation. The
signiﬁcance of the locality requirement is, however, more general and is critical to the
informational QCA framework proposed by the authors. This requirement is consis-
tent with the view of locality adopted in this study (Einstein-locality): all physical
interactions and indeed everything that essentially deﬁnes phenomena, information,
and so forth is local. According to D’Ariano, while falsiﬁability is a crucial require-
ment to be satisﬁed by this framework, it is equally crucial that all falsiﬁability is
local, which may be seen as a principle, the local falsiﬁability principle (D’Ariano
2018, pp. 8–9). The approach may, they hope, offer new possibilities for fundamental
physics, even on Planck’s scale.

326
9
From Circuits to Categories in Quantum Information Theory
It remains an open question whether this approach can reach beyond QFT and the
standard model, and it is not certain either whether it can encompass even them. At
the very least, however, it opens a trajectory beyond QTFD for quantum information
theory and, thus, possibly an alternative to other current approaches aiming to reach
beyond the standard model, especially in developing a theory of quantum gravity,
thus far an elusive goal, with no consensus concerning what kind of theory it could
be, for example, whether it will still be quantum.
9.5
Conclusion
Whether the QPA/QPAGG structure of quantum theory
QU ANTU M N ESS →P RO B ABI LI T Y →ALGE BRA/
QU ANTU M N ESS →P RO B ABI LI T Y →ALGE BRA →GE N E RALI Z E D GE OM ET RY
in place, as things stand now, regardless of interpretation, and the RWR view of it,
which is interpretive, will remain viable, as Bohr thought it might (or even will), or
willbedefeated,fulﬁllingthehopeofEinsteinandthosewhofollowedhim,isanopen
question as well. On the other hand, it appears likely, as no currently known attempts
to move beyond QFT would indicate otherwise, that, as throughout the history of
quantum theory and indeed all modern physics from Galileo on, we will continue
to see the use of new mathematical structures, either already available in mathe-
matics itself or yet to be invented by mathematicians or, as has happened before, by
physicists. This mathematics may continue to be dominated by QPA/QPAGG struc-
tures, as the mathematics of quantum theory has been thus far, or it may, as Einstein
hoped, return fundamental physics to more geometrically representing the ultimate
nature of physical reality. This return would still involve algebra, because, while
there might be algebra without geometry, there is no geometry without algebra. As
discussed in this study, from the Pythagoreans on, our thinking in mathematics and
physics alike has always been deﬁned by both geometry and algebra, and the multi-
faceted, and sometimes love–hate, relationships between them. This is, however, a
good thing. It helps to move mathematics and physics forward, and will continue
to do so, assuming that physics will remain a mathematical-experimental science of
nature, as it has been from Descartes and Galileo to our own time, with mathematics,
again, deﬁning this conjunction. Philosophical thinking in physics itself and in the
philosophy of physics has been equally deﬁned by the mathematical-experimental
character of modern physics—a remarkable way in which thought relates to matter,
via technology, even when the ultimate constitution of matter is beyond thought.

References
327
References
Abramsky, S., Brandenburger, A.: The sheaf-theoretic structure of non-locality and contextuality
(2011). arXiv:1102.0264 [quant-ph]
Bartlett, S.D., Rudolph, T., Spekkens, R.W.: Reconstruction of Gaussian quantum mechanics from
Liouville mechanics with an epistemic restriction. Phys. Rev. A 86, 012103 (2012)
Bohr, N.: The Philosophical Writings of Niels Bohr, vol. 3. Ox Bow Press, Woodbridge, CT, USA
(1987)
Born, M., Jordan, P.: Zur quantenmechanik. Z. Phys. 34, 858–888 (1925)
Born, M., Heisenberg, W., Jordan, P.: On quantum mechanics. In: Van der Waerden, B.L. (eds.)
Sources of Quantum Mechanics, 1968, pp. 321–385. Dover, New York, NY, USA (1926)
Chiribella, G., D’Ariano, G.M., Perinotti, P.: Informational derivation of quantum theory. Phys.
Rev. A 84, 012311-1–12339 (2011)
Chiribella,
G.,
Spekkens,
R.:
Quantum
Theory:
Informational
Foundations
and
Foils.
Springer/Nature, New York, NY, USA (2016)
Coecke, R.: From quantum foundations via natural language meaning to a theory of everything.
In: Cooper, S.B., Soskova, M.I. (eds.) The Incomputable: Journeys Beyond the Turing Barrier,
Theory and Applications of Computability, pp. 63–80. Springer/Nature, Berlin, Germany (2017)
Coecke, R., Kissinger, A.: Picturing Quantum Processes. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK (2017)
D’Ariano, G.M.: Physics without physics. Int. J. Theor. Phys. 56(1), 97–138 (2017)
D’Ariano, G.M.: Causality re-established. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A 376, 20170313 (2018). https://
doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2017.0313
D’Ariano, G.M.: No puriﬁcation ontology, no quantum paradoxes. Found. Phys. 50, 1921–1933
(2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10701-020-00398-6
D’Ariano, G.M., Chiribella, G., Perinotti, P.: Quantum Theory from First Principles: An Informa-
tional Approach. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK (2017)
D’Ariano, G.M., Perinotti, P.: Derivation of the Dirac equation from principles of information
processing. Phys. Rev. A 90, 062106 (2014)
D’Ariano, G.M., Perinotti, P.: Quantum cellular automata and free quantum ﬁeld theory. Front.
Phys. 12(1), 1–11 (2017)
Einstein, A.: What is the theory of relativity? In: Einstein, A. (ed.) Ideas and Opinions, 1954,
pp. 227–231. Bonanza Books, New York, NY, USA (1919)
Fuchs, C.A.: Quantum mechanics as quantum information, mostly. J. Mod. Opt. 50, 987–1023
(2003)
Hardy, L.: Quantum mechanics from ﬁve reasonable axioms (2001). arXiv:0101012v4 [quant-ph]
Hardy, L.: Towards quantum gravity: a framework for probabilistic theories with non-ﬁxed causal
structure. J. Phys. A 40, 3081–3099 (2007)
Hardy, L.: A formalism-local framework for general probabilistic theories, including quantum
theory (2010). arXiv:1005.5164 [quant-ph]
Hardy, L.: Foliable operational structures for general probabilistic theory. In: Halvorson, H. (ed.)
Deep Beauty: Understanding the Quantum World Through Mathematical Innovation, pp. 409–
442. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK (2011)
Hardy, L.: Reconstructing quantum theory (2013). arXiv:1303.1538 [quant-ph]
Hasegawa, M., Hofmann, M., Plotkin, G.: Finite dimensional vector spaces are complete for traced
symmetric monoidal categories. LNCS [Lecture Notes in Computer Science] 4800, 367–385
(2008)
Heidegger, M.: What is a thing? (tr. Barton, WB, Jr., Deutsch, V), Gateway, South Bend, IN, USA
(1967)
Heisenberg, W.: The Physical Principles of the Quantum Theory (tr. Eckhart, K., Hoyt, F.C.), rpt.
1949. Dover, New York, NY, USA (1930)
MacLane, S.: Categories for the Working Mathematician. Springer, Berlin, Germany (2013)

328
9
From Circuits to Categories in Quantum Information Theory
MacLane, S., Moerdijk, I.: Sheaves in Geometry and Logic: A First Introduction to Topos Theory.
Springer, Berlin, Germany (1994)
Schrödinger, E.: Discussion of probability relations between separated systems. Proc. Camb. Philos.
Soc. 31, 555–563 (1935)
Spekkens, R.W.: Evidence for the epistemic view of quantum states: a toy theory. Phys. Rev. A
75(3), 032110 (2007)
Spekkens, R.W.: Quasi-quantization: classical statistical theories with an epistemic restriction. In:
Chiribella, G., Spekkens, R.W. (eds.) Quantum Theory: Informational Foundations and Foils,
pp. 83–136. Springer/Nature, New York, NY, USA (2016)
Von Neumann, J.: Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (tr. R.T. Beyer), rpt. 1983.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, USA (1932)

Index
A
Action at a distance, 227–231, 248, 249,
251, 253, 257, 268
Algebra, 101, 102, 109–111, 114, 117, 118,
120–122, 124–136, 138–141
Analytic philosophy of physics, 4, 5
Annihilation and creation operators, 291
Arrow of time, 208, 209, 212, 214–216, 218
Asymptotic freedom, 273, 278, 293,
295–302
Atomicity, 172, 182
B
Beta-function, 296, 297
Bohr-completeness, 228–230, 237, 238,
248, 250, 253
Bohr’s 1913 theory, 84, 87, 90, 92, 93, 98
Bohr’s quantum postulates, 91
Born’s rule, 103, 104, 111, 115, 116, 121,
127, 139
C
Category, 310, 318–324
Category theory, 307, 309, 319, 323
Causality, 23, 36, 44, 49–56, 61, 63, 167,
170, 178, 179, 203–216
Circuit, 309–311, 314–318, 320–324
Classical ﬁeld, 289
Complementarity, 167–171, 176, 178–180,
183, 197–208, 211, 212, 218, 219,
221
Complex wave function, 6, 14, 25, 147,
152, 154–157, 161, 164, 165, 313
Concepts, 23–37, 39–48, 50–55, 57–60,
63–67, 69, 70, 72–76
Constructive theories, 104–106
Correspondence principle, 105, 111, 113,
115, 117, 120
D
Determinism, 23, 51, 53, 55, 61
Dirac’s equation, 145, 146, 152, 155, 159,
161, 162, 276, 282, 283, 301, 303,
325
Discreteness, 172, 182, 217
E
Eigenvalue (proper value) problem, 147,
153, 156
Einstein-completeness, 221, 222, 229, 230,
250
Einstein-locality, 193, 200, 209, 212, 230,
232, 235–238, 240, 246–253, 257,
259, 268, 269, 325
Einstein-nonlocality, 17, 227–232, 235,
236, 238, 240, 241, 247, 248, 250,
256, 257, 260, 268
Elementary particles, 273–282, 284,
287–289, 291, 293, 300, 303
Entanglement, 167, 170, 192–194, 227,
229, 231, 232, 236, 240, 249, 254,
258–260, 262, 263, 265–270
Epirestricted theories, 312, 313
EPR experiment, 227–229, 231, 233–237,
240–243, 245, 247, 248, 251, 253,
254, 258, 259, 264, 265, 267, 268,
270
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license
to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
A. Plotnitsky, Reality Without Realism,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-84578-0
329

330
Index
F
Feynman diagrams, 279, 292, 297, 298,
300, 301
Functor, 310, 318–320, 322, 323
G
Geometry, 101, 102, 104, 105, 109, 111,
116, 123–125, 127–138, 141
H
Hadron jets, 294, 295
Heisenberg method, 101, 102, 109–111,
122–124, 127, 130, 138, 140, 141
Hilbert space, 103–105, 109, 110, 116,
124–126, 129, 131, 133–139, 284,
287, 291, 299, 310, 311, 320–323,
325
History, 1–6, 13–15, 19
I
Idealization, 23, 24, 29–32, 38, 42, 45, 48,
52, 58, 65–67, 71–73, 169, 181, 182,
191–194, 197, 198, 203, 207,
217–219
Indeterminacy, 23, 24, 60, 62, 63
Individuality, 172, 182, 189
Interpretation, 23, 24, 28–43, 45, 46,
48–50, 55, 56, 58–60, 62–69, 71, 72,
74, 76, 78
Irrationality, 167, 170–177
M
Mathematical-experimental science, 3, 5,
15
Matrix mechanics, 104, 114, 126
Measurement, 167–173, 176–178,
180–183, 187–189, 191–200, 203,
204, 206–211, 213–217, 219, 220
Measuring instruments, 28, 30, 31, 33–38,
41–43, 45, 48, 49, 56–59, 61, 64–75,
170, 172, 173, 176, 178–184,
187–194, 196, 197, 199, 204–206,
208, 209, 211, 212, 214, 219, 220
Models, 23, 24, 37–39, 41, 42, 46, 48, 51,
58, 60, 68, 78
Modernist mathematics, 101, 102,
127–131, 136–138
Morphism, 310, 320, 322
N
Noether theorems, 285–287
Noncommutativity, 103
Noncommutativity, 113, 114, 118–121,
126, 133
O
Operation, 310, 315, 317, 318, 320, 322,
324
Operational-probabilistic framework, 316
P
Phenomenon, 1–3, 8–20, 23, 24, 27–45,
47–50, 53–78, 167–188, 190–195,
197–200, 202–204, 206, 207,
209–211, 213–222
Philosophical rigor, 4
Philosophy, 1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 10, 15
Philosophy of physics, 2, 3, 5
Physics to mathematics correspondence
principle, 318, 323
Physics to mathematics functoriality
principle, 319, 323
Predictions at a distance, 229, 231–233,
251–253, 257, 259, 262, 268
Principles, 101, 102, 104–108, 111, 122,
124, 125, 131, 132, 135, 139
Principle theories, 105–107, 111
Probability, 23–25, 47, 48, 50, 54, 55,
60–64, 71, 73, 75
Puriﬁcation, 311–315
Q
QCD Lagrangian, 301
QED, 276, 282–285, 290, 291, 296, 301,
303
QFT, 273–282, 284–293, 296, 297,
299–303
Quantum causality, 170, 207–217
Quantum chromodynamics (QCD), 273,
285, 287, 291, 293–301
Quantum correlations, 227, 229–232,
234–236, 253, 256, 261
Quantum ﬁeld, 273, 274, 276, 277, 279,
281, 282, 284, 288–292, 295, 298,
303
Quantum ignorance, 258, 260, 261
Quantum indeﬁnitiveness postulate, 54, 74
Quantum information theory, 307,
309–312, 319, 324, 326

Index
331
Quantum jumps, 83–85, 87–90, 93, 97,
148, 158, 164, 165
Quantum measurement, 42, 66, 67
Quantum nonlocality, 227, 229–232, 236,
244, 247, 248, 253, 256, 257, 268,
269
Quantum objects, 23, 24, 28–33, 35, 36, 38,
41, 42, 45, 47–50, 53, 56–59, 61,
64–74, 76, 167, 169–173, 175, 176,
178–184, 187, 191–198, 203–208,
211, 214–216, 219–221
Quantum postulate, 172, 173, 203
Quantum states, 83, 87–90, 92
R
Randomness, 24, 60, 63
Realism, 23, 24, 27, 32, 33, 37, 40, 43,
46–50, 53, 55–57, 59, 62, 65, 78
Reality, 3, 5–12, 16, 17, 20, 23, 24, 27–32,
34–38, 41–48, 50, 55–67, 69–76, 78
Reality without realism, 6, 20, 23, 24, 27,
43, 44, 49, 69, 74
Real particles, 274, 276–279, 285, 289,
292–295, 298, 300, 301
Reconstruction projects, 307, 308, 310, 324
Renormalization group, 296, 297
RWR-type interpretations, 23, 24, 28, 36,
37, 40–42, 44, 48–50, 54, 56, 58,
61–67, 69, 71
RWR view, 1, 2, 6, 9–11, 13–16, 19, 20, 23,
29–31, 33–38, 42–50, 52, 54–60, 63,
64, 66, 69–71, 73–75, 77, 78
S
Schrödinger’s time-dependent equation,
145, 146, 150, 152, 155, 157,
159–161, 164
Schrödinger’s time-independent equation,
155, 156
Statistics, 61, 62, 64, 75
Strong RWR view, 10, 11, 27, 29, 38, 40,
44, 45, 47, 57, 58, 64, 69, 74, 78,
168, 172, 175, 178, 179, 204, 214,
217, 220
Symmetry group, 281, 285, 287, 295
T
The cut, 52, 70–72
Theory, 23–25, 27–35, 37–60, 62–64,
66–70, 72, 75–78
Things-in-themselves, 10, 11
Thinking, 1–7, 10, 12, 13, 15, 19, 21
Transitions without connections, 83, 87–90,
92, 98
U
Uncertainty relations, 168, 179, 182, 183,
194, 197, 202, 205–207
V
Virtual particles, 273, 274, 276–279, 285,
292–296, 298, 300, 301
W
Wave mechanics, 145–152, 156, 160, 165
Wave-particle complementarity, 29, 86,
202, 205
Weak RWR view, 10, 11, 33, 46, 49, 57, 58

