702
Solitons
Shor’s Algorithm
See  quantum computation.
Solitons
A. Seeger
Historical Background
The soliton concept has in common with other mathematical concepts such as vec-
tors, tensors, matrices that it arises not only in mathematics but also in numerous
other ﬁelds, including physics, chemistry, biology as well as various branches of
engineering science (see, e.g., [1]). It is therefore not surprising that, depending on
the ﬁeld, the same name denotes different objects or properties and that a simple
deﬁnition comprising the entire current usage cannot be given.
The name soliton has its origin in hydraulics. In 1834, the Scottish engineer–
scientist John Scott Russell (1808–1882), while studying the movement of ships on
the Union Canal between Edinburgh and Glasgow, discovered what he described
as a ‘large, solitary, progressive wave’ [2]. This ‘heap of water’ originated when
a fast-moving ship was suddenly stopped. The swell, however, travelled along the
channel with essentially constant shape and with a velocity
V = [g(H + h0)]1/2
(1)
that depended only on the height H of the water level and the amplitude h0 of the
swell (g = 9.81 m s−2). Russell realised the difference between the ‘solitary wave
of translation’, as he also called the phenomenon, and the more common oscillatory
waves which do not involve transport of matter over long distances. He was con-
vinced of the fundamental nature of his discovery but could not give a convincing
theoretical explanation based on, say, Stokes’ equations of ﬂuid dynamics. After
many attempts by British and French scientists – either fruitless or only partially
successful – the French mathematician Joseph Valentin Boussinesq (1842–1929)
solved the problem in 1872 by demonstrating that a fourth-order partial differential
equation for the height h(x, t) of the water level in a shallow canal has the solution
h = h0 Sech2[(3h0/4H 3)1/2(x −V t)],
(2)
the speed V being given by (1) [3]. Equation (2) accounted very well indeed for
Russell’s numerous observations as well as later experimental work.

