608
Quantum State Diffusion Theory (QSD)
Quantum State Diffusion Theory (QSD)
Mauricio Su´arez
Quantum state diffusion (QSD) is possibly the most sophisticated collapse inter-
pretation on offer today. It is closely related to the Ghirardi–Rimini–Weber (GRW)
style-theories ( GRW), but it assumes that free particles are idealisations. Accord-
ing to QSD all physically real particles are subject to a degree of interaction with
their environment. The fundamental equation of QSD is the linear master equation,
which looks just like the  Schr¨odinger equation, but with additional terms besides
the usual Hamiltonian [1, pp. 44–45]:
dρ/dt = −i/h[H, ρ] + 
j(Lj ρ Lj ∗−1/2 Lj ∗Lj ρ −1/2 ρLj ∗Lj), where the
Lindblad operators Lj may or not be Hermitian.
The two limiting cases are:
1. LINDBLAD: The environmental interaction dominates and the Hamiltonian in-
ternal dynamics is negligible (these are “wide open systems”  decoherence):
dρ/dt =

j
(Lj ρ Lj ∗−1/2 Lj ∗Lj ρ −1/2 ρ Lj ∗Lj).
2. SCHR ¨ODINGER:
The
environmental interaction
is
negligible and
the
Hamiltonian dynamics dominates (“completely isolated systems”):
dρ/dt = −i/h [H, ρ] .
So QSD recovers the Schr¨odinger equation for the idealisation of a completely iso-
lated system. In general, however, the full linear master equation applies, and the
resulting diffusion process for the quantum state on the Bloch sphere is similar to
 Brownian motion in 3-d physical space. A measurement is typically modelled
within QSD as a wide open system interaction with a macroscopic measuring de-
vice [2]. Thus QSD predicts a transition from a pure state ( states, pure and mixed)
to a  mixed state for the pointer position, which it claims solves the measure-
ment problem. See also  Bohmian mechanics; Measurement theory; Metaphysics
in Quantum Mechanics; Modal Interpretation; Objectiﬁcation; Projection Postulate.
Literature
1. Ian Percival: Quantum State Diffusion (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1999)
2. N. Gisin, I. C. Percival: The quantum-state diffusion model applied to open systems. J. Phys. A:
Math Gen. 25, 5677–5691 (1992)

