Abduction and Creativity in Mathematics
Paul Ernest
Contents
Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
Abduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
School Mathematics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
Meaning and Abduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
Abduction in Practice. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
Abduction in Mathematics Education Research. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
Abduction and the Philosophy of Mathematics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
Conclusion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
Abstract
This chapter reviews current thinking on abduction and creativity in mathe-
matics. Mathematics uses abduction to generate explanatory hypotheses and
novel concepts and theories. This is recognized in the emergent philosophy
of mathematical practice, following on from the groundbreaking work of Imre
Lakatos. His linkage of creativity with proof is leading to the breakdown of
the traditional rigid separation of the contexts of discovery and justiﬁcation.
The role of meaning in mathematics also crosses this divide, and links are
made here between abduction and the meaning theories of Wittgenstein and
Brandom. Creativity is a topic that connects the domains of school mathematics
and research mathematics too. One such connection is that schooling repre-
sents the conduit for the development of new creative mathematicians. School
mathematics is traditionally made up of routine exercises but there are moves
P. Ernest ()
University of Exeter, Exeter, UK
e-mail: p.ernest@exeter.ac.uk
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
L. Magnani (ed.), Handbook of Abductive Cognition,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-68436-5_38-1
1

2
P. Ernest
to try and bring more creativity into it. The aims are to foster deeper feelings
of understanding, and the excitement and the joy felt by mathematicians, as
well as to enhance education for the beneﬁt of all, including developing more
mathematicians. Overall, it can be said that Peirce’s ideas of abduction offer a
deeper understanding of creativity, both in school and research mathematics.
Keywords
Mathematical creativity · Meaning theory · Discovery in mathematics ·
Creativity in school mathematics · Abduction in mathematics
Introduction
There is a growing literature on the importance of abductive reasoning in the
philosophy of science, cognitive science, and mathematics and science education.
This stems from the work of the great philosopher and logician Charles Saunders
Peirce, who fathered the idea. Peirce was concerned to offer an overall scheme for
categorizing logic. In his search for completeness, Peirce differentiated three forms
of logical reasoning: deduction, induction, and abduction. A brief sketch of these,
as they pertain to mathematics, is as follows.
Deduction is well understood and concerns the rules for drawing necessary
conclusions from premises. There are many systems of deductive logic, from
Aristotle’s syllogistic forms of reasoning to modern systems of mathematical logic
including natural deduction.
Induction has two meanings. Mathematical induction is a form of deductive
reasoning limited in its application to mathematics. Mathematical induction has the
following form. Let P stand for any property of the natural numbers. If it can be
proved that, from the assumption that P(n) holds for all values of n up to k, P(k + 1)
also holds, then for all natural numbers n, P(n) is true. Phrased in this way, the
principle of mathematical induction does not require the premise P(0), as it does in
some versions, because it is included in the premise stated above.
In contrast, in its other meaning, induction is a scheme for coming up with
a hypothesis or conjectured general rule from the observation of a ﬁnite num-
ber of cases. For example, on observing that 1 + 3 = 4, 1 + 3 + 5 = 9,
and 1 + 3 + 5 + 7 = 16, the process of conjecturing the hypothesis that
1 + 3 + 5 + . . . + 2n + 1 = (n + 1)2 is an instance of induction. The fact
that this general formula correctly describes the pattern of a ﬁnite number of
cases in a generalization is no guarantee that it holds for all further cases. In
fact, in mathematics, if we have a ﬁnite sequence of numbers, as in this example,
then it can be continued in an unlimited number of different ways. However, the
induced generalization in this case is perhaps the simplest and most elegant way of
generalizing the initial sequence.
This process, the induction of a generality from a sequence of examples, is a
strategy or heuristic, a pattern of plausible reasoning. As such, there is no guarantee

Abduction and Creativity in Mathematics
3
that the induced formula will be correct. Of course the schema of induction is also
widely employed in science, and informally in language acquisition and concept
formation, but always as a suggestive or speculative technique and not as a means
of generating validated knowledge.
There have been attempts to formalize induction as a logical principle (see,
e.g., Lakatos, 1968). However, it is widely accepted that induction is not a reliable
foundation for science (Popper, 1959). A common example quoted in the philosophy
of science concerns black swans. The observation of any number of endemic swans
in the United Kingdom may suggest the inductive generalization that all swans
are white. However, black swans are found in Australia and have now also been
imported to the United Kingdom. So, the generalization “All swans are white,”
derived by induction based on a ﬁnite number of observations in the United
Kingdom, is false.
Abduction
Peirce’s third form of reasoning is abduction. Like induction this is a form of
plausible reasoning, one that does not guarantee correctness of outcomes. Peirce
viewed abduction as the only logical operation which introduces any new idea into
reasoning. Thus, evidently, he did not view induction as a logical operation on a par
with deduction and abduction. For it involves a mysterious leap, coming up with
something not preformed or even anticipated in the “reasoning.”
Peirce gave differing accounts of abduction at different times in his long career.
According to Fann (1970, p. 9), “most writers on Peirce’s theory of abduction divide
Peirce’s thought roughly into two periods.” These consist of his early and middle
work versus his later work, from about 1900 onward. The earlier period approaches
abduction in terms of theorizations based on the logical form of the reasoning, and
there is an emphasis on abduction as a probabilistic form of syllogism. At that
time, he referred to abduction as “hypothesis” and characterized it by this syllogism
(Peirce, 1867, p. 285):
Hypothesis
Any M is, for instance, P′ P′′ P′′′, etc.
S is P′ P′′ P′′′, etc.;
∴S is probably M.
Here S is the subject, a speciﬁc case of interest, and P′, P′′ P′′′ are a number of
characteristics of S. The word “probably” in the conclusion indicates a key characteristic
of abduction. The argument gives the conclusion plausibility, but not certainty. (Reid, 2018,
p. 2).
Note that in this example, if M is fully characterized by a ﬁnite list of properties,
P′ P′′ P′′′, etc., and S satisﬁes this list as well, then one may correctly conclude that
S is M.
This earlier version of abduction was published when Aristotle’s syllogistic was
still the dominant form of recognized logical reasoning. At the time the syllogism
was the theoretically most developed theory of logical reasoning, although it

4
P. Ernest
was not that much used in mathematics. Syllogistic reasoning is not subtle or
complex enough to deal with the full range of logical inferences in either sentential
or predicate forms. However, in the intervening period between Peirce’s early
publications on the topic (1860s) and his later publications (roughly 1900 onward),
there were major developments in logic. Starting with Frege’s (1879) Begriffsschrift
and including parallel work by Peirce himself, Schröder, Peano, and others,
mathematical logic emerged as a theory in its own right. In this quick overview
have I ignored such developments in logic such as Boole’s The Laws of Thought of
1854. This, although important, did not provide a full logic adequate for expressing
mathematical reasoning and was still dominated by Aristotle’s syllogistic, according
to Corcoran (2003).
In 1902 Peirce wrote that he now regarded the syllogistic forms and the doctrine
of extension and comprehension (i.e., objects and characters as referenced by terms),
as being less fundamental than he had earlier thought:
According to my own principles, the reasoning with which I was there dealing could not be
the reasoning by which we are led to adopt a hypothesis, although I all but stated as much.
But I was too much taken up in considering syllogistic forms and the doctrine of logical
extension and comprehension, both of which I made more fundamental than they really
are. As long as I held that opinion, my conceptions of Abduction necessarily confused two
different kinds of reasoning. (Peirce, 1902, p. 102)
Peirce’s earlier work on abduction was very much based on Aristotelian syllogistic,
which he rejected in his mature understanding. Therefore, this chapter will concen-
trate on his later work on abduction which has more direct bearing on mathematics.
The main interest of the concept of abduction for mathematics, other than historical,
is its intended role as a logic of discovery and not as a form of logical reasoning.
In Peirce (1903, pp. 188–189), he offered the following form for abduction:
The surprising fact, C, is observed;
But if A were true, C would be a matter of course,
Hence, there is reason to suspect that A is true.
Thus, abduction is a pattern of plausible reasoning, a strategy, if not for generating,
then for selecting possible hypotheses to explain a surprising fact. In mathematics
this could be a shared pattern in a sequence of examples or a surprising relationship
between concepts.
Hintikka (2007, p. 38), drawing on the work of others, offers a philosophical
analysis. He characterizes the Peircean concept of abduction rather thoroughly, in
terms of the following four theses.
Inferential Thesis:
Abduction is, or includes, inferential process, or processes.
Thesis of Purpose:
The purpose of “scientiﬁc” abduction is both to generate new
hypotheses, and to select hypotheses for further examination. Hence, a central
aim of such abduction is “to recommend a course of action”.
Comprehension Thesis:
Scientiﬁc abduction includes all the operations whereby
theories are engendered.
Autonomy Thesis:
Abduction is, or embodies, reasoning that is distinct from, and
irreducible to, either deduction or induction.

Abduction and Creativity in Mathematics
5
These seem like clear and valuable theses. From the perspective of mathematics,
the Thesis of Purpose can be extended beyond the generation of new hypotheses
with the additional idea of problem solving, theoretical development, and other
mathematics-speciﬁc courses of action.
Shank (1988) regards abduction as an essential part of human thinking and
reasoning in many of its forms. He argues that the abductive imperative has
shifted away from its role as a key principle in human inquiry and turned into a
methodological procedure. He coined the term “the law of juxtaposition” to describe
what he regards as one of the most interesting models of abductive inquiry. This
law simply states, in its general form, that human beings will inevitably be drawn
to attempt to reconcile, by abduction, any two juxtaposed items into a meaningful
and conclusive third. Thus, according to Shank, the law of juxtaposition states that
for any conscious sign using being, there exists an imperative to resolve any two
signs just juxtaposed in experience in terms of a consequential third. By signs he
means such possible objects as observations, entities, experiences, ideas, texts, units,
understandings, beliefs, claims, clues, rules, things, happenings, and so on. This
provides him with a powerful unity, thus linking different methods of inquiry. For
example, he argues that the following all share this form.
1. A topic juxtaposed with a sign or concept produces a metaphor as a consequence.
2. A rule juxtaposed with a case yields a result as a consequence.
3. A signal juxtaposed with any innate release yields a user behavior as a conse-
quence.
4. A subject juxtaposed with a predicate yields a proposition.
5. A term juxtaposed with the context yields a connotation as a consequence.
Every juxtaposition described here involves an abductive imperative where some
implicit rule links the two new components of the juxtaposition so as to describe
a third, the consequence that renders the juxtaposition itself meaningful. The jux-
tapositions described are in turn (1) metaphoric, (2) comprehension, (3) deductive
syllogistic reasoning, (4) reﬂexive behavior, and (5) propositional formation.
According to Shank, these constitute different forms of abduction all using the
same general methodological principle.
Shank is a semiotician who looks out from the use of signs to the whole
panoply of human understandings and knowledge. This is a fully divergent view
of abduction. Another semiotician interested in the nature and role of abduction
is Umberto Eco. In contrast with Shank, Eco looks inward into the different
types of logical forms that abduction can take. Or rather he looks at the different
circumstances during which an abductive hypothesis emerges.
Eco (1983) provides an analysis of different variants of the logical form of
abduction, according to the nature and role of the rule abducted. Eco terms the
three kinds of abduction that he identiﬁes as overcoded, undercoded, and creative.
Overcoded abduction occurs when the proposer only has access to one rule from
which the case under consideration follows.

6
P. Ernest
What Eco terms “undercoded abduction” occurs when the abductive selection
can be made from multiple general rules. Here a single rule is to be selected,
presumably the one considered optimal in the speciﬁc context. Eco illustrates this
with the case of Kepler who in order to explain astronomical observations was
selecting from among several types of planetary trajectories. These needed to be
closed curves, like the circle, ellipse, or ovoid, because of the cyclical recurrence
of planets in their orbits. This example is drawn from Peirce’s own illustration. He
argued that the number of possible path types for a moving planet is ﬁnite, so one
curve must be chosen from this range of possibilities.
These two types of abductions, the overcoded and the undercoded, are termed
selective abductions by Magnani (2001). In selective abduction the right or best
explanatory hypothesis is drawn from a given set of possible explanations. The
third type of abduction occurs when there is no known rule that would produce the
observed result. Eco (1983) calls this type “creative abduction” because the reasoner
must invent or discover a new rule.
In attempting to ﬁnd a foundation for (what he terms) the extraordinary ordinary
types of reasoning used in psychological processes, Shank (1998) analyzed different
forms of abductive reasoning. He identiﬁed six modes of abductive reasoning that
are used in cognition across the full range of human practices and activities:
They are (a) reasoning to the omen or hunch; (b) reasoning to the clue; (c) reasoning to
the metaphor analogy; (d) reasoning to the symptom; (e) reasoning to the pattern; and (f)
reasoning to the explanation. Three of these modes of abductive reasoning, have played such
an important historical role in the history of empirical inquiry that they can be identiﬁed as
the basis of three venerable modes of abductively guided empirical enquiry. These so called
skills are detection, diagnosis and divination. (Shank, 1998, pp. 848–849)
Most commonly these modes of reasoning are identiﬁed as the special techniques of
detectives, hunters, doctors, and other professionals seeking to diagnose or identify
some general characteristic from a sign or clue. Shank’s contention is that these
modes of reasoning are far more widely applied than deduction or induction which
are given pride of place in accounts of logic and its philosophy. Brieﬂy, abduction
rules!
As beﬁts a mode of reasoning on a par with deduction and induction, the literature
on abduction ranges far and wide over the whole territory of human reasoning
and understanding. The great virtue of abduction is that it is a means or vehicle
for creativity. While this is true for all domains of human creativity, my particular
concern here is with mathematics. Within mathematics it would seem that the most
valuable role of abduction is to offer a possible analysis of creativity.
Creativity in Mathematics
Abduction, incorporating all three of Eco’s (1983) types, constitutes one strand of
creativity in mathematics, admittedly an important strand. But the more general
question is: what constitutes creativity in mathematics?
Devlin (2019) analyzed responses to an informal survey of opinions on math-
ematical creativity conducted among mathematicians and mathematics educators.
The deﬁnition that he came up with, which summarized these responses, is that

Abduction and Creativity in Mathematics
7
mathematical creativity is non-algorithmic decision-making. In order to make
sense of this answer, it must be contextualized and expanded beyond this very
minimal deﬁnition. Obviously, it pertains to mathematical activity and is about the
deployment of mathematical knowledge and skills in tackling a task or problem.
Unpacking it, it would seem that by non-algorithmic Devlin means that it is not an
automatic mathematical activity. In other words, it refers to thoughtful application
of mathematical skills in problem solving. Devlin’s second term is decision-making.
Here he means that it is a metacognitive activity involving a deliberate and conscious
selection of which of one’s own skills and knowledge to apply in any solution
process.
Here, in a nutshell, Devlin successfully identiﬁes key elements of creativity in
mathematics. However, it is not yet clear whether he is describing the successful
student of mathematics or the practice of the research mathematician. Perhaps it
applies to both.
In discussing mathematical creativity, it is useful to distinguish activities in the
teaching and learning of mathematics, that is, in mathematics education, from the
activities of the working mathematician. Within mathematics education research,
the main focus is on deﬁning and fostering creativity in school mathematics. Thus,
the focus is often on moving away from routinized mathematical activities toward
responses to more difﬁcult mathematical problems set by the teacher (or even
self-set). As Devlin’s deﬁnition suggests, the creativity resides in non-algorithmic
decision-making. In other words, the student must choose for themselves which
concepts, skills, algorithms, or strategies to apply in trying to solve any given
problem. As with abduction, the concepts and skills or missing hypotheses must
be provided by the student and are not automatically given within the task.
However, the novelty in the student’s solutions must be judged with respect to the
set of concepts, skills, methods, and algorithms that the student has been previously
taught to use with some automaticity. For the creativity resides in the decision-
making about what skills and tools to apply in the solution of any given problem, as
well as in the overall implementation and self-evaluation of the solution produced.
Creativity is not involved in the application of any automatic algorithmic process
cued by the problem type. Any automaticity will reﬂect the student’s mastery of
some of the skills and algorithms learned up to that point in their course of study,
which will then be drawn upon as resources to be used in problem solving.
For example, working 17 + 21 for younger children and solving x2 + 3x + 2 = 0
for high school students can be automatic given the appropriate teaching. In contrast,
ﬁnding and continuing the pattern in the sequence 0, 3, 8, 15, 24, . . . and then
expressing it algebraically is not normally an automatic task for junior high school
students. In fact, solving the latter can be done by abductive reasoning, namely,
hypothesizing formulas that generate this pattern. There are heuristic strategies
that can direct one toward possible solutions, such as looking at the ﬁrst-order
differences between the terms in the sequence (3, 5, 7, 9, . . . ). Several different
ways of proceeding can be envisaged. One can guess what the formula is. Term 1
is 0, so the formula could be n-3. This gives Term 1 correctly but gives Term 2
the incorrect value 2–3 = −1. An observant student might conjecture that the

8
P. Ernest
sequence is one less than the square numbers and conjecture the formula n2–1. This
is indeed the simplest formula that describes these ﬁrst ﬁve terms of the sequence
and continues with the same pattern. Typically, this would be the answer intended
in a school setting. However, it should be remarked that mathematically there are in
fact an unlimited number of formulas to describe this sequence, even if one extends
it to k terms, but will vary in value from the given formula for later terms (i.e., for
n > k). Thus, what might be accepted in school as “the right answer” is in fact not
the only possible answer, just the simplest and, indeed, the “standard” answer.
Perhaps it is unnecessary to note that for any function F(n), given the function
G(n) = 1 for n < 6 and G(n) = 0 for n > 5, then the expression G(n)(n2–1)
+ G(n)F(n) matches the ﬁrst ﬁve terms of the sequence but continues as F(n)
thereafter. A more explicit version of this formula can be provided but it has a more
complicated form. Thus, potentially any numerical sequence beginning with a ﬁnite
number of ﬁxed terms can be consistently described and continued by some function
in an unlimited number of ways.
For a mathematician, ﬁnding the formula for the sequence, in the standard
answer form, should be a quick intuitive job. But mathematicians also have
further algorithms and heuristics at their disposal that could be employed. For
example, looking at the ﬁrst-order differences (3, 5, 7, 9, . . . ) and the second-order
differences (2, 2, 2, 2, . . . ) indicates to the knowledgeable that the pattern is an
expression of power 2.
School Mathematics
Creativity in school mathematics is expressed in at least four ways. These are
mental agility, problem solving, problem posing and mathematical investigations,
and mathematical projects. Each of these involves creativity in different ways,
although there are overlaps.
Mental agility involves creativity because in performing mental arithmetic, there
are a variety of ways of completing a task. This is different from written arithmetic,
where often there is a standard algorithm for an operation. However, working out
mental arithmetic tasks involves a choice of how to decompose and recompose the
numbers to make the calculation easy and convenient to complete. For example,
in multiplying 36 by 48, the proximity of 48 to 50 can be exploited (e.g., in
the calculative sequence 36 × 48 = 36 × 50 – 36 × 2 = 1800 – 72 = 1728).
However, another product might be decomposed differently, for example, 36 × 42
can be calculated as 36 × (40 + 2). This is a different strategy based on the
characteristics of numbers involved and the most convenient ways of decomposing
them. The creativity in mental arithmetic is based on identifying and exploiting
decompositions that make the calculation more accessible and less effortful. This
is explained (and conducted and monitored) by the facility of metacognition, being
aware of and regulating one’s own knowledge and mental processes in arithmetic.

Abduction and Creativity in Mathematics
9
Perhaps the earliest documented use of mental agility strategies, in terms of
children’s development, occurs when children move on from the “count on” to the
“count on from larger” (Carpenter et al., 1982). Thus, in computing 3 + 5 young
children move from computing 3 (+1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1) to reach the answer 8 to
computing 5 (+1 + 1 + 1) to reach it. As well as the efﬁciency gained in counting
on from the larger number, this is also part of the process of gaining understanding
of commutativity (e.g., 3 + 5 = 5 + 3), an essential element of mental arithmetic.
Problem solving is the process of solving mathematical problems. In school
mathematics these are mostly tasks that have been set by a teacher. Problem solving
can be conducted in several ways. The simplest is proceeding by trial and error
impulsively using simple strategies that are to hand, one after another without learn-
ing much from the failures. More sophisticated problem solving involves planning
and executing strategies more systematically. Polya (1945) offered an inﬂuential
analysis of problem solving based on four stages. These are understanding the
problem, planning a solution strategy, carrying out the plan, and reﬂecting on the
outcome and looking back. If the attempted solution does not work or if there is a
desire to extend the solution, the cycle can be started again. Polya was reﬂecting
on how he and his professional mathematician acquaintances solved problems in
university-level mathematics problems or research mathematics, but his “method”
has been widely adopted for school mathematics teaching.
Schoenfeld (1992) contrasts the typical pattern of work of novice and expert
problem solvers. To do this he analyzed problem-solving activity into six levels or
stages of work, building on Polya’s categories. These are read, analyze, explore,
plan, implement, and verify. These correspond to Polya’s stages but include an
additional impulsive (unplanned) stage of exploring the problem, corresponding to
the impulsive trial-and-error approach mentioned above:
Understanding the Problem:
Read, Analyze
Seeking to Solve Without Plan:
Explore
Devising a Plan:
Plan
Carrying Out the Plan:
Implement
Looking Back:
Verify
The new category is exploration, meaning seeking to solve without plan. This is
something that is neither planned nor recommended (at least not to excess) but is
something that is frequently observed. Exploration can be valuable for enriching
understanding and providing information on which to base planning. But when this
stage of activity is persisted in, typically by novice solvers lacking self-regulation
or metacognitive skills, it usually leads to failure .
Problem posing and mathematical investigations are enlarged versions of prob-
lem solving, but they begin with an extra stage, namely, the posing of the problems
to be solved by the proposed solver. In a mathematical investigation, students may
be given an area of mathematics to explore and then invited to pose problems
for themselves to explore, within it. For example, students can be invited to cut
out a range of different sized squares from centimeter square printed card and
explore what plane shapes they can make with them and examine their properties.

10
P. Ernest
If one looks at the triangles one can assemble from card squares, one may discover
that when the area of the largest square equals the sum of the areas of two
smaller squares, the angle opposite the largest square is a right angle (a version
of Pythagoras’ theorem).
This type of activity includes two aspects of mathematical creativity. First there
is the choice of solution strategy, as in problem solving. Second, there is the choice
and formulation of the problems to be solved, the problem-posing element. This
is a novel dimension of creativity, posing or creating a problem to be solved, or a
hypothesis to be tested, which exceeds the marshalling of knowledge and skills to
solve a given or existing problem.
Mathematical projects are typically activities conducted by a group of students.
They engage in a joint (or individual) mathematical project and then build a display
of their activities and results to be viewed by others. The project could be, for
example, a joint mathematical investigation with a display of the inquiry and its
outcomes or a student-conducted survey with the results analyzed and illustrated
graphically on a poster. There are two creative dimensions involved. First there is
the choice and conduct of the mathematical inquiry. This includes the creativity of
problem posing and mathematical investigations. Second, there is the choice of how
best to display the results of the project. Communicating mathematical outcomes is
also a creative process. It is an activity shared with other areas beyond mathematics.
However, picking out the mathematical content to show and the means of showing
it are more speciﬁcally mathematical.
Niss and Højgaard (2019) offer a valuable analysis of competences in math-
ematics. This includes two main headings. First, there is the ability to ask and
answer questions in and with mathematics. Second, there is the ability to deal
with mathematical language and tools. The ﬁrst heading includes the main creative
dimensions of mathematics discussed above, including thinking mathematically
and posing and solving mathematical problems. However, the second heading
includes representing mathematics and communicating with and about mathematics,
including making use of aids. Thus Niss and Højgaard (2019) attach a considerable
weight to creativity in communicating with mathematics, the fourth dimension of
creativity listed above.
Looking back over these four types of creative activities in school mathematics,
only the middle two types of activity, problem solving and mathematical investiga-
tions, might involve abduction. If and when abduction is involved in project work,
it is of the same types as in problem solving and problem posing, so it need not be
counted separately. The strategies or heuristics used in problem solving are perhaps
the most important place where abduction is employed in school mathematics,
namely, the coming up with a hypothesis to explain a mathematical result or solve a
problem.
Liljedahl and Sriraman (2006, p. 19) offer a view of mathematical creativity at
the school levels parallel to what has been discussed here. They suggest that school
creativity in mathematics has two parts:

Abduction and Creativity in Mathematics
11
1. Creativity includes the process that results in unusual (novel) and/or insightful
solutions to a given problem or to analogous problems.
2. Creativity also includes the formulation of new questions and/or possibilities that
allow an old problem to be regarded from a new angle.
Thus, although creativity in school mathematics is broader than the uses of
abduction, it employs abduction both in solving problems and in posing problems.
These two dimensions of mathematical creativity are evidently also very necessary
within research mathematics.
There is less research on professional mathematicians’ creativity, and the
strategies that they employ, than there is about students of mathematics. However,
creative work among professional mathematicians can be expected to use a deeper
and more extensive range of strategies for solving problems. After all most school
mathematics tasks or problems can be solved in a few minutes or, in the case
of the most difﬁcult ones, in a couple of days. The problems addressed by
professional mathematicians sometimes remain unsolved for centuries with many
mathematicians offering partial solution methods that ﬁnally lead to a breakthrough,
if any solutions are ever reached. Furthermore, the range and depth of knowledge
and techniques used by research mathematicians will clearly be deeper and more
complex, by several orders of magnitude. Even the day-to-day problems addressed
by mathematicians, as opposed to the great problems of mathematics, such as the
Fermat problem (Fermat’s last theorem), are likely to take days, weeks, or months
to solve.
Sriraman (2004) reviews research on the creativity of mathematicians. He begins
with Hadamard’s (1945) studies which constitute one of the earliest systematic
investigations of the creativity of mathematicians. Hadamard (1945) suggests a
four-stage cycle of creativity, building on the work of Poincare. He considers the
process of invention to progress through four stages, beginning with “preparation,”
passing through “incubation” to “illumination,” and ﬁnally reaching “veriﬁcation.”
In following these stages, the mathematician ﬁrst prepares by immersing their self
in the speciﬁc literature related to the problem they are addressing and studying
the techniques involved (preparation). Having thought hard about the problem, the
mathematician is trying to solve in the context of relevant knowledge they enter
what is described as the stage of incubation. Here the mathematician lets the ideas
mull over at the back of their mind and lets their unconscious work on the ideas and
the problem. The following stage is almost miraculous and is called illumination. It
seems like luck when following an irrational and unconscious process they gain a
sudden awareness, coming to a rule or a model suggesting a solution to the problem.
Such a process does not always happen, but when it does can arrive like a bolt from
the blue, often called the “Aha!” moment. Hence the appropriateness of the term
illumination for this stage. There is no guarantee that this sudden insight will solve
the problem, but where it does occur, it is commonly reported as resulting in a
successful solution.
The ﬁnal stage of veriﬁcation occurs when the mathematician seeks to ver-
ify or prove the result that they have derived by this process. According to

12
P. Ernest
Sriraman (2004), Hadamard’s emphasis on the preparatory stage is at odds with
some current theories, which emphasize the illuminatory stage. But it seems that
Hadamard’s model still works very well for mathematics. Sriraman interviewed a
number of practicing mathematicians and came to the conclusion that this same
process and description ﬁts well with their explanations of their own mathematical
discoveries or inventions.
The illumination stage is where abduction takes place. It is unbidden, but with
the prepared stage or arena, the hypothesis springs to mind from some unknown
unconscious source and suggests the missing piece that helps to solve the problem.
As in many creative processes, the author, artist, or mathematician is mystiﬁed as to
where the inspiration comes from. Traditionally, the inspiration was attributed to the
muses. But these days we are more likely to attribute it to intuition and the workings
of the mind at the unconscious level.
There is a parallel with Zen Buddhism. The seeker after Satori undergoes a long
period of preparation learning meditation techniques, Zen koans and the philosophy
of Zen. Engaging in a sustained period of meditational practice is in some ways
parallel to the stage of incubation. This may be followed by sudden illumination or
Satori in the case of Zen. Achieving this illumination is unpredictable and variable,
and some students of Zen may never achieve it. Likewise, some mathematicians will
never succeed in solving a problem that they are addressing. Luckily, they can turn
to another problem to solve unlike the student of Zen for whom there is only one
Satori. But when it does happen, when the mathematician receives the inspiration
that solves the problem, it may be like a bolt from the blue.
The ﬁnal stage of the four-phase process is that of veriﬁcation. Here mathemati-
cal creation and the practice of Zen differ. For the mathematician enters a convergent
phase of working in seeking to verify the result, looking for and constructing a proof.
For the enlightened Zen student Satori needs no validation. It is a self-validating
experience. Any subsequent, further, or ﬁnal stage will be divergent, addressing the
world with the newfound wisdom.
It is during the stage of illumination that the mathematician’s conjectured
hypothesis, their abducted result, arrives. We do not know, and we will probably
never know, what actually goes on in the unconscious mind to complete the process
of abduction. We know how to prepare for it, but there is no guarantee that creativity
underpinning abduction will take place. From the literature we know that often
mathematical illuminations are accompanied by visual imagery, analogous to and
representative of the solution process or the abducted hypothesis sought. In these
cases, the mathematician not only has a vision, that is, experiences visual imagery,
dynamic or static, but also has the capacity or inspiration to interpret this vision as
an analogy for the result or hypothesis. There are a number of well-known cases of
this phenomenon including Kekule’s discovery of the carbon ring and Poincare’s
solution to the Fuchsian function problem.
In exploring mathematical creativity, and creativity in any ﬁeld, we have to
acknowledge that the actual processes of creation are irrational. That is, it is not
explicit chains of reasoning that lead to the creative product. Tacit knowledge, the
experience acquired and learned through engagement in productive practices, seems

Abduction and Creativity in Mathematics
13
to be what contributes to the creative process, including the abductive emergence of
hypotheses and tentative results. Indeed, there seem to be unconscious processes at
work in creativity that as yet cannot be pinned down, made explicit, let alone be
analyzed rationally.
One of the problems with an account of mathematical creativity that goes through
the four stages of preparation, incubation, illumination, and validation is that it
mystiﬁes the process of illumination. If one draws the analogy with the process of
building an arch, one can see that much work goes into preparing and building the
foundations, erecting the verticals and the curved sides of the arch, and it is only in
the last phase that the capstone is inserted in the supporting armature to complete the
arch. In the same way, mathematical discovery involves a great deal of preparation
and establishment work before the ﬁnal link can be inserted to hold all the elements
together. Inserting the capstone is like the illumination phase where all the parts of
the arch are put together into a whole. The subsequent mortaring of the joints is like
the validation stage. Although the capstone is the most dramatic and essential parts
of the building work, it only represents at most 5% of the whole process. Likewise,
the generation of the hypothesis in a ﬂash of illumination is the most dramatic
and visible bit of mathematical creation, but it can only occur after serious and
extensive preparatory work. Like an athlete’s medal winning Olympic performance,
it is the most dramatic and memorable part of their career, but it does not reﬂect
all the years of preparation and hard work. The illumination phase in mathematical
creation, where it occurs, is indeed a marvelous thing. But it is not an indication that
the creative mathematician is some kind of specially empowered being, superior to
ordinary mortals, on whom the lightning bolt of inspiration strikes. Instead, it is a
reﬂection of the extensive training and preparatory work undertaken to get to the
position of being able to invent new mathematics. Furthermore, as Burton (2004)
shows, much of mathematical creation emerges from group activity.
Despite all the preparatory work involved, the source of new hypotheses and con-
jectures remains mysterious. According to Peirce (1960, vol. 7, p. 202), “Abduction
is the process of initially setting up or entertaining a hypothesis likely in itself.”
Peirce’s focus is on the logical or semiotic processes involved in abduction, not the
psychological or cognitive aspects. Thus, he offers no conjectures as to the source
of the hypothesis. This is a whole different direction of inquiry. Nevertheless, in
exploring mathematical creativity and the role of abduction, it is illuminating to
speculate on the origins of hypotheses. After all it was Peirce himself that indicated
that abduction is the sole logical entry point for creativity in reasoning, especially
in mathematics.
Mathematical heuristics is that branch of study that considers the strategies
employed in solving mathematical problems or in coming up with new mathematical
ideas. One of the ﬁrst to study such strategies systematically was the philosopher
Descartes who published a book entitled Rules for the Direction of the Mind.
This contains several strategies that might enable successful problem solving. For
example, rule 13 suggests that simplifying a problem can help to solve it, and rule
15 suggests that drawing a diagram to represent the problem can also help in the
solution.

14
P. Ernest
Polya (1945) offers an extended list of strategies for problem solving, including
the suggestion, again, that making a diagram can help solve a mathematical problem.
Among other things Polya suggests that the mathematician may fruitfully begin
by asking the questions: What is the unknown? What are the data? What is the
condition? Can you restate the problem more suggestively? Could you imagine a
more accessible related problem? (If so try to solve that and then build a bridge to
the original problem.) These are just a sample of the strategies and heuristics that he
offers.
Ever since his pioneering work, many authors have extended Polya’s suggested
strategies. For example, Burton (1984) offers the following strategies among many
others: control variables systematically, use one solution to ﬁnd others, work
backward, focus on one aspect of the problem, partition the problem into cases,
and reformulate the problem.
What kinds or levels of thinking are involved in problem solving? Following
the literature, Ernest (2013) analyzes the cognitive activities involved in problem
solving into two types, the cognitive and the metacognitive. These are as follows:
Cognitive Activities:
carrying out plan, applying strategies, using skills, knowl-
edge, etc.
Metacognitive Activities:
planning,
monitoring
progress,
decision-making,
checking, choosing strategies, etc.
To these, in the light of the above discussion of abduction, we could add a third
cluster comprised of intuitive activities. These might include the following:
Intuitive Activities:
following hunches, noticing associations, attending to memo-
ries triggered, following intuitive links, responding to multisensory experiences,
etc.
However, although we know intuition plays an important part, there is no known
technique for invoking abductive inferences or suppositions. It is an irrational,
intuitively triggered process that wells up from the prepared unconscious. Like
Satori in Zen Buddhism, you can make all the preparations you like but the lightning
strike of inspiration may or may not come. While in school mathematics the
problems set should be within reach of the students, in research mathematics many
of the most famous problems are either very difﬁcult or ultimately and demonstrably
insoluble. Hilbert’s ﬁrst problem, from his famous list of 23 offered at the beginning
of the twentieth century, was to prove the continuum hypothesis. Simply put the
hypothesis states that the size of the continuum (how many real numbers exist)
is Aleph one, the next and immediately subsequent measure of inﬁnity greater in
size than the set of natural numbers (Aleph null). It was not until the 1960s that the
mathematician P. J. Cohen (1966) demonstrated with his new technique of “forcing”
that this problem is insoluble and that the continuum hypothesis is independent of
the standard axioms of set theory .

Abduction and Creativity in Mathematics
15
Meaning and Abduction
There is a link between abduction and meaning theory which is of signiﬁcance for
mathematics and mathematics education.
Traditionally, the referential or picture theory of meaning has been dominant.
However, this is now widely regarded as inadequate (see, e.g., Ernest, 2018; Rorty,
1979). Instead, we can draw on Wittgenstein’s (1953) widely adopted “use” theory
of meaning. This says that much of meaning is given by use: “for a large class
of cases – though not for all – in which we employ the word ‘meaning’ it can be
deﬁned thus: the meaning of a word is its use in the language” (Wittgenstein, 1953,
I, Sec. 43). His account also treats sentences and other signs in the same way: a
large part of their meaning resides in their use. Wittgenstein allows for three other
sources of meaning – custom, rule following, and physiognomic meaning (Finch,
1995). We shall leave these to one side as they do not illuminate abduction much, if
at all.
Focusing on meaning as use, it is important to hedge this in the way that
Wittgenstein does. Namely, the use of words or signs is always located within
what he terms language games situated within forms of life. Thus, according to this
theory, the meanings of words and signs are the roles they play within conversations
located in social forms of life. But these are not free-ﬂoating conversations; they
are conversations centered on, and intrinsically a part of, shared activities with
a goal or object in mind. Thus, conversations are not just trivial decorations but
an integral part of social activities. The function of conversations is to facilitate
important joint and productive activities through directions, conﬁrmations, and other
communicative means. Thus, the meanings of the terms and signs employed is their
functions within these activities. Joint action within a form of life is usually directed
and punctuated by discourse. In other words, language in conversation is a tool
employed to further a joint activity and take it toward its goal.
Wittgenstein makes it clear that meanings depend on the language games in
which they are used, and “When language-games change, then there is a change
in concepts, and with the concepts the meanings of words change” (Wittgenstein,
1969, Sect. 65). Wittgenstein even goes on to say that with every new proof of a
mathematical theorem, the meaning of that theorem is changed.
At this point Robert Brandom’s (2000) inferentialist account of meaning is a
useful supplement. For Brandom, the meaning of words and sentences is largely
given by their use in language, but it is a central aspect of use, namely, the nexus of
inferential connections with other words and sentences.
According to the inferentialism of Robert Brandom, the meaning of any linguistic
expression (sentence, claim, principle, theory, rule, etc.) consists of sets of central
conceptual uses, namely, the consequences and logically justiﬁed applications of
the expression, and the reasonings that lead up to or justify the expression. The
inferential signiﬁcance or meaning of a claim also depends on background collateral
commitments, which is the beliefs and knowledge of the author or speaker of the
claim.

16
P. Ernest
For Brandom the inferentialist meaning of a word or sentence S is its connections
through reasoning with antecedents (reasonings leading to S) and its consequences
(reasonings that follow from S). These uses are shown through enacted utterances,
but meaning also reﬂects past uttered links and is always open toward the future.
So, the current meaning of a word or sentence, at any time, is partial and never
ﬁnal, for further patterns of use will supplement the meaning. Figure 1 is a
diagram representing the inferential theory of meaning of an expression illustrating
Brandom (2000). As noted above, it must be acknowledged that the antecedents and
consequents of the expression S must be located within the background context of
the utterance, with its collateral commitments.
Thus, according to the inferentialism of Brandom (2000), the meaning of any
linguistic expression (sentence, claim, principle, theory, rule, etc.) consists of set of
central conceptual uses:
1. The consequences and logically justiﬁed applications of the expression including
reasonings, conceptual uses, and representations that ﬂow from it
2. Reasonings that lead up to or justify the expression including assumptions,
conditions, and precursors
These reasonings are all located within the background collateral commitments
(beliefs, knowledge), and these also add to the inferential signiﬁcance of a claim or
expression.
It is clear that abduction ﬁts primarily in Part 2 here, among the antecedents of
the expression. Given an expression S, representing a surprising fact, observation,
or conclusion, abduction is the inference or other process that gives rise to a
hypothesis X that explains, justiﬁes, or otherwise gives rise to the expression S.
This is part of what Brandom includes within the inferential meaning of term or
sentence, and it includes its abductive precursors. But abduction is not just about
the precursor to a claim or sentence. Abduction also includes the surprising fact that
follows on from the claim or sentence. Thus, it includes some of the consequences
or subsequent associations where the link is weaker than straightforward or full-
• Assumptions
• Conditions
• Pre-cursors
Leading to
• EXPRESSION
Sentence or
concept
• Applications
• Conceptual
uses
Consequences
Fig. 1 The inferential meaning of an expression. (After Brandom (2000))

Abduction and Creativity in Mathematics
17
strength deduction. Abduction thus spreads over all three domains of Brandom’s
meaning triple. This includes the antecedents, the central expression, term or
sentence, and the consequents. Abduction does not encompass all of these but lies
within these domains of potential. The inferential meaning of a sentence is never
ﬁnal, for the list of antecedents and consequents is never complete. Likewise, the
list of abductive hypotheses can never be complete. It is always a potential list,
realized to a greater or lesser extent in practice.
It might be said that the third of Brandom’s domains corresponds to deduction,
for it includes the deductive consequences of the central sentence. The central term
or sentence might be compared with inductive reasoning, for it can be a gener-
alization, induced from its antecedents, which predicts new facts as consequence.
The ﬁrst of Brandom’s domains thus corresponds to abduction, for it is the missing
antecedent of the central sentence or claim which in turn gives rise to subsequent
conclusions, inferences, and facts. Although this is just an analogy, the comparison
with Brandom’s meaning theory is illuminating as it parallels the tripartite division
of reasoning principles into abductive, inductive, and deductive.
There is a sense in which Brandom’s inferentialist theory of meaning corre-
sponds, at least in part, with the ancient mathematician Pappus’ understanding of
the methods of analysis and synthesis. According to the standard interpretation,
analysis is a downstream process (drawing logical conclusions from the desired
theorem). In contrast, synthesis is an upstream process (looking for the premises
from which the conclusions can be drawn). Substituting temporal elements for the
logical sequencing in the inferential meaning schema, the before, after, and future
elements are all accommodated.
Hintikka and Remes (1974) offer another interpretation of Pappus’ method, in
which instead of logical consequence, they substitute the ideas of “corresponds to”
or “goes together with.” This leads to a looser interpretation of the relationship
of the antecedents and the succedents with the central expression whose proof is
sought. I shall draw upon this relaxation of the strict logical relation in considering
the application of this meaning schema to mathematics education.
Polya acknowledges that abduction is a heuristic inference, namely, an identi-
ﬁable kind of plausible reasoning. He claims that the logical form of abductive
reasoning is a kind of reverse modus ponens inference (Walton, 2004).
Modus ponens is the reasoning scheme that permits the deductive inference of B
from the antecedents A→B and A. This can be presented as the following natural
deduction scheme:
A       A B  
___________ 
B 
Abduction can be presented as a plausible reasoning scheme as follows:
B          X B 
____________ 
X? 

18
P. Ernest
In these ﬁgures the horizontal line represents a division of the reasoning into
the space of premises and the conclusion space. It is also analogous to the vertical
addition or subtraction calculation, where the horizontal line marks off the answer,
drawn from the operation on the preceding numbers (e.g., the addends).
In the second scheme, X? represents X as having the modality of possibility. The
fact is that X is a plausible antecedent of B but it does not have the logical status
of a deductive conclusion. Rather than launching into full-blooded modal logic that
formalizes possibility and necessity operators, the use of the question mark here
is just an informal indication of the modal status of hypothesis X. If X was not
presented with this modiﬁed status (X?), the inference schema could be a source of
contradiction. For if F stands for a false statement, then whatever the status of B, the
implication statement F→B is correct (falsity implies anything). Nevertheless, the
following scheme is safeguarded:
B          F  B 
____________ 
F?  
For even if the conclusion F is false, F? remains possible. That is, F? is true or
false, and in the particular case where F is false, this holds true.
From the perspective of Brandom’s inferentialist meaning theory, X? is a
plausible antecedent for the expression B. This scheme, with its use of the variable
X, is also intended to suggest that there can be, indeed there must be, many
antecedents for the expression B, although not all of these will stand in the abductive
relation to the conclusion B.
In the contexts of mathematics and mathematics education, there will be many
different types of antecedents and consequences for an expression S making up its
meaning. The types of reasoning include a much broader range than those that we
normally label as deductive reasoning. Many antecedents will suggest the expres-
sion S as a tentative conclusion or as a plausible generalization. Likewise, many of
the reasonings that follow on from S will not be strictly logical inferences. Brandom
himself describes the relationship between the antecedents and consequents of S,
which make up its meaning, as moves in the space or game of giving and asking for
reasons. Understood liberally this can include antecedents and consequents that are
not strictly linked by deduction to the sentence or expression S. The full range of
reasons that we may give or ask for in arguments or conversations includes instances
that are more loosely linked to the inquiry than by logical inference.
Thus far, my discussion of types of inference has been very abstract. None of
the mathematically speciﬁc modes of reasoning have been discussed in the context
of Brandom’s meaning theory. However, many speciﬁc types of inference and even
weaker forms of derivation, consequence, and association are to be found within
mathematics. Within mathematics and school mathematics, some of the possible
types of reasoning involved include the following, listed approximately from the
simpler to the more rigorous types of reasoning:

Abduction and Creativity in Mathematics
19
•
Copying the pattern shown in an example in a further example
•
Following a pattern or rule to give further examples or instances
•
Solving a problem using heuristics
•
Reasoning from a representation (table, graph, equation, diagram, etc.)
•
Reasoning from observations, results, conjectures
•
Reasoning by analogy, or metaphorically, to illustrate, represent, or justify
•
Reasoning by using a model (concrete or abstract) to illustrate, represent, or
justify
•
Reasoning from a model to derive speciﬁc results and predictions
•
Arguing from general to the particular (specializing, instantiating)
•
Reasoning from the particular to the general (induction, abstracting, abduction)
•
Informal deduction using principles of logical inference
•
Formal deductive inferences from axioms using rules of deduction or other
systems of deduction
This is a far from complete list, but it illustrates some of the plausible forms of
reasoning that can be employed to loosely derive an expression from its antecedents
or to draw conclusions from an expression in mathematics. As remarked above,
already in Hintikka and Remes (1974), there is the suggestion for the relaxation of
the strict logical relations in the application of the methods of analysis and synthesis
which is exempliﬁed here in applying Brandom’s meaning theory to mathematics
education.
In each case the formal reasoning and the antecedents employed need not be
on the same level as the consequents. They may be more abstract, at an equivalent
level of abstraction, or at a lower level. In this respect they may differ from strict
deductive arguments where conclusions and antecedents are often on the same level.
As with inductive arguments, there may be a difference in the level of particularity
or speciﬁcity and abstraction. The inclusion of some of these antecedents and
consequents very likely exceeds what Brandom would like to see, according to his
inferentialist schema. But in the area of mathematical invention, one needs to be
open to more informal reasonings and associations than the normal deductive logic
admits. Even mathematicians use informal forms of reasoning in their proofs that
fall short of formal deductions, so it is not surprising that such forms of reasoning
are also employed in school mathematics (Rav, 1999) .
Abduction in Practice
A number of studies of abduction in practice have been reported. Kim et al.
(2021) conducted an ethnomethodological study of abductive reasoning used by
student teachers while “tinkering.” They observed three pairs of student teachers to
document how they engaged in reasoning while tinkering with robots to reprogram
their behaviors:

20
P. Ernest
Abduction was often observed in debugging episodes in that participants (a) determined
plausible cases (causes) that explained misfunctioning code (the result) (b) by applying
the best rule at the moment that connected the case to the result, and (c) eliminated
irrelevant rules when realizing a disconnect between the case and the result through seeing
reprogrammed robot behaviors. (Kim et al., 2021, p. 5)
Their ﬁndings were summarized by the following themes:
Theme 1: Tacit rules were applied in search for best explanations.
Theme 2: Rules were eliminated based on perceptual observations.
Theme 3: Reﬂective abstraction was seldom observed.
Theme 4: Generating multiple hypotheses in advance was an unnatural requirement.
(Kim et al., 2021, p.6)
Thus, although abductive reasoning was at work, it was often implicit rather than
explicit. The processes involved what Eco (1983) describes as “creative abduction”
rather than overcoded or undercoded abduction. Indeed, undercoded abduction was
avoided according to theme 4 of the ﬁndings, for it was deemed sufﬁcient to generate
one hypothesis at a time and then test or eliminate that through trial-and-error
methods.
Hidayah et al. (2020) conducted a study of 58 secondary school students solving
algebraic problems. Their study classiﬁes the types of reasoning employed by
students in attempting to solve these problems. Their four categories of results
are types of student response. These comprised what they termed the (1) creative
conjectures type, (2) fact optimization type, (3) factual error type, and (4) mistaken
fact type.
Students of the creative conjecture-type group solved the problem. They made
conjectures based on the given facts by writing, describing, or sketching so as
to design their problem-solving strategy. Some of them had some doubts about
the solution. Consequently, they developed new conjectures outside the speciﬁc
problem question but still related to the question. In solving the problem, this group
of students developed new ideas related to the questions using abductive reasoning.
Among the fact optimization-type group (2), students made conjectures about
the answers to problems, and then they conﬁrmed the conjectures with deductive
reasoning. Thus, they can be said to have used abduction ﬁrst and deduction
subsequently. Among the factual error-type group (3), students added facts drawn
from outside of the problem to help their solutions, but the facts used were incorrect,
leading to incorrect conclusions. In the mistaken fact-type group (4), students
assumed that the question itself stated a truth, so it was employed as a fact. As a
result, their conclusions were also incorrect. The students classiﬁed among the ﬁrst
two types successfully used abductive strategies to solve the problems.
Abduction in Mathematics Education Research
Reid (2018) offers an overview or meta-analysis of abductive research within
mathematics education:

Abduction and Creativity in Mathematics
21
Three ‘lineages’ can be identiﬁed in the mathematics education literature. One (predomi-
nantly German) lineage begins with Voigt’s work on methodology and leads to Hoffmann’s
use of abductive reasoning in a theory of learning. A second (based in the United States)
focuses on abductive reasoning in problem solving. A third (mainly Italian) lineage focuses
on the role of abductive reasoning in the ‘cognitive unity’ between conjecturing and
proving.
The ﬁrst of these strands looks at abductive reasoning as part of a theory of learning.
Reid highlights the work of Hoffmann (2001) in developing a theory of learning
in which signs mediate between different forms of knowledge and which makes
learning possible. This is primarily a semiotic theory of learning and as such it
foregrounds the role of signs.
The second strand concerns abductive reasoning in conjecturing when solving
problems. For example, Cifarelli (1999) is interested in activities in which a learner
needs to discover mathematical coherences to solve a problem. In particular, he
looks at ways in which abductive reasoning fosters an intermingling of problem-
posing and problem-solving activities. As he says, he is mainly focused on the
function of abduction, which “furnishes the reasoner with a novel hypothesis to
account for surprising facts” (Cifarelli, 1999, p. 217).
Ferrando (2006) examined students’ problem solving in calculus. Inspired by
Cifarelli’s (1999) idea “that an abductive inference may serve to organize, re-
organize, and transform a problem solver’s actions” (Ferrando, 2006, p. 58), she
distinguishes between facts, conjectures, statements, and actions. She argues that
both statements and actions can be abductive:
An abductive statement is a proposition describing a hypothesis built in order to corroborate
or to explain a conjecture. . . . An abductive action represents the creation, or the ‘taking
into account’ a justifying hypothesis or a cause. (Ferrando, 2006, p. 59)
The third strand identiﬁed by Reid (2018) is about abductive reasoning in the
dialectic between conjecturing and proving. Boero et al. (1996) proposed that the
argumentation processes involved in ﬁrst forming a conjecture involve elements
that are then employed in the proof of the conjecture, so that the two processes
of conjecturing and proving have a unity. They termed this idea cognitive unity. It
is relevant here because abductive reasoning plays an important part in cognitive
unity. This is manifested in a reversal of the abduction used in conjecturing to
produce the deduction used in proving the theorem. Arzarello et al. (1998, p.
78) explicitly discuss “the dialectic between an explorative, groping phase and an
organizing strategy which converges towards some piece of validated knowledge.”
This is discussed further in the next section, in the context of the philosophy of
mathematics.
Abduction and the Philosophy of Mathematics
The main concerns of the philosophy of mathematics in the twentieth century
have been epistemological and ontological. The lesser of these two interests is

22
P. Ernest
ontological, concerned with investigating the nature and being of mathematical
objects. Although there is some attention to the social construction of mathematical
objects, Platonism has been the main ontological position among mathematicians
and philosophers. Platonism views mathematical objects as eternal and superhuman,
so the issue of their discovery or formation does not really arise.
The dominant of these two interests has been epistemological, with a primary
concern for the justiﬁcation of mathematical results. The main instrument for this is
mathematical proof which is deductive proof encompassing various modes of infer-
ence including mathematical induction. Although proof has always been a concern
of the philosophy of mathematics, one of the triggers for this renewed interest in
epistemology was the emergence of paradoxes, anomalies, and contradictions in
new mathematical theories at the end of the nineteenth century. This gave a great
impetus for research in the foundations of mathematics. Indeed, it was regarded as
a crisis in the philosophy of mathematics, and various schools of thought emerged,
primarily concerned to give mathematics ﬁrm foundations. Throughout all of this
work, the attention was on justiﬁcation, proof, and other means of warranting and
vouchsaﬁng mathematical results and truth. From Frege onward concerns with
invention in mathematics, including the creation of new hypothesis claims and
theories, has been dismissed as merely a psychological interest and not the proper
concern of the philosophy of mathematics.
The philosophy of science has also focused on the testing and justiﬁcation of
scientiﬁc theories as opposed to their discovery or invention. Popper (1959) care-
fully distinguishes between the context of discovery and the context of justiﬁcation.
He regards only the latter as the legitimate concern of the philosophy of science.
He dismissed concerns with the context of discovery as beyond the scope of the
philosophy of science. This is ironic given that the title of his book in English is
The Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery. Even his protégé and successor, Lakatos (1976),
one of the ﬁrst in the new philosophy of mathematical practice tradition, named
his key work “Proofs and Refutations,” a homage to Popper’s (1963) work’s title
“Conjectures and Refutations.” Lakatos (1976) claimed to be more concerned with
justiﬁcation than discovery in mathematics. However, this book, which among other
things traces the development of the Euler-Cauchy theorem, represents a key work in
the emergent philosophy of mathematical practice tradition. This, at last, introduces
discovery and invention as proper concerns of the philosophy of mathematics.
Lakatos (1976) begins his philosophical and historical account with a preliminary
conjecture relating the numbers of edges, sides, and vertices of a polyhedron.
He then devotes much of his work to the processes of criticism, redeﬁnition,
revised proofs, refutations, and revised conjectures, concerning this relationship.
This ultimately leads to the accepted version of the theorem and its proof. Even in
this account, he omits the initial abductive stage in which the preliminary conjecture
is formulated. Nevertheless, his dialectical interplay between the processes of
formation and discovery versus those of refutation and validation opens the door to
the context of discovery in mathematics. Indeed, there is a role for abduction in some
of his developmental phases in which hypotheses and conjectures are improved and
replaced.

Abduction and Creativity in Mathematics
23
In his later work, Lakatos (1978) extends his logic of mathematical discovery to
the twin processes of analysis and synthesis which gives a place, albeit implicitly,
to the processes of abduction in the formation of mathematical knowledge. Lakatos
describes the machinery of proofs and refutations within the framework of Pappu-
sian analysis-synthesis: “The analysis provides the hidden assumptions needed for
the synthesis. The analysis contains the creative innovation, the synthesis is a routine
task” (Lakatos, 1978, p. 93):
However, the hidden lemmas are false . . . But nevertheless we can extricate from the
analysis (or from the synthesis) a ‘proof-generated theorem’ by incorporating the conditions
articulated in the lemmas. (Lakatos, 1978, p. 95)
Lakatos’ (1976) theory of proofs and refutations consists in reﬁning an existing
conjecture and proving it. At the beginning, there is a conjecture, some sentence S
which possibly holds within the target domain D. Through a thought experiment,
a surprising or interesting situation emerges, namely, a counterexample c to the
sentence S, which has a global character. This raises the problematic situation
of explaining the counterexample, that is, of producing the rule of which this
counterexample is a case.
Through a new abduction, we get such a reason or rule R. The stage is now
set for a new resolutive move, investigating how the cause of the counterexample
and the conjecture S might be connected. In fact, R is possibly a reason why the
conjecture does not hold; hence it is reasonable to look within the context D for some
new hypothesis, say S′, which eliminates R and, consequently, the counterexample.
Lakatos (1978) describes how the subject can ﬁnd such a S′ within the context D,
through a dynamic exploration, namely, how S′ is produced with a new abduction.
Arzarello et al. (1998) propose a model based on Lakatos’ work to explain the
two main modalities of mathematical action. These consist of creating (explor-
ing/selecting conjectures) and warranting (constructing proofs) for mathematical
knowledge. They claim that any process of exploration-conjecturing-proving fea-
tures a complex switching from the one modality to the other and back. This requires
a high level of ﬂexibility for the mathematician in tuning themselves to the right
mode. Their model aims to explain how the transition from the one modality to the
other happens. Their model goes through three phases.
Phase 1
Within the explorative modality, the process starts with the use of some heuristic
to guess what happens in particular examples, thus selecting a conjecture. This is
a working hypothesis to be checked, which, typically, is not in conditional form.
To conﬁrm it new explorations are made by using some heuristics. At this stage
the subject expresses their hypothesis as an abduction, namely, a sort of reverse
deduction. In fact, generally the subject sees what rule it is the case of. Having
selected the piece of their knowledge that they believe to be right, the conditional
form is virtually present. Its ingredients are all present, but their relationships are
reversed with respect to the conditional form. The direction in which the subject

24
P. Ernest
sees the things is still in the stream of the exploration, and the control of the meaning
is ascending.
Phase 2
A switching to the deductive form happens, because of the abduction. Now the
control is descending, and we have an exploration of the situation, where things
are looked at in the opposite way: not in order to have hints for getting a conjecture,
but in order to see in them why the regularity that the abduction provides works.
The reversed way of looking at the reasoning leads the subject to formulate the
conjecture in the conditional form. Now the modality is typically heading toward
that of a proof.
Phase 3
Now suitable, possibly fresh, heuristics are used, in order to prove the conjecture.
Here the descending control is crucial: it allows the subject to interpret the
relationships in the way that produces proof steps. First, they have a local character,
and then they are organized in a more global and articulated way. In this last phase,
conjectures are possibly reformulated in order to combine better proof steps, and
new explorations are possibly made to test them.
The philosophy of mathematical practice, which Lakatos’ work helped to launch,
no longer rigidly separates the contexts of discovery and justiﬁcation. As Arzarello
et al. (1998) show in their scheme, the contexts of discovery and justiﬁcation are
inextricably interwoven in the creative processes of mathematicians.
In this emergent tradition, ethnomethodological studies examine mathemati-
cians’ day-to-day practices in generating and validating new knowledge. Further,
social studies of mathematics look at mathematicians’ beliefs and the role of their
interactions and institutions in the development and furthering of mathematics.
But although increasing attention is devoted to the discovery and creation of
mathematics, no formulaic methodology of creativity exists or, in my view, is
possible. However, acknowledging that the process of abduction is involved in
mathematical creativity is a big step forward. It enables a deeper analysis of
the processes involved. Part of the creativity of mathematicians is to create new
techniques, methods, new ways of deﬁning mathematical ideas, modes of argument,
and so on.
If mathematical creativity could be deﬁned and mechanized, then it could be
conducted by computers without human input. But mechanized theorem proving
has only produced trivial results because the description of past practices can
never encompass future innovation. That is why we recognize the essential role
of abduction in mathematical creativity, and it gives us a tool for analyzing these
processes. But they can never be brought to the ﬁnal canonical encoded state that
we ﬁnd in deductive methods. Indeed, even the mathematical proof techniques
employed in mathematical practice are themselves not satisfactorily captured by
logic. Theoretically, formal proofs are fully syntactic. But as Rav (1999, p. 11)
points out, the informal proofs “of customary mathematical discourse, hav[e] an

Abduction and Creativity in Mathematics
25
irreducible semantic content.” To demand that all published proofs were fully
syntactic, apart from the explosion in size of journals and papers this would lead
to, would force creative mathematics to grind to a halt. More than slowing down
mathematical creativity as in a “work to rule,” demanding fully rigorous proofs
would make even the simplest inferential step unacceptably long.
The creative jumps in reasoning in accepted papers need an expert mathematician
for judgment and remain several steps away from purely mechanical veriﬁcation. It
is therefore no surprise that the processes of abduction employed in mathematical
discovery are even less amenable to explicit speciﬁcation than those of deductive
reasoning. Furthermore, human judgment as to what is of interest and value is
something that cannot, as yet, be written as a program. In my view, like the rest
of creativity, it is something that will never be captured mechanically.
Conclusion
This chapter offers a review of current thought on abduction and creativity in
mathematics. Mathematics is a mysterious subject which draws its inspiration from
the domain of pure ideas, unlike empirical science which tries to explain the world.
Both of these disciplines use abduction to generate explanatory hypotheses about
their respective worlds. But the world of mathematics is not simply given to our
senses. In this respect it is unlike science where our senses can be supplemented
and enlarged with the most penetrating extensions such as telescopes, microscopes,
and cloud chambers. The domain of mathematics is fully abstract, so the materials
for abduction remain in the mind, in conversation, and in the lecture room.
Nevertheless, these domains offer plenty of room for speculations about the patterns
that link and indeed create mathematical objects. No mathematician has ever
claimed, unlike some overconﬁdent Victorian physicists, that the ﬁeld is exhausted.
The potential for creativity is boundless.
Just as with all sciences, the conduit to new creative mathematicians is that of
schooling. School mathematics is traditionally made up of routine exercises, but
there are moves to try and bring more creativity into it through problem solving and
problem posing (as well as some of the other dimensions indicated above). In both
problem solving and posing, abduction has an important place to play. The goal in
bringing creativity into school mathematics is twofold. First, to foster in miniature
the creativity manifested by all mathematicians, resting as it does on feelings of
understanding, excitement, and joy. To the extent that this can be achieved for
every student, it is surely character building and empowering. Second, as the
means to developing more mathematicians, enhancing the processes of education
to encourage more to follow this path must be a beneﬁt. The growing need for
mathematicians across a whole range of professions from ﬁnance and economics to
managers and mathematics teachers calls out for improved teaching practices.
Research mathematics, at least in the domain of pure mathematics, is all about
creativity, and here abduction plays an essential part. We have seen how meaning as
use theories, and inferentialism in particular, is bound up with the use of abduction.

26
P. Ernest
These ideas lead to broader understandings of the relationships between terms,
concepts, sentences, and theories, with signiﬁcant meaning links that are not as
strong as formal deductions. Creativity depends on a larger and richer array of
connections between concepts, terms, conjectures, theorems, and theories than
deduction alone can offer. Overall, it can be said that Peirce’s ideas of abduction
offer a deeper understanding of creativity, both in school and research mathematics.
Such an enriched understanding offers prospects for enhancing creativity in school
mathematics, as well as increasing the numbers of creative mathematicians and
further extending the ﬁeld.
References
Arzarello, F., Andriano, V., Olivero, F., & Robutti, O. (1998). Abduction and conjecturing in
mathematics. Philosophica, 61(1), 77–94.
Boero, P., Garuti, R., Lemut, E., & Mariotti, M. A. (1996). Challenging the traditional school
approach to theorems: A hypothesis about the cognitive unity of theorems. In L. Puig & A.
Gutierrez (Eds.), Proceedings of the twentieth conference of the international group for the
psychology of mathematics education (Vol. 2, pp. 113–120). PME.
Brandom, R. B. (2000). Articulating reasons: An introduction to inferentialism. Harvard University
Press.
Burton, L. (1984). Thinking things through. Blackwell.
Burton, L. (2004). Mathematicians as enquirers: Learning about learning mathematics. Kluwer
Academic.
Carpenter, T. P., Moser, J. M., & Romberg, T. (1982). Addition and subtraction: A cognitive
perspective. Lawrence Erlbaum.
Cifarelli, V. (1999). Abductive inference: Connections between problem posing and solving. In
O. Zaslavsky (Ed.), Proceedings of the 23rd conference of the international group for the
psychology of mathematics education (Vol. 2, pp. 217–224). PME.
Cohen, P. J. (1966). Set theory and the continuum hypothesis. Benjamin.
Corcoran, J. (2003). Aristotle’s prior analytics and Boole’s laws of thought. History and
Philosophy of Logic, 24(4), 261–288.
Devlin, K. (2019). What is mathematical creativity, how do we develop it, and should we try
to measure it? Part 1, Mathematical Association of America website. Retrieved 13 March
2022 via https://www.mathvalues.org/masterblog/2019/1/25/what-is-mathematical-creativity-
how-do-we-develop-it-and-should-we-try-to-measure-it-part-1?rq=creativity
Eco, U. (1983). Horns, hooves, insteps: Some hypotheses on three types of abduction. In U. Eco &
T. Sebeok (Eds.), The sign of three: Dupin, Holmes, Peirce (pp. 198–220). Indiana University
Press. 1983.
Ernest, P. (2013). The psychology of mathematics. Amazon Digital Services, Kindle edition.
Ernest, P. (2018). A semiotic theory of mathematical text. Philosophy of Mathematics Education
Journal, 33.
Fann, K. T. (1970). Peirce’s theory of abduction. Martinus Nijhoff.
Ferrando, E. (2006). The abductive system. In J. Novotná, H. Moraová, M. Krátká, & N. Stehlíková
(Eds.), Proceedings of the thirtieth conference of the international group for the psychology of
mathematics education (Vol. 3, pp. 57–64).
Finch, H. L. (1995). Wittgenstein. Element Books.
Frege, G. (1879). Begriffsschrift. In J. van Heijenoort (Ed.), (1967) From Frege to Gödel: A source
book in mathematical logic (pp. 1–82). Harvard University Press.
Hadamard, J. (1945). Essay on the psychology of invention in the mathematical ﬁeld. Princeton
University Press.

Abduction and Creativity in Mathematics
27
Hidayah, I. N., Sa’dijah, C., Subanji, A., & Sudirman, B. (2020). Characteristics of students’
abductive reasoning in solving algebra problems. Journal on Mathematics Education, 11(3),
347–362.
Hintikka, J. (2007). Socratic epistemology: Explorations of knowledge–seeking by questioning.
Cambridge University Press.
Hintikka, J., & Remes, U. (1974). The method of analysis. Reidel Publishing Company.
Hoffmann, M. H. G. (2001). Skizze einer semiotischen Theorie des Lernens. Journal für
Mathematik-Didaktik, 22(3–4), 231–251.
Kim, C., Baabdullah, A., Lee, E., Dinç, E., & Zhang, A. Y. (2021). An ethnomethodological study
of abductive reasoning while tinkering. AERA Open, 7(1), 1–25. https://journals.sagepub.com/
action/doSearch?target=default&ContribAuthorStored=Belland%2C+Brian+R,B.R
Lakatos, I. (Ed.). (1968). The problem of inductive logic. North Holland Publishing.
Lakatos, I. (1976). Proofs and refutations, the logic of mathematical discovery. Cambridge
University Press.
Lakatos, I. (1978). Mathematics, science and epistemology: Philosophical papers (Vol. 2).
Cambridge University Press.
Liljedahl, P., & Sriraman, B. (2006). Musings on mathematical creativity. For the Learning of
Mathematics, 26(1), 17–19.
Magnani, L. (2001). Abduction, reason and science: Processes of discovery and explanation.
Kluwer Academic.
Niss, M., & Højgaard, T. (2019). Mathematical competencies revisited. Educational Studies in
Mathematics, 102(1), 9–28.
Peirce, C. S. (1867). On the natural classiﬁcation of arguments. In Peirce (1960), vol. 2, pp. 461–
516.
Peirce, C. S. (1902). Minute logic. In Peirce (1960), vol. 2, pp. 1–118.
Peirce, C. S. (1903).Lectures on pragmatism. In Peirce, (1960), vol. 5, pp. 14–212.
Peirce, C. S. (1960). Collected papers. Harvard University Press.
Polya, G. (1945). How to solve it. Princeton University Press.
Popper, K. (1959). The logic of scientiﬁc discovery. Hutchinson.
Popper, K. (1963). Conjectures and refutations (Revised fourth edition 1972). Routledge and
Kegan Paul.
Rav, Y. (1999). Why do we prove theorems?. Philosophia Mathematica (Series 3), 7, 5–41.
Reid, D. A. (2018). Abductive reasoning in mathematics education: Approaches to and theorisa-
tions of a complex idea. EURASIA Journal of Mathematics, Science and Technology Education,
14(9), 1–13.
Rorty, R. (1979). Philosophy and the mirror of nature. Princeton University Press.
Schoenfeld, A. (1992). Learning to think mathematically. In D. A. Grouws (Ed.), Handbook of
research on mathematics teaching and learning (pp. 334–370). Macmillan. 1992.
Shank, G. (1988). Semiotics. Plenum Press.
Shank, G. (1998). The extraordinary ordinary powers of abductive reasoning. Theory & Psychol-
ogy, 8(6), 841–860.
Sriraman, B. (2004). The characteristics of mathematical creativity. The Mathematics Educator,
14(1), 19–34.
Walton, D. (2004). Abductive reasoning. University of Alabama Press.
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical investigations (G. E. M. Anscombe, Trans.). Basil Black-
well.
Wittgenstein, L. (1969). On certainty. Blackwell.

