122
Correlations in Quantum Mechanics
6. R. B. Grifﬁths: Consistent resolution of some relativistic quantum paradoxes. Phys. Rev. A 66,
062101 (2002)
7. R. B. Grifﬁths: Bohmian mechanics and consistent histories. Phys. Lett. A 261, 227 (1999)
8. R. B. Grifﬁths: Probabilities and quantum reality: are there correlata? Found. Phys. 33, 1423
(2003).
Copenhagen Interpretation
See  Born rule; Consistent Histories; Metaphysics in Quantum Mechanics; Non-
locality; Orthodox Interpretation; Schr¨odinger’s Cat; Transactional Interpretation.
Correlations in Quantum Mechanics
Richard Healey
The statistical algorithm of quantum mechanics predicts that measurements will
reveal correlations among the values of magnitudes (“ observables”). Whenever
such measurements have been performed, they have borne out the predictions. But
the patterns exhibited by these correlations can be difﬁcult to square with classical
intuitions – about probability, about the nature and properties of quantum systems,
and about causal connections between systems.
In a  Hilbert space formulation, an observable is represented by a  self-adjoint
operator, while the state of a system is represented by a normalized vector (perhaps a
 wave function) or more generally a  density operator ˆW (a self-adjoint operator
with unit trace). If {O1, ..., On} is a set of observables on a system represented
by pairwise commuting operators { ˆO1, ..., ˆOn}, then quantum mechanics predicts
that measured values of all these observables in state ˆW will conform to a joint
probability distribution pr(O1 ∈1, ..., On ∈n) given by
pr(O1 ∈1, ..., On ∈n) = T r

ˆW ˆO1(1)..... ˆOn(n)

(1)
where ˆOi(i) is the element of the spectral resolution of ˆOi corresponding to Borel
set i of possible values (i = 1, ..., n). If any two operators ˆOi, ˆOj in such a set
fail to commute, then no joint distribution is predicted.
For example, a simple quantum mechanical model of a Hydrogen atom  Bohr’s
atom model will predict a joint probability distribution for energy, total angular
momentum, and z-component of angular momentum in any state; but it will never
predict a joint probability distribution for energy, position and momentum, nor for
z-component and x-component of angular momentum.

Correlations in Quantum Mechanics
123
C
The orthodox view of this reticence takes non-commuting operators to represent
incompatible observables–pairs of observables that can never be jointly measured
with arbitrary precision because at most one of each pair may have a precise value
in any state. In general, there are no theoretical restrictions on the precision with
which any single observable may be measured. So measurement cannot be taken
always faithfully to reveal the value of the measured observable.
A number of “no-go” theorems may be cited in support of this orthodox view
[6, 11]. But when are the joint distributions that quantum mechanics does predict
compatible with an underlying joint distribution for all observables? Fine [4] shows
that the necessary and sufﬁcient condition for four two-valued observables Ai, Bj
(i, j = 1, 2) to have a joint distribution compatible with the given joints is that the
following system of (BCH) inequalities be satisﬁed, for i ̸= i′ and j ̸= j′:
−1 ⩽pr(Ai, Bj) + pr(Ai, Bj′) + pr(Ai′, Bj′) −pr(Ai′, Bj)
−pr(Ai) −pr(Bj′) ⩽0
As we shall see, for some observables and quantum states quantum mechanics
predicts values for the terms in this expression that violate the inequalities: these
predictions have been veriﬁed. Such observables then have no joint distribution.
The state of a non-relativistic particle may be represented in a tensor product
Hilbert space H = H1 ⊗H2, where H2 is used to represent its  spin. But not ev-
ery vector in a product space is itself expressible as a tensor product of vectors, one
from each space. A vector state of the form | ψ1⟩⊗· · · ⊗| ψn⟩is said to be sepa-
rable. The state of a pair of particles may also be represented in a tensor product of
the spaces used to represent their individual states. When their joint state is nonsep-
arable between these component spaces, the particles are said to be entangled, and
their state exhibits state holism ( Holism in Quantum Mechanics). The total spin
space for a pair of spin-1/2 particles is a tensor product of two-dimensional spin
spaces that includes nonseparable spin states, including the singlet spin state
| ψs⟩=
1
√
2
(|↑⟩⊗|↓⟩−|↓⟩⊗|↑⟩)
(2)
Any spin component Ai on one particle is compatible with any spin component Bj
on the other, so quantum mechanics predicts a joint distribution for every such pair.
There are many choices of four such observables for which these violate the (BCH)
inequalities in the singlet state and other entangled states.
Quantum mechanics predicts that measurements of the same spin-component on
each particle in the singlet state will yield different results with probability 1. Ein-
stein believed that if particles in such a pair are widely separated, then each must
have its own real state, and any inﬂuence on the state of one can have no direct
inﬂuence on the state of the other [3]. On that basis his argument would conclude
that each particle in the singlet state has a deﬁnite value of spin-component in ev-
ery direction. But every way of distributing such values among many pairs will

124
Correlations in Quantum Mechanics
yield a statistical distribution conforming to the (BCH) inequalities [2, 13]. So un-
less the statistics systematically differ between measured and unmeasured pairs,
measurements conﬁrming (quantum mechanically-predicted) statistics in violation
of (BCH) inequalities refute this conclusion. These measurements have been suc-
cessfully performed in circumstances where the event of choice and execution of
a measurement on one particle is spacelike separated from the analogous event on
the other [1]. Not only is there no known mechanism by which the measurement on
one particle could inﬂuence the result of the other measurement: any such inﬂuence
would have to be superluminal, undetectable and unpreventable, and extraordinarily
selective. Although Einstein dismissed this possibility as “spooky” action at a dis-
tance, the observed violations of (BCH) inequalities show we may have to live with
just such a novel kind of non-local “causal” connection [10], [ Causal Inference
and EPR].
But causation is a relation between distinct events. Perhaps it is wrong to regard
each particle, or measurement event, as a distinct entity, each with its own properties.
If a pair together constitute an indivisible whole, then the question of causal relations
among its parts doesn’t arise. The clearest violations of (BCH) inequalities involve
the polarization states of pairs of photons ( light quantum). A two-photon state
of the quantized electromagnetic ﬁeld is perhaps best not thought to consist of two
distinct particles–certainly not if each were considered to have its own trajectory.
From this perspective, violation of (BCH) inequalities only seems strange if one
fails to acknowledge the fundamental holism underlying quantum mechanics. It is
neither the properties of quantum objects nor their probabilistic relations that strain
our non-classical intuitions, but the objects themselves. Such ontological holism is
also suggested by the fact that violations of (BCH)-type inequalities occur even in
the vacuum state of a quantum ﬁeld [14].
Leggett [9] has proposed a test of macroscopic realism that relies on an unusual
application of (BCH)-type inequalities involving measurements on a single system.
Here the quantum correlations that cause problems for a classical world-view con-
cern measurements at different times of the current circulating in an RF SQUID.
There are quantum mechanical states that are  superpositions of different direc-
tions of current circulation. Assuming these are measurable without disturbance,
then measurements of the current at carefully chosen times will reveal correlations
that are incompatible with the assumption that the current is always circulating ei-
ther one way or the other.
Investigations of the nature of light have uncovered correlations that seemed sur-
prising on the assumption that light is “composed” of photons. Hanbury, Brown
and Twiss [5] investigated correlations between the responses of two separated de-
tectors to a weak light source. They expected the responses of the detectors to be
uncorrelated, on the grounds that each photon could activate only one detector at a
time. Instead they found strong correlations. These could be explained by a  semi-
classical model in which light is treated classically but the detectors are treated
quantum-mechanically.The anticorrelations expected on the photon hypothesis only
showed up much later after the incoherent light source was replaced by a source to
which single excited atoms made independent coherent contributions [7, 8].

Correspondence Principle
125
C
Correlations play a starring role in some proposed interpretations of quantum me-
chanics. Mermin [12] claims that while correlations have physical reality, that which
they correlate does not. This view of correlations without correlata has produced
philosophical debate but little consensus.
See Consistent histories, Ignorance interpretation, Ithaca Interpretation, Many
Worlds Interpretation, Modal Interpretation, Orthodox Interpretation, Transactional
Interpretation.
Primary Literature
1. A. Aspect, J. Dalibard, G. Roger, Experimental test of Bell’s Inequalities using time-varying
analyzers, Physical Review Letters 49: 1804–7, 1982.
2. J.S. Bell, On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox, Physics 1: 195–200, 1964.
3. A. Einstein, Quantentheorie und Wirklichkeit, Dialectica 2: 320–4, 1948.
4. A. Fine, Joint distributions, quantum correlations, and commuting observables, Journal of
Mathematical Physics 23: 1306–10, 1982.
5. R. Hanbury-Brown and R.Q. Twiss, Correlations between photons in two coherent beams of
light, Nature 177: 27–9, 1956.
Secondary Literature
6. J. Bub, Interpreting the Quantum World, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1997.
7. P. Grangier, G. Roger and A. Aspect, Experimental evidence for a photon anticorrelation effect
on a beamsplitter, Europhysics Letters 1: 173–9, 1986.
8. M. Hennrich, A. Kuhn, and G. Rempe, Transition from antibunching to bunching in cavity
QED, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94: 53604-1–4, 2005.
9. A.J. Leggett and A. Garg, Quantum mechanics versus macroscopic realism: Is the ﬂux there
when nobody looks?, Phys. Rev. Lett. 54: 857–60, 1985.
10. T. Maudlin, Quantum Non-locality and Relativity, Blackwell, Oxford 1994.
11. N.D. Mermin, Simple uniﬁed form for the major no-hidden-variables theorems, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 65: 3373–7, 1990
12. N.D. Mermin, What is quantum mechanics trying to tell us?, American Journal of Physics 66:
753–67, 1998.
13. A. Shimony, Bell’s Theorem at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/bell-theorem/.
14. S.J. Summers and R.F. Werner, The vacuum violates Bell’s inequalities, Phys. Lett. A 110:
257–9, 1985.
Correspondence Principle
Brigitte Falkenburg
The correspondence principle is due to Niels Bohr (1885–1962).According to Bohr,
the principle justiﬁes the use of formal classical expressions in quantum theory and
a physical interpretation of quantum theory in terms of classical concepts. The prin-
ciple emerged from his use of classical concepts and formal analogies in  Bohr’s

