Symmetry
779
S
10. G. C. Wick, A. S. Wightman, E. P. Wigner. Superselection rule for charge. Phys. Rev., 1(12),
3267–3269 (1970)
11. W. H. Zurek. Decoherence, einselection, and the quantum origins of the classical. Rev. Mod.
Phys., 75, 715–775 (2003)
Secondary Literature
12. N.N. Bogolubov et al: General Principles of Quantum Field Theory, volume 10 of ‘Mathemat-
ical Physics and Applied Mathematics’. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1990
13. R. Haag: Local Quantum Physics: Fields, Particles, Algebras. ‘Texts and Monographs in
Physics’. Springer Verlag, Berlin, second revised and enlarged edition, 1996.
14. E. Joos et al: Decoherence and the Appearence of a Classical World in Quantum Theory.
Springer Verlag, Berlin, second revised and enlarged edition, 2003.
15. S. Weinberg: The Quantum Theory of Fields. Volume I Foundations. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1995
Symmetry
K. Mainzer
Symmetry concepts play a central role in physics [13]. The  invariance ( covari-
ance) properties of a system under speciﬁc symmetry transformations can either be
related to the conservation laws of physics or be able to establish the structure of the
fundamental interactions. This is the most essential aspect of symmetry as it con-
cerns the basic principles of physics and the interactions themselves and not only
the properties of a particular system [14].
In geometry, ﬁgures or bodies are called symmetrical when they possess com-
mon measures or proportions. Thus the Platonic bodies can be rotated and turned
at will without changing their regularity. Similarity transformations, for example,
leave the geometric form of a ﬁgure unchanged, i.e. the proportional relationships
of a circle, equilateral triangle, rectangle, etc. are retained, although the absolute
dimensions of these ﬁgures can be enlarged or decreased. Therefore one can say
that the form of a ﬁgure is determined by the similarity transformations that leave
it unchanged (invariant). In mathematics, a similarity transformation is an example
of an automorphism [12]. In general an automorphism is the mapping of a set (e.g.
points, numbers, functions) onto itself that leaves unchanged the structure of this set
(e.g. proportional relations in Euclidean space). Automorphisms can also be charac-
terized algebraically in this way: (1) Identity I that maps every element of a set onto
itself, is an automorphism. (2) For every automorphism T an inverse automorphism
T ’ can be given, with T ·T ’ = T ’·T = I. (3) If S and T are automorphisms, then so
is the successive application S · T . A set of elements with a composition that fulﬁls
these three axioms is called a group. The symmetry of a mathematical structure is
determined by the group of those automorphisms that let it unchanged (invariant).

780
Symmetry
Symmetry transformations can be classiﬁed in two classes: continuous and dis-
crete transformations. Continuous transformations are in turn divided into global
and local transformations. By deﬁnition, a symmetry transformation is said to be
continuous if the set of parameters, which are necessary to describe the transforma-
tion, range over a continuous set of values. Examples of continuous transformations
are the translation in space, the rotation around a given axis, and the translation
in time. These symmetry transformations are global because once the transforma-
tion of a given point in space has been ﬁxed, then the transformation at all other
points in space is also ﬁxed. Basic principles of physics like linear momentum con-
servation, angular momentum conservation and energy result from the symmetry
properties of the interactions under global space and time continuous transfor-
mations [15]. According to Emmy Noether’s theorem [1], a Lagrangian theory
possesses N conserved quantities, if the theory (i.e. the Lagrangian function) is
invariant under a N-parameter continuous transformation. Noether’s theorem is not
only a cornerstone of classical physics, but, by the  correspondence principle, of
quantum physics as well.
The state space of a quantum system is a  Hilbert space of ﬁnite or countably-
inﬁnite dimension. A quantum state is a one-dimensional subspace of the state
space H. Any normalized vector in the one-dimensional subspace of a state can be
used to represent this state, and is called a state vector. The original formulation of
quantum mechanics assumed a one-to-one correspondence of one-dimensional sub-
spaces of the state space with physical states, implying the unrestricted validity of
the  superposition principle for state vectors. This requirement is equivalent to the
exclusion of  superselection rules. A statement that selects some vectors, adding
that they are physically unrealizable as state vectors is called a superselection rule. If
there are superselection rules, then there exist subspaces of the state space that can-
not be connected to each other by any observable. Not all  self-adjoint operators
on the state space are therefore  observables [16].
Ignoring superselection rules, the states of a quantum system span a projective
Hilbert space. Every vector ψ in the Hilbert space H determines a one-dimensional
subspace, called the ray ¯ψ. The inner product of two rays ¯ψ and ¯ϕ is deﬁned by
 ¯ψ
 ¯ϕ

=

ψ
 ϕ

55ψ
55 · ∥ϕ∥
The set of all rays in H is called the projective Hilbert space ¯H associated with the
Hilbert space H. A symmetry transformation of quantum mechanics is an automor-
phism of the projective Hilbert space ¯H associated with the state space H. Thus
the symmetry of quantum mechanics is given by the automorphism group Aut( ¯H).
A theorem of Eugene P. Wigner [2] asserts that the automorphism group Aut( ¯H)
can be represented by the group of  unitary operators acting on the state space H.
Let H1 and H2 be Hilbert spaces and F be a mapping from H1 into H2. Then F is
called linear if F (aψ + bϕ) = aFψ + bFϕ

Symmetry
781
S
F is called antilinear if F (aψ + bφ) = a∗Fψ + b∗Fφ
F is called isometric if
55Fψ
55 =
55ψ
55
for all ψ and ϕ from H1 and all complex numbers a and b. If the range of a linear
isometric operator F: H1 →H2 is the whole space H2, then F is called unitary.
An antiunitary operator F: H1 →H2 is an antilinear isometric operator having the
range H2. Wigner’s theorem implies that two realizations of quantum mechanics
whose state spaces are connected by a unitary or antiunitary transformation are from
a logical point of view equivalent. Historically, the fact that symmetries in quantum
mechanics are described by projective unitary representations has been known since
Hermann Weyl. In his book on Gruppentheorie und Quantenmechanik (1928) he
stated: ‘The pure case or state is (. . .) more properly represented by the ray than by
the vector, and we must therefore operate in the ray ﬁeld in system space rather than
in the vector ﬁeld.’ [2] Wigner published his theorem in his textbook (1931) without
full proof. A complete proof was given by V. Bargmann (1954) [4].
In quantum physics, all the properties of a system can be derived from the state or
 wave function associated with that system. The absolute phase of a wave function
cannot be measured, and has no practical meaning, as it cancels out the calculations
of the probability distribution. Only relative phases are measurable in an interfer-
ence experiment. Therefore it is possible to change the phase of a wave function
without leading to any observable effect. Formally a phase transformation of the
wave function ψ(x, t) can be written as
ψ (x, t) →ψ′ (x, t) = eiαψ (x, t)
with the parameter (phase) α of the transformation. If α is constant, i.e. the same for
all points in space-time, the equation expresses the fact that once a phase convention
has been made at a given point in space-time, the same convention must be adopted
at all other points. This is an example of a global transformation applied to the ﬁeld
ψ(x, t). If α = α(x, t) is a function of space and time, then such a transformation
will not leave invariant any equation of ψ(x, t) with space or time derivatives. This is
in particular true for the  Schr¨odinger equation or any relativistic wave equation for
a free particle. In order to satisfy the invariance under a local phase transformation
it is necessary to modify the equations in some way, which describe the form of
interaction. Such modiﬁcations will introduce additional terms, which describe the
interaction of the particle with external ﬁelds. The question if and which force of
interaction is realized can only be decided empirically. This is the gauge principle or
principle of local symmetry. Historically, the principle of gauge invariance ( gauge
symmetry) dates back to a (false) idea of Weyl who assumed a deeper dependence
between the laws of matter and electromagnetism [5].
A discrete symmetry transformation is described by parameters ranging over a
discrete set of values. Examples are symmetry operations that leave unaffected a
crystal by reﬂections through planes, inversions with respect to a centre point and
rotations around a given axis with angles 2π/n(n = 2, 3, 4 or 6) corresponding to
the periodicity of the crystal lattice. In elementary  particle physics, there are three
discrete transformations for interactions between leptons and quarks: the charge

782
Symmetry
conjugation C, the parity transformation P, and the time reversal T . In a charge
conjugation operation
C : qα →−qα
All the particles of a system are replaced by their antiparticles and therefore all
charges qα change sign. The parity transformation
P : r →−r
corresponds to a space inversion relative to a point. In a system of Cartesian coor-
dinates, a point with coordinates (x, y, z) transforms into (−x, −y, −z) under the
parity operation. The position vector r changes sign under a space inversion. The
time reversal operation
T : t →−t
corresponds to the inversion of the time variable t. The laws of physics are invari-
ant with respect to T . Symmetry of time means that it is physically impossible
to distinguish between forward and backward moving in time. Quantum theory of
ﬁelds requires the invariance of the ﬁelds and interactions under the combined trans-
formations of the three operations CPT. The CPT-theorem was proved by Wolfgang
Pauli in 1957 [6]. If one of the three symmetries is violated, then, according to the
 CPT-theorem, one of the other two symmetries has also to be violated. For ex-
ample, the violation of parity P requires that C or T be violated. If the invariance
under the combination of two transformations holds, then the invariance under the
third transformation must also hold. For example, the invariance under CP implies
the invariance under T and vice-versa. The decay of Kaons is the only known ex-
ample of time violation T which is enforced by a CP-violation. Further on, the
CPT invariance implies that the masses and the lifetime of a particle is identical to
those of antiparticles. CPT invariance has been empirically conﬁrmed to very high
precision [17].
Before 1956, it was assumed that  parity was a fundamental symmetry of
physical processes. In 1956, Tsung Dao Lee and Chin Ning Yang examined the
question of whether processes driven by the weak interaction would distinguish left
or right [7]. Their famous experiments performed in the beta decay of 60Co, and in
the weak decays of pions and muons, π+ →μ+ + νμ and μ+ →e+ + νe + ¯vμ
not only provided the empirical support to the suggestions of Lee and Yang but also
showed that parity violation was an universal property of the weak interaction.
The observation of parity violation was soon incorporated in the theory of weak
interaction and is now a part of modern uniﬁed theory of electro-weak interac-
tions, the Standard Model  quantum ﬁeld theory; particle physics. Actually, the
fundamental physical forces of interaction can be characterized by local gauge
symmetries. The unitary group U(n) and the special unitary group SU(n) refer to
the unitary transformation of a n-dimensional complex coordinate space [12]. In
the standard model, gravitation, electromagnetic, weak and strong interaction are
represented by local Poincar´e-, U(1)-, SU(2)-, and SU(3)- gauge groups. The re-
search program of uniﬁed theories tries to unify the fundamental forces step by

Symmetry
783
S
step in states of higher energy characterized by uniﬁed local symmetries. In 1954,
the Yang-Mills theory tried at ﬁrst to unify proton and neutron by a gauge the-
ory of isospin-symmetry [8]. But the Yang-Mills theory only predicted massless
gauge particles of interaction in contradiction to empirical observations. Later on,
J. Goldstone [9] and P. Higgs [10] introduced the mechanism of spontaneous sym-
metry breaking (Higgs’ mechanism) in order to give appropriate gauge particles the
desired mass. The intuitive idea is that a symmetric theory can have asymmetric
consequences. For example, the equations of a ball and the wheel of a roulette are
symmetric with respect to the rotation axis, but the ball always keeps lying in an
asymmetric position. In a ﬁrst step, electromagnetic and weak forces could already
be uniﬁed at very high energies in an accelerator ring. For energies of more than
100 Gigaelectron–Volts and distances less than 10−16 cm, there would be a perfect
U(1) × SU(2) symmetry, in which the W± and Zo ﬁeld quanta would be exchanged
as rapidly as the photon. Their transformations are described by the same symmetry
group U(1)× SU(2). At a critical value of lower energy the symmetry spontaneously
breaks apart into two partial symmetries U(1) of electromagnetic force and SU(2)
of weak interaction. The gauge particles of weak interaction get their mass by the
Higgs mechanism, the photon of electromagnetic interaction remains massless.
After the successful uniﬁcation of electromagnetic and weak interaction physi-
cists try to realize the “big” uniﬁcation of electromagnetic, weak and strong forces,
and in a last step the “superuniﬁcation” of all four forces. There are several re-
search strategies of superuniﬁcations such as supergravity and superstring theories.
Mathematically they are described by extensions of richer structures of local sym-
metries and their corresponding gauge groups. On the other hand the variety of
elementary particles is actualized by spontaneous symmetry breaking. The concept
of local symmetry and symmetry breaking play an immense role in cosmology.
During cosmic expansion and cooling temperature, the initial uniﬁed supersymme-
try of all forces broke apart into the subsymmetries of physical interactions, and
the corresponding elementary particles were crystallized in phase stages leading to
more variety and complexity.
The phases of cosmic expansion are determined by properties of symmetry
breaking. For example, in the case of weak interaction, neutrinos occur only as
a left-handed helix, but not as a right-handed one which means parity violation.
This kind of antisymmetry or dissymmetry seems also to be typical for molecular
structures of life. Protein analysis shows that amino acids have an antisymmetri-
cal carbon atom and occur only in the left-handed conﬁguration. Weak interaction
takes part in the chemical bonds. Thus, cosmic parity violation of weak interaction
is assumed to cause the selection of chiral molecules. The reason is that the left-
handed (L) and right-handed (D) examples of chiral molecules can be distinguished
by a tiny parity violating energy difference Epv. The energetically stable examples
(e.g., L-form of amino acids) are preserved. But, this assumption is only based on
theoretical calculations (e.g., Hartree–Fock procedures in physical chemistry). We
still miss exact measurements of experiments because of the tiny small parity viola-
tion energy difference Epv (e.g., 4 · 10−14 (hc)cm−1 (H2O2), 1 · 10−12 (hc)cm−1
(H2S2)), although there are proposed experiments with spectroscopic methods [11].

784
Symmetry
From a philosophical point of view, the epistemic question arises whether sym-
metry only concerns syntactic and semantic properties of scientiﬁc theories and their
models, or whether they are real structures of the world. Empirical structuralism
defends a strict empiristic view [18]: symmetry only refer to syntactical and seman-
tic properties of mathematical structures which are inventions of the human mind.
But if they are only syntactical and semantic constructions, why do observations,
measurements and predictions display these regularities? It seems to be a wonder
or miracle. Hilary Putnam put it in the “no miracle-argument” of scientiﬁc realism:
“The positive argument for realism is that it is the only philosophy that doesn’t make
the success of science a miracle” [19]. Structural realism assumes that mathematical
structures refer to real structures of the world, independent of syntactical and seman-
tic representations in the human mind. The question is which mathematical terms
and models refer to ontological structures [20]. In general, the gauge principle only
determines the form of the coupling term of physical interaction. But the existence
of a physical force is an empirical question which, of course, cannot be derived from
an a priori demand of local symmetry. A gauge group characterizes a physical in-
teraction mathematically in terms of local symmetry. It is epistemically remarkable
that only gauge-invariant quantities have observable effects. Local phase transfor-
mations do not change any measurable observable. Therefore, the gauge principle
or demand for local symmetry can epistemically be considered as a ﬁlter of observ-
ables in a theory of physical interactions ([21] cf. [22]).
Primary Literature
1. E. Noether: Invariante Variationsprobleme. Nachr. Ges. Wiss. G¨ottingen, Math. Phys. Kl.
(1918) 235–257
2. H. Weyl: Gruppentheorie und Quantenmechanik (Hirzel, Leipzig 1928; English trans. The
Theory of Groups and Quantum Mechanics, Dover, New York 1950, 75)
3. E.P. Wigner: Gruppentheorie und ihre Anwendung auf die Quantenmechanik der Atomspektren
(Vieweg, Braunschweig 1931; English trans. Group Theory, Academic, New York 1959)
4. V. Bargmann: On Unitary Ray Representation of Continuous Groups. Ann. Math. 59, 1–46
(1954)
5. H. Weyl: Gravitation und Elektrizit¨at. Sitzungsberichte der K¨oniglich Preußischen Akademie
der Wissenschaften zu Berlin (1918) 465–480; H. Weyl: Gravitation and the Electron. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 15, 323–334 (1929)
6. W. Pauli: Niels Bohr and the Development of Physics (Pergamon Press, London 1957)
7. T.D. Lee, C.N. Yang: Questions of Parity Conservation in Weak Interactions. Phys. Rev. 104,
254 (1956)
8. C.N Yang, R.L. Mills: Conservation of Isotopic Spin and Isotopic Gauge Invariance. Phys. Rev.
96, 191–195 (1954)
9. J. Goldstone: Field theories with ‘Superconductor’ solutions. N. Cimento 19, 154–164 (1961)
10. P.W. Higgs: Broken symmetries, massless particles, and gauge ﬁelds. Phys. Lett. 12, 132–133
(1964)
11. M. Quack: Molecular spectra, reaction dynamics, symmetries and life. Chimia 57, 147–160
(2003)

Symmetry
785
S
Secondary Literature
12. K. Mainzer: Symmetrien der Natur (De Gruyter, Berlin 1988, English trans. Symmetries of
Nature, De Gruyter, New York 1996); K. Brading, E. Castellani (eds.): Symmetries in Physics
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 2003)
13. K. Mainzer: Symmetry and Complexity. The Spirit and Beauty of Nonlinear Science (World
Scientiﬁc, Singapore 2005)
14. M.G. Doncel, A. Hermann, L. Michel, A. Pais (Eds.): Symmetries in Physics (1600-1980)
(Servei de Publicacions, UAB, Barcelona 1987)
15. E. Schmutzer: Symmetrien und Erhaltungss¨atze der Physik (Akademie, Berlin 1972)
16. H. Primas: Chemistry, Quantum Mechanics and Reductionism (Springer, Berlin 1983)
17. H. Genz, R. Decker: Symmetrie und Symmetriebrechung in der Physik (Vieweg, Braunschweig
1991, p. 160)
18. B.C. van Fraassen: Laws and Symmetry (Clarendon Press, Oxford 1989)
19. H. Putnam: Mathematics, Matter and Method. Philosophical Papers Vol. 1 (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge 1975, p. 73)
20. M. Kuhlmann, H. Lyre, A. Wayne (eds.): Ontological Aspects of Quantum Field Theory (World
Scientiﬁc, Singapore 2002)
21. K. Mainzer: Symmetry and Complexity in Dynamical Systems. Eur. Rev. Acad. Eur.
13 (suppl. 2), 29–48 (2005)
22. K. Brading, E. Castellani (Eds.): Symmetries in Physics (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge 2003)

