758
Superﬂuidity
Superﬂuidity
Kostas Gavroglu
The Peculiar Properties of Helium
Ever since 1911 – three years after the liquefaction of helium – when Heike Kamer-
lingh Onnes (1853–1926) discovered that helium had a maximum density at about
2 K, there were various indications that at that temperature “something happens to
helium.” By the end of the 1930s the phenomena associated with liquid helium
below 2.19 K would defy all the attempts to describe, let alone understand, the be-
haviour of liquid helium by classical hydrodynamics.
In 1930 Keesom (1876–1976) and van der Ende [1], quite accidentally, observed
that liquid helium-II (liquid helium below 2.19 K) passed with remarkable ease
through extremely small leaks – something which was not possible for higher tem-
peratures, even for gaseous helium. This observation indicated an enormous drop
of the viscosity when helium was below 2.19 K. During 1932, Keesom and Clu-
sius reported that the  speciﬁc heat curve had “an extremely sharp maximum”
although there was no latent heat for the transition from helium-I (liquid helium
above 2.19 K) to helium-II, but they could not ﬁgure out the “inner causes” for such
a transition. Keesom decided to repeat the same measurements more accurately and
in the paper he wrote with his daughter Anna Petronella, they proposed, after Paul
Ehrenfest’s (1880–1933) suggestion, for the ﬁrst time the term “lambda point” to
indicate the transition from helium-I to helium-II. They, then, attempted to measure
the heat conduction in helium-II. They found that below the lambda-point “the heat
conductivity is about 200 times that of copper at ordinary temperatures, or about
14 times that of very pure copper at liquid hydrogen temperatures. Hence liquid
helium-I was by far the best heat conducting substance we know.”1
When some years later, in 1935, the viscosity of helium was measured by
Wilhelm, Misener and Clark in Toronto and in 1938 by Keesom and MacWood [2] in
Leiden using the method of rotating disks, it was found that the change in viscosity
was continuous, and even though it became less with the fall of temperature, it did
not differ appreciably from that of helium-I. But the difference when compared to
the results derived by the capillary method was about one million. Such an enormous
difference in viscosity by the two different, yet equivalent methods could not be
understood in the framework of classical hydrodynamics. More accurate viscosity
measurements by Pyotr Kapitza (1894–1984) conﬁrmed the earlier results and he
used the term superﬂuidity to characterize this strange behaviour of helium.
“Perhaps the strangest of all the properties” was reported by Allen (1908–
2001) and Jones in February 1938. Allen and Jones [3] wanted to extend the heat
1 Keesom and Keesom (1936), 360.

Superﬂuidity
759
S
conductivity experiments to lower and lower temperature differences and for that
matter used an apparatus consisting of a reservoir capillary. When they supplied
heat to the inner vessel, they saw that the inner helium level, far from being de-
pressed, seemed to rise above that of the reservoir. The rise increased with heat input
and, for constant input, with falling temperature. This was the “thermomechanical
effect”, a mass ﬂow of helium opposing the heat current. In one of their experi-
ments they used a powder-ﬁlled bulb, open at the bottom and with a narrow oriﬁce
at the top. When they heated the powder by shining a light on it, they observed a
jet of liquid helium rising from the upper end to a height of several centimeters.
The phenomenon was named fountain effect. Extremely small temperature differ-
ences between the reservoir and inner vessel were sufﬁcient to produce a very large
convection. It seemed, thus, impossible to treat the hydrodynamical and caloriﬁc
properties of liquid helium-I independently.
In 1939 Daunt and Mendelssohn in Oxford and Kikoin (1908–1984)and Lasarew
in Kharkov found that liquid helium ﬂowed from one container to another inside it
(or outside it depending on the relative height of the liquid helium surface) by means
of a ﬁlm of thickness of the order of 100 atoms formed on the walls. Such ﬁlms, of
course, are formed by any liquid which wets a solid surface, but the viscosity of
an ordinary liquid is such that the ﬁlm forms slowly and there is practically no
movement. Helium-II is the only ﬂuid which, owing to its superﬂuidity, forms a
swiftly moving ﬁlm.
A Strange Phenomenon Explained by an Even Stranger
Mechanism
In November of 1937 the Centenary Conference for Van der Waals took place in
Amsterdam. Among the speakers of the Conference was Mayer who had attempted
to solve the general problem for any law of central force between the molecules.
Kahn and Uhlenbeck showed that Mayer’s treatment could be shown to be formally
analogous to Einstein’s equations for the ideal Bose gas – for which Einstein had
predicted a condensation phenomenon. It was this work by Mayer which directed
Fritz London’s attention to the Einstein condensation paper.
In Fritz London’s (1900–1954) proposed model each helium atom moved nearly
free in the self-consistent periodic ﬁeld formed by the other atoms similar to the way
 electrons move in a metal according to Bloch’s theory – but with a crucial differ-
ence. The helium atoms obeyed  Bose–Einstein statistics, whereas the electrons
in metals obeyed  Fermi–Dirac statistics. As a ﬁrst step London disregarded the
self-consistent ﬁeld altogether and considered the ideal Bose–Einstein gas. Einstein
had already discussed in 1924 a peculiar condensation phenomenon of this gas. But,
because of Uhlenbeck’s observation in his doctoral thesis “in the course of time the
degeneracy of the Bose–Einstein gas has rather got the reputation of having only an
imaginary existence.”2
2 London (1938a), 644.

760
Superﬂuidity
Liquid helium-II, despite its high degree of “order,” instead of being close to a
“liquid” or solid crystal, is, owing to its extremely large volume, much closer to a
gas than to an ordinary liquid. This gas-like nature combined with the high degree of
order of helium-II prompted London to look closely into the possibilities provided
by the phenomenon of Bose–Einstein condensation. But, since all real gases had
been condensed in temperatures higher than the temperature where the ideal Bose–
Einstein gas started this condensation phenomenon, the mechanism appeared to be
“devoid of any practical signiﬁcance.”3
Fritz London’s short paper in Nature was published on April 9, 1938 [4]. He
started with a critique of Frohlich’s scheme to account for the lambda transition
as an order–disorder transition and directed his attention to an entirely different
interpretation of this strange phenomenon. For an ideal Bose–Einstein gas the con-
densation phenomenon represented a discontinuity of the derivative of the speciﬁc
heat. Such a discontinuity was experimentally observed for liquid helium.
In his paper published in the Physical Review in December 1938 [5] London
attempted to provide an explanation for the transport properties. Below a certain
temperature that depends on the mass and density of the particles, a ﬁnite fraction
of them begins to collect in the lowest energy state, that is they assume zero mo-
mentum. The remaining particles have a velocity distribution similar to a classical
gas, ﬂying about as individuals. Since both components – the “condensed” and the
“excited”– occupy the total volume of the container as if one was dissolved into the
other, there is no condensation in the ordinary sense. “But if one likes analogies,
one may say that there is actually a condensation, but only in momentum space and
not in ordinary space”4. There was, then, an equilibrium of two phases. One con-
tained the molecules of momentum zero and occupying in the space of momenta, a
zero volume. The second phase contained molecules with a distribution over all the
momenta as it was found in temperatures higher than the transition temperature. No
separation of phases was to be found in ordinary space.
The Two-Fluid Model
Laszlo Tisza, a Hungarian born physicist, proceeded in 1938 to formulate the
two-ﬂuid model for superﬂuidity. Tisza’s ﬁrst step was to examine the concept of
viscosity in liquids and gases in view of the discrepancy between the methods of
measurement of viscosity and he concluded that this was not a kinetic coefﬁcient
of an unusual value, but the breakdown of the viscosity concept: there was no
Navier–Stokes equation with a viscosity parameter! Tisza’s paper in Nature on May
21, regarded helium-II [6] as a mixture of two (completely interpenetrating) compo-
nents, the normal and the superﬂuid. These components or “ﬂuids” are distinguished
by different hydrodynamical behaviour, in addition to the difference in their heat
3 London (1938b), 947.
4 London (1938b), 951.

Superﬂuidity
761
S
contents. A very narrow capillary (acting as an ‘entropy ﬁlter’) was permeable only
to the superﬂuid ﬂow, but not to the normal ﬂuid. While the uncondensed normal
ﬂuid is supposed to retain the properties of an ordinary liquid (it is identical with
helium-I), the condensed superﬂuid fraction of helium-II is meant to be incapable of
taking part in dissipation processes. At absolute zero, the entire liquid is supposed
to be a superﬂuid consisting of condensed atoms, while at the transition temperature
this component vanishes. An oscillating disk in helium-II experienced friction by
the normal ﬂuid while a ﬁne capillary allowed the superﬂuid to pass without experi-
encing friction. Similarly, an interpretation was provided for the thermo-mechanical
effect. Since in this model the temperature of a volume of helium-II simply meant
a relative concentration of the two ﬂuids, a change in this concentration could be
registered as either a cooling or a heating. Absorption of heat had the effect of in-
creasing the concentration of the viscous component and also the osmotic pressure
at the expense of the superﬂuid which was sucked into the cell.
This explanation led to the prediction of the inverse effect, namely that helium
forced through a ﬁne capillary should be richer in superﬂuid and, therefore, exhibit
a drop in temperature. This effect known as “mechano-caloric effect” was observed
in 1939 by Daunt and Mendelssohn. The anomalously high heat transport in helium-
II was also consistent with the assumptions of the two-ﬂuid model. The important
thing here was that the superﬂuid and viscous components may have different ﬂow
velocities, giving rise to an “internal convection” which was connected with an en-
ergy transfer without any mass transfer. This internal convection accounted for the
super heat-conductivity. Tisza predicted that the thermomechanical effect ought to
have an inverse: a superﬂuid transfer from vessel A to B should lead to heating A
and cooling B. This was readily veriﬁed.
A few months later in another short note presented to the Academie des Sciences
in Paris, Tisza went much further; he recognized that this model implied a very
strange feature, namely that in liquid helium-I the temperature would obey a wave
equation. Tisza called these waves “temperature waves” – they would later be known
as “second sound” and the temperature dependence of their velocity would be a
decisive test of the validity of the two ﬂuid model.
The Soviet Union, Kapitza and Landau
The phenomenal development of low temperature physics in the Soviet Union
is justiﬁably tied to the career of Pyotr Kapitza. In fact, excluding some areas
of applied physics, low temperature physics became the trademark of Soviet
physics – especially during the war years. Kapitza and Lev Landau (1908–1968)
were the towering ﬁgures. In 1941 Kapitza [7] published the results of his extensive
measurements on the behaviour of the two kinds of helium. He put forward the
hypothesis that the abnormal heat conductivity was due to heat transferred by
convection currents. It was calculated that to explain the values of thermal con-
ductivity observed by Keesom and Keesom in 1936 [8], the convection velocity

762
Superﬂuidity
must be assumed to be about 50 m s−1. Kapitza decided to measure this velocity,
but his experiments yielded a heat transfer at least 20 times greater than that mea-
sured by Keesom. Consequently the convection velocity had to be of the order of
1,000 m s−1! It became quite obvious that the then accepted mechanisms for heat
transfer could not be of much help in explaining such large convection velocities.
But it was “an accidental observation” [7]5 which gave their work an impetus
in a totally new direction. Kapitza found that the pressure pulsations transmitted
from the helium pipeline of the laboratory into the helium in the capillary caused
substantial changes in the thermal conductivity. Kapitza suggested the possibility of
two spatially separated mass currents, ﬂowing into the bulb of the surface layer of
the inner perimeter of the tube and outﬂowing through the center of the tube. In or-
der to explain the great thermal conductivity of helium-II on the basis of this pattern
of movement, Kapitza suggested that there is a difference between the heat function
of helium in this ﬁlm and in the free state, and thus the difference in heat content
between the two mass currents was accounted for by the Van der Waals forces of
the capillary wall on the surface of the layer of the liquid. This hypothesis led to the
prediction that the thermal conductivity of helium would be strictly normal in the
absence of surface phenomena. Subsequent experiments showed that the entropy of
liquid helium ﬂowing through the narrow tubes was, indeed, zero. This had been al-
ready predicted by both Tisza and London, but Kapitza thought that these schemata
could not provide a “rigid theoretical basis”6 for his observations and pointed to the
theory of liquid helium proposed by Landau and published in the same year as his
experiments.
Landau attempted to construct a  quantum theory of liquids by direct
 quantization of the hydrodynamical variables such as the density, the current
and the velocity without explicit reference to the interatomic forces. He considered
the quantized states of the whole liquid instead of the single atoms, and started
with the state of the ﬂuid at absolute zero, which he considered as its ground state.
Excitation of vorticity would represent departure from the zero temperature states.
Departure from the ground state could also arise from the excitation of one or more
units of sound-wave energy or “phonons.” In this way, Landau constructed the en-
ergy spectrum of a liquid from two types of excitations; to the phonons of the solid
body he added a spectrum of “rotons” which deﬁned the elementary excitations of
the vortex spectrum. Thus in Landau’s theory, helium became a background liquid
in which excitations moved, and there existed only one ﬂuid: liquid helium. In a
way, the ground states and the excitations played the role of the superﬂuid and
the normal state respectively. The excitations were the normal state because they
may be scattered and reﬂected, and hence, showed viscosity. The ﬂuid associated
with the ground state was superﬂuid because it could not absorb a phonon from
the walls of the tube or a roton unless it was ﬂowing with a velocity greater than
the velocity of sound or a “critical velocity” respectively. Below the lesser of these
two velocities the ﬂowing helium would not interact with the walls and, hence,
5 Kapitza (1980), 24.
6 Ibid., 638.

Superﬂuidity
763
S
would be superﬂuid – unless, as Landau pointed out, some other mechanism, as yet
undetermined, limited the ﬂow.
Landau’s formalism led to two different equations for the propagation of sound,
and, hence, to two velocities for sound. One of them was related to the usual velocity
due to compressibility while the other depended strongly on the temperature. This
was the same phenomenon as Tisza’s thermal or temperature waves. Landau named
them “second sound.” The ﬁrst and unsuccessful attempt to generate and detect
second sound waves was made with acoustic apparatus by Shalnikov and Sokolov.
They failed and that was interpreted by London to mean that Landau’s theory was
“born refuted.” The failure to observe second sound acoustically was explained in
1944 by Lifshitz (1915–1985) who made a more detailed theoretical analysis of
second sound waves and showed that if one used the usual mechanical methods
for generating sound, then “second sound” is masked by the ordinary sound. But a
plate with a periodically varying temperature would radiate only the “second sound.”
Using such a “radiator,” Peshkov in 1944 was able to demonstrate the existence of
standing thermal waves for the ﬁrst time.
These results were communicated to the International Conference which took
place at Cambridge in the spring of 1946 [9] devoted to low temperature physics and
elementary  particle physics, even though, the scientists from the Soviet Union
did not attend the Conference and where London gave the opening paper titled
“The present state of the theory of liquid helium.” London insisted that both su-
perconductivity and superﬂuidity were manifestations of quantum mechanisms on
a macroscopic scale and that the decisive test between his and Tisza’s approach and
Landau’s schema would be the study of the low temperature properties of helium-3
where the absence of superﬂuidity would be ascribed to the role of statistics.
“Second Sound” at Very Low Temperatures
Peshkov’s new measurements for the second sound velocities between 1.36 and
2.19 K, were not in agreement with Landau’s prediction for this temperature range.
Landau proceeded to modify the energy spectrum of the phonons after the results.
The measurements appeared to agree with Tisza’s predictions, but the predictions
of Tisza and Landau were approximately similar down to 1K, but sharply diverged
below 1K. The velocity ﬁrst went through a maximum for which both theories gave
identical results, and then went through a minimum rising sharply as the temperature
approached absolute zero.
Pellam’s measurements in 1949 below 1.4K, showed an increase in velocity and
differed considerably from Peshkov’s. It was the experiments of Maurer and Herlin
in 1949 [10] that settled the issue of the temperature dependence of the second sound
velocity below 1K. Using the pulse method initiated by Peshkov, they were able to
lower the temperature to 0.85K and observe an increase of velocity starting at about
1.1K. The results were quite unambiguous and could have been used to corroborate
Landau’s approach – if it weren’t for the new experiments, completed at the same

764
Superﬂuidity
time, which tried to detect superﬂuidity in a pure liquid sample of He3, and found
negative indications down to 1.05K. Maurer and Herlin appeared to believe that
the results were not necessarily contradicting the predictions of the Bose–Einstein
hypothesis, but they felt that further reﬁnements should be introduced in the model
to account for the second sound velocity results. Few months later Pellam and Scott
[11] would also observe the increase of the second sound velocity in the very low
temperature range, and would be of the same opinion as to the relevance of these
measurements to distinguish between the two competing theories.
The measurements that corroborated Landau’s theory came from the Mond
Laboratory at Cambridge. In 1950 Atkins and Osborne [12], using two different
demagnetizations, were able to measure velocities down to 0.17K. They found that
there was a marked increase that could be extrapolated to 0K and found it to equal
Landau’s prediction.
The Importance of Liquid He3
In 1949 measurements on the viscosity of He3 were reported from Argonne National
Laboratory.The viscosity was measured by letting He3 pass through a ﬁne slit, and it
did not show any discontinuity down to 1.05K. London felt that these measurements
had conﬁrmed the dependence of superﬂuidity on statistics and decided to send a re-
view article to Nature. He no longer insisted on the difference of the second-sound
velocity at temperatures around 1K, but rather on the implications of the statistics.
He believed that what the reported absence of superﬂuidity of He3 settled, was the
issue concerning the necessity of the assumption of Bose–Einstein statistics for any
theory professing to provide an explanation for the properties of helium-II. William
Fairbank (1917–1986)examined the extent to which He3 behaved as an ideal Fermi–
Dirac gas, by measuring the strengths of the He3 nuclear magnetic resonance signals
as the temperature of the liquid He3 was reduced. When measurements were re-
sumed below 1.2K there was a deﬁnite departure from the predictions of the Curie
law and the liquid appeared to behave as an ideal Fermi–Dirac gas having a de-
generacy temperature of 0.45K. Furthermore, one of the best known results derived
by Fairbank was the discovery of the ﬂux quantization, predicted by London, by
detecting macroscopic quantization of the magnetic ﬁeld outside a superconductor.
By 1956 Richard Feynman (1918–1988) was able present a theory synthesizing
the views of London and Landau. Considering all previous theories as phenomeno-
logical, his microscopic theory did not “supplant the phenomenological theories. It
turns out to support them.”7 He showed that despite the strong forces of interaction
between helium atoms which could have undermined the ideal gas approximation
by London, they did indeed allow the Bose–Einstein condensation. He also showed
that some of Landau’s assumptions which were rather empirical could be justiﬁed
quantum mechanically and that the rotons were a kind of quantum mechanical ana-
log of a microscopic vortex ring.
7 Feynman (1953a), 1291.

Superﬂuidity
765
S
Literature
1. W. Keesom, J. N. van der Ende: The speciﬁc heat of solids obtainable with liquid helium. IV.
Measurements of the atomic heats of tin and zinc. CPL 219b (1932)
2. W. Keesom, G. E. MacWood: The viscocity of liquid helium. Physica 5, 737–744 (1938)
3. J. F. Allen, H. Jones: New phenomena connected with heat ﬂow in helium II. Nature 141,
243–244 (1938)
4. F. London: The λ-phenomenon of liquid helium and the Bose-Einstein degeneracy. Nature 141,
643–644 (1938)
5. F. London: On the Bose-Einstein condensation. Physical Review 54, 947–954 (1938)
6. L. Tisza: Transport phenomena in helium-II. Nature 141, 913 (May 21, 1938)
7. P. Kapitza: Problems of liquid helium. A Report at the General Assembly of the USSR
Academy of Sciences, 28 December 1940. Reprinted in P. Kapitza: Experiment, Theory, Prac-
tice, Articles and Addresses (Reidel Publishers, Boston 1980)
8. W. Keesom, A. P. Keesom: On the heat conductivity of liquid helium. Physica 3, 359–360
(1936)
9. V. Peshkov: Determination of the velocity of propagation of the second sound in Helium II.
Journal of Physics (USSR) 10, 389–398 (1946)
10. R. D. Maurer, M. A. Herlin: Second sound velocity in helium II. Physical Review 76, 948–950
(1949)
11. J. R. Pellam, R. B. Scott: Second sound velocity in paramagnetically cooled liquid helium II.
Physical Review 76, 869–870; 948–950 (1949)
12. K. R. Atkins, D. V. Osborne: The velocity of second sound below 1 K, Philosophical Magazine
41, 1078–1081 (1950)
13. E. L. Andronikashvilii: Reﬂections on Liquid Helium, translated by R. Berman (American
Institute of Physics 1989)
14. B. S. Deaver, W. M. Fairbank: Experimental evidence for quantized ﬂux in superconducting
cylinders. Physical Review Letters 7, 43–46 (1961)
15. R. Feynman: Atomic theory of the lambda transition in helium. Physical Review 91,
1291–1301 (1953)
16. R. Feynman: Atomic theory of liquid helium near absolute zero. Physical Review 91,
1301–1310 (1953)
17. K. Gavroglu: Fritz London (1900–1954), A Scientiﬁc Biography. Afterward by John Bardeen
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1995)
18. K. Gavroglu, Y. Goudaroulis: Some Methodological and Historical Considerations in Low
Temperature Physics II: The case of Superﬂuidity. Annals of Science 43, 137–146 (1986)
19. K. Gavroglu, Y. Goudaroulis: Methodological Aspects in the Development of Low Temperature
Physics 1881–1957: Concepts out of Context(s) (Kluwer, Dordrecht 1989)
20. K. Gavroglu, Y. Goudaroulis: The Remarkable Work of ‘Le Gentleman du zero absolu’,
in Through Measurement to Knowledge: The Selected Papers of Heike Kamerlingh Onnes
1853–1926 (Kluwer, Dordrecht 1991, 1–94)
21. A. Grifﬁn: Excitations in a Bose-Condensed Liquid (Cambridge University Press 1994)
22. H. Kamerlingh Onnes: The importance of accurate measurements at very low temperatures.
CPL (Supplement) 9 (1904)
23. H. Kamerlingh Onnes: The liquefaction of helium. CPL, 108 (1908)
24. H. Kamerlingh Onnes: Report on the researches made in the Leiden cryogenics laboratory
between the second and third international congress of refrigeration. CPL (Supplement) 34b,
37–70 (1913)
25. P. L. Kapitza: The Collected Papers of P.L. Kapitza, edited by D. ter Haar (Pergamon 1965)
26. W. H. Keesom: Quelques remarques en rapport avec l’anomalie de la chaleur speciﬁque de
l’helium au point lambda, CPL (Supplement) 71e, 47–52 (1932)
27. W. H. Keesom: Helium (Elsevier 1942)
28. W. Keesom, A. P. Keesom: On the anomaly in the speciﬁc heat of liquid helium. CPL 221d,
19–26 (1932)

766
Superluminal Communication in Quantum Mechanics
29. W. Keesom, M. Wolfke: Two different liquid states of helium. CPL 190b, 17–22 (1927)
30. A. Kozhevnikov: Piotr Kapitza and Stalin’s government: a study in moral choice. Historical
Studies in the Physical and Biological Sciences 22, 131–163 (1992)
31. L. D. Landau: The theory of superﬂuidity of helium II. Journal of Physics (USSR), 5, 71–90
(1941); On the hydrodynamics of helium II, Ibid. 8, 1–3 (1944)
32. L. D. Landau: On the theory of superﬂuidity of Helium II. Journal of Physics (USSR), 11, 9–92
(1947)
33. L. D. Landau: On the theory of superﬂuidity. Physical Review 75, 884–885 (1949)
34. E. M. Lifshitz: Radiation of sound in helium II. Journal of Physics 8, 110–114 (1944)
35. E. Maxwell: Isotope effect in the superconductivity of mercury. Physical Review 78, 477
(1950)
36. L. Tisza: The theory of liquid helium. Physical Review 72, 838–854 (1947)
Superluminal Communication in Quantum
Mechanics
Daniel J. Gauthier
One consequence of the special theory of relativity is that no information can be
transmitted between two parties in a time shorter than it would take light, propagat-
ing through vacuum, to travel between the parties. That is, the speed of information
transfer is less than or equal to the speed of light in vacuum c. Hypothetical faster-
than-light (superluminal) communication is very intriguing because causality would
be violated [8]. Causality is a principle where an event is linked to a previous cause;
superluminal communication would allow us to change the outcome of an event af-
ter it has happened. I’m sure all of us at one point in our lives would like a cell-phone
with superluminal capabilities!
Soon after Einstein published the theory of relativity, scientists began the search
for examples where objects or entities travel faster than c. There are many known
examples of superluminal motion [8], yet explaining, in simple terms, why such mo-
tions do not violate the special theory or allow for superluminal communication can
be exceedingly difﬁcult. Also, approximations used to solve models of the physical
world can lead to subtle errors, sometimes resulting in predictions of superluminal
signaling. For these reasons, studying superluminal signaling can be an interesting
exercise because it often reveals unexpected aspects of our universe or the theories
we use to describe its behavior.
The possibility of superluminal motions in classical physics have been known
for over a century. For example, the group velocity of a pulse of light propagat-
ing through a dispersive dielectric can exceed c, where the group velocity gives
(approximately) the speed of the peak of the pulse [10]. There exists a simple math-
ematical proof demonstrating that such behavior cannot be used for superluminal

