Rutherford Atom
671
R
Russell–Saunders Coupling
Klaus Hentschel
The  vector model provides various ways of calculating the vectorial sum of all
the contributing angular momenta li and  spins si = 1/2 for atoms with more than
one  electron. ( Spin; Stern–Gerlach experiment; Vector model). Either all the
li are ﬁrst summed up to one L, and then combined with S = 
i si, or all the li
and si are ﬁrst summed up separately to ji with J = 
i ji. The noncommutativ-
ity of  operators makes these two procedures in general non-equivalent, yielding
different combinatorics, and thus different energy levels and transitions. The ﬁrst
possibility is called Russell–Saunders coupling (also referred to as L-S coupling or
strong coupling because it assumes that the interaction of L and S to form a joint
J for each electron is much stronger than between different  electrons). For mag-
netic dipole radiation, the  selection rules are: J = ±1 or 0, and similar for
L and M with the additional constraint that a transition from M = 0 to M = 0
is forbidden for J = 0. The selection rule S = 0 leads to a prohibition of in-
tercombinations. Russell-Saunders coupling is valid for the lighter, hydrogen-like
atom  Bohr’s atom model, for which the multiplet splitting is small compared to
the energy difference of the levels with the same electron conﬁguration but different
L. For heavier atoms and for the energetically higher terms,  jj-coupling yields the
better approximation. Transition cases between the two couplings also occur (see,
e.g. [2], 175f.).
Literature
1. G. Herzberg: Atomic Spectra and Atomic Structure (New York: Prentice-Hall 1937, 2nd
ed. New York: Dover Publications 1944) (http://wwwchem.uwimona.edu.jm:1104/courses/
RScoupling.html; accessed July 20, 2006)
2. C. Candler: Atomic Spectra and the Vector Model (Princeton: Van Nostrand 1937, esp. chaps.
11, 16–18)
Rutherford Atom
J.L. Heilbron
The identiﬁcation of the “corpuscle” (later renamed  “electron”) by J.J. Thomson
(1856–1940) in 1897 inspired the design of atomic models by the British school of
mechanistic physics. The obvious initial assumption, based on relative weights, was

