S
Saadia Gaon
JONATHAN JACOBS
Department of Philosophy
Colgate University
Hamilton, NY
USA
Abstract
Saadia Gaon (Saadia ben Joseph) (882–942) has an impor-
tant place in medieval Jewish philosophy, and was
a distinguished translator (of Bible into Arabic), commen-
tator, author of a Hebrew dictionary and the earliest
known Hebrew grammar, and a contributor to liturgy. In
The Book of Belief and Opinions, he formulated many of
the main problems of medieval Jewish philosophy. While
later thinkers disagreed with him in many respects (e.g.,
Maimonides criticized his views and his method), medie-
val Jewish philosophy owes a great deal to him. He was not
doctrinally committed to one or another philosophical
approach or system, such as Neoplatonism or Aristote-
lianism. While his thought shows the inﬂuence of kalam,
he is important for helping shape a rationalist disposition
in Jewish philosophy. In The Book of Beliefs and Opinions,
he argues that there are adequate replies to skeptics and
other critics who object that Judaism lacks rational justi-
ﬁcation. His distinction between ‘‘laws of reason’’ and
‘‘laws of revelation’’ has had considerable inﬂuence on
many thinkers’ treatments of the issue of ‘‘the reasons of
the commandments.’’ Also, Saadia discussed extensively
the various parts of the soul, the basic motivational ten-
dencies of human beings, and the question of what is the
best life for a human being. He elaborated a rich moral
psychology with some Platonic resonances and some
Aristotelian resonances, integrated in a way that showed
the wisdom of Torah as the guide to life. His discussion of
repentance, merit and demerit, prophecy, creation, divine
foreknowledge, Messianism, and other topics exhibits
considerable philosophical sensitivity along with very
great knowledge of Torah and tradition. Saadia was also
the head of a major Talmudic academy in Babylonia and
was a vigorous critic of Karaism. Little is known of his
education or personal life, but his was a very active,
engaged, life, of notable and enduring accomplishment.
Saadia is a key ﬁgure in medieval Jewish philosophy.
‘‘Gaon’’ is the title of the head of a Talmudic academy.
Saadia was Gaon of the Babylonian academy at Sura. He
was born in Upper Egypt and died in Sura, after living
there for several decades. He had lived for a time in
Palestine and in Baghdad. It is not known by whom or
where he was educated, but he had very extensive knowl-
edge and made contributions of numerous kinds. As
a young man he completed what was the ﬁrst Hebrew
dictionary and also wrote a Hebrew grammar. He also
translated the Bible (or at least, most of it) into Arabic,
and he wrote commentaries on several of the books of the
Bible. His translation and commentaries have long been
important to Jews in Arabic-language countries. In addi-
tion, Saadia wrote a number of halakhic works (works on
Jewish law) and he compiled a prayer book – a siddur –
including some poetry he wrote himself.
Saadia was no stranger to dispute. In one important
instance this involved disagreement with Ben Meir (Gaon
of the Talmudic academy in Palestine) over regulation of
the calendar. In another, he refused to endorse a verdict of
the exilarch. Also, he had a prominent role in the contro-
versy over Karaism, which he criticized severely. However,
his importance to philosophy is based on the fact that his
great work, The Book of Beliefs and Opinions largely set the
agenda of much of medieval Jewish philosophy. It was
perhaps the most important work in Jewish philosophy
since Philo. In it, Saadia developed arguments for the
existence of God, elaborated on central issues in philo-
sophical theology, and formulated views on providence,
free will, repentance, and other matters of philosophical
psychology.
The Book of Beliefs and Opinions has a rationalist char-
acter. It opens with an extensive treatment of epistemo-
logical considerations aimed at showing how Judaism is
a religion of reason in the sense that Jewish faith-
commitments and Jewish tradition can be shown to be
rationally defensible and can answer skeptical challenges.
In part, Saadia was motivated to write the book by concern
Henrik Lagerlund (ed.), Encyclopedia of Medieval Philosophy, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9729-4,
# Springer Science+Business Media B.V., 2011

that many Jews felt a measure of doubt concerning their
faith. There were numerous inﬂuential Muslim and
Christian defenses and articulations of those faiths. Saadia
supplied a powerful philosophical voice to Judaism and
his rationalist orientation shaped a great deal of later,
important Jewish thought.
Saadia and Maimonides were much inﬂuenced by
Islamic intellectual culture. Maimonides objected to the
evident inﬂuence of kala¯m on Saadia’s thought, insisting
that Saadia was a dialectical theologian rather than
a ‘‘genuine’’ philosopher. His criticism may be somewhat
unfair. Saadia was both philosophically alert and philo-
sophically sophisticated, though his thought did not
explicitly reﬂect the pronounced inﬂuence of one or
another speciﬁc philosophical theory, such as Neoplato-
nism or Aristotelianism. Like the mutakallimu¯n (practi-
tioners of kala¯m), Saadia accepted a number of religious
claims and doctrines and then sought to show how reason
supported them, and he defended those claims and doc-
trines against objections. Despite the inﬂuence of kala¯m
there is a recognizably rationalistic dimension to his
thought. The doctrines in question, such as free will or
God’s creation of the world, can be shown, he argued, to
be rationally defensible. In either refuting or obviating
skeptical considerations, Saadia argued that along with
reason and sense, Scripture and tradition are sources of
evidence (a stance that would have been widely acceptable
to his readers). This proved to be an enduringly important
philosophical move, given the signiﬁcance of tradition to
Jewish life and the conception of how it is informed by
wisdom.
Another especially
important aspect of Saadia’s
approach is that he argued that among the command-
ments is the obligation to cultivate and develop rational
understanding to the fullest extent possible. This shaped
a highly signiﬁcant current of medieval Jewish thought.
Its inﬂuence is detectable in the thought of Bahya ibn
Paquda, Maimonides, and Gersonides among others.
The notion that enlarged and deepened understanding is
vitally important to fulﬁlling the commandments, to striv-
ing to imitate God, and thus, to aspiring to holiness is
crucial to medieval Jewish thought and Saadia was an
early, founding ﬁgure in developing it.
Saadia’s distinction between ‘‘laws of reason’’ and
‘‘laws of revelation’’ was highly inﬂuential in medieval
Jewish thought, even though several thinkers revised his
formulation of it. For example, it ﬁgures centrally in
Maimonides’ thought, though he disagreed with Saadia
over the explication of rational justiﬁcation of the com-
mandments. Saadia held that some of the commandments
are such that we can ascertain the rational justiﬁcation for
them unaided by revelation, and other commandments
are such that we could not do so, though they are not
arbitrary or without reason. This notion – that divine
wisdom informs divine will and that the commandments
are rational – powerfully shaped Jewish thought in respect
to the epistemology of tradition. Though Saadia did not
think that human beings could discern the reasons for
a great many ritual commandments and commandments
concerning diet, purity, and so forth, he held that they
have a measure of utility we can discern, and that there are
reasons for them, even if those reasons exceed our grasp.
However, some commandments concerning fundamen-
tally important moral matters, such as those concerning
gratitude owed to a benefactor, wages being owed to
a laborer, the duty not to cause harm, and some others
are rationally evident, thus highlighting the place of reason
in acceptance of the obligations of Torah. (Maimonides
disagreed with Saadia over the issue of whether some of
the commandments are rationally evident even though
Maimonides argued that there are reasons for all of the
commandments.)
This issue, of course, motivates the question of why
revelation was necessary. Saadia argued that revelation is
necessary for two main reasons. One is that a great many
commandments are such that, while there are rational
justiﬁcations for them, we are not able to ascertain those
justiﬁcations by unaided reason. The commandments are
for our good (given God’s wisdom and benevolence), but
divine wisdom exceeds ours and it has formulated com-
mandments for our good though we cannot always under-
stand just how that is so. A second reason is that, even for
those that are rationally evident, the speciﬁcs of how they
are to be fulﬁlled are not evident, and revelation of that
sort of speciﬁcity reﬂects divine graciousness and spares
human beings a great deal of disagreement and uncer-
tainty. Saadia noted that we might know, just through
reason alone, that we are not to steal, but we do not
know through reason alone just what are the speciﬁc
conditions of ownership and what ownership implies.
Similarly, we might rationally determine that it is wrong
to commit adultery, but it is not rationally evident just
what constitutes proper marriage. And so forth. Prophecy
(revelation) was needed in order for mankind to be guided
to holiness, but there is nothing in prophecy (or in
Judaism overall) that is in conﬂict with reason or ulti-
mately obscure to reason even though our comprehension
is ﬁnite.
The Book of Beliefs and Opinions also contains
extensive discussion of creation, redemption, and olam
1172 S
Saadia Gaon

haba (the world to come), including a detailed treatment
of merit and demerit. In addition to the important epis-
temological material early in the work, Saadia took up the
most fundamental theological issues – creation ex nihilo
and the divine nature, human free will, and divine justice
(including Messianic redemption and also resurrection).
Saadia’s conception of how reason and revelation are
mutually reinforcing and how the claims of both can be
integrated in the pursuit of truth shaped an important
current of Jewish thought. He sought to show that rational
inquiry and speculation could strengthen Jewish faith
rather than raise doubts about it.
He was a key ﬁgure in developing an understanding of
Judaism, in which reason, ritual, worship, rabbinics, and
moral life all have vitally important roles and he did much
to explicate the relations between them. He said that he
was motivated to write his philosophical work because of
widespread doubt and confusion. He wanted Jews to be
able to overcome that kind of demoralization and to be
strengthened in their faith. The depth of Saadia’s insights,
the emphatic insistence on the role of reason in Judaism
properly understood, and his integrative vision were for-
mative for a great deal of succeeding Jewish philosophy,
even if much of it was elaborated through methods differ-
ent from his own.
Some of his works are lost, but it is notable that his
work in numerous areas including grammar, liturgy,
and commentary as well as philosophy has had enduring
inﬂuence. He made signiﬁcant contributions to philology,
linguistics, commentary, liturgy, and philosophy. The
depth and breadth of his expertise and the lasting inﬂu-
ence of his contributions are really quite striking. He was
an encyclopedic, creative, and ambitious thinker. He com-
bated Karaism and other attacks on rabbinic Judaism and
defended and invigorated tradition with philosophical
acumen and argument. He made a crucial contribution
to articulating Judaism in a way that involved essential
roles for rational understanding and revelation. As
remarked above, his philosophical work does not clearly
show the stamp of a particular ‘‘school’’ or theory; yet, it
reﬂects a powerful, original mind, actively engaged in
multiple arguments and inquiries and deploying resources
from all of them.
See also: ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic,
and
Hebrew
Traditions
▶Epistemology
▶Gersonides ▶Kala¯m ▶Moses Maimonides ▶Philo-
sophical Psychology, Jewish Tradition ▶Philosophical
Theology,
Jewish
▶Philosophy,
Jewish
▶Platonism
▶Proofs of the Existence of God ▶Skepticism ▶Will
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Gaon Saadia (1970) Sefer ha-Niver ba-Emunot uva-De ‘ot, ed. Kaﬁh J.
Jerusalem: Sura (Arabic text in Hebrew characters, with Hebrew
translation)
Gaon Saadia (1972) Commentary on the book of creation, ed. Kaﬁh J.
Jerusalem
(Arabic
text
in
Hebrew characters,
with
Hebrew
translation)
Gaon Saadia (1976) The book of doctrines and beliefs, trans. Rosenblatt S.
Yale University Press, New Haven. (Complete)
Gaon Saadia (1988) The book of theodicy, trans. Goodman LE, Yale
University Press
Gaon Saadia (2002) The book of doctrines and beliefs, trans. Altmann A,
intro: Frank DH. Hackett, Indianapolis. (Abridged)
Gaon Saadia (2006) The book of doctrines and beliefs, trans. Altmann.
In: Lewy H, Altmann A, Heinemann I (eds) Three Jewish philoso-
phers. Toby Press, New York (Abridged)
[There are some other, incomplete works, such as Saadia’s Biblical com-
mentaries (1972–1976) published in Jerusalem, edited by Kaﬁh J.]
Secondary Sources
Davidson I (2009) Saadia’s polemic against Hiwi Al-Balkhi. Kessinger,
Whiteﬁsh
Efros I (1942–1943) Saadya’s theory of knowledge. Jew Q Rev 33:133–170
Efros I (1974) Studies in medieval Jewish philosophy. Columbia Univer-
sity Press, New York
Finkelstein L (ed) (1944) Rav Saadia Gaon; studies in his honor. Jewish
Theological Seminary, New York
Goodman LE (1996) God of Abraham. Oxford University Press, New York
Goodman LE, Saadya Gaon on the human condition. Jewish Q Rev
67:23–29
Heschel AJ (1942–1943) The quest for certainty in Saadia’s philosophy.
Jew Q Rev 33:213–264
Malter H (2006) Saadia Gaon: his life and works. Kessinger, Whiteﬁsh.
(Copyright 1921, Jewish Publication Society)
Rynhold D (2009) An introduction to medieval Jewish philosophy. I. B.
Tauris, New York
Sirat C (1985) A history of Jewish philosophy in the Middle Ages.
Cambridge University Press, New York, pp 18–37, 416–418
Skoss SL (1955) Saadia Gaon, the earliest Hebrew grammarian. Dropsie
College Press, Philadelphia
Stroumsa S (2003) Saadya and Jewish kalam, ed. Frank DH, Leaman O.
The Cambridge companion to medieval Jewish philosophy. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 71–90
Wolfson HA (1943) The Kalam arguments for creation in Saadia, Averroes,
Maimonides and St. Thomas (repr. Saadia Anniversary Volume.
American Academy for Jewish Research, New York, pp 198–245)
Wolfson HA, Twersky I (1977) The Kalam problem of nonexistence
and Saadia’s second theory of creation. In: Twersky I, Williams GH
(eds) Studies in the history of philosophy and religion, vol II.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, pp 338–358
Solomon ibn Gabirol
▶Avicebron
Solomon ibn Gabirol S
1173
S

al-Sarakhsı¯, Ah˙mad ibn al-T˙ayyib
PETER ADAMSON
Philosophy Department
King’s College London
London
UK
Abstract
Ah˙mad ibn al-T˙ayyib al-Sarakhsı¯ (c. 835–899) was
a ninth-century polymath and student of the more famous
al-Kindı¯. He worked in a number of ﬁelds, including
philosophy, geography, reﬁned literature (adab), and sci-
entiﬁc areas such as medicine and astrology. His writings
are almost entirely lost, and it is thus unclear to what
extent his philosophical output went beyond transmitting
the thought of his master al-Kindı¯.
Greek-inspired philosophy (falsafa) in the Arabic speak-
ing world became widespread in the tenth century, the
time of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ and his school as well as various forms of
Neoplatonism. But the philosophical tradition began
already in the ninth century with the ﬁrst reception of
philosophical works translated from Greek into Arabic.
Even among the relatively few practitioners of falsafa
during this early period, al-Sarakhsı¯ must be seen as
a lesser ﬁgure. However, his importance is difﬁcult to
judge because not a single philosophical work of his is
extant in its entirety. We are thus forced to reconstruct
both his life and his thought as best we can from later
reports about him, which include lists of the works that
made up his originally voluminous corpus. This recon-
struction has been done in a series of studies by the late
Franz Rosenthal (see especially Rosenthal 1943), which are
the main basis for this entry.
Al-Sarakhsı¯ was presumably born in Sarakhs in Khu-
rasan, and probably in about 835 CE. We know this with
reasonable exactness because he tells us that he is 61 years
old in a work he is writing for ‘‘the Caliph,’’ probably
al-Mu‘tad˙id (whose reign began in 892). We also know
that he died in 899 after falling from favor in the Caliphal
court in 896. This catastrophic fall from grace, which
involved imprisonment, beating, and ultimately execu-
tion, seems to have resulted from a political intrigue
but the exact reasons are shrouded in uncertainty (see
Rosenthal 1943:25–34 for the conﬂicting reports). It may
be that he had expressed religious views, for instance pro-
Shı¯ʿite sentiments, that made him an inconvenient ﬁgure
to maintain at court.
Prior to his disgrace al-Sarakhsı¯’s career had reached
its peak with important administrative duties under al-
Mu‘tad˙id. He had been appointed tutor to al-Mu‘tad˙id
when the latter was still a young prince, much as al-
Sarakhsı¯’s master al-Kindı¯ had been tutor to Ah:mad, the
son of the Caliph al-Mu‘tas:im (who reigned 833–842).
When al-Mu‘tad˙id ascended to the throne al-Sarakhsı¯
became a ‘‘boon companion,’’ and he was later given
oversight over mercantile accounting (h:isba), perhaps on
the strength of having written on the subject of fraud
(Rosenthal 1943:24).
The chief intellectual event of al-Sarakhsı¯’s career,
however, occurred earlier when he became the student of
al-Kindı¯. As Rosenthal (1943:17) puts it: ‘‘it is certainly no
exaggeration that he owed al-Kindı¯ very much of his
scholarly achievement.’’ In fact, many of the titles of al-
Sarakhsı¯’s works duplicate titles of al-Kindı¯’s, and we may
thus speculate that al-Sarakhsı¯ was merely a transmitter of
these treatises. Unfortunately, due to lack of textual evi-
dence, we are unable to say how much he might have
reworked his material. Other titles ascribed to Sarakhsı¯
show that he in any case tended to agree with al-Kindı¯’s
philosophical stance. For instance, both argued against
atomism and in favor of the inﬁnite divisibility of body.
Al-Sarakhsı¯ is thus a member of what might be called
the ‘‘Kindian tradition’’ (for this phrase see Adamson
2007), and takes his place along two other ﬁrst-generation
associates of al-Kindı¯’s as an important transmitter of
Kindian thought. The other two associates are Abu¯ Zayd
al-Balkhı¯, teacher of the well-known al-‘A¯mirı¯, and Abu¯
Ma‘shar, who was arguably the greatest astrologer of Islam.
Astrology seems to have been a shared enthusiasm among
the Kindians. Al-Sarakhsı¯followed al-Kindı¯in using astro-
logical calculations to determine the duration of the reign
of the Arabs. He also wrote a work that must have pro-
vided a philosophical rationale for the science of astrology,
entitled On the Main Principles of Philosophy and the
Establishment of Astrology. In this he would have been
following al-Kindı¯ and Abu¯ Ma‘shar, though it must be
said that a fragment preserved from this work (see
Rosenthal 1943) strikes an un-Kindian note in saying
that the Qurʾa¯n encourages us to study the stars but
without ‘‘searching out a reason or investigating into
a cause.’’ (Perhaps this should be seen as an extraneous
remark by a later transmitter.)
Another fragment that may derive from an astrological
work is a remarkable discussion by al-Sarakhsı¯ on the
subject of erotic love (‘ishq), and why it manifests in
a desire to kiss the beloved (see Rosenthal 1961). He
explains, in a manner reminiscent of Plato’s Symposium
or Phaedrus, that the lover desires a commingling of souls,
1174 S
al-Sarakhsı¯, Ah˙mad ibn al-T˙ayyib

but is unable to achieve this and thus seeks the passageway
of the beloved’s breath.
The stars also play a role in a well-known report by al-
Sarakhsı¯, which claims to repeat al-Kindı¯’s account of the
star-worshipping S˙a¯bians of H˙ arra¯n (see Rosenthal
1943:41–51). This report is preserved in three different
versions, the most detailed being in the Fihrist of Ibn al-
Nadı¯m. Particularly striking is the claim that the S˙a¯bians
followed the teaching of Aristotle. All three versions claim
that the S˙a¯bians were inﬂuenced by the Physics. The Fihrist
version then adds that they adopted Aristotelian views
about demonstration, natural bodies, meteorology, the
soul, and dreams. Their view about God is described as
follows:
"
God, in their opinion, is one. No attribute can be applied to
Him, and no positive statement can be made about Him,
and, therefore, He does not fit into any syllogism. This
opinion is in agreement with Aristotle’s opinion in the
Metaphysics (Rosenthal trans.).
Although al-Sarakhsı¯ does not identify his own views with
those of the S˙a¯bians, it is tempting to detect here an echo
of ideas that are found in the works of al-Kindı¯, for
instance his On First Philosophy (cf. al-Kindı¯’s characteri-
zation of Aristotle’s Metaphysics in his On the Quantity of
Aristotle’s Books).
This raises the question of al-Sarakhsı¯’s attitude
toward Islam. As mentioned above, unorthodox religious
views may have played a role in his downfall. Some evi-
dence suggests that he tried to integrate Islam with phi-
losophy, which again would be a characteristically Kindian
project. Not only did he quote the Qurʾa¯n in support of
astrology, but he reports h:adı¯ths (sayings of the Prophet)
and is placed by one later author in a group of authors who
fused kala¯m (Islamic speculative theology) with philosophy
(see Rosenthal 1943:34–35; also in the group is the some-
what later historian and philosopher Miskawayh, who has
likewise been associated with the Kindian tradition).
Al-Sarakhsı¯ also participated in an interreligious dis-
pute regarding the doctrine of the Trinity, serving in this
debate as al-Kindı¯’s representative (see Moosa 1972). Al-
Sarakhsı¯’s attempted refutations never get far in the
account we have, because the report is authored by
a Christian who describes the event as a stunning victory
by al-Sarakhsı¯’s opponent, the Bishop of Kaskar. Still, it
is worth reading the account alongside al-Kindı¯’s brief
refutation of the Trinity, which is extant thanks to a
counter-refutation by none other than al-Farabi’s Chris-
tian student Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯. Kindı¯’s refutation deploys
ideas from the Aristotelian tradition, arguing that the
Persons of the Trinity cannot be identiﬁed with any of
the Porphyrian predicables. Similarly, al-Sarakhsı¯ asks the
Bishop whether the Persons are differentiated essentially
or accidentally (neither, replies the Bishop).
Also typical of the Kindian tradition is participation in
the reﬁned Arabic literary culture of the ninth–tenth cen-
tury. This culture of reﬁnement (adab) saw its greatest
exponent in a rough contemporary of al-Sarakhsı¯’s, al-
Ja¯h:iz˙. Al-Sarakhsı¯’s own contributions to adab include a
kind of mirror for princes, entitled On the Appropriate
Behavior of Kings, which is probably extant (see Rosenthal
1995; on the fusion of philosophy and adab, see further
Rowson 1990). He is credited with many sayings and witty
remarks, which are the subject of praise and quotation by
later authors.
He is also praised for the breadth of his knowledge,
which took in not only the ﬁelds mentioned already but
also geography and medicine. Some of his geographical
notes are extant, including information he collected while
on a military expedition with al-Mu‘tad˙id in 884 (on this
see Rosenthal 1943, 1951). In medicine we know nothing
but a few fragments and titles of lost works. It is however
interesting to see that the great physician and philosopher
Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯ criticized al-Sarakhsı¯’s refutation of
Galen on the subject of bitter foods. (Al-Sarakhsı¯ also
disputed with Galen over al-mah:all al-awwal, ‘‘ﬁrst loca-
tion’’ – the meaning is unclear.)
All of this – the openness toward explicitly Muslim
theological speculation, the practice of adab and of astrol-
ogy, and expertise in a wide range of disciplines – is
distinctive of other members of the Kindian tradition. If
more of al-Sarakhsı¯’s output were extant, we would have
a better idea of the philosophical and cultural commit-
ments of the Kindian intellectual heritage.
See also: ▶Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯, Muh:ammad ibn Zakarı¯ya¯ʾ
(Rhazes) ▶al-ʿA¯mirı¯, Abu¯ l-H˙ asan ▶al-Balkhı¯, Abu¯ Zayd
▶al-Kindı¯, Abu¯ Yu¯suf Yaʿqu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q ▶Mirrors for
Princes ▶Trinity ▶Yah:ya¯ ibn ʿAdı¯
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Rosenthal Franz (1943) Ah:mad b. at:-T˙ayyib as-Sarah˘sı¯. American Orien-
tal Society, New Haven
Secondary Sources
Adamson P (2007) The Kindian tradition: the structure of philosophy in
Arabic Neoplatonism. In: D’Ancona C (ed) The libraries of the
Neoplatonists. Brill, Leiden, pp 351–370
Moosa M (1972) A new source on Ah:mad ibn al-T˙ayyib al-Sarakhsı¯:
Florentine MS Arabic 299. J Am Oriental Soc 92:19–24
Rosenthal F (1951) From Arabic books and manuscripts IV: new frag-
ments of as-Sarakhsı¯. J Am Oriental Soc 71:135–142
al-Sarakhsı¯, Ah˙mad ibn al-T˙ayyib S
1175
S

Rosenthal
F
(1956)
From
Arabic
books
and
manuscripts
VI:
Istanbul materials for al-Kindı¯ and as-Sarakhsı¯. J Am Oriental Soc
76:27–31
Rosenthal F (1961) From Arabic books and manuscripts VIII: as-Sarakhsı¯
on love. J Am Oriental Soc 81:222–224
Rosenthal F (1995) From Arabic books and manuscripts, XVI: as-Sarakhsı¯
(?) on the appropriate behavior for kings. J Am Oriental Soc
115:105–109
Rowson E (1990) The philosopher as Litte´rateur: al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ and his
predecessors. Z Gesch Arab-Islam Wiss 6:50–92
Scholarios, George (Gennadios II)
▶George Scholarios (Gennadios II)
Schools in the Twelfth Century
CHRISTOPHE ERISMANN
Helsinki Collegium for Advanced Studies
University of Helsinki
Helsinki
Finland
Abstract
There is no general agreement on the meaning of the
expression ‘‘twelfth-century schools’’ and the reality of
some of them, mainly of the famous School of Chartres,
has been seriously challenged. Without solving this prob-
lem, we can distinguish three types of institution: (1) The
cathedral schools: Notre-Dame of Paris, Chartres, and also
Laon, Orle´ans, Reims. These schools are, ﬁrst and fore-
most, places where theology was taught. (2) Collegial or
canonical schools: the most interesting example is the
School of Saint Victor. (3) Private schools, led by inde-
pendent masters, based in Paris and focusing their teach-
ing on dialectic, logic, and the liberal arts but also
interested in theology. Schools are different from each
other regarding their institutional status, the authoritative
texts on which they focus, and their doctrinal inclination.
The expression ‘‘twelfth-century schools’’ refers to a
historical object that is difﬁcult to outline and deﬁne.
Roughly, it is used to speak of the essentially urban mul-
tiplication of institutions of teaching and training in cen-
tral and northern France, mainly in the area around
Paris, and of the revival of scholarly thought that came
with it. However, according to the interpretation one gives
to this expression, its extension may vary considerably.
This is because the existence of some schools has been
questioned – for example, the reality of the most famous
school of the twelfth century, the School of Chartres, has
been challenged by Richard Southern; Valerie Flint has
given an analogous criticism of the School of Laon – but
also because there is no agreement on what is meant by the
word ‘‘school.’’ It is the task more of research on intellec-
tual culture and the social history of ideas to determine
what the nature of these schools may have been, than that
of the history of philosophy stricto sensu. A historian of
philosophy can acknowledge the fact that some authors
inﬂuence others or defend the same theses, or disagree;
however, it is difﬁcult to provide proof of the reality of the
institutional organization of given intellectual centers.
Despite the general climate of skepticism, two facts justify
our speaking about ‘‘schools’’ – at least in a weak sense –
during the twelfth century. The ﬁrst is obvious: in all
periods of history, teaching and training in philosophy
required a minimal framework and structure. The second
pertains to the unquestionable activity of masters: in a way
unprecedented until the twelfth century, some particularly
original and charismatic thinkers initiated an intellectual
movement, had an indisputable posterity and attracted
around them a group which perpetuated their thought;
the twelfth century is clearly, to quote the expression of
David Knowles, ‘‘the age of the secular masters.’’
Previously, teaching was mainly given in monastic
schools (Fleury and, more importantly, the Abbey of Bec
are good examples); this type of structure began to wane,
and monastic schools closed to students from outside.
New structures appeared or acquired renewed dyna-
mism: during the twelfth century, a phase of active teach-
ing took place, in particular – and this was new – in
towns, masters opened their schools and currents of
thought were constituted, in which a feeling of belonging
can be identiﬁed. The history of this century is particu-
larly rich regarding the teaching of philosophy: in towns,
cathedral schools developed, such as Notre-Dame in
Paris, a new kind of philosophical work led by authors
associated to Chartres ﬂourished, the School of Saint
Victor was founded, the Parisian schools of logic were
created and grew, innovative thought such as that of
Gilbert of Poitiers had a remarkable posterity, an impor-
tant center for medieval spirituality developed at the
Abbey of Clairvaux, and the ﬁrst universities were
founded (in 1200, Philip Augustus issued the privilege
to the schools in Paris which marks, at least symbolically,
the beginning of the University of Paris).
Grouping these diverse phenomena under the generic
name of twelfth-century schools is probably imprecise,
1176 S
Scholarios, George (Gennadios II)

such are the differences between them. We may, however,
distinguish three types of institutions:
1. The cathedral schools: Notre-Dame of Paris, Chartres,
and also Laon, Orle´ans, Reims. These schools are ﬁrst
and foremost places where theology was taught,
although in the case of Chartres for example, great
interest was shown for grammar and natural philosophy.
2. Collegial or canonical schools: the most interesting
example is Saint Victor.
3. Independent or private schools, led by independent
masters, also sometimes called sectae. All these schools
were based in Paris and taught dialectic, logic, and the
liberal arts. In many cases, theology was associated to
logic; it is thus appropriate, following Yukio Iwakuma
and Sten Ebbesen, to call such schools logico-
theological schools.
Schools differ in their nature and history; some continue
a tradition, while others reﬂect the innovative approach of
the twelfth century. Schools can also be distinguished from
each other according to the content of their teaching.
Some, such as Laon, had recognized expertise in theology,
whereas the independent schools became specialized in
the teaching of logic, which came to be seen as their
hallmark. These schools also differ through the texts
that found their teaching: we can observe particularly
remarkable climaxes such as the exegetical tradition of
the Timaeus at Chartres or that of the Pseudo-Dionysius
at Saint Victor. In contrast, the schools of dialectic, both of
realist and nominalist inclination, are clearly focused on
Aristotle’s logical writings. However, some thinkers cross
these lines. William of Champeaux ﬁrst taught at the
School of Notre-Dame in Paris before founding Saint
Victor; and he was interested in Aristotelian logic. Gilbert
of Poitiers, who was chancellor at Chartres from 1126 to
1137, was also highly competent in logic, but had little
interest in the exegesis of the Timaeus.
Let us consider these three types of schools by focus-
ing, in the ﬁrst two cases, on the examples that provided
the most interesting philosophical contribution, Chartres
for the ﬁrst type and Saint Victor for the second. For the
third type, we shall consider the case of the Porretans.
The Cathedral Schools: The Case of Chartres
It is not the role of this entry to decide who, of Richard
Southern or the supporters of the School of Chartres
(N. Ha¨ring, P. Dronke, and E. Jeauneau), is correct. We
can adopt a neutral attitude by saying that Chartres can be
described as a group of twelfth-century masters working
in various centers, who shared some interests but not
others, some references but not all.
Among the Chartrian masters, the ﬁrst of the new
school was Bernard, master at Chartres by c. 1119 and
chancellor by 1124, dying perhaps by 1126. Bernard initi-
ated one of the ﬁelds of reﬂection characteristic of the
Chartrian milieu: divine ideas. This theme originates in
two texts that were centrally important to thinkers asso-
ciated with Chartres – the Timaeus and Boethius’ Opus-
cula sacra. As a Platonist, Bernard distinguished between
the ideas, which are eternal, and the forms, reﬂections of
the ideas, created by nature with the things which they
specify. It was he who originated the phrase ‘‘native forms’’
(formae nativae). This reading was echoed by later authors
associated with Chartres who found a similar idea in
Boethius. Bernard of Chartres inspired a community of
learning (to use an expression less controversial than
‘‘school’’) in which Platonic texts, notably the Timaeus,
Macrobius’ Commentary on the Dream of Scipio and the
Consolation of Philosophy played a key role.
Among his disciples, two were great philosophers:
Gilbert of Poitiers (born c. 1080, a canon of Chartres in
1124 and chancellor there from 1126 to 1137 succeeding
to Bernard) and William of Conches (c. 1080–c. 1154).
William of Conches wrote glosses to Boethius’ Consolation
of Philosophy, to Macrobius’ Commentary on the Dream
of Scipio, and possibly to the De nuptiis Philologiae et
Mercurii of Martianus Capella, as well as a Philosophia
and a commentary on Priscian’s Institutiones grammaticae
based on the anonymous eleventh-century Glosule to
Priscian. He wrote a Dragmaticon – largely a reworking
of his Philosophia, made during his spell in the household
of the Duke of Normandy, after he had left the schools.
Thierry (‘‘the Breton’’ or ‘‘of Chartres’’) became Chan-
cellor in about 1142; previously he had taught in Chartres
and almost certainly at Paris. Thierry demonstrates vari-
ous interests, touching on rhetoric, logic, mathematics,
and natural philosophy. His most distinctive philosophi-
cal teaching – in which both his realism and his Platonism
are expressed – is his activity as commentator on Boethius’
Opuscula sacra (some of the texts published under the
name of Thierry were probably written by disciples). In
his exegesis of Boethius, Thierry denies proper substantial
reality to individuals; he considers that the essence is
common to the individuals of a same species and that it
is possessed in proper by none of them. Only the images of
the forms exist in matter, and they come from the real
forms that exist in the divine mind. According to him,
a species is one and the same form for all the subordinate
individuals. In Plato, Socrates, and Cicero, Thierry sees
three distinct human beings, three individuals who differ
through their accidents. But in them all, there is only one
nature, humanity (una natura una et eadem sit humanitas
Schools in the Twelfth Century S
1177
S

in omnibus). The plurality of individuals comes from the
diversity of accidents, not from diversity of natures (see
the Commentum super Boethii librum de trinitate, I, 8;
Ha¨ring (1971) 64:66–82 which reﬂects Thierry’s teaching).
Whatever may be the status of their school, we can
mention some common elements of the intellectual pro-
jects of the various concerned authors. The ﬁrst common
trait of the thinkers associated with Chartres is a strong
commitment to the artes liberales (as distinct from theol-
ogy). This is true for authors such as Bernard of Chartres,
William of Conches, and Bernard Silvestris, who, unlike
most of the leading teachers of their time, remained –
insofar as we can judge – masters of the arts and did not
venture into theology at all, and for those like Thierry of
Chartres and, to an even higher extent, Gilbert, who were
interested in theology and demonstrated a vivid desire to
integrate the seven liberal arts into theological reﬂection.
The second is to believe in the relevance of reading pagan
texts as allegories of Christian truth. The most noticeable
example of this phenomenon is the interpretation
according to which Plato’s Timaeus is to be related to
theology, and that Plato’s teaching in this work is consis-
tent with the ﬁrst chapters of Genesis. Thierry of Chartres
is probably the thinker who went furthest in this direction,
by identifying, in his early commentary on the 6 days of
the creation, that which Plato called the anima mundi as
the Christian Holy Spirit (Tractatus de sex dierum operibus,
in Commentaries on Boethius by Thierry of Chartres and
his School, ed. N. M. Ha¨ring (Toronto, 1971), 566–567:
‘‘Plato uero in Timeo eundum spiritum mundi animam
uocat [. . .]. Christiani uero illud idem Spiritum sanctum
appellant’’). It is possible that Abelard’s Theologia summi
boni is, at least in part, an answer to this attempt to relate
Platonic teaching to Christian doctrine. The third is the
important role given to grammar: Bernard of Chartres,
William of Conches, and Bernard Silvestris greatly valued
the study of grammar; however, differently from the Pari-
sian masters and their contemporaries, they were not
interested in logic. The fourth concerns their characteristic
interest for natural philosophy.
The importance of these common points must not be
exaggerated. We may indeed acknowledge the central role
occupied by Boethius’ Opuscula sacra in the thought of
some of the authors associated with Chartres. Gilbert and
Thierry both wrote commentaries on these texts. How-
ever, their reading is different in many ways, the most
obvious being that Gilbert develops a particularist ontol-
ogy on the basis of his interpretation of the Opuscula sacra,
whereas Thierry defends an unsophisticated universalism.
From this fundamental disagreement stem many others,
on essential unity (Thierry insists against Gilbert that
humanity is one for all men; when he mentions Gilbert’s
opinion on this point, he adds the comment quod omnino
falsum est), on the explanation of individuality (Thierry
defends a literal reading of Boethius, according to which
the individuality of an individual is explained by acci-
dental properties, whereas Gilbert limits the role of acci-
dents to the epistemological distinction between two
individuals of the same species, ontological individual-
ity being caused by the fact that each individual pos-
sesses its own essence).
Collegial or Canonical Schools: Saint Victor
Saint Victor is a particular case in the landscape of twelfth-
century schools. It is a new school, related to a city, con-
stituted on the basis of converging intellectual interests,
whose members share the spirit of a school. However, it is
different from other institutions that were created in the
twelfth century by its limited interest in logic and the arts
of language (with the obvious exception of its founder,
William of Champeaux, who was an important dialecti-
cian) and by its monastic status.
Following a virulent controversy with his disciple Abe-
lard on the topic of universals, William of Champeaux,
who had until then been a master in Paris, decided to
renounce his chair at Notre-Dame and, in 1108 (or 1111,
as convincingly argued recently by Constant Mews)
retired, with some students, outside of town, at the Saint
Victor hermitage. Following the explicit demand of
Hildebert of Lavardin, he pursued his teaching there. In
1113, William became the bishop of Chaˆlons and obtained
that ‘‘his’’ school of Saint Victor become an abbey of
regular canons and that it adopt the so-called rule of
Saint Augustine.
Hugh of Saint Victor gave great intellectual vivacity to
the school, but changed its focus from what had been
William’s, being less interested in speculation about
language and logic. Hugh (Hugo de Sancto Victore) is
the ﬁrst theologian of the school; this German thinker
was a master at Saint Victor from 1125 and directed the
school from 1133; he died in 1141. As a theologian, he was
interested in a variety of topics, both speculative and
moral; his two main works are the Didascalicon de studio
legendi, which provides a method of reading and
a systemic presentation of Greek and late ancient science
and the treatise De sacramentis ﬁdei christianae which is,
both in content and form, one of the ﬁrst theological sums
of the Middle Ages. To these two writings we may add his
Expositio on the Celestial Hierarchy of Pseudo-Dionysius.
This work, strongly inﬂuenced by Eriugena’s commentary,
1178 S
Schools in the Twelfth Century

was to be added to the Dionysian corpus of the University
of Paris and thus inﬂuenced scholastic thinkers.
The Didascalicon is an ars legendi, which aims at pro-
viding students with advice on what must be read (quid
legendum), in which order (quo ordine) and how (quo
modo); it is also a great widening of intellectual perspec-
tives, an attempt to organize knowledge as a coherent
whole, and a treatise of exegesis. Central to this text is an
attempt to organize all profane knowledge around holy
knowledge: ‘‘All the arts of nature serve divine science;
inferior wisdom, correctly ordered, leads to superior
wisdom.’’ One must master profane knowledge before
holy knowledge. Like William of Conches, he believed
that all ﬁelds of knowledge are related. Knowledge of the
liberal arts is necessary: ‘‘Learn everything, and then you
will see that nothing is superﬂuous’’ (Didascalicon, VI, 3).
All forms of knowledge serve wisdom because they help
to understand the Holy Scriptures. Hugh believed that
the knowledge of the liberal arts should be oriented
toward the meditation of Scriptures and is accomplished
through
contemplation.
The
second
part
of
the
Didascalicon (books Vand VI) is dedicated to Holy Scrip-
ture and constitutes a short exegetical treatise. Hugh gives
a theory of the three senses of the Scriptures: historical,
allegorical, and tropological. The historical sense or his-
tory is the literal meaning. This meaning must be sought
as the basis of any reading. The allegorical sense is the
dogmatic or theological sense par excellence. It consists in
the discovery of the organization of creation and of the
meaning of human history. Tropology gives the moral
meaning of the Scriptures.
In his treatise dedicated to ‘‘the holy signs of natural
and written law,’’ the De sacramentis ﬁdei christianae,
Hugh presents himself in many ways as renewing Latin
theology. On the basis of the architectonical structure of
John Scottus Eriugena’s Periphyseon, and the movements
of exitus and reditus, he tells the story of the destiny and
creation of men. The general framework of this sum is
provided by time: the time of nature, the time of written
law, and the time of grace. He speaks of the creation (opus
conditionis) and of the fall, then of the ‘‘restoration’’ (opus
restaurationis) – Christ, the Church, and the sacraments.
Beyond the traditional notion of sign inherited from
Augustine, Hugh offers a new use of the notion of symbol,
until then unknown to Latin theology, in which the efﬁ-
cacious symbolism of sacraments is justiﬁed by an analogy
or resemblance (similitudo) founded in the nature of
things themselves that supposes a natural ontological rela-
tion between that which signiﬁes and that which is
signiﬁed.
Several other thinkers contributed to the development
of a School of Saint Victor, in which doctrinal research
and spiritual life were intrinsically related. Achardus
(Achardus de Sancto Victore or A. Abricensis or A. of
Bridlington), theologian, preacher, and philosopher,
was the abbot of Saint Victor from 1155 to 1160 before
becoming the bishop of Avranches, where he died in 1171.
He is the author of a treatise On the Unity of God and the
Plurality of Creatures (De unitate Dei et
pluritate
creaturarum), in which he gives a metaphysical reﬂection
on the one and the many. Achardus develops an original
doctrine on the relation between the plurality of creatures
and the true unity of God. The plurality of creatures
reﬂects an intelligible plurality ‘‘which immediately
adheres to the supreme unity.’’ The second plurality –
that of things, created or possible, as they are thought by
God – is founded in a distinction, which is internal to the
unity of God himself.
Richard (Richardus de Sancto Victore or R. Parisiensis)
was master and then prior of Saint Victor until his death
in 1173. He was interested in many things and was
a philosopher, a theologian, a historian, an exegete, and
a mystic. We cannot be certain that Richard was a direct
student of Hugh, however, his work was strongly inﬂuenced
by the author of the De sacramentis, whose thought he
continues. His Liber exceptionum is a propaedeutical work
characterized by his interest for the liberal arts and phi-
losophy, written in the spirit of the Didascalicon; like
Hugh, Richard preached a lot and composed several com-
mentaries on the Bible. The Middle Ages retained more of
his spirituality than his exegesis. In the Divine Comedy,
Dante places him in the Heaven of the Sun, in a group of
12 blessed doctors of holy science. In Dante’s text, Thomas
Aquinas presents him in the following way: ‘‘Richard who,
in contemplation, was more than a man’’ (Paradise, X,
131–132). His main work, the De trinitate, proposes to
understand the mystery of the Trinity according to
a method inspired by Anselm of Canterbury’s contempla-
tive dialectic. Richard seeks to ‘‘present, in support of what
we believe, reasons that are not only plausible, but neces-
sary, and to elucidate and explain truth.’’ Richard insists
on the necessary character of his method: the existence of
eternal realities is absolutely necessary, they have always
existed, and will certainly never cease to exist; they are
always what they are, they cannot be different from what
they are.
Godfrey (Godefridus) joined the School of Saint
Victor around 1155 to become the student of Richard.
He wrote an allegorical and moral exegesis of the story
of creation (Microcosmus) and a Source of Philosophy
Schools in the Twelfth Century S
1179
S

(Fons philosophiae), a collection of verses that gives,
among other things, a reﬂection on the body of Christ
(Anathomia corporis Christi) and a division of philosophy
that continues Hugh’s research.
Walter (Gualterus) came to Saint Victor under Gilduin
and became prior in 1173, after Richard. Toward 1177, he
wrote a text in which he reacts against the theological
and philosophical innovations of his day – a manifest of
fundamentalist theology – the Contra quatuor labyrinthos
Franciae. This violent pamphlet is aimed at several inno-
vative theologians of his time, the ‘‘band of four’’: Abelard,
Peter Lombard (who compiled the Sentences), Peter of
Poitiers, and Gilbert Porreta. Abelard, who had been a
violent adversary of William of Champeaux, the founder
of Saint Victor, is taken to represent the excesses of dia-
lectic. Peter Lombard, despite having spent time at Saint
Victor, is reproached for the inﬂuence his Sentences had on
Abelard’s dialectics. Peter of Poitiers, who had dissemi-
nated the work of Peter Lombard his master, is accused of
the same crime. Gilbert of Poitiers, who had already been
condemned in Reims in 1148 by Bernard of Clairvaux,
symbolizes the inappropriate use of metaphysics in theology.
Logico-theological Schools
The twelfth century saw the ﬂourishing of competing and
self-consciously different schools of liberal arts, mainly
dialectic and logic, probably all based in Paris, a city
which underwent at the time a period of very rapid
growth. This multiplication can be explained by a histor-
ical process, which Richard Southern called the deinstitu-
tionalization of the schola, that is, the fact that teaching
became detached from the corporate schools of the past
and attached to an individual master who taught wherever
he could ﬁnd a place to teach. While cathedral schools
only admitted one master, in Paris it was possible to buy
a licentia docenti by paying a fee to the cathedral author-
ities and to open a school and settle as a master. These
masters received money from their students in response
to a new and growing interest of students who sought
new skills and knowledge which traditional institutional
schools were, by their nature and function, not well
adapted to provide. The success of this new type of teach-
ing was such that, according to Southern, there were at
least 25 well-known schools within a hundred miles of
Paris. These schools, also called sectae, were of various size
and nature.
With Peter Abelard’s The Story of My Misfortunes and
John of Salisbury’s Metalogicon, we have kept two lively
descriptions of the twelfth-century schools.
These various schools produced introductions to
logic, logical treatises, and commentaries, for example,
to the Categories, to Aristotle’s De interpretatione, or to
Porphyry’s Isagoge.
The main ones are the following:
1. The Nominales. This is the name given to the followers
of Peter Abelard. A good testimony of the work done
in this school was the Summa dialectice artis of
William of Lucca, a thinker who was also very open
to the ideas of Gilbert of Poitiers. Nominalism about
universals (genera and species are vocabula or voces) is
an important thesis of the school; however, the teach-
ing of the school went further, covering theses such as,
topical loci are not required (apti) for syllogisms; one
may not infer a negative claim from an afﬁrmative.
2. The Porretani. Gilbert of Poitiers had a posterity and
inﬂuence unequalled in the twelfth century. He had
disciples and enthusiastic defenders of his theological
thought. An excellent testimony of the reﬂection pro-
duced by the Porretan movement is the Compendium
logicae porretanum. This text develops one of the main
lines of Porretan ontology, ontological particularism,
according to which everything which exists is particu-
lar. This position rejects universals as shared entities,
since the Porretan doctrine states that no entity can
exist simultaneously in two spatiotemporally distinct
individuals: ‘‘nihil quod sit in uno est in alio’’
(Compendium logicae porretanum, III.15). The Com-
pendium retains the thesis according to which being
comes from the form; however, contrarily to what the
realists defend, the same form cannot be common to
Plato and Socrates. Therefore, according to this text,
there are as many humanities as there are men (quot
homines, tot humanitates).
3. The Parvipontani (so called because they gathered at
the Petit Pont in Paris) or Adamitae were the followers
of Adam of Balsham, sometimes also called Adam of
the Petit Pont, the author of a treatise called Art of
Discussing (Ars disserendi), which demonstrates an
innovative approach to logic. The second part of the
only surviving copy of this text is indeed not Adam’s
own work, but that of members of his school.
4. The Meludinenses or Robertini: the disciples of Robert
of Melun. The most interesting literary production of
this current is the Ars meliduna, a text from the 1170s/
1180s. The Ars meliduna contains an original theory of
universals, some elements of which are Stoic in origin.
Universals exist, and belong to a realm of their own,
different from that of concrete beings. They are out-
side sensible things and are understood outside
them; they are participated by many sensible things
(a pluribus participabilis). They are not substances or
1180 S
Schools in the Twelfth Century

properties and they can only be grasped by the
intellect.
5. The Albricani or Montani: the disciples of Alberic (de
Monte) in a school on the Mont Sainte Genevie`ve.
A good testimony of the work of this school is pro-
vided by a text that discusses the traditional points of
the teaching of logic: the Introductiones montanae
maiores.
The most interesting case is that of the Porretani. On the
basis of the thought of a master – Gilbert of Poitiers – we
see the constitution of a real current of thought, composed
both of people who were deeply inﬂuenced by his thought
(the most noticeable example being no doubt Alan of Lille
who, in the years 1160–1180, both in his Summa Quoniam
homines and in his Rules of Theology, makes extensive use
of Gilbert’s ontology and philosophy; Simon of Tournai
can also be mentioned), and of people who took to heart
to defend his theology against accusations of heresy (Hugh
of Honau’s quest for references to Patristic authorities,
in particular from Hugh Etherian, in order to defend
Gilbert’s theological positions is characteristic; the result
of this work can be found, among other places, in his
treatise De homoysion et homoeysion and in his Liber de
diversitate naturae et personae). The years during which
Gilbert taught in Paris (1137–1142) were probably deci-
sive in the formation of his ‘‘school.’’ Gilbert’s inﬂuence
can be found both in logic and in theology, in works as
diverse as the Summa Zwettlensis (written before 1150,
maybe by Peter of Vienna), the Tractatus invisibilia Dei
for the theological aspect, and for the years 1150–1170,
in the Compendium logicae porretanum, the Glosulae
porretane super Priscianum minorem, the Commentarium
in Categorias Aristotelis for the logical and semantical
aspect. Gilbert’s inﬂuence is still perceptible in the last
years of the twelfth century, as shown by a remarkable
text, the Dialogus Ratii et Everardi, written by the Porretan
Cistercian Everard of Ypres.
A Doctrinal Perspective on the Chartres
Versus Paris Distinction
The difference between types of schools is institutional,
but also doctrinal in nature. We could expect the distinc-
tive criterion to be the fact of privileging in one case the
arts of language and in the other theology. However, this
criterion quickly leads to a dead end. The schools of
logic – ﬁrst and foremost the Porretans – were fascinated
by theology and there was strong interest for grammar at
Chartres. Thinkers such as William of Champeaux and
Peter Abelard worked both as logicians and as theologians.
The divide between types of schools is more to be found in
the old opposition between Platonism and Aristotelian-
ism. Platonic thought clearly dominates the writings of
authors associated with Chartres (although this statement
must be moderated in the case of Gilbert), in particular
the tradition of the Timaeus and Platonic authors of late
Antiquity. The same can be said of the School of Saint
Victor (let us just mention the importance of the Pseudo-
Dionysius, the paradigm of Christian Platonism, in the
thought of Saint Victor); the central inﬂuence of Augus-
tine in cathedral schools conﬁrms this; nothing of this sort
can be observed among the Parisian masters of logic. The
dominant inﬂuence among the new masters is that of
Aristotelianism. Whether they were realists or nominal-
ists, the scope of their work was determined by Aristotle’s
Categories and Porphyry’s Isagoge for ontology, and com-
pleted by the De interpretatione for philosophy of lan-
guage. This fact causes a fundamental distinction. For
example, even if the two doctrines seem close, realism
developed on the basis of the Categories and Porphyry
(such as the material essence realism of William of
Champeaux) is very different from realism inspired by
Boethius’ Opuscula sacra read in a Platonic universalist
way (such as that developed by Thierry of Chartres or
Clarembald of Arras). In the ﬁrst case, separate forms are
not admitted, real forms are immanent to individuals and
do not exist outside them. The second version is based on
the Platonist metaphysical principle according to which
‘‘forms’’ of the sensible world (the enmattered forms) are
not the real forms, but only images of real forms.
Enmattered forms are caused by prototypical forms (the
real forms which are in God), of which they are only
degenerate images.
See also: ▶Adelard of Bath ▶Alan of Lille ▶Bernard of
Clairvaux ▶Gilbert of Poitiers ▶Hugh of St. Victor
▶John Scottus Eriugena ▶Liberal Arts ▶Logic ▶Peter
Abelard ▶Platonism ▶Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite
▶Thierry of Chartres ▶Trinitarian Logic ▶Universals
▶William of Champeaux
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Adam of Balsham (1956) Ars disserendi. In: Minio-Paluello L (ed)
Twelfth-century logic. Texts and studies I. Edizioni di Storia e
Letteratura, Rome
Alan of Lille (1954) Summa Quoniam homines, ed. Glorieux P. Arch Hist
Doct Litt M-Aˆ ge 20:113–364
Alan of Lille (1981) Regulae theologiae, ed. Ha¨ring NM. Arch Hist Doct
Litt M-Aˆ ge 48:97–226
Anonymous (1983) Compendium Logicae Porretanum, ed. Ebbesen S,
Fredborg K, Nielsen L. Cahiers de l’Institut du Moyen-Aˆ ge grec et
latin 46
Schools in the Twelfth Century S
1181
S

Bernard of Chartres (1991) Glose super Platonem, ed. Dutton PE.
PIMSST 107. PIMS, Toronto
Gilbert of Poitiers (1966) Commentaries on Boethius, ed. Ha¨ring N.
PIMSST 13. PIMS, Toronto
Hugh of Honau (1962) Liber de diversitate naturae et personae, ed.
Ha¨ring NM. Arch Hist Doct Litt M-Aˆ ge 37:103–216
Hugh of Saint Victor (1939) Didascalicon de studio legendi, ed. Buttimer
CH. Studies in medieval and Renaissance Latin, vol 10. The Catholic
University of America, Washington
Peter of Vienna (Poitiers) (1977) Summa, ed. Ha¨ring N, as Die Zwettler
Summe. BGPTMA n.f. 15. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Richard of St Victor (1959) De trinitate, ed. Salet G. Sources Chre´tiennes
63. Editions du Cerf, Paris
Thierry of Chartres et al (1971) Commentaries on Boethius. In: Ha¨ring
NM (ed) Commentaries on Boethius by Thierry of Chartres and his
school. PIMSST 20. PIMS, Toronto
William of Conches (1965) Commentary on Timaeus (Glosae super
Platonem), ed. Jeauneau E. Vrin, Paris
William of Lucca (1975) Summa dialetice artis, ed. Pozzi L. Testi e saggi 7.
Liviana, Padua
Secondary Sources
Benson RL, Constable G (eds) (1982) Renaissance and renewal in the
twelfth century. Clarendon Press, Oxford
Catalani L (2007) I Porretani: una scuola di pensiero, tra alto e basso
Medioevo. Brepols, Turnhout
Chaˆtillon J (1951) De Guillaume de Champeaux a` Thomas Gallus. Rev
M-Aˆ ge Lat VIII:139–162, Brepols
Chaˆtillon J (1992) Le mouvement canonial au Moyen Aˆ ge: re´forme de
l’e´glise, spiritualite´ et culture. Etudes re´unies par Sicard P. Biblio-
theca Victorina III. Paris/Turnhout
Chenu M-D (1957) La the´ologie au douzie`me sie`cle. Vrin, Paris
Courtenay W (ed) (1992) A collection of articles on twelfth-century
nominalism. Vivarium 30
de Rijk LM (1962/1967) Logica modernorum I and II. Van Gorcum, Assen
de Rijk LM (1966) Some new evidence on twelfth-century logic: Alberic
and the school of Mont Ste Genevie`ve. Vivarium 4:1–57
Dronke P (ed) (1988) A history of twelfth-century western philosophy.
CUP, Cambridge
Flint VIJ (1976) The ‘School of Laon’: a reconsideration. Rech The´ol Anc
Me´die´v 43:89–110
Gregory T (1955) Anima mundi: La ﬁlosoﬁa di Guglielmo di Conches e la
Scuola di Chartres. Sansoni, Florence
Giraud C (2010) Per verba magistri: Anselme de Laon et son e´cole au XIIe
sie`cle. Brepols, Turnhout
Ha¨ring N (1974) Chartres and Paris revisited. In: O’Donnell JR
(ed) Essays in honour of Anton Charles Pegis. PIMS, Toronto, pp
268–329
Jeauneau E (1973) Lectio philosophorum: recherches sur l’Ecole de
Chartres. Hakkert, Amsterdam
Jolivet J, de Libera A (1987) Gilbert de Poitiers et ses contemporains: aux
origines de la ‘logica modernorum’. History of logic 5. Bibliopolis,
Naples
Knowles D (1988) The evolution of medieval thought, ed. Luscombe DE,
Brooke CNL. Longman, London
Marenbon J (1993) Medieval Latin commentaries and glosses on Aristo-
telian logical texts before c. 1150 AD. In: Burnett C (ed) Glosses and
commentaries on Aristotelian logical texts. Warburg Institute sur-
veys and texts 23. Warburg Institute, London, pp 77–127
Nielsen LO (1982) Theology and philosophy in the twelfth century:
a study of Gilbert Porreta’s thinking and the theological expositions
of the doctrine of the incarnation during the period 1130–1180. Acta
theologica danica 15. Brill, Leiden
Sicard P (1991) Hugues de Saint-Victor et son e´cole. Brepols, Turnhout
Southern RW (1970) Humanism and the school of Chartres. In: Medieval
humanism and other studies. Blackwell, Oxford, pp 61–85
Valente L (2008) Logique et the´ologie. Les e´coles parisiennes entre 1150 et
1220. Vrin, Paris
Sense Perception, Theories of
PEKKA KA¨RKKA¨INEN
Faculty of Theology
University of Helsinki
Helsinki
Finland
Abstract
Medieval views of sense perception took as their starting
point the ancient theories, among which Aristotle’s view
was the most inﬂuential. The Augustinian tradition con-
sidered the soul as the active agent in perception, with it
not being affected by the sense organs. The Aristotelian
tradition, for its part, considered the sense as a passive
faculty, brought into actuality by sense data. Several late
medieval authors, inspired by Averroes, developed the
notion of an agent sense, an external nonmaterial agent
needed for the actualization of the act of perception in
addition to forms in the sense organs. The Aristotelian
view was mediated to Latin philosophy largely through
Avicenna’s faculty psychology. As an explanation of the
causal inﬂuence of the perceived object on the sensory
faculty, a theory of the multiplication of forms was widely
accepted. The forms were considered as similitudes of the
perceptibilities of the objects, and their function was to
make the perception of a particular perceptibility actual.
There was wide discussion on the metaphysical nature
of these forms. Some authors adopted the view that
the causal inﬂuence is to be explained merely by action
at a distance. The medieval philosophers commonly
described the physiological processes involved in percep-
tion with help from the medical and optical traditions.
The main sensory faculty was seen as located either in the
brain or in the heart. The medieval view on perception was
committed to the idea of perceptual realism. Awareness of
illusions and misperceptions did not lead to skepticism
about the possibility of sense perception rendering verid-
ical knowledge, but instead to some reﬂections on the
notion of objective being distinguished from real being.
1182 S
Sense Perception, Theories of

The philosophers also presented diverse views of the con-
ceptuality of sense perception.
Among ancient philosophical views on sense perception,
the most inﬂuential in the Middle Ages were those of
Aristotle and Augustine. Aristotle’s theory of perception
in De anima and De sensu et sensibilibus formed the basis
of medieval philosophical theories. Particularly important
was Aristotle’s view on the act of sense perception as an
actualization of the power of perception, triggered by the
perceived object. Another inﬂuential philosophical tradi-
tion behind the medieval theories was the Platonist view.
An important factor in the Platonist tradition was that it
considered the soul as the prime agent in sense perception.
Stoic views were particularly inﬂuential in the explanation
of the physical causal chain that is necessary for sense
perception to take place.
Augustine was a major ﬁgure in the mediation of
ancient views on sense perception to the Middle Ages.
Before the adoption of the Aristotelian corpus as the
basis of western natural philosophy, Augustine’s views
were dominant, and his inﬂuence remained even long
afterward. He adopted the Aristotelian view of the change
in sense organs caused by the object of the sense. Augus-
tine explained the physical causation of the change by
discussing the change of the elements in the medium
and in the corporeal spirits, which he described according
to the medical tradition.
For Augustine, the physical process of perception
was not, however, only a passive process of being affected
by external activators. Similar to the Stoic optical tradi-
tion, Augustine thought that a ray emanating from the eye
was necessary for seeing to take place. Incidentally, he also
referred to the Stoic metaphor of the stick in describing
the active nature of physical processes involved in sense
perception. The view that vision involved the physical
change of a medium emanating from the eye was com-
monly rejected by Arabic thinkers such as Avicenna and
Alhazen and subsequently by later Latin philosophy.
Augustine also developed the notion of an inner sense,
which mediates between external perception and the
activity of the soul. He also utilized the Aristotelian dis-
tinction between common and proper sensibles.
According to Augustine, as a psychological process
perception takes place as an activity of the soul, which he
described in Platonist rather than Aristotelian terms. The
soul directs its attention toward the corporeal change in
the sense organ and notices it, without being affected by it.
At the same time, the soul produces in itself an image or
a similitude of the perceived object, which is identical to
the image in the sense organ, except that the former is
immaterial. The mind then contemplates this immaterial
image. Augustine’s ideas were appropriated during the
Middle Ages in various ways, but in particular, his view
on the activity of the soul was adopted by Robert
Kilwardby and many twelfth-century writers.
The most inﬂuential view on sense perception was the
Aristotelian model, which was transmitted to the Latin
West mainly through Avicenna’s De anima. After the
introduction of Aristotelian philosophy during the forma-
tion of the universities in western Europe, Aristotle’s De
anima soon became part of the curriculum in arts facul-
ties. Students were obliged to participate in the lectures
and exercises based on this book as a part of their studies
in natural philosophy. Sense perception was also discussed
during the study of natural philosophy in the teaching
of De sensu et sensato. Although Avicenna’s De anima
was not, strictly speaking, a commentary on Aristotle’s
corresponding work, it provided a frame of reference for
the teaching. Later Averroes’ commentaries on De anima
and Parva naturalia also became important for Latin
commentators.
A central part of the Aristotelian theory was the notion
of a teleological dependence between the perceptible qual-
ities and corresponding faculties of the soul. The percep-
tual faculties were understood as potentialities, which
were in a state of waiting to be actualized as perceptions
by an impulse from speciﬁc external objects of perception.
This view presupposed a causal link between the percep-
tibility of the external world and the faculty of perception.
There were different views on the causal mediation of
the impulse. The prominent view was to posit a chain of
qualitative changes, which multiplied themselves in the
mediating matter. Averroes, whose thought became inﬂu-
ential among later writers, stated that the changes are of
a material nature in the external objects, but that their
degree of spirituality gradually rises when they reach the
sense organs and the soul.
Averroes often called these spiritual changes ‘‘inten-
tions’’; Avicenna had earlier used the same term for
certain qualities of the objects, which are perceived by
an internal sense called ‘‘estimation.’’ Both uses of the
term inﬂuenced later Latin philosophy. The notion of
spiritual change was used in this context to explain
how the impulse was transmitted through the mediat-
ing matter without making the medium itself percepti-
ble. Aquinas thought that the spiritual change in the
medium indicates that the lower substances have to
some extent the capability of non-corporeal causation
typical of higher substances. As well, many writers
pointed out the inﬂuence of higher spheres as an explana-
tion of spiritual changes.
Sense Perception, Theories of S
1183
S

Various authors considered the different amounts of
spirituality that were necessary to explain this causation.
Sight was often used as the standard of sense perception,
but at the same time was seen as more spiritual than the
other senses. In the causation of smell and sound, ordinary
physical changes such as vibration of air and movement of
material particles played a considerable role. Even during
the late Middle Ages, authors still argued for both the
spiritual and corporeal mediation of sensory impulses.
Jean Buridan attempted to show that even the perception
of smell and touch presupposes a spiritual change in the
medium in addition to an ordinary physical one. In doing
this, he hinted at the existence of rays of heat, which
mediate the perception of heat. There were also discus-
sions on whether light is mediated by an instantaneous
change in the medium or whether the multiplication of
changes takes a deﬁnite period of time. Peter John Olivi
and William of Ockham rejected the idea of spiritual
changes in the medium and considered the notion of
action at a distance as sufﬁcient for explaining the causal
chain. Their views gained only minor support.
The faculties of perception were divided according to
the different objects and organs of perception. The stan-
dard division derives from Avicenna, who enumerated ﬁve
external senses (sight, hearing, smell, taste, and touch) and
ﬁve internal senses (See the enry on Internal Senses in
this volume). Averroes considered the ‘‘common sense’’
as part of external rather than internal senses. Among later
authors, some functions in external perception were
attributed to common sense. While some authors attrib-
uted the perception of perception to the external senses,
most medieval writers agreed with Aquinas on the con-
trary position.
Although the distinction between the external senses
was for the most part considered as unproblematic, theo-
retical foundations for the distinction were commonly
presented. Therefore, the senses were usually distin-
guished according to their particular objects and organs.
There was also some discussion of the number of external
senses, which derived from questions surrounding the
sense of touch. This sense had manifold objects, which
ranged from qualities of cold and hot to such as phenom-
ena as pleasure and pain.
The physiological process of perception was discussed
with the help of ancient medical and optical traditions.
Avicenna’s fusion of Aristotelian and Galenic ideas had
a notable inﬂuence on the later De anima -tradition, but
similar ideas were known even before the introduction
of Aristotelianism in the medieval West through a
medical compendium called the Pantegni and through
the works of Qust˙a ibn Lu¯qa¯, Nemesius of Emesa, and
John Damascene. As a physiological process, perception
was understood to take place in the sense organs.
Avicenna posited the physiological site of vision in the
pupil and in the connection of the optic nerves.
According to Avicenna, common sense, which is located
in the front part of the brain, consummates the act of
perception. Later Latin Aristotelians followed Avicenna’s
view, but also attributed to common sense the capability
of perception of perception. Alhazen and Roger Bacon
developed the optical theory of the generation of the
image in the pupil, which they thought was the primary
sensory organ of vision.
Avicenna’s view that the primary physiological seat of
perception is in the nerves, and especially in the front of
the brain, was not universally accepted. It was grounded
on the Galenist medical tradition, which was designed to
explain the cognitive defects found in the context of
lesions in the brain. The awareness of the Aristotelian
view, which posited perception as being in the heart,
made itself known among several authors. Averroes was
a prominent proponent of the Aristotelian heart-centered
view, and during the late Middle Ages John Buridan advo-
cated this same view. Some authors identiﬁed the brain-
centered view as one of physicians and the heart-centered
as one of philosophers.
The medieval view on perception was committed to
the idea of perceptual realism. The Aristotelian tradition
called the objects of perception perceptible forms (species
sensibiles), which denoted the perceptual qualities of
extramental material objects. Acts of perception in the
soul were considered to be essentially about these objects.
The changes in the medium and in the sense organs were
also called perceptible forms; these were not considered
intentional objects of perception, but as still formally
identical to the perceptual qualities of the objects. Their
function was to enable acts of perception concerning per-
ceptible objects. John Duns Scotus, in particular, stressed
the distinction between the presence of a perceptible
form in the soul and the intentional act of perception of
an object.
During the late Middle Ages, William of Ockham
defended a view according to which sense perception is
essentially not conceptual, but rather a pre-conceptual
process, which was a necessary precondition for the con-
cept formation of the intellect. According to him, however,
it did not consist of a mere ﬂow of information but
included also acts of discrimination between various sen-
sory contents. On the contrary, some of Ockham’s con-
temporaries like Adam Wodeham and John Buridan
considered some conceptual or semi-conceptual features
as essential for sense perception.
1184 S
Sense Perception, Theories of

The reliability of sense perception was discussed in
optical treatises. Alhazen proposed eight conditions for
veridical vision. Six of these were requirements for any act
of vision: distance between the object and the eye, direct
opposition of the object before the eye, light, sufﬁcient
magnitude of the visible object, transparency of the
medium between the eye and the object, and density of
the visible object. In addition to this, he listed two further
requirements for veridical vision: time and a healthy
eye. Alhazen’s list was used and commented on by later
perspectivists. The awareness of such phenomena as illu-
sions and misperceptions did not lead to skepticism about
the possibility of sense perception rendering veridical
knowledge. In the late Middle Ages, however, Duns Scotus
distinguished the element of the objective being of the
sensory objects in the intentional content of perception.
Accordingly, Peter Auriol argued for a distinctive objective
being using a series of examples from misperceptions such
as the illusory ring of light, which is produced by a moving
torch. Furthermore, Auriol proposed that the ring has an
objective or intentional existence in the air, without hav-
ing a real extramental existence.
The Aristotelian view considered perception essen-
tially as a passive faculty, but this view was never accepted
without qualiﬁcations. Averroes suggested there was an
agent sense, an operative principle outside the human
soul, which would be active in sense perception in manner
analogous to the agent intellect in concept formation.
Some authors took Averroes’ remarks as signiﬁcant, and
the discussions about agent sense continued until six-
teenth-century philosophy. Among fourteenth-century
philosophers, it was common to point out that the soul
is the primary sensing agent, since a material entity cannot
produce an immaterial act. Some of the later Aristotelian
writers, who emphasized the activity of the soul in sense
perception, saw this view as a combination of Augustinian
and Aristotelian ideas.
See also: ▶Epistemology ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn
Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avi-
cenna) ▶Intentionality ▶Internal Senses ▶John Buridan
▶John
Duns
Scotus
▶Medicine
and
Philosophy
▶Natural Philosophy ▶Parva naturalia, Commentaries
on Aristotle’s ▶Peter John Olivi ▶Philosophical Psychol-
ogy ▶Robert Kilwardby ▶Skepticism ▶Species, Sensible
and Intelligible ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Albert the Great (1968) De anima. Alberti Magni Opera omnia VII.1, ed.
Stroick C. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Albert the Great (1986) Summae de creaturis secunda pars, quae est de
homine. Opera omnia, vol 35, ed. Borgnet A. Vive`s, Paris
Aquinas Thomas (1984) Sentencia libri de anima. Sancti Thomae de
Aquino doctoris angelici Opera omnia iussu Leonis XIII P. M.
edita, 45.1, ed. Gauthier R-A. Commissio Leonina, Rome/Vrin,
Paris
Avicenna (1968/1972) Liber de anima seu sextus de naturalibus. Avicenna
Latinus, I–III (1972), ed. van Riet S. Peeters, Louvain/Brill,
Leiden; IV–V (1968). E´ditions Orientalistes, Louvain/Brill, Leiden
Bacon Roger (1996) Perspectiva, ed. Lindberg DC. In: Roger Bacon and
the origins of Perspectiva in the Middle Ages. Clarendon, Oxford
Buridan John (1984) Quaestiones in Aristotelis De anima liber secundus
de tertia lectura, ed. Sobol PG. In: John Buridan on the soul and
sensation. PhD dissertation, Indiana University
Secondary Sources
Baumgarten H-U (1999) Nikolaus von Kues’ Theorie der Wahrnehmung.
Phil Jahrb 106(2):299–311
Brown VL (1971) Sensation in Henry of Ghent. A late medieval Aristote-
lian-Augustinian synthesis. Arch Gesch Phil 53(3):238–266
Dewender T (2004) Wahrnehmung II. Mittelalter. In: Ritter J (ed)
Historisches Wo¨rterbuch der Philosophie, vol 12. Schwabe, Basel,
pp 197–203
Knuuttila S, Ka¨rkka¨inen P (eds) (2008) Theories of perception in medi-
eval and early modern philosophy. Springer, Dordrecht
Lindberg DC (1976) Theories of vision from Al-Kindi to Kepler. Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, Chicago
Maier A (1967) Das Problem der ‘species sensibiles in medio’ und die
neue Naturphilosophie des 14. Jahrhunderts. In: Ausgehendes
Mittelalter 2. Edizioni di storia e letteratura, Rome, pp 419–451
Sobol PG (2001) Sensations, intentions, memories, and dreams. In:
Thijssen JMMH, Zupko J (eds) The metaphysics and natural philos-
ophy of John Buridan. Brill, Leiden, pp 183–198
Steneck NH (1980) Albert on the psychology of sense perception. In:
Weisheipl JA (ed) Albertus Magnus and the sciences: commemora-
tive essays. Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto,
pp 263–290
Tachau KH (1982) The problem of the ‘species sensibiles in medio’ at
Oxford in the generation after Ockham. Mediaev Stud 44:394–443
Tellkamp
J
(1999)
Sinne,
Gegensta¨nde
und
Sensibilia.
Zur
Wahrnehmungslehre des Thomas von Aquin. Brill, Leiden
Sergius of Reshʿayna¯
EMILIANO FIORI
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
Leiden
The Netherlands
Abstract
Sergius of Resh‘ayna¯ (d. 536), a Syriac doctor and philos-
opher of the ﬁfth to sixth century, studied in Alexandria
and worked as a doctor-in-chief in his native town in
Sergius of Reshʿayna¯ S
1185
S

Mesopotamia. He died in Constantinople. Sergius pro-
duced a wide range of original works and translations in
the ﬁelds of theology, philosophy (logic and physics), and
medicine, but he is best known as the ﬁrst Syriac translator
of the corpus of Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite. During
his stay in Alexandria, he was very likely in contact
with the Alexandrian Neoplatonic school of Ammonius
Hermias: allusions and quotations from the latter’s logical
commentaries are to be found in Sergius’ treatises on
logic, together with quotations from John Philoponus’
edition of Ammonius’ courses. His translations of astro-
nomical treatises ﬁt this context as well. Sergius intro-
duced Greek philosophy in Syriac as a living system of
problems and not as a heritage of the past. Moreover, this
philosophical mediation is original from a theological
point of view: this newly introduced ‘‘pagan’’ wisdom is
reinterpreted as a gift of God’s own Wisdom to the ascetic.
Therefore, Sergius reinterprets it as a component of an
ascetic progression – which is heavily inﬂuenced by
Evagrius Ponticus’ doctrine – on the way to the contem-
plation of God. These remarks have led to the recent
hypothesis that Sergius thinks here of a new sort of
Christian cursus studiorum which, instead of culminating
in Plato, would culminate in the Christian Platonist
Pseudo-Dionysius.
Biography
The biographical details at our disposal for Sergius are
scarce:
no
new
source
has
been
discovered
since
Baumstark (1894). Most of the biographical information
concerning Sergius is to be found in the sixth century
chronicle of Pseudo-Zacharias, the Syriac continuator
of Zacharia of Mytilene’s chronicle, which was also
written in the sixth century, and now is extant only in
Syriac. The Pseudo-Zacharias (IX, 19) provides us with
most of our knowledge about Sergius’ life: archiater,
that is, doctor-in-chief, in his native city of Resh‘ayna¯,
east of the Euphrates between H˙ arra¯n and Nisibis, he
studied for a long time in Alexandria, mainly medicine.
He read many Greek doctors, and was fond of the teach-
ings of Origen; he knew Greek as well as Syriac, and was
the author of a discourse on faith and of a very good
translation of Dionysius’ works, together with a preface
to the latter. In the last year of his life, that is, 536,
Sergius, having gone to Antioch to complain by the
Chalcedonian Patriarch about Resh‘ayna¯’s bishop, was
found clever and intelligent by the same Patriarch, who
decided to send him to Constantinople, where the
emperor Justinian needed ambassadors to send to pope
Agapitus, in Rome. On his return from Rome to Con-
stantinople, Sergius died.
Works
It is still difﬁcult to establish the real extent of Sergius’
writings. They can be subdivided as follows: (1a) original
theological works, (1b) original philosophical works, (2a)
theological translations or paraphrases, (2b) philosophical
translations or paraphrases, and (2c) medical translations
or paraphrases from Galen, not treated here. We will not
mention the works attributed to Sergius, but surely not
written by him.
Here, we give only the extant works:
(1a) – The Discourse on Spiritual Life (SpL), used
by Sergius as a preface to his translation of Pseudo-
Dionysius’ corpus; edited and translated by Sherwood
(1960–1961) and now newly translated by Fiori (2008),
on the base of a wider collation of mss.
(1b) – The Treatise Composed by Sergius Archiater of
Resh‘ayna¯ on the Categories of Aristotle the Philosopher. It
is a short introduction to the Aristotelian treatise.
Not published; partial translation and commentary in
Hugonnard-Roche (2004:53–163).
– The Commentary to Theodore (CT), whose real title
is Writing Composed by Mar Sargis the Archiater on the Aim
of All the Aristotelian Writings. Not published; partial
translation in Furlani (1922); translation and commentary
of the Preface and the ﬁrst book (of seven) in Hugonnard-
Roche (2004: 165–231). It is in fact a longer treatise on the
Categories, to be understood in the tradition of the Neo-
platonic commentaries on Aristotle.
(2a) – While it is doubtful that Sergius was the trans-
lator of the S2 version of Evagrius Ponticus’ Kephalaia
Gnostika (see Guillaumont 1962:14–227), he is assuredly
the author of the ﬁrst Syriac version of the Dionysian
corpus (CD). An introduction to this version has been
provided by Perczel (2000). (Perczel 2004 has edited and
translated Sergius’ translation of the fourth Epistle.)
Hornus (1970) has edited the ﬁrst chapter of the Mystical
Theology.
(2b) – The Treatise on the Causes of the Universe, Which
Has Been Composed By the Priest Sergius of Resh‘ayna¯
According to the Doctrine of Aristotle the Philosopher,
[Showing] That It Is A Globe (CU). Unpublished, and
translated by Furlani (1923), it is in fact a sort of epitome
of some arguments of a longer treatise by Alexander of
Aphrodisias On the Universe, whose original Greek text is
not extant and can be read in Arabic (edition in
Genequand 2001). Discussed by Miller (1994), who
advances some legitimate doubts about the attribution to
Sergius.
– A version of the pseudo-Aristotelian treatise Peri
Kosmou/De mundo, edition De Lagarde (1858), studied
at length by Ryssel (Ryssel 1880–1881).
1186 S
Sergius of Reshʿayna¯

Thought
As Furlani (1922, 1923) had already pointed out, and
Hugonnard-Roche (2004) has conﬁrmed, Sergius is
inﬂuenced by the Alexandrian Neoplatonism of the begin-
ning of the sixth century. From a close reading of his
logical texts, it is evident that he refers, even quoting
directly from it, to Ammonius’ commentary On Catego-
ries; sometimes, he is nearer to John Philoponus’ editions
of Ammonius’ courses: it is the case of a corollary on space
in the fourth book of his CT, quoting John Philoponus’
edition of Ammonius’ On Physics. He also develops some
personal points of doctrine. These remarks ﬁt Pseudo-
Zacharias’ mention of Sergius’ stay in Alexandria. His
astronomical writings could ﬁt this philosophical context
as well: if the CU is really to be attributed to him, one
could think that, selecting from Alexander’s much longer
treatise only the arguments which pertain to the spherical
shape of the universe, Sergius (or someone who was soon
confused with him, and this cannot be by chance) wanted
to contribute, siding with Philoponus, to a famous Syriac–
Greek controversy about this topic, whose witnesses are
Cosmas Indicopleustes’ Topography and John Philoponus’
On Creation. Thus, it seems that Sergius is not simply an
interpreter of Greek philosophy for a Syriac-speaking
milieu: he introduces that philosophy into Syriac culture
as a living body of current problems. Nonetheless, for
Sergius this philosophical education, which was the basis
of the Neoplatonic cursus studiorum culminating in the
study of Plato, is to be reinterpreted in the context of
a different cursus: not a scholastic, but an ascetic one. As
Sergius says in the preface to his CT, according to the
traditional Christian teaching, not everything is good in
Greek philosophy: the ascetic must separate what is good
from what is bad. The outcome of this separation will be
the grafting of pagan philosophy on an ascetic ascent
entirely shaped by the model of Evagrius Ponticus, from
the praktike¯ to the physike¯ theo¯ria. What is good in physics
is reinterpreted as biblical contemplation, guided by the
Wisdom of God, of the principles of the world. This ascent
culminates in theologia. This progression is evident in the
SpL, where it is clear (see paragraphs 101–113) that phil-
osophical knowledge is a gift of God to the ascetic and is
placed under the authority of two Church Fathers, whom
Sergius considers as complementary to one another:
Evagrius and Dionysius the Areopagite. This is so evident
that Bettiolo (2005), followed by Hugonnard-Roche
(2009) and Fiori (2008), proposed to interpret Sergius’
translation of the CD, the Platonic rewriting of Christian
philosophy, as an ideal substitute in the new Christian
cursus for the study of Plato as the ultimate goal of
a radically new cursus.
See also: ▶Categories, Commentaries on Aristotle’s
▶John Philoponus ▶Logic, Byzantine ▶Logic in the
Arabic
and
Islamic
World
▶Medicine,
Byzantine
▶Medicine in the Arab World ▶Natural Philosophy
▶Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Alexander of Aphrodisias (2001) On the cosmos. In: Genequand Ch
(ed and trans) Islamic philosophy, theology and science. Texts and
studies 44. Brill, Leiden
Brooks Ernest Walter (ed) (19532/19652) Historia ecclesiastica Zachariae
Rhetori
vulgo
adscrpita.
t.
II-textus
(Corpus
Scriptorum
Christianorum Orientalium, Vol 84). Imprimerie Orientaliste
Durbecq,
Louvain,
19532;
t.
II-versio
(Corpus
Scriptorum
Christianorum Orientalium, Vol 88). Durbecq, Louvain, 19652
De Lagarde Paul (1858) Analecta Syriaca. Teubner, Leipzig (repr. Zeller,
Osnabru¨ck, 1967, pp 134–158 [Pseudo-Aristotle’s (S. of Resh‘ayna¯’s
translation) Peri Kosmou])
Fiori Emiliano (2008) Sergio di Resh‘ayna¯. Trattato sulla vita spirituale
(intr, trad e note a cura di: Fiori E). Qiqajon, Mangnano (Bi)
Furlani Giuseppe (1922) Sul trattato di Sergio di Reˆsh‘aynaˆ circa le
Categorie. Riv Trimest Stud Filos Relig 3:135–172
Furlani Giuseppe (1923) Il trattato di Sergio di Reˆsh‘aynaˆ sull’universo.
Riv Trimest Stud Filos Relig 4:1–22
Hornus Jean-Marie (1970) Le Corpus dionysien en syriaque. Parole
Orient 1:69–93
Perczel Istvan (2004) The Christology of pseudo-Dionysius the Areopa-
gite: the Fourth Letter in its direct and indirect traditions. Le Muse´on
117:409–446
Sherwood Polycarpe (1960–1961) Mimro de Serge de Resˇayna sur la vie
spirituelle. L‘Orient syrien 5:433–457; 6:95–115; 121–156
Secondary Sources
Baumstark A (1894) Lucubrationes Syro-graecae. Jahrb Klass Philol
(suppl XXI) 5:353–524
Bettiolo P (2005) Scuole e ambienti intellettuali nelle chiese di Siria. In:
D’Ancona C (ed) Storia della ﬁlosoﬁa nell’Islam medievale, vol I.
Einaudi, Torino, pp 48–100
Guillaumont A (1962) Les Ke´phalaia gnostica d’E´vagre le Pontique
et l’histoire de l’orige´nisme chez les Grecs et chez les Syriens.
Seuil, Paris
Hugonnard-Roche H (2004) La logique d’Aristote du grec au syriaque.
E´tudes sur la transmission des textes de l’Organon et leur interpre´-
tation philosophique. Vrin, Paris
Hugonnard-Roche H (2009) Platon syriaque. In: Amir Moezzi
M-A,
Dubois
J-D,
Jullien
C,
Jullien
F
(eds)
Pense´e
grecque
et
sagesse d’orient. Hommage a` Michel Tardieu, Brepols, Turnhout,
pp 307–322
Miller DR (1994) Sargis of Resˇ‘ayna¯: on what the celestial bodies know. In:
Lavenant R (e´d) VII Symposium Syriacum, Roma (=Orientalia
Christiana Analecta 247) pp 221–233
Perczel I (2000) Sergius of Resh‘ayna’s Syriac translation of the Dionysian
corpus. Some preliminary remarks. In: Bafﬁoni C (ed) La diffusione
dell’eredita` classica nell’eta` tardoantica e medioevale: III. Filologia,
storia, dottrina. Atti del Seminario di studio nazionale (Napoli-
Sorrento 29–31 ottobre 1998). Edizioni dell’Orso, Alessandria, pp
79–94
Sergius of Reshʿayna¯ S
1187
S

Ryssel V (1880–1881) U¨ ber den textkritischen Werth der syrischen
U¨ bersetzungen
griechischer
Klassiker.
Theile
I-II,
Nicolai-
Gymnasium, Leipzig
Sherwood P (1952) Sergius of Reshaina and the Syriac versions of the
Pseudo-Denys. Sacris Erudiri 4:171–184
al-Shahrasta¯nı¯, Muh:ammad ibn
ʿAbd al-Karı¯m
EMILY J. COTTRELL
Department for Religious Studies
Leiden University
Leiden
The Netherlands
Abstract
Abu¯ l-Fath: Muh:ammad al-Shahrasta¯nı¯ was a Muslim
theologian (mutakallim) and a historian of religions
from northern Iran who lived under the last Seldjuks of
Khorasan. He composed commentaries on the Qurʾa¯n and
a monumental history of religions, which remains to this
day a primary source for scholars of various different
ﬁelds. He taught at the Niz˙a¯miyya madrasa in Baghdad
and was considered a Sunni scholar until modern schol-
arship has attempted to demonstrate that he may rather
had been a crypto-Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯.
According to the Arabic medieval sources, Muh:ammad
ibn ‘Abd al-Karı¯m ibn Ah:mad al-Shahrasta¯nı¯ (Ta¯j al-Dı¯n,
Abu¯ l-Fath:) was born in 467/1074, 469/1076, or 479/1086,
and died in 548/1153. He studied theology in Nishapur:
Qurʾa¯nic commentary (tafsı¯r) and dialectic theology with
Abu¯ l-Qa¯sim al-Ans:a¯rı¯, a colleague of al-G˙ a¯za¯lı¯, and juris-
prudence with Abu¯ Nas:r al-Qushayrı¯ (see further Monnot
1998). In 510/1117, he came to Baghdad where he started
to teach theology at the Niz˙a¯miyya madrasa, which he did
for 3 years. When he returned to Iran in 514/1120, the
Seldjuk Sandjar had just taken the title of Sultan and
Merv, his capital, was a center of attraction for scholars.
Shahrasta¯nı¯ became the na¯’ib (deputy) of the chancellery
and one of the closest conﬁdants of the Sultan. His death
followed shortly that of Sandjar, in 1153.
Along with shorter works in the ﬁeld of dialectical
theology (kala¯m), he authored a Qurʾa¯n-commentary
(the Mafa¯tı¯h: al-asra¯r) and an imposing history of religions
and philosophies (the Kita¯b al-Milal wa-l-Nih:al, Book of
Religions and Sects). Many of his works are lost, but his
thinking seems to have been evolving from Ashʿarism to
Isma¯ʿı¯lism, as was ﬁrst established by the Iranian scholar
Muh:ammad Rid˙a Jala¯lı¯ Na¯’ı¯nı¯ in 1964. Further, studies by
Diane Steigerwald, Guy Monnot, and Wilferd Madelung
have
ﬁnally
ascertained
the
connections
between
Shahrastani’s so-called Ashʿarism and his actual crypto-
Isma¯ʿı¯lism (see Steigerwald 2005:265 and Steigerwald
1997:298–307). Although the traditional Islamic text-
books would follow the medieval sources in seeing
Shahrasta¯nı¯as an Ashʿarite, Madelung and Meyer consider
that al-Shahrasta¯nı¯ may be described as ‘‘Sunni socially
and communally, but as Shı¯ʿite and Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ in some of his
core beliefs and religious thoughts.’’ (al-Shahrasta¯nı¯,
Mus:a¯ra‘at al-fala¯sifa, introduction, p. 4). As noted by
Steigerwald (2005:265 and 268–270), Monnot proved
already in a series of lectures given in 1986 that al-
Shahrasta¯nı¯ believed in a living Imam, an element linking
him to the Nizari Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯s of his time.
His ﬁrst preserved work of importance, the Kita¯b al-
Milal wa-l-Nih:al (Book of Religions and Sects), written in
521/1127–1128 while working at the chancellery of the
Seldjuk Sultan Sandjar, is an encyclopedia of past and
contemporary religions as well as philosophical currents.
The Khorasanian context, with its mosaic of people and
religions, must have been particularly ﬁtting to such an
enterprise. Shahrasta¯nı¯’s information on the Greek philos-
ophers is mainly derived from the S˙iwa¯n al-H˙ ikma (Chest
Box of Wisdom), attributed to Abu¯ Sulayma¯n al-Sijista¯nı¯
and from the Arabic translation of Pseudo-Plutarch’s
Opinions of the Philosophers. But he also makes use of
other works on the ancient Greeks (see the introduction
of Jean Jolivet, in al-Shahrasta¯nı¯, 1986–1993). The Milal
wa-l-Nih:al remains fundamental for modern scholars’
knowledge of Zoroastrianism, Mazdakism, and Mani-
chaeism, as well as of the different Islamic sects, as one
could expect. Moreover, it encompasses Hinduism, Juda-
ism, Buddhism, Greek philosophy, and different Christian
currents. According to Monnot and Steigerwald, the
S˙a¯bians in the Milal develop the views of the Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯s,
and this is also the case with their so-called opponents, the
h:unafa¯’ (plural of h:anı¯f, ‘‘monotheist’’).
The Niha¯yat al-aqda¯m fı¯ ‘ilm al-kala¯m (The Last
Degree in Theological Science) was composed after the
Milal, which is quoted several times. The title uses a pun
between aqda¯m (steps) and iqda¯m (eternity of the world),
but a quotation from the Majlis (see Steigerwald 2001:86
(text) – 87 (translation): Niha¯yat al-aqda¯m al-a‘ma¯l, i.e.,
‘‘The latest steps are in (good) actions’’) ascertains the ﬁrst
reading. Shahrasta¯nı¯ studies in 20 chapters the basic rules
(qawa¯‘id) of the theological sciences, according to the
Ashʿarite method. The themes he discusses in detail,
1188 S
al-Shahrasta¯nı¯, Muh:ammad ibn ʿAbd al-Karı¯m

comparing the arguments of the theologians and the
Greek and Muslim philosophers, are the following: the
temporal origination, i.e., adventicity of the world, the
adventicity (h:udu¯th) of existents, divine unicity, divine
attributes, matter and nothingness, divine knowledge,
divine will, eternal logos (al-kala¯m al-azalı¯), the unicity
of the logos, the attributes of hearing and seeing, the vision
of God, the theory of divine acts, prophecy, paradise and
hell, imamate, miracles, and abrogation. As a conclusion
to the Niha¯ya, Shahrastanı¯ gives a separate Treatise on the
Question of the Perennity of the Single Substance (Mas’alat
fı¯ ithba¯t al-jawhar al-fard˙, in Niha¯ya, p. 505–514).
According to Monnot, Shahrasta¯nı¯ seems to have been
willing to explore in the Niha¯ya the limits of Ashʿarite
theology (EI2, p. 215).
An incomplete Qurʾa¯nic commentary, the Mafa¯tı¯h:
al-asra¯r wa-mas:a¯bı¯h: al-abra¯r (The Keys of Mysteries and
Lamps of the Rightfuls) was composed from 538/1143 on.
The extant part of the unique manuscript goes as far as the
second sura, The Cow (al-Baqara). In the introduction,
Shahrasta¯nı¯ gives some general directions as to the
study of the Qurʾa¯n. According to Monnot (1998), it is
a valuable commentary of no less importance than al-
T˙abarı¯’s and Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯’s. Traces of Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯
inﬂuence in this text and in the other books composed
by Shahrasta¯nı¯ led Jala¯lı¯ Na¯’ı¯nı¯ to suggest that Shahrasta¯nı¯
may have been a Niz˙a¯rı¯ Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯. His hypothesis was later
on pursued by Muh:ammad Ta¯qı¯ Da¯nishpazu¯h who
established in 1968 that Shahrasta¯nı¯ must have been at
least in part a follower of some Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ beliefs while at the
court of Sanjar and in Khwa¯razm. Shahrasta¯nı¯’s exegetical
methods were attacked by Z˙ ahı¯r al-Dı¯n al-Bayhaqı¯(c. 490/
1097–565/1169), for using philosophy side by side with
traditional exegesis (see Tatimmat S˙iwa¯n al-h:ikma, s. v.
al-Shahrasta¯nı¯).
Shahrasta¯nı¯’s last work, the Mus:a¯ra‘at al-fala¯sifa
(Struggling with the Philosophers), was ﬁrst studied in
a doctoral dissertation by Suhayr Muh:ammad Mukhta¯r
in Baghdad before she published the text in Cairo in 1976.
A new translated edition with an introduction was given in
2001 by T. Meyer and W. Madelung. Unachieved by
Shahrasta¯nı¯ who mentions the disasters of his time, the
book addresses theological issues with speciﬁcally aiming
at refuting Avicenna’s theories and the inﬂuence they had
reached on the debates. Speciﬁcally, Shahrasta¯nı¯ points
out the contradictions in Avicenna’s theory of the Neces-
sary being (wa¯jib al-wuju¯d), which he regards as being
merely anthropomorphist (see Steigerwald 2005:266).
Pointing out a contradiction in Ibn Sı¯na¯’s theory of
essence and existence, Shahrasta¯nı¯ notes that in order to
be intrinsically necessary, a thing must be absolutely
simple. Shahrasta¯nı¯’s answer to the dilemma is to elevate
God above existence, as would the Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯s, and to con-
sider existence as a purely equivocal term (Madelung
and Meyer 2001, introduction, p. 11). Following a
device already in use in the Kita¯b al-Milal, the use of al-
shar‘ al-h:anı¯fı¯ (the ‘‘h:anı¯f-law’’) in the Mus:a¯ra‘at al-
fala¯sifa points, according to Madelung and Meyer
(2001), to the Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯s. H˙ anı¯f is in itself a problematic
notion, originally meaning ‘‘pagan’’ in Aramaic, and
which came to be used for the ‘‘pure monotheism’’ of
Ibra¯hı¯m (Abraham) in the Qurʾa¯n.
Two undated works have also been published: (1) The
Risa¯la fı¯‘ilm wa¯jib al-wuju¯d, An Epistle on the Knowledge of
the Necessary Being, dedicated to Sharaf al-Zama¯n, Abu¯
‘Abd Alla¯h Muh:ammad ibn Yu¯suf al-I¯la¯qı¯, d. 536/1141.
(2) The Majlis al-khalq wa-l-amr is the Arabic title of an
untitled Persian treatise (Conversation on Creation and
Divine Instauration). Following M. Jala¯lı¯ Na¯‘ı¯nı¯, G.
Monnot brought to evidence many of the elements of
cosmology shared between the Majlis and Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ beliefs
in a series of lectures (see Annuaire de l’E´cole Pratique des
Hautes E´tudes, 1983–1988). Further doctrinal evidences
were gathered by Diane Steigerwald in different publica-
tions (see below, bibliography). In the Majlis, Shahrasta¯nı¯
is openly critical of both the Muʿtazilite and the Ashʿarites,
the former being accused of ta‘t:ı¯l, or of falling into an
extreme negative theology, while the latter being accused
of tashbı¯h, that is, anthropomorphism, for giving to God
attributes that should be reserved to living creatures.
The Majlis is a cosmological discourse on the Intelligible
world, here assimilated to the amr, or ‘‘God’s Order’’
(taken from the Qurʾa¯nic notion of immediate creation,
also known as ‘‘instauration’’(ibda¯ʿ) following God’s
order: ‘‘Be!’’), described as eternal, and the Sensible
world, or khalq, that is, ‘‘creation,’’ described as limited
and adventice. The distinction between amr and khalq is
already used by Ibn Sı¯na¯ and in al-G˙ a¯za¯lı¯’s latest works. An
analysis of the two notions (further identiﬁed, respec-
tively, to the One and the Multiple) and of this dichotomy
in the writings of some important Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ authors is given
by Steigerwald in her introduction to the translation of the
Majlis, pp 34–39.
Al-Shahrasta¯nı¯ lived in a time of transition between
‘‘the Shı¯ʿite century’’ and the Sunni reconquest, ﬁrst at the
hands of the Seldjuks and soon at that of the extreme
Sunni Ghaznavids. The living transmission of philosophy
in northern Iran remains to be studied, as is the role
played by both the Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ propagandists and the strong
Buddhist and Christian communities of Central Asia.
al-Shahrasta¯nı¯, Muh:ammad ibn ʿAbd al-Karı¯m S
1189
S

Finally, further research on the history of Isma¯ʿı¯lism may
shed some light on the particular trend al-Shahrasta¯nı¯
represents.
See
also:
▶Abu¯
Sulayma¯n
al-Sijista¯nı¯
al-Mant:iqı¯
▶Doxographies, Graeco-Arabic ▶Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ Philosophical
Tradition ▶al-Mubashshir ibn Fa¯tik ▶Presocratics in the
Arab World
Bibliography
Primary Sources
al-Shahrasta¯nı¯ (1370–1375 H/1951–1955) Al-Milal wa-l-nih:al, 2 vols, ed.
Muh:ammad Fath: Alla¯h Badra¯n. Cairo; French trans: Gimaret D,
Jolivet J, Monnot G (1986–1993) Livre des religions et des sectes,
2 vols. Louvain; Dated German trans: Theodor Haarbru¨cker
(1850) Religionspartheien und Philosophen-Schulen. Halle; Several
noncritical editions published in the Arab world; translations (in
Persian and Turkish) listed by Monnot 1998 (s. v. infra). Maybe
identical with the Ta’rı¯kh al-H˙ ukama¯’ mentioned in some bibliogra-
phies of Shahrasta¯nı¯ and believed to be lost by Monnot, 1998
al-Shahrasta¯nı¯ (1934) Niha¯yat al-aqda¯m fı¯ ‘ilm al-kala¯m, ed. and trans.
Alfred Guillaume. The Summa Philosophiæ of Shahrasta¯nı¯. Oxford
al-Shahrasta¯nı¯ (1269 H/1990) Risa¯la fı¯ ‘ilm wa¯jib al-wuju¯d, ed. fac-simile
of a reproduction of the manuscript in M. Jala¯lı¯ Na¯’ı¯nı¯. Majlis-i
maktu¯b. Tehran
al-Shahrasta¯nı¯ (1396/1976) Mus:a¯ra‘at al-fala¯sifa, ed. Mukhta¯r SM. Cairo;
Madelung W, Meyer T (ed and Engl trans) (2001) Struggling with the
philosopher. A refutation of Avicenna’s metaphysics. Ismaili Texts
and Translations Series, 2. London/New York
al-Shahrasta¯nı¯ (1409/1368 H/1989) Mafa¯tı¯h: al-asra¯r wa-mas:a¯bı¯h: al-abra¯r,
reproduction of the autograph manuscript, 2 vols. Teheran
al-Shahrasta¯nı¯ (1343 H/1964) Majlis al-khalq wa-l-amr, ed. Muh:ammad
Rid˙a Jala¯lı¯ Na¯’ı¯nı¯. Majlis-i maktu¯b-i Shahrasta¯nı¯-i mun‘aqid dar
Khwarazm. Sharh:-i h:a¯l wa a¯tha¯r-i H˙ ujjat al-H˙ aqq Abu¯ al-Fath:
Muh:ammad b. ‘Abd al-Karı¯m b. Ah:mad Shahrasta¯nı¯; and from
a greater number of manuscripts in his Majlis-i maktb. Tehran
1269 H/1990. It is this latest edition which was translated by
Steigerwald D (1998) Majlis: Discours sur l’ordre et la cre´ation.
Sainte-Foy. Maybe identical with the Qis:s:a Mu¯sa¯ wa Khid˙r men-
tioned by Bayhaqı¯ in his list of Shahrasta¯nı¯’s works
Main Biographical Notices on al-Shahrasta¯nı¯
Bayhaqi (1935) Tatimmat S˙iwa¯n al-h:ikma, ed. Shafı¯ M. Lahore; M. Kurd
‘Alı¯ (1946) Damascus [under the title Ta’rı¯kh h:ukama¯’ al-Isla¯m];
Rafı¯q al-‘Ajam (1994) Beyrouth; Ya¯qu¯t (1993) Mu‘jam al-Udaba¯’,
ed. ‘Abba¯s I. Beyrouth; Ibn Khallika¯n (1980) Wafaya¯t al-a’ya¯n, ed.
‘Abba¯s I. Beyrouth; al-Dhahabı¯ (1960–1966) al-‘Iba¯r fı¯ khabar man
g˙abar, ed. Sayyid F, Sala¯h: al-Dı¯n al-Munajjid. Kuwait; al-Subkı¯
(1964–1976) T˙abaqa¯t al-shafı¯‘iyya al-kubra¯, ed. ‘Isa¯ al-Ba¯bı¯ al-
H˙ alabı¯. Cairo; see further Monnot (1998)
Secondary Sources
Danish-Pazhuh MT (1967–1968) Da’ı¯ al-du’a¯t Ta¯j al-Dı¯n Shahrasta¯nı¯-i.
In: Na¯ma-yi a¯sta¯n-i quds, VII et 8, Mashhad, 1346–1347 H
Jala¯lı¯ Na¯’ı¯nı¯ MR (1964) Sharh:-i h:a¯l-o atha¯r-i (. . .) Shahrasta¯nı¯, Tehran
1343 Solar Hijra
Meyerhof Max (1948) ‘Ali al-Bayhaqi’s Tatimmat S˙iwa¯n al-H˙ ikma:
a biographical work on learned men of the Islam. Osiris 8:122–217
Monnot G (1998) Al-Shahrasta¯nı¯. Encyclopaedia of Islam, 2nd edn. t. IX,
pp 214–216
Steigerwald D (1997) La pense´e philosophique et the´ologique de
Shahrasta¯nı¯. Sainte-Foy
Steigerwald D (2005) Al-Shahrastani’s contribution to medieval Islamic
thought. Reason and inspiration in Islam. Theology, philosophy and
mysticism in Muslim thought. Essays in honour of Hermann
Landolt, ed. Todd Lawson, pp 262–273
al-Shahrazu¯rı¯, Muh:ammad ibn
Mah:mu¯d Shams al-Dı¯n
EMILY J. COTTRELL
Department for Religious Studies
Leiden University
Leiden
The Netherlands
Abstract
Al-Shahrazu¯rı¯,
(Muh:ammad
ibn
Mah:mu¯d,
Shams
al-Dı¯n), the ‘‘Ishra¯qı¯’’ (d. between 1288 and 1304) was
a Muslim philosopher of the Ishra¯qı¯ (‘‘Illuminationist’’)
school, strongly inﬂuenced by Neoplatonism. He is pri-
marily known as the biographer and commentator of the
Persian philosopher Shiha¯b al-Dı¯n Yah:ya¯ b. Amirak
Suhrawardı¯ (1155–1191) known as the Shaykh al-Ishra¯qı¯
(the ‘‘Master of Illumination’’). Ishra¯qı¯philosophy follows
an anti-Peripatetic path initiated in the twelfth century by
Abu¯ l-Baraka¯t al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ and ‘Umar ibn Sahla¯n al-Sa¯wı¯,
which has to be considered, in the post-Avicennian con-
text, as a reaction to Avicenna’s philosophy. Al-Shahrazu¯rı¯
organized the Ishra¯qı¯ philosophy into a new system that
had not been elaborated by Suhrawardı¯, the founder of the
school.
Al-Shahrazu¯rı¯’s life is difﬁcult to reconstruct as he has left
no trace in the Arabic and Persian biographical dictionar-
ies. The circles to which he may have belonged would lead
one to expect to ﬁnd some information about him in Ibn
al-Fuwat:ı¯’s Majma¯ʿ al-a¯da¯b fı¯ muʿjam al-alqa¯b, yet the
parts of the volumes that could have contained an entry
on Shahrazu¯rı¯ seem to be forever lost. Some scholars have
attempted to connect him with the Shahrazu¯rı¯-family of
scholars of Aleppo, but no concrete evidence has been
offered (see Mascitelli 1995–1996: the identiﬁcation
seems improbable as none of al-Shahrazu¯rı¯ al-Ishra¯qı¯’s
book titles are listed in any of the bibliographies given
for the shaykh of Aleppo). A mistake in the reading of the
colophon of a Vatican manuscript (MS Citta` del Vaticano,
Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, ar. 299) of Shahrazu¯rı¯’s
Divine Symbols and Parabols Kita¯b al-rumu¯z wa-l-amtha¯l
1190 S
al-Shahrazu¯rı¯, Muh:ammad ibn Mah:mu¯d Shams al-Dı¯n

al-la¯hu¯tiyya led a number of scholars (including Dozy,
Sachau, and Corbin at an early stage) to believe that
Shahrazu¯rı¯
might
have
been
a
direct
disciple
of
Suhrawardı¯, but this was certainly not the case. (The
date reads clearly 911 and not 611, as wrongly reproduced
by Levi della Vida from the early catalogue of A. Mai.)
A number of elements on Shahrazu¯rı¯’s life can be
retrieved from manuscripts’ colophons:
●
The date of 665/1266–67 for the composition of
a ﬁrst version (see below) of the Promenade of Souls
(Nuzhat al-arwa¯h:) is given by the MS Istanbul, Esad
Efendi 3804.
●
The Metaphysical Tree (Shajara al-ila¯hiyya) was
achieved in 680/1282 and copied once in Siwas
(whose qa¯d˙ı¯ at the time was none other than Qut:b
al-Dı¯n Shı¯razı¯) during al-Shahrazu¯rı¯’s lifetime in
juma¯da¯ al-awwal 687/June 1288, according to the MS
Istanbul, Esad Efendi 1926.
●
The composition date of the Commentary on the Phi-
losophy of Illumination (Sharh: h˙ikmat al-Ishra¯qı¯) is
given as 685/1286 in the MS Istanbul, Esad Efendi
1932 (see Schmidtke and Pourjavady 2006:77 follow-
ing Karabulut and Karabulut 2005, t. I/6, no 8408, 5)
and a copy of the same commentary by Ibra¯hı¯m ‘Abd
al-Rah:ma¯n al-Irbilı¯ on 14 shawwa¯l 704 (9 May 1305)
gives Shahrazu¯rı¯ as passed away (see Cottrell 1999, for
the complete text of the colophon of MS London, Brit.
Lib. Codex 427 [=Arund. Or. 36], erroneously identi-
ﬁed by Rieu (1894) in his Catalogue as the H˙ ikmat
al-Ishra¯qı¯ by Suhrawardı¯, whereas it is Shahrazu¯rı¯’s
commentary on it).
While the biographical data make it certain that Shahrazu¯rı¯
cannot have been a direct disciple of Suhrawardı¯, it is
surprising to discover that Shahrazu¯rı¯shares with his master
a common historiography of ancient philosophy which is
ultimately rooted in such works as the anonymous S˙iwa¯n
al-h˙ikma (see Gutas 1982) and the Mukhta¯r al-h:ikam of
Mubashshir ibn Fa¯tik. In turn, these important eleventh-
century histories of philosophy may rely on some lost
translations emanating from both H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q’s and
al-Kindı¯’s circles in Baghdad. The history of Greek philos-
ophy is linked by both Suhrawardı¯ and Shahrazu¯rı¯ to the
ancient Persian and Egyptian civilizations, and they use
here and there Gnostic-related myths, apparently familiar
to Ibn Wah˙shiyya in his Nabatean Agriculture and in his
book on the ‘‘Ancient Alphabets’’ (actual title: al-Shawq al-
mustaham fı¯ ma‘rifat rumu¯z al-aqla¯m (Flowing Desire for
the Knowledge of the Symbols Traced by Pens)) where the
myth of Hermes and his sister as the tutelary ﬁgures of
the Ishra¯qı¯ lineage appears for the ﬁrst time (uncritical
edition and translation by Hammer 1806, tr. p 29–30/
Ar. p 101; compare the translation by Matton 1976; the
attribution to Ibn Wah:shiyya has been rejected by
Ha¨meen-Antilla 2006:21).
This historiographical framework of Ishra¯qı¯ philoso-
phy is explored by al-Shahrazu¯rı¯ in the Promenade of Souls
and Garden of Rejoicings in the History of the Philosophers
(Kita¯b nuzhat al-arwa¯h: wa rawd˙at al-afra¯h: fı¯ ta’rikh al-
h:ukama¯᾽), a three-part work on the history of philosophy
from Adam (!) to Suhrawardı¯ organized as follows: Part
1 – Historical and geographical introduction, Part 2 –
Bio-biblio-doxographical chapters on the ‘‘Ancients,’’
and Part 3 – On the ‘‘Moderns.’’ A supplement of short
biographies of Afd˙al al-Dı¯n Ka¯sha¯nı¯, Kama¯l al-Dı¯n ibn
Yu¯nis, Nas:ı¯r al-Dı¯n Tu¯sı¯, and some less-known ﬁgures
may be from another hand (see Cottrell 2004–2005b, for
details on this supplement and a list of the manuscripts
and editions where it appears).
The Nuzhat al-arwa¯h: opens with an exhortation to
study philosophy following the path of the Ancients
(mainly Greeks and Egyptians, but Zoroaster, as well as
the Biblical Adam and Seth do also ﬁgure, see Cottrell
2010a, b) and explicitly claims that the imitation of the
ascetic way of life and the meditation of moral sayings will
lead to the separation from the body and to the ascension
toward the higher principles. What follows are 40 chapters
on the main ﬁgures of ancient philosophy and medicine –
principally reproduced from Mubashshir ibn Fa¯tik and the
Muntakhab S˙iwa¯n al-h:ikma – and around 90 entries on the
main ‘‘philosophers of the Islamic period,’’ starting with
H˙ unayn b˙ Ish:a¯q and culminating with longer entries on
Avicenna and Suhrawardı¯. The two main sources used for
the chapters on the Moderns are the Muntakhab S˙iwa¯n al-
h:ikma and the Tatimmat S˙iwa¯n al-h:ikma of al-Bayhaqı¯
(known in Persian as Ebn Funduq). Apart from being
inﬂuenced by the Neoplatonic theory of the progressive
ascent towards truth, the Nuzhat represents the ﬁle of
a scholar, and it was probably enriched all along his life
by al-Shahrazu¯rı¯. The three editions of the text clearly
represent two different recensions, of which only the lon-
ger one (edited by Abu¯ Rayya¯n and Abu¯ Shuwayrib) uses
Shahrasta¯nı¯’s Book of Religions and Sects. Suhrawardı¯’s
treatises are quoted only in the Suhrawardı¯ biography.
Shahrazu¯rı¯ also made use of an anonymous collection of
poems written by famous ‘‘modern’’ philosophers and
compiled under the title of Itma¯m al-Tatimma, which
appears in the four manuscripts of the Muntakhab S˙iwa¯n
al-h:ikma, on which see Gutas 1982. The whole S˙iwa¯n-cycle
was at some point summarized by G˙ ad˙anfar al-Tabrı¯zı¯
(born in 630/1232–3, d. before 692/1293), a contemporary
of al-Shahrazu¯rı¯ quoted by him as al-usta¯dh (‘‘the
al-Shahrazu¯rı¯, Muh:ammad ibn Mah:mu¯d Shams al-Dı¯n S
1191
S

Teacher,’’ also used as a simple honoriﬁc title). On the
detailed utilization by Shahrazu¯rı¯ of these sources in the
Promenade of Souls, see Cottrell (2004–2005b).
In his Commentary on the Philosophy of Illumination
(Sharh: h˙ikmat al-Ishra¯qı¯), al-Shahrazu¯rı¯ deﬁnes it as
a philosophy based on the illumination (Ishra¯qı¯) of
thought, including visions and contemplation, in which
the role of light is underlined. In the aftermaths of al-Sa¯wı¯
and Abu¯ l-Baraka¯t al-Bag˙da¯dı¯’s criticisms, Suhrawardı¯
had departed from Aristotle in rejecting the theory of
prime matter and form, and by criticizing the categories,
which he reduces to ﬁve (see Ziai 1990b; Ziai and Alwishah
2003). Fundamentally, the epistemological method of the
Aristotelians is rejected, the Stoic lekton theory intro-
duced, and priority is given to the (Neo-)Platonist way
of anamnesis. The self-conscious being is at the same time
the knower and the known and there is no differentiation
between the subject and the object. In the Ishra¯qı¯ system,
this theory became known as ‘‘knowledge by presence’’
(al-‘ilm al-h:ud˙u¯rı¯). This development is reminiscent of
Plotinus’ Enneads, partly known to Suhrawardı¯ and to
al-Shahrazu¯rı¯ under the title of its Arabic-adapted trans-
lation, the Theology of Aristotle. Another theme of crucial
importance in Ishra¯qı¯ philosophy is the existence of
a realm of semi-embodied ﬁgures, different from the
world of the Platonic forms and inferior to it, known as
the ‘a¯lam al-mitha¯l (see Ziai 1998). Identiﬁed with the
realm we access through dreams and visions, it met the
criteria both of the Qurʾa¯nic cosmos, where dreams played
an important role (it is considered that the human soul,
when asleep, leaves the sublunary world and is directly
connected to God), and of the ancient Persian lore, which
was integrated by Suhrawardı¯ into his syncretistic system.
Hossein Ziai distinguishes two main trends among the
commentators of Suhrawardı¯: one is represented by al-
Shahrazu¯rı¯, who ‘‘tends to emphasize the symbolic and
distinctly non-peripatetic components of Illuminationist
philosophy,’’ while the second, represented by the works of
Ibn Kammu¯na (d. 682/1284), ‘‘emphasizes the discursive
and systematically philosophical side of the philosophy
of Illumination and makes every attempt to deﬁne
Illuminationist symbolic language in terms of standard
philosophical terminology’’ (see Ziai 1995b). Qut:b al-
Dı¯n Shı¯ra¯zı¯, using both authors, attempted a synthesis of
the two.
While the Commentary on the Philosophy of Illumina-
tion was known and was already used by Corbin in his
edition of Suhrawardı¯’s text, it has not been edited in its
entirety until the 1993 edition of Hossein Ziai. The
Commentary on the Intimations (al-Tanqı¯h:a¯t fı¯ sharh: al-
talwı¯h:a¯t) by al-Shahrazu¯rı¯ however remains unpublished
in its entirety. The recent edition by Ziai and Alwishah
(2003) of the second part (on Physics) of Ibn Kammu¯na’s
commentary of the same text (written before Shahrazu¯rı¯’s)
has ﬁnally given access to the totality of the text. An
important study of the Intimations contents is given by
Ziai in his introduction, and addresses the questions on
Peripatetic philosophy presented in the text and the
answers given by both Suhrawardı¯ and Ibn Kammu¯na:
deﬁnition of the body, question on the atoms, form and
matter, direction and motion, space and void, time, nature
and faculties of the soul, the intellect, the rational soul,
and intuition. A comparative analysis of the three texts
(Suhrawardı¯’s, Ibn Kammu¯na’s, and Shahrazu¯rı¯’s) should
result in a better comprehension of Shahrazu¯rı¯’s original-
ity, but only a few manuscripts are available. Ziai notes
that the answers of Suhrawardı¯ are in some ways an antic-
ipation of Descartes’ theory of the sensible object.
The Divine Tree of the Sciences of Divine Realities (Kita¯b
al-shajarat al-ila¯hiyya fı¯ ʿulu¯m al-h:aqa¯’iq al-rabba¯niyya),
or Metaphysical Tree in Ziai translation, is the magnum
opus of al-Shahrazu¯rı¯. Composed a little before the Com-
mentary on the Philosophy of Illumination, it enlarges the
discussion on the main themes already present in this
fundamental text, but according to a novel organization.
The text is divided into ﬁve main epistles (methodology
and division of the sciences, logic, ethics and political
philosophy,
physics,
metaphysics)
and
consists
of
discussions,
following
what
Ziai
has
labelled
the
‘‘constructivist’’ method of the Ishra¯qı¯-s (see Ziai 1993,
1995b). Important quotations from the Stoics, from the
Muʿtazilite and Ashʿarite theologians, from the Suﬁs, from
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ and Avicenna are given and remain to be studied
in the light of the extant publications. As for the circle
where it was possibly written, Nas:ı¯r al-Dı¯n T˙u¯sı¯ (d.
672/1274) is mentioned as recently deceased, conﬁrming
the date of the composition given by one of the Istanbul
MSS (680/1282).
The Kita¯b al-rumu¯z wa al-amtha¯l al-ila¯hiyya fı¯
al-anwa¯r al-mujarrada al-malakutiyya (Divine Symbols
and Paraboles About the Simple Lights of the Celestial
Realm), for which we have consulted the Yale manuscript
(MS Yale, Landberg 509) and the forthcoming edition by
M. Privot, is a text inﬂuenced by Suﬁ(and Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯?)
teachings, focused on the metaphysical themes of Ishra¯qı¯
philosophy: the knowledge of the self, the soul’s journey to
its Creator, and the perception (idra¯k) of the metaphysical
lights, in a Platonic context that was already present in
Suhrawardı¯. The book is an in-depth analysis of the Ishra¯qı¯
theory of the Soul, though its layout may seem less rigorous
than other works by al-Shahrazu¯rı¯. The introduction is
a series of notes on some ‘‘philosophical’’ hadiths, such as
1192 S
al-Shahrazu¯rı¯, Muh:ammad ibn Mah:mu¯d Shams al-Dı¯n

‘‘Who knows himself, knows his Lord’’ or Qurʾa¯nic extracts.
Al-Shahrazu¯rı¯ seems to have aimed at reconciliating the
metaphysical theory of light and darkness in Suhrawardı¯’s
works with the beliefs of mainstream Islam, and on a larger
scale, to defend philosophy in a language accessible to a
‘‘mystical’’ or ‘‘spiritual’’ audience. Faithful to Ishra¯qı¯ syn-
cretism, he also quotes Jesus, who would have said the
following, ‘‘When I will leave this body, I shall be standing
in the air, at the right of the Lord’s trone.’’ It should be
mentioned in this context that in his biography of
Suhrawardı¯ in the Promenade of Souls (Nuzhat al-arwa¯h:),
al-Shahrazu¯rı¯ has compared the spiritual exercises prac-
ticed by the master to those of the Christians.
In the peculiar syncretism proper to Ishra¯qı¯ philoso-
phy, Persian mythology is not ignored by al-Shahrazu¯rı¯.
Thus, the Sun is once given its Persian name, following the
H˙ ikmat al-Ishra¯qı¯ (the manuscripts offer both khurshı¯d
and hu¯rakhsh, while it is the latter which is to be found
in Suhrawardı¯, see Privot 2001:314–317). The Sun of the
sublunar world is here given the powers of a Demiurge,
leaving intact the inaccessibility of the One in accordance
with a typical element of Neoplatonism since Proclus
(whose works were widely accessible in Arabic). In turn,
a study of the genealogy of this Proclean element in the
Syriac-speaking context should shed some new light on
al-Suhrawardı¯’s syncretism.
See also: ▶Abu¯ l-Baraka¯t al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ ▶Abu¯ Sulayma¯n al-
Sijista¯nı¯ al-Mant:iqı¯ ▶Ibn Kammu¯na, ʿIzz al-Dawla ▶Ibn
Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ Philosophical Tradi-
tion ▶al-Mubashshir ibn Fa¯tik ▶Plotinus, Arabic ▶Pro-
clus, Arabic ▶Qut:b al-Dı¯n al-Shı¯ra¯zı¯ ▶al-Suhrawardı¯,
Shiha¯b al-Dı¯n Yah:ya¯ al-Maqtu¯l
Bibliography
Primary Sources
al-Bag˙da¯di Abu¯ l-Baraka¯t Hibat-Alla¯h (1936–1939) Kita¯b al-mu‘tabar.
Mat˙ba‘a da¯’irat al-ma‘a¯rif al-‘uthma¯niyya, Hyderabad
Bayhaqı¯ Z˙ ahı¯r al-Dı¯n [Ali ibn Zaid al-Baihaqi] (2005) Tatimma Siwan
al-Hikma: texts and studies, ed. Sezgin F et al. Institut fu¨r Geschichte
der Arabisch-Islamischen Wissenschaften, Frankfurt am Main
Ibn al-Fuwa˙tı¯al-Shayba¯nı¯(1416/1995) Majma¯‘al-a¯da¯b fı¯mu‘jam al-alqa¯b.
In: Muh˙ammad al Ka¯z˙im (ed) Mu’assasat al-Tib˙a¯‘a al-a¯da¯b wa-l-
Nashr, Wiza¯rat al-Thaqa¯fa wa-l-Irsha¯d al-Isla¯mı¯, Tehran, 1995
Ibn Kammu¯na (2003) al-Tanqı¯h˙a¯t fı¯ Sharh˙ al-Talwı¯h˙a¯t. Reﬁnement and
commentary on Suhrawardı¯’s Intimations. A thirteenth century text
on natural philosophy and psychology, ed. Ziai H, Alwishah A.
Mazda, Costa Mesa
al-Shahrazu¯rı¯ Shams al-Dı¯n. al-Rumu¯z wa-l-amtha¯l al-ila¯hiyya fı¯ l-anwa¯r
al-mujarrada al-malakutiyya. MS Yale, Landberg 509
al-Shahrazu¯rı¯ Shams al-Dı¯n (1372/1993) Sharh˙
h˙ikmat al-ishra¯q.
Commentary on the philosophy of illumination, ed. Ziai H
Mu’assasa-i Mut˙a¯la‘a¯t va Tah˙qı¯qa¯t-i Farhangı¯ (Pazhu¯hishga¯h), Teh-
ran, no. 736
al-Shahrazu¯rı¯ Shams al-Dı¯n (1383–1385/2004–2006) al-Shajara al-
ila¯hiyya,
ed.
Najaf
Gulı¯ [Najafquli]
H˙ abı¯bı¯.
Mo’asseseh-ye
Pazuheshi-e Hekmat va Falsafeh-ye Iran, Tehran
al-Shahrazu¯rı¯ Shams al-Dı¯n (1976) Nuzhat al-arwa¯h˙ wa rawd˙at al-afra¯h˙
fı¯ ta’rı¯kh al-h˙ukama¯’ wa-l-fala¯sifa, ed. Sayyid Khurshı¯d Ah˙mad.
Mat˙ba‘ah da¯’irat al-ma‘a¯rif al-‘uthma¯niyya, Hyderabad (New Series,
n˚ V/c/vi/i)
al-Shahrazu¯rı¯ Shams al-Dı¯n (1987) Nuzhat al-arwa¯h˙ wa-rawd˙at al-afra¯h˙.
(Ta¯rı¯kh al-h˙ukama¯’). Persian trans. Maqs˙u¯d ‘Alı¯ Tabrı¯zı¯, ed.
Muhammad Taqı¯ Da¯nishpazhu¯h, Muh˙ammad Sarwa¯r Mawla¯’ı¯.
Shirkat-i Intisharat-i ‘Ilmi va Farhangı¯, yabastah bih Vizarat Farhang
va Amuzish-i Ali, Tehran (Tihra¯n)
al-Shahrazu¯rı¯ Shams al-Dı¯n (1988) Nuzhat al-arwa¯h˙ wa-rawd˙at al-afra¯h˙,
ed. ‘Abd al-Karı¯m ‘Umar Abu¯ Shuwayrib. Jam‘iyat al-Da‘wat al-
Isla¯miyya al-‘A¯lamiyya, Tripoli
al-Shahrazu¯rı¯ Shams al-Dı¯n (1993) Nuzhat al-arwa¯h˙ wa-rawd˙at al-afra¯h˙,
ed. Muh˙ammad ‘Alı¯ Abu¯ Rayya¯n. Manshu¯ra¯t Markaz al-Turath
al-Qawmı¯ wa-l-Makhtu˙ta˙t, Kullı¯yat al-A¯da¯b/tawzı¯’ Da¯r al-Ma‘rifa
al-Ja¯mi’ı¯yah, Alexandria/Ja¯mi‘at al-Iskandarı¯ya
al-Shahrazu¯rı¯ Shams al-Dı¯n (2004) Rasa¯’il al-Shajara al-ila¯hiyya ﬁ‘ulu¯m
al-h˙aqa¯‘iq al-rabba¯niyya (Esh-Sheceretu¨’ l-ilaˆhiyye ve Shehrezuˆrıˆ’ nin
Felsefesi), ed. Necip Go¨rgu¨n (in Arabic: Muh˙ammad Najı¯b Ku¯rku¯n).
Elif Yayiınları. Felsefe Divizi, Istanbul
al-Shahrazu¯rı¯Shams al-Dı¯n (2008) Tawarı¯kh al-h˙ukama¯’ wa-l-fala¯sifa, ed.
Ah˙mad ‘Abd al-Rah˙ı¯m al-Sa¯yih˙, Tawfı¯q ‘Alı¯ Wahbah. Maktabat
al-Dı¯niyya, Cairo [not a scientiﬁc edition]
al-Shahrazu¯rı¯ Shams al-Dı¯n (forthcoming) Kita¯b al-Rumu¯z wa-l-amtha¯l
al-la¯hu¯tiyya, ed. Privot M
al-Suhrawardı¯
Shihab
al-Dı¯n
Yah˙ya¯
(1945)
[Shiha¯boddin
Yah˙ya
Sohravardi] Opera Metaphysica et Mystica I (Majmu¯ʿa fı¯ l-h˙ikma
al-Ila¯hiyya). Bibliotheca Islamica; 16a. Mat˙ba‘at al-Ma‘a¯rif, Istanbul
(repr. Tehran, 1976–1977 and 1993 with subsequent volumes)
al-Suhrawardı¯ Shihab al-Dı¯n Yah˙ya¯ (1952) Œuvres philosophiques et
mystiques: Opera Metaphysica et Mystica II 1, ed. Corbin H. Institut
Franco-Iranien, Tehran (repr. Tehran, 1976–1977 and 1993 with
subsequent volumes)
al-Suhrawardı¯ Shihab al-Dı¯n Yah˙ya¯ (1969) Kita¯b al-lamah˙a¯t (The ﬂashes
of light), ed. Maalouf E. Da¯r al-Nahar, Beirut
al-Suhrawardı¯ Shihab al-Dı¯n Yah˙ya¯ [Shihab al-Dı¯n Yah˙ya¯ Suhravardı¯]
(1970) Opera Metaphysica et Mystica II 2, ed. Corbin H, Nasr SH.
Bibliothe`que iranienne 17,2. Institut Franco-Iranien, Tehran (third
volume, repr. Tehran, 1976–1977 and 1993 with further volumes)
al-Suhrawardı¯ Shihab al-Dı¯n Yah˙ya¯ [Shihab al-Dı¯n Yah˙ya¯ Suhravardı¯]
(1976–1977) Opera Metaphysica et Mystica I-III, ed. Corbin H,
Nasr
SH.
Bibliothe`que
iranienne,
n.
s.
1–3.
Anjuman-i
Sha¯hinsha¯hı¯-i Falsafah-i I¯ra¯n, Tehran (repr. Tehran, 1993)
al-Suhrawardı¯ Shihab al-Dı¯n Yah˙ya¯ [Shiha¯boddin Yah˙ya Sohravardi]
(1986) Le Livre de la Sagesse Orientale, trans. and annot. Corbin
H, ed. Jambet Ch. Verdier, Paris (contains in the introduction a
French translation of al-Shahrazu¯rı¯’s Introduction to his Commen-
tary on the Philosophy of Illumination)
al-Suhrawardı¯ Shihab al-Dı¯n Yah˙ya¯ [Shihab al-Dı¯n Yah˙ya¯ Suhravardı¯]
(1998) Partawna¯mah: a parallel English–Persian text, ed. Ziai H.
Mazda, Costa Mesa
al-Suhrawardı¯ Shihab al-Dı¯n Yah˙ya¯ [Suhrawardi, Yah˙ya¯ ibn H˙ abash]
(1999) The philosophy of illumination: a new critical edition of the
text of H˙ ikmat al-Ishra¯q. Walbridge J, Ziai H. Brigham Young Uni-
versity Press, Provo
al-Sa¯wı¯ Zayn al-Dı¯n ‘Umar ibn Sahla¯n (1993) al-Bas˙a¯’ir al-Nus˙ayriyya
fı¯ ‘ilm al-mant˙iq, ed. Rafı¯q al-’Ajam. Da¯r al-Fikr al-Lubna¯nı¯,
Beirut
al-Shahrazu¯rı¯, Muh:ammad ibn Mah:mu¯d Shams al-Dı¯n S
1193
S

Secondary Sources
Cottrell E (1999) Les Philosophes grecs dans le Kita¯b Nuzhat al-arwa¯h˙ wa
Rawd˙at al-afra¯h˙ ﬁTa’rı¯kh al-h˙ukama¯’. Diploˆme de l’Ecole Pratique
des Hautes Etudes (5e section), Paris
Cottrell E (2004–2005a) Le Kita¯b Nuzhat al-Arwa¯h˙ wa Rawd˙at al-Afra¯h˙
de Shams al-Dı¯n al-Shahrazu¯rı¯: composition et sources. position de
the`se. Annuaire de l’E´cole Pratique des Hautes E´tudes, Section des
Sciences Religieuses, t. 113, 383–387
Cottrell E (2004–2005b) Shams Al-Dı¯n Al-Shahrazu¯rı¯ et les manuscripts
de la Promenade des aˆmes et le Jardin des re´jouissances: Histoire des
philosophes. Bull E´tudes Orient 56:225–260
Cottrell E (2007) L’Anonyme d’Oxford (Bodleian Or. Marsh 539):
Bibliothe`que ou commentaire? In: D’Ancona C (ed) The Libraries
of the Neoplatonists. Proceedings of the meeting of the European
Science Foundation Network “Late antiquity and Arabic thought:
patterns in the constitution of European culture”, Strasbourg, March
12–14, 2004. Philosophia Antiqua, v. 107. Brill, Leiden/Boston, pp
415–441
Cottrell E (2010a) L’ Autobiographie de Zoroastre. In: Amir-Moezzi MA,
Dubois JD (ed) Pense´e grecque et sagesse d’Orient. Hommage a`
Michel Tardieu. Brepols, Paris (Collection de la Bibliothe`que de
l’Ecole des Hautes Etudes) pp 177–183
Cottrell E (2010b) Mandean connections in the Adam and Seth chapters
of Shams al-Dı¯n al-Shahrazu¯rı¯ al-Ishra¯qı¯’s History of the Philoso-
phers. Aram Periodical, forthcoming
Gutas D (1982) The Siwan al-hikma Cycle of texts. J Am Orient Soc
102:645–650
Hairi Yazdi M (1992) The principles of epistemology in Islamic philoso-
phy: knowledge by presence. State University of New York Press.
Albany
Ha¨meen-Antilla J (2006) The Last Pagans of Iraq: Ibn Wah˙shiyya and his
‘Nabatean Agriculture’. Brill, Leiden
Hammer
[=Hammer-Purgstall]
J
(1806)
Ancient
alphabets
and
hieroglyphic
characters
explained:
with
an
account
of
the
Egyptian
priests,
their
classes,
initiation
and
sacriﬁces,
by
Ahmad bin Abubekr bin Wahshih [=Wahshiyya]. W. Bulmer,
London
Ho¨rten M (1912) Die Philosophie der Erleutung nach Sohravardi. Strauss
and Cramer, Halle (repr. Georg Olms, Hildesheim, 1981)
Karabulut AR, Karabulut AT (2005) Mu’emu¨’t-Taˆrihi’t-Tu¨raˆsi’l-I˙slaˆmıˆ fıˆ
Mektebaˆti’l-Aˆlem: el-Mahtuˆtaˆt ve’l-Matbuˆaˆt=Du¨nya Ku¨tu¨phanelerinde
Mevcut I˙slam Ku¨ltu¨r Tarihi ile I˙lgili Eserler Ansiklopedisi I–VI. Mektebe
yayınları 12. I˙lmi eserler serisi 3, Kayseri
Langermann YT (2005) Ibn Kammu¯na and the new wisdom of the
thirteenth century. Arabic Sci Philos 15:277–327
Langermann YT (2007) Ibn Kammu¯na at Aleppo. J R Asiat Soc, third
series, 17:1–19
Levi Della Vida G (1935) Secondo elenco dei manoscritti arabi islamici
della Biblioteca Vaticana. Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, Citta` del
Vaticano
Mai A (1831) Scriptorum veterum nova collectio e Vaticanis codicibus
edita ab Angelo Maio, vol 5. Bibliotheca Apostolica Vaticana, Citta`
del Vaticano
Mascitelli D (1995–1996) L’identita` di Shams al-Din Shahrazuri,
ﬁlosofo ishraqi: un caso aperto. Riv Stud Orient 69:219–227
Matton S (1976) Magie arabe traditionnelle (includes a translation of
Ibn Wah˙shiyya’s al-Shawq al-mustaham). Retz, Paris (Bibliotheca
Hermetica)
Privot M (2001) Some notes on the typology of the works of al-Shahrazu¯rı¯
al-Ishra¯qı¯. J Islam Stud 12(3):312–321
Rashed M (2009) On the authorship of the treatise On the Harmonization
of the Opinions of the Two Sages, attributed to al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯. Arabic Sci
Philos 19(1):43–82
Rieu Ch (1894) Supplement to the catalogue of the Arabic manuscripts in
the British Museum. British Museum, London
Schmidtke S, Poujavardy R (2006) Some notes on a new edition of a
medieval philosophical text in Turkey: Shams al-Dı¯n al-Shahrazu¯rı¯’s
Rasa¯’il al-Shajara al-Ila¯hiyya. Die Welt des Islams 46(1):76–85
Spies O, Khatak SK (1935) Three treatises on mysticism by Shihabuddin
Sohravardi Maqtul. Bonner orientalistische Studien, Stuttgart
Thackston
WM (1982) The
mystical and visionary
treatises of
Shihabuddin Yahya Suhrawardi. Octagon Press, London
Vajda G (1951) Les Notes d’Avicenne sur la ‘The´ologie d’Aristote’. Rev
Thomiste 51:346–406
Walbridge J (1992) The science of mystic lights: Qut˙b al-Din Shira¯zi and
the illuminationist tradition in Islamic philosophy. Harvard Middle
Eastern monographs, 26. Harvard University Press, Cambridge
Ziai H (1990a) Beyond philosophy: Suhrawardi’s Illuminationist Path to
Wisdom. Myth and philosophy, ed. Reynolds FE, Tracy D. State
University of New York Press, New York, pp 215–243
Ziai H (1990b) Knowledge and illumination: a study of Sohravardi’s
H˙ ikmat al-Ishra¯q. Scholars Press, Atlanta
Ziai H (1990c) The manuscript of al-Sˇajara al-ela¯hiya, a philosophical
encyclopedia by Sˇams al-Din Sˇahrazuri. Iranshenasi 2(1):14–16,
89–108
Ziai H (1995a) Shiha¯b al-Din Yah˙ya¯ Suhrawardi. The Routledge history of
Islamic philosophy, ed. Nasr SH, Leaman O. Routledge, London,
pp 434–464
Ziai H (1995b) The illuminationist tradition. The Routledge history
of Islamic philosophy, ed. Nasr SH, Leaman O. Routledge, London,
pp 465–496
al-Shı¯ra¯zı¯
▶Qut:b al-Dı¯n al-Shı¯ra¯zı¯
Siger of Brabant
FRANC¸ OIS-XAVIER PUTALLAZ
De´partement des Sciences de la Foi et des Religions,
Philosophie
Universite´ de Fribourg
Fribourg
Switzerland
Abstract
Siger of Brabant (c. 1240–c. 1284) is one of the most
controversial authors of the Middle Ages, and there are
conﬂicting opinions about him. Some see him as one of
1194 S
al-Shı¯ra¯zı¯

the most dangerous heretics which were condemned
by the Bishop of Paris in 1277. Others regard him as one
of the most remarkable philosophers of the thirteenth
century, whom Dante Alighieri includes in his ‘‘Paradise’’
alongside Thomas Aquinas, Albert the Great, and
King Solomon. It is true that he before 1270, as a young
professor of the Faculty of Arts in Paris, defended
a heterodox thesis, which was inspired by Averroes’ com-
mentary of Aristotle, that there is only one intellect for all
humans. Clearly such a position suppresses any immor-
tality of the soul. The evolution of Siger’s thought is very
clear, however. He progressively abandons this thesis for
the interpretation of Thomas Aquinas. But in other areas
he defends an original view, namely a complete separation
of philosophy and the teachings of theology. According to
him, philosophy should have full autonomy, although
within limits. He took stands on some of the most pas-
sionate debates at the end of the thirteenth century, such
as freedom and the eternity of the world, and Siger of
Brabant remains one of the most controversial thinkers
of all time.
Introduction
Siger of Brabant (c. 1240–c. 1284) is one of the most
controversial authors of the Middle Ages, and there are
conﬂicting opinions about him. On one hand, some see
him as the symbol of a dangerous heresy at the University
of Paris. Siger of Brabant, along with Boethius of Dacia, is
seen as the ﬁgurehead of a movement that sees philosophy
as self-sufﬁcient, detached from theology, and hence as the
spokesman of disbelief in the Middle Ages. Since the
studies of Ernest Renan in the nineteenth century, he is
associated with the movement called ‘‘Latin Averroism,’’
which comes from the name of the Muslim philosopher
Ibn Rushd known in the Latin West under the name
‘‘Averroes.’’ Siger is criticized for having supported three
theses opposing Christian faith. Firstly, that there exists
only one intellect unique to all humans, thus destroying
any belief in the immortality of the soul and all personal
judgments after death; secondly, that the universe has no
beginning, which destroys the belief that the world was
created by God; and thirdly, that human freedom exists in
name only.
There seems to be good reason for these charges
against Siger of Brabant. He was summoned to appear
before the Inquisitor of France, Simon du Val, on January
18, 1277. Some think he would have ﬂed from Paris to
plead his case directly to the Pope in Orvieto. However,
in 1284, he fell into disfavor, and was murdered by
his secretary who had gone mad. The great Parisian
condemnation of March 7, 1277, the most important
intellectual censorship of the Middle Ages, was largely
directed against him. He was considered to be an anti-
Christian thinker, and a scandal amongst his contempo-
raries. He angered the Bishop of Paris, Etienne Tempier.
From 1268, Bonaventure vehemently criticized the theo-
ries of Siger in several of his university sermons, and in
1270, Thomas Aquinas wrote the well-argued work De
unitate intellectus to take apart the interpretation that
Siger gave Aristotle.
On the other hand, Dante Alighieri did not hesitate
to reserve a place in paradise for him. He placed him
alongside Peter Lombard, King Solomon, and Dionysius
the Areopagite, but especially together with Albert the
Great and Thomas Aquinas, who presents him with
the highest praise: ‘‘It is Siger’s eternal light, in teaching
at the Rue du Fouarre, that by demonstrating truths
created hate and envy’’ (Dante, Par. X, 136–138). Siger
is thus presented as one of the most remarkable phi-
losophers of the thirteenth century, and as one of the
most ‘‘excellent doctors of philosophy.’’ But who was
really
this
‘‘Sigerus magnus’’ mentioned in several
manuscripts?
The Life and Works
The edition of Siger’s major works was done in the 1970s
and since then historians have been able to place him in
the proper historical perspective. To account for the
contrasting judgments about him, one should follow
Fernand van Steenberghen‘s judgment and distinguish
three distinct periods of his career.
First Period: Before 1270
The ﬁrst mention of Siger of Brabant dates to August 27,
1266, when the papal legate Simon de Brion calmed a crisis
dividing the Faculty of Arts in Paris. Paris University was
in fact made up of four faculties. Three higher faculties:
medicine, canon law, and particularly theology, which
were accessible only after having studying for several
years at the largest faculty, the Faculty of Arts. Siger was
a professor in the Faculty of Arts at a time when it was
involved in serious intellectual and political disputes. The
four nations that composed it were also divided by
controversy. Siger, in the Picardy Nation, was portrayed
as a troublemaker. He was suspected of having partici-
pated in the kidnapping of a master of the French Nation
and of having locked him up. This is the traditional view,
which makes Siger to be a leader and head of a sect whose
ideas became a kind of ‘‘radical Aristotelianism,’’ highly
critical of Christianity.
Siger of Brabant S
1195
S

On the contrary, other historians have concluded that
Siger was innocent in the kidnapping case, that political
tensions had nothing to do with the philosophical debates
about Aristotle, and especially that Siger was a character of
limited importance. Was he the head of a sect or an
unimportant person? The views are certainly divided.
Besides some logical works a commentary on the third
book of the De anima of Aristotle, Quaestiones in tertium
de anima, has been found from Sigers career before 1270.
It was transmitted in the form of a reportatio, that is, as
unreliable notes of the teaching of the master. This book is
of great importance because it is the only witness to the
‘‘Averroistic’’ period in which he defended the thesis of the
unity of the intellect.
Second Period: 1270–1275
From 1272 to 1275, the Faculty of Arts in Paris was divided
into two groups, each claiming to be the legitimate leader
of the University. A dissident minority had promoted
Siger of Brabant as Rector and head of Paris University
due to his strong personality. Indeed the manuscripts
speak of the pars Sigieri. For some historians, it was his
strong philosophical ideas that made Siger a leader. At the
source of tension was the bold thesis that Siger wanted to
free the Faculty of Arts from the dominance of theology,
and free reason from any control of faith. According to
other historians, such as R.-A. Gauthier, the crisis was
purely institutional, without doctrinal issue, and Siger
was never the leader of any ‘‘Averroistic sect.’’
In addition to logic texts, two books from this period
are in direct response to the debates of the 1270s, namely
the De aeternitate mundi and De anima intellectiva. Along-
side the Quaestiones naturales et morales, they are the four
published parts of the Quaestiones in metaphysicam, which
focus on the heart of the debate, namely the relationship
between philosophy and theology.
The chronology of the writings of Siger is decisive
here, because it shows a profound evolution of the ques-
tion of the unity of the intellect. Under the effect of the
ﬁrst censure by the Bishop of Paris, dated to December 10,
1270, and particularly under the inﬂuence of Thomas
Aquinas’ De unitate intellectus, Siger approaches Thomas’
position to the point of rejecting his earlier ideas on
Aristotle’s interpretation and the unity of the intellect.
However, we must be careful not to assume that this
evolution affects all of his thinking.
Third Period: After 1275
Little is known about the third period of his life. Certainly
the condemnation of March 7, 1277, was directed at sev-
eral of his theses, but it is not certain that, summoned to
appear before the Inquisitor of France, Siger would have
ﬂed Paris in 1276 to plead his case to the papal curia. It is
not certain any more that he was murdered by his secre-
tary who had gone mad, and there is no basis for
a connection between his teachings and his death. Not
much is needed, however, for legend to take hold of
history: ‘‘The tragic death of Siger has succeeded in mak-
ing him, for opponents without pity, the kind of heretic
that is punished by Heaven’’ (Gauthier 1984:28). It is
also probable that he ended his life peacefully as a canon
in Liege.
The last known work of Siger is the Questions on the
Book of Causes, on which the masters of the Faculty of Arts
had to spend seven weeks lecturing, dating from the years
1275–1276. In this work, which in the Middle Ages was
attributed to Aristotle, Siger comments on 57 questions
that address several major problems of metaphysics.
Thought
Before 1270: The Problem of the Unity of the
Intellect
The Quaestiones in tertium De anima is a document typical
of his ﬁrst teaching. It gives the impression of a young
professor (master) of 30 years, teaching at the Faculty of
Arts, infatuated by philosophy, and not caring much for
the religious implications of his theses. The primary doc-
trine concerns ‘‘the unity of the intellect,’’ inspired by the
third book of Aristotle’s De anima. According to this literal
interpretation, there exists only one ‘‘possible intellect’’ for
the whole of humanity. What is this intellect? According to
the doctrine of Aristotle, the intellect has a dual function.
On the one hand, it is ‘‘active,’’ like a light that illuminates
the sensible images in order to identify the intelligible
core. This process of abstraction makes bare the essence
of material things to render them compatible with the
intellect. On the other hand, the intellect is ‘‘passive’’ in
that it receives these intelligible abstract forms. It is this
function that is called the ‘‘possible intellect.’’
However, according to Thomas Aquinas’ interpretation,
for example, it is clearly the individual human being, Peter
or Socrates, that is the subject of this intellect. It is not the
intellect that thinks, but the human being, this human being
of ﬂesh and bones. According to Thomas, the intellective
soul, its substantial form, is what constitutes the human
being. For Siger, however, the intellect is completely sepa-
rated from matter. Not only is it not material, as demon-
strated by Aristotle, but it is apart from individual humans.
The intellect is a separate and eternal substance, unique in
species, genderless and incorruptible, therefore it cannot
play the role of substantial form of the body. This is the
1196 S
Siger of Brabant

thesis called ‘‘Averroistic’’ about the unity of the intellect,
which Siger indeed reads in the Muslim thinker’s commen-
tary of the books of Aristotle.
Is Siger really then this ‘‘independent spirit and vigor-
ous thinker’’ that he has been described as? Or did he
simply have second-hand knowledge of Averroes’ books?
It is probably by reading Aquinas’ Commentary on the
Sentences that Siger discovered the Averroist movement,
which defends the separation and the unity of the possible
intellect. Siger seems to have been content to unite several
views without noticing the inconsistency of holding them
simultaneously. We discover an author of limited culture,
where lack of information does nothing to the faculty of
invention. Once again, opinions differ.
From 1270 to 1275: The Eternity of the World
Between Faith and Philosophy
On December 10, 1270, the Bishop of Paris exercised his
authority by condemning 13 theses, some of which
defended the unity of the intellect and the eternity of
the world. At ﬁrst glance, each of the denounced theses
were opposed to the foundational truths of the Christian
faith in that they seemed to deny the immortality of the
soul, responsibility and merit, the beginning of the
world, prescience, and divine providence, as well as the
ﬁre of hell. That was why these errors were condemned
and why Etienne Tempier threatened to excommunicate
anyone who professed them. The Bishop of Paris
believed that the truths of faith should instead lead
philosophers to realize the theological implications of
their statements and to invite them to correct their
doctrines. On March 7, 1277, the Bishop of Paris went
even further, solemnly condemning 219 theses, includ-
ing several theses aimed directly at Siger of Brabant and
his colleague, Boethius of Dacia (Hissette 1977:314). He
blamed them for holding that some statements are true for
philosophy, but false according to the Catholic faith. These
philosophers, he said, act as if there were two contradic-
tory truths.
Let us illustrate this difﬁculty with the controversial
issue of the eternity of the world. Here is the problem. The
inaugural words of the Genesis reads: ‘‘In the beginning
God created the heavens and the earth.’’ This asserts that
the world began to exist temporally. It seems also to
absolutely contradict the Aristotelian belief that the
world is eternal. Everything had gone very fast when, on
March 19, 1255, the Faculty of Arts in Paris introduced
into its mandatory program the main and newly discov-
ered works of Aristotle. The clash was unavoidable.
All the thinkers of the late thirteenth century were
involved,
and
the
debate
took
on
considerable
proportions. Bonaventure, for example, fought tirelessly
since 1267 against this error, in which he denounced the
hypothesis of a creation ab aeterno. The eternity of the
world ruins the Holy Scripture, because it describes
a world that, having no history, excludes the whole idea
of salvation. According to Bonaventure, it is contradictory
both to maintain that things are created ex nihilo and that
the world is eternal.
This is not the way in which Thomas Aquinas saw
things. According to him, it is impossible to rationally
prove the thesis of the beginning of the world, which is
a truth revealed by faith. From a philosophical standpoint,
the creation does not prevent the theoretical possibility of
an eternal world, because the notion of creation does not
have as a consequence the duration of the created world. It
expresses an ontological dependence, not a temporal suc-
cession. In fact, being created is not the beginning
of being, but it means ‘‘depending on another’’ or ‘‘receiv-
ing its being from another.’’ It is not then contradictory
that the world is created, that is, dependent upon another,
but does not have a temporal beginning. Only faith can
give an answer to the question about the beginning of the
world, not philosophy. In short, for Thomas Aquinas, the
beginning of the world is an article of faith that cannot be
proven false by reason.
Siger of Brabant also realizes that faith teaches as true
that the world and the human species had a beginning,
and he never ventured to deny this. But in his eyes, it is
illusory to think that philosophy can demonstrate such
truths. All the evidence we can come up with is doomed to
fail, since they are inconsistent arguments. Siger’s inten-
tion is not to demonstrate the opposite of the truths
revealed, nor to suggest that the world is eternal. He only
wants to show the weakness of the arguments that are in
favor of the beginning of the world and the human species.
He adopts a position fairly similar to that of his col-
league Boethius of Dacia. When a science, like physics,
demonstrates that the world has no beginning, this in
reality stems from its own empirical principles. Con-
versely, when a Christian states absolutely (simpliciter)
that the world began to be, he does so by reference to an
absolute cause that does not take into account the consid-
eration of the physicist. On the one hand, the physicist says
the truth, but only from the principles that are his own. In
his proof that the world did not have a beginning, he
adopts his conclusion under the condition of the validity
of his principles (ex conditione). On the other hand, the
Christian bases his argument on other principles. He is
right in arguing that the world began, because he judges
this from a superior cause. Even if their conclusions are
contrary, both can be right, but they adopt different
Siger of Brabant S
1197
S

perspectives. Thus there is no contradiction, because
one does not disagree with the other in the same respect.
It is by misunderstanding this subtle distinction that
these philosophers have been criticized for defending
a ‘‘double truth,’’ and that philosophy denies the truth
of faith.
But Siger does not cease to repeat that he proceeds by
following the proper method of philosophy. He begins
from the principles of experience, which, far from being
absolute, are only conditional. It is from this relative data
alone that he reasons to the consequences that necessarily
follow. This approach, albeit false in its conclusion, should
not be distorted or hidden. Philosophy remains indeed
a search for truth, but Siger offers a different conception of
truth than that of Thomas Aquinas. A truth within certain
limits set by the validity of its principles. These are limited
and empirical principles, and hence will never yield an
absolute truth.
In his eyes, to proceed philosophically, is ‘‘to method-
ologically abstract from faith,’’ and it is to follow rationally
and logically a thought to its conclusion via certain prin-
ciples. But its premises, drawn from sensory experience,
are inevitably unstable, and this is why errors can occur.
Herein lays Aristotle’s approach. Siger’s profession, as
master in the Faculty of Arts, consists precisely of
commenting on Aristotle’s texts in deducing conclusions
from partial principles based on experience. Therefore,
metaphysics cannot lay claim to an absolute truth
(simpliciter), which is the prerogative of faith, anymore
than physics. ‘‘We are looking rather for the philosophers’
intention than for the truth, since we proceed philosoph-
ically’’ (De anima intellectiva VII, 101). Siger therefore
never denied the truth to be eminently theological. He
only maintained that, because of its limitations, meta-
physics does not attain the absolute truth of faith
(simpliciter). The philosophical truth is only conditional
(ex conditione). Hence the astonishing thesis according to
which human reason leads to conclusions that must then
be denied from a religious viewpoint (Quaestiones in
metaphysicam III, 9, Dunphy 144).
In an original manner, Siger of Brabant ensures the
autonomy of philosophy, but he does so by setting strict
limits and by circumscribing the scope of its validity. It is
by limiting the scope of philosophy that its autonomy is
assured. Commenting on Aristotle is to abstract from all
revealed truth, and settle for a mere human experience.
This clariﬁes the overall project of Siger, which of course is
transferable to other issues, for example, the human soul.
‘‘Our main intention is not to seek the truth about the
soul, but to clarify the opinion proposed by the philoso-
pher’’ (De anima intellectiva VI, 99). The absolutely true
conclusion about the human soul is not philosophical, but
revealed and theological. Given this, Siger never proposed
the absolute truth about this issue. This was indeed what
was imposed by the decree issued by the Faculty of Arts on
April 1, 1272, which prohibited teachers from straying
from their competences and meddle in theology. But
they did not understand Siger’s project, and this is the
reason why, on March 7, 1277, the Bishop of Paris not only
censored the theses on the eternity of the world, but also
on the soul animating humans, and the new conception of
philosophy that was offered by some teachers of the
Faculty of Arts in Paris.
Besides the theses about the unity of the intellect, and
eternity of the world there was yet another thesis, which
aroused strong reactions, namely one concerning free-
dom. Siger did not have the slightest doubt about the
existence of human freedom, but the way in which he
explained it gave the impression that he denied it. He
compares human desire to animal desire. Animals are
not free since they are all subject to instinct that leads
them to determined objects. They have no freedom to
change their judgments. A human is endowed with free
choice. His desire is not chained to any particular object
because he is free to judge otherwise. He is not a slave to
his desires. It is the intellect that is free, however, not the
will, which necessarily follows the intellect’s judgments.
It is this radical form of moral intellectualism that
was condemned by the Bishop of Paris in 1277. In fact, if
the development of the intellect is sufﬁcient for a good
life, and to do what is good, it is not clear why a human
being would need to be saved by Christ. Does philosophy
propose to supplement faith? Is this enough to ensure the
happiness of humans? It is in this way that the censorship
of 1277 interpreted the doctrines of Siger of Brabant. The
Bishop condemned the following thesis: ‘‘If reason is right,
so is the will’’ (si recta ratio et voluntas recta), since this
thesis seemed to revive the heresy of Pelagius, namely that
since science is sufﬁcient for the rectitude of the will, why
then would humanity still need the grace of God?
After 1275: Return to Orthodoxy?
The last known work of Siger is his Commentary on the
Book of Causes. A careful reading of the book conﬁrms that
Siger had deﬁnitely abandoned the thesis of the unity of
the possible intellect. Indeed, after having presented the
philosophical motivation for the position of Averroes, he
adds: ‘‘But this position is heretical to our faith, and it also
appears
irrational
(irrationalis)’’
(Quaestiones
super
Librum de causis q. 27, 112). The novelty lies not in the
rejection of this view, evidently opposed to Christian
doctrine, but in his strong afﬁrmation that the thesis of
1198 S
Siger of Brabant

the unity of the intellect does not hold up even in the eyes
of reason. On this particular question, there is no doubt
that Siger had ﬁnally abandoned his way of reading
Aristotle before 1270. Thomas Aquinas’ De unitate
intellectus had him ﬁnally convinced. On other points,
Siger approaches the Thomistic doctrine, particularly
when he states that God, the ﬁrst cause, is ipsum esse per
se subsistens (q. 9a), that we must hold a composition of
essence and existence in angels (q. 22), and that each
immaterial substance is a species (q. 24).
Historians have concluded that Siger had ended by
completely endorsing the doctrines of Aquinas. But this
is a conclusion drawn too quickly. Indeed, the explicit
desire to stay within the limits of orthodoxy does not
constitute the most important aspect in his late work,
which provides an interesting example of Siger’s intellec-
tual mentality and of his way of working. The 57 questions
in this book have indeed literally borrowed many views
from the commentary that Thomas Aquinas had himself
given on the Liber de causis. There are also views borrowed
from the Commentary on the Physics and especially from
the Summa theologiae. For example, in question 8 Siger
wants to deﬁne the notion of eternity. He cites word for
word the Summa I, 10, 1, but without mentioning his
source. However, this usage of the text actually hides
important changes. Aquinas’ work is exploited, but Siger
changes its meaning in order to say something else.
One must avoid judging this practice according to our
modern standards and from the accusation of ‘‘plagia-
rism,’’ ﬁrstly, because the use of texts of other authors
was common practice, and, secondly, because Siger uses
some texts of Thomas Aquinas to turn them against him.
We have an example in the analysis of the relationship
between the primary cause (God) and the secondary
causes. Siger begins by criticizing the belief of the ‘‘vulgar
and popular men’’ who tend to attribute everything to
God, and to ignore the autonomy of the created world.
The direct intervention of God must be excluded, and
philosophy rejects any direct divine intervention. Thomas
Aquinas had also been anxious to strengthen the auton-
omy of the world and secondary causes, but he nonetheless
explained that God always reserves the possibility to
directly intervene in the course of events. By using the
same texts as Thomas did Siger reversed this thomistic
doctrine and logically excludes that the primary cause may
alter the natural course and create, for example, an ‘‘acci-
dent’’ existing without a ‘‘substance.’’ It is clearly the
doctrine of the Eucharist which is here undermined.
Siger’s thesis made it impossible that the bread, while
retaining its unchanging physical properties, transformed
into the body of Christ. When Siger is critical of the
theologian’s ability to argue in a sophisticated manner, it
is difﬁcult to maintain that he has at any point agreed with
the doctrine of Thomas Aquinas.
Siger of Brabant remains one of the most fascinating
witnesses of the philosophical debates that had developed
in the wake of Bonaventure and Thomas Aquinas. The
true signiﬁcance of his work is revealed if we relocate its
usage in the institutional and historical context of the
1270s, and we refrain from making him the spokesman
of ‘‘Averroism,’’ which perhaps never existed in the
thirteenth century.
See also:
▶Boethius of Dacia ▶Bonaventure ▶Dante
Alighieri ▶Ibn Rushd (Averroes), Latin Translations of
▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes)
▶Parisian Condemnation of 1277 ▶Thomas Aquinas
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Boethii Daci (1976) Opera: Topica – opuscula, vol VI, pars II; Opuscula:
De aeternitate mundi, De summo bono, de somniis, ed. Sajo´ G,
Green-Pedersen NG. G.E.C. Gad, Hauniae, pp 334–366 (English
translation: Boethius of Dacia (1987) On the supreme good, On
the eternity of the world, On dreams, trans. Wippel JF. Pontiﬁcal
Institute, Toronto)
Siger de Brabant (1972a) Quaestiones in tertium de anima, De anima
intellectiva, De aeternitate mundi, ed. Baza´n B. Philosophes
me´die´vaux XIII. Publications universitaires/Be´atrice-Nauwelaerts,
Louvain/Paris
Siger de Brabant (1972b) Les Quaestiones super librum de causis, ed.
Marlasca A. Philosophes me´die´vaux XII. Publications universitaires/
Be´atrice-Nauwelaerts, Louvain/Paris
Siger de Brabant (1974) E´crits de logique, de morale et de physique, ed.
Baza´n B. Philosophes me´die´vaux XIV. Publications universitaires/
Be´atrice-Nauwelaerts, Louvain/Paris
Siger de Brabant (1981) Quaestiones in metaphysicam. E´dition revue de la
reportation de Munich. Texte ine´dit de la reportation de Vienne, ed.
Dunphy W. Philosophes me´die´vaux XXIV. E´ditions de l’Institut
Supe´rieur de Philosophie, Louvain-la-Neuve
Siger de Brabant (1983) Quaestiones in Metaphysicam. Texte ine´dit de la
reportation de Cambridge. E´dition revue de la reportation de Paris,
ed. Maurer A. Philosophes me´die´vaux XXV. E´ditions de l’Institut
Supe´rieur de Philosophie, Louvain-la-Neuve
Secondary Sources
Bianchi L (1984) L’errore di Aristotele. La polemica contro l’eternita` del
mondo nel XIII secolo. Pubblicazioni della Facolta` di lettere
e ﬁlosoﬁa dell’Universita` di Milano 104. La Nuova Italia Editrice,
Firenze
BifﬁI (1994) Figure medievali della teologia: la teologia in Sigieri di
Brabante e Boezio di Dacia. Teologia 19:263–299
Dales RC (1990) Medieval discussions of the eternity of the world. Brill’s
studies in intellectual history 18. E.J. Brill, Leiden/New York/
København/Ko¨ln
Gauthier R-A (1983) Notes sur Siger de Brabant, I. Siger en 1265. Revue
des sciences philosophiques et the´ologiques 67:201–232
Siger of Brabant S
1199
S

Gauthier R-A (1984) Notes sur Siger de Brabant, II. Siger en 1272–1275;
Aubry de Reims et la scission des Normands. Revue des sciences
philosophiques et the´ologiques 68:3–49
Hissette R (1977) Enqueˆte sur les 219 articles condamne´s a` Paris le 7 mars
1277. Philosophes me´die´vaux XXII. Publications universitaires/
Vander-Oyez, Louvain/Paris
Imbach R (1996) Dante, la philosophie et les laı¨cs. Initiations a` la
philosophie me´die´vale I. Pense´e antique et me´die´vale, Vestigia 21.
E´ditions universitaires/Cerf, Fribourg/Paris
Mandonnet P (21908–1911) Siger de Brabant et l’averroı¨sme latin au XIIIe
sie`cle, 2 vols. Les philosophes belges 6–7. Institut Supe´rieur de
Philosophie de l’Universite´, Louvain
Putallaz F-X (1995) Insolente liberte´. Controverses et condamnations au
XIIIe sie`cle. Pense´e antique et me´die´vale, Vestigia 15. E´ditions
universitaires/Cerf, Fribourg/Paris
Putallaz F-X, Imbach R (1997) Profession: philosophe. Siger de Brabant.
Initiations au Moyen Aˆ ge. Cerf, Paris
Van Steenberghen F (1977) Maıˆtre Siger de Brabant. Philosophes
me´die´vaux XXI. Publications universitaires/Vander-Oyez, Louvain/
Paris
Wippel JF (1995) Mediaeval reactions to the encounter between faith and
reason. The Aquinas lecture 59. Marquette University Press,
Milwaukee
al-Sijista¯nı¯
▶Abu¯ Sulayma¯n al-Sijista¯nı¯ al-Mant:iqı¯
Simon of Faversham
JOHN L. LONGEWAY
Department of Philosophy
University of Wisconsin
Kenosha, WI
USA
Abstract
Simon of Faversham, c. 1260–1306, was a commentator
on Aristotle’s works, particularly in logic and on the soul.
He taught at Oxford, primarily in the Arts, and although
he took the degree in Theology and became Chancellor of
the university, almost none of his work outside the Arts
survives. His initial formation seems to have been Tho-
mist, whom he follows in his Avicennan understanding of
universals, but in his later writings he took issue with
Aquinas on the real distinction, following Henry of
Ghent, and absorbed much from Giles of Rome. None-
theless, even in his later works, he takes distinctively Tho-
mist positions in his Posterior Analytics commentary,
favoring Thomas over Grosseteste and Giles of Rome on
the nature of the highest sort of demonstration and the use
of the fourth kind of per se statement in demonstration.
These were major points of controversy, and Simon’s
positions reﬂect the dominance of the Thomistic view of
them in later Scholastic work.
Simon of Faversham (c. 1260–1306) was a commentator
on Aristotle’s works, particularly those on logic and the
soul. He was educated at Oxford, and although his com-
mentaries seem to reveal a residence at Paris in the 1270’s
and 1280’s, reﬂecting in particular the inﬂuence of Peter of
Auvergne, he spent the rest of his life at Oxford, where he
became Chancellor in 1304. In the past he has been iden-
tiﬁed as a follower of Aquinas, and he certainly knows
Aquinas and often follows his views, but his mature work
shows some independence of thought. He follows Giles of
Rome on many occasions in his commentary on the
Sophistici elenchi, as well as his account of the nature of
logic in his Posterior Analytics commentaries. In his second
question-commentary on the Posterior Analytics, Question
49, he explicitly attacks Thomas and follows Henry of
Ghent on the real distinction between essence and exis-
tence (though he does not attribute his view to Henry),
though he had followed Aquinas in Question 20 of his
commentary on the Categories, written much earlier in his
career. Simon’s objection to Thomas’ view is this: if exis-
tence differs from essence in creatures, then it is something
added, though Thomas, of course, insists that it is not an
accident added to the essence, as Avicenna thought. (This
common criticism of Avicenna probably misinterprets
him, but it was generally accepted as correct at the time
on the authority of Averroes.) But if existence is added to
essence, then it is a kind of actuality. Now Thomas says it is
primary actuality, but this cannot be, for essence is the
primary actuality. The essence of a human being, for
instance, is rational, not just potentially rational, and so
there is a kind of primary actuality here. Nor can it be an
added secondary actuality, either, as Thomas confesses. So
existence is nothing real added at all to essence, and so
does not really differ from essence. But it differs in some
way from essence, and that means it differs in formula
(ratio).
What is the formula of existence? Well, one considers
a substance as existing when one considers it insofar as it is
part of the causal order, and itself caused by something to be
part of that order. So existence is the sort of being possessed
by something which is the effect of another thing. It is esse in
effectu, a being in an effect. Finally, borrowing a notion
from Giles of Rome, Simon argues that existence falls
under the category of substance, for there are substantial
1200 S
al-Sijista¯nı¯

relations; for instance, the relation between matter and
form falls under substance. Esse in effectu, then, is the sort
of being a particular substance has, as opposed to inesse,
which is the sort of being an accident has.
The phrase ‘esse in effectu’ is borrowed from Avicenna
(On First Philosophy V 1). The term ‘esse in effectu’ is
accompanied by two other terms, ‘esse essentiae,’ and ‘esse
universale.’ Simon’s Sophisma holds that one can speak of
the essence as it is part of the natural world and
a particular to be found interacting with other particulars
in the natural world, or without reference to anything
outside itself (esse essentiae), or as it is conceived in the
intellect (esse universale), so that it can be asserted of
different things. The picture comes from Avicenna, and
plays a role in Thomas’ thought as well. Like Thomas,
Simon insists that the universal concept has a foundation
in the essence itself, which is real quite independently of
the concept, though it is neither universal nor particular in
itself, both because it is not in itself brought under the
consideration of the intellect, and because it is not in itself
multiplied, or for that matter, singular, in the way that
individuals entering into natural causal processes are. But
the Sophisma never uses the term ‘esse in effectu,’ preferring
to speak of being in matter or in particulars, or outside the
soul, when it wants to indicate existing particulars. More-
over, it does not discuss the real distinction either,
restricting itself to a consideration of universality. Like
the Categories commentary, it seems to predate the recon-
siderations that produced the criticism of Thomas in
Simon’s Questions on the Posterior Analytics.
It is a sign of Simon’s realist leanings that he prefers
Aquinas in his most characteristic doctrines in his account
of the highest sort of demonstration (demonstratio
potissima), arguing that the real deﬁnition of the subject
term is the middle term and relying on the fourth mode of
per se predication (predicating a thing of its cause) to
explain the connection between the real deﬁnition of the
subject term and the deﬁnition of the attribute which is
concluded of the subject. This view is rejected by
Grosseteste, Albert the Great, and Giles of Rome, though
it became the usual view in later authors. Simon follows
Aquinas on these matters even in the second Posterior
Analytics commentary, in which he differs with him on
the real distinction.
Simon may have started life as a Thomist, then, but as
he matured, he moved much closer to the Augustinian
view, following certain neoplatonic elements in Thomas’
own views. In his comments on Aristotle a fundamentally
Augustinian, even Avicennan, approach often obtrudes
itself, and when he follows Aquinas, he often seems
to take Thomas’ typically Augustinian phraseology for
non-Augustinian doctrines at its word, making himself
look rather clumsy and immature if taken as an expositor
of Aquinas’ thought. (One observes this, for instance, in
Simon’s short work, Sophism: AUniversal Is An Intention.)
These points should all be regarded with caution, as
a deﬁnitive study of Simon’s work has yet to be written.
Simon’s forays into more serious philosophical issues are
limited by his general simplicity of approach, no doubt
dictated by his undergraduate students, and the obvious
need to move on quickly to other things. Nonetheless,
Simon’s work provides a window to the world of
a pedestrian but intelligent and honest scholar of the
thirteenth century.
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Aristotelianism in the
Greek, Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions
▶Essence and Existence ▶Giles of Rome ▶Henry of
Ghent ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Posterior Ana-
lytics, Commentaries on Aristotle’s ▶Robert Grosseteste
▶Thomas Aquinas ▶Thomism ▶Universals
Bibliography
Primary Sources
DeRijk Lambertus Marie (1968) On the genuine text of Peter of Spain’s
Summule
logicales.
II:
Simon
of
Faversham
(d.
1306)
as
a commentator of the tracts I–Vof the Summule. Vivarium 6:69–101
Ebbesen Sten (1980) Gerontobiologiens grundproblemer. Mus Tuscul
40–43:269–288
(extracts
from
Simon’s
quaestiones
on
De
longitudine et brevitate vitae)
Longeway John L: John Longeway’s website at University of Wisconsin at
Parkside, http://uwp.edu/~longeway/, has working translations of
a number of Simon’s works, in particular, both his Posterior Analyt-
ics commentaries and the Sophisma: Universale est intentio
Longeway John L (1977) Simon of Faversham’s questions on the posterior
analytics: a thirteenth-century view of science. PhD thesis, Cornell
University (Dissertation Abstracts International 38.7:4211-A)
Ottaviano Carmelo (1930) Le Quaestiones super libro Praedica-
mentorum di Simone di Faversham. In: Atti della Reale Accademia
Nazionale die Lincei, serie 6, Memorie della Classe di Scienze Morali,
Storiche e Filologiche, vol 3, pp 257–351
Pinborg Jan (1971) Simon of Faversham’s sophisma: Universale est
Intentio: a supplementary note. Mediaev Stud 33:360–365
Sharp D (1934) Simonis de Faverisham Quaestiones super tertium De
anima. Archives d’histoire doctrinale et litte´raire du moyen aˆge
9:307–368 (edition of Book III from one manuscript)
Simon of Faversham (1957) Magistri Simonis Anglici sive de Faverisham
Opera omnia, vol 1: Opera logica, tomus Prior, (1) Quaestiones
super libro Porphyrii, (2) Quaestiones super libro Praedica-
mentorum,
(3)
Quaestiones
super
libro
Perihermeneias.
In:
Mazzarella P (ed) Pubblicazioni dell’Instituto universitario di
magistero di Catania, serie ﬁlosoﬁca, testi critici, 1. Cedam, Padua
Simon of Faversham (1984) In: Ebbesen S, Izbicki T, Longeway J, del
Punta F, Serene E, Stump E (eds) Quaestiones super libro
Elenchorum. Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto
Vennebusch Joachim (1963) Ein anonymer Aristoteleskommentar
des xiii. Jahrhunderts: Quaestiones in tres libros de Anima
Simon of Faversham S
1201
S

(Admont: Stiftsbibliothek, cod. lat. 367), F. Scho¨ningh, Paderborn.
(pp 25–27, one question from Simon’s commentary)
Vennebusch Joachim (1965) Die Quaestiones in tres libros De anima des
Simon von Faversham. Archiv fu¨r Geschichte der Philosophie
47:20–39 (Lists the questions in Simon’s commentary)
Wolf Friedrich Antonius (1966) Die Intellektslehre des Simon von
Faversham nach seinem De-anima-Kommentaren. Inaugural disser-
tation, Universita¨t, Bonn (excerpts from both the literal and the
question commentaries on De anima, and an appendix editing
three questions from the latter)
Yokoyama Tetsuo (1969) Simon of Faversham’s sophisma: Universale est
intentio. Medieval Stud 31:1–14 (an edition of the work. See Pinborg
(1971) for corrections)
Zimmermann Albert (1971) Verzeichnis Ungedruckter Kommentare zur
Metaphysik und Physik des Aristoteles aus der Zeit von etwa 1250–
1350, Studien und Texte zur Geistesgeschichte des Mittelalters, 8/9.
Brill, Leiden/Cologne (see pp 10, 32–33, 190–196)
Secondary Sources
Simon of Faversham (2007). In: The Stanford encyclopedia of
philosophy. Longeway J, http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/simon-
faversham/
Skepticism
CHRISTOPHE GRELLARD
Philosophy
University of Paris 1 Panthe´on-Sorbonne
Paris
France
Abstract
Every inquiry into skepticism in the Middle Ages aims at
seeking the missing link that would allow the understand-
ing of how we changed from the ancient conception of
skepticism as a way of life (living without belief) to
a modern conception of skepticism as the general critique
of knowledge. The medieval reception of the ancient mode
of skepticism and the transformations they made after its
reception allow us to understand this evolution. Thus, the
Middle Ages occupy a nodal place in the history of
skepticism.
Strictly speaking, there is no skeptical school in the Middle
Ages insofar as no one, except John of Salisbury, explicitly
claimed to be a skeptic. Medieval epistemology on the
other hand accords a place of growing importance to the
question of skepticism, ultimately ﬁnding incontrovertible
the examination and refutation of skeptical arguments.
In a way, skepticism in the Middle Ages is primarily
a construction lacking a historical foundation; a set of
arguments against the possibility of knowledge and a test
for all theories of knowledge. Nonetheless, the consider-
ation of these arguments, conjoined with the development
of a set of theories of knowledge attuned to the fallibility of
human reason and to the problem of induction drove, at
the end of the Middle Ages, some philosophers to develop
theories of knowledge that produce skeptical effects, lim-
iting the hold of our capacity for knowledge (e.g., Nicolas
of Autrecourt, William Crathorn, Robert Holcot). It is in
this sense that we can speak of a medieval form of skepti-
cism proper in the fourteenth century.
In order to understand how the medieval skeptical
vision was elaborated, we must examine the medieval
reception of ancient skepticism. If Sextus Empiricus’ Out-
lines of Pyrrhonism was available in Latin near the end of
the Middle Ages, it is not possible to tell today if the text
had any readers. In the same fashion, Cicero, whose texts
were more widely circulated, could have inﬂuenced John
of Salisbury (who does not seem to know of the Academics,
however) and Henry of Gent, but his real inﬂuence
remains quite minimal. Indeed, the construction of the
image of skepticism as that which denies the possibility of
knowledge stems from the conjunction of the Augustinian
inﬂuence and the rediscovery of Pre-Socratic (Democri-
tus, Protagoras, Heraclitus) arguments via Aristotle.
Presenting neo-Academic doctrines in a synthetic manner
in Against the Academicians II, 11, Augustine shows what
we can call the logical structure of skepticism. The point of
departure and the crux of the Academic position is that
nothing can be known. Augustine draws the conclusion,
typically skeptical according to him: the sage must sus-
pend assent. This suspension of assent would be taken as
a general doubt in the Middle Ages. Augustine thus
emphasizes the fundamental status of the thesis according
to which nothing can be known (that is to say an object of
scientia, or to be known with certainty). This thesis is
proved by the Academics by showing that it is impossible
to ﬁnd a perception that is an evident criterion of truth.
Augustine goes on to elaborate a typology of skeptical
arguments: (1) disagreement among people (i.e., relativity
of knowledge); (2) the fallibility of the senses; (3) dreams
and madness, and, ﬁnally; (4) paralogisms and sophisms.
(1) permits the emphasis that there are no evident and
universal criteria for truth, (2) and (3) that the sources of
knowledge are not reliable, and (4) that error is found just
as much at the level of reasoning as it is in the testimony of
the senses. This thus frames the portrait of skepticism as
that which denies the possibility of knowledge due to the
impossibility of distinguishing truth from falsity since
uncertainty is found just as much in objects as it is in the
knower. The model of skepticism inherited in the Middle
1202 S
Skepticism

Ages is taken from here. Faced with this kind of skepti-
cism, there is a complementary double attitude: skepti-
cism must then be refuted by showing that there is evident
knowledge (the cogito, mathematics, revealed truths).
Once refuted, however, it becomes legitimate to make a
limited use of skepticism as a test to distinguish true and
false knowledge. Use and refutation: a schema that we ﬁnd
throughout the Middle Ages. If the Augustinian model
determines the whole of the medieval conception of skep-
ticism, it will be enriched, however, by the superposition
of different traditions. The ﬁrst enrichment stems from
the rediscovery of the pre-Socratic tradition through
Aristotle, beginning in the twelfth century. Two sets of
texts are important. One, stemming from the Posterior
Analytics, and book II of the Metaphysics, drive the ques-
tions of what we must demonstrate and, more generally,
justify. It is in this context that the medievals examine the
problem of skepticism: can we know anything? Can we
apprehend truth? The second set of texts is made up of
book IV of the Metaphysics. The analyses of Heraclitean,
Protagorean, and Democritean doctrines give rise to the
examination of a host of arguments thought to be skepti-
cal. According to Aristotle, upholding that all that is
apparent is true makes it no longer able to distinguish
the true from the false. More often, the reading of these
texts allows giving an ontological basis to skeptical doc-
trines: it is because they hold, like Heraclitus, that all
things are in ﬂux, and because they deny the principle of
noncontradiction that the Academics hold that we cannot
know anything. The second enrichment is properly medi-
eval and results from reﬂection, mostly from Duns Scotus,
on the radical contingence of the created and on the
omnipotence of the Divine. The basic idea is to not set
a limit to Divine freedom. From here, we must emphasize
that the created world is not simply the actualization of
Divine Ideas, according to logical necessity, but that the
status of this world is contingent and that it could be
otherwise. In a like manner, we must pass to a working
conception of God’s omnipotence. God de facto intervenes
by means of his Divine power in creating the world with
a set of laws, but he maintains the possibility to intervene
in the course of things to modify it, through his absolute
power. Reﬂection on the possibility of God substituting
secondary causes in cognitive processes (to substitute the
causality of the perceived object) leads to the idea of a
deceptive God.
We ﬁnd in the thirteenth century a resurgence of the
problem of skepticism taken as a challenge put to our
ability to gain knowledge. It is in this context (and even
if Academics are not always explicitly mentioned) that the
interest in the problem of our access to truth and our
capacity to sufﬁciently justify our knowledge occurs.
Schematically, we can distinguish between three types of
responses to the skeptical challenge: an a posteriori
response, or a weak response seeking to limit the scope
of error in order to not give weight to skeptical arguments.
It is a response that contextualizes knowledge. We ﬁnd this
notably in Thomas Aquinas and Siger of Brabant, and
mostly in John Buridan. Two a priori or strong responses
accept the presuppositions of skepticism and seek to face it
on its terms. It consists of one part theories of knowledge
that rest on illumination (in particular, St. Bonaventure
and Henry of Ghent), and another part foundationalist
theories that base knowledge in a priori principles, the
clearest expression of which is found in Duns Scotus. We
will examine brieﬂy the positions of St. Bonaventure,
Thomas Aquinas, and John Duns Scotus.
The skeptical question appears in Bonaventure in his
questions on The Knowledge of Christ q. 4, as strongly tied
to the teaching of Augustine. It displays an intellectualist
reading
of
skepticism,
seemingly
inherited
from
a misunderstood Platonism. According to the skepticism
identiﬁed by Bonaventure, Divine Light is the only mean
of knowledge. Bonaventure criticizes this thesis as
a reduction of all knowledge to knowledge of Divine
Being. It removes the distinction between worldly knowl-
edge (knowledge of the viator) and beatiﬁc vision,
between the knowledge of things in God and direct knowl-
edge of things, between science and wisdom, and between
reason and revelation. The problem with skepticism is the
reduction of knowledge to the one intelligible world
(knowledge of Forms). And yet, this intelligible world
is inaccessible to the human mind after the fall (the
Christian dimension to skepticism is explicit here).
Faced with this kind of skepticism, Bonaventure defends
another conception of illumination: Divine reason is the
driving and regulating principle, that is, that which rules
the action of human reason. There is no direct interven-
tion as there is in the case of infused knowledge, but only
God’s presence in the act of intellectual knowing. How-
ever, it is just a step from created reason from whence it
gets its partial character. God is the standard of Supreme
Truth that allows for all inferior truth. The consequence of
this recourse to Divine rule is the stability of the object of
knowledge and the infallibility of knowledge, two neces-
sary conditions for knowledge (infallibility on the side of
the subject and stability on the side of the object). Thus,
the conditions for knowledge required by the skeptics (a
knowledge that cannot be false and of which we know is
not false) can be ﬁlled in. But, we must add a ﬁnal condi-
tion for knowledge: completeness in the understanding of
the object. Indeed, there are three modes of being: being in
Skepticism S
1203
S

spirit, worldly being, and being in the Divine Intellect.
Created truth cannot grasp but the ﬁrst two modes of
being where truth is conditional: there is mutability of
the sensible world, thus there is mutability in our thoughts
of the sensible world. We must then grasp the last mode of
being, which is impossible without Divine aid: the mind,
not being transformed by God, has not complete, clear,
and distinct knowledge. The idea of illumination is that
Divine Ideas are the conditions and basis for abstraction,
that is, for intellectual knowledge. There is an a priori
structure to knowledge: we do not know Divine Ideas
directly but they serve as standards for human knowledge.
We thus ﬁnd in Bonaventure a view of illumination tied to
the theme of Heraclitean skepticism on the mutability of
the sensible: evident knowledge supposes immutability,
and this is only found in the Divine understanding. Ratio-
nal thought is the highest form of knowledge that we can
attain in this world, but it is a weakened form of the true
intellectual knowledge that we will have in the glory of the
beatiﬁc vision. We must distinguish between degrees of
knowing and admit that our knowledge does not perfectly
match certain criteria admitted to be necessary for knowl-
edge such as clarity and fullness. Theories of illumination,
because of the importance of the Augustinian inﬂuence,
are perfect examples of the use of skepticism: they use
skeptical arguments to show the necessity of a divine
guarantee and the insufﬁciency of purely natural means
of knowledge, and they refute skepticism by means of this
intellectual knowledge guaranteed by God. However, we
ﬁnd skepticism surfacing in such a theory since the com-
pleteness of knowledge is only guaranteed in an eschato-
logical perspective.
We can present the contextualist position (which con-
sists in limiting the scope of the validity of skeptical
arguments to limit its reach) by borrowing Thomas
Aquinas’ view on the role of Adamic knowledge in the
Questions on Truth, q. 18, a. 6. The question is to know if
Adam, who had an ideal form of knowledge before the fall,
could have erred. This thought experiment allows us to
determine an exemplary situation from which we can
evaluate our own knowledge. Thomas advances two argu-
ments to show that Adam could not have been in error.
First, before original sin, there could have been a defect but
not a corruption. In epistemological terms, this signiﬁes
that either Adam knew truth, and he knew it completely
and perfectly, or he did not know it at all. Thus, Adam
could have ignored certain things (he is not omniscient)
but could not err. Adam could not have incomplete
knowledge since it stems from hasty assent. And yet, for
Adam the assent is always proportional to the object
known. Second, the intellect is created by God to be
capable of truth. It can thus know the truth without
error, as is attested by the indubitable knowledge of ﬁrst
principles. Consequently, error, the act of the intellect of
confusing truth and falsity or approving an incomplete
opinion, is a consequence of the fall, that is, a disorder
making way for the natural order willed by God. Thus,
Adam had but true, ﬁrm, and evident knowledge. Skepti-
cal arguments allow to assure that we determine criteria of
truth sufﬁcient to elude the skeptical challenge. In the
argument from dreams, Thomas replies by qualifying the
weight of the objection: on the one hand, in dreams assent
is not free, thus the question of error meant as epistemic
responsibility does not arise. On the other hand, dreams
stem from sensation, thus it is a particular case. Since
Thomas does not consider that we could be dreaming
permanently, the objection from dreams is not relevant;
not for Adam nor for us. In return, the argument from
sensible illusions poses the problem of the conditions for
perception and sensory Adamic knowledge. And yet, as
a good Aristotelian, Thomas reckons that all knowledge
stems from experience. His answer stays no less extremely
classical: there is no error at the level of proper sensibles;
error is in judgment. The entire skeptical problem is
thus reduced to the problem of judgment: the gap
between the intellect and the sensible given. The difﬁ-
culty for us, by comparison with Adam, lies thus in the
mastery of sensation by the intellect and in the applica-
tion of the principle of correction. As such, Adam mas-
ters his sensation perfectly thus either he recognizes
a situation of appropriateness between the intellect and
its object and he judges veridically, or he recognizes an
absence of this appropriateness and he corrects his
judgment, or if correction is impossible (as when asleep),
he differs it. What the case of Adam shows us is that
skepticism results from an accidental situation of sepa-
rating sensation and the intellect, a separation that we
can bridge by the temporary suspension of judgment and
by the correction of the sensible by the intellect. Thus in
a general way, even after the fall, man is created capable of
truth, and in normal conditions of cognitive function
we are able to judge correctly. Error is but factual, and
skepticism does but emphasize that we can occasionally
ignore this or that parameter in the knowing of an object.
Justifying our knowledge does not then consist in exclud-
ing all possible logical objections, of rejecting a priori all
sources of error, but only in delimiting the scope of what
we know and what we do not know. In as much, Thomas’
answer is a posteriori and cannot, quite evidently, satisfy
the skeptic.
John Duns Scotus, for his part, proposes in his Com-
mentary on the Sentences L. I, d. 3, q. 4, a foundationalist
1204 S
Skepticism

and rationalist response to the question of justiﬁcation
by explaining the role of principles while at the same
time maintaining the demand of infallibility. Against the
skeptical position, Scotus aims to provide three catego-
ries of infallible truths that cover the whole of the ediﬁce
of knowledge: logical truths, introspection (knowledge of
one’s mental states), sensible and experimental truths. In
effect, Scotus distinguishes between sensation or direct
perception and experience or induction (understood as
a collection of sensations). The category of logical prin-
ciples, examined ﬁrst, regroups at once ﬁrst principles
and propositions known in themselves. The infallibility
of these principles is connected to their logical form:
these propositions are only known by the analysis of
the terms by the connection of including the predicate
in the subject. The knowledge of this relation accom-
panies the truth of this proposition and an evident assent
of the intellect. We then have here an a priori form of
knowledge independent of experience. The second cate-
gory of evident truths is that of sensation and experience.
First, experimental knowledge (i.e., induction) rests on
two parameters: the frequency of a case and the addition
of a causal principle. If a repeated experience reveals con-
stant reactions in natural agents, then we can conclude
with an infallible certitude that the observed effect is
proper to this agent and that it will always produce the
same effect. This observational reasoning is guaranteed by
a causal principle known in itself, that is, a principle which
belongs to the ﬁrst category, according to Scotus, and
which maintains that the effect which is frequently
a restrained cause is the natural effect of this cause. The
principles that base experience are found in sensible
knowledge in a way. We must here distinguish two situa-
tions, either the convergence of the products of different
senses or a conﬂict. In the ﬁrst case, the convergence allows
to conclude with absolute and infallible certainty about
perception. In effect, this convergence supplies the princi-
ple of frequency to which induction calls upon. It is, once
again, the causal dimension of knowledge that enables its
justiﬁcation. If an object produces uniform impressions
that converge on two or more senses, we can then be sure
of the truth of our perceptions. Conversely, in the second
case, the certainty of sensation rests on the capacity of the
intellect to correct the sense. In such a situation, truth is
known only through a posteriori justiﬁcations, through
the help of an infallible intellectual knowledge and thanks
to the convergence of several senses. Thus in the case of
seeing distant things, sight may err but natural reason tells
us that a distant object acts in a weakened manner. As
such, once we have realized that sense cannot furnish
reliable information in this context we can seek for ways
to overcome this inadequacy. The third category is that of
mental states: inﬂuenced by Augustine’s cogito, Scotus
holds that the apprehension of our own mental states is
as certain as principles in themselves. Scotus thus defends
a strong response to skepticism; a response that tries hard
to defend a model of knowledge where truth, evidence,
and infallibility are necessary conditions for knowledge.
To do so, he employs a foundationalist and rationalist
conception of knowledge: ﬁrst principles of knowledge,
the most evident principles, are a priori principles known
by the intellect outside of all sensation. And these
principles are the ultimate basis of knowledge, which
permit the infallible justiﬁcation of sensible truths.
Therefore, we have of the movement of foundation of
knowledge on intellectual principles: sensible truths are
based on the principle of causality that justiﬁes the cogni-
tive value of sensation. The same causal principle, along
with the principle of uniformity of nature, warrants
induction. Thus, all reliability of experience comes from
ﬁrst principles, known a priori only through the analysis
of terms.
Next to these attempts to refute skepticism we ﬁnd
a group of philosophers defending a fallibilist conception
of knowledge, such that the majority of our knowledge is
never absolutely evident and always susceptible to be oth-
erwise. While most of these philosophers are active in
the fourteenth century, the most important and the only
to explicitly call himself a skeptic (academicus), is a
philosopher from the twelfth century, John of Salisbury.
This philosopher insists on the cognitive fallibility of Man;
a weakness that renders difﬁcult his access to truth: Man
must be satisﬁed with mostly having likely knowledge, and
his probabilistic truths conﬂict such that, Man, incapable
of overcoming this is reduced to uncertainty and hesitancy
(Metalogicon, IV, 40). John of Salisbury’s theory of knowl-
edge allows putting this moderate conception of skepti-
cism into place. This seems to be a fallback to a kind of
fallibilism and a probabilism tied to the imperfection of
our cognitive apparatus. Proposing a phenomenology of
knowledge in several places, Salisbury emphasizes how the
process, by which we gain knowledge passing through
sensation, imagination, and memory (faculties of the syn-
thesis of sensation) and then, by the prudence of reason
and an intellectual judgment, runs the risk of incomplete-
ness and error at each step. In describing the progressive
elaboration of our concepts, stemming from sensation up
to reason, he stresses hard that, fundamentally, all knowl-
edge is approximate knowledge. The work of analysis and
synthesis run at each level by different faculties, works to
deﬁne precisely the object of knowledge by situating it by
its differences and similarities, in relation to what is
Skepticism S
1205
S

already known. What interests John of Salisbury are the
steps of this approximation and the degrees of justiﬁca-
tion wherein our knowledge claims to be. A distinction
is imposed between judgment (sententia) and opinion.
Judgment, which is the object of prudence, creates
a strong conﬁdence that practically excludes error and
allows a reliable approximation of truth, meanwhile opin-
ion is an unjustiﬁed belief (Metalogicon, II, 5). John of
Salisbury thus distinguishes between degrees of justiﬁca-
tion that determine an assent more or less ﬁrm depending
on the reliability we can claim to. The importance
accorded to the probable is justiﬁed both by the reality
and the limits of our faculties. As such, to judge veridically
with absolute certainty supposes on our part a capacity to
judge which events are necessary. But speciﬁcally, such
complete apprehension of the laws of nature is impossible
for us and reserved to God alone: it is too difﬁcult from
our point of view to distinguish that which occurs often
from that which occurs always (Metalogicon, II, 13). It is
thus a recourse to a theme from Christian skepticism (only
God knows truly what is true) which justiﬁes the recourse
to the probable in the study of nature, as far as possible,
where thought about the contingent is permitted. From
here, we are driven to a philosophical skepticism: the
difﬁculty to perceive truth inclines us to follow the Aca-
demics. We must renounce certitude and necessity in the
ﬁeld of natural philosophy since all that is corporeal and
mutable, is contingent and free of necessity, and we must
admit that demonstration is not possible but in the
domain of mathematics.
See
also:
▶Augustine
▶Bonaventure
▶Certainty
▶Divine Power ▶Epistemology ▶Henry of Ghent
▶Induction
▶John
Buridan
▶John
Duns
Scotus
▶John
of
Salisbury
▶Knowledge
▶Nicholas
of
Autrecourt ▶Nicholas Oresme ▶Peter Auriol ▶Robert
Holcot ▶Sense Perception, Theories of ▶Siger of Brabant
▶Thomas Aquinas ▶William Crathorn ▶William of
Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Aquinas Thomas (1972–1976) Quaestiones disputatae De veritate,
Leonina edn, t XXII. Editori di san Tommaso, Roma
Augustine (1970) Contra Academicos. Corpus Christianorum. Brepols,
Turnhout
Bonaventure (1893) De scientia Christi, in Opera omnia V, ed. studio et
cura PP. Collegii a S. Bonaventura, Quaracchi
Crathorn William (1988) Quaestiones super librum sententiarum, ed.
Hoffmann F. In: Questionen Zum ersten Sentenzenbuch. Beitra¨ge
zur Geschichte der Philosophie und Theologie des Mittelalters, Band
29. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Duns Scotus John (1954) Ordinatio. Opera omnia, vol 3. Typis Polyglottis
Vaticanis, Civitas Vaticana, pp 123–172, L. I, d. 3, q. 4: Utrum aliqua
veritas certa et sincera possit naturaliter cognosci ab intellectu
viatoris absque lucis increati speciali illustratione
Henry of Ghent (2001) Summa (Quaestiones ordinariae), art.
I–V, ed. Wilson GA. In: Henrici de Gandavo Opera omnia
(1979 sqq.). Leuven University Press, Leuven (initially also E.J.
Brill, Leiden)
Holcot Robert (1518) In quatuor libros sententiarum quaestiones. Lyons
(repr Minerva, Frankfurt, 1967)
John of Salisbury (1909) Policraticus sive de nugis curialium et vestigiis
philosophorum, 2 vols, ed. Webb CCJ. Clarendon, Oxford
John of Salisbury (1929) Metalogicon libri III, ed. Webb CCJ. Clarendon,
Oxford
Nicholas of Autrecourt: De Rijk LM (ed) (1994) Nicholas of Autrecourt.
His correspondance with Master Giles and Bernard d’Arezzo. Brill,
Leiden/New York/Ko¨ln
Siger of Brabant (1974) Impossibilia, II. In: Ecrits de logique, de morale et
de physique, ed. Bazan B. B. Nauwalaerts/Publications universitaires,
Paris/Louvain
Secondary Sources
Coˆte´ A (2006) Siger and the skeptic. Rev Metaphys 60:723–743
Gregory T (1974) Dio ingannatore e genio maligno, nota in margine
alle Meditaniones di Descartes. Giornale critico della ﬁlosoﬁa
italiana 53:479–516 (repr (1992) Mundana Sapientia, Forme di
conoscenza nella cultura medievale. edizioni di storia e letteratura,
Roma)
Gregory T (1982) La tromperie divine. Stud Mediev 23:517–527 (repr
(1992) Mundana Sapientia, Forme di conoscenza nella cultura
medievale. edizioni di storia e letteratura, Roma, pp 389–399)
Grellard C (2004) Comment peut-on se ﬁer a` l’expe´rience? Esquisse d’une
typologie
des
re´ponses
me´die´vales
au
scepticisme.
Quaestio
4:113–135
Grellard C (2007a) Jean de Salisbury. Un cas me´die´val de scepticisme.
Freibg Z Theol Philos 54:16–40
Grellard C (2007b) Scepticism, demonstration and the inﬁnite regress
argument (Nicholas of Autrecourt and John Buridan). Vivarium
42(2–3):328–342
Hendley BP (1967) Wisdom and eloquence: a new interpretation of
the Metalogicon of John of Salisbury. Unpublished PhD disserta-
tion, Yale
Lagerlund H (ed) (2010) Rethinking the history of skepticism: the missing
medieval background. Brill, Leiden-Boston
Perler D (2006) Zweifel und Gewissheit. Skeptische Debatten im
Mittelalter. Klosterman, Frankfurt-am-Main
Schmitt C (1972) Cicero Scepticus. A study of the inﬂuence of the
Academics in the Renaissance. Martin Nijhoff, The Hague
Schmitt C (1983) The rediscovery of ancient skepticism in modern times.
In: Burnyeat M (ed) The skeptical tradition. University of California
Press, Berkeley/Los Angeles/London, pp 225–251
Thijssen H (2000) The quest for certain knowledge in the fourteenth
century: Nicolas of Autrecourt against the Academics. In: Sihvola J
(ed)
Ancient
scepticism
and
the
sceptical
tradition.
Acta
philosophica Fennica 66. Societas Philosophica Fennica, Helsinki,
pp 199–223
Wittwer R (2002) Zur Lateinischen Uberliefung von Sextus Empiricus’
Pyrrhoneioi upothuposeis. Rheinisches Museum fu¨r Philologie
145:366–373
Zupko J (1993) Buridan and skepticism. J Hist Philos 31(2):191–221
1206 S
Skepticism

Sophisms
MIKKO YRJO¨ NSUURI
Department of Social Sciences and Philosophy
University of Jyva¨skyla¨
Jyva¨skyla¨
Finland
Abstract
In the medieval sense of the word, a sophism is
a problematic sentence that is discussed in a technical
manner, usually including a solution showing how the
apparent problems arise. Sophisms were used from the
twelfth century onward as exercises for student in their
ﬁrst years of university studies, but at least in the four-
teenth century sophisms were also used for purposes more
accurately described as research. The problems with single
sentences were for the most part logical or linguistic, but
also many issues of natural philosophy were addressed as
sophisms. Collections of sophisms may have circulated as
exercise books but in the mature form of the genre
established authors wrote their own collections, since the
solutions provided an efﬁcient context for presenting
philosophical doctrine.
The Structure and Uses of Sophisms
A sophism in the medieval sense of the word is
a problematic sentence that is argued for and against the
case (casus), often against an assumed background situa-
tion. The solution of a sophism typically consists of the
correct evaluation, an explanation of the problems
involved, and a resolution of the argument or arguments
for the wrong evaluation. For example, ‘‘all men are all
men’’ (omnis homo est omnis homo) can be argued for as
a predication where the same is predicated of the same, or
by pointing out that ‘‘this man is a man, and that man is
a man, etc.’’ The same sentence can be argued against since
from a universal predication a particular follows, but
‘‘some man is every man’’ is false, and thus the sophism
itself must be false. The sophism is solved through
distinguishing two senses of ‘‘every man’’: the sophism is
true if it is taken to claim that the set of all men is the set of
all men, but false if it claims that each singular men would
be all men.
Sophisms had an important role in the medieval uni-
versity education. It seems clear that sophisms were
actively discussed in medieval universities from the
twelfth century to the Renaissance. In medieval writings,
sophisms were most importantly discussed in speciﬁc
collections of sophisms of different kinds. Different
authors from the same period would typically discuss
roughly similar lists of sophisms. It seems that sophisms
would circulate among teachers in roughly the same man-
ner in which logical examples circulate among logic
teachers nowadays.
Twelfth- and thirteenth-century sophisms deal mainly
with linguistic and logical issues. In the fourteenth cen-
tury, problems of natural philosophy are addressed
through sophisms. These topics belonged to the ﬁrst
years of medieval university education, and indeed soph-
isms seem to have formed an important part of the ﬁrst
years of study. In fourteenth-century Oxford, a student
who had done two years of disputations on sophisms, was
called ‘‘Sophista.’’ Later in the Renaissance, the title started
to be used in a pejorative sense.
Magister Abstractionum
A particularly important early collection of sophisms was
known as the work of ‘‘magister abstractionum,’’ or
‘‘magister Ricardus Sophista.’’ The collection was com-
posed around 1230s or 1240s and contained over 300
sophisms, which are characteristically logico-linguistic.
Scholarship has not yet satisfactorily identiﬁed the author.
Richard Fishacre and Richard Rufus of Cornwall have
been suggested among others. One possibility is that the
collection evolved from the work of many authors using
sophisms in their teaching. In any case, the collection
circulated several decades as the work of ‘‘magister
abstractionum,’’ and it was well known even in the 1330s.
Natural Philosophy ‘‘secundum
imaginationem’’
In the fourteenth century, sophisms were used also for the
purposes of natural philosophy. They were particularly
important in the work of the so-called Oxford Calculators,
especially Richard Kilvington and William Heytesbury.
Commentators have wondered whether their sophisms
really can be directed at ﬁrst-year students, given the
complexity of the issues involved. Rather, it may seem
that sophisms were appropriated as a methodology for
studying
nature
‘‘secundum
imaginationem,’’
which
would involve assuming a casus and reasoning what
would happen given such a casus. For example, assume
that a hole is drilled through the earth and a stone
dropped into it. Will it stop when it reaches its Aristotelian
natural place at the center of the earth, or continue further
as the impetus-theory of movement would have it? One
crucial ﬁnding achieved by the secundum imaginationem –
method that may have found its way to modern physics
was the mean speed theorem.
Sophisms S
1207
S

Logical Sophisms in the Fourteenth Century
One important technique used in the solution of sophisms
was expositio, which typically turns a sentence containing
a problematic term or expression into a conjunction of
two or more simpler sentences. Thus, for example, ‘‘Soc-
rates begins to be white’’ equals ‘‘Socrates is not white and
immediately Socrates will be white.’’ Although expositio
was a very general logical technique, the sophisms on
beginning and ceasing – on limit-decision problems –
can be singled out as an especially important group of
such sophisms where also questions of natural philosophy
were dealt with.
Epistemic logic was one central interest of Richard
Kilvington and William Heytesbury in their respective
collections of sophisms. Kilvington’s sophism 47, for
example, is ‘‘the king is seated,’’ when it is assumed that
if the king is seated, you know that he is, and if he is not
seated, you know that he is not. The gist of the sophism is
that you may be forced to doubt whether you know that
the king is seated, and whether such doubt is in general
possible. Also William Heyetesbury addresses the issue in
his sophisms.
One interesting group of fourteenth-century sophisms
concerns
insolubles.
For
example,
John
Buridan’s
Summulae de dialectica contains as the last part of the
work a large collection of sophisms, including a group of
20 sophisms dealing with self-referential paradoxes. As
Buridan does not tackle insolubles seriously anywhere
else in his logic, it seems safe to suppose that at least he
did not take sophisms simply as a teaching tool. Rather,
sophisms were also considered a methodology for serious
study.
See also: ▶Insolubles ▶John Buridan ▶Oxford Calcula-
tors ▶Richard Fishacre ▶Richard Kilvington ▶Richard
Rufus of Cornwall ▶William Heytesbury
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Heytesbury W (1984) On maxima and minima: chapter 5 of rules for
solving sophismata, with an anonymous fourteenth-century discus-
sion, trans. with introduction and study by Longeway J. D. Reidel,
Dordrecht
Hughes GE (1982) John Buridan on self-reference. Chapter eight of
Buridan’s ‘Sophismata’. An edition and a translation with an intro-
duction and a philosophical commentary. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge (The paperbound edition omits the Latin text)
Kretzmann N, Kretzmann BE (1990a) The ‘Sophismata’ of Richard
Kilvington, critical edn. Oxford University Press for the British
Academy, Oxford
Kretzmann N, Kretzmann BE (1990b) The ‘Sophismata’ of Richard
Kilvington. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (English trans-
lation, historical introduction and philosophical commentary)
Secondary Sources
Biard J (1989) Les sophismes du savoir: Albert de Saxe entre Jean Buridan
et Guillaume Heytesbury. Vivarium 27:36–50
Ebbesen S (1979) The dead man is alive. Synthese 40:43–70
Lewry PO (ed) (1985) The rise of British logic: acts of the sixth European
symposium on medieval logic and semantics. Papers in medieval
studies 7. Pontiﬁcal Institute of Medieval Studies, Toronto
Pinborg J (1976) Magister Abstractionum. Cahiers de l’Institut du
Moyen-Aˆ ge Grec et Latin 18:1–4. Copenhague
Read S (ed) (1993) Sophisms in medieval logic and grammar, acts of
the 8th European symposium for medieval logic and semantics.
Kluwer, Dordrecht
Rosier I (1991) Les sophismes grammaticaux au XIIIe s. Medioevo
17:175–230
Wilson C (1960) William Heytesbury: medieval logic and the rise of
modern physics. The University of Wisconsin Press, Madison
Sophonias
DENIS SEARBY
Department of Linguistics and Philology
Uppsala University
Uppsala
Sweden
Abstract
Sophonias is the author of paraphrases of Aristotelian
works, most probably active in the latter half of the thir-
teenth century (see Hunger I:25–26, 37 nn. 139–140,
II:267–268; PLP 11 p. 49 no. 26424; Praechter in RE
15,2, col. 1099). He is almost certainly to be identiﬁed
with Sophonias, the monk from the same period, who
lived in Constantinople and spent time in Thessalonika,
concerning whom reliable historical data exists.
Biography
We begin with the works attributed to him as the basic
starting point. Two paraphrases of Aristotle’s De anima
and Parva naturalia, attributed in the manuscripts to the
‘‘very wise Sophonias,’’ form a clear point of departure in
establishing his authorship. According to Wendland, the
manuscripts of the Parva naturalia can be divided into two
classes, one attributing the work to Sophonias, the other to
Themistius. The latter attribution is clearly wrong, since
the work is based on the later commentary of Michael of
Ephesus. Sophonias must have lived long enough after
Michael to allow for the text transmission of the latter to
become corrupt, since he often agrees with the readings
in the inferior group of manuscripts for Michael
(cf. Wendland CAG V.6 pp. VI, X–XI).
1208 S
Sophonias

Sophonias introduces De anima with a preface
distinguishing between commentaries and paraphrases.
The De anima preface is important both for its description
of Sophonias’ method and for the indication of his inten-
tion to apply his method ﬁrst to De anima and then to
other treatises (cf. De anima 2,38–3,1). This gives us
grounds for attributing to one and the same author the
similar, anonymous paraphrases of the Categories, the
Prior Analytics I, and the Sophistici elenchi, all edited in
vol. 23 of the Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca. The
paraphrase of the Prior Analytics is erroneously attributed
in some manuscripts to Themistius but is actually
a compilation of the commentaries of Alexander and
Philoponus.
Due to their similarities, however, all the treatises in
CAG 23 may reasonably be attributed to Sophonias. Thus,
we are furnished with more precise arguments as to
dating. Given the author’s use of Blemmydes and Leo
Magentenos, Ebbesen (1981:333) regards a date after 1250
as very probable for the paraphrase of Sophistici elenchi and
is inclined toward dating it after 1275. Apart from the
Aristotelian paraphrases, there is also a brief letter from
a ‘‘monk Sophonias’’ to Joseph the philosopher; this letter
must have been written between 1307 and 1325, the period
when Joseph lived in Constantinople (cf. Mercati 1925).
There is also a declamation written in the person of ‘‘Paul
discoursing in Athens’’ ascribed to the ‘‘very wise monk
Sophonias’’ in Codex Marcianus Graecus 266 (cf. Mioni
1981:383–386). From the vocabulary, style, and philosoph-
ical content of the declamation, it seems clear that this
author was the same as the Aristotelian paraphrast.
There are important references to Sophonias from this
period in various other sources. We have, ﬁrst of all,
Pachymeres’ statement that Sophonias the priest-monk
(hieromonachos) was sent by Andronikos II Palaeologos
to Italy to negotiate the marriage of his son Michael IX to
Catherine de Courtenay (Pachymeres, IX,5, ed. Failler
1984–2000: 227,22 ff.). This embassy, corroborated in
historical records (cf. Perrat and Longnon 1967; Do¨lger
1960:18 no. 2156a), ended without success in 1296. Both
Sophonias and Manuel Holobolos (c. 1245–1310/14) are
described as typifying well-known intellectuals of the pre-
ceding generation in a letter directed to Makarios
Chrysokephalos, metropolitan of Philadelphia (Walther
1973:229,28–30). The Dominican friar Simon of Constan-
tinople (c. 1235–1325) dedicated the second book of his
work De processione Spiritus Sancti etiam ex Filio to
Sophonias (using the title hieromonachos). A Latin man-
uscript in the library of Uppsala University contains
a treatise written by Guilelmus Bernardus de Gaillac
(Guillaume
Bernard)
who,
in
1307,
founded
the
Dominican monastery in Pera. On f. 5r of this treatise
(Stegmu¨ller 1953:342), written after he had left Pera, Guil-
laume reveals that he was personally acquainted with
Sophonias the monk, for he informs us that Sophonias
the ‘‘kalogerus or monk’’ knew both Greek and Latin and
‘‘had suffered persecution on account of his confession of
the true faith as taught by the Roman Church.’’ Sophonias’
connections with the Roman Church may be one reason
why the emperor sent him on an embassy to the West.
Thus, in the same period in which Sophonias the
paraphrast of Aristotle must be assumed to have been
working, we also ﬁnd Sophonias the monk, well versed
in the intellectual issues of the day, a Greek equipped with
the knowledge of Latin, with ties to Dominicans in Con-
stantinople and Pera (cf. Congourdeau 1987:165–174,
175–181). Most scholars view the paraphrast and the
monk as one and the same man. The identiﬁcation
of the paraphrast and the monk provides a coherent
historical context and should be regarded as historically
certain.
It is pertinent to note yet another letter of some his-
torical importance from one ‘‘Sophronias,’’ a priest-monk,
to Charles de Valois, dated 1308, one of ﬁve Byzantine
supporters in high positions who wrote to Charles, urging
him to take the Byzantine throne to save it from the Turks
(cf. Congourdeau 1987:181 n. 28; Laiou 1972:216). The
name ‘‘Sophronias’’ occurs only once, on the back of the
parchment letter, in the bold address to Charles as
emperor of the Romans, according to the text edited
in Moranville´. The name was omitted in the original
edition of the letter in Du Cange (1657), and appeared
ﬁrst in print in Omont’s revision (Moranville´ 1890:86).
The salient point here is that the name ‘‘Sophronias’’ is so
rare as not to be included in any form in either the Lexicon
of Greek Personal Names or the Thesaurus Linguae Graecae.
Since the name appears not to have been in use at all, one
may speculate, given the rest of our knowledge about him,
that the author of the letter to Charles is our monk
Sophonias, and that the name on the back of the page is
some kind of error written by someone other than the
original sender.
Thought
Although today we might scoff at the endeavor, paraphras-
ing Aristotelian treatises as difﬁcult as the De anima is an
impressive enterprise in any language, let alone in the
higher style of ancient Greek. It may well have been
undertaken in connection with teaching, but we have as
yet no further evidence on that point. As he explains in the
preface to In De anima, Sophonias aimed not merely at
paraphrase but at a combination of paraphrase and
Sophonias S
1209
S

commentary. For him, the deﬁning characteristic of
a commentary is that the commentator divides the philo-
sophical work into discrete, verbatim quotations and adds
his own clariﬁcation of the philosopher’s words that, as
Sophonias states, are often ‘‘oracular’’ in their obscurity.
Characteristic of paraphrases is that the paraphrast speaks
in the voice of Aristotle, rewriting the text in his own style,
and clarifying the meaning through examples and similes,
doing this in a continuous composition as opposed to one
arranged under different headings. In the paraphrases
conventionally ascribed to him, Sophonias never cites
either Aristotle or his other sources by name, but he
stays very close to the original texts, abridging consider-
ably, replacing difﬁcult or obscure words here and there,
adding some glosses and examples. Whole sentences are
lifted directly from Aristotle with scarcely a change or only
moderate ones. The major changes are due to abridgement
and omission. The same approach is also applied to his
commentary sources, which, moreover, also go through
a process of combination.
Most historians of philosophy hold that Sophonias
contributes nothing of his own in the way of argument
or interpretation, apart from his peculiar method of
paraphrase and compilation as well as certain scattered
remarks here and there (but see Blumenthal 1997; Byde´n
2006; Ebbesen 1981:333–340; Tatakis 2003:203). However,
both at the beginning and end of the De anima, Sophonias
does allow himself to speak in his own words. In the
preface, he explains his aims and methods, as already
mentioned; in an epilogue, he reveals his philosophical,
or rather theological, interest in how Aristotle’s psychol-
ogy relates to the question of the immortality of the soul
and the resurrection of the body, an interest he has
also already indicated earlier in the treatise (see CAG
23,1 p. 7. 29–38, and p. 132,39 – 133,24; cf. Constantinides
1982:131, n. 109). With regard to the Aristotelian tradi-
tion, Sophonias’ chief value today lies in his offering an
indirect tradition for the textual transmission of Aristotle,
and he is occasionally cited as a textual witness by the
editors of Aristotle. He has proven valuable in corroborat-
ing fragments of Philoponus’ lost commentary on Book 3
of De anima (cf. Van Riet 1965), and may prove useful in
similar, as yet unstudied contexts.
See also: ▶Alexander of Aphrodisias and Arabic Aristote-
lianism ▶George Pachymeres ▶John Philoponus ▶Leo
Magentenos
▶Michael
of
Ephesus
▶Nikephoros
Blemmydes
▶Parva
naturalia,
Commentaries
on
Aristotle’s ▶Prior Analytics, Commentaries on Aristotle’s
▶Themistius, Arabic
Bibliography
Primary Sources
CAG = Commentaria in Aristotelis Graeca, Reimer
Pachyme`re Georges (1984–2000) Relations historiques (e´d. introd. et
notes par Failler A; traduction franc¸aise par Laurent V). Belles
Lettres, Paris
Stegmu¨ller Friedrich (1953) Guilelmus Bernardi de Gaillac OP, Tractatus
de obiectionibus Graecorum contra processionem Spiritus sancti
a Filio (Uppsala C 55), ed. Stegmu¨ller F, Analecta Upsaliensia
Theologiam Medii Aevi Illustrantia, tom. I. Opera systematica.
Uppsala, pp 323–360
Sophonias
Sophonias (1883) In libros Aristotelis De anima paraphrasis, ed. Hayduck
M, CAG XXIII.1. Berlin
Sophonias (1884) In Aristotelis Categorias Paraphrasis, ed. Hayduck M,
CAG XXIII.2. Berlin
Sophonias (1884) [Themistii] quae fertur in Aristotelis Analyticorum
Priorum Librum I Paraphrasis, ed. Wallies M, CAG XXIII.3. Berlin
Sophonias (1884) In Aristotelis Sophisticos elenchos Paraphrasis, ed.
Hayduck M, CAG XXIII.4. Berlin
Sophonias
(1903)
Themistii
(Sophoniae)
in
Parva
naturalia
commentarium, ed. Wendland P, CAG, vol 6. Berlin
Sophonias (ff. 156–161r) Declamatio quam Paulus Athenis habuit ad
populum, Cod. Marc. gr. 266 (forthcoming edition by Searby and
Sjo¨rs)
Secondary Sources
Blumenthal HJ (1997) Sophonias’ commentary on Aristotle’s De anima.
In: Benakis L (ed) Ne´oplatonisme et philosophie me´die´vale. Brepols,
Tournhout, pp 307–317
Byde´n B (2006) Lοgοtewnikές kainοtοmίeς sta prώima palaiοlόgeia
υpοmnήmata stο Perιcυw˜Zς tου ΑristοtέlZ. ΥpόmnZma stZ
filοsοjίa 4:221–251
Congourdeau M-H (1987) Fre`re Simon le Constantinopolitain, O. P.
(1235?–1325?). Revue des e´tudes byzantines 45:165–174; Note sur
les Dominicains de Constantinople au de´but du 14e sie`cle. Revue des
e´tudes byzantines 45:175–181
Constantinides CN (1982) Higher education in Byzantium in the
thirteenth and early fourteenth centuries (1204–c. 1310). Texts and
studies of the history of Cyprus, vol XI. Cyprus Research Centre,
Nicosia
Do¨lger F (1960) Regesten der Kaiserurkunden des ostro¨mischen Reiches
von 565–1453, 4. Teil: Regesten von 1282–1341. Beck, Munich
Du Cange Ch (1657) Histoire de l’empire de Constantinople sous les
empereurs franc¸ois. de l’Imprimerie Royale, Paris
Ebbesen S (1981) Commentators and commentaries on Aristotle’s
Sophistici elenchi. The Greek tradition, vol I. Brill, Leiden
Failler A (2002) La mission du moine Sophonias en Italie et le
mariage de Michael IX Palaiologos. Revue des e´tudes byzantines
60:151–166
Hunger H (1978) Die hochsprachliche profane Literatur der Byzantiner,
2 vols. Beck, Munich
Laiou AE (1972) Constantinople and the Latins. The foreign policy of
Andronicus II 1282–1328. Harvard University Press, Cambridge
Mercati SG (1925) Lettera del monaco Sofonia al ﬁlosofo Giuseppe. Studi
bizantini e neoellenici 1:168–174 (= Collectanea Byzantini I, Bari,
1970, pp 343–347)
Mioni E (1981) Bibliothecae Divi Marci Venetiarum codices Graeci
manuscripti, vol 1. Ministerio della Pubblica Istruzione, Venice
1210 S
Sophonias

Moranville´ H (1890) Les projets de Charles de Valois sur l’empire de
Constantinople. Bibliothe`que de l’E´cole des chartes 51:63–86
Perrat Ch, Longnon J (eds) (1967) Actes Relatifs a` la Principaute´ de More´e
1289–1300. Collection de documents ine´dits sur l’histoire de France
6. Bibliothe`que nationale, Paris
PLP = (1991) Prosopographisches Lexikon der Palaiologenzeit. erstellt
von Erich Trapp, Hans-Veit Beyer und Ioannes G. Leontiades.
Faszikel 11, Wien 1991. Verlag der O¨ sterreichischen Akademie der
Wissenschaften
RE = von Pauly AF, Wissowa G, Kroll W et al (1894–1980) Paulys
Realencyklopa¨die
der
classischen
Altertumswissenschaft.
Verlagsbuchhandlung, Stuttgart
Tatakis B (2003) Byzantine philosophy (trans with intro: Moutafakis NJ).
Hackett, Indianapolis
Van Riet S (1965) Fragments de l’original grec du De Intellectu de
Philopon dans une compilation de Sophonias. Revue philosophique
de Louvain 63:5–40
Walther R (1973) Ein Brief an Makarios den metropoliten von Philadel-
phia. Jahrbuch der O¨ sterreichischen Byzantinistik 22:219–232
Sources of Ancient Skepticism
▶Skepticism
Species, Sensible and Intelligible
LEEN SPRUIT
Sapienza University Rome
Rome
Italy
Abstract
Aristotle regarded the mind as capable of grasping forms
detached from matter. Most of his medieval and Renais-
sance followers interpreted this conception along the lines
of a theory of abstraction, grounded in the mediating role
of representational forms called ‘‘intentions’’ or ‘‘species.’’
The theory of species addresses the issue of how percep-
tion and cognition of sensible reality is brought about; it
attempts a non-circular analysis of this process, that is,
with the aid of formal principles, such as the species that
are not direct objects of perception or cognition, and of
mental capabilities, such as the agent intellect, that are not
knowing faculties. This approach was not universally
accepted. In particular, after Thomas Aquinas’ death,
a long series of controversies developed about the neces-
sity of species. The controversy spans a period from the
second half of the thirteenth century until the end of the
seventeenth century. Here only medieval discussions are
analyzed.
‘‘Species’’ in classical Latin had an active sense (‘‘seeing,’’
‘‘sight,’’ ‘‘look,’’ ‘‘view’’) and an passive sense (‘‘outward
appearance,’’ ‘‘shape,’’ ‘‘form,’’ ‘‘ﬁgure’’). Cicero translated
the Platonic ide´a with ‘‘species’’ or ‘‘forma’’ (Academica, I,
viii). Seneca introduced the Latin ‘‘idea’’ (Epistulae, 58 and
65), but later writers, such as Apuleius and Augustine,
continued to use ‘‘forma’’ or ‘‘species’’ for the same Pla-
tonic term. Most likely, the medieval controversy about
species would have taken a different course, if the Aristo-
telian eidos in De anima, III had not been translated with
‘‘species’’ (passive sense), in addition to the other render-
ing ‘‘forma.’’ This translation signiﬁcantly affects the phil-
osophical perspective, because in medieval philosophy
‘‘species’’ assumes instrumental and representational con-
notations, whereas the Aristotelian form stands for the
deﬁning characteristics of a thing. The Arabic-Latin ver-
sion of De anima by Michael Scotus (c. 1220) offers
‘‘forma’’ for eidos in the crucial sections about the presence
of the form of the stone in soul and about intellectual soul
as topos or eidos eidon (De anima, III.8, 431b30-32a3).
‘‘Species’’ for eidos is the rendering of the Vetus Translatio
(by James of Venice, around the middle of the twelfth
century) in the same sections – an example followed by
William of Moerbeke, whose translation set the terms for
the subsequent species controversies.
According to the theory of species, sense perception
occurs when sense organs are affected by external stimuli
(sensible species); it consists essentially in the production
of sensory representations called ‘‘phantasmata,’’ i.e., the
product of the inner senses (common sense, imagination
or phantasy, ‘‘aestimativa’’ and/or ‘‘cogitativa’’), capable of
organizing and transforming the information received
from sense organs and external senses. Then the active
feature of the human soul (agent intellect) derives, by
abstraction from sensible representations, an intelligible
species, which is received by the mind, and allows the
latter to know, by an individual and simple act, the
‘‘quidditas’’ associated with the intelligible species. The
sensible species is the link between sensible objects and
the sense organs, while intelligible species bridges a
receptive, interpretation-independent activity (sense per-
ception), and the more speciﬁcally cognitive processes
such as judgment, reﬂection, discursive thinking, and
syllogistic reasoning. Thus, the sensible species which
impinge on the sense organs and the intelligible species
which trigger the mental act are strictly instrumental, that
Species, Sensible and Intelligible S
1211
S

is, they are viewed as quo and not as quod (Thomas
Aquinas, S. theol., I, q. 12, a. 9; q. 14, a. 5; q. 85, a. 2;
De ver., q. 10, a. 8, ad 2um). This means that human
soul grasps what is transmitted through relevant interme-
diate ‘‘events,’’ rather than these intermediate events
themselves; it grasps the sensible essences progressively
detached from matter and individuating conditions.
The intentional species must be distinguished from the
so-called ‘‘species expressa,’’ which corresponds to the
concept.
Medieval discussions of mental representation are
not only constrained by Aristotle‘‘s cognitive psychology,
but also by Augustine’s views on ‘‘species’’ and cognition,
and the Arabic development of the idea that cognitive
processes involve progressive abstraction through percep-
tual and cognitive faculties up to immaterial contents.
Inﬂuenced by Stoic doctrines on sense perception, Augus-
tine assigned a prominent function in our knowledge of
sensible reality to (what he calls) the ‘‘species’’ (i.e., shape,
ﬁgure or form) of material things. He postulated the
existence of a chain of entities, interchangeably referred
to as ‘‘forms,’’ ‘‘images,’’ ‘‘similitudes’’ or ‘‘species,’’ origi-
nating in sensible bodies, penetrating sense organs and
eventually reaching perceptual and cognitive faculties (De
musica, VI, c. 11; De Genesi ad litteram, XII, c. 24; De
trinitate, XI, c. 9). Their presence enables one to attain
knowledge of distant bodies or to recall objects perceived
in the past. Arabic commentators embodied Hellenistic
ideas on cognitive impressions and mental representations
in their interpretation of Peripatetic cognitive psychology.
The evolution of the concept of ‘‘intentio’’ – the Latin
translation of ma‘qul, the Arabic translation of the Greek
noema, and of ma‘na, which reaches back to the Hellenis-
tic ennoia, based in turn on a Stoic-Neoplatonic mediation
of the Aristotelian logos – in Arabic philosophy, from
Alhazen to Averroes, enables one to discern various ingre-
dients of the doctrine of intentional species in Scholastic
cognitive psychology. The Arabic intention also echoes the
Epicurean prolepsis (the effect of an involuntary and
unconscious mental mechanism, viewed as the basis for
conceptualization), and the phantasiai kataleptikai of the
Stoics (unerring cognitive impressions, providing reliable
data for discursive reasoning): it is both a representational
item and the result of the soul’s operations on the effects
of sensation. Alhazen’s intentions, material, albeit non-
corpuscular, messengers of speciﬁc features of the sensible
object, reappear in the doctrine of (sensible) species, and
particularly in the strand associated to perspectivistic
optics. Avicenna’s and Averroes’ doctrines of intention,
which merely represents the sensible thing-to-be-known,
provide rather sophisticated accounts of how a perceptual
content is delivered to and becomes present in the soul. In
Avicenna, the feature that moves the senses is captured as
‘‘intentio’’ by the inner senses, which are capable of some
rudimentary form of abstraction. Also, Averroes distin-
guished between the presence of a perceptual content in
the soul as ‘‘intentio,’’ and the sensible object as such.
Avicenna and Averroes, however, did not distinguish pre-
cisely, at the intellectual level, between representation and
known content. In point of fact, it is not until Aquinas
that this distinction is explicitly drawn and convincingly
argued for.
After the spread of Aristotelianism in the West, two
different doctrines of species were developed by Roger
Bacon (and other representatives of perspectivistic optics)
and by Thomas Aquinas. Roger Bacon worked out
a doctrine of the multiplication of species, based on the
central claim that all natural causation occurs according to
a process of emanation, the paradigmatic example of
which is the propagation of light (Lindberg 1983:lIII–
lXXI). Bacon; signiﬁcantly broadens the meaning of the
term ‘‘species’’: no longer used to describe speciﬁc percep-
tual events, it comes to denote the likeness emanating
from
any
given
object,
independently
of
whether
a percipient being is present to receive it, deﬁning the
central meaning of ‘‘species’’ as ‘‘primus effectus agentis.’’
E.g., the visible object generates or ‘‘multiplies’’ species of
light in the transparent medium (De mult. specierum, II.i,
90), proceeding in all directions through the medium until
they reach and are ‘‘impressed’’ on the eyes of the viewer.
Once received in the sense organ, each species is again
multiplied along the optic nerves into the internal senses.
Thus, Bacon provides a physical analysis of the processes
that are causally responsible for vision in particular, and
for sense perception in general. The internal sensitive
faculties of the soul complete the process of apprehending
sensible objects. This does not entail that the process of
multiplication of the species continues at the intellectual
level,
and
exerts
inﬂuence upon
conceptualization.
Bacon’s view on this point is akin to Augustine’s, who
adopted a mechanical model only for the initial stages of
sense perception. When Bacon speaks of species present in
the rational soul and originating from the ‘‘cogitativa,’’ he
merely qualiﬁes them as instruments of our soul, without
presupposing any abstraction from or impression of these
species: Bacon maintains that all species are essentially
material, whereas the human soul is strictly spiritual
(Opus maius, pars V, 9).
Thomas Aquinas’ theory of mental representation dis-
plays a complete symmetry between sense perception and
1212 S
Species, Sensible and Intelligible

intellectual knowledge, distinguishing in both stages
between quod and quo. In its contact with external reality,
the human soul grasps the sensible object in its formal
structure, that is, in its ‘‘esse spirituale’’ or ‘‘intentionale’’
(In De anima, I, lectio X, 159). Perception is an intentional
and causal transaction between soul and reality (In De
anima, II, lectio XXIV, 553), and depends on sensible
species, that is, on the external object inasmuch as it affects
the medium and the sense organs. Sensible species are
brought about by an action of bodies, inasmuch as they
participate in a mode of action proper to separate sub-
stances (De pot., q. 5, a. 8). The full actualization of the
physiological structures of the senses enables the human
soul to construct a representational device called phan-
tasm. The phantasm, in turn, enables the agent intellect to
produce the intelligible species. The intellect abstracts and
receives the species from the senses. Their ultimate origin,
however, is the divine light, giving rise to the ‘‘lumen
intellectus agentis,’’ which produces them effectively
(Summa theol., I, q. 84, a. 4, ad 1um). Although the
various modes of being for intellect, species and object
may change, they are identical with respect to their formal
structure in the cognitive act. Hence, according to
Thomas, man does not know a deformed, ‘‘spiritualized’’
object: he is capable of grasping the intelligible structure of
sensible objects, for material beings naturally tend toward
an ‘‘esse spirituale’’ – in the same way the human mind is
capable of containing more forms than just its own.
The doctrine of species began to be perceived as con-
troversial during the later thirteenth century. Roughly
speaking, criticisms involve two main types of objections.
Ontological objections purport to show that physiologi-
cally embedded representations cannot determine the
immaterial soul. Logical objections attempt to demon-
strate that the idea of a formal mediation in perception
and/or intellectual knowledge is intrinsically inconsistent.
Major critics, including Henry of Ghent and William
Ockham, argue that the sole purpose of perception and
knowledge, according to the species doctrine, is to con-
struct an internal copy of the perceived or known thing.
But this view involves an inﬁnite regress: if seeing or
knowing simply amounted to constructing a copy of the
thing seen, one would have to make another copy to see
the copy, and so on. The fourteenth-century controversies
on the issue of species – marked by lively exchange and
mutual inﬂuences between Franciscans, Dominicans,
Averroists, and Augustinian Hermits – show that it is
misleading to speak schematically of a conﬂict of ideas
between doctrinal schools. Staunch defenders and vigor-
ous opponents of the species can be found among
Dominicans as well as Franciscans. The Dominicans
mostly abide by Aquinas’ teachings. There are, however,
outstanding exceptions, such as Durand of St. Pourc¸ain.
Inﬂuential representatives of this order, such as Thomas
Sutton, suggest essential modiﬁcations; others, such as
Hervaeus Natalis, express strong reservations. In turn,
the psychological views of Duns Scotus and his disciples
are heavily inﬂuenced by Aquinas. Furthermore, one may
detect doctrinal afﬁnities on the generation of intelligible
species between some Augustinian Hermits – Giles of
Rome and Alphonsus Vargas Toletanus, for example –
and the Averroist school.
Henry of Ghent accepted sensible species, but rejected
intelligible species (Quodlibeta IV, q. 21, and V, q. 14):
(1) abstracted species presupposes that the intellect
cannot receive anything from the senses; (2) any mediat-
ing species would become the object of knowledge,
thus preventing a cognitive grasp of essences; (3) the intel-
ligible species as a singular entity could never mediate
knowledge of a universal essence; (4) postulating intelli-
gible species forces one to accept the undesirable conse-
quence that the intellectual act is a necessary physical
phenomenon, independent of the will; (5) a formal
mediation leads to an inﬁnite regress of cognitive
representations.
Peter John Olivi rejected both sensible and intelligible
species, because he thought it crucial to support the active
nature of the cognitive powers (In II Sent., q. 58 and q. 74).
Perception occurs by means of a ‘‘virtual’’ or an ‘‘actual
attention,’’ and mental acts do not depend upon intelligi-
ble species. In general, if intelligible species were the
effective principle of intellectual cognition, cognitive
capabilities should be assigned to them, rather than to
the soul. Any interaction between species and the cogni-
tive faculty in the production of the cognitive act must be
excluded, since the latter, like the intelligible species, is
a simple effect. Moreover, if species mediate between mind
and object then either the proper object of the mind
becomes unattainable or objects can be known both
through species and through themselves. Thus, Olivi
holds that representation through species interposes
a veil between mind and object. Finally, if the species is
an instrument in the production of mental acts, then the
cognitive faculty would have a function different from the
generation of knowledge. This last claim derives from
Olivi’s basic assumption that the cognitive faculty either
has an exclusive role in the generation of knowledge or
none at all.
Other critics active at the turn of the thirteenth and
fourteenth centuries, such as Godfrey of Fontaines,
Species, Sensible and Intelligible S
1213
S

Radulphus Brito and John Baconthorpe, identiﬁed the
species with the intellectual act itself, and argued for this
identiﬁcation using the Aristotelian thesis that the mind is
‘‘nothing’’ before it effectively knows.
John Duns Scotus considered the doctrine sensible
species as uncontroversial. Instead, answering criticisms
of Henry of Ghent, Peter John Olivi and Godfrey of
Fontaines, he advanced two related arguments for the
necessity of intelligible species (Ordinatio, lib. I, dist. 3,
q. 1): (1) sensible things, in their concrete existence, are
not ‘‘proportionate’’ to the immaterial intellectual act, and
must be differently ‘‘presented’’ to the human mind; and
(2) knowledge of the universal can be attained only
through species.
Most
medieval
Averroists,
including
John
of
Jandun, accepted sensible and intelligible species. The
production of the latter by perceptual faculties ensure
that human beings can be cognitively joined to a
separate intellect. Indeed, Averroist cognitive psychology
is bound to postulate links preserving the continuity of
the causal chain from perception to knowledge: gaps
in this causal chain would show that no effective co-
operation occurs between sensible faculties and the unique
intellect.
Many critics of species exclude a priori any direct
contact between mind and (the information contained
in) sensory representations. The most extreme formula-
tion of this view is in Durand of St. Pourc¸ain (In II Sent.,
dist. III, q. 6, 9–10), who gave his opinion that the doctrine
of species was introduced to explain sense-perception, and
was transferred to the explanation of intellectual knowl-
edge; he then proceeds to criticize the doctrine of sensible
species as follows: ‘‘Omne illud, per quod, tamquam per
repraesentativum, potentia cognitiva fertur in alterum, est
primo cognitum; sed species coloris in oculo non est primo
cognita seu visa ab eo, immo nullo modo est visa ab eo ergo
per ipsam, tamquam per repraesentativum, non fertur in
aliquid
aliud.’’
Rejecting
any
mediating
principles,
Durandus stated that the mind has a direct and conscious
cognitive grasp of whatever may ‘‘encounter,’’ determine
or inﬂuence it. The thesis of the direct cognitive grasp of
sensible objects will be more convincingly argued for
by William of Ockham, who expressed the most radical
opposition to the species, and put forward an alternative
view that avoids the metaphysical obstacles usually asso-
ciated with the idea of formal mediation. He regarded
species as ontologically suspect and as epistemologically
superﬂuous, and introduced a new view of perception
and intellectual cognition, based essentially on a direct
(semantic) relation between the human mind and sensible
reality. Ockham rejected both sensible and intelligible
species on the ground that intermediary entities or func-
tions between the human intellect and individual things
would terminate the cognitive act, thus making actual
objects inaccessible. This criticism of the species doctrine,
whose principal targets are Thomas Aquinas and Duns
Scotus (In II Sent., q. 13), is strictly related to Ockham’s
dismissal of epistemological views dominated by the
perspectivist-optical model, inspired in its central features
to the Arabic interpretation of the Neoplatonic theory of
emanation. His ﬁve arguments in defense of the claim that
(intelligible) species are superﬂuous became a milestone
in the species controversy: (1) if the species has to secure
the assimilation of soul and object, then one would only
attain knowledge of accidents, through processes possibly
involving an inﬁnite regress; (2) there is no need of species
representing objects, for the objects are capable of
representing themselves; (3) the idea that matter cannot
interact with immaterial entities does not ensure the
necessity of species for knowledge acquisition; on the
contrary, it establishes that sensible reality does not play
a causal role in the production of intelligible species. If, by
contrast, one assumes that the material world has a causal
efﬁcacy on the mental realm, then it can also weigh
directly on the production of the intellection; (4) only
the object and the intellect are needed in cognition,
because intellectual knowledge does not depend on any-
thing else; (5) assuming that species are necessary for
joining object and mind involves, once again, the threat
of inﬁnite regress. After Ockham, other authors reject or
simply dispense with intelligible species. For example,
Gregory of Rimini played down the role of species,
grounding the primary acquisition of knowledge in intu-
ition, and understanding species chieﬂy in terms of mem-
ory contents. Roughly speaking, Gregory held that the
mind has direct access to cognitive contents that are com-
mitted to memory as representations.
During the ﬁrst ﬁfty years following Aquinas’ death,
sensible and intelligible species were the subject of intense
philosophical dispute. From the 1320s onward, the issue
gradually disappeared from the philosophical agenda, and
few doctrinal innovations were introduced until the sec-
ond half of the ﬁfteenth century. Three characteristic
features mark the ﬁfteenth-century speculation as the
cradle of later Renaissance disputes. Firstly, many authors
advanced profoundly eclectic views, whether convincingly
argued for or manifestly inconsistent, as is illustrated by
the works of John Capreolus and Paul of Venice, respec-
tively. Secondly, a return to Albert’s psychology, some-
times
interpreted
in
decidedly
Neoplatonic
terms,
dominates the psychological accounts of some North-
European Dominicans. Thirdly, a ‘‘new’’ Thomism arises
1214 S
Species, Sensible and Intelligible

during the second half of this century, as is exempliﬁed by
the works of John Versor and Peter Crockaert.
See also: ▶Epistemology ▶Intentionality ▶Intuitive and
Abstractive Cognition ▶Knowledge ▶Mental Word/
Concepts
▶Philosophical
Psychology
▶Philosophy,
Arabic ▶Sense Perception, Theories of
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Aquinas Thomas (1952–1963) Summa theologiae, 3 vols, ed. Caramello P.
Marietti, Turin
Aquinas Thomas (1953) Quaestiones disputatae, 2 vols. Marietti,
Turin
Aquinas Thomas (1984) Sentencia libri de anima. In: Opera omnia, ed.
Leonina, vol XLV.1, ed. Gauthier RA. Typis Vaticanis, Rome/Paris
Bacon Roger (1900) Opus maius, 3 vols, ed. Bridges J. Clarendon Press,
London
Bacon Roger (1983) De multiplicatione specierum. In: Lindberg DC (ed)
Roger Bacon’s philosophy of nature. Clarendon Press, Oxford
Durandus
of
Saint
Pourc¸ain
(1571)
In
Sententias
theologicas
commentarium libri IIII. Venice
Duns Scotus John (1950–) Opera omnia, ed. Balic C et al. Typis Vaticanis,
Vatican City
Henry of Ghent (1613) Quodlibeta. Ex typogr. Guerraea, Venice
John of Jandun (1587) Super libros De anima subtilissimae quaestiones.
apud Haeredem Hieronymi Scoti, Venice
Olivi Peter John (1926) Quaestiones in secundum librum Sententiarum, 3
vols, ed. Jansen B. Bonaventurae, Quaracchi
William
of
Ockham
(1981)
Quaestiones
in
librum
secundum
Sententiarum (reportatio). Opera theologica, vol V, edn. Ga´l
G,
Wood R. Inst. Franciscanum, St. Bonaventure
Secondary Sources
Monographs
Lindberg DC (1983) Rogers Bacon’s philosophy of nature. A critical
edition, with English translation, introduction, and notes, of De
multiplicatione specierum and De speculis comburentibus. Oxford
University Press, Oxford
Prezioso F (1963) La ‘‘species’’ medievale e i prodromi del fenomenismo
moderno. CEDAM, Padova
Spruit L (1994–1995) Species intelligibilis. From perception to knowl-
edge, 2 vols. Brill, Leiden
Tachau K (1988) Vision and certitude in the age of Ockham. Optics,
epistemology and the foundations of semantics 1250–1345. Brill,
Leiden
Collections
Maier A (1967) Das Problem der ‘‘species sensibiles in medio’’ und die
neue Naturphilosophie des 14. Jahrhunderts. In: Maier A (ed)
Ausgehendes Mittelalter, Band II. Storia e letteratura, Rome, pp
419–451
Michaud-Quantin PM (1970) Les champs semantiques de species. Tradi-
tion latine et traduction du Grec. In: Michaud-Quantin PM (ed)
E´tudes sur le vocabulaire philosophique du Moyen age. Edizioni
dell’Ateneo, Rome, pp 113–150
Minio-Paluello L (1972) Le texte du De anima d’Aristote: la tradition
latine avant 1500. In: Minio-Paluello L (ed) Opuscula. The Latin
Aristotle. Hakkert, Amsterdam, pp 250–276
Stephen Langton
RICCARDO QUINTO
Dipartimento di Filosoﬁa
University of Padua
Padua
Italy
Abstract
Stephen Langton was born in England around the mid-
twelfth century. Around 1170 he arrived in Paris, where he
was to remain until 1206, becoming one of the most
outstanding theologians of the newly established univer-
sity. In 1206, Pope Innocent III made him a cardinal and
brought him to Rome, where he probably taught theology
until 1207. Hoping thereby to resolve a disputed election
to the see of Canterbury, the pope consecrated him arch-
bishop on June 17th, 1207. But King John refused to accept
him in England until July 16th, 1213. SL spent the inter-
vening years in exile, mainly at the Cistercian abbey of
Pontigny. Once in England, he supported the rebel barons
against John and played a key role in the negotiations
leading to Magna Carta (June 1215). He was subsequently
suspended by the pope and left Britain once again. Also in
1215 he took part in the Fourth Lateran Council.
Reestablished by Honorius III in 1216, he governed the
archdiocese until his death in 1228. All SL’s numerous
works that have come down to us are theological works:
he did not write any philosophical works nor did he
comment on any philosophical text. His oeuvre as
a whole can be considered as the enactment of a great
project of theological training inspired by Peter Cantor,
which comprises the clariﬁcation of theological statements,
a comprehensive study of the Bible, and also a pastoral
training for theologians, aiming to make them good
preachers and zealous propagandists for the sacrament of
penance. Nevertheless, in three of his works (the Sentence
Commentary, the Summa magistri Stephani, and the
Quaestiones theologiae) SL enunciates a series of philo-
sophical positions, mainly in the ﬁeld of logic and seman-
tics, but also on other topics, such as God’s will and
omnipotence, human freedom, and the nature of the soul.
SL was born around the mid-twelfth century (probably
between 1150–1155) into a Lincolnshire family of the
minor nobility. Around 1170 he arrived in Paris, where
he was to remain until 1206, becoming one of the most
outstanding theologians of the newly-established univer-
sity. In 1206 Pope Innocent III made him a cardinal and
Stephen Langton S
1215
S

brought him to Rome, where he probably taught theology
until 1207. Hoping thereby to resolve a disputed election
to the see of Canterbury, the pope consecrated him arch-
bishop on June 17th, 1207. But King John refused to
accept him in England until July 16th, 1213. SL spent the
intervening years in exile, mainly at the Cistercian abbey of
Pontigny. Once in England, he supported the rebel barons
against John and played a key role in the negotiations
leading to Magna Carta. The pope suspended him from
his functions, and he left England for Rome, where he took
part in the Fourth Lateran Council. Reestablished by
Honorius III in 1216, he lingered in Rome until 1218
before going back to England. In the following years,
despite some other trips to Continental Europe and to
Rome, he devoted himself to the government of the arch-
diocese until his death, at Slindon (Sussex) at the begin-
ning of July (6th or 9th), 1228.
SL’s works comprise the following: a commentary on
Peter Comestor’s Historia scholastica, the ﬁrst version of
which probably existed before 1176, while the text was
reworked in 1193; a commentary on Peter Lombard’s
Sentences, which has been called the ‘‘ﬁrst example of
a genuine Sentence Commentary’’ (Landgraf 1939);
a commentary on the Pauline Epistles (which constitutes
an imposing Glossa in Magnam Glossaturam, or ‘‘super-
gloss’’ on Peter Lombard’s Collectanea), and one on the
Catholic Epistles. From his work of presiding over theo-
logical disputations in the Paris schools between c. 1180
and 1206 at least 200 Quaestiones theologiae (in different
versions) are preserved. He also began a short theological
Summa, which remained unﬁnished. He commented
upon most of the biblical books from Genesis to Revela-
tion (except Job, Psalms, Baruch, and Daniel; Gospels
lost), and his commentaries are preserved in different
redactions. Besides this, he wrote several works to support
pastoral care and more than 300 of his sermons survive (if
we consider the various versions, there are almost 500 of
them).
All SL’s numerous works that have come down to us
are theological works: he did not write any philosophical
works (such as a treatise on logic) nor did he comment on
any philosophical texts. His oeuvre as a whole can be
considered as the enactment of a great project of theolog-
ical training inspired by Peter Cantor, which comprises the
clariﬁcation of theological statements, a comprehensive
study of the Bible, and also a pastoral training for theolo-
gians, aiming to make them good preachers and zealous
propagandists of the sacrament of penance (Quinto 1998,
2005b). Nevertheless, in three of his works (the Sentence
Commentary, the Summa magistri Stephani, and the
Quaestiones theologiae – the Commentary on Paul’s
Epistles have not been sufﬁciently studied yet) SL makes
clear a series of philosophical positions, mainly in the ﬁeld
of logic and semantics. While deeply committed to Peter
Lombard’s theological project, he joins other contempo-
rary Lombardians by critiquing and developing it,
expanding on topics and arguments in the Sentences and
substituting or adding to the authorities cited. For
instance, in discussing the Lombard’s deﬁnition of persona
he demonstrates a direct knowledge of Boethius’ Contra
Eutichen et Nestorium. His acquaintance with Aristotle is
probably limited to the logical works: although Landgraf
maintained that SL referred to the De anima in his Sen-
tence Commentary (ed. p 123), the passage can also be
understood as a reference to top. IV, 5 (Bk 126a: Quinto
2010:77), which he also quoted in his question De libero
arbitrio (ed. Ebbesen and Mortensen 1985:183). The
topics which mainly lead SL to express his philosophical
views are Trinitarian theology and the problem of the
hypostatic union, but he also uses a highly technical
method of analyzing statements in other subjects too,
such as ethics (Quinto 2009:374–377) and, in particular,
sacramental theology (Rosier-Catach 2004:231–260, 346–
401, 456–461).
The most characteristic feature of SL’s thought is his
aim to regulate the use of human language in theology,
with the following principal goals: (a) to justify, as far as
possible, the validity of theological statements already
known to be true (because they are accepted by the eccle-
siastical tradition); (b) to avoid other statements known to
be false (or nonorthodox) deriving from accepted theo-
logical statements; and (c) to ‘‘generate’’ from admitted
premises other correct theological propositions, whose
orthodoxy is not warranted by tradition, but by the inter-
nal coherence of the system itself (cfr Ebbesen 1987;
Valente 2008:374, 385–386). In other terms, SL’s ‘‘system’’
aims at explaining why certain theological statements are
true and others are false, even though the latter seem to be
necessarily implied by the former. One important tool he
uses in this project is a principle that has been called ‘‘the
eadem ratione principle,’’ described by Ebbesen (1987:28)
as follows: ‘‘This principle, which is ever-present though
never explicitly formulated, states that if some proposition
or inference, p, is true or valid, then q is too unless it can be
shown that q differs from p in some relevant respect.’’ In
order to show why some statements or inferences differ
from others that seem at ﬁrst sight to be similar or iden-
tical, Langton concentrates in particular on the meaning
of the terms. For him, meaning is inﬂuenced, on one hand,
by the propositional context (although with some limita-
tions, see Valente 2008:378–379) and, on the other, it
depends on different semantic components (suppositio,
1216 S
Stephen Langton

signiﬁcatio, consigniﬁcatio, and modus signiﬁcandi/modus
supponendi) which contribute to the total meaning of each
term. For this reason we can say that SL elaborates
a semantic which is both analytic, and, at the same time,
contextual.
As far as the Trinity is concerned, the system recog-
nizes nine ‘‘entities,’’ namely, (1) the one essence (called
Deus, deitas, essentia); (2) the three Persons (Pater, Filius,
Spiritus Sanctus), and (3) ﬁve ‘‘notions’’ or personal
properties which distinguish the Persons (paternitas,
innascibilitas, spiratio, ﬁliatio, and processio). The essence
can be referred to by neutral pronouns (quid), the Persons
by masculine (quis), and the notions by feminine (quae).
These three different groups of nouns and pronouns
(quid, quis, quae) are in theological discourse the equiva-
lent of what the ten Aristotelian categories are in ordinary
language, and can be called ‘‘quasi-categories’’. These dis-
tinctions are particularly important when placed together
with the fundamental principle of absolute divine simplic-
ity, according to which ‘‘everything (quidquid) that is in
God is God.’’ This makes it possible, for instance, to
explain why, although the Persons are God, and there are
three of them, we cannot infer from this that there are
three Gods: Persons and Essence, in fact, belong to differ-
ent quasi-categories (quis, quid), and predicates of the
Persons cannot be transferred to the Essence (SL, In Sent.
I, 1, 2, ed. Landgraf p 3; Ebbesen 1987:405–408). In the
same way, the distinction between different semantic com-
ponents of terms allows us to maintain a difference
between sentences on God (which are otherwise mere
tautologies). For example, ‘‘Deus est iustus’’ and ‘‘Deus
est misericors’’ could mean the same, since both can be
transformed into Deus est Deus (God, in fact, is his own
mercy, as he also is his own justice). These sentences,
however, are different thanks to the semantic component
called consigniﬁcatio: although iustus and misericors both
suppone and signify the divine essence, they also consignify
(or signify secondarily) different effects in creatures and
this makes the two sentences differ (SL, Summa, ed.
Ebbesen and Mortensen 1985:41–47). ‘‘Deus est iustus’’
and ‘‘Deus est iustitia’’ are also different: although iustus
and iustitia suppone and signify the same thing (i.e., the
divine essence), they differ in their modus signiﬁcandi,
iustus signiﬁes divine essence ‘‘ut inhaerentem’’ and iustitia
signiﬁes it ‘‘ut supponentem’’ (SL, Summa, ed. Ebbesen and
Mortensen 1985:37). In conclusion, SL’s ‘‘system’’ can be
seen on one hand as a way of preventing the formation of
incorrect theological statements, and on the other as a way
of preventing theological discourse from being a mere
repetition of tautologies. In this context, an important
role is played by the theory of supposition of terms,
whose elaboration seems to take place at the same time
in logic and theology (not without reciprocal inﬂuence
between the two disciplines) toward the end of twelfth
century (Ebbesen 1987:419–24; Valente 2008:361–374,
388–389).
Because of his reverence for the normative value of
traditional authorities SL can be considered a pupil of
Peter Lombard (like Peter of Poitiers and Prepositinus of
Cremona), but for his interest in a systematic description
of the functioning of theological language, his more
mature use of logics and semantics (besides grammar),
and his desire to ‘‘generate’’ (and not only to ‘‘repeat’’)
orthodox propositions, he can be somehow linked to the
school of Gilbert of Poitiers.
In any case, SL is characterized by his strong originality
and independence of judgment (on his openly stated
disagreement
from
Peter
Lombard,
see
Landgraf
1939:119–127; Quinto 2010:72–76). Commenting on
Peter Lombard’s Sent. I, 45, c. 7, he states his disagreement
with Augustine’s teaching on God’s will in ench. 24, 96: for
Augustine, though evil is not good, it is nevertheless good
that evil exists besides good. The reason for this is that,
since God does not prevent evil from being performed, the
existence of evil is somehow contained within God’s will.
For SL, the fact that God does not prevent evil does not
mean that He wants evil, or that He wants evil to be. On
the contrary, God simply ‘‘does not want’’ evil. In order to
maintain this, SL distinguishes between two meanings of
‘‘does not want’’: ‘‘does not want’’ (non vult) can be
understood either as the third person of the Latin verb
nolo, or as the result of placing a negation before the third
person of the Latin verb volo. God ‘‘does not want’’ evil to
be in this second sense; see SL, In I Sent., d. 47, c. 7, and d.
46, c. 3, ed. Landgraf:63–66 (the position is conﬁrmed in
SL’s unedited Quaestio theologica De uoluntate Dei, from
which it is taken over by William of Auxerre: Quinto,
forthcoming). He is also original in his elaboration of
the concept of person: he in fact denies (against Hugh of
St. Victor and the Summa sententiarum) that the soul
united to the body is a person, and also contests Peter
Lombard’s opinion that the soul becomes a person when
separated from the body; for SL, in order for it to be
a substantia individua, it is not enough for a substance
not to be actually united with another substance: it must
also not have the ability (aptitudo) to form a compound
(such as man). For this reason, not only is the soul never
a person, but neither is Christ’s human nature a person,
because it is united with divinity, together with which it
forms the Person of the Incarnated Word (cfr Ebbesen and
Nielsen 1996; Nielsen 1999; Bieniak 2006; Rossi 2007:164–
171; Quinto 2010:66–69).
Stephen Langton S
1217
S

As far as it is possible to state at this point in research,
SL’s elaboration of a number of topics reﬂects the philo-
sophical concerns and contributions of late twelfth-
century theologians and remains of critical importance
in the thirteenth century, inﬂuencing William of Auxerre
and, through him, Alexander of Hales and Bonaventure
among Franciscans, and Hugh of St. Cher among Domin-
icans (Ebbesen 1987:408–410; Quinto 1999; Valente
2008:343–344, 379–393).
See also: ▶Alain of Lille ▶Peter Lombard ▶Schools in the
Twelfth Century ▶Supposition Theory ▶Trinitarian
Logic ▶William of Auxerre
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Detailed list of edited sources in Quinto (2008). An overview of current
research is found in Morard (2007). A critical edition of the
Quaestiones theologiae is in progress for the Auctores Britannici
Medii Aevi under the direction of R Quinto
Commentary on Jonah: Bataillon (2003)
Commentary on Ruth: Lacombe and Smalley (1930, pp 86–126)
Commentary on the Book of Chronicles: Saltman A (ed.) (1978) Stephen
Langton Commentary on the Book of Chronicles. Bar-Ilan Univer-
sity Press, Ramat-Gan
Conﬂictus uitiorum et uirtutum: Quinto (2005)
Prologue to and ﬁrst chapters of the Commentary on Historia scholastica:
Lacombe and Smalley (1930, pp 39–51); Clark (2005, pp 411–421)
Prologus generalitatum: Quinto (2007, pp 73–81)
Sentence commentary: Landgraf AM (Hg) (1952, 19952) Der Sentenzen-
kommentar des Kardinals Stephan Langton. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Sermons (partial edition): Roberts PhB (1980) Selected Sermons of
Stephen Langton. Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto
Single Quaestiones: about Christology and the hypostatic union: Ebbesen
and Nielsen (1996, pp 229–251); De primis motibus: Lottin (1931,
pp 103–115); De uirtutibus cardinalibus: Bejczy (2006); De timore:
Quinto (1992); De relaxationibus: Quinto (2001, pp 87–109); De
persona: Bieniak (2006)
Summa and Quaestiones (partial edition): Ebbesen and Mortensen
(1985)
Secondary Sources
Baldwin JW (2008) Master Stephen Langton, future archbishop of Canter-
bury: the Paris schools and Magna Carta. Engl Hist Rev 123:811–846
Bataillon L-J (2003) Il commento di Stefano Langton al libro di Giona.
Medioevo. Rivista di storia della ﬁlosoﬁa medievale 28:251–272
Bejczy IP (2006) Two questions of Stephen Lanton on the cardinal virtues.
Medioevo. Rivista di Storia della Filosoﬁa Medievale 31:299–335
Bieniak M (2006) A critical edition of Stephen Langton’s ({ 1228) theo-
logical question De persona. Cahiers de l’Institut du Moyen-Age
Grec et Latin 77:85–109
Clark MJ (2005) The commentaries on Peter Comestor’s Historia
scholastica of Stephen Langton, Pseudo-Langton, and Hugh of
St.-Cher. Sacris erudiri 46:301–446
Ebbesen S (1987) The semantics of the Trinity according to Stephen
Langton and Andrew Sunesen. In: Jolivet J, De Libera A (eds), pp
401–436
Ebbesen S, Friedman RL (eds) (1999) Medieval analyses in language and
cognition. Acts of the symposium ‘‘The Copenhagen School of
Medieval Philosophy’’, January 10–13, 1996. The Royal Danish Acad-
emy of Science and Letters, Copenhagen
Ebbesen S, Mortensen LB (1985) A partial edition of Stephen Langton’s
Summa and Quaestiones with parallels from Andrew Sunesen’s
Hexaemeron. Cahiers de l’Institut du Moyen-Age Grec et Latin
49:25–244
Ebbesen S, Nielsen LO (1996) Texts illustrating the debate about Chris-
tology in the wake of Alexander III’s 1177 condemnation. Cahiers de
l’Institut du Moyen-Age Grec et Latin 66:217–251
Jolivet J, De Libera A (eds) (1987) Gilbert de Poitiers et ses
contemporains.
Aux
origines
de
la
‘‘logica
modernorum.’’
Bibliopolis, Napoli
Lacombe G, Smalley B (1930) Studies on the commentaries of cardinal
Stephen Langton. Archives d’Histoire Doctrinale et Litte´raire du
Moyen Age 5:5–182
Landgraf AM (1939) The ﬁrst sentence commentary of the early scholas-
ticism. New Scholasticism 13:101–132
Lottin O (1931) La doctrine morale des mouvements premiers de l’appe´tit
sensitif au XIIe et XIIIe sie`cle. Archives d’Histoire Doctrinale et
Litte´raire du Moyen Age 6:49–173
Morard M (2007) Report on the international conference ‘‘E´tienne Lang-
ton ({ 1228) pre´dicateur, bibliste et the´ologien,’’ 13–15 Septembre
2006, Paris (France). Bulletin de philosophie me´die´vale 49:256–271
Nielsen LO (1999) Logic and the hypostatic union: two late twelfth-
century responses to the papal condemnation of 1177. In:
Ebbesen S, Friedman RL (eds), pp 251–279
Nielsen LO (2008) Three questions on the old law and the Gospel precepts
by Stephen Langton. Cahiers de l’Institut du Moyen-Age Grec et
Latin 78:3–36
Quinto R (1992) Die Quaestiones des Stephan Langton u¨ber die
Gottesfurcht. Cahiers de l’Institut du Moyen Age grec et latin
62:77–165
Quinto R (1994) Doctor Nominatissimus. Stefano Langton ({ 1228) e la
tradizione delle sue opere. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster i. W.
Quinto R (1998) The inﬂuence of Stephen Langton on the idea of the
preacher in Humbert of Romans’ De eruditione predicatorum and
Hugh of St.-Cher’s Postille on the Scriptures. In: Emery K,
Wawrikow J (eds) Christ among the medieval Dominicans: repre-
sentations of Christ in the texts and images of the order of preachers.
University Press, Notre Dame, pp 49–91
Quinto R (1999) Hugh of St.-Cher’s use of Stephen Langton. In:
Ebbesen S, Friedman RL (eds), pp 281–300
Quinto R (2001) Giubileo e attesa escatologica negli autori monastici e nei
maestri della sacra pagina. Medioevo. Rivista di storia della ﬁlosoﬁa
medievale 26:25–109
Quinto R (2005a) The Conﬂictus uitiorum et uirtutum attributed to
Stephen Langton. In: Bejczy IP, Newhauser RG (eds) Virtue and
ethics in the twelfth century. Brill, Leiden/Boston, pp 197–267
Quinto R (2005b) Stephen Langton: theology and literature of the pasto-
ral care. In: Tock B-M (ed) ‘‘In principio erat uerbum,’’ Me´langes
offerts en hommage a` Paul Tombeur par des anciens e´tudiants a`
l’occasion de son e´meritat. Brepols, Turnhout, pp 301–355
Quinto R (2007) Peter the Chanter and the ‘Miscellanea del Codice del
Tesoro’ (etimology as a way for constructing a sermon). In:
Andersson R (ed) Constructing the medieval sermon. Brepols,
Turnhout, pp 33–81
Quinto R (2008) Stefano Langton e la teologia dei maestri secolari di
Parigi tra XII e XIII secolo. Archa Verbi: Yearbook for the Study of
Medieval Theology 5:122–142
1218 S
Stephen Langton

Quinto R (2009) Dalla discussione in aula alla Summa quaestionum
theologiae di Stefano Langton: Testi sul timore di Dio dal ms. Paris,
BnF, lat. 14526 ed Erlangen, Universita¨tsbibliothek-Hauptbibliothek,
260. Rivista di Storia della Filosoﬁa 64:363–398
Quinto R (2010) Stephen Langton. In: Rosemann PW (ed) Medieval
commentaries on the sentences of Peter Lombard, vol II. Brill,
Leiden, pp 35–78
Quinto R (forthcoming) Bonte´ divine, toute-puissance divine et existence
du mal: la discussion autour d’Augustin, Ench. 24–26 d’Anselme de
Laon a` E´tienne Langton. In: Fe´dou M (ed) Re´ceptions des Pe`res et de
leurs e´crits au Moyen Aˆ ge. Le devenir de la tradition eccle´siale. Actes
du Congre`s de la Socie´te´ Internationale pour l’E´tude de la The´ologie
Me´die´vale, Paris 11–14 juin 2008. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Rosier-Catach I (2004) La parole efﬁcace. Signe, rituel, sacre´. Seuil, Paris
Rossi PB (2007) Contra Lombardum: reazioni alla cristologia di Pietro
Lombardo. In: Pietro Lombardo. Atti del XLIII Convegno storico
internazionale, Todi, 8–10 ottobre 2006. Centro Italiano di Studi
sull’Alto Medioevo, Spoleto, pp 123–191
Valente L (2008) Logique et the´ologie. Les e´coles parisiennes entre 1150 et
1220. Vrin, Paris
Strode, Ralph
▶Ralph Strode
Substance, Accident and Modes
GYULA KLIMA
Department of Philosophy
Fordham University
New York, NY
USA
Abstract
This article presents the Aristotelian distinction between
substance and accident, and the interpretational problems
it generated for medieval philosophers and theologians.
A survey of the extensional and intensional problems of
the distinction and some of the solutions proposed for
them will lead to an analysis of the theoretical need
to introduce the new ontological category of modes in
late-medieval philosophy, paving the way to the abandon-
ment of substance–accident metaphysics in early modern
philosophy.
Aristotle’s Ontological Square
The medieval distinction between substance and accident
goes back to Aristotle’s remarks in his Categories,
describing what is often referred to as his ‘‘ontological
square’’ (Angelelli 1991). The basis of the fourfold distinc-
tion is provided in terms of two pairs of criteria, namely,
being in/not being in and being said of/not being said of
a subject, yielding what is meant to be an exhaustive and
mutually exclusive division of the realm of all existents.
The resulting division was usually taken to provide the
division of all entities into particular and universal sub-
stances, and particular and universal accidents (Table 1).
This is the most fundamental division of the Aristote-
lian ontology of actual entities. Accordingly, slight differ-
ences in its interpretation led to vastly different solutions
to several problems it generated, both in metaphysics and
in theology. The following discussion provides a sampling
of these problems, relating them to these interpretational
differences.
Some Problems with the Ontological Square
The problems generated by the Aristotelian Ontological
Square can be grouped into extensional ones on the one
hand (dealing with the extent of these divisions), and
intensional ones (dealing with their interpretation), on
the other. The extensional problems concern the sufﬁciency
and necessity of the division of entities provided by the
Square. The intensional problems are related to the inter-
pretation of the extent (what counts as an existent in what
sense) and criteria (what does it mean for something to be
in/said of or not to be in/said of a subject) of the fourfold
division.
The problem of the sufﬁciency of the division is
whether it really comprehends all entities, or perhaps
there are others that cannot be placed in any of the four
domains of the Square. The problem of the necessity of the
division is whether it contains perhaps more than what is
needed for classifying all entities, that is to say, whether it
contains some nonentities.
The ﬁrst, naturally emerging Aristotelian suspicion
concerning the Square should be that about its necessity.
After all, the division is supposed to contain universals,
Substance, Accident and Modes. Table 1 The Aristotelian
Ontological Square
Is not in a subject
Is in a subject
Is not said of a
subject
Particular
substance
this man
Particular accident
this whiteness
Is said of a subject
Universal
substance
man
Universal accident
whiteness
Substance, Accident and Modes S
1219
S

whereas Aristotle denies the existence of universal entities.
If, therefore, the Square contains universals, and universals
are not entities, then it seems that the Square has to
contain some nonentities, i.e., it contains more than is
necessary for the classiﬁcation of all entities, for all entities
are either particular substances or particular accidents, but
there are no universal substances or accidents among real
existents.
The problem of sufﬁciency, however, is generated by
considerations concerning entities that somehow would
not seem to ﬁt into Aristotle’s fourfold division. A case
in point is provided by the signiﬁcata of propositions,
described most poignantly by the anonymous author of
the twelfth-century tract Ars Burana as being ‘‘extra-
predicamental,’’ i.e., as not belonging to any of the ten
Aristotelian categories, namely, the category of sub-
stance, and the nine categories of accidents (De Rijk
1967:357–359). Earlier on, Abelard’s dicta were also
assigned by him a peculiar place, apparently outside the
Aristotelian Square. And later authors, continuing in the
tradition of assigning propositions their signiﬁcata as
distinct
from the
signiﬁcata
or
supposita
of
their
categorematic terms, would also place them outside the
divisions of the Square: thus enuntiabilia as conceived by
thirteenth-century authors, or the real propositions of
Walter Burley, or the complexe signiﬁcabilia of Adam
Wodeham or Gregory of Rimini, not being identiﬁable
with either substances or accidents, were placed in their
own, separate category (Nuchelmans 1973, 1980).
The problem with all these additions is that since
Aristotle’s division was provided in terms of contradictory
criteria it was supposed to be an exhaustive and mutually
exclusive division of everything there is.
This way of putting the problem, however, directly
leads us to the intensional problems of the Square.
Aristotle’s opening words in the relevant passage indicate
that his division is supposed to cover all existents. How-
ever, depending on the interpretation of what we take to be
existent and in what sense, different items will be taken to
fall within the realm of existents to be divided by the
Square.
Taking his cue from Boethius’ remarks concerning the
subject
matter
of
Aristotle’s
Categories,
almost
a millennium later Thomas of Vio Cajetan characterized
the entities to be considered here in the following way:
"
if one is to ask whether it is words or things which are
principally treated of here, we have to say that it is things,
though not absolutely, but insofar as they are conceived in
an incomplex manner, and, by consequent necessity, inso-
far as signified by words (Cajetan 1939:5).
Cajetan’s interpretation of the subject matter of the Cate-
gories provides an elegant solution to both problems with
the Square posed above. Since the entities to be considered
here are not only mind-independent real beings, but any
objects of our simple concepts, universals ﬁt into the
Square, even if there are no mind-independent entities
existing in a universal manner, insofar as universals are
beings of reason, having some foundation in reality. For the
same reason, however, enuntiabilia are ruled out, insofar
as they are the objects not of simple, but of complex
concepts, namely, of complex thoughts formed by the
judgment-forming intellect.
Clearly, Cajetan’s solution is able to accommodate
beings of reason, because it presupposes the Thomistic
interpretation of what and how being is divided in the
Aristotelian Square, namely, the extension of an analogical
notion into the extensions of its analogata. According to
this doctrine, the extent of the Aristotelian Square should
cover both beings in an absolute sense, without qualiﬁca-
tion, and beings in some diminished sense, with qualiﬁ-
cation (see the entry on Being in this volume).
This is, in fact, the basis of Aquinas’ understanding of
the Aristotelian idea of inherence, that is, an accident’s
being-in a subject. For an accident to be is nothing but
for its subject to be informed by it, or, conversely, for it to
be in its subject: accidentis esse est inesse (‘‘for an accident
to be is for it to be in (a subject)’’). This is precisely why on
Aquinas’ conception an accident cannot be said to be in the
same sense as a substance. When we say that an accident,
say, the whiteness of a sheet of paper, exists, the act of
being signiﬁed by the predicate of this predication is not
the act of being of this sheet of paper without qualiﬁcation
(for that would be the substantial act of being of this
sheet), but the act of being of the sheet with respect to its
whiteness; it is not the being of the sheet absolutely, rather, it
is the sheet’s being white. So, the act of being of the whiteness
of this sheet is nothing but an act of being of the sheet,
although, of course, it is just an accidental act of being of
the sheet: the sheet may continue in its own existence even
if its whiteness perishes, say, when the sheet is dipped in
black ink.
Aristotle vs. the Theology of the Eucharist
However, this interpretation of the Aristotelian notion of
the inherence of an accident in its subject seems to be in
direct conﬂict with the theological doctrine of the miracle
of the Eucharist, which would require at least the logical
possibility of the existence of the accidents of transubstan-
tiated bread and wine without inhering in any substance.
For if for an accident to exist is for its subject to be
informed by it, then it seems to involve a direct
1220 S
Substance, Accident and Modes

contradiction to claim that an accident exists and yet it
does not inform any subject.
The theological requirement of the separability of
accidents in continued existence from their subject, there-
fore, introduced a number of complications into the inter-
pretation of the Aristotelian doctrine of accidental being.
The fundamental question is whether the Aristotelian
doctrine is absolutely incompatible with the theological
doctrine of the Eucharist, or whether there is some
authentic interpretation of the Aristotelian doctrine that
would allow the separate existence of accidents to be at
least supernaturally possible, i.e., free from contradiction.
A striking exposition of the ‘‘incompatibilist position’’
is provided in the fourteenth century by John Buridan,
who argues that since Aristotle’s position is incompatible
with Christian faith, Christians actually have to have
a radically different concept of accidental being from
that of Aristotle (Bakker 2001:247–257). On Buridan’s
view, the Aristotelian position necessarily implies that an
accident is inseparable in continued existence from its
subject precisely because on that position for an accident
to be is for it to be in a subject, whence the very concept of
an accident must be connotative, necessarily implying its
being an accident of some substance. Therefore, Buridan
ﬁnds it inevitable that Christians, who uphold the super-
natural separability of accidents, must part company with
Aristotle on the issue of accidental being, as well as the
Aristotelian doctrine of the analogy of being. For Chris-
tians, the accidents persisting in the Eucharist without
a subject ought to be conceived by means of absolute
concepts without any connotation of their subject, and
so as beings in exactly the same sense as their underlying
subject.
Thus, Buridan’s analysis closely ties together the Aris-
totelian doctrine of the analogy of being with that of the
absolute inseparability of accidents in continued exis-
tence, and, consequently, he also holds that the theological
doctrine of the supernatural separability of accidents
directly leads to the conception of the univocity of being
with regard to substance and accident.
In fact, the nominalist theologian Marsilius of Inghen,
summarizing what he takes to be ‘‘the common opinion of
many theologians’’ on the basis of the doctrine of the
philosopher, John Buridan, explicitly draws the conclu-
sion that on the basis of this opinion ‘‘being’’ should be
regarded as a genus common to substance and all acci-
dents, or at least to those accidents that are supernaturally
separable in continued existence by divine power. Marsil-
ius, however, does not want to side with the common
opinion as described by Buridan. Working out what he
takes to be a ‘‘more metaphysical’’ solution, he afﬁrms the
analogy of being between substance and accident; still, he
does not equate it with the inseparability of accidents in
the way Buridan does. He argues that substance and acci-
dent do not have the sort of essential agreement on the
basis of which we could form a common univocal concept
of the two; however, this does not mean that an accident
remaining of the same nature could not be miraculously
preserved in its being (Bakker 2001:257–264).
So, the question really is whether Buridan is correct in
claiming that the Aristotelian doctrine of the analogy of
being inevitably leads to the claim of the inseparability of
accidents in continued existence, and thus whether uphold-
ing the theological doctrine of the Eucharist entails the
commitment to the denial of the doctrine of the analogy
of being with regard to substance and accident. The posi-
tion of Duns Scotus certainly may give this impression.
However, Aquinas, who deﬁnitely upheld the Aristotelian
view concerning the analogy of being, found it to be com-
patible with the Christian doctrine of the Eucharist.
On Aquinas’ view, the division of ‘‘being’’ into sub-
stance and accident is not the division of a genus by means
of essential, speciﬁc differences, but a division of the
extension of an analogical term into its analogata, in
which the nature of the thing, determining the kind of
being the thing has, functions as a diminishing determi-
nation added to a distinct determinable, the act of being of
the thing (Klima 2002). Thus, the kind of being the thing
demands by its nature is determined by the thing’s nature.
However, if a superior power overrides the natural ten-
dency of this nature to have a certain kind of being, this
does not take away the natural tendency of the thing itself,
and hence does not destroy the thing’s nature, just as
a heavy body would not lose its natural tendency to be
down, even if an external power lifts it up. The crucial
point in Aquinas’ solution, therefore, is the Avicennean
interpretation of Aristotle’s doctrine of the analogy of
being, as based on the real distinction between the essence
and existence of created beings. For this is what grounds
his claim that even if the actual mode of being of an
accident changes in the Eucharist (from ‘‘inherent’’ to
‘‘subsistent’’), still, this may leave the distinct nature of
the thing unaffected, which only contains the natural
tendency to be in a subject.
But then it should not come as a surprise that the
philosopher Siger of Brabant, who rejects the Avicennean
interpretation of Aristotle, and sides with Averroes in
rejecting the real distinction between essence and exis-
tence in creatures, could not endorse this sort of solution
(Siger of Brabant 1972a:41). His position is actually the
closest to the position of Aristotle as described by Buridan.
In his commentary on the Metaphysics, after vehemently
Substance, Accident and Modes S
1221
S

denying the thesis of the real distinction between essence
and existence in the creatures as stemming from an error
of Avicenna’s (Siger of Brabant 1983:34), Siger insists (in
his reply to one of Aquinas’ arguments for the real dis-
tinction) that the act of being (esse) need not multiply in
beings because of something added to it, but rather it is
multiplied on account of its ratio essendi (its mode of
being), the diversity of which in different kinds of beings
is entailed by Aristotle’s claim that ens cannot be a genus
(Siger of Brabant 1983:36–37). However, in the question
directly addressing the issue whether existence is a genus,
Siger explicitly concludes that the reason why ens cannot
be a genus is that the ratio essendi of accidents, being
a non-absolute ratio, cannot be the same as the ratio
essendi of substances, which is an absolute ratio (Siger of
Brabant 1983:101). In a different context – most notably
in the context of the question whether the intellect can be
both subsistent and inherent – he also insists that these
rationes essendi are so incompatible, that they cannot
belong to the same thing (Siger of Brabant 1972:79–80).
Indeed, in the context where he directly addresses the
question of what sort of quiddity accidents have, he
explicitly asserts
"
an accident does not have a ratio essendi, except in rela-
tion to a substance, whence it cannot be deﬁned, except
in relation to substance (Siger of Brabant 1983:341).
The implication of all this, along with Siger’s identiﬁcation
of essence with existence, is clearly that the same thing,
while remaining the same thing, cannot have one ratio
essendi after the other, and thus, an accident, having
the ratio essendi of an inherent being, cannot, while
remaining what it was, an accident, have later on the
ratio essendi of a subsistent being, on pain of contradic-
tion. But this leaves him with a sheer ‘‘ﬁdeistic’’ position
concerning the possibility of the separate existence of
accidents in the Eucharist, without resolving the contra-
diction with his philosophical conclusions, provoking
both Aquinas’ philosophical criticisms, while defending
his own ‘‘Avicennean Aristotle,’’ and the wrath of Augus-
tinian theologians, rejecting Siger’s ‘‘Averroistic Aristotle.’’
It was this kind of ‘‘Averroistic Aristotelianism,’’
famously condemned in 1277, which was sternly rejected
by theologians such as Henry of Ghent and later Duns
Scotus. However, since they also rejected the Avicennean–
Thomistic thesis of the real distinction of being and
essence, they more radically reinterpreted the Aristotelian
distinction between substance and accident, ending up
with positions closer to what Marsilius (taking his cue
from Buridan) described as ‘‘the common opinion’’ of
theologians.
In general, the most fundamental issue concerning the
interpretation of the Aristotelian notion of inherence and
its compatibility with the doctrine of the Eucharist seems
to be whether the Aristotelian notion can consistently be
interpreted in such a way that according to this interpre-
tation transubstantiation does not have to destroy the
nature of accidents. Aquinas’ ‘‘Avicennean solution’’ is
based on the thesis of real distinction between essence
and existence, on the basis of which, even if the mode of
being of the thing changes, this can leave the distinct
nature of the thing unaffected.
Those, however, who rejected this Avicennean inter-
pretation of Aristotle, be they philosophers, like Siger or
Buridan, or theologians, like Henry of Ghent or Duns
Scotus, ended up either with an irresoluble conﬂict
between their Aristotelianism and their faith, as Siger
did, or with a more radical departure from Aristotle in
their interpretation of the Aristotelian doctrine of the
analogy of being, as Henry, Scotus, and Buridan did.
Either way, abandoning the Thomistic interpretation of
the Aristotelian distinction seems to drive a wedge
between faith and reason, culminating in the attribution
of radically different notions of accidental being to phi-
losophers and to theologians by Buridan. Perhaps, this is
what motivated Marsilius of Inghen’s ‘‘more metaphysi-
cal’’ solution, echoing the gist of Aquinas’.
The gist of Marsilius’solution is the permanence of the
natural tendency of the accident to be in a subject, even if
its actual existence changes from inherent to subsistent,
just as it was in Aquinas (Bakker 2001:262). However, for
Marsilius, the nominalist theologian, this solution was no
longer based on the Avicennean interpretation of Aristotle
provided by Aquinas, but rather on the strict separation of
what is naturally and what is only supernaturally possible,
indeed, on a radical separation of theological and secular
philosophical and scientiﬁc discourse initiated in many
ways by the nominalism of William of Ockham (see Klima
2009).
Ockham’s nominalism, on the other hand, was partly
motivated by what he perceived as entirely futile meta-
physical problems concerning the categories, based on
a mistaken semantic conception of his contemporaries
(Klima 1999a). His new semantic conception motivated
by this perception, in turn, led to a radical trans-
formation of scholastic discourse and, along with other
conceptual changes in late-medieval philosophy, to
the emergence of the possibility of completely and system-
atically eliminating accidents really distinct from sub-
stances, and thus eventually to the collapse of the
scholastic substance–accident metaphysics in early mod-
ern philosophy.
1222 S
Substance, Accident and Modes

The Problem of the Distinction of Accidents,
and the Emergence of Modes
As we have seen, the theological problem of the Eucharist
naturally gave rise to the intensional problem of the inter-
pretation of the Aristotelian notion of the inherence of
accidents. Particular philosophical problems concerning
the distinction of speciﬁc kinds of accidents from each
other as well as from their subject, however, tended to give
rise to a number of more speciﬁc extensional problems of
the necessity and sufﬁciency of the Aristotelian division.
The framework of the medieval discussion concerning
the distinction of speciﬁc kinds of accidents was provided
by Aristotle’s distinction of the ten categories, namely,
distinguishing substance from the nine categories of acci-
dents: quantity, quality, relation, action, passion, time,
place, position, and habit. One fundamental question
concerning the distinction of the categories was precisely
what sort of items these categories classify. Are they words,
or the concepts expressed by these words, or are they the
entities themselves already ﬁtted into the broader frame-
work of the Ontological Square by Aristotle?
Various authors handled these issues variously in their
interpretation of Aristotle, but few would have subscribed
to a simplistic ‘‘mirroring’’ idea, namely, the idea that the
ten classes of simple words ‘‘mirror’’ ten classes of simple
concepts, which in turn ‘‘mirror’’ the ten fundamental
classes of entities there are in reality.
In the ﬁrst place, that the relationship between words
and concepts is more complicated is clear from the phe-
nomena of equivocation (one word expressing several
concepts) as well as synonymy (several words expressing
the same concept) and translatability (different words in
different languages expressing the same concept) or from
the fact that a simple word may express a complex concept
and a complex phrase may occasionally convey a simple
concept (Buridan 2001:xxxvii–xxxix).
In the second place, the relationship between concepts
and things is quite complicated as well: universal concepts
comprehend several particular things (even if several par-
ticular things of the same kind), but even the same (kinds
of) things may be conceived in terms of radically different
concepts (as for example, all triangular things may also be
conceived as trilateral and vice versa).
Thus, even the medieval modistae, who insisted that
the modes of signifying of words (modi signiﬁcandi)
follow upon our ways of understanding things (modi
intelligendi), which in turn reﬂect the ways things are
(modi essendi), would not have subscribed to the simplistic
mirroring view of semantic relations; and, a fortiori, such
a view would have been rejected by their late-medieval,
especially, nominalist critics (Marmo 1999). But still,
especially
in
the
thirteenth-century
literature
on
Aristotle’s Categories and Metaphysics, there were various
speculations about the sufﬁciency of Aristotle’s classiﬁca-
tion (in the so-called sufﬁcientiae literature), trying to
establish that his ten categories comprehend all entities,
sorting them into their ten and only ten most universal
essential kinds (McMahon 2002; Gracia and Lloyd 2006).
However, apart from the issue of the sufﬁciency of the
categories to classify all entities into their essential kinds,
there was also the intriguing question of the necessity of
Aristotle’s categories, as far as the classiﬁcation of real
entities is concerned. For nobody seems to have denied
the usefulness of Aristotle’s classiﬁcation of predicable
terms and the concepts they express in the ten genera he
distinguished, establishing a certain system of them all;
but there were serious doubts as to whether this classiﬁ-
cation is at the same time the classiﬁcation of the essential,
natural kinds of all entities there are. Are there really (at
least) ten classes of really distinct, essentially different
entities in the universe?
One consideration that prompts this conclusion is the
following piece of reasoning, which may be dubbed the
argument from separability:
1. Any entities that can exist without each other are
distinct from each other
2. The entities in distinct categories can exist without
each other
3. Therefore, the entities in distinct categories are distinct
from each other
If this argument is sound, then the ten categories provide
a mutually exclusive (and hopefully also exhaustive) ten-
fold classiﬁcation of all entities.
However, in this argument, a great deal depends on the
interpretation of its second premise. The obvious justiﬁ-
cation for this premise is the fact that accidents are ‘‘sep-
arable’’ from their subject as well as from each other in the
sense that a subject may continue to exist while its acci-
dents come or cease to inform it, independently from each
other. (Of course, this natural ‘‘separability’’ of accidents
must not be confused with the question of their supernat-
ural separability in continued existence discussed above.)
After all, on Porphyry’s description of accident, ‘‘accident
is what comes and goes without the destruction of the
substrate’’ (Spade 1994:11). For example, the white sheet
of paper that turns black when dipped in ink certainly
continues to exist, while its whiteness is gone, and the
same goes for its other accidents in the other categories.
We need not be detained here too much by the issue of
naturally inseparable accidents discussed by Porphyry,
such as the blackness of a crow (to use his example),
Substance, Accident and Modes S
1223
S

which are inseparable only assuming the present course
of nature, but could be separated from their subject
(without preserving them in continued existence) in
a different system of nature, simply on account of their
nonessentiality. So, in a different system of nature, with
different laws in force, the same subjects could be present
without their actually naturally inseparable accidents. For
instance, in a different system of nature, there could be
white crows. (Indeed, we could actually produce them
even in this system of nature by dipping them in hydrogen
peroxide, but Porphyry apparently did not think of this
cruel possibility. Thus, a better example of a naturally
inseparable accident in his sense might be the yellow
color of pure gold.) By contrast, in a different system of
nature, the same subjects could not be present without
their essential properties, because then they would just not
be the same things. We certainly could not have crows that
are not crows or animals or bodies (or gold that is not an
element or does not have atomic number 79).
However, the justiﬁcation of premise (2) above in
terms of the Porphyrian deﬁnition clearly presupposes
that what we are referring to by means of the abstract
term ‘‘whiteness,’’ namely, the accident that veriﬁes the
corresponding concrete term ‘‘white’’ of this sheet, cannot
cease to be referred to by this term unless it ceases to exist,
that is to say, that this abstract term is an essential pred-
icate of this accident. For, if the term were not an essential
predicate of this thing, or would not refer ‘‘rigidly’’ to this
thing, to use the contemporary jargon, then the thing
could cease to be referred to by the term ‘‘whiteness,’’
i.e., it could cease to be whiteness, without ceasing to
exist. And so, even if the white sheet were identical with
its whiteness, it could cease to be white without its white-
ness ceasing to exist, for its whiteness could just cease to be
whiteness without ceasing to be.
To be sure, in the case of this example, one may have
the intuition that the thing that is called ‘‘whiteness’’
cannot cease to be whiteness without ceasing to be. How-
ever, consider another example in the category of quality,
in the species of shape, such as straightness. Scholastic
‘‘realists’’ (for the signiﬁcance of the quotes see Klima
2008) committed to the essentiality of abstract terms in
this species would have to claim that when, say, a piece of
wire is straight, then this is because the matter of this piece
of wire is informed by the quality of straightness, and so
when the wire is bent, its straightness is destroyed while
the wire itself continues to exist, which clearly indicates
that the wire and its shape are not the same thing.
However, what if this shape is not construed as
a simple quality essentially named ‘‘straightness’’? After
all, for the wire to be straight is just for its extremes to be
maximally distant; thus, the wire’s shape is nothing but the
way its quantity is extended, indeed, one may say, it is just
this quantity extended this way. But of course when the wire
goes from straight to bent, its quantity does not cease to
exist; it just goes from existing in one way to existing in
another. However, these ‘‘ways,’’ that is, modes of being of
this quantity are not further things added to this quantity:
they are the quantity itself arranged one way or another,
on account of which it once can be called straight and then
bent. Therefore, straightness is nothing but the quantity of
the wire arranged in a certain way, not a thing really
distinct from this quantity. Indeed, if quantity-terms can
be analyzed along similar lines, then its quantity can also
be identiﬁed with a material substance, for again, then the
dimensions of the substance are nothing but the substance
itself, its matter being arranged in a certain way.
This is precisely the gist of the idea of Ockham’s
nominalist program of ‘‘ontological reduction,’’ whereby
he sought to get rid of all sorts of ‘‘weird entities’’ to
which his realist opponents were apparently committed
(see Klima 1999a, b). Perhaps, the best illustration of the
kind of ontological commitment Ockham wanted to elim-
inate can be found in the following passage, coming from
the auspiciously titled treatise, ‘‘A Very Useful and Realist
Logic of Campsal the Englishman Against Ockham’’:
"
there are individuals subjected to each category that are
really distinct from the individuals of another category of
which it [their category] is properly and directly predicated;
for example, we can truly assert: ‘This is [a] when’ pointing
to the relation which is caused by the motion of the first
movable [i.e., the celestial sphere of the fixed stars] in the
inferior things, so that, if that individual had a distinct
proper name imposed on it, one could just as truly respond
to the question: ‘What is it?’ by saying: ‘[A] when’, as one can
reply to the question ‘What is it?’ asked about a man, by
saying: ‘A substance’ (Pseudo-Campsall 1982:216–217).
Indeed, the realist author of this treatise is willing to go as
far as to claim that denying the real distinction of individ-
uals in the ten categories would lead to the destruction of
philosophy and science:
"
we should see whether a when-ness is distinct from abso-
lute things. . . . And this appears but some quibble: for
denying that in any category there is to be found a thing
distinct from the things of all other categories amounts to
denying philosophy in general and several particular sci-
ences that deal with these categories (Pseudo-Campsall
1982:327).
The most important point in these passages is that our
realist author would take the categories as well as their
1224 S
Substance, Accident and Modes

subordinate genera and species to be essential predicates
of their particulars. But this is precisely the assumption
that allows ‘‘the argument from separability’’ to go
through, thereby generating a ‘‘Porphyrian forest’’
consisting of distinct Porphyrian trees (the arrangement
of genera and their subordinate species) in each category.
Consequently, it is no wonder that this is precisely the
assumption that Ockham’s and his followers’ new seman-
tic conception would systematically undermine, allowing
them to cut down what they took to be the realists’
‘‘Porphyrian forest,’’ leading to commitment to all sorts
of ‘‘weird entities’’ in one’s ontology, causing all sorts of
apparently insoluble problems in one’s logic, metaphysics,
and physics (for some of Ockham’s particular arguments
see Klima 1999a).
The gist of the Ockhamist idea, as I have indicated
above, was that abstract terms in the accidental categories
can be analyzed in terms of their nominal deﬁnitions,
revealing the complex conceptual structures ‘‘covered-
up’’ by the syntactic simplicity of these terms. But within
the Ockhamist semantic framework, the revelation of this
complex conceptual structure at the same time reveals that
the corresponding term is a nonessential predicate of its
particulars, which means that ‘‘the argument from sepa-
rability’’ cannot stand in the way of identifying this par-
ticular with one in another category. Thus, providing such
‘‘eliminative deﬁnitions’’ could become a powerful ana-
lytic tool for carrying out the Ockhamist program of
reducing the really distinct ontological categories to two
(substance and quality – as was Ockham’s original pro-
gram) or three (substance, quality, and quantity – as was
Buridan’s program).
Indeed, this conceptual tool in principle could have
been used to eliminate all real accidents, even in the
category quality, leaving only substances whose matter
being arranged in different ways is what causally accounts
for their various properties classiﬁable in the system of the
categories, in the framework of an atomist physical theory.
Buridan, however, who was well aware of this possibility
(explored by his contemporary John of Mirecourt),
rejected atomism as ‘‘an obscure and dangerous’’ doctrine
(Buridan 1989:122), and argued for the real distinction of
some species of quality, quantity, and substance (for more
on this, see Klima 2003).
However, despite the nominalists’ charges to the con-
trary, authors working in the older semantic framework
did not have to be committed to a full blown ‘‘Porphyrian
forest.’’ Even if they did not have the systematic analytic
tool of ‘‘eliminative nominal deﬁnitions’’ that the nomi-
nalists could apply in eliminating unwanted ontological
commitment
to
distinct
entities
in
the
accidental
categories, these authors could still use other conceptual
means to identify or ‘‘quasi-identify’’ entities across cate-
gories, provided they could abandon on principled
grounds the crucial assumption of the essentiality of
abstract terms in accidental categories.
One such conceptual tool was the distinction between
two types of relations: relations in being (relationes
secundum
esse)
and
relations
in
speech
(relationes
secundum dici). It is only abstract relational terms of the
former type of that would be essential predicates of dis-
tinct relation-things; abstract relational terms of the latter
type would just be relative denominations of absolute
things in other categories. Apparently, some authors
would identify this distinction with the distinction
between real relations (relationes reales) and merely con-
ceptual ones (relationes rationis). However, Cajetan
insisted that the former distinction is one to be applied
within the realm of real relations.
But similar considerations allowed the identiﬁcation
or quasi-identiﬁcation of items in other categories. For
instance, Aquinas would often cite Aristotle’s authority to
endorse the identiﬁcation of action and passion with the
same motion, or a location with the dimensive quantity of
the locating thing. In all such cases, what allows the iden-
tiﬁcation of items across categories is the consideration
that the terms referring to these items need not be their
essential predicates, which neutralizes the force of the
argument from separability. But the conceptual device
of allowing the nonessentiality of abstract terms in acci-
dental categories in and of itself would only produce the
recognition of conceptual distinctions of otherwise really
identical items in one’s ontology, just like the merely
conceptual distinctions produced by the nominalists’
eliminative deﬁnitions.
Another important conceptual tool among non-nom-
inalists, combined with allowing the nonessentiality of
abstract
terms,
but
also
emphasizing
the
mind-
independence of some distinctions, involved tweaking
the notions of unity and distinctness. This is how Henry
of Ghent’s intentional distinction or Scotus’ formal distinc-
tion, or later Sua´rez’s modal distinction were all capable of
providing a way to ‘‘quasi-identify’’ items across categories
without, however, fully identifying them. The best descrip-
tion of this strategy can be found in Sua´rez’s presentation
of his modal distinction, as being somehow halfway
between a full-blown real distinction and a mere concep-
tual distinction:
"
I think it is true without qualification that there is among
created things a certain actual distinction which is found in
nature prior to any activity of the mind, and that such
Substance, Accident and Modes S
1225
S

distinction is not so great as the distinction between two
altogether separate things or entities. This distinction, to
be sure, could be designated by the general term ‘real,’
inasmuch as it is truly verified in reality, and is not merely
an extrinsic denomination issuing from the intellect. How-
ever, to differentiate it from the other, namely the major
real distinction, we can call it either a ‘distinction from the
nature of the case,’ thus applying to this imperfect distinc-
tion a term that is in common use, or more properly
a ‘modal distinction.’ For, as I shall explain, this distinction
is invariably found to intervene between a thing and its
mode (Sua´rez 1947:27).
So, what is a mode? Sua´rez is well aware of the fact that
modes are not his invention. He mentions Giles of
Rome, Durand of Saint-Pourc¸ain, and especially Petrus
Fonseca, as his forerunners on this issue; although he
could have mentioned even earlier ﬁgures, such as John
Peter John Olivi or Peter Auriol. Indeed, even earlier,
Albert the Great tended to refer to all accidents as the
modes of substance, but he probably did not have in
mind the speciﬁc notion of a mode in Sua´rez’s sense,
which, following Fonseca, Sua´rez carefully distinguished
from the broader senses of the term.
In this speciﬁc technical sense, a mode of something
‘‘is something affecting [it] and, as it were, ultimately
determining its state and manner of existing, without
adding to it a proper new entity, but merely modifying
a pre-existing entity’’ (Sua´rez 1947:28).
So, modes are something real, indeed, as Sua´rez insists,
mind-independently distinct from the things of which
they are the modes, and yet they are not as distinct as
one thing from another, as a real accident would be dis-
tinct from a substance. Indeed, they are not sufﬁciently
distinct to be separable even by divine power; thus modes
could not be sustained in separation in the way accidents
can in the Eucharist. Therefore, modes in this strict sense
constitute a genuinely new category wedged ‘‘between’’ the
categories of substance and accident.
Of course, this characterization of modes and their
distinction from the substances and accidents of which
they are the modes makes the problem of the sufﬁciency of
the division of being into substance and accident return
with a vengeance. Sua´rez valiantly struggled with the
problem, trying to save the idea of sufﬁciency, but his
solution may have just added to the sense of later gener-
ations that the distinction is radically ﬂawed. Indeed, the
conceptual tools introduced by late-medieval realists and
nominalists discussed above opened up the possibility
of totally eliminating the distinction, which, after a
ﬂourishing of talk about modes of substances instead of
their real accidents, is basically what happened in the early
modern period.
See also: ▶Being ▶Boethius ▶Categories ▶Essence and
Existence ▶Henry of Ghent ▶John Buridan ▶John Duns
Scotus ▶Marsilius of Inghen ▶Parisian Condemnation
of 1277 ▶Siger of Brabant ▶Terms, Properties of
▶Thomas Aquinas ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Buridan John (1989) John Buridan’s philosophy of mind: an edition and
translation of book III of his ‘Questions on Aristotle’s De anima’
(third redaction), ed. and trans. Zupko JA. PhD dissertation, Cornell
University, Ithaca
Buridan John (2001) Summulae de dialectica (an annotated translation
with a philosophical introduction by Klima G). Yale University Press,
New Haven
Cajetan Thomas de Vio (1939) Scripta philosophica: commentaria in
Praedicamenta Aristotelis, ed. Laurent MH. Angelicum, Romae
Pseudo-Campsall Richard (1982) Logica Campsale Anglicj, valde utilis et
realis contra Ocham. In: Synan EA (ed) The works of Richard
Campsall, vol 2. Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto
Siger of Brabant (1972a) Les Quaestiones super Librum de causis de Siger
de Brabant, ed. Marsala A. Publications Universitaires, Louvain;
Be´atrice-Nauwelaerts, Paris
Siger of Brabant (1972b) De anima intellectiva, ed. Bazan B. Siger de
Brabant. Quaestiones in tertium de anima. De anima intellectiva. De
aeternitate
mundi,
Philosophes
me´die´vaux
13,
Publications
universitaires, Louvain; Be´atrice-Nauwelaerts, Paris
Siger of Brabant (1983) Quaestiones in metaphysicam, ed. Maurer A.
E´ditions de l’Institute Supe´rieur de philosophie, Louvain-la-Neuve
Sua´rez
Francisco
(1947)
On
the
various
kinds
of
distinctions
(Disputationes
metaphysicae,
Disputatio
VII,
De
variis
distinctionum generibus), (translation from the Latin with an intro-
duction by Vollert CSJ STD). Marquette University Press, Milwaukee
Secondary Sources
Angelelli I (1991) The ontological square. In: Burkhardt H, Smith B
(eds) Handbook of metaphysics and ontology, 2 vols. Philosophia,
Munich
Bakker P (2001) Aristotelian metaphysics and Eucharistic theology: John
Buridan and Marsilius of Inghen on the ontological status of acci-
dental being. In: Thijssen JMMH, Zupko J (eds) The metaphysics
and natural philosophy of John Buridan. Brill, Leiden/Boston/Ko¨ln,
pp 247–264
De Rijk LM (1967) Logica modernorum, vol II, Pt II. Van Gorcum, Assen
Gracia J, Lloyd N (2006) Medieval theories of the categories. In:
Zalta EN (ed) The Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy (Sum-
mer
2006
edition).
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2006/
entries/medieval-categories/
Klima G (1999a) Ockham’s semantics and ontology of the categories. In:
Spade PV (ed) The Cambridge companion to Ockham. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, pp 118–142
Klima G (1999b) Buridan’s logic and the ontology of modes. In: Ebbesen
S, Friedman RL (eds) Medieval analyses in language and cognition.
The Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters, Copenhagen, pp
473–495
1226 S
Substance, Accident and Modes

Klima G (2002) Aquinas’ theory of the Copula and the analogy of being.
Logic Anal Hist Philos 5:159–176
Klima G (2003) John Buridan. In: Gracia J, Noone T (eds) A companion
to philosophy in the middle ages. Blackwell, Oxford, pp 340–348
Klima G (2008) The medieval problem of universals. In: Zalta EN (ed) The
Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy (Winter 2008 Edition). http://
plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2008/entries/universals-medieval/
Klima G (2009) William Ockham. In: Oppy G, Trakakis N (eds) History of
western philosophy of religion. Acumen, Durham, pp 195–208
Marmo C (1999) The aemantics of the Modistae. In: Ebbesen S, Friedman
RL (eds) Medieval analyses in language and cognition, acts of the
symposium. The Copenhagen school of medieval philosophy, 10–13
January 1996, Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters. C. A.
Reitzels Forlag, Copenhagen
McMahon W (2002) The medieval Sufﬁcientiae: attempts at a deﬁnitive
division of the categories. Proc Soc Medieval Logic Metaphys 2:12–25
Nuchelmans G (1973) Theories of the proposition: ancient and medieval
conceptions of the bearers of truth and falsity. North-Holland,
Amsterdam/London
Nuchelmans G (1980) Late-scholastic and humanist theories of the prop-
osition. North-Holland, Amsterdam
Spade PV (1994) Five texts on the mediaeval problem of universals:
Porphyry, Boethius, Abelard, Duns Scotus, Ockham. Hackett,
Indianapolis/Cambridge
al-Suhrawardı¯, Shiha¯b al-Dı¯n
Yah:ya¯ al-Maqtu¯l
CE´CILE BONMARIAGE
Fonds National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque
Bruxelles
Belgium
Abstract
Shiha¯b al-Dı¯n al-Suhrawardı¯ (d. Aleppo, c. 1191) is
a mystical philosopher who founded a new tradition in
Islamic thought, that of Ishra¯qı¯ (‘‘Illuminationism’’). This
term applies ﬁrst to a new method: Suhrawardı¯ introduces
illumination or knowledge by the presence as the founda-
tion of a sounder way to apprehend the universe and
ourselves. Ishra¯qı¯ is also a new understanding of what is
conceived of as the participation of all that is in one fun-
damental reality, Light. Suhrawardı¯’s thought had a lasting
inﬂuence on later Islamic speculative tradition, especially in
the East, as an alternative trend to the ‘‘Peripatetic’’ tradi-
tion represented by thinkers such as Avicenna.
Biographical Information
Born in Suhraward near Zanja¯n (NW Iran) in the middle
of the sixth/twelfth century (probably c. 549/1155), Shiha¯b
al-Dı¯n Yah:ya¯ b. H˙ abash b. Amı¯rak al-Suhrawardı¯ received
his ﬁrst education in Maragha. After a few years of travel in
quest of knowledge in Anatolia, Syria, and possibly
Isfahan, he arrived in Aleppo, probably in 579/1183.
There he gained the favor of the court, then ruled by al-
Malik al-Z˙ a¯hir G˙ a¯zı¯, the son of Saladin. This short period
of favor was followed by a dramatic reverse of fortune,
instigated by local religious scholars, which resulted in
Suhrawardı¯’s condemnation to death by the order of Sal-
adin. The earliest account known, ‘Ima¯d al-Dı¯n’s Busta¯n
al-ja¯mi‘, a chronicle contemporary with the event, men-
tions Suhrawardı¯’s death in the year 588/1192. One cen-
tury later, Shahrazu¯rı¯ speaks of the end of 586 or of 588/
1191 or 1192. In the same thirteenth century, Ibn
Khallika¯n rejects the date 588, and gives precise dates
according to two different accounts: Suhrawardı¯ was
incarcerated and then strangled on 5 Rajab 587/July 29,
1191; his dead body was carried out of the citadel of
Aleppo on Friday, end of Dhu¯ al-H˙ ijja 587/January 17,
1192. Suhrawardı¯was then 38 in lunar years, or 36, or even
50 according to another version related by Shahrazu¯rı¯. The
accounts are no more precise regarding the manner in
which Suhrawardı¯ died (starvation to death, strangula-
tion, execution followed by cruciﬁxion for several days),
and the ultimate reasons for his condemnation, probably
a mix of religious and political factors.
During his short life, Suhrawardı¯ produced an impres-
sive number of writings both in Arabic and Persian, some
very brief, others lengthy, written in various styles, from
allegoric tales to scholastic treatises very much in the
manner of the writings typical of Islamic philosophers in
the Peripatetic tradition. His works comprise four major
philosophical treatises written in Arabic: al-Talwı¯h:a¯t
(The Intimations), al-Muqa¯wama¯t (The Oppositions), al-
Masha¯ri‘ wa-l-mut:a¯rah:a¯t (The Paths and Havens or Con-
versations), and Kita¯b H˙ ikmat al-Ishra¯qı¯(The Philosophy of
Illumination or Book of Illuminationist Wisdom), his mas-
terpiece completed in 582/1186 (H˙ ikma } 279). These
treatises are accompanied by shorter texts of different
types: mystical allegories such as the Qis:s:at al-g˙urba al-
g˙arbı¯ya (The Story of the Occidental Exile), epitomes of
philosophy such as the Haya¯kil al-nu¯r (Temples of light),
and prayers and invocations.
Thought
Suhrawardı¯’s thought represents a profound change in
Avicennan philosophy on which it is founded. The main
points of departure have to do with epistemology and with
the conception of the structure of reality. Suhrawardı¯’s
writings denote a strong dissatisfaction with discursive
rationality and the will to ﬁnd an alternative ground on
which to build a sounder system to apprehend the
al-Suhrawardı¯, Shiha¯b al-Dı¯n Yah:ya¯ al-Maqtu¯l S
1227
S

universe and ourselves. This ground is found in intuitive
knowledge, the kind of knowledge experienced by mys-
tics in their visions, but also in the experience of self-
knowledge. This ‘‘presential knowledge’’ or ‘‘knowledge
by presence’’ (‘ilm h:ud˙u¯rı¯), which is thus for Suhrawardı¯
the only way to truly access what is, is characterized by the
fact that it is not mediated through any image or repre-
sentation. It allows for a direct vision, an intuition, pro-
viding the principles of a new comprehension of reality. As
stated in the introduction of H˙ ikmat al-Ishra¯qı¯, beside the
sciences drawn from the observation of phenomena per-
ceived by our senses, such as geometry, there are the
sciences built on principles known from our experience
of the spiritual: ‘‘Those who do not proceed according to
this method have no share in wisdom; doubts will toy with
them!’’ (H˙ ikma } 6).
The integration of presential experience as a source for
knowledge does not entail a complete dismissal of discur-
sive rationality. In the recommendation made at the end of
the H˙ ikmat al-Ishra¯qı¯, it is said that this book should not
be made available ‘‘except to whom has mastered the
Peripatetic method,’’ which is precisely the method using
discursive argumentation (H˙ ikma } 279). However, dis-
cursive rationality alone cannot lead to true knowledge
because it lacks the validity given by mystical experience.
Only the speculative mystic who brings together mystical
vision and excellence of reasoning can reach certainty.
Hence the end of the quotation just given: ‘‘. . . and who
is enamored of the Light of God.’’ Mystical experience is
still more important than reasoning skills however: in
a hierarchy of sages given in the same book, second to
the speculative mystic are sages who follow the mystical
path with no attempt at speculation, followed by those
who are skilled in discursive rationality without mystical
experience (H˙ ikma } 5).
In metaphysics, Suhrawardı¯ builds an elaborate system
centered on Light. From the Light of lights emanates
a vertical hierarchy of pure immaterial lights, paralleled
by a horizontal order of lights, and from these emanations
and the interactions between the different orders, further
entities are produced. There is thus a gradual unfolding of
Pure immaterial lights – triumphant (only concerned with
themselves and the higher realms) and regent (i.e., those
ruling over the bodies) – of accidental lights, and obstacles
to light (barzakh), that is, the bodies.
The main characteristics of Suhrawardı¯’s metaphysical
system are as follows. Everything is conceived of as partic-
ipating in one fundamental reality, Light. Even that which
is an obstacle to light is caused by light and deﬁned by its
relationship to light. Lights are primarily differentiated by
their degree of intensity: the level of their share in light
makes them what they are and is the very principle of
individualization, even if other elements are also included
the further one gets from the higher levels. Intensity is also
understood in dynamic terms: a reality can be more or less
what it is, says Suhrawardı¯, thus introducing movement in
the category of substance. A corollary of this principle is
the ontological weight given to the lowest degrees of light:
this is a metaphysics attentive to the multiple instances of
light, a metaphysics of lights rather than of Light. Finally,
Suhrawardı¯ reintroduces Platonic Ideas of some sort, the
‘‘Lords of species,’’ and maintains the reality of a separate
World of images.
On human nature and destiny, Suhrawardı¯ considers
human soul as an immaterial light imprisoned in this
world and using the body as a tool to perfect itself, in
order to escape from its exile in the material world and
reach the world of Lights. Some passages in the H˙ ikmat al-
Ishra¯qı¯showing sympathy toward the afﬁrmation of trans-
migration of souls (tana¯sukh) have led to discussions by
later Ishra¯qı¯s and opponents as to how this afﬁrmation
should be understood (H˙ ikma } 229–236). Questions of
conscience of self and personal identity are also of special
interest for Ishra¯qı¯ thought.
Suhrawardı¯presents his system as a break from the views
of the ‘‘Peripatetic’’ (mashsha¯’ı¯) philosophers of Islam, and
many of his theories are introduced as an alternative to
their erroneous conception (e.g., on deﬁnition, syllogism,
hylomorphism, metempsychosis, Platonic Ideas, and
‘‘being’’ conceived as anything beyond a mental attribute).
This break is presented as a return to the doctrines of the
ﬁrst sages – Greeks, Persians, Indians, etc., – with tutelary
ﬁgures such as Hermes, Plato, and Zoroaster.
Suhrawardı¯’s writings had a lasting inﬂuence in Islamic
thought, not only through a line of commentators and
disciples such as Ibn Kammu¯na (d. 683/1284), Shahrazu¯rı¯
(thirteenth century), and Qut:b al-Dı¯n al-Shı¯ra¯zı¯ (d. 710 or
716/1311 or 1316), but also as a method, considered as
a distinct trend in contrast with the mashsha¯’ı¯ tradition,
and as a set of questions and problems. To mention just one
example, Suhrawardı¯’s insistence on the purely mental char-
acter of universals, especially of being, had a profound
impact on later debates on the essence/existence distinction.
Modern scholarship is divided on how to interpret
the different aspects of Suhrawardı¯’s thought. This
debate, which has consequences on the classiﬁcation of
Suhrawardı¯’s writings, is doubled by an interrogation on
the importance of Suhrawardı¯’s departure from Avicenna,
itself depending greatly on the manner Avicenna’s thought
is understood. Some scholars stress the mystical aspects,
others the Iranian heritage, yet others, the philosophical
aspects, with a will to fully acknowledge the scholastic
1228 S
al-Suhrawardı¯, Shiha¯b al-Dı¯n Yah:ya¯ al-Maqtu¯l

elements in Suhrawardı¯’s writings. This last approach led
to a better grasp of the importance of Suhrawardı¯’s logical
theories (it is interesting to note that only the parts on
metaphysics were included in Corbin’s edition of the
Talwı¯h:a¯t, Muqa¯wama¯t, and Masha¯ri‘, and that his transla-
tion of the Kita¯b H˙ ikmat al-Ishra¯qı¯ skips over the ﬁrst part
on general questions regarding logic and epistemology).
A few scholars have also pointed to other intellectual
traditions, which may have contributed to Suhrawardı¯’s
system, such as Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯thought, opening new perspectives
still to be explored.
See also: ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ Phil-
osophical Tradition ▶Logic in the Arabic and Islamic
World ▶Philosophy, Arabic ▶al-Shahrazu¯rı¯, Muh:ammad
ibn Mah:mu¯d Shams al-Dı¯n
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Suhrawardı¯ (1334/1955) Mant:iq al-Talwı¯h:a¯t, ed. Fayyad ‘A-A. Intisha¯rat-i
Da¯nishga¯h-i Tihra¯n, Tehran
Suhrawardı¯ (1397/1977)
Sih
risa¯la
al
Shaykh-i
Ishra¯q:
al-Alwa¯h:
al-‘Ima¯diyya. Kalima¯t al-tas:awwuf. al-Lamah:a¯t, ed. H˙ abı¯bı¯ N.-G.
Anjuman-i Sha¯hansha¯hı¯-’i Falsafah-’i I¯ra¯n, Tehran
Suhrawardı¯ (1935) Kohlhammer W, Three treatises on mysticism, ed. and
trans. Spies O., Khatak SK. Stuttgart (contains Lughat-i-Mu¯ran;
S˙afı¯r-i Sı¯murgh; Risa¯lat al-t:ayr)
Suhrawardı¯(1945–1970) Opera metaphysica et mystica I–III, ed. Corbin H.
(repr. (1993) oeuvres philosophiques et mystiques. Anjuman-i
Sha¯hansha¯hı¯-’i Falsafah-’i I¯ra¯n, Tehran) (t. I contains the metaphysical
part of al-Talwı¯h:a¯t, al-Muqa¯wama¯t, and al-Masha¯ri‘wa-l-mut:a¯rah:a¯t;
t. II contains Kita¯b H˙ ikmat al-ishra¯q; Risa¯la fı¯ i‘tiqa¯d al-h:ukama¯’;
Qis:s:at al-g˙urba al-g˙arbı¯ya; t. III contains the following short treatises
in Persian: Partow Na¯me, Haya¯kil al-nu¯r, Alwa¯h:-i ‘Ima¯dı¯ya, Risa¯lat
al-t:ayr, ‘Aql-i sorkh, Ru¯zı¯ ba¯ jama¯‘at-i s:u¯fı¯ya¯n, Fı¯ h:a¯lat al-t:ufu¯lı¯ya,
Fı¯ h:aqı¯qat al-‘ishq, Lughat-i mu¯ra¯n, S˙afı¯r-i Sı¯murgh, Busta¯n al-qulu¯b,
Yazda¯n shinakht, al-Kalima¯t al-dhawqı¯ya aw Risa¯lat al-abra¯j)
Suhrawardı¯ (1976) L’archange empourpre´: quinze traite´s et re´cits mys-
tiques, trans. Corbin H. Fayard, Paris (French translation of most of
the treatises in Opera metaphysica et mystica, t. III, plus a few others)
Suhrawardı¯ (1982) The mystical and visionary treatises of Shihabuddin
Yahya Suhrawardi, trans. Thackston W.M. Octagon Press, London
(repr. (1999) The philosophical allegories and mystical treatises.
A parallel Persian-English text. Costa Mazda Publishers) (the intro-
duction and translation are misleading on several counts. See
H. Landolt’s (1987) review in J Am Orient Soc 107(3):475–486)
Suhrawardı¯ (1986) Le livre de la sagesse orientale. Kitaˆb H˙ ikmat al-Ishraˆq.
Commentaires de Qot:boddıˆn Shıˆraˆzıˆ et Mollaˆ Sadraˆ Shıˆraˆzıˆ, trans.
Corbin H. intro. Jambet C. Verdier (transl: H˙ ikmat al-ishraˆq, Intro-
duction and Part 2, with commentaries)
Suhrawardı¯ (1996) Temples of lights, trans. Kuspinar B. ISTAC,
Kuala Lumpur
Suhrawardı¯ (1998) The book of radiance (Partow Na¯meh). A parallel
English-Persian text, ed. and trans. Ziai H. Costa Mazda Publishers
Suhrawardı¯ (1999) The philosophy of illumination. A new critical edition
of the text of H˙ ikmat al-ishraq, ed. and trans. Walbridge J., Ziai H.
Brigham Young University Press, Provo
Secondary Sources
Amin Razavi M (1997) Suhrawardi and the school of illumination.
Curzon Press, Richmond
Corbin H (1971) En Islam iranien. Aspects spirituels et philosophiques.
Tome II: Sohrawardıˆ et les Platoniciens de Perse. Gallimard, Paris
Ibra¯hı¯mı¯ Dı¯na¯nı¯ Gh H (1985) Shu‘a‘-i andisha va shuhu¯d dar falsafah-yi
Suhrawardı¯. H˙ ikmat Tehran
Ha’iri Yazdi M. (1992) The principles of epistemology in Islamic philos-
ophy: knowledge by presence. State University of New York Press,
Albany
Marcotte R (2001) Suhrawardı¯ al-maqtu¯l, the martyr of Aleppo.
al-Qantara 22:395–419
Walbridge J (2000) The leaven of the ancients: Suhrawardi and the
heritage of the Greeks. State University of New York Press, Albany
Walbridge J (2001) The wisdom of the mystic East: Suhrawardi and
Platonic orientalism. State University of New York Press, Albany
Ziai H (1990) Knowledge and illumination: a study of Suhrawardi’s
Hikmat al-Ishraq. Scholars Press, Atlanta
Supposition Theory
CATARINA DUTILH NOVAES
ILLC and Department of Philosophy
University of Amsterdam
Amsterdam
The Netherlands
Abstract
Supposition theory is one of the most important later
medieval semantic theories (in the Latin tradition). Sup-
position is the property of terms (occurring in proposi-
tions) of standing for things, so that these things can be
talked about by means of propositions, and supposition
theory (in its different versions) is a theory codifying the
different uses of terms in propositions, based on the idea
that one and the same term can stand for different things
when occurring in different propositional contexts. The
different kinds of supposition are attempts to capture the
phenomenon of semantic variation prompted by different
propositional contexts. The theory emerged in the twelfth
century, and the two main traditions contributing to its
development were the tradition of commentaries on
Aristotle’s
Sophistical
Refutations
and
the
tradition
commenting on the fourth-century grammarian Priscian.
Supposition theory acquired its ﬁrst mature form in the
thirteenth century, with the terminist/summulist tradition
(in the works of William of Sherwood, Peter of Spain,
Roger Bacon, and Lambert of Lagny/Auxerre), and was
further developed in the fourteenth century by authors
such as Walter Burley, William of Ockham, and John
Buridan.
Supposition Theory S
1229
S

Introduction
Supposition is one of the properties treated within the
doctrine of the properties of terms, a doctrine whose
development started in the twelfth century and which
then became the cornerstone of later medieval semantics
(see Read 2006, and the entry on Terms, Properties of
in this volume). In fact, the development of this doctrine
from the twelfth century onward consists precisely in
‘‘the growing dominance of just one of the properties of
terms, supposition’’ (De Rijk 1982:161). Indeed, by the
fourteenth century the concept of supposition had
almost entirely superseded or absorbed the other prop-
erties of terms for the purposes of semantic analysis.
A section (often several chapters) speciﬁcally on suppo-
sition is to be found in every single logical textbook of
the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries (not to mention
the several De suppositionibus treatises in the fourteenth
century).
Very generally put, supposition is the property of
terms (occurring in propositions) of standing for things,
so that these things can be talked about by means of
propositions. Thus described, it may appear to be the
medieval counterpart of the modern concept of refer-
ence, and indeed such a comparison has often been put
forward. But there are also signiﬁcant dissimilarities
between medieval theories of supposition and modern
theories of reference, and in fact this comparison can be
quite misleading (see Dutilh Novaes 2007: chap. 1).
Rather, it seems more appropriate to view medieval the-
ories of supposition as having no exact modern counter-
part – one must attempt to understand them in their own
terms. Moreover, throughout the centuries the concept
of supposition ‘‘developed in response to a variety of
needs, and one mistake of modern attempts at interpre-
tation is to seek a unique rationale’’ for its various for-
mulations at different stages of its development (Read
2006: Introduction).
Nevertheless, a fairly accurate general characterization
of the different versions of supposition theory is as
a theory codifying the different uses of terms in proposi-
tions; such variations of uses are important as such, but
they are also crucial for key logical concepts such as truth,
(fallacious or valid) inference, and propositional con-
tent. In other words, a trait common to the different
formulations of the theory is the idea that one and the
same term can stand for different things when occurring
in different propositional contexts, thus having distinct
semantic contributions to the content of a proposition at
each time. The different kinds of supposition are
attempts to capture the phenomenon of semantic varia-
tion prompted by different propositional contexts.
Indeed, theories of supposition deal with four main
kinds of semantic variation:
1. Whether a term is taken literally or metaphorically.
2. The different ontological kinds of the things that one
and the same term can stand for – the supposita:
(extra-mental) individual entities, universal entities,
mental entities, or linguistic entities.
3. The different temporal and modal statuses of the
supposita: present, past, future, actual, or possible.
4. The different quantities of entities required to verify or
falsify a proposition.
(1) The ﬁrst kind of variation is usually codiﬁed by means
of the distinction of proper vs. improper supposition. For
reasons of space, though, improper supposition will not be
analyzed in any detail here, and we shall concentrate on
proper supposition. (2) The second kind of variation is
accounted for by means of the distinction of the main
kinds of proper supposition, usually personal, simple, and
material supposition (such as in Ockham’s Summa
logicae). The contextual element usually thought to pro-
voke this kind of variation is the ontological kind(s) of the
things of which the other term in the proposition is
correctly predicated, as suggested by an oft-repeated
motto (Ebbesen 1981:41): ‘‘subjects are such as the pred-
icates permit’’ (see Sherwood 1966:113). (3) The third
kind of variation is addressed by the concepts of
ampliation and restriction, originally independent prop-
erties of terms that in later developments were absorbed by
the supposition machinery. The contextual element usu-
ally (though not always) thought to provoke this kind of
variation is the tense (past, present, future) and the mode
(actual, possible, necessary) of the verb in the proposition.
(4) The fourth kind of variation is dealt with by means of
the distinction of the modes of (common) personal sup-
position, whose main modes are confused and distribu-
tive, merely confused, and determinate supposition (such
as in Ockham’s Summa logicae). The contextual element
usually thought to provoke this kind of variation is the
presence or absence of syncategorematic terms (i.e., terms
such as ‘‘every,’’ ‘‘some,’’ ‘‘no,’’ ‘‘not’’) and word order.
(This last distinction is treated elsewhere in this volume;
see the entry on Quantiﬁcation.)
Among the other early properties of terms, the only
one having resisted total absorption by supposition in the
long run is the property of signiﬁcation. Indeed, while the
notion of supposition implies that a given term does not
have a stable, general meaning, but rather that its semantic
contribution depends fundamentally on the propositional
context (and thus on speciﬁc uses), the property of
signiﬁcation is thought to be context-independent and
1230 S
Supposition Theory

pre-propositional. Signiﬁcation concerns the ﬁrst imposi-
tion of what a term shall be used to talk about, whereas
supposition concerns uses of a term that already has
a signiﬁcation, and the semantic variations that may be
prompted by the propositional context.
Another important point to bear in mind is that sup-
position theory was not simply a sterile exercise, devel-
oped for purely theoretical reasons. Much to the contrary,
supposition theory was widely used as a semantic tool in
an ample range of ﬁelds, most notably theology (Brown
1993) and physics. Hence, besides the bare presentations
of the theory that one encounters in medieval logical
textbooks, the theory actually put to practice is perhaps
even more fascinating. For reasons of space we shall not
deal with speciﬁc applications of supposition theory, but
one should bear in mind that supposition theory was
essentially developed to be used, to be put to practice as
a semantic tool for the analysis and interpretation of
discourse, and thus also to deal with matters of truth
and inference in different ﬁelds of investigation.
In what follows, I present a chronological account of
the development of supposition theory in the twelfth,
thirteenth, and fourteenth centuries. Such a partition
although obviously somewhat arbitrary is nonetheless
supported by the signiﬁcant coherence within each cen-
tury. Moreover, it should not be taken to imply that after
the fourteenth century no developments worth mention-
ing took place: much to the contrary, in very late medieval
authors one ﬁnds sophisticated solutions to many of the
issues left open by previous generations (see Dutilh
Novaes 2008a; Ashworth 1974). Nevertheless, these three
centuries embody what we could call the ‘‘classical era’’ of
supposition theory.
Early Developments: Twelfth Century
The historical emergence of supposition theory was
the topic of De Rijk’s groundbreaking study Logica
modernorum, published in three volumes (De Rijk 1962/
1967) and including the edition of a wide range of twelfth-
and thirteenth-century crucial (anonymous) texts. De Rijk
identiﬁed two main traditions contributing to the devel-
opment of supposition theory: the tradition of commen-
taries on Aristotle’s Sophistical Refutations and, more
generally, of theories of fallacies; and the tradition
commenting on the fourth-century grammarian Priscian.
This account is still thought to be essentially correct, but
since the publication of De Rijk’s study, some scholars
(e.g., Ebbesen 1981 have questioned certain aspects of De
Rijk’s account. Also, it appears that other elements (such
as the theological tradition stemming from Gilbert of
Poitiers’ writings; see Kneepkens 1987 and Valente
forthcoming) must also be taken into account to explain
these developments. Furthermore, it is now believed that
a more cautious timeframe for the seminal texts would be
the very last decades of the twelfth century and the ﬁrst
decades of the thirteenth century, differing thus from De
Rijk’s earlier dating of these texts. Nonetheless, the signif-
icance of these two traditions – the grammarian tradition
and the tradition on the fallacies – is beyond any doubt, so
let us examine how exactly the suppositional framework
may have emerged from them.
At this early stage (second half of the twelfth century),
suppositio is often related to the syntactic act of putting
a term as the grammatical subject of a proposition (see
Kneepkens 1987). But it has been argued (Ebbesen 1981)
that even at this early stage, the suppositio terminology is
used not only to refer to a syntactic act but also to the
semantic relation between a term and what it stands for,
which was later to become the standard notion of
suppositio. In fact, these two apparently different accep-
tations of the suppositio terminology (present, for exam-
ple, in the twelfth-century grammarian Peter Helias,
whose Summa super Priscianum is a key text for these
developments) – the syntactic one and the semantic one
– are not really dissimilar if one considers that the proto-
typical subject of a proposition is a substantive noun and
that, according to the grammatical tradition following
Priscian, a noun signiﬁes a substance together with
a quality. Hence, by placing a noun as the subject of
a proposition, one also naturally invokes the substance
that the noun signiﬁes. The noun ‘‘man,’’ for example,
signiﬁes the individual primary substances that are men
insofar as they instantiate the universal nature humanity,
and thus it may stand for men in a proposition. Moreover,
following Aristotelian hylomorphism, universal natures
and qualities are usually viewed as corresponding to
forms, which are combined with matter to give rise to
individuals.
Thus,
in
the
twelfth
century,
to
be
a suppositum is regularly used in the sense of being the
bearer of a name or, equivalently, of a form/quality: and
indeed, the notion of ‘‘bearer of form’’ is (according to
Ebbesen 1981:38) crucial in the early development of
supposition theory.
Unsurprisingly, in this period supposition is often
viewed as a property pertaining exclusively to the subject
term, the corresponding property for predicates being
copulation; but soon thereafter (e.g., in the ﬁrst English
texts of the thirteenth century – Logica ‘‘Cum sit nostra,’’
Logica ‘‘Ut dicit,’’ and Introductiones Parisienses), supposi-
tion is seen as a property of predicates as well.
But even at this early stage, it is also widely acknowl-
edged that terms can be used to stand for things other than
Supposition Theory S
1231
S

what they signify depending on the speciﬁc context of use.
Particularly in the formulation of grammatical theories,
one must often use a term to talk about the very term itself
(for example, to say that ‘‘man’’ is a noun and that ‘‘to run’’
is a verb), and thus not to talk about the thing(s) they
usually stand for. Now, in order to indicate this autonymic
use of a term, twelfth-century authors belonging to the
grammatical tradition (such as in William of Conches,
Adelard of Bath and Peter Helias (De Rijk 1962:108–
109)) often spoke of terms being ‘‘materially imposed’’
(materiale impositum) in such cases. The notion of
materiale impositum is the forerunner of the later notion
of material supposition (see Rosier-Catach 2003), to
appear for the ﬁrst time in William of Sherwood, which
again indicates the crucial role of the grammarian tradi-
tion for the development of supposition theory.
As for the fallacies tradition, it is immediately appar-
ent why the fact that the very same term can be used in
different acceptations is of crucial importance for the
diagnosis of fallacious arguments; Ebbesen (1981:39)
argues that in the twelfth century this might have been
seen as the main purpose of supposition theory. Generally
speaking, fallacies are arguments that appear to be sound
in that they seem to display one of the forms usually
associated with sound arguments (for example, a valid
syllogistic mood), but which are in fact unsound in that
they feature true premises leading to (what appears to be)
a false conclusion. The challenge is to identify where the
problem lies, i.e., what (semantic) phenomenon is behind
the false appearance of validity. A standard example of
a fallacy is:
Homo est dignissima
creaturarum
(Man is the worthiest of
creatures)
Sortes est homo
(Socrates is a man)
Ergo Sortes est dignissima
creaturarum
(So Socrates is the worthiest
of creatures)
This is an obvious fallacy because the premises are true but
the conclusion is false, and yet it does seem to present
a valid (syllogistic) form. Intuitively, we immediately per-
ceive that the problem lies in the different uses of the
middle term ‘‘man’’ in the ﬁrst and second premises: in
the ﬁrst one, ‘‘man’’seems to stand for the nature common
to all men, i.e., humanity, while in the second one it seems
to stand for a particular man, i.e., an individual instanti-
ating the common nature.
Traditionally, a fallacy such as this one is diagnosed as
a fallacy of equivocation, as ‘‘man’’ is used in equivocal
ways in the ﬁrst premise and in the second premise. Now,
it is precisely this variation of uses of one and the same
term in different propositional contexts that supposition
theory seeks to codify. In the case of the example above,
supposition theory will allow the theorist to say that the
term ‘‘man’’ supposits for different things in the ﬁrst and
second premises (a common nature vs. an individual
man), and thus that it has different kinds of supposition.
Typically, the occurrence of ‘‘man’’ in the ﬁrst premise is
said to have simple supposition (insofar as the proposition
is true), whereas the occurrence of the same term in the
second premise is said to have personal supposition (inso-
far as the proposition is true). Indeed, in the fourteenth
century, with Ockham (Summa logicae I chap. 65) and
Burley (De puritate Longer Treatise }44), the distinction
between personal, simple, and material supposition is still
associated to the fallacy of equivocation. Now, for an
inference to be valid, the recurring terms must supposit
for the same things in all premises, and thus must have the
same kind of supposition; in these early developments,
one encounters formulations of rules of the form ‘‘no
inference is possible from supposition A to supposition
B’’ (Ebbesen 1981:39).
The Age of Terminism: Thirteenth Century
The ﬁrst decades of the thirteenth century are character-
ized by logical texts (several of which are edited in De Rijk
1962/1967) still presenting supposition theory in its early
stages. Its ﬁrst reasonably mature versions, where it
acquires the more or less standard shape it was to retain
for many centuries, are to be found in the writings
of the thirteenth-century terminists, also known as
‘‘summulists’’ because they produced complete overviews
of logic (summa, ‘‘sum’’ or summula, ‘‘little sum’’) where
the properties of terms, and supposition in particular,
occupy a key position. The main authors of this genera-
tion are William of Sherwood, Peter of Spain, Roger
Bacon, and Lambert of Auxerre/Lagny, each of them hav-
ing written at least one comprehensive logical text.
Moreover, the thirteenth century is also the period
when the Oxford/Paris opposition becomes signiﬁcant.
In effect, while in the twelfth century the development
of supposition theory is restricted to the Parisian schools,
the thirteenth century witnesses the emergence of a
distinctively Oxford school in logic, and concerning sup-
position in particular, even though there were many
points of mutual inﬂuence between the two centers (see
De Libera 1982). One distinctive characteristic of the
Parisian tradition is the importance of natural supposi-
tion, which is usually construed as the non-contextual,
stable supposition of a term (resembling thus the notion
of signiﬁcation), as opposed to accident supposition, i.e.,
the supposition that a term actually acquires in a given
propositional context (such as in Peter of Spain and
1232 S
Supposition Theory

Lambert of Auxerre/Lagny). Indeed, natural supposition is
the only variation in the development of this concept that
concerns terms out of a propositional context.
The four authors just mentioned each offer a
particular version of supposition theory, each with its
own divisions and subdivisions (for trees representing
these divisions per author, see Spade 1996:272–276). In
fact, the different versions of the theory recognize different
divisions and subdivisions of supposition, but they mostly
agree on the deﬁnitions of the kinds of supposition that
they do recognize. For the present purposes, let us exam-
ine the divisions and subdivisions presented by William of
Sherwood in his Introduction to Logic, as his theory
contains all the kinds and modes of supposition that
remained inﬂuential throughout the fourteenth century
and beyond.
Sherwood’s ﬁrst division of proper supposition is
between formal and material supposition. He deﬁnes for-
mal supposition as ‘‘when a word supposits what it sig-
niﬁes’’ (William of Sherwood 1966:107), as signiﬁcation is
inherently related to forms: for Sherwood, the signiﬁca-
tion of a common term is the universal form it corre-
sponds to, e.g., humanity in the case of ‘‘man.’’ But
formal supposition is of two kinds: simple supposition
is when a term supposits ‘‘for the signiﬁed form’’; per-
sonal supposition is when a term supposits ‘‘for a thing
bearing the form’’ (Sherwood 1966:107), that is, for the
individuals instantiating the universal nature. Indeed,
these are the deﬁnitions of personal and simple supposi-
tion that one generally encounters in writings of the
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries (with an important
modiﬁcation regarding simple supposition brought
about by Ockham, as we shall see). Material supposition
is opposed to formal supposition in that it is not signif-
icative; indeed, Sherwood continues the tradition of
referring to autonymic uses of a word (i.e., standing for
itself) as ‘‘material,’’ as in the notion of materiale
impositum discussed above.
These three main kinds of proper supposition –
personal, simple, and material – are in effect to be found
in most fourteenth-century texts (except for those follow-
ing Buridan in his dismissal of simple supposition), and
account for the variation of ontological kinds of supposita
(variation (2) above). Interestingly, none of the other
thirteenth-century main texts has either formal or mate-
rial supposition as kinds of supposition, but they all have
personal and simple supposition: for Roger Bacon and
Lambert of Auxerre, what Sherwood understood as mate-
rial supposition, namely, the supposition of a term for
itself or for other expressions qua expressions, becomes
a variation of simple supposition. But formal supposition
and especially material supposition make a resounding
comeback in the fourteenth century.
Another division of formal supposition presented by
Sherwood is between common and discrete supposition.
It is unclear whether Sherwood intends it to be a
subdivision of the simple-personal division or the other
way round – or perhaps as an independent division
altogether. Either way, the subsequent tradition usually
treats this distinction as a subdivision of personal sup-
position: common supposition is the supposition of
common terms, i.e., of terms not meant to designate
one speciﬁc individual, while discrete supposition is the
supposition of singular terms such as proper names and
demonstrative pronouns, which pick out one speciﬁc
individual.
For Sherwood, personal common supposition is fur-
ther subdivided into determinate and confused supposi-
tion; confused supposition is then divided into merely
confused, and confused and distributive; and ﬁnally, the
latter is divided into mobile and immobile. The divisions
of the modes of personal common supposition are then to
be found in virtually all subsequent texts (although the
mobile vs. immobile distinction tends to disappear), and
account for the different quantities of supposita that are
required for the veriﬁcation of different propositional
contexts (variation (4) above, treated elsewhere in this
volume.)
As for variation (3) above, it is usually accounted for
by means of the concepts of ampliation and restriction, as
in William of Sherwood, Peter of Spain, and Lambert of
Auxerre/Lagny; Sherwood also discusses this kind of var-
iation within the context of his theory of composite and
divided senses of modal propositions. The idea is that
some propositional contexts ampliate the range of
supposita being supposited for by a term, for example in
a modal sentence such as ‘‘A man can be white’’; in this
case, the supposition of ‘‘man’’ is not limited to the pres-
ently existing men, but also to possible men. A similar
phenomenon occurs with tensed propositions. Other con-
texts restrict the range of supposition, for example, when
an adjective modiﬁes a noun, such as ‘‘white man.’’ But
ampliation and restriction usually do not generate sub-
kinds of supposition, rather it is usually said that the
supposition of a given term is ampliated or restricted.
In the last decades of the thirteenth century, there was
a marked decline of the inﬂuence of terminist logic, in
particular in Paris, where an alternative approach to
semantics became very inﬂuential, that of the modistae
(Ebbesen 1981, 1985). The modistae inﬂuence in Oxford
was less intense, but still felt. In any case, terminism did
not go into total dormant state in this period, as is
Supposition Theory S
1233
S

sometimes thought: Roger Bacon’s De signis, where
a sophisticated version of supposition theory is presented
(improving his own earlier theory presented in his
Summulae dialectices) was written in the last decades of
the thirteenth century, in Oxford (see De Libera 1982).
Later Developments: Fourteenth Century
and Beyond
In the fourteenth century, terminist logic somehow
reemerges as the chief doctrine for semantic analysis,
completely replacing the modistae theories. In the very
ﬁrst years of the century, at Oxford, Walter Burley writes
a De suppositionibus treatise, essentially taking over
Sherwood’s distinctions of supposition. At the same
time, Burley seems to have been the ﬁrst to introduce
quite a few innovations, which were to remain inﬂuential
in the fourteenth century and beyond (see Brown 1972).
Thus, one can say that Burley’s treatise inaugurates four-
teenth-century-style supposition theory.
The next important text in the development of sup-
position theory was composed in the 1320s by William of
Ockham, also an Englishman: his Summa logicae.
Ockham’s Summa is revolutionary for many different rea-
sons, among which his purely extensional deﬁnition of
signiﬁcation – for Ockham, a common term such as
‘‘man’’ signiﬁes each and every man, not the universal
humanity. Another important innovation developed by
Ockham (but with earlier signs in the thirteenth century,
for example, in Lambert of Auxerre/Lagny; see Read 2006:
sect. 3) is the idea that the concept itself is a sign, just as
written and spoken terms. In fact, Ockham develops the
idea of a mental language functioning very much like
written and spoken language, and thus equally apt to
undergo semantic analysis; indeed, Ockham applies the
supposition apparatus also to mental propositions (see
Panaccio 1999), but with some paradoxical results (see
Spade 1980).
While Ockham was clearly inspired by Burley’s treatise
(the section on the supposition of relatives is almost an
exact copy of the same section in Burley’s treatise see
Brown 1972), he had to adjust the supposition machinery
to the ontological and semantic modiﬁcations he had
introduced. Thus, for Ockham simple supposition is no
longer the supposition for an extra-mental universal, as
such things simply do not exist in his ontology. Rather, he
reformulates simple supposition as the supposition for the
mental term corresponding to the spoken or written term
in question. Similarly, personal supposition becomes the
supposition for the thing(s) that the term signiﬁes, given
his reformulation of the notion of signiﬁcation (Summa
logicae I, chap. 64). For the rest, in particular with respect
to the subdivisions of the modes of personal supposition,
Ockham maintains the traditional divisions.
After Ockham, one important tradition in the four-
teenth century (following Buridan) simply dispenses with
simple supposition altogether, maintaining only personal
and material as the main kinds of proper supposition. The
idea is this: if simple supposition is the supposition for
a mental term, as Ockham has it, then it is in fact a kind of
material supposition (Buridan, Summulae de dialectica
4.3.2). Like Ockham, Buridan rejects the existence of
extra-mental universals, so for him simple supposition
becomes a superﬂuous concept.
Another author writing in the Buridanian tradition,
Marsilius of Inghen, introduces another important inno-
vation, namely that of applying the subdivisions tradi-
tionally reserved to personal supposition to material
supposition as well (see Marsilius of Inghen 1983 and
Dutilh Novaes 2008a:sect. 2). With this move, it becomes
possible to ‘‘quantify’’ over occurrences of spoken, written,
and mental terms being the material supposita of terms,
just as one quantiﬁes over the extra-mental individuals
that are typically (but not always) the personal supposita of
terms.
All in all, in the fourteenth century supposition theory
is widely applied to a variety of topics; in fact, it becomes
an over-arching methodological tool. Ockham, for exam-
ple, makes extensive use of it for theological as well as
physical analyses. In effect, a signiﬁcant application of
supposition theory in the fourteenth century is to the
issues surrounding the dogma of the Trinity (see the
entry on Trinitarian Logic in this volume). Moreover,
the theory continues to develop well into the ﬁfteenth
and sixteenth century. (The interested reader is urged to
consult the secondary literature on these developments, in
particular the work of E.J. Ashworth.)
Conclusion
For reasons of space, this brief overview has touched upon
only some of the important aspects in the development of
supposition theory only. However, it seems that two gen-
eral issues must still be addressed, concerning the very gist
and purpose of the theory: (1) What is to determine the
kind(s) of supposition that a term has in a given proposi-
tion? (2) Is there always only one (correct) kind of suppo-
sition for a term in a given propositional context? These
are difﬁcult questions with no single answer; different
authors seem to have held different views.
Concerning (1), most authors seem to hold that the
propositional context is indeed the main determining
element, as suggested by the maxim ‘‘subjects are such as
the predicates permit.’’ Some authors (such as Paul of
1234 S
Supposition Theory

Venice, at the end of the fourteenth century; see his Logica
parva, p 27), however, maintain that the desired truth of
the proposition, or in any case its intended meaning, is
what governs the kinds of supposition allowed for its
terms. Others, such as Buridan, seem to think that ulti-
mately the agreed-upon interpretation of a statement by
the speakers involved in the situation is what really deter-
mines the supposition of a term. Yet other authors, in
particular Ockham, present rules for the determination
of the supposition of the terms in a given propositional
context that seem to function almost algorithmically (see
Dutilh Novaes 2008b).
As for the second issue, Ockham (like Burley and
many other fourteenth-century authors) in fact allows
for multiple possibilities of kinds of supposition for
a term in one and the same propositional context,
entailing thus that the context does not always uniquely
determine the supposition of a term. For Ockham, sup-
position theory is an important device for the generation
of the (often multiple) possible readings of propositions
(corresponding to the different kinds of supposition
permitted by a given propositional context), what in the
fourteenth century is known as ‘‘distinguishing’’ proposi-
tions. But not all authors insist on the possibility of
generating the multiple readings of propositions by
means of supposition theory: in earlier developments,
the underlying idea seems to be that there should be a
unique correct kind of supposition for a term in a given
propositional context. However, in both cases supposition
theory is essentially a theory for semantic analysis and
interpretation.
See also: ▶Gilbert of Poitiers ▶John Buridan ▶Lambert
of Lagny ▶Logic ▶Marsilius of Inghen ▶Mental Lan-
guage ▶Modal Theories and Modal Logic ▶Modistae
▶Paul of Venice ▶Peter Helias ▶Peter of Spain
▶Quantiﬁcation ▶Roger Bacon ▶Terms, Properties of
▶Trinitarian Logic ▶Truth, Theories of ▶Walter Burley
▶William of Ockham ▶William of Sherwood
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Latin
The anonymous texts edited in De Rijk (1962/1967)
Bacon Roger (1986/1987) Summulae dialectics, ed. de Libera A.
Les Summulae dialectics de Roger Bacon. Archives d’Histoire
Doctrinale et Litteraire du Moyen Age 53:139–289 (1986); 54:171–
278 (1987)
Buridan John (1998) Summulae de suppositionibus, ed. van der Lecq R.
Ingenium, Nijmegen
Burley Walter (1955) De puritate artis logicae Tractatus Longior, ed.
Boehner P. Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
Helias Peter (1993) Summa super Priscianum, 2 vols, ed. Reilly L.
Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto
Lambert of Auxerre (Lagny) (1971) Logica (Summa Lamberti), ed.
Alessio F. La nuova Italia Editrice, Florence
Marsilius of Inghen (1983) Treatises on the properties of terms, a
ﬁrst
critical
edition
of
the
Suppositiones,
Ampliationes,
Appellationes, Restrictiones and Alienationes, ed. Bos EP. Reidel,
Dordrecht
Paul of Venice (2002) Logica parva: ﬁrst critical edition from the manu-
scripts with introduction and commentary, ed. and trans. Perreiah
AR. Brill, Leiden
Peter of Spain (1972) Tractatus, ed. De Rijk LM. Van Gorcum, Assen
William of Ockham (1974) Opera philosophica I, ed. Boehner Ph et al.
Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
William of Sherwood (1995) Einfu¨hrung in die Logik, ed. and German
trans. Brands H, Kann C. Felix Meiner, Hamburg
English
Buridan John (2001) Summulae de Dialectica, trans. Klima G. Yale
University Press, New Haven
Burley Walter (2000) On the purity of the art of logic, trans. Spade PV.
Yale University Press, New Haven
Lambert of Auxerre (Lagny) (1988) Properties of terms. In: Cambridge
translations of medieval philosophical texts, trans. Kretzmann N,
Stump E. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 102–162
Marsilius of Inghen (1983) Treatises on the properties of terms, a ﬁrst
critical edition of the Suppositiones, Ampliationes, Appellationes,
Restrictiones and Alienationes, ed. Bos EP. Reidel, Dordrecht
Peter of Spain (1945) The Summulae logicales of Peter of Spain, ed. and
trans. Mullally JP. University of Notre Dame Press, South Bend
William of Ockham (1998) Summa Logicae Part I, trans. Loux M. St.
Augustine’s Press, South Bend
William of Sherwood (1966) Introduction to logic, trans. Kretzmann N.
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis
Secondary Sources
Ashworth EJ (1974) Language and logic in the post-medieval period.
Reidel, Dordrecht
Brown S (1972) Walter Burleigh’s treatise De suppositionibus and its
inﬂuence on William of Ockham. Francisc Stud 32:15–64
Brown S (1993) Medieval supposition theory in its theological context.
Mediev Philos Theol 3:121–157
De Libera A (1982) The Oxford and Paris traditions in logic. In:
Kretzmann N, Kenny A, Pinborg J (eds) The Cambridge history of
later medieval philosophy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
pp 147–187
De Rijk LM (1962/1967) Logica modernorum. Van Gorcum, Assen
De Rijk LM (1982) The origins of the theory of properties of terms. In:
Kretzmann N, Kenny A, Pinborg J (eds) The Cambridge history of
later medieval philosophy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
pp 161–173
Dutilh
Novaes
C
(2007)
Formalizing
medieval
logical
theories.
Suppositio, Consequentiae and Obligationes. Springer, Berlin
Dutilh Novaes C (2008a) 14th century logic after Ockham. In: Gabbay D,
Woods J (eds) The handbook of the history of logic, vol 2. Elsevier,
Amsterdam, pp 433–504
Dutilh Novaes C (2008b) An intensional interpretation of Ockham’s
theory of supposition. J Hist Philos 46(3):365–393
Ebbesen S (1981) Early supposition theory (12th–13th century). Histoire,
E´piste´mologie, Langage 3/1:35–48
Ebbesen S (1985) OXYNAT: a theory about the origins of British logic. In:
Osmund P, Lewry OP (ed) The rise of British logic. Papers in
Supposition Theory S
1235
S

mediaeval studies, vol 7. Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies,
Toronto, pp 1–17
Kneepkens CH (1987) Suppositio and supponere in 12th century gram-
mar. In: Jolivet J, de Libera A (eds) Gilbert de Poitiers et ses
contemporains.
Aux
origines
de
la
‘‘Logica
modernorum.’’
Bibliopolis, Naples, pp 325–351
Panaccio C (1999) Semantics and mental language. In: Spade PV (ed) The
Cambridge companion to Ockham. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp 53–75
Read S (2006) Medieval theories: properties of terms. In: Zalta E (ed)
Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy. http://www.science.uva.nl/
seop/entries/medieval-terms/
Rosier-Catach I (2003) La suppositio materialis et la question de
l’autonymie au Moyen Age. In: Authier-Revuz J, Doury M, Reboul-
Toure´ S (eds) Parler des mots, Le fait autonymique en discours.
Presses de la Sorbonne nouvelle, Paris, pp 21–55
Spade PV (1980) Synonymy and equivocation in Ockham’s mental lan-
guage. J Hist Philos 18:9–22
Spade PV (1996) Thoughts, words and things. http://www.pvspade.com
Valente L (forthcoming) Supposition theory and Porretan theology. In:
Bos EP (ed) Proceedings of the 17th European symposium on medi-
eval logic and semantics
For an extensive bibliography on supposition theory, see http://www.
formalontology.it/supposition.htm
Swineshead, Richard
▶Richard Swineshead
Syllogism, Theories of
HENRIK LAGERLUND
Department of Philosophy
The University of Western Ontario
London, ON
Canada
Abstract
Aristotle’s theory of the syllogism is one of the most
inﬂuential theories ever developed. The theory of the
syllogism for assertoric sentences was a remarkable
achievement by Aristotle and it was virtually complete
already from the beginning. Medieval logicians could gen-
erally not add much to it. Small changes were made and it
was systematized in different ways. It was not until John
Buridan in the mid-fourteenth century reworked logic in
general and placed the theory in a context of a wider logic
of consequences that the picture of syllogistics also
changed. The theory of the modal syllogism was at
a completely different stage of completion in the Prior
Analytics, and in the hands of the medievals it went
through a remarkable development.
In the Prior Analytics Aristotle presents the ﬁrst logical
system, that is, the theory of the syllogism. A syllogism is
a deduction consisting of three sentences – two premises
and a conclusion. Syllogistic sentences are categorical
sentences involving a predicate and a subject connected
by a copula (verb) and they are divided into four different
classes, namely universal afﬁrmative (A), particular afﬁr-
mative (I), universal negative (E), and particular negative
(O) sentences. Aristotle writes them as follows:
A – ‘‘A belongs to all B’’ (AaB).
E – ‘‘A does not belong to any B’’ (AeB).
I – ‘‘A belongs to some B’’ (AiB).
O – ‘‘A does not belong to some B’’ (AoB).
The subject and predicate in the categorical sentences used
in a syllogism are called terms (horoi) by Aristotle. There
are three terms in a syllogism, a major, a minor, and
a middle term. The major and the minor terms are called
the extremes (akra), respectively major extreme (meizon
akron) and minor extreme (elatton akron), and they are
the predicate and the subject of the conclusion. The mid-
dle (meson) term is what joins the two premises. These
three terms can be combined in different ways to form
three ﬁgures (skheˆmata). Aristotle presents the following
three in the Prior Analytics (A is the major, B the middle,
and C the minor term):
When the four categorical sentences are placed into
these three ﬁgures Aristotle ends up with the following 14
valid moods (in parenthesis are the medieval mnemonic
names for the valid moods).
A fourth ﬁgure was discussed in ancient times as well as
during the Middle Ages. In the Aristotelian syllogistic it
had the following form:
By treating this ﬁgure we derive additional valid moods,
which are all mentioned by Aristotle in different parts of the
Syllogism, Theories of. Table 1 The three Aristotelian figures
of the syllogisms
I
II
III
A – B
B – A
A – B
B – C
B – C
C – B
A – C
A – C
A – C
1236 S
Swineshead, Richard

Prior Analytics (see, for example, An. Pr. I.7, 29a19–29).
The fourth ﬁgure moods are the following.
If one carries out a simple calculation based on the
four categorical sentences and the four ﬁgures, we ﬁnd
that there are 256 possible combinations of sentences and
of these 24 have traditionally been thought to be valid. To
the 19 already mentioned, two subalternate moods in the
ﬁrst ﬁgure (Barbari and Celaront), two subalternate
moods in the second ﬁgure (Camestrop and Cesaro),
and
one
subalternate
mood
in
the
fourth
ﬁgure
(Camenop) have to be added.
The difference between the ﬁrst ﬁgure and the other
ﬁgures is that the syllogisms in the ﬁrst ﬁgure are complete
syllogisms, while the syllogisms in the other two ﬁgures are
incomplete. This distinction is important in Aristotle’s
theory, since a complete syllogism is an immediately obvi-
ous syllogism and an incomplete syllogism requires proof.
This gives the ﬁrst ﬁgure an axiomatic character, while the
proofs of the incomplete syllogisms are arrived at foremost
through reduction to the complete syllogisms.
The reductions of the incomplete syllogisms were
made by Aristotle through conversion rules. He states
the following conversion rules in An. Pr. I.2, 25a1–26:
(1) AaB ) BiA,
(2) AiB , BiA,
(3) AeB , BeA.
(1) was called an accidental (per accidens) conversion, and
(2) and (3) were called simple (simpliciter) conversions
during the Middle Ages. Particular negative sentences do
not convert at all, according to Aristotle.
In Chapters 3 and 8–22 of Book I of the Prior Analytics,
Aristotle extends his theory to include syllogisms involv-
ing modally qualiﬁed categorical sentences. An Aristote-
lian modal syllogism is a syllogism that has at least one
premise modalized, that is, which in addition to the stan-
dard terms contains the word necessity, possibility, or
contingency. Aristotle’s terminology is not entirely clear,
however. He uses necessity and possibility, but he works
with two notions of possibility. In his preferred sense,
which is foremost used in the Prior Analytics, possibility
is deﬁned as that which is not necessary and not impossi-
ble. This sense of possibility was called contingency in the
Middle Ages. In another sense of possibility, which
Aristotle used foremost in De interpretatione, possibility
is placed on an equal footing with that which is not
impossible. The ﬁrst concept of possibility, which
I henceforth will call contingency, is used in the modal
syllogistic. The second concept of possibility is not treated
systematically in the Prior Analytics.
Syllogism, Theories of. Table 3 The fourth figure
IV
B – A
C – B
A – C
Syllogism, Theories of. Table 4 The fourth figure with
names
Fourth figure:
BaA, CaB; therefore, AiC
(Bramantip)
BaA, CeB; therefore, AeC
(Camenes)
BiA, CaB; therefore, AiC
(Dimaris)
BeA, CaB; therefore, AoC
(Fesapo)
BeA, CiB; therefore, AoC
(Fresison)
Syllogism, Theories of. Table 5 The four figures according to
Boethius
I
II
III
IV
B – A
A – B
B – A
A – B
C – B
C – B
B – C
B – C
C – A
C – A
C – A
C – A
Syllogism, Theories of. Table 2 The three figures with
names
First figure
AaB, BaC; therefore, AaC
(Barbara)
AeB, BaC; therefore, AeC
(Celarent)
AaB, BiC; therefore, AiC
(Darii)
AeB, BiC; therefore, AoC
(Ferio)
Second figure
BaA, BeC; therefore, AeC
(Camestres)
BeA, BaC; therefore, AeC
(Cesare)
BeA, BiC; therefore, AoC
(Festino)
BaA, BoC; therefore, AoC
(Baroco)
Third figure
AaB, CaB; therefore, AiC
(Darapti)
AeB, CaB; therefore, AoC
(Felapton)
AiB, CaB; therefore, AiC
(Disamis)
AaB, CiB; therefore, AiC
(Datisi)
AoB, CaB; therefore, AoC
(Bocardo)
AeB, CiB; therefore, AoC
(Ferison)
Syllogism, Theories of S
1237
S

Logic in the Middle Ages is generally thought to
have started with Boethius (c. 475–526). He wrote quite
extensively on the theory of the syllogism. He managed to
produce a translation of the Prior Analytics, which was
not well known, however, until the twelfth century, but
he wrote two textbooks on the categorical syllogism.
One is known as On the Categorical Syllogism (De
syllogismo categorico) and the other has been given the
title Introduction to Categorical Syllogisms (Introductio ad
syllogismos categoricos). He also wrote an interesting
book called On Hypothetical Syllogisms (De hypotheticis
syllogismis).
Boethius makes no substantial contribution to the
theory of the syllogism. He was foremost an important
transmitter of the theory to later logicians and his works
contain a clear presentation of the Aristotelian theory. The
presentation is, however, in one important aspect different
from Aristotle’s. In Boethius works the categorical
sentences involves ‘‘is’’ (est) and not ‘‘belongs’’ as
Aristotle’s. The four sentences thus become
A – ‘‘Every B is A.’’
I – ‘‘Some B is A.’’
E – ‘‘No B is A.’’
O – ‘‘Some B is not A.’’
In this way it is more obvious that they are subject pred-
icate sentences and moreover that the syllogisms are deduc-
tions and not conditional sentences. A consequence of this
is that the four ﬁgures will look different as well, namely
Systematically, Boethius change makes no difference
whatsoever and all medieval logicians writing after him
universally adopted it, but it makes the evident character
of the ﬁrst-ﬁgure syllogisms less apparent.
The ﬁrst known commentary on the Prior Analytics in
the Latin West can be found in an anonymous work. The
author has been called Anonymous Aurelianensis III and
the work dated to c. 1160–1180. The theory of assertoric
syllogism was repeated and summarized in almost all logic
works from the early thirteenth century, but there are no
major commentaries until the 1240s when Robert
Kilwardby (d. 1279) writes his Exposition on the Books of
the Prior Analytics (In libros Priorum analyticorum
expositio).
Kilwardby has very little to add to the theory of
assertoric syllogism, but his interpretation of the modal
syllogistic is quite remarkable and highly interesting.
It was also very inﬂuential in the thirteenth century;
for example, Albert the Great, Simon of Faversham, and
Radulphus Brito all follow him in their interpretations,
which means that all the major commentators of the Prior
Analytics in the thirteenth century followed Kilwardby.
He assumes from the beginning that Aristotle’s theory
is correct and makes it his project to ﬁnd the interpreta-
tion that shows this. He begins by considering a counter-
example
to
the
accidental
conversion
of
necessity
sentences, namely
(4) ‘‘Every literate being is necessarily a human being.’’
According to the conversion rules accepted by Kilwardby
(4) should be converted to
(5) ‘‘Some human being is necessarily literate,’’
(4) is obviously true while (5) is false.
Kilwardby preferred solution to the above counter-
examples is based on a distinction between sentences
that are necessary per se and those that are necessary per
accidens. He writes
"
When it is said: ‘Every literate being is necessarily a human
being’, this subject is not something which can be said per
se of this predicate, but since ‘literate being’ is not sepa-
rated from that which belongs to a human being itself, the
proposition is conceded to be necessary, but when
a proposition is necessary in this way it is necessary per
accidens. Therefore, when Aristotle says that necessity
propositions are convertible, he means that only the prop-
ositions that are necessary per se are convertible.
The idea is here that since ‘‘human being’’ is not predi-
cated per se of its subject ‘‘literate being,’’ the sentence
(4) is not a per se necessity sentence and, therefore, not
convertible. (4) is a necessity sentence, not of the per se
type, but only of the per accidens type, since it is necessarily
true only in the sense that being a human being and
being literate are not separable. Kilwardby implies that
the relation between subject and predicate term must
be of a special kind if a sentence is to be called necessary
per se. In (4), ‘‘literate being’’ and ‘‘human being’’ do not
have the close per se relation Kilwardby demands of
a convertible sentence.
Kilwardby thinks that sentences per se should be
understood in the way Aristotle explains them in An.
Post. I.4–6. Aristotle discusses four different notions of
per se (kath’ hauto) predication, but Kilwardby seems
only to have the two ﬁrst in mind when referring to per
se. Aristotle says that the ﬁrst type of per se predication (per
se primo modo) occurs when the deﬁnition of the subject
includes the predicate. The second type of per se predica-
tion (per se secundo modo) occurs when the deﬁnition of
the predicate includes the subject. The best characteriza-
tion of the ﬁrst relation is the genus-species model, that is,
that the deﬁnition of a species includes its genus. The
second relation is often characterized by a proprium
1238 S
Syllogism, Theories of

(property), since a proprium is included in the deﬁnition
of a subject; for example, in ‘‘a human being is able to
laugh.’’ The term ‘‘human being’’ is included in the deﬁ-
nition of the predicate ‘‘being able to laugh.’’ A sentence is
per se necessary if it includes any of these two predications,
according to Kilwardby. Necessity per accidens belongs to
all other necessity sentences that do not have the intrinsic
relation between subject and predicate.
Around the time William of Ockham (c. 1287–1347)
wrote Summary of Logic (Summa logicae) medieval logic
was starting to change. More emphasis was put on the
theory of consequence. Such a theory was developed by
Abelard as part of his discussion of the topical inferences
and the hypothetical syllogism. During the thirteenth cen-
tury it was developed as part of the topics, but in the
fourteenth century there started appearing works solely
on consequences. The most famous one is perhaps John
Buridan’s Treaties on the Consequences (Tractatus de
consequentiis), but we also ﬁnd earlier authors like Walter
Burley that stress consequences over syllogisms. Burley
probably wrote On the Purity of the Art of Logic (Puritate
de arte logicae) as an answer to Ockham’s famous book.
For Ockham, however, the most important formal infer-
ences are still syllogisms, and he devotes most of Book III
of the Summa to it.
John Buridan (c. 1300–1358) is perhaps the foremost
logician of the Middle Ages and in his hands the theory of
the syllogism is reworked and developed well beyond
anything seen before in the history of logic. The two
foremost logical works of Buridan are the Treaties on
Consequence and the Summulae de dialectica.
In the Treatise, he bases his theory of the syllogism on
his philosophical semantics and treats the syllogistic infer-
ence as a special case of a much wider theory of conse-
quences. As his immediate predecessors he is almost
uninterested in the assertoric syllogistic and moves quickly
to temporal, oblique, variation, and modal syllogisms, but
this does not hinder him from making some original
contributions to the theory.
A syllogism is a formal consequence, according to
Buridan. The theory of syllogism is hence only a branch
of the theory of formal consequence. It is distinguished by
having a conjunctive antecedent and a single sentence as
consequent, and furthermore by having involving three
terms. This last condition is not a necessary one since
Buridan also treats syllogisms involving more than three
terms.
Buridan threats all the three famous ﬁgures and he
notes that the conclusion can be either direct or indirect.
In an indirect conclusion the minor term is predicated of
the major instead of the other way around. Since the
premises are part of a conjunction as the antecedent of
a consequent, they can easily be transposed, which means
that he can deﬁne the fourth ﬁgure as a ﬁrst ﬁgure with
transposed premises and an indirect conclusion. Hence,
he does not need to discuss it independently of the ﬁrst
ﬁgure.
A formal consequence holds for Buridan by the prin-
ciple of uniform substitution, that is, such a consequence
is valid for any uniform substitution of its categorematic
terms. A syllogism is a special kind of formal consequence
since it requires for its validity that terms be conjoined
across sentences. How the principle of uniform substitu-
tion works in such a case is a bit tricky and it requires him
to bring his general semantics and the notions of distribu-
tion into the theory of the syllogism. To spell out the
relation of the terms and hence the validity of ﬁrst ﬁgure
syllogisms he reformulates the traditional dictum de omni et
nullo rules. They can be formulated in the following way:
(7) Any two terms, which are called the same as a third
by reason of the same thing for which that third term
supposits, not collectively, are correctly called the
same as each other.
(8) Any two terms, of which one is called the same as
some third term of which the other is called not the
same by reason of the same thing for which that
third term supposits, are correctly called not the
same as each other.
One could say a lot about these rules, but the term that
carries most of the weight here is of course ‘‘supposits.’’
Supposition is a theory of reference and it is terms
coreferentiality in the different sentences in a syllogism
that is going to be the decisive thing in determining whether
the principle of uniform substitution is satisﬁed or not. It is
at this point he brings in his theory of distribution.
The rules governing distribution of terms in a sentence
is given as part of his account of common personal sup-
position. A term is distributed if it in a sentence is taken to
refer to all it signiﬁes – the most obvious example is if the
term is in the scope of a universal quantiﬁer. He gives ﬁve
rules for when a term is distributed, but in short one can
say that universals distribute subjects, negatives distribute
predicates, and no other terms are distributed. If we stay
within the square of opposition, then we get that universal
afﬁrmative sentences have the subject term distributed,
universal negative have both terms distributed, particular
afﬁrmative have neither term distributed, and particular
negative have only the predicate term distributed.
Given the theory of distribution, he turns his attention
to the syllogisms, and we see now that in order for
a combination of premises to be acceptable the middle
Syllogism, Theories of S
1239
S

terms need to be distributed, otherwise we will not have
a formally acceptable consequence. Buridan approaches it
combinatorially. Given four different sentences and two
places they can be in, we get 16 possible combinations.
Some of these can, based on the rules for distribution, be
ruled out immediately. A combination with only negative
premises will not work at all; hence, EE, EO, OE, and OO
must be rejected. II has both middle terms undistributed
and can thus be rejected. In the ﬁrst ﬁgure IA, OA, and OI
have a middle term undistributed. The other eight are
accepted. In the second ﬁgure we see that AA, AI, and IA
must be rejected because of an undistributed middle term.
The other eight are accepted. In the third ﬁgure IO and OI
have an undistributed middle but the remaining nine
combinations are accepted.
There are some surprises in the assertoric syllogistics
in Buridan’s presentation. In the second ﬁgure he accepts
indirect
conclusions
for
IEO
(Tifesno)
and
OAO
(Robaco), and in the third ﬁgure indirect conclusions for
AOO (Carbodo), AEO (Lapfeton), and IEO (Rifeson). He
also accepts syllogisms to what he calls ‘‘uncommon idiom
for negatives,’’ that is, when the predicate term precedes
the negation. This adds another three in the ﬁrst ﬁgure and
two in the second. If we add this up and include all the
indirect conclusions, we get 33 valid moods as opposed to
19 in the Aristotelian syllogistic. If we then add the sup-
plementary subalternate (weakened) conclusions we get in
the traditional 24 valid moods, but in Buridan’s systema-
tization of the theory we get 38.
A theory that all thought were perfect and could not be
developed further is in the hand of Buridan changed quite
radically. As a matter of fact Buridan is quite right in
accepting these additional 14 moods. They are valid.
After having done all this in just a few pages – as men-
tioned Buridan is rather uninterested in the assertoric
syllogistics – he turns to the temporal, oblique, and
modal syllogistics. Of these, it is the modal syllogistics he
spends the most time on.
A temporal syllogism is made up of sentences involv-
ing temporal ampliation of the copula. In such a sentence,
the supposition of the subject term is extended to include
past and future things as well as present. The syllogistics
for sentences involving oblique terms is important for
Buridan’s general theory of consequence, since it is here
that we ﬁnd the rules governing the behavior of oblique
terms in distributive contexts. His investigation is extraor-
dinarily detailed and maintains a high level of rigor, which
is almost unbelievable for someone not having the sym-
bolic tools of contemporary logic.
The syllogistics for composite modal sentences is
straightforward and Buridan uses only a couple of pages
in the Treatise on Consequences to outline its basic struc-
ture. The theory of the syllogism for divided modal
sentences is given a much more thorough treatment. For
Buridan, a modal copula always ampliates its subject term
to stand for not only present, past, and future beings but
also possible beings unless the supposition of the subject
term is explicitly restricted to only actual beings. Based on
this he can outline an exhaustive account of the logical
relations between quantiﬁed divided modal sentences,
which he presents in the octagon of opposition. Slightly
simpliﬁed and assuming that the complete octagon can be
formed by some trivial equivalences holding between the
modalities it can be presented in the Figure 1.
Together with the octagon he uses some additional
consequences to prove the valid syllogisms.
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Boethius ▶Consequence,
Theories of ▶John Buridan ▶Logic ▶Modal Theory and
Modal Logic ▶Radulphus Brito ▶Richard Campsall
▶Robert Kilwardby ▶Simon of Faversham ▶Walter
Burley ▶William of Ockham
( Represents contradiction) 
( Represents contrareity and subcontrareity) 
( Represents subalternation) 
Every B is necessary A 
Every B is possibly A
Some B is necessarily A
Some B is possibly A
Every B is necessarily not A
Every B is possibly not A
Some B is necessarily not A 
Some B is possibly not A 
Syllogism, Theories of. Fig. 1 John Buridan’s octagon of opposition for model propositions.
1240 S
Syllogism, Theories of

Bibliography
Primary Sources
Abelard Peter (1956) Dialectica, ed. de Rijk LM, Wijsgerige teksten en
studies 1. Van Gorcum, Assen
Albert the Great (1890) Liber I Priorum analyticorum, ed. Borgnet A,
Opera omnia, vol I. Vive`s, Paris
Aristotle (1962) Analytica priora, in Aristoteles Latinus III.1–4, ed.
Minio-Paluello L. Descle´e de Brouwer, Bruges-Paris
Buridan John (1976) Tractatus de consequentiis, ed. Hubien H, Philo-
sophes me´die´vaux 16. Publications Universitaires, Louvain
Buridan John (2000) Summulae de dialectica, an annotated translation
with a philosophical introduction by Gyula Klima. Yale University
Press, New Haven
Kilwardby Robert (1516) In libros Priorum analyticorum expositio,
printed under the name Aegidius Romanus. Venice (repr. Frankfurt
1968)
Migne Jacques Paul (1847) Manlii Severini Boetii opera omnia. Patrologia
Latina 64. Migne, Paris
Minio-Paluello
Lorenzo (1958)
Twelfth
century
logic: texts
and
studies. II Abaelardiana inedita. Edizioni di storia letteratura,
Rome
Richard of Campsall (1968) The works of Richard of Campsall I:
Questiones super librum Priorum analeticorum, ed. Synan EA.
Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto
Thomsen Tho¨rnqvist Christina (2001) Anicii Manlii Severini Boethii De
Syllogismo categorico: critical edition. PhD dissertation, University
of Gothenburg
Trutfetter Jodocus (1501) Summulae totius logicae, quod opus maius
appelitare libuitur. Erfurt
William of Ockham (1974) Summa logicae, ed. Boehner Ph, Ga´l G,
Brown S (OP 1). Franciscan Institute of St. Bonaventure University,
St. Bonaventure
Secondary Sources
Becker A (1933/1968) Die aristotelische Theorie der Mo¨glichkeits-
schlu¨sse. Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, Darmstadt
Bochenski I (1956) Formale Logik. Verlag Karl Alber, Freiburg/Mu¨nchen
Coombs JS (1990) The truth and falsity of modal propositions in Renais-
sance nominalism. PhD dissertation, University of Texas, Austin
Corcoran J (1974) Aristotle’s natural deduction system. In: Corcoran J (ed)
Ancient logic and its modern interpretations. Reidel, Dordrecht
Ebbesen S (1981) Analyzing Syllogisms or anonymous Aurelianensis III:
the (presumably) earliest extant Latin commentary on the prior
analytics, and its Greek model. Cahiers de l’Institut du Moyen-Aˆ ge
Grec et Latin 37:1–20
Freddoso
AJ
(1980)
Ockham’s
theory
of
truth
conditions.
In:
Freddoso AJ, Schuurman H (trans) Ockham’s theory of propositions:
part II of the Summa Logicae. Notre Dame University Press, Notre
Dame, IN
Green-Pedersen NJ (1984) The tradition of the topics in the Middle Ages.
Philosophia, Mu¨nchen
Hughes GE (1989) The modal logic of John Buridan. In: Corsi G,
Mangione C, Mugnai M (eds) Atti del Convegno Internazionale di
Storia della Logica. Le Teorie della Modalita`. CLUEB, Bologna
Karger E (1980) Would Ockham have shaved Wyman’s beard. Francisc
Stud 40:244–264
King P (1985) Jean Buridan’s logic. The treatise on supposition. The
treatise on consequences, translation with introduction and notes.
Synthese Historical Library 27. Reidel, Dordrecht
Knuuttila S (1993) Modalities in medieval philosophy. Routledge,
London/New York
Knuuttila S (1996) Early English discussions of Aristotle’s modal syllogis-
tic. In: Marenbon J (ed) Aristotle in Britain during the Middle Ages.
Brepols, Belgium
Lagerlund H (2000) Modal syllogistics in the Middle Ages. Brill, Leiden
Lukasiewicz J (1957) Aristotle’s syllogistic from the standpoint of modern
formal logic, 2nd enlarged edn. Clarendon, Oxford
Patzig G (1968) Aristotle’s theory of the syllogisms. Reidel, Dordrecht
Rescher N (1974) A new approach to Aristotle’s Apodeictic Syllogisms. In:
Rescher N, Studies in modality. American Philosophical Quarterly
Monograph Series, No. 8. Blackwell, Oxford
Roncaglia G (1996) Palaestra rationis. Discussioni su natura della copula
e modalita` nella ﬁlosoﬁa ‘scolastica’ tedesca del XVII secolo. Leo S.
Olschki Editore, Florence
Smith R (1989) Aristotle’s prior analytics, translated with introduction,
notes and commentary. Hackett, Indianapolis
Smith R (1995) Logic. In: Barnes J (ed) The Cambridge companion to
Aristotle. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 27–65
Thom P (2005) Medieval modal systems. Ashgate, Aldershot
Syncategoremata
JOKE SPRUYT
Philosophy, Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences
Maastricht University
Maastricht
The Netherlands
Abstract
The distinction between categorematic and syncategore-
matic words (syncategoremata) can be traced to two main
sources, viz., the grammarian Priscian (sixth century), and
the famous author (commentator and translator of
Aristotle’s works) Boethius (c. 480–526). With the increas-
ing intertwinement of grammar and logic from the
eleventh century and the emergence of treatises on logic
in the twelfth century onward, the syncategoremata grad-
ually became a subject of interest in their own right. The
development of theories on syncategoremata is closely
connected with the emergence of theories on the proper-
ties of terms, particularly theories of supposition. The
most important factor leading to the development of
these related areas of study is the medievals’ keen interest
in the interpretation of linguistic expressions within the
context of the propositions they occur in, a method of
analysis that has become known as the contextual
approach (de Rijk 1962–1967).
Generally speaking, the class of words labelled
syncategoremata included expressions that, more than
Syncategoremata S
1241
S

their categorematic counterparts, require a context of
expressions in order to be meaningful. Nouns and verbs,
such as ‘‘man’’ and ‘‘to run,’’ were considered as having
a more deﬁnitive meaning than expressions like, ‘‘every’’
or ‘‘not.’’ In the early days of the syncategoremata-studies,
the criteria for distinguishing categorematic from syncat-
egorematic words were not entirely clear; authors used
both a syntactic and semantic criterion to separate the
two classes from each other. The different ways of describ-
ing the two classes of words sometimes led to different lists
of syncategoremata (Braakhuis 1979).
Throughout the Middle Ages, logicians developed
their own views about the precise characteristics of
syncategoremata, including their identity, nature, and
(linguistic and logical) function(s). The late twelfth and
entire thirteenth centuries produced separate treatises on
syncategorematic words, and later on the topics and
analyses featuring in them were incorporated into
works of a wider range. The medievals’ ideas on
syncategoremata are not only important for understanding
their accounts on language and logic, but also shed light
on their views in other areas of research (Braakhuis 1979;
Kretzmann 1982).
Historical Development of the Concept
The use of syncategorema as a technical term derives
from a well-known passage in Priscian’s Institutiones
grammaticae, in which he lists the parts of speech (partes
orationis). In this passage, Priscian refers to the ‘‘dialecti-
cians’’ (most probably the Peripatetici), who distinguish
between two parts of speech: the ﬁrst kind include nouns
and verbs, such that when they alone are combined
in a proposition they make up a complete statement;
the second kind are called syncategoremata, that is,
consignifying, i.e., having a particular meaning in combi-
nation with categorematic words.
While we do not ﬁnd the expression syncategorema as
such in his works, Boethius does have clear views about
the notion of consigniﬁcare. He considers nouns and verbs
(including adverbs, participles, pronouns, and interjec-
tions) as the only parts of speech; conjunctives and prep-
ositions are not parts of speech, because they either have
no signiﬁcation of their own or none at all, except when
they are used in combination with the ones that do. This
idea ﬁts in with his view that only nouns and verbs can
function as the subject or predicate of a proposition; the
copula est (is) and non est (is not), the expressions omnis
(every), nullus (no), and aliquis (some) (i.e., the signa
quantitatis, expressions we now know as quantiﬁers) do
not, but merely indicate the quality and quantity respec-
tively of the propositions they occur in, e.g., omnis homo
est animal. The semantic function of these signs of quality
and quantity is to consignify.
The syncategoremata became a distinct topic of interest
from about the middle of the eleventh century, when
logic ﬁrst entered the domain of grammar and the two
ﬁelds became increasingly intertwined. Grammarians
commenting on Priscian’s works were particularly inter-
ested in providing explanations for the division into dif-
ferent parts of speech, and both grammarians and
logicians attempted to deal with the correct way of
interpreting linguistic expressions. The logicians’ concern
with the syncategoremata is to be seen in the context of
the logica modernorum, which emerged from the second
half of the twelfth century. From then on, the study of
syncategorematic words became part of the standard
literature on logic. Syncategoremata were dealt with in
Syncategoremata-treatises proper from about the last
quarter of the twelfth century onward until the ﬁnal quar-
ter of the thirteenth century. They were also studied in
more general tracts on logic, particularly devoted to dis-
cussions on sophismata and/or fallacies, in which all kinds
of logical and grammatical distinctions were introduced.
Throughout this time, the medievals gradually came to
form their own ideas about the distinguishing features, the
nature and function of syncategorematic words.
Several works on grammar, such as the Ars disserendi
by Adam of Petit Pont (1132), the Glosses on Priscian by
William of Conches (c. 1080–1154) and the Summa super
Priscianum by Peter Helias (taught in Paris c. 1140), pay
attention to the notion of consigniﬁcare. While Adam
appears to conﬁne the notion of consigniﬁcatio to the
semantic function of prepositions and conjunctives, his
account offers evidence that he also uses the expression in
a broader sense for words that acquire a more determinate
meaning within a particular context. William’s treatise
explicitly distinguishes several uses of the expression
consigniﬁcare, viz., as equivalent to ‘‘to secondarily signify’’
(secundario
signiﬁcare),
as
in,
‘‘a verb
consigniﬁes
time’’ (verbum consigniﬁcat tempus) to denominate
(denominare), as in, ‘‘the predicate consigniﬁes the sub-
ject’’ (predicatum consigniﬁcat subiectum), and as used for
that which by itself signiﬁes nothing, but only when it is
combined with some other meaningful expression. It is in
this
latter
way
that
conjunctives
and
prepositions
consignify. He considers the signa quantitatis a separate
group of nominal expression, alongside expressions that
signify a substance (such as ‘‘Socrates’’ and ‘‘man’’), those
that signify things that inhere in a substance (such as
‘‘whiteness’’ and ‘‘blackness’’), and the ones that signify
ﬁctitious entities (such as ‘‘goat-stag’’ and ‘‘chimera’’);
they do not signify a substance or quality, but modes of
1242 S
Syncategoremata

speaking about things (modus loquendi de rebus). Peter
Helias also devotes considerable attention to Priscian’s
division of parts of speech. In his view prepositions and
conjunctives are indeed classes of words, and have the
same kind of semantic function as prepositions, conjunc-
tives, adverbs, and pronouns do, viz., to consignify
(Braakhuis 1979).
In the Dialectica, the Logica ingredientibus and the
Glossae super Perihermeneias, the logician Peter Abelard
(1079–1142) explicitly devotes attention to the semantic
function of prepositions and conjunctives; of these expres-
sions he says that they have no deﬁnitive meaning on their
own but only in combination with other linguistic expres-
sions, or that they have no meaning whatsoever, but only
come to consignify when they are combined with other
expressions. In general, their function is to indicate some
property of that which is signiﬁed by the nouns and verbs
they are conjoined with. The signa quantitatis are counted
among the parts of a proposition (partes propositionis);
they are nominal expressions, but it is difﬁcult to decide
what they signify. Of the expressions est and non est, like si
(if) and et (and), he also says that they do not have
a meaning of their own; they only contribute to the afﬁr-
mative or negative force (vis afﬁrmationis vel negationis) of
an expression, because they produce a composition or
division in the mind. Abelard identiﬁes the basis of these
expressions with the intellect’s way of conceiving that
which is signiﬁed by the subject and predicate of the
proposition at issue. The expressions necessarium (neces-
sary) and possibile (possible) do not have a signiﬁcation of
their own either; their semantic function is comparable
with that of the copula and conjunctives.
In the period after Abelard, the treatment of syncate-
gorematic terms is incorporated in discussions on falla-
cious reasoning. In a number of works dating from the
third quarter of the twelfth century syncategorematic
words are extensively discussed: they are considered
important because they can lead to fallacies and misun-
derstandings. In the Fallacie Parvipontane syncategore-
matic words feature in a section on the fallacy of
equivocation:
the
class
of
words
labelled
as
syncategoremata is identiﬁed with that of indeclinable
expressions. The Ars Emmerana also mentions expressions
like unum (one), tantum (only), solus (alone), and nisi
(unless), which are identiﬁed as words that can easily
produce fallacies. In the Tractatus De univocatione
Monacensis we ﬁnd similar remarks to the effect that
expressions like tantum, solus, and nisi can cause problems
in inferences. The Ars Meliduna considers the signa and
the words solus, tantum and preter as syncategoremata. The
Tractatus Anagnini devotes discussions to distributive
terms, such as omnis, inﬁnite terms, such as non-homo
(not-man), and exclusive terms, such as tantum (only),
nisi (unless), and preter (but), and solus (alone). The focus
is on the congruity and incongruity of propositions.
The Dialectica Monacensis, which was presumably
written somewhere between the end of the twelfth and
the beginning of the thirteenth century, lists three kinds of
equivocation, one of which is connected with the occur-
rence of a syncategorematic word in a proposition: among
such words are exclusive and exceptive words, preposi-
tions and conjunctives (that can cause ambiguity). Fur-
thermore the expressions incipit (begins) and desinit
(ceases) are reckoned among the syncategoremata; so is
est insofar as it involves the composition of subject and
predicate. Although there is evidence suggesting that the
author of the Dialectica Monacensis also wrote a treatise on
syncategoremata, the treatises on which research has been
done all stem from the thirteenth century. Other treatises,
which deal with sophismata (Sophistaria), take grammat-
ical and logical distinctions as their starting point for the
study of syncategoremata.
In
general,
the
thirteenth
century
forms
the
highlight of intensive study of syncategorematic words.
Syncategoremata treatises were written by several authors,
such as Robert (Roger?) Bacon (written around the ﬁrst
quarter of the thirteenth century), Jean le Page (taught in
Paris between 1225 and 1235), Peter of Spain (written
in the second quarter of the thirteenth century), William
of Sherwood (written between 1230 and 1240), Nicolas
of Paris (written between 1240 and 1250), and Henry of
Ghent (written between 1240–1250).
In the fourteenth century all kinds of material
discussed in the syncategoremata treatises ﬁnd their way
into more general works on logic, and works devoted to
sophismata. Some of these sophismata speciﬁcally deal
with physical problems, particularly those connected
with the analysis of motion; examples are found in the
tradition of the De probationes propositionum, inspired by
Richard Billingham (ﬂ. c. 1340). Prominent authors such
as William of Ockham (c. 1287–1347), John Buridan
(c. 1300–1362) and Peter of Ailly (1350–1420) speak
about the distinction between categorematic and syncate-
gorematic expressions in connection with their accounts
of mental language.
Systematic Development of the Concept
Throughout the history of logic and grammar, we gradu-
ally see that the list of words labelled as syncategorematic is
expanded. While initially only conjunctives and preposi-
tions were counted as such, the list ultimately came to
include all the words that do not function as the subject or
Syncategoremata S
1243
S

predicate of a proposition, but nevertheless modify the
expressions they are conjoined with and thus affect the
interpretation of the entire proposition they occur in.
The lists of syncategorematic words continued to dif-
fer, because two distinct criteria (based upon an ambiguity
in the notion of consigniﬁcare and dispositio) were used to
discern categorematic from syncategorematic words. The
more syntactic criterion identiﬁes syncategorematic words
as those that do not function as the subject or a predicate
of a proposition but only modify the relationship between
subject and predicate. The semantic criterion singles
out syncategorematic words by their semantic function,
as consignifying a disposition or circumstance of the
‘‘things’’ (res) indicated by the categorematic expressions
they are conjoined with. The semantic criterion to distin-
guish the syncategoremata is initially the most dominant in
the treatises of Robert (Roger?) Bacon, Nicholas of Paris
and Henry of Ghent, whereas in John le Page’s, Peter of
Spain’s and William of Sherwood’s treatises, the syntactic
criterion prevails. However, even these two distinct
criteria in themselves did not give a sufﬁcient reason for
labelling words as either categorematic or syncategore-
matic. Throughout their treatises, most authors in fact
used both criteria to make the distinction, albeit to
different extents. In treatises of English authors, we also
ﬁnd a distinction between the categorematic and syncate-
gorematic use of certain expressions (for example ‘‘alone’’
(solus) and inﬁnitely many (inﬁnita)) (Braakhuis, 1979).
The words labelled syncategorematic came to include
the following: the verb ‘‘is’’ used as a tertium adiacens (i.e.,
as part of an attribution), the negation ‘‘not,’’ the modal
adverbs ‘‘necessarily’’ and ‘‘contingently,’’ the exclusives
‘‘only’’ and ‘‘alone,’’ the exceptives ‘‘except’’ and ‘‘unless’’
(preter,
preterquam),
the
distributive
signs
‘‘every’’
(omnis), ‘‘whole’’ (totum), ‘‘both’’ (uterque), ‘‘of whatever
kind’’ (qualislibet), the consecutives ‘‘if’’ (si), ‘‘unless’’
(nisi), and ‘‘but that’’ (quin), the copulatives (like
‘‘and’’), the disjunctive ‘‘or’’ (vel, aut) the adverbs
‘‘whether’’ (an) and the verbs ‘‘begins’’ (incipit) and
‘‘ceases’’ (desinit). The Syncategoremata authors were
inclined to say that syncategorematic words do not signify,
but rather carry out what they indicate. In most
syncategoremata treatises from the continent, the negation
‘‘not’’ was marked as the basic principle of all other syn-
categorematic expressions, into which they could all be
analysed. In the fourtheenth-century accounts of mental
language, the focus on the function of syncategorematic
expressions became predominant (Braakhuis 1979).
The emergence of treatises on syncategorematic terms
in the Middle Ages has greatly contributed to the growth
and development of medieval analyses of ambiguities, and
also helped people gain a better understanding of the
distinction between material and formal elements of lan-
guage. However, it was not only language itself the medi-
evals were interested in: an author’s views on the function
and application of speciﬁc syncategoremata in proposi-
tions can help us shed light on their position regarding
ontological matters as well. For example, discussions of
the syncategorema ‘‘to be’’ and ‘‘not’’ reveal differences of
opinion regarding what kind of entities propositions are
expressions of; the notion of being itself is under discus-
sion in analyses of sophismata like ‘‘only one is’’ (tantum
unum est); authors also have different views about what
kinds of ‘‘things’’ are to be reckoned as necessary and (im)
possible, as is demonstrated in the way they deal with
propositions containing the expression ‘‘of necessity’’
(necessario), as well as in their accounts of the logical
rule ‘‘from the impossible anything follows.’’ Much of
this kind of material can help us decide whether an author
should be considered a realist or a conceptualist. Finally,
expositions of propositions containing the verbs ‘‘begins’’
(incipit) and ‘‘ceases’’ (desinit) show what an author has to
say about the notions of time and motion (Braakhuis
1979, 1999; Spruyt 1989, 1992, 1994).
See also: ▶Boethius ▶Henry of Ghent ▶Peter of Spain
▶Supposition Theory ▶Terms, Properties of
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Ebbesen Sten and Braakhuis Henricus Antonius Giovanni (1997)
Anonymi Erfordiensis (= Roberti Kilwardby?) Sophisma TANTUM
UNUM EST. CIMAGL 67:105–125
Matthew of Orle´ans (Mattheus Aurelianensis) (2001) Sophistaria sive
Summa communium distinctionum circa sophismata accidentium
(edited with an introduction, notes and indices by Spruyt J). Brill,
Leiden
Nicholas of Paris (1979) Syncategoreumata. Braakhuis
Peter of Spain (1992) Syncategoreumata. First critical edition with an
introduction and indexes, ed. de Rijk LM, with an English translation
by Spruyt J. Brill, Leiden/Ko¨ln/New York
William of Sherwood (1941) Syncategoremata. In: O’Donnell JR (ed)
Medieval Studies 3:46–93
Secondary Sources
Braakhuis HAG (1979) De 13e eeuwse tractaten over syncategorematische
termen. Deel I: Inleidende studie. Deel II: Uitgave van Nicolaas van
Parijs’ Sincategoreumata (diss.). Kreps, Meppel
Braakhuis
HAG
(1999)
Convertibility
of
being
and
one
in
a
Sophism atributed to Robert Kilwardby. In: Ebbesen S, Friedman R
(eds) Medieval analyses in language and cognition. Acts of the
symposium. The Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters,
The Copenhagen School of Medieval Philosophy, Copenhagen, pp
117–138
de Rijk LM (1962–1967) Logica modernorum. A contribution to the
history of early terminist logic. Vol I: On the twelfth century
1244 S
Syncategoremata

theory of fallacy. Vol II, Part one: The origin and early development
of the theory of supposition; Part two: The origin and early develop-
ment of the theory of supposition. Texts and indices. Van Gorcum,
Assen
Kretzmann N (1982) Syncategoremata, exponibilia, sophismata. In:
Kretzmann N, Kenny A, Pinborg J, Stump E (eds) The Cambridge
history of later medieval philosophy. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp 211–245
Nuchelmans G (1988) The distinction Actus Exercitus/Actus Signiﬁcatus
in medieval semantics. In: Kretzmann N (ed) Meaning and inference
in medieval philosophy; studies in memory of Jan Pinborg. Kluwer,
Dordrecht, pp 57–90
Spruyt J (1989) Peter of Spain on composition and negation. Text,
translation, commentary. Ingenium, Nijmegen
Spruyt J (1992) Thirteenth-century positions on the rule Ex impossibili
sequitur quidlibet. In: Jacobi Kl (ed) Argumentationstheorie.
Scholastische Forschungen zu den logischen und semantischen
Regeln korrekten Folgerns. Brill, Leiden, pp 161–193
Spruyt J (1994) Thirteenth-century discussions on modal terms.
Vivarium 32:196–226
Syncategoremata S
1245
S


