384
Metaphysics of Quantum Mechanics
Primary Literature
1. P.M. Petroff, A. Lorke, A. Imamoglu: Epitaxially self-assembled quantum dots. Phys. Today
54, (5), 46–52 (2001).
2. B.D. Josephson: The discovery of tunnelling supercurrents. Rev. Mod. Phys. 46, 251–54
(1974).
3. P.W. Anderson: Absence of diffusion in certain random lattices. Phys. Rev. 109, 1492 (1958).
4. K. von Klitzing: Nobel lecture: The quantized Hall effect. Rev. Mod. Phys. 58, 519–31 (1986).
5. K.C. Schwab, M.L. Roukes: Putting mechanics into quantum mechanics. Phys. Today 7, 36
(2005).
6. E. Cornell, C.E. Wieman: Nobel Lecture: Bose–Einstein condensation in a dilute gas, the ﬁrst
70 years and some recent experiments. Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 875 (2002).
7. S. Haroche: Entanglement, decoherence and the quantum/classical boundary. Phys. Today 51,
(7), 36–42 (1998).
8. M. Arndt, K. Hornberger, A. Zeilinger: Probing the limits of the quantum world. Phys. World
18, 35 (2005).
Secondary Literature
9. J. Imry: Introduction to Mesoscopic Physics. Oxford University Press, Oxford (1997).
10. Y. Yamamoto: Mesoscopic Quantum Optics. Wiley-Interscience, New York (1999).
11. I. O. Kulik: Quantum Mesoscopic Phenomena and Mesoscopic Devices in Microelectronics.
Springer, Amsterdam (2000).
12. E. Joos, H.D. Zeh, C. Kiefer, D. Giulini, J. Kupsch, I.O. Stamatescu: Decoherence and the
Appearance of a Classical World in Quantum Theory. Springer, Berlin (2003).
13. D. Vitali, S. Gigan, A. Ferreira, H. R. B¨ohm, P. Tombesi, A. Guerreiro, V. Vedral, A. Zeilinger,
M. Aspelmeyer: Optomechanical entanglement between a movable mirror and a cavity ﬁeld.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 030405 (2007).
Metaphysics of Quantum Mechanics
Craig Callender
Quantum mechanics, like any physical theory, comes equipped with many meta-
physical assumptions and implications. The line between metaphysics and physics
is often blurry, but as a rough guide, one can think of a theory’s metaphysics as
those foundational assumptions made in its interpretation that are not usually di-
rectly tested in experiment. In classical mechanics some examples of metaphysical
assumptions are the claims that forces are real, that inertial mass is primitive, and
that space is substantival. The distinctive feature of these claims is that they are all
rather far removed from ordinary tests of the theory. Newton defended all three of
the above claims at one time or other, whereas Mach attacked each one; however,
both scientists agreed on enough of the formalism and its connection to experiment

Metaphysics of Quantum Mechanics
385
M
to predict (e.g.) the same periods for given pendulums. What they disagreed about
were the ingredients necessary to use classical mechanics to explain and understand
the world.
Controversy engulfed the metaphysics of classical mechanics soon after its ori-
gin. Newton’s idea of forces proved extremely contentious among the scientists of
his time. Although metaphysical assumptions need not be controversial, quantum
mechanics is also no stranger to metaphysical dispute. If anything, here the situa-
tion is more undecided because the theory was born with two different formalisms
(Heisenberg’s  matrix mechanics, wave functions) and no clear interpretation.
Heisenberg [1] originally offered a merely instrumental understanding of his formal-
ism (later he opted for an interpretation employing discontinuous quantum jumps),
whereas Schr¨odinger [2] viewed his theory as having physical content: it described,
he thought, the evolution of continuous matter waves. The formalisms subsequently
proved to be equivalent, but the metaphysical pictures could hardly have been more
different. Soon thereafter, Bohr’s  complementarity thesis took shape,  Heisen-
berg’s uncertainty principle was discovered, and Born provided a  probabilistic
interpretation of the wavefunction. The combination of these three theses formed
the essential core of the so-called Copenhagen interpretation. Associated especially
with Bohr [3], the Copenhagen interpretation is itself the subject of active interpre-
tation [10], and few advocates of the theory agree on all of the theses commonly
associated with it. (See  Born rule; Consistent Histories; Nonlocality; Ortho-
dox Interpretation; Schr¨odinger’s Cat; Transactional Interpretation). Nevertheless,
if correct, it makes dramatic metaphysical assumptions. These include the ideas
that measurement brings into being the measured property as opposed to revealing
it, that there is a “complementarity” between dynamic and kinematic aspects of the
world, and that all properties of atoms are inherently contextual – that is, irreducibly
relative to a measuring apparatus.
Stepping back from its history, we see that the basic ontology of the quantum
world is very much undetermined. Thanks to the infamous measurement prob-
lem [7,8] we have an extra layer of assumptions that might be called metaphysical –
although in another sense these assumptions are simply the ordinary claims of any
physical theory. The reason for this extra layer is that one must ﬁrst solve the
measurement problem and then provide the best interpretation of that solution. Ex-
periment cannot yet decide among these theories, and in some cases, never will.
Thus the choice of solution is not directly tested in experiment, nor are some of
assumptions made by any given solution. The metaphysics of quantum mechan-
ics thus hangs on both a particular solution to the measurement problem and then
the best interpretation of that solution. (For measurement problem, see  Bohmian
mechanics; Measurement theory; Modal Interpretation; Objectiﬁcation; Projection
Postulate).
Working in the Schr¨odinger formalism, the measurement problem arises from
the (1) linearity of the equation evolving the wave function, and (2) the claim that the
 wave function or quantum state is representationally complete – that is, that there
are properties of kind A in the world if and only if the quantum state is in an eigen-
state of the operator ℜbelieved to represent that property. If linear dynamical evolu-

386
Metaphysics of Quantum Mechanics
tion of the quantum state is uninterrupted, then the  superpositions of microscopic
states necessary for quantum predictions will evolve into superpositions of macro-
scopic states. And if the quantum state offers a complete representation of what there
is, then the systems described by these macroscopic superpositions do not have any
deﬁnite measurable properties. Since measurements seem to have determinate out-
comes, we appear to have an inconsistency between the theory and experience.
Putative solutions to this problem fall naturally into three classes. The ﬁrst class
consists of theories (sometimes dubbed “hidden variable theories”) denying that
the quantum state is representationally complete. In addition to the wavefunction
evolving according to some linear equation, there are posited what J.S. Bell [7]
calls “beables” (as opposed to  observables) and a dynamics for these beables.
Beables are the basic ontology of the theory. In classical electromagnetism, they
are the electric and magnetic ﬁelds; in Newtonian mechanics, the beables are the
particles. In quantum mechanics, typically particle or ﬁeld ontologies are posited.
The ontology is dualistic: interpreted realistically, there are both beables and wave-
functions in the world. The best-known version of this kind of reaction was ﬁrst
discovered by de Broglie but later developed by Bohm [5]. According to this theory,
there are in addition to wavefunctions particles with always-determinate trajectories
evolving in three-dimensional space, governed by an equation that is a function of
the system’s wavefunction. Even within a solution in this class one ﬁnds varying
metaphysical pictures [7,12]. One can ﬁnd deterministic and indeterministic Bohm
theories, particle and ﬁeld-based theories, theories that treat  spin as a beable and
ones that do not – even theories that do not treat fermions as beables. Some believe
the wavefunction is part of reality, others that it is nomological, and still others treat
it instrumentally.
The second class of solutions are uniﬁed in their claim that the evolution of the
quantum state is not always linear. So-called “collapse” theories state that upon mea-
surement there is an instantaneous  wavefunction collapse from a superposition to
an eigenstate (when the state is expanded in the relevant basis for the observable
being measured). Proposals for what triggers this collapse include the “classical-
ity” of the device (some Bohrians – although perhaps not Bohr [10]), non-physical
minds (Wigner) [11], and in more recent theories, such as GRW [4] (after Ghirardi,
Rimini and Weber), certain thresholds being reached in the system’s mass density
or particle number.
Again, even within one class of putative solutions, we ﬁnd a diverse array of pos-
sible metaphysical assumptions. In some theories the wavefunction represents an
objective part of reality, in others our state of knowledge. Even within a particular
solution, say,  GRW [4], there are a variety of metaphysical pictures available.
In one especially radical interpretation of GRW, there is nothing but a sometimes-
collapsing wavefunction evolving in 3N-dimensional state space, where N is the
number of “constituents” of the system. On this view, 3-dimensional objects like
us are aspects of the universal wavefunction that have grown “clumpy” in 3N-
dimensional conﬁguration space. According to the “mass density” theory, there is
a continuous distribution of mass throughout spacetime, and the mass density at a
point is a function of the wavefunction. Yet according to the “ﬂash ontology” the-

Metaphysics of Quantum Mechanics
387
M
ory, the basic ontology is one of primitive spacetime events that are the loci of GRW
collapses [11].
The third class of solutions tries to explain away the mismatch between macro-
scopic superpositions and experience by neither supplementing the wavefunction
description of the world nor interrupting its linear evolution. Originally developed
by Everett [6], advocates of the so-called relative-state interpretation claim that
our experience supervenes upon macroscopic superpositions in a way that is more
complicated than one normally thinks. According to the “many worlds” version,
quantum measurements literally split the world into two or more mini-worlds – one
corresponding to each possible measurement outcome. The most interesting ver-
sions of Everettian theories, however, do not add anything to the wavefunction but
instead discover different observers as emergent from complex relations encoded in
the wavefunction of the world [13]. It is hardly necessary to say that the metaphysi-
cal implications of this view for our conception of ourselves, the external world and
probabilities—to name just three topics – are quite dramatic.
Finally, it is worth mentioning that there is a very different group (e.g. [9]),
inspired by Bohr that treats quantum mechanics instrumentally. These thinkers
consider the wavefunction to be solely an epistemic device that gives observers
information about the probabilities of ﬁnding various outcomes. Collapse of the
wavefunction is viewed as merely the modiﬁcation of one’s subjective credence in
light of new information. Because the wavefunction does not represent a genuine
state of a real physical system, and these theorists are silent about what the informa-
tion is information about, the theory offers no physical picture of the world.
In general, no matter the solution to the measurement problem, we expect
any non-instrumental version of quantum mechanics to provide answers to vari-
ous metaphysical questions. Is the wavefunction epistemic or ontological? What is
the basic ontology (i.e. beables) of the theory? Do we live in  Hilbert space or
four-dimensional spacetime? What is the mechanism responsible for the non-local
quantum correlations? What is the interpretation of the probabilities given to us by
Born’s rule? Do measurements create or reveal the measured properties? Answers
to these questions will hang on both the best solution to the measurement problem
and the best interpretation of that solution. It is important not to confuse these two
issues. For instance, it is commonly said that quantum mechanics implies that atoms
don’t have determinate trajectories; but strictly speaking, these conclusions follow
only from some versions of some interpretations. The original Bohm theory is an
empirically adequate (for non-relativistic phenomena) counterexample to this claim,
for instance.
The same warning applies to what is one of the most vexed metaphysical
questions surrounding quantum mechanics, the question of determinism. ( Indeter-
minism and determinism in quantum mechanics) A physical theory is deterministic
if, roughly, given a complete state of the universe at any one time, a unique past
and future follow. With suitable assumptions classical mechanics is deterministic.
With the advent of quantum mechanics, many of the theory’s founders famously
declared that determinism was “dead”. The Schr¨odinger evolution of the wavefunc-
tion is deterministic; however, the collapse of the wavefunction is stochastic, so the

388
Metaphysics of Quantum Mechanics
full theory is indeterministic. Quantum mechanics proved, they thought, that “God
plays dice”. However, as we have just seen, this claim is interpretation-dependent.
There are plenty of no-collapse interpretations of quantum mechanics, e.g. Everett,
Bohm, and some versions of these are deterministic. The question of whether “God
plays dice” is still open.
(See Consistent histories, Ignorance interpretation, Ithaca Interpretation, Many
Worlds Interpretation, Modal Interpetation, Orthodox Interpretation, Transactional
Interpretation).
Interestingly, the many interpretations of quantum mechanics illustrate why
the line between metaphysics and physics is sometimes blurry. Given current
technology, there is no way to experimentally decide between, say, a Wignerian col-
lapse theory (“human consciousness causes collapse  Wigner’s friend”) and one
or more versions of GRW (“reaching a threshold of particle number in the system
makes collapse likely”). But in principle these theories do issue different predictions
for some observables. In this sense, the metaphysics of today may be the physics of
tomorrow. In addition, even before any crucial experiment is performed—and it is
not clear that there ever will be such between certain pairs of interpretations—we see
that science can have a real bearing on these metaphysical disputes. Scientists value
more than good predictions. They also prize simplicity, uniﬁcation, consilience and
other theoretical virtues. Even if there is no test between two given interpretations,
there may be good reasons to adopt one over another. One interpretation may pos-
sess a symmetry others do not, resolve a problem others cannot, or uniquely extend
to a promising new theory (say, some version of  quantum gravity).
Primary Literature
1. W. Heisenberg: The Physical Content of Quantum Kinematics and Mechanics. Zeitschrift fur
Physik 43, 172 (1927)
2. E. Schr¨odinger: Collected Papers on Wave Mechanics (Chelsea, New York, 1982)
3. N. Bohr: Atomic Theory and the Description of Nature (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1934)
4. G.C. Ghirardi, A. Rimini, T. Weber: Uniﬁed Dynamics for Microscopic and Macroscopic Sys-
tems. Physical Review D 34, 470 (1986)
5. D. Bohm: A Suggested Interpretation of the Quantum Theory in Terms of Hidden Variables.
I & II.’ Physical Review 85, 166, Physical Review, 85, 180 (1952)
6. H. Everett, H.: Relative State Formulation of Quantum Mechanics. Review of Modern Physics
29, 454–462 (1957)
Secondary Literature
7. J.S. Bell: Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics (Cambridge University Press,
New York, 1987)
8. D.Z. Albert: Quantum Mechanics and Experience (Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
MA, 1992)

Mixed State
389
M
9. J. A. Wheeler: Information, Physics, Quantum: The Search for Links, In Complexity, Entropy
and the Physics of Information (Addison-Wesley, Redwood City, 1990), edited by W. Zurek.
10. J. Faye: Copenhagen Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics, In The Stanford Encyclope-
dia of Philosophy (Summer 2002 Edition), edited by E. Zalta, URL = http://plato.stanford.
edu/archives/sum2002/entries/qm-copenhagen/
11. G.C. Ghirardi: Collapse Theories, In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2007
Edition), edited by E. Zalta, URL=<http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2007/entries/qm-
collapse/>
12. S. Goldstein: Bohmian Mechanics, In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2007
Edition), edited by E. Zalta, URL=<http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2007/entries/qm-
bohm/>
13. J. Barrett: Everett’s Relative-State Formulation of Quantum Mechanics, In The Stanford En-
cyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2003 Edition), edited by E. Zalta, URL=<http://plato.
stanford.edu/archives/spr2003/entries/qm-everett/>
Mixed State
Peter Mittelstaedt
The most general state of a proper quantum system S with  Hilbert space HS is
given by a self-adjoint positive operator with trace 1, i.e. by an operator
WS = WS+ ⩾0 with tr {WS} = 1.
It can be shown that these positive trace class 1 operators form a convex set
T1+(HS) [1].
Two kinds of states must be distinguished. If WS is idempotent, i.e. WS = WS2,
then WS is a pure state given by an projection operator P[ϕ] where ϕ ∈HS is an
element of HS. If, however, WS ̸= WS2, then WS describes a mixed state. As any
self-adjoint operator, a mixed state WS can be decomposed according to its spectral
decomposition
WS =

i
wi P[Mi]
with real numbers wi such that 0 ⩽wi ⩽1 and projection operators P ( pro-
jection), which project on subspaces Mi of HS. It must be emphasised, however,
that the decomposition is not uniquely deﬁned, since there are many other, non-
orthogonal decompositions of WS. If, in addition, the operator WS has a degenerate
spectrum, there are also inﬁnitely many orthogonal decompositions.
There are two kinds of mixed states of S given by an operator WS
=

i wi P [ϕi] with 0 ⩽wi ⩽1, which are distinguished by their preparation.
(a) Mixture of states
Assume that a preparation apparatus does not work completely accurately
and prepares systems with states ϕ1, ϕ2, ϕ3 . . ., say, with a priori probabilities
p1, p2, p3 . . ., which depend on the construction of the apparatus. In this case, any

