Quantitative Assessment of the Mechanical
Properties of the Neural Interface
Arati Sridharan and Jit Muthuswamy
Contents
1
Importance of Tissue Biomechanics in Neural Interface Design. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
215
2
Biomechanical Characterization of Brain Tissue. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
223
3
Biomechanics of the Neural Interface. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
231
3.1
Initial Penetration Phase. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
231
3.2
Chronic Micromotion and a Mechanical Mismatch at the Neural Interface. . . . . . .
232
3.3
Brain Shift and Lead Migration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
234
4
Methods to Quantitatively Assess the Mechanical Properties
of the Brain Tissue-Implant Interface. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
236
4.1
Conventional Methods for in Vitro and in Vivo Assessment
of Brain Tissue. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
237
4.2
Penetrating Microindentation Methods for Assessing Neural
Interfaces in Vivo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
239
4.3
Experimental Setup for the Penetrating Microindentation Technique. . . . . . . . . . . .
240
4.4
Analysis of Force-Displacement Curves. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
243
5
Discussion and Conclusions: Neural Interface Design
from a Biomechanics Perspective. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
250
References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
252
Abstract
Recent studies provide compelling evidence that besides the implant material,
a combination of implant size and implant stiffness determines the long-
term integrity and functionality of implantable neural interfaces. Mechanical
parameters are now a design imperative for the neural interface engineers.
However, despite the compelling empirical evidence, neural engineers face
several daunting challenges: First, there are several signiﬁcant gaps in our
A. Sridharan · J. Muthuswamy ()
School of Biological and Health System Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA
e-mail: arati.sridharan@asu.edu; jit@asu.edu
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023
N. V. Thakor (ed.), Handbook of Neuroengineering,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-5540-1_4
213

214
A. Sridharan and J. Muthuswamy
knowledge of the underlying mechanisms of how mechanical properties of
the neural interface inﬂuence stability and reliability of the interface in the
long term. Second, there are no standard methods, similar to electrochemical
impedance spectroscopy (EIS) or cyclic voltammetry (CV) that characterize
the interface’s electrical properties, to characterize the mechanical properties of
the brain tissue-implant interface quantitatively. In this chapter, we attempt to
summarize what we know about the mechanical properties of the brain tissue-
implant interface from our studies over the last several years and from a diversity
of imaging, neurophysiology, and neural engineering studies. We also propose
an improvised, penetrating “microindentation” technique as a possible standard
to help neural engineers quantitatively benchmark the mechanical properties of
their designs against others. We lay out the neural interface design problem in
the framework of two rather broadly contradicting design constraints – “stiff
enough” to penetrate and “soft enough” to match the surrounding brain tissue
under chronic conditions.
Keywords
Biomechanics · Neural implants · Stress · Strain · Biocompatibility
Abbreviations
AFM
Atomic force microscopy
BBB
Blood-brain-barrier
CAMS
Cell adhesion molecules
CNS
Central nervous system
CSF
Cerebrospinal ﬂuids
CV
Cyclic voltammetry
DBS
Deep brain stimulation
E
Elastic modulus
ECM
Extracellular matrix
ED-1
Ectodermal dysplasia-1 (also known as CD-68)
EIS
Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy
FEA
Finite element analysis
G
Shear modulus
GAGs
Glycosaminoglycans
GFAP
Glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein
GPa
Gigapascals
ICP
Intracranial pressure
kPa
Kilopascals
Mac-1
Macrophage integrin
MEG
Motion encoding gradient
MEMS
Micro-electromechanical system
mM
Millinewtons
MPa
Megapascals
MR
Magnetic resonance
MRE
Magnetic resonance elastography
μm
Micrometers
μN
Micronewtons

Quantitative Assessment of the Mechanical Properties of the Neural Interface
215
N
Newton
NeuN
Neuronal nuclei
NF
Neuroﬁlament
Pa
Pascal
TBI
Traumatic brain injury
1
Importance of Tissue Biomechanics in Neural Interface
Design
Penetrating neural implants play an essential role in clinical applications such as
delivering therapeutic electrical stimulation to deep brain structures, cortical record-
ings to map epileptic seizure activity, etc. The BrainGate™system is an example of
how neural implants can partially restore motor function in paralyzed patients using
brain-controlled robotics [1]. Current arrays of neural implants such as the FDA-
approved Utah array and Michigan array focus on a small to an intermediate number
of independent, active sites (<100) for targeted applications. The BRAIN initiative
from the federal funding agencies has accelerated the development of modern neural
implants with large numbers of electrodes in a high-density array format (such as
Neuropixels™with 960 available recording sites) [2] and tunable MEMS probes for
targeting speciﬁc neural circuitry [3]. Nevertheless, biocompatibility due to inser-
tion mechanics and implant-tissue material mismatch remains a signiﬁcant factor in
determining neural interface performance, emphasizing the need to understand the
biomechanics of neural interfaces better.
Several creative strategies have been reported to address the biomechanical
challenges involved in the insertion of microscale and often high-density neural
interfaces. These include techniques such as the deployment of net-like nanoprobes
through custom-designed mechanisms [4], the use of microﬂuidic-release insertion
shuttles [5], and the use of mechanically tunable substrates [6, 7]. Microscale
actuators using MEMS (microelectromechanical systems) have been successfully
used to drive individual probes in an array to target speciﬁc brain regions
[8–11]. These electrostatic and electrothermal actuators can drive microelectrodes
independently in microscale increments (5–10-μm step sizes) along the depth axis
using a ratchet mechanism to grab and push individual microelectrodes through
the brain with insertion forces ranging from 200 μN to several mN [3]. Navigating
the microelectrode in brain tissue is also a signiﬁcant challenge due to the build of
mechanical stress from the viscoelastic material properties of the brain tissue. The
buildup of mechanical stresses during penetration and subsequent relaxation during
the rest phase of the microelectrode can also create a moving target for the individual
microelectrodes. We have successfully demonstrated that using optimized,
bidirectional movement patterns can signiﬁcantly minimize residual stresses on the
probe, enabling precise interfacing with the desired neurons [12]. In the chronic
situation, the interface’s mechanical properties can change signiﬁcantly over
6–8 weeks postimplantation due to tissue remodeling, posing additional concerns
regarding the functionality of neurons in such a dynamic environment.

216
A. Sridharan and J. Muthuswamy
Neurons are microelectromechanical units in that they are typically 2–100 μm
in diameter (depending on the species) whose electrical activity is determined by
the maintenance of relative adhesion forces (between the neurons and between
neurons and the substrate) and the widespread presence of mechano-sensitive stretch
receptors on neuronal cell membranes. The biomechanics of the microenvironment
within the brain is also highly dynamic and modulates neuronal function in the
vicinity of implantable neural interfaces via tissue remodeling. Mechanical stresses
at the neural interfaces have been shown to fracture brain tissue, rupture capillaries
and larger blood vessels, disturb calcium ion homeostasis, activate inﬂammatory
pathways, and cause neuronal necrosis. The stability of the interface between brain
tissue and implanted neural devices is key to the success of both neural recording
(single- and multi-unit recording) and neuromodulation applications. Examples of
biomechanical failure modes include electrode drift to different brain regions as in
the case of deep brain stimulation (DBS) leads [13, 14], slow lead migration in
DBS or cochlear implants [15, 16], or constant chaﬁng of tissue against an implant
[17] by micromotion-related brain displacements due to the mechanical mismatch
between brain tissue and the implant, leading to interfacial scar tissue formation.
Therefore, it is imperative for neuromodulation and neural recording technologies
in their design phase to take into account the dynamics of mechanical changes in
brain tissue, which impacts the long-term safety and efﬁcacy of the neural interfaces
and neuromodulation therapies.
From a biomechanics perspective, as illustrated in Fig. 1, there are broadly
three phases in the life of a neural implant that place dramatically different and,
in some ways, conﬂicting biomechanical requirements on the implantable neural
interface. The ﬁrst is the initial penetration phase during surgical implantation of
the device when implants experience peak forces ranging from several hundreds
of micro-Newtons to tens of milli-Newtons (accompanied by signiﬁcant dimpling
of brain tissue, for example, ∼1–2 mm dimpling in rodents) depending on the speed
of penetration, the number of electrodes in the array, dimensions of the implant,
stiffness of the implant, and geometry of the implant tip. The penetration phase
can last from several seconds to minutes, depending on individual investigators
and clinical practitioners’ anecdotal experiences and preferences. The dimpling
is exacerbated by the presence and integrity of the dura mater that is generally
hyperelastic. Successful penetration of dura mater and underlying pia results in
tearing of these meninges and adhesion of meningeal debris to the tip of the neural
implant as it travels through the brain tissue.
The second is the displacement phase. The implant’s tip has moved past the
outer meningeal layers and is inside the cerebral cortex and is now beginning its
journey to the targeted brain region of interest. In this second phase, signiﬁcant
rupture of the blood vessels has been observed [18] along the length of the neural
implant as it is moved to the desired location in the brain. The compromised blood-
brain barrier (BBB) results in local ischemia, extravasating vessel contents into the
interstitial space. Local ischemia can result in cytotoxic edema due to the failure
of Na-K pumps in the cell membrane (that are now depleted of ATP due to the
lack of oxygen), causing depolarization and subsequent cellular edema. However,

Quantitative Assessment of the Mechanical Properties of the Neural Interface
217
Fig. 1 Biomechanics of electrode/implant insertion into the brain in vivo. Initially, the brain tissue
(A) dimples due to its material properties, subsequently (B) tearing or fracturing the tissue till its
motion is stopped at the desired depth. (C) The electrode imposes compressive and shear stresses
upon the tissue as the brain tissue undergoes a viscoelastic relaxation. (D) Chronic, long-term
implantation leads to wound healing response and ﬁbrotic scar formation around the implant
depending on the injury’s intensity over 4–8 weeks. During chronic implantation, the brain tissue-
implant interface is subject to micromotion-induced strain from vascular and respiratory pulsatility
this does not result in the overall swelling of brain tissue since there is only a ﬂuid
movement from the interstitium to inside the cell. This ﬂuid movement can cause
signiﬁcant changes in the concentrations of ions and proteins in the interstitial space.
Other events include the entry of large blood proteins into the interstitial space due
to BBB breach and large negatively charged glycosaminoglycans and proteoglycans
[19] from the rupture of swollen cells that can result in an osmotic pressure gradient.
The accompanying Donnan effect [20] drives ﬂuid ﬂow from the vasculature into
the interstitial space causing vasogenic edema [21]. Depending on the severity
of the injury, cellular edema may increase cell stiffness around the implant [22].
Hypoxia and metabolic acidosis can stiffen the material properties of brain tissue
[23], accompanied by hypoxia-related functional impairment in the different cells.
Depending on the magnitude of relaxation times built into the stepwise incremental
positioning of the implant inside the brain tissue, the forces experienced by the
implant can continue to monotonically increase with depth, albeit at a slower rate
than the rate of force buildup during the penetration phase. The above displacement
phase can last from several seconds to hours, depending on individual investigators
and clinical practitioners’ anecdotal experiences and preferences. Histological

218
A. Sridharan and J. Muthuswamy
Fig. 2 Histological examples of (a) an implant dimpling brain tissue during penetration phase in
a brain slice [18] (used with permission of IOP Publishing from “Effects of insertion conditions
on tissue strain and vascular damage during neuroprosthetic device insertion,” by C. S. Bjornsson
et al., vol. 3, no. 3, 2006; permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.) © IOP
Publishing. Reproduced with permission. All rights reserved. (b) Time-lapse images (b1–b5) of
probe causing blood vessel rupture in b4/b5 indicated by arrows [18] during the displacement
phase, (c) H&E tissue staining showing probe insertion causing tissue compaction (dotted lines) in
the chronic phase. Bleeding is observed near (c) probe site and away from the probe site (d) besides
tissue fracture [24]. (Images obtained under Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license from
[20])
examples of the biological impact of the insertion mechanics described above
are shown in Fig. 2, illustrating tissue dimpling, blood vessel rupture, tissue
compaction, and tissue fracture.
The third and the last phase (probably the least understood of the three phases)
is the chronic presence of the microelectrode in the brain tissue during which the
implant is now either tethered to the skull or left ﬂoating in the brain. During
this phase, the mechanical forces are primarily due to relative micromotion of
brain tissue around the implant due to either periodic pulsations propagated by
breathing and vascular pulsations or episodic motion of brain tissue relative to
the implant due to behavior. The periodic stresses experienced by implants during
this phase vary greatly from tens of Pascals to hundreds of Pascals depending on

Quantitative Assessment of the Mechanical Properties of the Neural Interface
219
implant size, material, stiffness, and whether the implant is tethered to the skull or
freely ﬂoating [25]. The episodic stresses due to behavior during this phase have
not been carefully quantiﬁed. They are still expected to be several times larger
than the periodic stresses since the corresponding aperiodic tissue micromotion or
displacement due to behavior has been determined to be several times larger than
the periodic micromotion in the brain tissue. Measurements of material properties
at neural interfaces show that the tissue dynamically remodels itself around neural
implants, becoming stiffer with implantation time over 4 weeks and subsequently
(and somewhat surprisingly) decreasing in stiffness 6–8 weeks post-insertion [26]. It
is well-documented that the inﬂammation response around neural interfaces leads to
dramatic changes in cell-type composition and tissue organization. Classic examples
of tissue reaction near neural interfaces are shown in Fig. 3, where microglia and
astrocytes contribute to the glial scar formation around implants.
Interestingly also, studies from our lab using moveable microscale implants have
demonstrated that the initial insertion through the meninges and brain tissue causes
more damage on the brain tissue (with higher reactive astrocytes) compared to the
damage induced by moving the electrode into brain tissue 14–28 days post-insertion
[29] (Fig. 4). A potential indicator is the level of initial dimpling on the cortical
surface that occurs in part due to dura and meningeal layers. Electrode advancement
into the tissue can dimple the brain >1 mm (level of dimpling depends on the
presence or absence of dura and the number of electrodes in the microelectrode
array) and impose high levels of strain on the tissue. A summary of potential injury
mechanisms discussed in the above paragraphs is presented in Table 1.
The neural interface design engineer, therefore, often faces a set of conﬂicting
design requirements – to design a microscale interface – which is sufﬁciently stiff to
penetrate the brain tissue without buckling and breaking while simultaneously being
comparable to brain tissue in mechanical stiffness to minimize chronic stresses
[25, 26] and foreign body response [7, 30]. Some examples of electrode buckling,
mechanical stresses during the chronic implant phase, and the effect of implant size
on tissue response are shown in Fig. 5.
Individual neural implants in the brain tissue have typically been in the form of
long, slender shanks that are several millimeters (or centimeters for some human
applications) in length, few tens to hundreds of micrometers in cross-sectional
diameter with conductive interfaces deﬁned at the tip or along the length of the
shank. Such implants are either used individually or in arrays or bundles. The
neural implants should be capable of penetrating the brain tissue at some reasonable
implantation speed (a few 10–100 s of micrometers per second depending on the
individual preferences and needs), typically using a stereotactic positioning system.
Euler’s buckling equation gives the maximum force P that a slender neural implant
can endure before buckling during penetration of the brain tissue:
P = π2EI
l2

220
A. Sridharan and J. Muthuswamy
Fig. 3 Histological examples of chronically implanted neural probes. (a) A typical neural probe
after 2 weeks of implantation is shown (left) with the histological staining for Mac-1 (speciﬁc for
intracellular adhesion proteins, i.e., leukocyte-speciﬁc integrins) (right). The scale bar is 50 μm
[27]. (b) Microglia staining using an antibody against Iba-1 (speciﬁc for microglia/macrophages)
in a coronal section shows a differential cell density along the probe length. The cell density
toward the brain’s surface (dotted box, b1) is dominated by non-CNS cells (b1-Hoescht 342 nuclei
staining), extending ∼500 μm into the brain, after which microglia surround the probe [28]. (c)
This representative image is a classic example of tissue reaction as a function of distance from the
neural interface located on the picture’s left edge. After 4 weeks of implantation, the remodeled
tissue composition is seen in descending order, with the top image showing ED-1 marker (speciﬁc
to microglia). The second image from the top shows glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein, GFAP expression
(speciﬁc to reactive astrocytes) extending further away from the interface. The third and fourth
images from the top show increasing NeuN (speciﬁc to neuronal nuclei) and neuroﬁlament (NF,
speciﬁc to neurites), respectively. The neuronal density is shown to increase away from the implant
[27]. ((a) and (c) were used with permission of Elsevier from “Neuronal cell loss accompanies
the brain tissue response to chronically implanted silicon microelectrode arrays,” by R. Biran,
D. C. Martin, and P. A. Tresco. Vol. 195, no. 1, 2005; permission conveyed through Copyright
Clearance Center, Inc. Copyright © Elsevier. All rights reserved. (b) was used with permission
of IOP Publishing from “Chronic intracortical microelectrode arrays induce non-uniform, depth-
related tissue responses,” by A. J. Woolley, H. A. Desai, and K. J. Otto, vol. 10, no. 2, 2013. © IOP
Publishing. Reproduced with permission. All rights reserved)
where E is the elastic modulus of the implant material, I is the second moment of
inertia of the cross-section of the neural implant, and l is the length of the neural
implant. The moment of inertia, I, is given by:
I = bt3
12 , for a neural implant with a rectangular cross-section of thickness “t” and
width “b”
I= πr4, for a cylindrical neural implant with a circular cross-section of radius “r.”
Therefore, for neural implants of a given length (typically a few millimeters) and
circular cross-section without any taper, made of stiff materials such as tungsten and

Quantitative Assessment of the Mechanical Properties of the Neural Interface
221
Fig. 4 Comparison of GFAP expression (a biomarker for reactive astrocytes) near a representative
(a) stationary probe tip and (b) a probe moved after 14 days of initial insertion showed increased
reactive astrocytes around stationary probes. Histology was performed 6 weeks post-initial
insertion. Dotted lines indicate the position of the inserted probe. The high GFAP expression in (a)
suggests that initial insertion contributes more to the inﬂammation response at the neural interface
compared to subsequent movement within the tissue >14 days [29]. The scale bar is 150 μm
Table 1 Injury mechanisms associated with probe-tissue biomechanics
Initiation of injury mechanism
References
Potential injury
mechanism
Penetration
phase
Displacement
phase
Chronic phase
Dimpling
X
[18]
Meningeal/brain
tissue tearing
X
X
[29]
Blood vessel
rupture
X
X
[18]
Local ischemia
[18]
BBB
breach/leakiness
X
X
X
[19]
Vasogenic edema
X
[20, 21]
Force
buildup/tissue and
cell stiffness
X
[23, 25]
Glial scar/chronic
inﬂammation
X
[17]
Tissue-implant
mechanical
mismatch
X
X
[25]
silicon with elastic modulus typically over 100 GPa can penetrate the brain tissue
with diameters >10–25 μm. In contrast, softer materials such as polyimide with an
elastic modulus of 2.5 GPa (DuPont Kapton ﬁlm) will require a minimum diameter
of 50–75 μm to penetrate brain tissue.

222
A. Sridharan and J. Muthuswamy
Fig. 5 Examples of (a) stiff nanocomposite probes (E ∼5.2 GPa) penetrating brain tissue
compared to compliant nanocomposite probes (E ∼12 MPa) that buckles [6]. (Figures used with
permission of IOP Publishing, from “In vivo deployment of mechanically adaptive nanocomposites
for intracortical microelectrodes,” by J. P. Harris et al., Vol. 8, no. 4, 2011; permission conveyed
through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.. © IOP Publishing. Reproduced with permission. All
rights reserved.) (b) After insertion of tunable nanocomposite probes into rat brain cortex,
chronic micromotion stresses (due to breathing) were signiﬁcantly higher (p < 0.05) when the
nanocomposite implants were stiff compared to those when the implants became compliant [31].
(c–d) Small 12-μm-diameter microwire implants elicited signiﬁcantly less reactive astrocytes near
the interface than larger 25-μm-diameter implants [32]. The scale bar is 150 μm
The design of reliable neural implants for chronic experiments has been directed
toward (a) minimizing the foreign body response such as reactive astrocytes,
activated microglia, neuronal migration and necrosis, and vascular remodeling
around the implant site and (b) improving the stability and quality of neuronal
signals being recorded. Arguably, the working hypothesis that has been most
successful in achieving these twin design objectives is that a reduction in mechanical
stresses around the neural interface will mitigate the foreign body response and
improve the stability and quality of neuronal recordings. Two design strategies that
have demonstrated success by multiple groups are (a) a reduction in cross-sectional
size (or diameter) of neural implants [33–35] and (b) reducing the mismatch in
the elastic modulus between the neural implant material and the surrounding brain
tissue [6, 36–38]. A recent meta-analysis of nine prior studies identiﬁed a common
parameter, which the authors labeled “stiffness” (a numerical combination of elastic
modulus and the geometry of the neural implant), that appeared to be common to
both of the above design strategies in minimizing foreign body response within the
ﬁrst 50 μm of brain tissue surrounding the implant [39].
The fact that the brain tissue’s mechanical properties and its constituents play a
vital role in the structural organization and function of the different regions of the
brain can also be seen during the development phase of the nervous system. For

Quantitative Assessment of the Mechanical Properties of the Neural Interface
223
example, the formation of the neural crest occurs in part along stiffness gradients in
the microenvironment in vivo [40, 41]. Other examples are the mechanical tension
required for axonal guidance of growth cones and the preference of neurites to align
along “soft” substrates similar to brain tissue extracellular matrix (ECM) [42–44].
Therefore, to develop reliable neural interfaces and implantable neuromodulation
devices for chronic, long-term use, it is vital to understand the interaction between
biomechanical cues in the brain microenvironment around the implant and its effects
on the topology, shape, and function of brain tissue and its different constituents.
This chapter will discuss the (a) mechanical properties of brain tissue and its various
constituents, (b) mechanical properties of brain tissue at the implant-tissue interface,
(c) experimental and modeling approaches to assess the mechanical properties of the
tissue-implant interface, and ﬁnally (d) neural interface design from a biomechanics
perspective.
This chapter’s focus is to highlight the mechanical events at the neural interface
and outline methods to assess the mechanical properties of the neural interface
quantitatively. Current microindentation and nano-indentation techniques are instru-
mental in quantifying the mechanical properties of brain tissue at the microscale in
different regions of the brain [45]. However, if we are interested in the mechanical
properties of the neural interface that is comprised of both the abiotic implant and
the surrounding brain tissue, the conventional microindentation technique poses
serious challenges. Hence, we describe a modiﬁed penetrating microindentation
technique that we have developed and used successfully over the last several years
to create the neural interface and assess its mechanical properties simultaneously.
2
Biomechanical Characterization of Brain Tissue
Brain tissue is one of the softest organs in the human body, resembling the consis-
tency of oatmeal or gelatin. But how soft is “soft”? For quantitative comparisons,
material scientists typically examine a material’s ability to deform under an imposed
stress (i.e., tension or compression). Mechanical stress (σ, τ) corresponding to both
normal and shear stresses is deﬁned as:
σ, τ ∼Force/Area

N/m2
(1)
Stresses can be pulling on a surface (tension), pushing on a surface (compres-
sion), or twisting (shear or torsional). A load that applies a stress perpendicular to
the surface area (i.e., tension, compression) generates a normal stress (σ), while a
stress parallel to the axis generates a shear stress (τ) (Fig. 6).
Soft, biological organs/tissues are composites of various cell types and extra-
cellular matrix components (i.e., collagen, hyaluronic acid, peptides, proteogly-
cans). Brain tissue in vivo contains a composite of blood vessels (which includes
endothelial cells, blood cells, ﬁbroblasts, and ECM components), oligodendrocytes
(myelinating cells), glial support cells (i.e., astrocytes, microglia, etc.), and a

224
A. Sridharan and J. Muthuswamy
Fig. 6 Normal stress (a) versus shear stress (b). Under axial loading, the applied stress is normal to
the biological tissue, while a shear stress is parallel to the tissue surface under load. A biomaterial
like a brain tissue may experience both stresses under different conditions. Elastic moduli (E) and
shear moduli (G) are intrinsic material parameter characteristics of the biomaterial
Fig. 7 Uniaxial stress-strain behavior of brain tissue. (a) Brain tissue is a complex, composite
material consisting of various cell types and extracellular components with elastic moduli that
range from 1 to 60 kPa and vasculature whose elastic moduli range 6–25 MPa. (b) Upon application
of a load under uniaxial conditions, brain tissue deforms according to a stress-strain relationship
shown in (c) from which elastic modulus (E) characteristic of the composite brain tissue can be
derived
wide variety of neuronal subtypes with different levels of branching and complex
nanoscale and microscale geometries that could traverse several hundreds of μm to
mm to form neuronal networks (Fig. 7). Physical cell-to-cell connectivity via tight
junction complexes and anchoring components to ECM via cell adhesion molecules
(CAMs) like cadherin and integrin protein families also contribute toward material
properties of brain tissue [46]. Also, there are ﬂuidic components like interstitial
and cerebrospinal ﬂuids (CSF) that contribute toward tissue integrity and stiffness.
When soft, biological organs like brain tissue are stretched, all the components
typically respond in tandem depending on the position and scale of the applied stress
(Fig. 6b). The relative change in the length of the brain tissue material (L) with
respect to the initial length (L) is deﬁned as strain (ε) under a uniaxial condition or
deformation in a multidimensional state. Shear strain (γ ) is deﬁned similarly where
the relative change in length (L) with respect to initial length (L) is represented by
tan α (Fig. 6b).
ε, γ ∼L/L (Dimensionless)
(2)

Quantitative Assessment of the Mechanical Properties of the Neural Interface
225
A typical stress-strain curve for cortical brain tissue under constant, uniaxial
loading rate with small displacement conditions is presented in Fig. 7c. Initially
under relatively small strains, the induced.
stress in the tissue is minimal due to the compliance of the tissue. Induced stress
increases monotonically with strain until the tissue tears or fractures, resulting in
material failure. The brain tissue, therefore, behaves as an elastomer or rubber.
However, under small strains, the relationship between stress and strain in brain
tissue can be approximated using a linear model. The elasticity of brain tissue that
determines its resistance to deformation can be quantiﬁed from the slope of the
linear region of the stress-strain curve. The elastic modulus or Young’s modulus is
deﬁned as:
E = σ/ε
(3)
Reported elastic moduli (E) for brain tissue typically range from 0.5 to 10 kPa
[47]. Examples of estimated elastic moduli of individual cell types and other brain
tissue components typically derived from in vitro studies are summarized in Table 2.
Neurons are the softest with a median elastic modulus of ∼142 Pa [48], while
microglia exhibit a wide range of elastic moduli (0.1–5 kPa) due to their ability
to adapt to mechanically stiffening environments [50]. The ﬂuidic component of
the brain tissue (CSF and interstitial ﬂuid) constitutes ∼5–10% of the total brain
tissue volume. While it is typically modeled as a thin, incompressible layer with
E ∼150 kPa [58], typical static intracranial pressures (ICP) range 0.5–2 kPa [52].
Brain blood vessels are extremely stiff, with E ∼25 MPa for arteries and ∼6 MPa
Table 2 Brain tissue component and reported elastic moduli
Brain tissue component
Elastic
modulus
References
Neurons
0.082–
0.521 kPa
[48]
Oligodendrocytes
0.04–0.21 kPa
[49]
Microglia
0.1–5 kPa
[50]
Gray matter (cerebrum)
0.5–1.0 kPa
[51]
White matter (cerebrum)
1–3 kPa
[51]
CSF/interstitial ﬂuids is based on intracranial pressure
(ICP)
0.5–2 kPa
[52]
Capillary endothelial cells
∼5–8 kPa
[53, 54]
Astrocytes
23–27 kPa
[55]
ECM is based on the elastic component G’ of
decellularized brain tissue
20–60 kPa
[56]
Blood vessels
Brain arteries
∼25 MPa
[57]
Brain veins
∼6 MPa
[57]

226
A. Sridharan and J. Muthuswamy
for veins [57]. However, the biomechanical contribution from endothelial cell-
lined capillary networks is expected to dominate the majority of volume fraction
associated with the brain vascular system since the average neuron to capillary
distance is 15–20 μm in the brain [59]. Reported elastic moduli for brain capillary
endothelial cells are E ∼5–8 kPa [53, 54], which can also change with respect to
cerebral blood ﬂow dynamics, injury, and disease. The major components of brain
tissue ECM are glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) and numerous other polysaccharides,
peptides, and proteins [60]. Reported values for decellularized brain tissue range
from 20 to 60 kPa [56].
The brain tissue composition is 70–80% cells and 15–20% ECM/interstitial ﬂuid
[61]. If we assume that the brain tissue material is a composite of cells, ﬂuid, and
ECM, then the composite brain structure’s elastic modulus would be the sum of
relative contributions of individual components and their respective volume fraction
(rule of mixtures). Assuming neurons make up ∼20–25% of the brain volume,
capillary endothelial cells are expected to be 30% of the nonneuronal cells [62].
Based on the glia-to-neuron ratio (2:1) and glia-to-endothelial cell ratio (2:1) [62],
Fig. 8 shows the expected volume fraction of each cell component of the brain
tissue and the resulting estimate of the elastic modulus of the whole brain to be
∼9.5 kPa, which is close to reported values [47]. However, it should be noted that
there is considerable variation in reported cell composition numbers with additional
variability emanating from the regional composition of the brain (i.e., cortex, gray
Fig. 8 Calculated elastic modulus of a hypothetical brain tissue composite based on typical
volume fractions of individual cellular, ﬂuidic, and ECM components [61, 62] and elastic moduli
from Table 1

Quantitative Assessment of the Mechanical Properties of the Neural Interface
227
matter, white matter, deep brain structures, hippocampus, etc.), which may explain
the wide range of elastic moduli reported for the brain tissue [63–65].
If the material is homogeneous and isotropic (material response is the same in all
directions), one can estimate the shear modulus (G) from the following relationship:
G = E/2 (1 + ν)
(4)
where ν is the Poisson’s ratio deﬁned as the ratio of transverse strain to axial strain:
ν = −dεtransverse/dεaxial,
(5)
Poisson’s ratio ranges from −1.0 to 0.5, with brain tissue typically reported with
ν ∼0.42–0.4999. Therefore, under small strains, the material is incompressible
and will behave in a nearly elastic manner for a ν ∼0.5. Since the brain tissue
composition is ∼80% water, the assumption of incompressibility is plausible.
As we increasingly implant nanoscale and microscale neural interfaces and
other neural devices (cannulas, anchors, stimulators, etc.) in patients, a good
understanding of brain tissue’s biomechanics and its functional impact is critical,
particularly in the vicinity of the implanted neural interfaces. Indentation-based
experiments of brain tissue gray matter, which are cell soma-rich isotropic regions
in the brain, show little variation with respect to tissue/cell orientation. In contrast,
the white matter tracts of brain tissue showed more signiﬁcant variation in stiffness
along the axon length, suggesting varying degrees of anisotropy [63]. White matter
such as the corpus callosum is considered transversely isotropic since the ﬁber
direction is clearly deﬁned. The inﬂuence of directionality can be addressed within
the strain tensor for better modeling of mechanical behavior [66].
As the resolution of mechanical measurement increases, ﬁner elastography
reveals regional differences in stiffness at the microscale along anatomical bound-
aries, for example, between CA1 and CA3 regions in a hippocampal slice [65,
67]. Emerging technologies such ultrasound shear wave elastography and magnetic
resonance elastography (MRE) use either intrinsic motion (such as heart rate and
breathing-related movement) or external drivers to generate a dynamic, mechanical
shear wave to map the shear moduli (G) of brain tissue regions of interest [68, 69].
MRE, in comparison to other techniques, has a high dynamic range and contrast
that allows ﬁner mapping from fat (E ∼10–100 Pa) to cortical bone (E > 10 MPa)
[68]. With these technologies, noninvasive mapping of stiffness in various brain
areas shows regional variations and dynamic changes due to injury, disease, or even
neuronal activity [70–72]. However, reported G values for brain tissue have a wide
range of 1–35 kPa [73–75], in part due to the level of stretch (up to 30% oscillatory
strain) and the sensitivity to the frequency of applied mechanical strain.
Spatial information in MR is derived from perturbation of nuclear spins via
applied magnetic gradients in each of x-y-z imaging planes and encoded in k
space (frequency spectrum). To obtain spatial MR maps of mechanical stiffness
(as in MRE), a piezo actuator is attached to the subject and vibrated at a speciﬁc
frequency to generate sinusoidal (100–2500 Hz) mechanical waves in the brain

228
A. Sridharan and J. Muthuswamy
Fig. 9 Frequency of imposed
mechanical strain vs. shear
modulus of brain tissue. This
data set is a summary of prior
MRE and indentation results
[75]. Frequency is indicative
of imposed strain rates on the
tissue. Higher frequencies
(900–1200 Hz) are typically
used in rodent models, while
10–200 Hz are used in
porcine, bovine, and human
models. Results from
indentation methods are
represented at 0 Hz on the
same plot
tissue. In synchrony with the mechanical waves, a motion-encoding gradient (MEG)
is used to sensitize a spatial encoding signal corresponding to the same plane as the
shear wave propagation. The MEG needs to be the same frequency as the motion
for obtaining optimal displacement data and resolution. However, the imaging
resolution also needs to be high for accurately capturing wave propagation and
resolving relatively small displacements in small animals. Therefore, higher MEG
frequencies are required, and in turn, higher-frequency mechanical shear waves
(increased deformation rate) in the brain tissue are needed to spatially resolve the
displacements and estimated stiffnesses in the desired anatomical regions. As shown
in Fig. 9, as the frequency of mechanical vibration increases, the measured shear
modulus in brain tissue increases based on a collection of reported data [75]. Similar
data from [76] show frequency-dependent changes in shear moduli from indentation
experiments. These collective data in the literature demonstrate that brain tissue
is nonlinear, viscoelastic material whose properties vary with (a) duration and (b)
intensity of strain.
Brain tissue can experience different strain and strain rates induced by neu-
rological disorders, dysfunctions, or injury conditions. Examples are diseases
like hydrocephalus, which imposes a 30–100% strain on brain tissues [77] or
10–25% strain imposed by gliomas on surrounding tissue [78]. Even in the above
cases, when the level of strain experienced by brain tissue is high, the immediate
damage to surrounding brain tissue may be less apparent due to a low strain rate.
Neural circuitry and support cells surrounding regions of strain typically structurally
remodel and functionally adapt to high strain. However, this maladaptation could
induce plasticity and changes in overall biological function, leading to secondary
injury mechanisms. Further, using classic stress-strain curves (Fig. 10), the levels of
stress in brain tissue have been shown to increase nonlinearly with increasing strain
rate [79, 80].

Quantitative Assessment of the Mechanical Properties of the Neural Interface
229
B
Brain 
Condition/Injury
Associated
Strain Rate (S-1) 
Reference
Blunt impact/blast-
wave induced TBI
100-300
[82]
Football/ice-hockey
concussion/Severe 
TBI
35-90
[83]–[85]
Football related 
brain strain with 
helmet
19-27
[86]
Diffuse TBI
10
[84]
Soccer header
9
[87]
Brain cell damage
0.1-.34
[88]
Cortical 
neuron/astrocyte 
death in cultures
0.006-0.01
[89]
Respiratory 
micromotion near 
implanted probes
<0.003
[90]
Healthy neurons in 
culture/collagen gel
10-4
[91]
Fig. 10 (a) As strain rate increases, the mechanical behavior of brain tissue becomes nonlinear
with increased stresses. (b) A summary of strain rates and associated brain tissue injury
Typical constitutive models to characterize such nonlinear dependence are
hyperelastic models, which describe the mechanical behavior of materials such as
rubbers and elastomers, suggesting brain tissue also behaves similarly at high strain
rates. High strain rates (>30/s) are typically associated with traumatic brain injury
(TBI) [81, 82, 84, 87]. Diffuse axonal injury associated with mild TBI has been
reported to occur above strains of 10% and strain rates >10/s [83]. Strain rates
between 22 and 44/s are critical thresholds for breaking of microtubules within the
cell [90]. Below strain rates of 10/s, the impact of strain rate on injury is more
dependent on the level of stretch that neural tissue experiences. The brain deforms
at 1–5/s during exercise, like running with peak strains of ∼1.7% without tissue
damage [86], suggesting that the combination of strain rate and level of stretch
determines the level of injury. However, neurons can be affected even at extremely
low strains and strain rates such as 3% seen around neural interfaces due to the
relative motion of brain tissue induced by vascular pulsatility and breathing [31, 91].
Karumbaiah et al. showed that a 3% strain and 0.2 Hz repetition (corresponding to
∼0.006/s strain rate) caused signiﬁcant cell death in cortical neurons and increased
expression of inﬂammatory cytokines in cultures containing neurons, glia, and
microglia [88].
Even at low strain rates (<0.01/s), brain tissue can exhibit time-varying proper-
ties. Under a periodic loading cycle, brain tissue experiences hysteresis during the
unloading process due to the material’s viscoelastic relaxation properties (Fig. 11).
Viscoelasticity implies that the brain tissue has an elastic component and loss

230
A. Sridharan and J. Muthuswamy
Fig. 11 (a) Cyclic loading of brain tissue induces a hysteresis where lower stresses occur for
a given strain due to viscoelastic material properties of the brain tissue. (b) Stresses in brain
tissue are dynamic in response to a step indentation protocol (arrows). Brain tissue relaxes under
a constant load in an exponential manner that can be characterized using a Prony series model.
(c) Example of an actual force-displacement curve from rodent brain cortex and olfactory bulb
in vivo for a 200-μm-diameter probe [92]. (The ﬁgure used with permission of IEEE from “In
Vivo Penetration Mechanics and Mechanical Properties of Mouse Brain Tissue at Micrometer
Scales,” by A. A. Sharp, A. M. Ortega, D. Restrepo, D. Curran-Everett, and K. Gall, vol. 56,
no. 1, 2009; permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. © IEEE. Reproduced
with permission. All rights reserved.) (d) Example of a step indentation showing relaxation of
tissue (swine model) in situ and in vivo (inset) over time. The effect of preconditioning is seen
in subsequent cycles compared to the ﬁrst cycle, and the micromotion induced by natural and
ventilator-induced breathing is also reﬂected during tissue relaxation [93]. (Figures were used with
permission of Elsevier from “Are in vivo and in situ brain tissues mechanically similar?” by A.
Gefen and S. S. Margulies, vol. 37, no. 9, 2004. Copyright © Elsevier. All rights reserved)
(viscous) component under small strains. A pure elastic material will maintain
steady-state stress in response to a given strain, independent of strain duration.
In response to a given strain (Fig. 11b), a viscoelastic material will dissipate
some energy after reaching maximum stress, leading to stress relaxation within the
material. Under small strains, the brain tissue’s viscous and elastic components can

Quantitative Assessment of the Mechanical Properties of the Neural Interface
231
be assumed to be separable, characterized by a linear viscoelastic model. The shear
relaxation modulus can be ﬁt using a Prony series exponential model.:
G(t) = Gl +

i
Gie

−t
τi

(6)
where Gl is the long-term shear modulus when the material is fully relaxed and τ i
characterizes the material relaxation time. The material parameters derived from the
equation can be used to better understand the interaction of neural implants with
brain tissue both under acute conditions (involving fracture of meningeal layers
and the underlying brain tissue, rupture of blood capillaries, and displacement
of brain tissue as the implant penetrates the brain) and under chronic conditions
(involving mechanical stresses induced by relative micromotion of brain tissue and
extensive remodeling of vasculature and brain tissue around the neural implant).
We will provide more details in the subsequent sections on experimental and
modeling approaches based on equations such as (6) that we have developed and
used to quantitatively assess the mechanical properties of brain tissue around neural
implants under both acute and chronic conditions.
3
Biomechanics of the Neural Interface
3.1
Initial Penetration Phase
The forces experienced by a typical microscale implant/microelectrode during
insertion into rodent brain tissue under different conditions such as (a) presence
of intact dura mater (outer meningeal layer covering the brain), (b) dura removed
but intact inner meningeal layers (pia), and (c) cortical tissue without dura and pia
are shown in Fig. 12. The dura mater is an extremely stiff membrane (in comparison
with other brain tissues that enclose the brain and provide a protective barrier. The
elastic modulus of dura is ∼1 MPa in the rat brain and ∼60 MPa in the human
brain [94]) that results in signiﬁcantly different force-displacement plot for other
species. Table 3 shows the inﬂuence of meningeal layers on ranges of insertion
stresses in the somatosensory cortex during the initial dimpling/indentation phase
in rat models. Removal of the dura mater with minimal damage to the blood vessels
and other tissues below maintains the maximum indentation stresses at ∼4–8 kPa.
If mechanical damage to the inner meningeal layers occurs or if multiple insertions
of the electrode are done at the same site, the effective stresses are between 0.5
and 3.3 kPa, which is similar to the range of intracranial pressure values in the
CSF. Since the dura mater has a high collagen content, enzymatic breakdown
of the dural membrane with collagenase treatment softens the layer enough for
electrode penetration with minimal dimpling. We sometimes observed bleeding with
collagenase treatment since blood vessels typically have a high collagen content.

232
A. Sridharan and J. Muthuswamy
Fig. 12 Force-displacement curves (one can determine displacements by multiplying the insertion
speed indicated at the bottom of the plot with time on the x-axis) during insertion of microindenters
to a distance of 1 mm into rat brain tissue followed by termination of movement and tissue
relaxation. Microelectrode insertion into the brain in vivo shows the signiﬁcant inﬂuence of dura
and inner meningeal layers in a rat. In this representative example, we recorded the axial forces
from a load cell attached to a platinum/iridium microwire electrode as it was inserted through
the brain tissue at ∼10 μm/s. We observe a large deformation or dimpling of the brain tissue
(approximately 1 mm depth) before penetration (peak force indicated by arrow) in the presence of
meningeal layers, immediately followed by a decrease in measured forces on the tissue
Table 3 Inﬂuence of meningeal layers on insertion stresses in rat cortex
Surgical observations
No. of animals
Maximum
stresses during
indenta-
tion/dimpling
Clean excision of dura without visible damage to inner
meningeal layers
10
6.3–8.3 kPa
Collagenase removal of the dura
2
8.5–10.5 kPa
Nicked dura/small incision at the electrode site
7
4.4–5.5 kPa
Visibly damaged pia (broken blood vessels, fully exposed
cortex, sheared tissue)
9
0.48–3.3 kPa
Multiple insertions at the same site
2
1.9–2.4 kPa
aData from [26]
3.2
Chronic Micromotion and a Mechanical Mismatch
at the Neural Interface
It is a well-known phenomenon that brain tissue moves within the cranium (and
hence relative to an implanted probe that is ﬁxed to the skull) due to spatially

Quantitative Assessment of the Mechanical Properties of the Neural Interface
233
Fig. 13 Relative tissue displacements in the human brain due to pressure waves emanating from
breathing and vascular pulsatility. Data from MR-based measurements from [95]
propagating pressure waves created by the combination of breathing and local
vascular pulsatility. We have sketched the direction of propagation of mechanical
pressure waves in a human brain as estimated from MR-based measurements from
prior studies [59] in Fig. 13 as the wave propagates up the brain stem through
the midbrain and to the outer cortical sulci and gyri. The relative intensity of the
pressure wave is highest near the brain stem and lowest in the cortical regions
with ∼300–400 ms delay from the brain stem to the cortical areas. Recent MRI-
based studies have sought to capture the displacement level in various brain
regions in human subjects [95–97]. Typical data for humans at rest are 40–200-μm
displacements, as seen in Fig. 13 [95]. Poncelet et al. have measured a maximum
of 500-μm displacement near the thalamus in human subjects [98]. Based on data
from our lab and other studies, we have plotted the amplitude of micromotion
in brain tissue as a function of brain volume in different species in Fig. 14. We
observe a monotonic increase (under two distinct conditions of open versus closed
craniotomy) in micromotion-induced brain tissue displacements with increasing
brain volume (Fig. 14). Mice typically have a 2–5-μm displacement [99, 100] and
rats 10–30-μm breathing-related change and 1–5-μm vascular-related displacement
[91]. In cats, breathing-related micromotion can displace brain tissue 300–950 μm
and 100–250 μm due to vascular pulsatility [101]. Anesthetized macaque monkeys
displace ∼87 μm [102]. The slightly higher values for cats compared to larger
brain volumes might be due to an open craniotomy system. The anatomical
variations between quadruped and biped may also play a role in the level of
displacement.

234
A. Sridharan and J. Muthuswamy
Fig. 14 A plot of micromotion-induced brain tissue displacement as a function of brain volume
across species. Data summarized from [91, 95–97, 99–102]
3.3
Brain Shift and Lead Migration
Patients implanted with DBS electrodes often experience a loss of treatment efﬁcacy
due to lead migration within the brain that often shifts >3–4 mm from the targeted
region [13, 14]. An example of brain shift is seen in Fig. 15, where bilateral electrode
placement shifts the position of brain structures up to 10 mm.
A biomechanical stressor that contributes to this failure mode is the loss of
hydrostatic pressure during lead placement. Lead placement in humans is a highly
invasive process involving a craniotomy through which leads are placed in deep
brain structures. The Monro-Kellie hypothesis suggests that the brain is a closed
system whose mechanical homeostasis is preserved by maintaining the hydrostatic
pressure of CSF and interstitial ﬂuids and brain volume (Fig. 16a). The brain is a
highly dynamic organ with a constant turnover of blood and ﬂuid to clear waste
from highly metabolic neurons and support cells. It is estimated that 10% of the
total ﬂuid in the brain is CSF, 10% blood, 15–20% interstitial ﬂuid, and > 60% is
intracellular [104]. The glymphatic system maintains the pressure balance between
tissue for appropriate clearance of waste and delivery of metabolites (Fig. 16b). The
intracranial pressure (ICP) reﬂects the hydraulic pressure generated by CSF and the
vascular component. Typical resting pressures are between 0.5 and 2.5 kPa, though
this may change with posture, stress, and injury (Fig. 17). The ICP also ﬂuctuates
with respiratory and vascular pressures (Fig. 17a). In a closed skull, the ﬂuctuations
in ICP due to the combined effects of breathing and heart rate pulsations are large;
however, a craniotomy induces dampening of the pressure as the brain tissue now
has more room for expansion. The initial injury response below 2.5 kPa (i.e., a

Quantitative Assessment of the Mechanical Properties of the Neural Interface
235
Fig. 15 T2-weighted MR image showing brain tissue (a) pre-electrode placement and (b) post-
bilateral electrode placement, where brain shift is observed most obviously in the frontal and
temporal lobe. The MR images are axial images in the anterior commissure plane and posterior
commissure with a 2-mm slice thickness and 1-mm voxel size. Regional measurements (red) were
made pre- and post-electrode placement, where the frontal lobe moved up to 10 mm and deep brain
structures moved up to 2 mm [103]. (The ﬁgure was used with permission of JNSPG from “Brain
shift during bur-hole-based procedures using interventional MRI: Clinical article,” by M. E Ivan
et al., vol. 121, no. 1, 2014; permission conveyed through Rockwater, Inc. Copyright © JNSPG All
rights reserved)
craniotomy or insertion of DBS lead) is to maintain the homeostasis by adjusting
the ﬂuidic pressure via (a) vasodilation/constriction of the cerebral vasculature, (b)
manipulation of ICP by CSF production, or (c) changing cerebral perfusion pressure
(Fig. 17b). The ﬂuidic compensation system’s tolerance fails beyond 2.5 kPa, and
the brain begins to deform to maintain the pressure-volume criteria. Above 6.5 kPa,
the brain tissue as a material fails due to low compliance and high elastance resulting
in the collapse of the microvasculature.
In summary, many biomechanical stressors can inﬂuence the performance
and biocompatibility of neural implants/interfaces both under acute and chronic
conditions. Under acute conditions, insertion stresses (controlled by the geometry
of the implant, number of implants in the array, speed of insertion, presence of
meninges, etc.) and trajectory of insertion (rupture of any large blood vessels in
the path of insertion resulting in signiﬁcant ischemic stresses) play a crucial role
in determining the long-term stability and reliability of the neural interface. Under
chronic conditions, the key drivers are body movement, micromotion, and ﬂuidic
pressure-brain tissue volume homeostasis, including blood ﬂow and glymphatic
dynamics.

236
A. Sridharan and J. Muthuswamy
Fig. 16 (a) The brain’s ﬂuidic system diagram comprises blood, CSF and interstitial ﬂuid, and the
brain parenchyma (ECM + cells). CSF production occurs in the choroid plexus, which establishes
a direction of ﬂow in the ventricles, subarachnoid space, sinuses, and parenchyma. (b) The
glymphatic system is the ﬂow of ﬂuids across the parenchyma for cell waste clearance, metabolic
delivery, and hydrostatic pressure maintenance
4
Methods to Quantitatively Assess the Mechanical
Properties of the Brain Tissue-Implant Interface
This section will provide a combination of experimental and modeling techniques
to characterize the mechanical properties of brain tissue at the implant-tissue
interface both in the acute and chronic experiments. We have used these techniques

Quantitative Assessment of the Mechanical Properties of the Neural Interface
237
Fig. 17 (a) Illustration of ICP due to breathing and vascular pulsations (adapted from [105]).
During a craniotomy, the exposure of the brain to air dampens the pressure and related pulsations
[106]. (b) Illustration of the pressure-brain volume compensation relationship. If ﬂuidic pressure
compensation mechanisms fail, the brain tissue deforms to maintain mechanical homeostasis.
Beyond 6.5 kPa (∼50 mmHg), the brain material has low compliance and high elastance, leading
to mechanical tissue failure. (c) Brain shift and deformation (arrows) due to unilateral DBS lead
placement in one hemisphere and an intracranial air displacement of approximately 4 mm during
surgery. Light blue indicates CSF, and dark blue reﬂects the change in CSF volume and brain
displacement. (Adapted from [13])
extensively in our Neural Microsystems Laboratory at Arizona State University,
Tempe. We have also trained neural engineers from other universities in these
techniques to help quantitatively characterize the new generation of soft interfaces.
These techniques are described in the form of an experimental protocol and are
intended to help readers replicate these measurements in their laboratories with a
few pilot experiments and some investment in load cells ($1000–1500) and other
standard surgical supplies found in a neuronal electrophysiology laboratory.
4.1
Conventional Methods for in Vitro and in Vivo Assessment
of Brain Tissue
Current in vitro brain studies typically utilize microindentation or nano-indentation
methods to determine brain tissue’s mechanical properties. Typical experiments
involve a brain tissue specimen being placed under strain (i.e., compression, tension,
shear, etc.) [47, 107–110]. Multiple loading rates (0.01 to >100 mm/s) are used

238
A. Sridharan and J. Muthuswamy
Fig. 18 Current methods to assess the mechanical properties of brain tissue. In in vitro methods
(top row), the tissue is typically immobilized between two plates, which can be moved in either
a biaxial (strain-induced along two axes) or a uniaxial (strain-induced along one axis) manner.
The microindentation method assumes a “uniaxial” mode where the indentation-induced strain
is much smaller than the specimen size. AFM and other piezo method nano-indenters use a
similar principle. In vivo methods (bottom row) typically utilize microindentation methods or
induce minute tissue displacements via periodic mechanical vibrations that can be measured using
ultrasound or magnetic resonance (MR) imaging
to obtain force-displacement curves from which stress-strain relationships from
different strain rates are derived and modeled. The main mechanical testing methods
for brain tissue are shown in Fig. 18. Alternatively, microindenters and atomic force
microscopy (AFM) or piezo-based nano-indenters have also been used to study
microelectrode insertion mechanics and brain material properties in neuronal and
mixed cultures and in situ [48, 49, 51, 53–54, 111–113]. The physical principle
for microindentation is similar to the uniaxial testing method, though with one side
being held unconstrained. A general rule of thumb to consider in microindentation
and nano-indentation is to keep the indentation depth at most three to ﬁve times the
thickness of the indenter (assuming the thickness of the specimen is much larger
than the indentation depth) to mitigate the inﬂuence of the support substrate on
which the sample is placed. Similar to uniaxial, biaxial, and triaxial testing, force-
displacement curves are measured in microindentation studies and analyzed for

Quantitative Assessment of the Mechanical Properties of the Neural Interface
239
material properties. The main advantage of microindentation and nano-indentation
is the precise assessment of mechanical properties of microscale areas of brain tissue
in situ and living cells in vitro in a variety of biological microenvironments and
disease states.
Brain material properties are currently assessed in vivo using either millimeter
scale or microscale indentation [92, 93, 114, 115] or elastography methods using
MR or ultrasound [68, 74, 116]. Elastography methods are useful for spatiotemporal
mapping of relative stiffness between anatomical regions but suffer from low
resolution. The fundamental assumption is that the brain follows a linear viscoelastic
model, which may not hold in regions rich with white matter tract or brain tissue
subject to high deformation rates, as seen in Fig. 9. In vivo microindentation
involves making point measurements on brain tissue with microscale precision,
dependent on load cell sensitivity and range. Typical loading rates (0.01–100 mm/s)
are not oscillatory, and deformation rates are often orders of magnitude smaller than
elastography methods. For instance, Gefen and Marguiles utilized a 2-mm-diameter
ﬂat surface indenter for the porcine brain surface in vivo, while Sharp et al. inserted
cylindrical ﬂat punch and sharp microprobes (∼100–200 μm diameter) to determine
brain tissue material parameters in the cerebral cortex and olfactory bulb in vivo [92,
93]. The range of elastic moduli 3–10 kPa derived using microindentation is similar
to those derived using uniaxial and biaxial methods under low loading conditions.
4.2
Penetrating Microindentation Methods for Assessing Neural
Interfaces in Vivo
The methods summarized in Sect. 4.1 face several technical challenges when used
to assess the mechanical properties of a neural interface in vivo since the neural
interface consists of both the neural implant and brain tissue within a distance
of a few hundred microns from the neural implant. We cannot readily extend the
conventional microindentation and nano-indentation technique designed solely for
brain tissues to neural interfaces in vivo. Elastography methods (both ultrasound
and MR) do not have an adequate spatial resolution. Therefore, we have developed
an improvised “penetrating microindentation” technique [25] that can be used to
assess the mechanical properties of a neural interface both in acute [25, 26, 31] and
chronic experiments [26]. Using this technique, we have assessed the mechanical
properties of neural interfaces in challenging chronic studies lasting over 6–8 weeks
[26]. The elastic modulus of brain tissue at the neural interface changes from 5 kPa
to 33 kPa in the ﬁrst 4 weeks postimplantation as the brain tissue remodels in the
interface [26].
The material properties (such as the elastic modulus) assessed from the force-
displacement curves are due to the combined effect of both the indenter and the brain
tissue (Fig. 19). Force measurements of probes with hyper-soft, silicone coatings
using the penetrating microindentation technique showed lower forces exerted on
tissue as the implant was inserted into the cortex [25].

240
A. Sridharan and J. Muthuswamy
Fig. 19 The effective elastic modulus of brain tissue is based on the relative contributions of the
brain tissue and the indenter (Eq. 7). Soft indenters show a lower effective elastic modulus than
hard indenters. The indenter’s elastic modulus needs to be at least two orders more than that of the
tissue sample to measure tissue elastic modulus
In theory, one can deﬁne the effective elastic modulus (E*) as [117]:
1
E∗= 1 −ν2
brain
Ebrain
+ 1 −ν2
indenter
Eindenter
,
(7)
where νbrain is 0.5 assuming incompressibility of brain tissue and νindenter is varied
between to account for indenter material properties (i.e., elastic modulus, coatings
that may give composite characteristics to the indenter material). Theoretically,
the effective elastic modulus, E*, approaches the elastic modulus of the brain,
Ebrain, when the indenter’s elastic modulus is at least two orders of magnitude
higher compared to Ebrain. Both Ebrain and E* can be determined using different
sections of the force-displacement curve (more details in Sect. 4.4) obtained from
the penetrating microindentation experiment. Since Eindenter is typically a known
value, both Ebrain and the effective elastic modulus of the neural interface E* can be
validated using Eq. 7 above.
4.3
Experimental Setup for the Penetrating Microindentation
Technique
The key to deriving material properties of brain tissue is obtaining good quality
force-displacement curves in vivo. While relatively inexpensive, the experimental

Quantitative Assessment of the Mechanical Properties of the Neural Interface
241
setup requires careful attention to external perturbations that may inﬂuence the mea-
surement. A typical in vivo penetrating microindentation experiment involves (a)
constant, controllable insertion rate using a motorized micromanipulator (hydraulic
microactuators with minimal transient and sustained vibrations during motion work
well), (b) a high sensitivity load cell (at least 10 μN resolution) and a rigid mount
for the load cell to mount the microindenters, and (c) microindenters (that will also
serve as neural implants) with well-deﬁned tip geometries. For microindentation
experiments in chronic experiments that require measurement of force-displacement
curves several weeks post-insertion (before and after insertion injury), the indenter
needs to preserve the same frame of reference for comparative assessments. To
accomplish this, the indenter can be held in place using rigid cranial supports after
implantation (as illustrated in Fig. 20). To preserve brain tissue integrity in the
neural interface (i.e., brain tissue in contact with the microindenter/implant), the
rigid cranial support uses a gentle unloading/loading mechanism for the load cell
using a weak magnet. A rigid frame attached to the skull surface is necessary to hold
the indenter/implant in place in chronic conditions until it is ready to be used for
microindentation and accompanying force measurements. During the measurement
process, the indenter must be free-ﬂoating relative to the skull/cranium to maintain
frame of reference. The rigid nylon frame can be cut using a hot knife without
inducing torque that might disturb the integrity of the neural interface. In the acute
experiment, the frame is not used, and the indenter is pre-mounted to the load cell.
One of the most critical aspects of the experimental setup is the surgical
preparation and maintenance of the brain tissue’s integrity in the craniotomy. The
frame of reference of the measurement needs to be with respect to the brain tissue,
which means the animal has to be mounted on a stereotaxic frame that constrains the
skull rigidly in place, preventing even microscopic movement of the head (induced
by breathing) by clamping the nose snugly and using ear bars (Fig. 20c). Any
motion from the skull/head can generate motion artifacts in force measurements.
One way to minimize such motion is to place a small contact on the skull (without
touching the brain) and measure forces using the load cell and then adjust the ear
bars and nose clamp till the forces registered by the load cell are minimal and
close to zero. For measurements of force-displacement curves, an indenter/implant
mounted on a tension-compression load cell, unattached to the skull, is placed
close to the brain tissue in the craniotomy before being inserted into the brain at
a constant rate. For acute measurements, one should note that the ﬁrst ∼500 μm
will be inﬂuenced by the meningeal layers (Table 3). For chronic measurements, the
brain tissue around the indenter needs to be kept hydrated and moist without blood
measuring micromotion-induced forces emanating from the brain tissue. One way
to eliminate any blood clots and encrustation in the craniotomy is to perform regular
saline washes and connective tissue debridement around the craniotomy. Gel foam
is placed in the surrounding area around the indenter and sealed with a removable
coverslip.
At a prescribed time point (typically days to weeks) postimplantation, the rigid
nylon frame is detached from the indenter after the load cell is mounted and
coupled to the indenter using the weak magnet. Once the indenter is connected

242
A. Sridharan and J. Muthuswamy
Fig. 20 Rigid nylon support frame for chronic “penetrating microindentation” experiments in
rodents. (a) Image of microindenter with removable cranial supports for acute and chronic
measurements [26]. (b) The diagram shows the frame with an indenter implanted in a ∼2-mm-
diameter craniotomy in the rat somatosensory cortex for a “before injury” measurement. After
placement of the indenter in the brain tissue, the craniotomy is sealed with a removable coverslip.
The cranial supports are placed on the skull and immobilized with bone cement to preserve indenter
location, and the load cell is removed for later use at later time points. (c) A 10-g load cell with
indenter is shown with a rat in the stereotaxic frame. The arrows stress the importance of a ﬁrm
lock on the head using ear bars and nose clip to prevent head movement, impacting load cell
measurements. (d) For chronic time point, the load cell is gently mounted on the indenter, and the
struts for the indenter are cut using a hot knife to prevent torque and potential shearing of tissue
near the indentation. The load cell-attached indenter is then further pressed forward at a constant
rate using an FHC motorized microdrive into the tissue for post-injury measurement
to the load cell and detached from the rigid nylon frame, it is free to move and
be inserted into the brain tissue enabling force-displacement curve measurements
at the predetermined chronic time point postimplantation. This predetermined
time point could be multiple weeks postimplantation. Unfortunately, once the
indenter/implant is moved over a distance of typically 1 mm at the chronic time point
postimplantation and a force-displacement curve is generated, the brain tissue in
the neural interface is now disrupted. It, therefore, cannot be assessed subsequently
in longitudinal experiments. Thus, the penetrating microindentation technique is
useful in determining the mechanical properties from force-displacement curves
during implantation of the indenter/implant and thereafter at one additional time
point (typically days and weeks) postimplantation to capture changes in the material
properties of brain tissue in the interface due to remodeling in the intervening period.

Quantitative Assessment of the Mechanical Properties of the Neural Interface
243
4.4
Analysis of Force-Displacement Curves
What does a good quality force-displacement curve look like? Key measure-
ment issues to consider are (a) tissue-probe contact mechanics and (b) electrode
geometry. Modeling ideas from conventional microindentation techniques (without
penetration) can be extended to analyzing force-displacement curves obtained from
penetrating microindentation techniques presented here. The key to getting accurate
estimates of the mechanical properties of brain tissue from an in vivo force-
displacement measurement is to ensure that the interface between the indenting
probe and the brain tissue needs to have a good contact for registering axial forces
that the brain exerts on the implant. Typical indentation probes may be Hertzian
(spherical probe) or Sneddon (typically conical, cylindrical probe). Analytical
solutions for the estimated contact area with a substrate are well-deﬁned, and
their respective load-displacement relationship engaged in contact mechanics is a
function of their geometry [118, 119]:
F = 4
3
E

1 −ν2
√
R i3/2, (Hertzian)
(8)
F = 2
π
E

1 −ν2 tan αi2, (Sneddon, conical)
(9)
F = 2
E

1 −ν2ai, (Sneddon, cylindrical)
(10)
where F is the loading force, E is the elastic modulus of the brain tissue, ν is the
Poisson’s ratio, R is the radius of the spherical indenter tip, a is the cross-section
area, α is the conical probe indenter half-angle, and i is the indentation depth.
A typical force-displacement curve of an indenter/implant moved into the tissue
at a constant rate shows a reasonably linear dependence with respect to insertion
depth till the movement into the brain tissue is stopped, after which the tissue
slowly relaxes against the probe (Fig. 21). The recorded forces are a combination of
compressive and shear forces. Mostly compressive forces occur due to indentation
during the initial portion of the force-displacement curve, followed by penetration
due to tissue fracture. One may use this portion of the force-displacement curve
before penetration to develop stress-strain curves that are useful to estimate the
elastic modulus of brain tissue (which may or may not have intact meninges).
Changing the insertion rates below 100 μm/s appears to have only a marginal
effect on the cortical brain tissue’s stress-strain properties. One can estimate the
mechanical properties of the neural interface (deﬁned as the brain tissue within
200 μm from the boundaries of the rigid implant) by modeling the latter segment
of the force-displacement curve (>500 μm) using linear viscoelastic models. One
can also generate the force-displacement curves involving the indenter/implant
movement from one depth location to a secondary depth location at a different
time point. This last aspect is advantageous in chronic conditions, where we are

244
A. Sridharan and J. Muthuswamy
Fig. 21 A typical force-displacement curve (time on the x-axis is multiplied by appropriate
constant insertion speed to get displacement) from a penetrating microindentation experiment is
shown above. In this experiment, a conical, stainless steel microprobe with a 200-μm-diameter
shaft is moved into the tissue at a constant rate of 10 μm/s. The initial portion (typically 300–
500 μm depth before penetration) is dominated by compressive forces, while shear forces dominate
subsequent movement into the brain tissue. Upon the end of the movement, the brain tissue
relaxes in a viscoelastic manner around the indenter/implant. One can use the initial portion of
the force displacement (typically <500-μm displacement into the brain tissue) to generate stress-
strain curves for estimating elastic moduli of brain tissue using hyperelastic or other models. In
contrast, the latter portion of the above curve may be modeled using linear viscoelastic brain tissue
models, whose instantaneous shear modulus (G(t)) can be deﬁned using a Prony series model. For
further explanation, see Sect. 4.4.2
interested in the mechanical properties of the brain tissue after remodeling around
the neural implant. In this case, the force-displacement curve obtained during the
second movement at a predetermined time point postimplantation will now yield
the corresponding stress-strain curves for the remodeled neural interface. Examples
of “good” quality force-displacement curves representing brain tissue material
properties are shown in Fig. 22a–c for different indenter geometries. In contrast,
examples of “bad” quality force-displacement curves are shown in Fig. 22d–f.
Since brain tissue tends to conform to the indenter’s shape, one may derive
effective contact stresses based on the indenters’ geometric surface area in contact
with the tissue. The experimentally derived forces are converted to effective stresses
based on the geometric area of contact between the probe and the tissue. One
can plot these dynamic stresses or nominal stresses against the strain to obtain
stress-strain curves. Examples of compressive stress-strain curves for chronic
measurements are shown in Fig. 23, where microprobes initially implanted at 1 mm
depth in the rat cortex were indented again at different time points, showing the
gradual increase in elastic modulus of the brain tissue over 4 weeks and subsequent
softening at 6 weeks [26].

Quantitative Assessment of the Mechanical Properties of the Neural Interface
245
Fig. 22 Representative force-displacement curves (displacements can be determined by multiply-
ing the insertion speed indicated at the bottom of the individual plots with time on the x-axis)
during insertion of microindenters to a distance of 1 mm into brain tissue followed by termination
of movement and tissue relaxation. Force-displacement curves shown correspond to (a) a truncated
conical tip with 200 μm diameter at the base that tapers to −20 μm tip diameter; (b) ﬂat, cylindrical
punch with 200 μm base diameter and no taper; and (c) a silicon shank with a rectangular
cross-section of ∼120 × 30 μm at the base tapering into a sharp tip. (d) Representative force-
displacement curve shows indenter/implant hitting a cortical blood vessel generating high forces.
We observed rapid ﬂooding of the craniotomy with blood after the removal of the probe. Inset
shows a different implant with good insertion forces but with blood pooling and clotting around
the implant after ∼1000 s, generating a large tension force on the implant (arrow) similar to a
tethering effect. (e) Examples of force-displacement curves on day 1 and day 14 after implantation
where forces are relatively constant due to ﬂuidic accumulation around probes. We terminated the
movement as per protocol after 10 s. Micromotion-induced forces were larger on day 1 compared
to day 14. (f) Example of the force-displacement curve during an additional 1-mm insertion
movement of an implanted microprobe placed in the cortex >30 days at 1 mm depth in highly
stiff, visibly dry, and dehydrated brain tissue that was not irrigated appropriately

246
A. Sridharan and J. Muthuswamy
Fig. 23 Chronic stress-strain curves derived from the indentation portion of the force-
displacement (or strain) curve for microprobes implanted at 1 mm depth and indented at day
1 through 6 weeks postimplantation show dynamic changes in elasticity of surrounding brain
tissue due to implantation injury. The curves were smoothed to remove micromotion-related stress
changes [26]
4.4.1
Models of Stress-Strain Relationship in Brain Tissue
Brain tissue is typically modeled as a continuous material with isotropic and
incompressible material properties. Under equilibrium conditions, the stress-strain
relationship can be deﬁned using a strain energy density function U. Typically,
deformation in a continuum is described using a second-order strain tensor (F)
deﬁned as:
F = ∂x
∂X =
⎡
⎣
∂x
∂X
∂x
∂Y
∂x
∂Z
∂y
∂X
∂y
∂Y
∂y
∂Z
∂z
∂X
∂z
∂Y
∂z
∂Z
⎤
⎦,
(11)
where x is deﬁned as a position within the continuum that is rotated and stretched
and dX is the reference position on the undeformed body. The left Cauchy-Green
strain, also known as the spatial tensor B, describes the deformation in terms of the
spatial coordinate system and is deﬁned as
B = F • F T .
(12)
The strain invariants of B are I1, I2, and I3, and they are deﬁned as:
I1 = tr(B),
(13)

Quantitative Assessment of the Mechanical Properties of the Neural Interface
247
I2 = 1
2

tr(B)2 −tr

B2
= 1
2

I 2
1 −tr (B • B)

(14)
I3, J = det(B).
(15)
Brain tissue, along with other biological tissue materials, is commonly modeled
as an elastomer or a rubber using a strain energy density-dependent polynomial U
that is a function of I1, I2, I3, or Jel:
U =
N

i+j=1
Cij(I1 −3)i(I2 −3)j +
N

i=1
1
Di
(Jel −1)2i
(16)
where Cij are the material parameters, I1 and I2 are strain invariants, Jel is the elastic
volume strain, and Di is a compressibility coefﬁcient, which typically is set to zero
due to incompressibility. If N is 1, the equation is reduced to a ﬁrst-order model
commonly referred to as neo-Hookean . A prevalent model for brain tissue using
the ﬁrst two terms of Eq. 16 is the Mooney-Rivlin model [107]. Other models are
Yeoh, Arruda-Boyce, and second- and third-order Ogden models, where I1, I2, and
I3 are dependent [120]. The choice of models is often dependent on the levels of
strain measured and the model’s ability to predict the material response accurately.
Typically, neo-Hookean models are only accurate for strain <20%, while Mooney-
Rivlin models may be appropriate for strain levels of 100–150%. Other models such
as Ogden and Yeoh could better predict across a wide range of strain levels.
From the experimentally derived stress-strain curves, one can derive parameters
for hyperelastic models like the Mooney-Rivlin model through either forward or
inverse models [121]. A forward model uses a model to predict brain tissue
stress-strain behavior given a set of parameters and compares it to experimentally
derived data. In contrast, an inverse model attempts to ﬁt hyperelastic parameters
by minimizing the differences between the model and the experimentally derived
data in an iterative optimization process. Finite element analysis (FEA) tools like
Abaqus can be used to develop an indentation model with a virtual indenter/implant
and simulated brain tissue with hyperelastic properties. Using a constrained design
optimization protocol (inverse model), the hyperelastic parameters (Cij) or cus-
tomized hyperelastic, viscoelastic models are determined to ﬁt the experimental
data. Alternately, Abaqus 6.11 also has a built-in material evaluation feature with
a least squares regression model that could be used to determine parameters (Cij)
from experimentally derived data for common models such as the neo-Hookean,
Mooney-Rivlin, Yeoh, Arruda-Boyce, Ogden models, etc.
4.4.2
Models of Viscoelastic Properties of Brain Tissue
After termination of movement in the microprobe indenter insertion process, the
brain tissue exponentially relaxes against the probe due to its viscoelastic properties.
One can use the shear portion of the insertion stress curve to model this behavior
using a Prony series model, typically either as a two- or three-parameter model

248
A. Sridharan and J. Muthuswamy
(Eq. 6). Each point on the insertion curve is related to the instantaneous shear
modulus (G(0)), which in empirical studies has been determined to have a linear
relationship with insertion rate or step size [12]. Therefore, the relaxation response
of the shear modulus G(t) as a function of depth and time is predictable regardless
of whether the terminal depth is 100 μm or 1–2 mm in cortical tissue. The long-
term or steady-state shear modulus Gl is experimentally derived at G(90 s). Beyond
90 s, other factors may introduce variations due to blood and ﬂuid ﬂow and motion-
induced shearing of tissue. Gefen and Marguiles [93] also used similar criteria as
the point where steady-state stresses due to tissue relaxation due to internal material
stresses occur. The experimentally derived data may be ﬁtted using a least squares
regression in MATLAB or other curve-ﬁtting tools based on this model. Examples
from chronic implant-based indentation data are shown in Fig. 24.
The parameters derived from the hyperelastic, viscoelastic models may be
compared to estimations from linear, viscoelastic models. In a linear viscoelastic
system, the elastic modulus (E) is related to the shear modulus (G) based on Eq. 4.
Assuming the Poisson’s ratio (ν) is 0.5, the equation reduces to:
E ∼3G.
(17)
As an estimation of elastic modulus from hyperelastic models like Mooney-
Rivlin:
E ∼6 (C10 + C01) .
(18)
Based on data from [26], the elastic moduli derived from hyperelastic models of
the indentation portion for pristine cortical brain tissue were 4.0–7.8 kPa, while the
elastic moduli derived from two-parameter viscoelastic models were 2.7–7.5 kPa.
Although the range is wider for viscoelastic models, possibly due to fracture post-
Fig. 24 (a) A chronic penetrating microindentation protocol shows an initial insertion depth
(∼1 mm) and a ﬁnal insertion depth (1.5–2 mm) at a chronic time point. (b) Two-parameter
Prony series model ﬁt (Eq. 6) for the relaxation phase of the force-displacement curves yields
the instantaneous shear modulus G(0) over 0–56 days postimplantation. G1, G2, and Gl are
parameter values derived at t = 0 using Eq. 6. There is a monotonic increase in G(0) over 30 days
postimplantation, likely due to inﬂammatory processes and tissue remodeling around the neural
implant during this period. The surprising decrease in G(0) back to nearly baseline levels of
1–5 kPa over 30–56 days likely indicates compacting of scar tissue around the neural implant

Quantitative Assessment of the Mechanical Properties of the Neural Interface
249
insertion and tissue damage, the general estimated range for Mooney-Rivlin-based
hyperelastic and viscoelastic models overlaps and is comparable to those reported
in the literature [47, 93, 114].
4.4.3
Mechanical Stresses Due to Periodic Micromotion of Brain
Tissue
Another piece of information derived from the force-displacement curves is the
respiratory and vascular contributions of micromotion-induced stresses. Figure 25
shows a close-up of experimentally derived forces at steady state (after the implant
has reached targeted depth), showing changes due to respiratory- and vascular-
induced micromotion. The breathing rate frequencies are ∼1–2 Hz, while the
overriding vascular component is ∼3–5 Hz, whose pulsations are closely matching
the recorded data. Reported micromotion-induced tissue displacements for a rat
model ranged from 10 to 30 μm due to breathing and from 2 to 5 μm due to
vascular pulsations [91]. The level of displacements is expected to be dependent
on the species and their relative size, as shown in Fig. 14, with data supporting up
to 100–200-μm displacements in the cortex of humans. Behavior-induced episodic
movements of brain tissue are expected to be on the order of millimeters in the
human brain, albeit there are no precise measurements yet to conﬁrm this.
Fig. 25 Forces (mostly shear) experienced by the indenter due to relative micromotion of brain
tissue against the indenter in response to respiratory and vascular pulsations. Forces due to
the vascular (smaller) component rides on top of the larger breathing-related pulsations. The
experimental setup is similar to Fig. 20c and d with the probe placed at a depth in the brain.
The relative micromotion-induced stress is measured on the stationary probe along the axis
perpendicular to the brain tissue

250
A. Sridharan and J. Muthuswamy
In summary, critical steps in the penetrating microindentation method to obtain-
ing successful force-displacement curves for determining material properties of the
brain tissue/neural interface are:
1. Good surgical preparation
2. Sensitive load cell with precisely controlled loading rates
3. Stable chronic indentation setup with gentle loading and unloading of the
indenter
4. Microindenter/implants with known geometries and material properties
Essential information that can be derived from force-displacement curves are:
1. Stress-strain curves from indentation portion of the curve
2. Elastic modulus derived from stress-strain curves
3. Shear modulus and tissue relaxation properties
4. Degree of micromotion-induced mechanical stresses at the interface
5
Discussion and Conclusions: Neural Interface Design
from a Biomechanics Perspective
The main challenge in neural interface design continues to be stability and reliabil-
ity. Biomechanics plays a signiﬁcant role in the stability and reliability of implanted
devices in vivo. From a biomaterials perspective, the mechanical mismatch between
implants and the brain tissue is a signiﬁcant contributor to biomechanical stressors
in the brain both in the acute and chronic conditions that accelerate failure. Recent
efforts to minimize the above mismatch through novel biomaterials are summarized
in Fig. 26, where the elastic moduli of different biomaterials are compared against
brain tissue. As shown, the elastic moduli of soft materials that have been used for
neural interfaces in the recent years, such as eDuraTM, thiolene/acrylate, etc., are
still at least three orders of magnitude higher than the elastic modulus of brain
tissue. Elastic moduli of conventional materials, such as tungsten, silicon, etc.,
are at least seven to eight orders of magnitude higher than the elastic modulus of
brain tissue. To further highlight the signiﬁcant differences in elastic moduli, single
cortical neurons have been previously shown to exert a stress of 75 Pa on an AFM
tip, and typical elastic moduli for neurons range from 30 to 200 Pa [48, 122]. The
function of neurons adherent to the implanted neural interface can be signiﬁcantly
inﬂuenced by the implant’s elastic modulus. Past studies have shown that the
stiffness of the substrate on which neurons in culture adhered to caused changes
in neural activity, the strength of adhesion, neurite outgrowth, and branching [123–
130]. Besides, episodic stress rates of 85 Pa/s have been shown to induce changes
in calcium homeostasis, and rates exceeding 5600 Pa/s have been shown to cause
neuronal necrosis [131]. A study on the density of implanted probes showed that
higher-density material increased activated astrocytes near the interface compared
to lower-density materials [132]. If the neural tissue is already pre-strained near the

Quantitative Assessment of the Mechanical Properties of the Neural Interface
251
Fig. 26 Comparison of elastic moduli of common electrode materials, hydrogel, and other
polymer scaffolds used for neural interfaces. The relative mechanical mismatch is illustrated by
the fact that brain tissue and its cellular components are at least seven to ten orders softer than
common electrode materials (conductors and insulators). Typical tissue scaffolding materials can
be tuned to brain tissue mechanical properties, though their conductive properties for recording
and stimulation parameters are not par with common electrodes
interface due to the mechanical mismatch between probe and tissue interface, the
additional periodic strain rate imposed by micromotion may be a critical factor in
the chronic failure of devices. Current design strategies to counter the inﬂammatory
injury response and improve chronic biocompatibility and functional performance
include either redesigning devices to softer substrates or utilizing smaller implants.
Finite element models simulating micromotion also suggest that stiff probes induce
more stresses at the interface compared to soft, brain-like probes [30, 133–135].
We have used penetrating microindentation experiments to demonstrate that
mechanically compliant cellulose-based nanocomposites showed a substantial
decrease in the micromotion-induced average stress amplitudes and strain at the
interface compared to silicon and stainless steel [31] (Fig. 27). Soft materials and
soft coatings on materials like Matrigel™and other hydrogels and polymer blends
have been shown to improve histological and functional outcomes [6, 7, 30, 36, 38,
136–140]. Alternatively, ultrasmall probes also show improved biocompatibility and
functional performance [32–33, 141–144]. An analysis of histological outcomes and
microprobe mechanical and geometric qualities shows that both elastic modulus and
probe dimensions related via stiffness play a signiﬁcant role in the biocompatibility
factor at the interface [39]. Future designs must look into both material properties

252
A. Sridharan and J. Muthuswamy
Fig. 27 Comparison of elastic moduli of hard and tunably soft materials and their respective
micromotion-induced strains at the neural interface. Data from [31]. Silicon, typically used as
a base material in Utah and Michigan electrode arrays, generates ∼4–5 times more chronic
micromotion stresses on brain tissue than cellulose hydrogel-based nanocomposites
and geometry and appropriate models for biomechanical stressors at the brain-
device interface for long-term functional performance in humans.
References
1. Nuyujukian, P., et al.: Cortical control of a tablet computer by people with paralysis. PLoS
One. 13(11), 1–16 (2018)
2. Jun, J.J., et al.: Fully integrated silicon probes for high-density recording of neural activity.
Nature. 551(7679), 232–236 (2017)
3. Anand, S., Sutanto, J., Baker, M.S., Okandan, M., Muthuswamy, J.: Electrothermal microac-
tuators with peg drive improve performance for brain implant applications. J. Microelec-
tromech. Syst. 21(5), 1172–1186 (2012)
4. Hong, G., Yang, X., Zhou, T., Lieber, C.M.: Mesh electronics: a new paradigm for tissue-like
brain probes. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 50, 33–41 (2018)
5. Takeuchi, S., Yoshida, Y., Ziegler, D., Mabuchi, K., Suzuki, T.: Parylene ﬂexible neural probe.
In: 7th IEEE International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems. Maastricht
MEMS 2004 Technical Digest, 2004, pp. 208–211
6. Harris, J.P., et al.: In vivo deployment of mechanically adaptive nanocomposites for intracor-
tical microelectrodes. J. Neural Eng. 8(4), 046010 (2011)
7. Hess-Dunning, A., Tyler, D.J.: A mechanically-adaptive polymer nanocomposite-based
intracortical probe and package for chronic neural recording. Micromachines. 9(11):583
(2018)

Quantitative Assessment of the Mechanical Properties of the Neural Interface
253
8. Muthuswamy, J., Okandan, M., Gilletti, A., Baker, M.S., Jain, T.: An array of microactuated
microelectrodes for monitoring single-neuronal activity in rodents. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.
52(8), 1470–1477 (2005)
9. Muthuswamy, J., Okandan, M., Jain, T., Gilletti, A.: Electrostatic microactuators for precise
positioning of neural microelectrodes. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 52(10), 1748–1755 (2005)
10. Muthuswamy, J., Anand, S., Sridharan, A.: Adaptive movable neural interfaces for monitoring
single neurons in the brain. Front. Neurosci. 5, 94 (2011)
11. Jackson, N., Sridharan, A., Anand, S., Baker, M., Okandan, M., Muthuswamy, J.: Long-term
neural recordings using MEMS based movable microelectrodes in the brain. Front. Neuroeng.
3, 10 (2010)
12. Anand, S., Kumar, S.S., Muthuswamy, J.: Autonomous control for mechanically stable navi-
gation of microscale implants in brain tissue to record neural activity. Biomed. Microdevices.
18, 72 (2016)
13. Miyagi, Y., Shima, F., Sasaki, T.: Brain shift: an error factor during implantation of deep brain
stimulation electrodes. J. Neurosurg. 107(5), 989–997 (2007)
14. Bilger, A., Dequidt, J., Duriez, C., Cotin, S.: Biomechanical simulation of electrode
migration for deep brain stimulation. In: Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted
Intervention-MICCAI 2011, 2011, vol. Part 1, no. LNCS 6891, pp. 339–346
15. Dietz, A., Wennström, M., Lehtimäki, A., Löppönen, H., Valtonen, H.: Electrode migration
after cochlear implant surgery: more common than expected? Eur. Arch. Otorhinolaryngol.
273(6), 1411–1418 (2016)
16. Morishita, T., et al.: Postoperative lead migration in deep brain stimulation surgery: incidence,
risk factors, and clinical impact. PLoS One. 12(9), 1–22 (2017)
17. Polikov, V.S., Tresco, P.A., Reichert, W.M.: Response of brain tissue to chronically implanted
neural electrodes. J. Neurosci. Methods. 148(1), 1–18 (2005)
18. Bjornsson, C.S., et al.: Effects of insertion conditions on tissue strain and vascular damage
during neuroprosthetic device insertion. J. Neural Eng. 3(3), 196–207 (2006)
19. Syková, E., Nicholson, C.: Diffusion in brain extracellular space. Physiol. Rev. 88(4), 1277–
1340 (2008)
20. Donnan, F.G.: The theory of membrane equilibria. Chem. Rev. 1(1), 73–90 (1924)
21. Goriely, A., et al.: Mechanics of the brain: perspectives, challenges, and opportunities.
Biomech. Model. Mechanobiol. 14(5), 931–965 (2015)
22. Kozai, T.D.Y., Jaquins-Gerstl, A.S., Vazquez, A.L., Michael, A.C., Cui, X.T.: Brain tissue
responses to neural implants impact signal sensitivity and intervention strategies. ACS Chem.
Neurosci. 6(1), 48–67 (2015)
23. Holtzmann, K., Gautier, H.O.B., Christ, A.F., Guck, J., Káradóttir, R.T., Franze, K.: Brain
tissue stiffness is a sensitive marker for acidosis. J. Neurosci. Methods. 271, 50–54 (2016)
24. Casanova, F., Carney, P.R., Sarntinoranont, M.: Effect of needle insertion speed on tissue
injury, stress, and backﬂow distribution for convection-enhanced delivery in the rat brain.
PLoS One. 9(4), e94919 (2014)
25. Sridharan, A., Kodibagkar, V. D., Muthuswamy, J.: Penetrating microindentation of hyper-
soft, conductive silicone neural interfaces in vivo reveals signiﬁcantly lower mechanical
stresses. MRS Adv., Submitted 4, 2551–2558 (2019)
26. Sridharan, A., Rajan, S.D., Muthuswamy, J.: Long-term changes in the material properties of
brain tissue at the implant-tissue interface. J. Neural Eng. 10(6), 066001 (2013)
27. Biran, R., Martin, D.C., Tresco, P.A.: Neuronal cell loss accompanies the brain tissue response
to chronically implanted silicon microelectrode arrays. Exp. Neurol. 195, 115–126 (2005)
28. Woolley, A.J., Desai, H.A., Otto, K.J.: Chronic intracortical microelectrode arrays induce
non-uniform, depth-related tissue responses. J. Neural Eng. 10(2), 026007 (2013)
29. Stice, P., Muthuswamy, J.: Assessment of gliosis around moveable implants in the brain.
J. Neural Eng. 6(4), 46004 (2009)
30. Nguyen, J.K., et al.: Mechanically-compliant intracortical implants reduce the neuroinﬂam-
matory response. J. Neural Eng. 11(5), 056014 (2014)

254
A. Sridharan and J. Muthuswamy
31. Sridharan, A., Nguyen, J.K., Capadona, J.R., Muthuswamy, J.: Compliant intracortical
implants reduce strains and strain rates in brain tissue in vivo. J. Neural Eng. 12(3), 036002
(2015)
32. Stice, P., Gilletti, A., Panitch, A., Muthuswamy, J.: Thin microelectrodes reduce GFAP
expression in the implant site in rodent somatosensory cortex. J. Neural Eng. 4(2), 42–53
(2007)
33. Patel, P.R., et al.: Chronic in vivo stability assessment of carbon ﬁber microelectrode arrays.
J. Neural Eng. 13(6), 1–15 (2016)
34. Fu, T.M., Hong, G., Zhou, T., Schuhmann, T.G., Viveros, R.D., Lieber, C.M.: Stable long-
term chronic brain mapping at the single-neuron level. Nat. Methods. 13(10), 875–882
(2016)
35. Guitchounts, G., Markowitz, J.E., Liberti, W.A., Gardner, T.J.: A carbon-ﬁber electrode array
for long-term neural recording. J. Neural Eng. 10(4), 46016 (2013)
36. Du, Z.J., et al.: Ultrasoft microwire neural electrodes improve chronic tissue integration. Acta
Biomater. 53, 46–58 (2017)
37. Hara, S.A., Kim, B.J., Kuo, J.T.W., Lee, C.D., Meng, E., Pikov, V.: Long-term stability of
intracortical recordings using perforated and arrayed Parylene sheath electrodes. J. Neural
Eng. 13(6), 066020 (2016)
38. Spencer, K.C., Sy, J.C., Ramadi, K.B., Graybiel, A.M., Langer, R., Cima, M.J.: Erratum:
characterization of mechanically matched hydrogel coatings to improve the biocompatibility
of neural implants. Sci. Rep. 7(1), 12812 (2017)
39. Stiller, A., et al.: A meta-analysis of intracortical device stiffness and its correlation with
histological outcomes. Micromachines. 9(9), 443 (2018)
40. Barriga, E.H., Franze, K., Charras, G., Mayor, R.: Tissue stiffening coordinates morphogene-
sis by triggering collective cell migration in vivo. Nature. 554(7693), 523–527 (2018)
41. Franze, K.: The mechanical control of nervous system development. Development. 140(15),
3069–3077 (2013)
42. Athamneh, A.I.M., Suter, D.M.: Quantifying mechanical force in axonal growth and guid-
ance. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 9, 1–8 (2015)
43. Anava, S., Greenbaum, A., Ben Jacob, E., Hanein, Y., Ayali, A.: The regulative role of neurite
mechanical tension in network development. Biophys. J. 96(4), 1661–1670 (2009)
44. Tuft, B.W., et al.: Material stiffness effects on neurite alignment to photopolymerized
micropatterns. Biomacromolecules. 15(10), 3717–3727 (2014)
45. MacManus, D.B., Pierrat, B., Murphy, J.G., Gilchrist, M.D.: Region and species dependent
mechanical properties of adolescent and young adult brain tissue. Sci. Rep. 7(1), 1–12
(2017)
46. Hemphill, M.A., Dauth, S., Yu, C.J., Dabiri, B.E., Parker, K.K.: Traumatic brain injury and
the neuronal microenvironment: a potential role for neuropathological mechanotransduction.
Neuron. 85(6), 1177–1192 (2015)
47. Chatelin, S., Constantinesco, A., Willinger, R.: Fifty years of brain tissue mechanical testing:
from in vitro to in vivo investigations. Biorheology. 47(5–6), 255–276 (2010)
48. Spedden, E., White, J.D., Naumova, E.N., Kaplan, D.L., Staii, C.: Elasticity maps of living
neurons measured by combined ﬂuorescence and atomic force microscopy. Biophys. J.
103(5), 868–877 (2012)
49. Jagielska, A., Norman, A.L., Whyte, G., Van Vliet, K.J., Guck, J., Franklin, R.J.M.:
Mechanical environment modulates biological properties of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells.
Stem Cells Dev. 21(16), 2905–2914 (2012)
50. Bollmann, L., et al.: Microglia mechanics: immune activation alters traction forces and
durotaxis. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 9, 363 (2015)
51. Weickenmeier, J., de Rooij, R., Budday, S., Steinmann, P., Ovaert, T.C., Kuhl, E.: Brain
stiffness increases with myelin content. Acta Biomater. 42, 265–272 (2016)
52. Czosnyka, M., Pickard, J.D.: Monitoring and interpretation of intracranial pressure. J. Neurol.
Neurosurg. Psychiatry. 75(6), 813–821 (2004)
53. Bálint, Z., et al.: Changes induced by hyperosmotic mannitol in cerebral endothelial cells: an
atomic force microscopic study. Eur. Biophys. J. 36(2), 113–120 (2007)

Quantitative Assessment of the Mechanical Properties of the Neural Interface
255
54. Schrot, S., Weidenfeller, C., Schärfer, T.E., Robenek, H., Galla, H.J.: Inﬂuence of hydrocor-
tisone on the mechanical properties of the cerebral endothelium in vitro. Biophys. J. 89(6),
3904–3910 (2005)
55. Curry, N., Ghézali, G., Kaminski Schierle, G.S., Rouach, N., Kaminski, C.F.: Correlative
STED and atomic force microscopy on live astrocytes reveals plasticity of cytoskeletal
structure and membrane physical properties during polarized migration. Front. Cell. Neurosci.
11, 1–10 (2017)
56. Saldin, L.T., Cramer, M.C., Velankar, S.S., White, L.J., Badylak, S.F.: Extracellular matrix
hydrogels from decellularized tissues: structure and function. Acta Biomater. 49, 1–15 (2017)
57. Suh, C.M., Kim, S.H., Monson, K.L., Goldsmith, W.: Tensile characteristics and behavior
of blood vessels from human brain in uniaxial tensile test. KSME Int. J. 17(7), 1016–1025
(2003)
58. Wu, J.Z., Pan, C.S., Wimera, B.M., Rosen, C.L.: An improved ﬁnite element modeling of the
cerebrospinal ﬂuid layer in the head impact analysis. Biomed. Mater. Eng. 28(2), 187–189
(2017)
59. Mabuchi, T., Lucero, J., Feng, A., Koziol, J.A., Del Zoppo, G.J.: Focal cerebral ischemia
preferentially affects neurons distant from their neighboring microvessels. J. Cereb. Blood
Flow Metab. 25(2), 257–266 (2005)
60. Novak, U., Kaye, A.H.: Extracellular matrix and the brain: components and function. J. Clin.
Neurosci. 7(4), 280–290 (2000)
61. Lei, Y., Han, H., Yuan, F., Javeed, A., Zhao, Y.: The brain interstitial system: anatomy,
modeling, in vivo measurement, and applications. Prog. Neurobiol. 157, 230–246 (2017)
62. von Bartheld, C.S., Bahney, J., Herculano-Houzel, S.: The search for true numbers of neurons
and glial cells in the human brain: a review of 150 years of cell counting. J. Comp. Neurol.
524(18), 3865–3895 (2016)
63. Budday, S., et al.: Mechanical properties of gray and white matter brain tissue by indentation.
J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 46, 318–330 (2015)
64. Elkin, B.S.: Age-dependent regional mechanical properties of the rat hippocampus and cortex.
J. Biomech. Eng. 132(1), 11010 (2009)
65. Elkin, B.S., Azeloglu, E.U., Costa, K.D., Morrison III, B.: Mechanical heterogeneity of the
rat hippocampus measured by atomic force microscope indentation. J. Neurotrauma. 24(5),
812–822 (2007)
66. Feng, Y., Okamoto, R.J., Namani, R., Genin, G.M., Bayly, P.V.: Measurements of mechanical
anisotropy in brain tissue and implications for transversely isotropic material models of white
matter. J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 23, 117–132 (2013)
67. Antonovaite, N., Beekmans, S.V., Hol, E.M., Wadman, W.J., Iannuzzi, D.: Regional variations
in stiffness in live mouse brain tissue determined by depth-controlled indentation mapping.
Sci. Rep. 8(1), 1–18 (2018)
68. Mariappan, Y.K., Glaser, K.J., Ehman, R.L.: Magnetic resonance elastography: a review. Clin.
Anat. 23(5), 497–511 (2010)
69. Weaver, J.B., et al.: Brain mechanical property measurement using MRE with intrinsic
activation. Phys. Med. Biol. 57(22), 7275–7287 (2012)
70. ElSheikh, M., et al.: MR elastography demonstrates unique regional brain stiffness patterns
in dementias. AJR Am. J. Roentgenol. 209(2), 403–408 (2017)
71. Guo, J., et al.: Towards an elastographic atlas of brain anatomy. PLoS One. 8(8), e71807
(2013)
72. Boulet, T., Kelso, M.L., Othman, S.F.: Long-term in vivo imaging of viscoelastic properties of
the mouse brain after controlled cortical impact. J. Neurotrauma. 30(17), 1512–1520 (2013)
73. Bigot, M., Chauveau, F., Beuf, O., Lambert, S.A.: Magnetic resonance elastography of rodent
brain. Front. Neurol. 9, 1–8 (2018)
74. Kruse, S.A., et al.: Magnetic resonance elastography of the brain. NeuroImage. 39, 231–237
(2008)
75. Atay, S.M., Kroenke, C.D., Sabet, A., Bayly, P.V.: Measurement of the dynamic shear
modulus of mouse brain tissue in vivo by magnetic resonance elastography. J. Biomech. Eng.
130(2), 21013 (2008)

256
A. Sridharan and J. Muthuswamy
76. Boudjema, F., Khelidj, B., Lounis, M.: Dynamical properties of the brain tissue under
oscillatory shear stresses at large strain range. J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 790. 7790, 12002 (2017)
77. von Holst, H., Li, X.: Quantiﬁcation of stretching in the ventricular wall and corpus
callosum and corticospinal tracts in hydrocephalus before and after ventriculoperitoneal shunt
operation. J. Appl. Math. 2013(Cc), 1–10 (2013)
78. Selbekk, T., Brekken, R., Solheim, O., Lydersen, S., Hernes, T.A.N., Unsgaard, G.: Tissue
motion and strain in the human brain assessed by intraoperative ultrasound in glioma patients.
Ultrasound Med. Biol. 36(1), 2–10 (2010)
79. Prevost, T.P., Balakrishnan, A., Suresh, S., Socrate, S.: Biomechanics of brain tissue. Acta
Biomater. 7(1), 83–95 (2011)
80. Li, Z., Yang, H., Wang, G., Han, X., Zhang, S.: Compressive properties and constitutive
modeling of different regions of 8-week-old pediatric porcine brain under large strain and
wide strain rates. J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 89, 122–131 (2019)
81. Hosseini-farid, M., Ramzanpour, M., Ziejewski, M., Karami, G.: Estimating the brain strain
rates during traumatic brain injury. Biomed. Sci. Instrum. 54(1), 361–368 (2018)
82. McAllister, T.W., et al.: Maximum principal strain and strain rate associated with concussion
diagnosis correlates with changes in corpus callosum white matter indices. Ann. Biomed.
Eng. 40(1), 127–140 (2012)
83. Rashid, B., Destrade, M., Gilchrist, M.D.: Mechanical characterization of brain tissue in
simple shear at dynamic strain rates. J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 28, 71–85 (2013)
84. MacManus, D.B., Murphy, J.G., Gilchrist, M.D.: Mechanical characterisation of brain tissue
up to 35% strain at 1, 10, and 100/s using a custom-built micro-indentation apparatus. J.
Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 87, 256–266 (2018)
85. Darling, T., Muthuswamy, J., Rajan, S.D.: Finite element modeling of human brain response
to football helmet impacts. Comput. Methods Biomech. Biomed. Engin. 19(13), 1432–1442
(2016)
86. Kuo, C., Wu, L.C., Ye, P.P., Laksari, K., Camarillo, D.B., Kuhl, E.: Pilot ﬁndings of brain
displacements and deformations during roller coaster rides. J. Neurotrauma. 34(22), 3198–
3205 (2017)
87. Rashid, B., Destrade, M., Gilchrist, M.D.: Mechanical characterization of brain tissue in
tension at dynamic strain rates. J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 33(1), 43–54 (2014)
88. Karumbaiah, L., et al.: The upregulation of speciﬁc interleukin (IL) receptor antagonists and
paradoxical enhancement of neuronal apoptosis due to electrode induced strain and brain
micromotion. Biomaterials. 33(26), 5983–5996 (2012)
89. Bar-Kochba, E., Scimone, M.T., Estrada, J.B., Franck, C.: Strain and rate-dependent neuronal
injury in a 3D in vitro compression model of traumatic brain injury. Sci. Rep. 6, 1–11 (2016)
90. Ahmadzadeh, H., Smith, D.H., Shenoy, V.B.: Viscoelasticity of tau proteins leads to strain
rate-dependent breaking of microtubules during axonal stretch injury: predictions from a
mathematical model. Biophys. J. 106(5), 1123–1133 (2014)
91. Gilletti, A., Muthuswamy, J.: Brain micromotion around implants in the rodent somatosensory
cortex. J. Neural Eng. 3(3), 189–195 (2006)
92. Sharp, A.A., Ortega, A.M., Restrepo, D., Curran-Everett, D., Gall, K.: In vivo penetration
mechanics and mechanical properties of mouse brain tissue at micrometer scales. IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng. 56(1), 45–53 (2009)
93. Gefen, A., Margulies, S.S.: Are in vivo and in situ brain tissues mechanically similar?
J. Biomech. 37(9), 1339–1352 (2004)
94. Maikos, J.T., Elias, R.A.I., Shreiber, D.I.: Mechanical properties of dura mater from the rat
brain and spinal cord. J. Neurotrauma. 25(1), 38–51 (2008)
95. Zhong, X., et al.: Tracking brain motion during the cardiac cycle using spiral cine-DENSE
MRI. Med. Phys. 36(8), 3413–3419 (2009)
96. Holdsworth, S.J., Rahimi, M.S., Ni, W.W., Zaharchuk, G., Moseley, M.E.: Ampliﬁed
magnetic resonance imaging (aMRI). Magn. Reson. Med. 75(6), 2245–2254 (2016)

Quantitative Assessment of the Mechanical Properties of the Neural Interface
257
97. Soellinger, M., Rutz, A.K., Kozerke, S., Boesiger, P.: 3D cine displacement-encoded MRI of
pulsatile brain motion. Magn. Reson. Med. 61(1), 153–162 (2009)
98. Poncelet, B.P., Wedeen, V.J., Weisskof, R.M., Cohen, M.S.: Brain parenchyma motion –
measurement with cine echo-planar MR imaging. Radiology. 185, 645–651 (1992)
99. Dombeck, D.A., Khabbaz, A.N., Collman, F., Adelman, T.L., Tank, D.W.: Imaging large-
scale neural activity with cellular resolution in awake, mobile mice. Neuron. 56(1), 43–57
(2007)
100. Jung, W.B., Shim, H.J., Kim, S.G.: Mouse BOLD fMRI at ultrahigh ﬁeld detects somatosen-
sory networks including thalamic nuclei. NeuroImage. 195, 203–214 (2019)
101. Britt, R.H., Rossi, G.T.: Quantitative analysis of methods for reducing physiological brain
pulsations. J. Neurosci. Methods. 6(3), 219–229 (1982)
102. Chen, G., et al.: Functional magnetic resonance imaging of awake monkeys: some approaches
for improving imaging quality. Magn. Reson. Imaging. 30(1), 36–47 (2012)
103. Ivan, M.E., et al.: Brain shift during bur hole-based procedures using interventional MRI:
clinical article. J. Neurosurg. 121(1), 149–160 (2014)
104. Jessen, N.A., Munk, A.S.F., Lundgaard, I., Nedergaard, M.: The glymphatic system – a
beginner’s guide. Neurochem. Res. 40(12), 2583–2599 (2015)
105. Rodríguez-Boto, G., Rivero-Garvía, M., Gutiérrez-González, R., Márquez-Rivas, J.: Basic
concepts about brain pathophysiology and intracranial pressure monitoring. Neurologia
(English Ed.). 30(1), 16–22 (2014)
106. Mariano, G.S.L., Fink, M.E., Hoffman, C., Rosengart, A.: Intracranial pressure: monitoring
and management. In: Hall, J.B., Schmidt, G.A., Kress, J.P. (eds.) Principles of Critical Care,
4th edn. McGraw Hill (2015)
107. Miller, K., Chinzei, K.: Constitutive modelling of brain tissue. J. Biomech. 30(11–12), 1115–
1121 (1997)
108. Miller, K., Chinzei, K.: Mechanical properties of brain tissue in tension. J. Biomech. 35(4),
483–490 (2002)
109. Budday, S., et al.: Mechanical characterization of human brain tissue. Acta Biomater. 48,
319–340 (2017)
110. Cheng, S., Clarke, E.C., Bilston, L.E.: Rheological properties of the tissues of the central
nervous system: a review. Med. Eng. Phys. 30(10), 1318–1337 (2008)
111. de Rooij, R., et al.: Mechanical properties of gray and white matter brain tissue by indentation.
J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 46, 318–330 (2015)
112. Li, Y., Deng, J., Zhou, J., Li, X.: Elastic and viscoelastic mechanical properties of brain tissues
on the implanting trajectory of sub-thalamic nucleus stimulation. J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Med.
27(11), 163 (2016)
113. Qian, L., et al.: Inﬂuence of strain rate on indentation response of porcine brain. J. Mech.
Behav. Biomed. Mater. 82, 210–217 (2018)
114. Miller, K., Chinzei, K., Orssengo, G., Bednarz, P.: Mechanical properties of brain tissue in-
vivo: experiment and computer simulation. J. Biomech. 33(11), 1369–1376 (2000)
115. Prevost, T.P., Jin, G., De Moya, M.A., Alam, H.B., Suresh, S., Socrate, S.: Dynamic
mechanical response of brain tissue in indentation in vivo, in situ and in vitro. Acta Biomater.
7(12), 4090–4101 (2011)
116. Ertl, M., Raasch, N., Hammel, G., Harter, K., Lang, C.: Transtemporal investigation of brain
parenchyma elasticity using 2-D shear wave elastography: deﬁnition of age-matched normal
values. Ultrasound Med. Biol. 44(1), 78–84 (2018)
117. Oliver, W.C., Pharr, G.M.: Measurement of hardness and elastic modulus by instrumented
indentation: advances in understanding and reﬁnements to methodology. J. Mater. Res. 19(1),
3–20 (2004)
118. Fukuda, T., Arai, F., Nakajima, M.: Biological cell manipulation/measurement/analysis under
E-SEM. In: Micro-Nanorobotic Manipulation Systems and Their Applications, pp. 243–321
(2013)

258
A. Sridharan and J. Muthuswamy
119. Frey, M.T., Engler, A., Discher, D.E., Lee, J., Wang, Y.L.: Microscopic methods for measuring
the elasticity of gel substrates for cell culture: microspheres, microindenters, and atomic force
microscopy. Methods Cell Biol. 83(07), 47–65 (2007)
120. Mihai, L.A., Budday, S., Holzapfel, G.A., Kuhl, E., Goriely, A.: A family of hyperelastic
models for human brain tissue. J. Mech. Phys. Solids. 106, 60–79 (2017)
121. Mesa-Múnera, P., Ramírez-Salazar, E., Boulanger, J.F., Branch, J.W.: Inverse-FEM character-
ization of a brain tissue phantom to simulate compression and indentation. Ing. Cienc. 8(16),
11–36 (2012)
122. Bernick, K.B., Prevost, T.P., Suresh, S., Socrate, S.: Biomechanics of single cortical neurons.
Acta Biomater. 7(3), 1210–1219 (2011)
123. Lantoine, J., et al.: Matrix stiffness modulates formation and activity of neuronal networks of
controlled architectures. Biomaterials. 89, 14–24 (2016)
124. Wen, Y.Q., et al.: Substrate stiffness affects neural network activity in an extracellular matrix
proteins dependent manner. Colloids Surf. B: Biointerfaces. 170, 729–735 (2018)
125. Georges, P.C., Miller, W.J., Meaney, D.F., Sawyer, E.S., Janmey, P.A.: Matrices with
compliance comparable to that of brain tissue select neuronal over glial growth in mixed
cortical cultures. Biophys. J. 90(8), 3012–3018 (2006)
126. Flanagan, L.A., El Ju, Y., Marg, B., Osterﬁeld, M., Janmey, P.A.: Neurite branching on
deformable substrates. Neuroreport. 13(18), 2411–2415 (2002)
127. Suter, D.M., Miller, K.E.: The emerging role of forces in axonal elongation. Prog. Neurobiol.
94(2), 91–101 (2011)
128. Franze, K., et al.: Neurite branch retraction is caused by a threshold-dependent mechanical
impact. Biophys. J. 97(7), 1883–1890 (2009)
129. Ladoux, B., et al.: Strength dependence of cadherin-mediated adhesions. Biophys. J. 98(4),
534–542 (2010)
130. Kolarcik, C.L., et al.: In vivo effects of L1 coating on inﬂammation and neuronal health at the
electrode/tissue interface in rat spinal cord and dorsal root ganglion. Acta Biomater. 8(10),
3561–3575 (2012)
131. LaPlaca, M.C., Prado, G.R.: Neural mechanobiology and neuronal vulnerability to traumatic
loading. J. Biomech. 43(1), 71–78 (2010)
132. Lind, G., Linsmeier, C.E., Schouenborg, J.: The density difference between tissue and neural
probes is a key factor for glial scarring. Sci. Rep. 3, 1–7 (2013)
133. Subbaroyan, J., Martin, D.C., Kipke, D.R.: A ﬁnite-element model of the mechanical effects
of implantable microelectrodes in the cerebral cortex. J. Neural Eng. 2(4), 103–113 (2005)
134. Bentil, S.A., Dupaix, R.B.: Simulations of hydrogel-coated neural microelectrodes to assess
biocompatibility improvement using strain as a metric for micromotion. Biomed. Phys. Eng.
Express. 4(3), 035036 (2018)
135. Lee, H., Bellamkonda, R.V., Sun, W., Levenston, M.E.: Biomechanical analysis of silicon
microelectrode-induced strain in the brain. J. Neural Eng. 2(4), 81–89 (2005)
136. Lee, C.D., et al.: Matrigel coatings for Parylene sheath neural probes. J. Biomed. Mater. Res.
Part B Appl. Biomater. 104(2), 357–368 (2016)
137. Shoffstall, A.J., et al.: Characterization of the neuroinﬂammatory response to thiol-ene shape
memory polymer coated intracortical microelectrodes. Micromachines. 9(10), 1–18 (2018)
138. Kolarcik, C.L., et al.: Elastomeric and soft conducting microwires for implantable neural
interfaces. Soft Matter. 11(24), 4847–4861 (2015)
139. Minev, I.R., et al.: Electronic dura mater for long-term multimodal neural interfaces. Science.
347(6218), 159–163 (2015)
140. Kim, D.H., et al.: Soft, fuzzy, and bioactive conducting polymers for improving the chronic
performance of neural prosthetic devices. In: Reichert, W.M. (ed.) Indwelling Neural
Implants: Strategies for Contending with the In Vivo Environment. CRC Press/Taylor&
Francis (2008)

Quantitative Assessment of the Mechanical Properties of the Neural Interface
259
141. Seymour, J.P., Kipke, D.R.: Neural Probe Design for Reduced Tissue Encapsulation in CNS.
Biomaterials (2007)
142. Kozai, T.D.Y., et al.: Ultrasmall implantable composite microelectrodes with bioactive
surfaces for chronic neural interfaces. Nat. Mater. 11(12), 1065–1073 (2012)
143. Zhao, Z., et al.: Ultraﬂexible nanoelectronic probes form reliable, glial scar–free neural
integration. Sci. Adv. 3(2), e1601966 (2017)
144. Lee, H.C., et al.: Histological evaluation of ﬂexible neural implants; ﬂexibility limit for
reducing the tissue response? J. Neural Eng. 14(3), 36026 (2017)

