O
Obligations Logic
MIKKO YRJO¨ NSUURI
Department of Social Sciences and Philosophy
University of Jyva¨skyla¨
Jyva¨skyla¨
Finland
Abstract
Medieval obligations logic dealt with logical duties, pri-
marily that of granting what follow from what has already
been laid down. Technically these duties were put into the
context of so-called obligational disputations, where the
opponent puts forward propositions, which the respon-
dent grants, denies, or doubts. For the most part, the
answers do not follow truth, but some speciﬁc obligation
given at the beginning of the disputation and the technical
obligation rules. The main ﬂourishing of obligations logic
can be dated to the ﬁrst half of the fourteenth century with
authors like Walter Burley, Richard Kilvington, and Roger
Swyneshed, who all presented somewhat different sets of
rules for these disputations. It seems that medieval authors
aimed generally at rules that take heed of two general
dialectical duties: to follow truth and to remain coherent
in one’s answers. The latter becomes clearly visible when
exceptions to the former are allowed through issuing some
special duty at the beginning of the disputation. Obliga-
tions logic, thus, can be characterized as studying what it
means to be consistent and how one can remain coherent.
This way, the area also contributed to the development of
such modal notions as logical possibility and necessity.
Obligations Logic
Obligations logic is one of the branches of medieval logic
that have no modern counterpart. In obligational dispu-
tations as they were known in the late Middle Ages, the
opponent puts forward propositions that the respondent
must evaluate. Standard answers include granting, deny-
ing, and doubting the proposition put forward. The title
word ‘‘obligations’’derives from the special setting that the
respondent is at the beginning of the disputation given
a special duty that he must follow during the disputation.
In the mature form of the technique, this duty was that of
holding a false sentence, called the positum, as something
that has to be granted.
It is unclear how the historical origin of these
disputations should be construed. In a wide sense, the
setting derives from the dialectical encounters described
by Aristotle in book VIII of the Topics, but obligations
did not develop as straightforward commentaries of
this book. Rather, the beginnings in the early thirteenth
century seem to be connected to logical paradoxes like
the so-called insolubles. The most important treatises on
obligations date from the ﬁrst half of the fourteenth
century.
According to the rules formulated in Boethius de
Dacia’s questions on Aristotle’s Topics (written between
1270 and 1276), the respondent should grant to the oppo-
nent anything except a proposition that is repugnant with
what has been laid down as a positum. The gist of the
game, as Boethius presents it, derives from the opponent
laying progressively down a set of sentences as many
posita, while the respondent must check that the set
remains consistent.
Modern scholars have considered Walter Burley’s trea-
tise on obligations (written 1302) to be the most impor-
tant one because it is a lengthy carefully argued text that
presents obligations logic in a well-developed form. Fur-
thermore, medieval authors seem to have taken Burley’s
rules as standard, while alternative formulations mainly
appear as suggestions for a major revision. For the most
part, these suggestions were rejected in the discussion. The
only important revision that was accepted seems to have
been John Duns Scotus’ suggestion that the respondent
need not deny the present when he has a false positum to
defend. That is, the necessity of the present need not be
respected in obligational disputations.
Burley’s rules tell the respondent to keep the set of his
answers consistent, but otherwise to follow the truth of the
matter. That is, anything that follows from the positum
together with previous answers must be granted, and
anything that is repugnant with them, must be denied.
Any other proposition must be deemed irrelevant and
answered in accordance with truth-value. After the
Henrik Lagerlund (ed.), Encyclopedia of Medieval Philosophy, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9729-4,
# Springer Science+Business Media B.V., 2011

answer, the irrelevant proposition becomes relevant and
can be used in inferences within the game.
Burley’s rules have the odd consequence that the
respondent can be forced to grant practically any propo-
sition, if the selection and the order of propositions are
chosen for such an end. Similarly, the correct answer to
a particular proposition may depend on the order of
presentation. These features are explicitly recognized by
Burley and others, and no medieval author calls them
problems. However, interesting revisions were put for-
ward in the second quarter of the fourteenth century by
Richard Kilvington in his Sophismata (written soon after
1321) and Roger Swyneshed in a separate treatise (written
1330–1335). Neither of these revised sets of rules allows
the order to have such an effect on the answers, though
Swyneshed does provide a technique for achieving such
effects if they are speciﬁcally aimed at.
The idea behind Kilvington’s revision is straightfor-
ward, but logically unsatisfactory. He claims that propo-
sitions should be evaluated in respect to what their truth-
values would be if the actually false positum were true. In
other words, Kilvington seems to think that obligations
logic should be understood as being based on counterfac-
tual reasoning. Unfortunately, he is unable to spell out
speciﬁc rules that would be unambiguous in the way
Burley’s rules are. Kilvington’s revision seems to have
received little attention among medieval authors.
Swyneshed’s suggestion is based on keeping irrelevant
propositions as irrelevant, not allowing them to be taken
into inferences. That is, the respondent should grant what
follows from the positum alone and deny anything that is
repugnant with it alone. Swyneshed makes it clear that the
whole set of answers need not be consistent if it also
includes
irrelevant propositions. Much attention was
paid on his recognition that a conjunction can be denied
when both parts have been granted (one as following from
the positum and the other as irrelevant and true).
In the later period, the core of Burley’s rules seems to
have gained general acceptance. For example, Ralph Strode
(later fourteenth century) and Paul of Venice (see Logica
magna, written 1397–1398) follow this basic structure. In
the later period, some further development can be found in
discussions on disputational obligations concerning the
meanings of the words uttered in the disputation.
In the modern research, much time has been spent in
making obligations logic understandable to modern logi-
cians. It seems impossible to give any clear counterpart for
obligations among the ﬁelds of modern logic. Theories of
counterfactuals and belief revisions systems have been
pointed out, but they both proceed from a semantic
perspective while the sets of granted sentences in
obligational disputations typically lack any meaningful
interpretation.
It seems clear, however, that one logically very inter-
esting phenomenon, which is familiar to modern logi-
cians, is especially carefully studied in obligations logic.
When an increasing number of propositions are evaluated
in a dynamic setting, their consistency can either be
maintained or lost. Obligations logic studies this phenom-
enon and thus results in an increased understanding of
what is at issue in determining consistency.
From the history of modal concepts, obligations thus
address a crucial issue. In late medieval developments, it
became increasingly important to consider possibility as
related to logical consistency. But while earlier medieval
logicians often deﬁned logical notions like consistency by
leaning on some kind of real possibilities, obligations
provided a framework where consistency was attended to
with conscious disregard to any kinds of real possibilities.
That is, consistency was understood to obtain at the sen-
tential level in abstraction from the possible interpreta-
tions of the sentences.
See also: ▶Insolubles ▶John Duns Scotus ▶Paul of
Venice ▶Richard Kilvington ▶Walter Burley
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Boethius de Dacia (1976) Questiones super librum Topicorum, ed.
Green-Pedersen NJ, Pinborg J. Corpus Philosophorum Danicorum
Medii Aevi 6. Gad, Copenhagen
Burley Walter (1963) Tractatus de obligationibus, ed. Green R. An intro-
duction to the logical treatise De obligationibus, with critical texts of
William of Sherwood (?) and Walter Burley. PhD dissertation,
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven
Kilvington Richard (1990) Sophismata, ed. Kretzmann N, Kretzmann BE.
Oxford University Press for the British Academy, Oxford
Strode Ralph (1493) Consequentiae et obligationes cum commentis.
Octavianus Scolis, Venice
Swyneshed Roger (1977) Obligationes, ed. Spade PV. In: Roger
Swyneshed’s
Obligationes:
edition
and
comments.
Archives
d’histoire doctrinale et litte´raire du moyen aˆge 44:243–285
Venetus Paulus (1988) Logica magna, Tractatus de obligationibus (II. 8),
ed. Ashworth EJ. Oxford University Press for the British Academy,
Oxford
Secondary Sources
De Rijk LM (1974) Some thirteenth century tracts on the game of
obligation I. Vivarium 12:94–123
De Rijk LM (1975) Some thirteenth century tracts on the game of
obligation II. Vivarium 13:22–54
Dutilh Novaes C (2007) Formalizing medieval logical theories. Springer,
Dordrecht
902 O
Obligations Logic

Keffer H (2001) De obligationibus – Rekonstruktion einer spa¨tmittelal-
terlichen Disputationstheorie. Brill, Leiden
Spade P (1982) Three theories of obligationes: Burley, Kilvington and
Swyneshed on counterfactual reasoning. Hist Philos Logic 3:1–32
Spade P (1992) If obligationes were counterfactuals. Philos Top 20:
171–188
Yrjo¨nsuuri M (ed) (2001) Medieval formal logic – obligations, insolubles
and consequencies. Kluwer, Dordrecht
Ockham, William
▶William of Ockham
Odonis, Gerard
▶Gerard Odonis
Oresme, Nicholas
▶Nicholas Oresme
Oxford Calculators
EDITH D. SYLLA
Department of History
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC
USA
Abstract
With Richard Swineshead’s Book of Calculations taken as
its characteristic product, the ‘‘Oxford Calculators’’ were
a group of thinkers at Oxford University in the mid-
fourteenth century, most but not all of whom were asso-
ciated with Merton College, for which reason they were
earlier called ‘‘the Merton School,’’ and credited with
contributions to astronomy and to the development of
mathematical physics. The particularly ‘‘calculatory’’ fea-
tures of the work of this group seem to have resulted from
their connection to undergraduate disputations in the
Faculty of Arts, particularly those devoted to the solution
of so-called sophismata.
Historical and Systematic Development of
the Movement
Several factors combined to bring about the work of the
Oxford Calculators. First of all, undergraduate education
at Oxford in the fourteenth century emphasized taking
part in disputations as a way of training students to detect
fallacies, argue logically, remember signiﬁcant detail, think
quickly, and so forth. The curriculum of the Faculty of
Arts included grammar, logic, the quadrivium (arith-
metic, geometry, astronomy, and music), natural philos-
ophy, ethics, and metaphysics. The most important tool
used in disputations was logic, especially the ‘‘new logic,’’
which made use of the theory of supposition and related
tools of analysis. All students took part in disputations on
sophismata, that is perplexing propositions linked to
a ‘‘case’’ with reference to which the truth or falsehood
of the sophismata statement was to be judged. Typical
calculatory sophismata from a relatively early period are
those of Richard Kilvington, starting with the sophisma
sentence, ‘‘Socrates is whiter than Plato begins to be
white,’’ taken together with the case that Socrates is now
white in a given degree, while Plato begins to increase his
whiteness from having no whiteness at all. This case and
the related sophisma sentence are perplexing because
‘‘whiter’’ is understood to involve a geometric ratio
between Socrates’ whiteness and Plato’s whiteness, but if
Plato begins to become whiter from not being white at all,
Plato will begin from zero whiteness and the initial ratios
between Socrates’ ﬁnite whiteness and Plato’s very earliest
whitenesses will be greater than any given ratio, or poten-
tially inﬁnite. To resolve the sophism, the respondent had
to determine whether as Plato or any other subject begins
to become white, there is a ﬁrst instant of being white with
some degree of whiteness or only a last instant of having
no whiteness at all. If there were a ﬁrst instant of being
white, then there would be a ﬁnite ratio between Socrates’
whiteness and Plato’s ﬁrst whiteness, but if there is no ﬁrst
instant of Plato’s being white, as was normally assumed,
then the ratios between Socrates’ whiteness and Plato’s
whiteness will be greater than any given value as one
considers times closer and closer to the beginning of his
whitening (see Richard Kilvington 1320s/1990).
Only a few of Richard Kilvington’s 48 sophismata do
not deal with situations involving natural philosophy and
related issues of continuity and inﬁnity, and thus Norman
and Barbara Kretzmann are right in claiming in their
edition of his Sophismata that it ‘‘may be taken as
Oxford Calculators O
903
O

a paradigm of the philosophical problems and techniques
that characterize the work’’ of the Oxford Calculators.
Interestingly, Kilvington’s series of commentaries on the
works of Aristotle in the form of a few (usually about ten)
but lengthy questions track the acceptance of the second
major
factor
in
the
development
of
the
Oxford
Calculatory approach, namely Thomas Bradwardine’s
new theory of the relations of proportions of forces to
resistances, on the one hand, and velocities produced on
the other, which appeared in 1328 in his On the Propor-
tions of Velocities in Motions. According to Bradwardine’s
new theory, the proportion of force to resistance must be
‘‘duplicated’’ for a velocity to be doubled, ‘‘triplicated’’ for
the velocity to be tripled, and so forth – where ‘‘dupli-
cated’’ not infrequently was rendered ‘‘doubled,’’ and
‘‘triplicated’’ as ‘‘tripled.’’ Thus the proportion of nine to
one was said to be ‘‘double’’ the proportion of three to one,
so that nine to one would, according to Bradwardine’s
theory, produce a velocity double that produced by
a proportion of three to one.
Given that Richard Kilvington’s Sophismata was earlier
than Bradwardine’s On the Proportions of Velocities in
Motions, it follows that the context of disputations on
sophismata was more important than Bradwardine’s On
Proportions in leading to the Oxford Calculatory move-
ment, and yet Bradwardine’s mathematical physics cer-
tainly contributed to the impact that the Oxford
Calculators had, ﬁrst at the University of Paris, and later
at Italian, Spanish, and eastern European universities. For
the next 200 years and more, university student textbooks
would include the mathematics of proportions needed for
Bradwardine’s science of motion as well as the standard
topics of logic and sophismata, etc. (Not discussed here
are the external factors that may have contributed to the
turn to quantiﬁcation, but see Kaye (1998) for an argu-
ment that economic factors were important).
In earlier surveys of the work of the Oxford Calcula-
tors, Richard Kilvington played a relatively small part, but
that was because none of his work was in print until the
Sophismata were edited in 1990; because his Questions on
Aristotle’s Physics, ascribed in manuscript to ‘‘Magister
Richard,’’ had tentatively been assigned to Richard
Swineshead; and because his Questions on Aristotle’s On
Generation and Corruption and Nicomachean Ethics, and
on Peter Lombard’s Sentences had been little noticed.
More recently Elzbieta Jung has begun to edit the rest of
Kilvington’s corpus beyond the Sophismata. Eventually, we
will be able to see the application of the Oxford
Calculatory approach throughout the curriculum, includ-
ing theology and Kilvington will take a central place
among the Oxford Calculators.
Jung has shown that the order of composition of
Kilvington’s works is (1) the Sophismata, before 1325;
(2) the Questions on Aristotle’s On Generation and Corrup-
tion; (3) Questions on Aristotle’s Physics; (4) Questions
Aristotle’s Ethics; and ﬁnally (5) Questions on the Sentences,
which she dates as before the end of 1334. In the
Sophismata there is nothing to indicate that Kilvington
had any idea of Bradwardine’s new theory of the propor-
tions of velocities in motions. In his Questions on
Aristotle’s On Generation and Corruption, Kilvington
seems to know Bradwardine’s usage according to which
the proportion of nine to one is called ‘‘double’’ the
proportion of three to one, but Kilvington rejects this
approach because he says that in the case of proportions
of lesser inequality (i.e., where the ﬁrst term is less than the
second), proportions become less by being duplicated, as
the proportion of one to nine is less than the proportion of
one to three. In his Questions on Aristotle’s Physics, how-
ever, Kilvington accepts Bradwardine’s theory of the rela-
tion of proportions of force to resistance to velocities. We
may suppose then that in the years around 1330,
Bradwardine’s function came gradually to be accepted,
and remained the dominant view for the next 200 years,
despite a minority who protested against it, mostly on
mathematical grounds. Jung has argued that Kilvington’s
Questions on the Physics are before Bradwardine’s De
proportionibus, and hence that Kilvington inﬂuenced
Bradwardine in the introduction of ‘‘Bradwardine’s func-
tion’’ rather than vice versa. There is more evidence, how-
ever, that those who rejected Bradwardine’s function often
took arguments against it from Kilvington’s work. It
would be safer to say, then, that Bradwardine and
Kilvington were sparring partners in this matter. In later
years both Bradwardine and Kilvington, along with Walter
Burley and others, were employed as members of the circle
of Richard of Bury, Bishop of Durham (see articles on
these individuals).
William
Heytesbury’s
1335
Rules
for
Solving
Sophismata follows mainly in the footsteps of Kilvington’s
Sophismata, with some inﬂuence from the work of
Bradwardine. In addition to discussing questions of
dynamics – how velocities are related to the forces and
resistances causing them – Bradwardine had also discussed
the measure of motion with respect to effect (tanquam
penes effectum). For instance, how should a velocity of
rotation be measured? Should it be measured by the
motion of the fastest moved point of the body rotating,
or by some average of the velocities of the various parts or
points of the body? Likewise, the question might be raised
as to how motions nonuniform in time, that is, motions
that are accelerated or decelerated regularly or irregularly,
904 O
Oxford Calculators

are to be dealt with. Heytesbury, Dumbleton, and later
authors accept the so-called Merton mean-speed theorem,
recognizing that a uniformly accelerated body will cover
the same distance as it would cover if in the same period of
time it moved uniformly with the velocity it had at the
middle instant of the motion.
In Heytesbury’s Rules for Solving Sophismata natural
philosophical issues are involved in many, but not all of
the chapters. Thus the sixth chapter concerns the measures
of motion in the categories of place, quality, and quantity,
but the earlier chapters concern: (1) insoluble sentences,
such as the liar paradox; (2) paradoxes involving the terms
to know and to doubt; (3) relative terms; (4) beginning
and ceasing or ﬁrst and last instants; and (5) maxima and
minima. Thus it is mainly the last three chapters that deal
with the natural philosophical topics with which the
Oxford Calculators are primarily identiﬁed.
It is generally accepted that most of the Oxford Cal-
culators tended to follow a nominalist, ontologically min-
imalist, or Ockhamist line, as opposed to a realist line.
Thus they assumed that there are no Platonic forms
existing outside of individual substances and they tried
to understand the intension and remission of forms in
terms of the actual qualitative forms inhering in a body.
Although they did not all discuss the matter explicitly, it
appears that most of the Oxford Calculators (but not
Walter Burley) followed John Duns Scotus in holding the
so-called addition theory of intension or increase of qual-
ity (see Sylla 1973). In his 1968 article ‘‘Ockham and some
Mertonians’’ (Weisheipl 1968:173), James A. Weisheipl
said that the Mertonians, except Walter Burley, accepted
the Ockhamist teaching in logic and natural philosophy
‘‘as a matter of course.’’ In contrast to the other Mertonian
Calculators, Burley was a ‘‘realist’’ in the sense that he
argued against Ockham’s nominalism in logic.
If William of Ockham is not included as an ‘‘Oxford
Calculator’’ – because he did not take a calculational
and sophismatical approach to natural philosophical
problems – does it make sense to include Walter Burley?
Burley had already left Oxford to study theology in Paris
long before the late 1320s when Bradwardine’s On Pro-
portions appeared, so his Aristotelian commentaries are
more like those of the late thirteenth century than like
Kilvington’s commentaries consisting of a short list of very
long questions. Actually, Burley wrote a commentary on
Aristotle’s Physics with fairly long questions as well as an
exposition of the text when he was still teaching at Oxford,
not long after 1300. (Burley’s early Physics commentary
seems to have a close relationship to that of Thomas
Wylton, something that has yet to be entirely sorted
out.) But Burley revised his Physics commentary while
teaching in the Faculty of Arts at Paris at the same time as
his work in theology, and he completed the revision of the
last books after he was already a member of Richard of
Bury’s circle, back in England, and associated with
Bradwardine and Kilvington. It is, however, Burley’s work
in logic and his separate treatises or questions that reveal his
similarities
to
the
likes
of
Heytesbury
or
Richard
Swineshead. Two of his works, the so-called Tractatus pri-
mus and Tractatus secundus on the intension and remis-
sion of forms, were off-shoots of his bachelor lectures and
disputations on the Sentences at Paris. Nevertheless, they
pay the same attention to issues of indivisibles and continu-
ity in a natural philosophical context as do the other works
of the Oxford Calculators. Burley’s quodlibetal question On
the First and Last Instant is also calculatory in nature as are
some of his later works composed in the 1330s.
Of all the Oxford masters who might be included
among
the
‘‘Oxford
Calculators,’’
it
was
Thomas
Bradwardine, WilliamHeytesbury, andRichard Swineshead
whose works received multiple early modern editions, com-
mentaries, and elaborations. Out of its Oxford context,
Richard
Swineshead’s
Book
of
Calculations
(Liber
calculationum) appears to be a work of mathematical
physics, covering the sub-topics that might be expected
to arise from Aristotle’s natural philosophical works, but
then elaborating quantitative ‘‘calculations.’’ At Oxford
itself, however, the work of Bradwardine, Heytesbury,
and Kilvington was closely related to works on natural
philosophy, to which logical and mathematical methods
might be applied. Perhaps surprisingly, early modern
printers did not choose to publish the more natural phil-
osophical works of the Oxford Calculators, except in the
case of Walter Burley, whose thorough commentary on
Aristotle’s Physics, as it was revised at the University of
Paris in the 1320s and later, received multiple printings.
A larger gap in our knowledge comes from the fact that
John Dumbleton’s Summa of Logic and Natural Philosophy
has never been printed. Dumbleton’s explanations of the
theories of latitudes and degrees shared by the Oxford
Calculators and of Bradwardine’s theory of the propor-
tions of velocities in motions go a long way to reveal what
is tacitly assumed about natural philosophy by William
Heytesbury and Richard Swineshead. A start to ﬁll in this
gap has been made in the article on John Dumbleton
elsewhere in this volume.
Of all the individuals who might be considered Oxford
Calculators, this encyclopedia contains separate articles on
John
Dumbleton,
Richard
Kilvington,
Richard
Swineshead, Thomas Bradwardine, Walter Burley, and
William Heytesbury, but it lacks an article on Roger
Swineshead, probably because Roger has sometimes been
Oxford Calculators O
905
O

lumped together with Richard Swineshead. Given this
lack, something more about Roger Swineshead will be
said here.
In his thorough work on medieval theories of insolu-
bles and on the exercise of obligations, Paul Spade has
made clear the signiﬁcant place that Roger Swineshead
held in each of these traditions. With regard to the exercise
of ‘‘obligations,’’ Roger Swineshead directed the respon-
dent to reply taking into account only the position, which
he had been obligated to afﬁrm, whereas Burley had earlier
required that the respondent in obligations exercises take
account not only of the position to which he was originally
obligated, but also of all the other propositions that he had
accepted, rejected, or labeled doubtful earlier in the exer-
cise. With regard to insolubles, Roger Swineshead took
a position that might be regarded as a variant of the
position held by Thomas Bradwardine. According to
Bradwardine, for a proposition to be true, it must not
only ‘‘signify as is the case,’’ but also not signify other
than is the case. To this Roger Swineshead added that for
a proposition to be true it must not ‘‘falsify itself’’ (see
Spade 2005). From this position, Swinehead concluded
that some insolubles do signify as is the case, despite
being false – as is true for the proposition ‘‘a is false,’’
where a is the proposition itself. In some valid formal
inferences, Swineshead said, falsehoods follow from
truths. And, ﬁnally, in the case of insolubles, two mutually
contradictory propositions can be false at the same time
(Spade 2005). In his 1335 Rules for Solving Sophismata,
Heytesbury added to the debate about insolubles the
requirement that the circumstances in which the insoluble
is asserted must be taken into account before anything can
be said about its truth or falsehood.
In his On Natural Motions (c. 1337), Roger Swineshead
compiled a work that included both natural philosophical
theory and the particular methods of the Calculators (see
Sylla 1987a). Unlike Dumbleton, who was to advocate the
mainstream theories that the other Calculators simply
assumed, Roger Swineshead advocated theories that,
whether on purpose or not, made it easy to reach appar-
ently paradoxical conclusions. Thus he deﬁned ‘‘uniform
degrees’’ of qualities or velocities and uniformly difform
degrees, where the ‘‘uniform degrees’’ were indivisibly
greater than a uniformly difform distribution that
included every degree of a quality less than the given
uniform degree. There is only one complete manuscript
of Swineshead’s On Natural Motions, which currently is
MS Erfurt Amplonian F 135, but a famous student note-
book from the 1340s still existing as MS Paris, BNF 16621
includes excerpts from On Natural Motions (in a more
accurate version than the Erfurt manuscript), along with
excerpts from Dumbleton, Summa; Burley, On First and
Last Instants; Bradwardine, On Proportions of Velocities in
Motions; and other calculatory works (see Kaluza 1978).
But it is Richard Swineshead’s Book of Calculations that
gives the Oxford Calculators their name (see Murdoch and
Sylla 1976). That book begins by discussing the measures
and intension and remission of qualities and works up to
more and more complicated situations. With regard to
bodies that are non-uniformly qualiﬁed with whiteness or
heat, Swineshead asks what degree of quality should be
assigned to the body as a whole – the maximum degree
perhaps, or some sort of average degree? If there is a body
that has two different qualities, say it is both hot and
moist, is there an overall degree that might be assigned?
And how will the substantial form of a body change as the
qualities change? As water is heated, will it immediately
begin to become air, or only after the hotness has reached
a certain degree? And if two bodies with different degrees
of various qualities like hot, cold, wet, and dry act on each
other and resist each other, what will determine the force
with which one body acts on another – will it involve the
maximum degree? The average degree? The extent of the
body? The ‘‘quantity of quality’’ if certain bodies have, so
to speak a greater density of quality than others (think of
speciﬁc heats)? If the force must be greater than the resis-
tance for action to occur, how can hot and cold bodies
interacting with each other each act on the other at the
same time (this is the problem of ‘‘reaction’’)?
In later treatises of the work, Richard Swineshead deals
with the power of light sources, as measured by the intensity
of the light they cast together with the distance to which the
illumination extends. He then turns to cases of local
motion.
After
a
treatise in which he
shows
how
Bradwardine’s function works to calculate what velocity
will result if it is known what velocity results from an initial
situation and how the force or resistance changes,
Swineshead attacks problems where the resistance to
a mover results from the medium in which the mover is
exerting its force. Here the Bradwardinian theory, as well as
the classical Aristotelian theory, runs into problems,
because both theories indicate what the ‘‘velocity’’ will be
for a given force and a given resistance. If, however, the
degree of resistance depends on the position of a moving
body in a nonuniform resistance, there will be two, most
likely contradictory ways to calculate velocity – either by the
ratio of force to resistance (this is the measure of motion
with respect to cause) or by the distance moved in a given
time (this is the measure of motion with respect to effect).
As if this were not a sufﬁcient problem, Swineshead
then supposes that the nonuniform resistance of the
medium moves, as the mobile itself moves. It is not
906 O
Oxford Calculators

difﬁcult to see that if there were a medium with little
resistance with a boundary layer next to a medium of
high resistance, and if this boundary layer were moving
in the direction the mobile is moving, then the mobile
might move up very quickly to the boundary layer and get
stuck there, if the boundary layer were moving faster than
the mobile, given its force, was able to move in the more
resistant medium. But then the velocity of the mobile
within the boundary layer would not correspond to the
proportion of its force to the resistance of medium, but
rather simply to the velocity of the boundary layer.
In all of this, it appears that Swineshead is interested
providing exercises that will give the students facility in
working with such calculations as applied to physical prob-
lems. The problems are much more complex than the
problems that Galileo would later deal with, assuming non-
resistant mediums, and they bear some relation to hydro-
dynamics applied to biological systems. In later Treatises,
turning from local motion to alteration, and assuming that
an agent of qualitative change, such as a heat source, causes
a greater effect next to itself, which decreases, perhaps
uniformly, the farther away from the agent one gets,
Swineshead considers how, over time, the maximum degree
might be induced into an extended body. In the separate
article on Richard Swineshead, reference is made to
Swineshead’s Treatise 11, which discusses what would hap-
pen if a thin rod were to fall through a channel in the earth
until it began to pass the center, inwhich case part of the rod
would begin to try to move back toward the center.
How then are we to understand the context and pur-
pose of Swineshead’s Book of Calculations? On one level, it
seems to be a book of mathematics applied to various
natural philosophical problems. But while the natural
philosophical problems are indeed like problems that
had long been raised in connection with commentaries
on the natural works of Aristotle, they are often more
complex and technical. Much has been made of the ten-
dency of fourteenth-century philosophers to deal with
problems secundum imaginationem, that is supposing
imaginary situations, and inquiring what would happen
in such a case. It has been supposed that this resulted from
the condemnations at Paris in 1277, as a result of which
philosophers teaching at the university of Paris were
enjoined not to deny that God might do anything that is
not a logical contradiction. So, it followed, God might
create a vacuum by annihilating everything inside the
sphere of the moon. What then? If there was a mobile
without any resistance, would it not move inﬁnitely fast,
according to the theories of Aristotle or Bradwardine?
Swineshead, however, does not seem to be invoking
God’s absolute power in designing the problems to which
he applies his ‘‘calculations’’ – almost all of which, notably,
involve juggling quantities in the mind without any actual
numbers or arithmetic being involved. Rather, the point
seems to be to exhibit what can be achieved with the
available logical and mathematical tools. There really is
not a special subject matter, in which the students are
expected to be interested. The point is not to study the
ballistics of cannons or the motion of ships through water
or any other practical problem. The obvious conclusion
seems to be that, just as Heytesbury’s Rules for Solving
Sophismata was written as a handbook for students who
would take part in disputations on sophismata, so
Swineshead’s Book of Calculations was most immediately
to be an aid to students in their disputations, whether in
the very same disputations on sophismata as Heytesbury’s
book, or in disputations connected with the curriculum in
natural philosophy or ethics. In fact, we can see Richard
Kilvington and then later scholastics applying calculatory
techniques in their commentaries on Aristotle’s Ethics and
on Peter Lombard’s Book of Sentences.
When calculatory techniques were applied in theology,
was it an incredible misapplication of technical brain
power to matters better left to the heart? This may very
well be a reasonable judgment in the case of a theologian
such as Jean de Ripa, who seems to have been inﬂuenced
by the Calculators (see Coleman 1975; Kaye 1998). This
issue, however, goes beyond the work of the Oxford Cal-
culators proper, and will not be pursued here.
Very soon after the 1330s when calculatory ideas
developed at Oxford, they spread to Paris, perhaps as
Oxford students traveled to Paris to study theology, as
was the case of Burley and Dumbleton. Nicholas Oresme
and Albert of Saxony wrote treatises extending, on the one
hand, and simplifying on the other, Bradwardine’s theory
of the proportions of velocities in motions. Later the
logical ideas of the likes of Heytesbury were widely
studied in Italian universities and then in eastern Euro-
pean universities such as Erfurt (see Sylla 1996a). At the
beginning of the sixteenth century, Alvarus Thomas of
Lisbon,
teaching
at
Paris,
thoroughly
mastered
Swineshead’s Book of Calculations, as well as some of the
extensions of his work by Nicholas Oresme, and discussed
astutely some of Swineshead’s knottier problems (see Sylla
1989, 2004). Although the label ‘‘calculators’’ was not
applied in the fourteenth century to Swineshead or the
men surrounding him – at the time, ‘‘calculations’’ was
more likely to bring to mind the work of astrologers – the
label began to be used in the sixteenth century, when it
became common to label the different philosophical
approaches
or
‘‘ways’’
(via
modernorum,
antiqui,
nominales, etc. see Wallace 1969).
Oxford Calculators O
907
O

See also: ▶Insolubles ▶Intension and Remission of
Forms ▶John Dumbleton ▶Obligations Logic ▶Richard
Swineshead ▶Thomas Bradwardine ▶Walter Burley
▶William Heytesbury
Bibliography
Primary Sources
For John Dumbleton, Richard Kilvington, Richard Swineshead, Thomas
Bradwardine, Walter Burley, and William Heytesbury, see articles on
these individual authors. There are extensive outlines in Latin of John
Dumbleton, Summa logicae et philosophiae naturalis, Books II–VI,
Roger
Swineshead,
Descriptiones
motuum
or
De
motibus
naturalibus, Richard Swineshead, Liber calculationum, and Walter
Burley, Tractatus primus and Tractatus secundus in Sylla E (1970,
1991) The Oxford Calculators and the mathematics of motion,
1320–1350. Physics and measurement by latitudes, Harvard PhD
dissertation, reprint Garland Publishing
Cited in this Article
Kilvington Richard (early 1320s/1990) Sophismata. In: Kretzmann N,
Kretzmann BE (eds and trans) The sophismata of Richard
Kilvington, text volume Oxford University Press, Oxford, for the
British Academy; volume with introduction, translation and com-
mentary, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Swineshead Richard (ca. 1345) Liber calculationum. Printed many times
in the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries, including Padua, ca. 1477;
Pavia, 1498; Salamanca, 1520; and Venice, 1520
Swineshead Roger (1977) Obligationes in Paul V. Spade Roger
Swyneshed’s Obligationes:
edition
and
comments. AHDLMA
44:243–285
Swineshead Roger (1979) Insolubilia in Paul V. Spade, Roger Swyneshed’s
Insolubilia: edition and comments. AHDLMA 46:177–220
Secondary Sources
Bottin F (1985) The Mertonians’ metalinguistic sciences and the
Insolubilia. In: Lewry O (ed) The rise of British logic. Pontiﬁcal
Institute of Medieval Studies, Toronto. Includes Roger Swyneshed
although he probably was not a Mertonian
Clagett M (1959) The science of mechanics in the Middle Ages. University
of Wisconsin Press, Madison. Includes many texts and translations
from the more physical of the works of the Oxford Calculators
Coleman J (1975) Jean de Ripa, OFM, and the Oxford Calculators.
Mediaeval Stud 37:130–189
de Libera A (1990) La de´veloppement de nouveaux instruments
conceptuels et leur utilisation dans la philosophie de la nature au
XIVe sie`cle. In: Asztalos M, Murdoch J, Niiniluoto I (eds) Knowledge
and the sciences in medieval philosophy, vol 1. Yliopistopaino, Hel-
sinki, pp 158–197
Jung-Palczewska E (2000) Works by Richard Kilvington. AHDLMA
67:181–223
Kaluza Z (1978) Thomas de Cracovie: Contribution a` l’histoire du colle`ge
de la Sorbonne. Ossolineum, Wroclaw
Kaye J (1998) Economy and nature in the fourteenth century. Money,
market exchange, and the emergence of scientiﬁc thought. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, for the calculators, see pp 165–167
Livesey S (1986) The Oxford ‘‘Calculatores,’’ quantiﬁcation of qualities,
and Aristotle’s prohibition of ‘‘metabasis.’’ Vivarium 24:50–69
Molland G (1968) The geometrical background to the ‘Merton School,’
Brit J Hist Sci 4:108–125
Murdoch JE, Sylla ED (1976) Swineshead (Swyneshed, Suicet, etc.), Rich-
ard. In: Gillispie CC (ed) Dictionary of scientiﬁc biography, vol XIII.
Charles Scribner’s, New York, pp 184–213; Sylla E supplement
(2008), Complete dictionary of scientiﬁc biography, vol 24. pp
562–563; available online through Gale Virtual Reference Library
Spade PV (1982) Three theories of obligationes: Burley, Kilvington and
Swyneshed on counterfactual reasoning. Hist Philos Logic 3:1–32
Spade PV (2003) Medieval theories of obligationes. In: Stanford encyclo-
pedia of philosophy. http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/obligationes/
(Compares the ideas on obligations of Burley and Swyneshed)
Spade PV (2005) Insolubles. In: Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy.
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/insolubles/
Sylla ED (1970/1991) The Oxford Calculators and the mathematics of
motion, 1320–1350. Physics and measurement by latitudes. Harvard
University dissertation. Now published in Harvard university disser-
tations in history of science with a new preface. Garland, New York/
London
Sylla ED (1973) Medieval concepts of the latitude of forms: the Oxford
calculators. AHDLMA 40:223–283
Sylla ED (1982) The Oxford Calculators. In: Kretzmann N, Kenny A,
Pinborg J (eds) The Cambridge history of later medieval philosophy.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 540–563
Sylla ED (1986a) The fate of the Oxford calculatory tradition. In: Wenin
C (ed) L’Homme et Son Univers au Moyen age. Actes du septie`me
congre`s
international
de
philosophie
me´die´vale
(30
aout–4
septembre 1982. Philosophes Medie´vaux, vol 27). Editions de
l’Institut Superieur de Philosophie, Louvain-la-Neuve, pp 692–698
Sylla ED (1986b) Galileo and the Oxford Calculatores: analytical lan-
guages and the mean-speed theorem for accelerated motion. In:
Wallace WA (ed) Reinterpreting Galileo. Studies in philosophy and
the history of philosophy, vol 15. Catholic University of America
Press, Washington, pp 53–108
Sylla ED (1987a) Mathematical physics and imagination in the work of
the Oxford Calculators: Roger Swineshead’s on natural motions. In:
Grant E, Murdoch J (eds) Mathematics and its application to science
and natural philosophy in the Middle Ages. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, pp 69–101
Sylla ED (1987b) The Oxford Calculators in context. Sci Context 1:257–
279
Sylla ED (1989) Alvarus Thomas and the role of logic and calculations in
sixteenth century natural philosophy. In: Caroti S (ed) Studies in
medieval natural philosophy, (Biblioteca di Nuncius, Studi e Testi I).
Leo S. Olschki, Florence, pp 257–298
Sylla ED (1991) The Oxford Calculators and mathematical physics: John
Dumbleton’s Summa logicae et philosophiae naturalis, Parts II and
III. In: Unguru S (ed) Physics, cosmology, and astronomy. Kluwer,
Dordrecht, pp 129–161
Sylla ED (2004) Mathematics in the Liber de Triplici Motu of Alvarus
Thomas of Lisbon. In: Saraiva L, Leita˜o H (eds) The practice of
mathematics
in
Portugal.
Acta
Universitatis
Conimbricensis.
Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, pp 109–161
Thakkar M (2007) The Oxford Calculators. Oxford Today 19(3):24–26
Wallace WA (1969) The ‘Calculatores’ in early sixteenth-century physics.
Brit J Hist Sci 4(3):221–232
Weisheipl JA (1968) Ockham and some Mertonians. Medieval Stud
30:151–175
Weisheipl JA (1969) Repertorium Mertonense. Medieval Stud 31:174–
224. Lists manuscripts of the works of the Oxford Calculators
Wilson C (1960) William Heytesbury: medieval logic and the rise of
modern physics. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison
908 O
Oxford Calculators

