Generalizations of Quantum Statistics
255
G
32. R. Gambini, J. Pullin: Loops, Knots, Gauge Theories and Quantum Gravity. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge (1996).
33. M. Henneaux, C. Teitelboim: Quantization of Gauge Systems. Princeton University Press,
Princeton (1992).
34. M. Nakahara: Geometry, Topology and Physics. IOP Publishing, Bristol (1990).
35. L. H. Ryder: Quantum Field Theory. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1985, 21996).
36. T. Y. Cao: Conceptual Developments of 20th Century Field Theories. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge (1997).
37. L. O’Raifeartaigh: The Dawning of Gauge Theory. Princeton University Press, Princeton
(1995).
38. L. O’Raifeartaigh, N. Straumann: Gauge Theory: Historical Origins and Some Modern
Developments. Reviews of Modern Physics. 72 (1): 1–23 (2000).
39. J. C. Taylor: Gauge Theories in the Twentieth Century. World Scientiﬁc, Singapore (2001).
40. V. P. Vizgin: Uniﬁed Field Theories. Birkh¨auser, Basel (1994).
Generalizations of Quantum Statistics
O.W. Greenberg
The general principles of quantum theory allow statistics more general than bosons
or fermions. ( Bose-Einstein statistics and  Fermi statistics are discussed in sep-
arate articles.) The restriction to Bosons or Fermions requires the symmetrization
postulate, “the states of a system containing N identical particles are necessarily
either all symmetric or all antisymmetric under permutations of the N particles,” or,
equivalently, “all states of identical particles are in one-dimensional representations
of the symmetric group [1].” Messiah and Greenberg discussed quantum mechanics
without the symmetrization postulate [2]. The spin-statistics connection, that inte-
ger  spin particles are bosons and odd-half-integer spin particles are fermions [3],
is an independent statement. Identical particles in 2 space dimensions are a special
case, “ anyons.” Braid group statistics, a nonabelian analog of anyons, are also
special to 2 space dimensions.
All  observables must be symmetric in the dynamical variables associated with
identical particles. Observables can not change the permutation symmetry type of
the wave function; i.e. there is a superselection rule separating states in inequivalent
representations of the symmetric group and when identical particles can occur in
states that violate the  spin statistics theorem their transitions must occur in the
same representation of the symmetric group. One can not introduce a small violation
of statistics by assuming the Hamiltonian is the sum of a statistics-conserving and a
small statistics-violating term, H = HS+ϵHV , as one can for violations of  parity,
charge conjugation, etc. Violation of statistics must be introduced in a more subtle
way.
Doplicher et al. [4, 5] classiﬁed identical particle statistics in 3 or more space
dimensions. They found parabose and parafermi statistics of positive integer orders,

256
Generalizations of Quantum Statistics
which had been introduced by Green [6], and inﬁnite statistics, which had been
introduced by Greenberg [7,8]. Parabose (parafermi) statistics allows up to p iden-
tical particles in an antisymmetric state (symmetric) state. Inﬁnite statistics allows
any number of identical particles in a symmetric or antisymmetric state.
Trilinear commutation relations,
[[a†
k, al]±, a†
m]−= 2δlma†
k
(1)
with the vacuum condition, ak|0⟩= 0, and single-particle condition, aka†
l |0⟩=
pδkl|0⟩, deﬁne the Fock representation of order p parabose (parafermi) statistics.
Green found two inﬁnite sets of solutions of these commutation rules, one set for
each positive integer p, by the ansatz,
a†
k =
p

α=1
b(α)†
k
, ak =
p

α=1
b(α)
k ,
(2)
where the b(α)
k
and b(β)†
k
are bose (fermi) operators for α = β but anticommute
(commute) for α ̸= β for the parabose (parafermi) cases. The integer p is the order
of the parastatistics. For parabosons (parafermions) p is the maximum number of
particles that can occupy an antisymmetric (symmetric) state. The case p = 1 corre-
sponds to the usual Bose or Fermi statistics. Greenberg and Messiah [9] proved that
Green’s ansatz gives all Fock-like solutions of Green’s commutation rules. Local
observables in parastatistics have a form analogous to the usual ones; for exam-
ple, the local current for a spin-1/2 theory is jμ = (1/2)[ ¯ψ(x), ψ(x)]−. From
Green’s ansatz, it is clear that the squares of all norms of states are positive; thus
parastatistics [10] gives a set of orthodox positive metric theories. Parabose or
parafermi statistics for p > 1 give gross violations of Bose or Fermi statistics so
that parastatistics theories are not useful to parametrize small violations of statistics.
The bilinear commutation relation
a(k)a†(l) −qa†(l)a(k) = δ(k, l),
(3)
with the vacuum condition, a(k)|0⟩= 0, deﬁne the Fock representation of quon
statistics. Positivity of norms requires −1 ⩽q ⩽1 [11,12]. Outside this range the
squared norms become negative. There is no commutation relation involving two a’s
or two a†’s. There are n! linearly independent n-particle states in  Hilbert space if
all  quantum numbers are distinct; these states differ only by permutations of the
order of the  creation operators.
For q ≈±1, quons provide a formalism that can parametrize small violations of
statistics so that quons are useful for quantitative tests of statistics. At q = 1(−1)
only the symmetric (antisymmetric) representation of Sn occurs. The quon operators
interpolate smoothly between fermi and bose statistics in the sense that as q →
∓1 the antisymmetric (symmetric) representations smoothly become more heavily
weighted.

Generalizations of Quantum Statistics
257
G
Although there are n! linearly independent vectors in Fock space associated with
a degree n monomial in  creation operators that carry disjoint quantum numbers
acting on the vacuum, there are fewer than n! observables associated with such vec-
tors. The general observable is a linear combination of projectors on the irreducibles
of the symmetric group.
A convenient way to parametrize violations or bounds on violations of statistics
uses the two-particle density matrix. For fermions, ρ2 = (1 −vF )ρa + vF ρs; for
bosons, ρ2 = (1−vB)ρs+vBρa. In each case the violation parameter varies between
zero if the statistics is not violated and one if the statistics is completely violated.
R.C. Hilborn [13] pointed out that the transition matrix elements between symmetric
(antisymmetric) states are proportional to (1 ± q) so that the transition probabilities
are proportional to (1 ± q)2 rather than to (1 ± q).
Several properties of kinematically relativistic quon theories hold, including a
generalization of Wick’s theorem, cluster decomposition theorems and (at least for
free quon ﬁelds) the  CPT theorem; however  locality in the sense of the com-
mutativity of  observables at spacelike separation fails [7]. The nonrelativistic
form of locality
[ρ(x), ψ†(y)]−= δ(x −y)ψ†(y),
(4)
where ρ is the charge density, does hold.
Greenberg and Hilborn [14] derived the generalization of the result due to
Wigner [15] and to Ehrenfest and Oppenheimer [16] that a bound state of bosons
and fermions is a boson unless it has an odd number of fermions, in which case it is
a fermion generalizes for quons: A bound state of n identical quons with parameter
qconstituent has parameter qbound = qn2
constituent [14].
Primary Literature
1. A.M.L. Messiah: Quantum Mechanics, Vol. II (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1962), p 595
2. A.M.L. Messiah and O.W. Greenberg: Symmetrization Postulate and Its Experimental Foun-
dation. Phys. Rev. 136, B248–B267 (1964)
3. W. Pauli: The Connection Between Spin and Statistics. Phys. Rev. 58, 716–722 (1940)
4. S. Doplicher, R. Haag, J. Roberts: Local Observables and Particle Statistics I. Commun. Math.
Phys. 23, 199–230 (1971)
5. S. Doplicher, R. Haag, J. Roberts: Local Observables and Particle Statistics I. Commun. Math.
Phys. 35, 49–85 (1974)
6. H.S. Green: A Generalized method of ﬁeld quantization. Phys. Rev 90, 270–273 (1952)
7. O.W. Greenberg: Example of Inﬁnite Statistics. Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 705–708 (1990)
8. O.W. Greenberg: Particles with Small Violations of Fermi or Bose Statistics. Phys. Rev. D 43,
4111–4120 (1991)
9. O.W. Greenberg and A.M.L. Messiah: Selection Rules for Paraﬁelds and the Absence of Para
Particles in Nature. Phys. Rev. 138, B1155–B1167 (1965)
10. G.F. Dell’ Antonio, O.W. Greenberg and E.C.G. Sudarshan: Parastatistics: Axiomatic Formu-
lation, Connection with Spin and Statistics and TCP Theorem for the General Field Theory.
In Group Theoretical Concepts and Methods in Elementary Particle Physics, ed. F. G¨ursey,
Gordon and Breach, New York, 1964, p 403, introduced the word “parastatistics”
11. D. Zagier: Realizability of a Model in Inﬁnite statistics. Commun. Math. Phys. 147, 199–210
(1992)

258
GHZ (Greenberger–Horne–Zeilinger) Theorem and GHZ States
12. R. Speicher: Generalized Statistics of Macroscopic Fields. Lett. Math. Phys. 27, 97–104 (1993)
13. R.C. Hilborn: Connecting q-Mutator Theory with Experimental Tests of the Spin-Statistics
Connection. in Spin-Statistics Connection and Commutation Relations, ed. R.C. Hilborn and
G.M. Tino (American Institute of Physics, Melville, NY, 2000), pp 128–141
14. O.W. Greenberg and R.C. Hilborn: Quon Statistics for Composite Systems and a Limit on
the Violation of the Pauli Principle for Nucleons and Quarks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 4460–4463
(1999)
15. E.P. Wigner: Math. und Naturwiss. Anzeiger der Ungar. Ak. der Wiss. 46, 576 (1929); trans-
lated in Collected Works of E.P. Wigner
16. P. Ehrenfest and J.R. Oppenheimer: Note on the Statistics’ of Nuclei. Phys. Rev. 37, 333–338
(1931)
Secondary Literature
17. O.W. Greenberg, D.M. Greenberger and T.V. Greenbergest: (Para)bosons, (Para)fermions,
Quons and other Beasts in the Managerie of Particle Statistics, in Quantum Coherence and
Reality, ed. J.S. Anandan and J.L. Safko, (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1994), pp 301–312
18. Y. Ohnuki and S. Kamefuchi: Quantum Field Theory and Parastatistics, (University of Tokyo,
Berlin, 1982)
19. R. Haag: Local Quantum Physics, (Springer, Berlin, 1992)
20. R.C. Hilborn and G.M. Tino, editors: Spin-Statistics Connection and Commutation Relations,
(American Institute of Physics, Melville, NY, 2000)
GHZ (Greenberger–Horne–Zeilinger) Theorem
and GHZ States
Daniel M. Greenberger
The GHZ states (Greenberger–Horne–Zeilinger states) are a set of entangled states
that can be used to prove the GHZ theorem, which is a signiﬁcant improvement
over  Bell’s Theorem as a way to disprove the concept of “elements of reality”, a
concept introduced by  EPR problem (Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen) in their attempt
to prove that quantum theory is incomplete. Conceding that they did not quite know
what “reality” is, EPR nonetheless said that it had to contain an “element of reality”
as one of its properties. This was that if one could discover a property of a system
(i.e., predict it with 100% certainty) by making an experiment elsewhere, that in no
way interacted with the system, then this property was an element of reality. The
argument was that since one had not in any way interacted with the system, then
one could not have affected this property, and so the property must have existed
before one performed one’s experiment. Thus the property is an intrinsic part of the
system, and not an artifact of the measurement one made.
From a common-sense point of view, this proposition seems unassailable, and yet
quantum theory denies it. For example, in the Bohm form of the EPR experiment,

