
Essential Readings in Biosemiotics

BIOSEMIOTICS
VOLUME 3
Series Editors
Marcello Barbieri
Professor of Embryology
University of Ferrara, Italy
President
Italian Association for Theoretical Biology
Editor-in-Chief
Biosemiotics
Jesper Hoffmeyer
Associate Professor in Biochemistry
University of Copenhagen
President
International Society for Biosemiotic Studies
Aims and Scope of the Series
Combining research approaches from biology, philosophy and linguistics, the emerging ﬁeld
of biosemiotics proposes that animals, plants and single cells all engage in semiosis – the
conversion of physical signals into conventional signs. This has important implications and
applications for issues ranging from natural selection to animal behaviour and human psy-
chology, leaving biosemiotics at the cutting edge of the research on the fundamentals of life.
The Springer book series Biosemiotics draws together contributions from leading players in
international biosemiotics, producing an unparalleled series that will appeal to all those inter-
ested in the origins and evolution of life, including molecular and evolutionary biologists,
ecologists, anthropologists, psychologists, philosophers and historians of science, linguists,
semioticians and researchers in artiﬁcial life, information theory and communication tech-
nology.
For further volumes:
http://www.springer.com/series/7710

Donald Favareau
Essential Readings
in Biosemiotics
Anthology and Commentary
123

Dr. Donald Favareau
National University of Singapore
University Scholars Programme
10 Kent Ridge Crescent
Singapore 119260
Singapore
favareau@gmail.com
ISBN 978-1-4020-9649-5
e-ISBN 978-1-4020-9650-1
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9650-1
Springer Dordrecht Heidelberg London New York
Library of Congress Control Number: 2009943437
© Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010
No part of this work may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by
any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, microﬁlming, recording or otherwise, without written
permission from the Publisher, with the exception of any material supplied speciﬁcally for the purpose
of being entered and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work.
Printed on acid-free paper
Springer is part of Springer Science+Business Media (www.springer.com)

Preface
A Stroll Through the Worlds of Science and Signs
Having spent the last ten years in regular correspondence with the world’s small
but steadily growing population of “biosemioticians,” I feel warranted in saying
of this diverse group of molecular biologists, neuroscientists, zoologists, anthro-
pologists, psychologists and philosophers: that while each one more or less found
their way into this common project alone – proceeding from vastly different start-
ing points and through drastically varying routes – it might yet not be too broad a
claim to say that a growing discontent with what was being offered as (or in lieu of )
“explanation” regarding the nature of empirically observed, real-world sign pro-
cesses in their respective ﬁelds of origin appears to be the single most common
impetus setting the majority of these researchers on their respective paths to what
has now converged to become the growing interdisciplinary project of biosemiotics.
Accordingly, on the website of the International Society for Biosemiotic Studies that
I maintain at www.biosemiotics.org, I deﬁne the interdisciplinary research agenda
of biosemiotics as follows:
“Biosemiotics is the study of the myriad forms of communication and signiﬁ-
cation observable both within and between living systems. It is thus the study of
representation, meaning, sense, and the biological signiﬁcance of sign processes –
from intercellular signaling processes to animal display behavior to human semi-
otic artifacts such as language and abstract symbolic thought. Such sign processes
appear ubiquitously in the literature on biological systems. Up until very recently,
however, it had been implicitly assumed that the use of terms such as message, sig-
nal, code, and sign with respect to non-linguistic biological processes was ultimately
metaphoric, and that such terms could someday effectively be reduced to the mere
chemical and physical interactions underlying such processes. As the prospects for
such a reduction become increasingly untenable, even in theory, the interdisciplinary
research project of biosemiotics is attempting to re-open the dialogue across the life
sciences – as well as between the life sciences and the humanities – regarding what,
precisely, such ineliminable terms as representation, sign of, and meaning might
v

vi
Preface
refer to in the context of living, interactive, complex adaptive systems” (Favareau
2005: o.l).1,2
Indeed, my own entry into this ﬁeld came as the result of my growing discon-
tent with the inability of cognitive neuroscience to confront issues of experiential
“meaning” at the same level that it was so successful in, and manifestly commit-
ted to, studying the mechanics of those very same electro-chemical transmission
events by which such meanings were being asserted (but not explained) to be pro-
duced. Indeed, the 1990s were declared to be “The Decade of the Brain” in the
United States – and reservations about the seriousness of such self-aggrandizing
hyperbole aside, however, this period did indeed see a great explosion of ideas and
energy emanating out of such newly minted hybrid research projects as neurophi-
losophy, evolutionary psychology, dynamic systems theory, cognitive neuroscience,
and Artiﬁcial Intelligence/Artiﬁcial Life.
What intrigued me about this research then (and now) was the fact that at the heart
of these disparate research projects lay the primordial scientiﬁc question: “What
is the relation between mental experience, biological organization, and the law-
like processes of inanimate matter?”. However, and for reasons that should become
clear as this history progresses, that ancient and comprehensively articulated ques-
tion progressively became re-formulated – and ultimately replaced – by the much
narrower and more presumption-driven question: “How does the human brain pro-
duce the mind?”. And this is a very different question – making some very different
assumptions – from the prior formulation, as we soon shall see.
However, even in response to this perhaps less optimally formulated latter
question, many interesting analyses were made, hypotheses proposed and theories
advanced – though none proved fully satisfactory, even on the theoretical level, and
as the inquiry began taking on its institutionally funded form, fewer and fewer of the
major participants in the debate took the opportunity to reﬂect publicly on whether
the question of “How do brains produce minds?” was not itself framed in such a
way that there could never be provided a satisfactory answer.
For with the object of study itself being conceptualized either in a modiﬁed
Cartesian sense (i.e., “mind” as an immaterial system property either emergently
produced by, or actually reducible to, the activity of an material brain), or as an
“inherently unknowable” phenomenon (McGinn 1999), or as outright category mis-
take of “folk psychology” (Churchland 1984), it’s hard to see how any progress
could be made on this issue, given the artiﬁcially barren parameters within which
the search was set.
Towards the end of the century, the application of dynamic systems theory to
neuroscience was promising to open up a third alternative to the “dualist-and-
immaterialist versus reductionist-and-determinist” impasse, and several visionary
brain researchers (e.g. Edelman 1992, Damasio 1994, Freeman 2000, Llinás 2001,
1 The abbreviation “o.l.” stands for “online” throughout this volume.
2 The reference list for this section appears in the back of the volume, to maintain consistency with
the rest of the editorial material that introduces each reading.

Preface
vii
Fuster 2003) were suggesting interesting syntheses that, although not phrased as
such by their proponents, attempted to preserve the interdependent reality of both
sign relations and material relations in their explications of the phenomenon of
“mind.”
However, the majority of these searches still proceeded from the yet too partial
understanding that somehow “the human mind produces sign relations” – and it was
not until neuroscientist and bio-anthropologist Terrence Deacon (1997) suggested a
new way of looking at the problem of language origins through the lens of Charles S.
Peirce’s architectonic of “sign relations” per se that it became clear at least to some
people, myself included, that a potentially more viable approach to the conventional
mind-brain question might be to not begin that study by using the uniquely human
manifestation of mental experience as the archetypal example of the system needing
explanation, as if it – alone among the products of the natural world – somehow
arose ex nihilo and persists today sui generis – but to inquire ﬁrst, instead, into the far
more fundamental relationship of all purposive organisms to subjective experience
(a term which itself, it turns out, denotes a far broader set of natural relations and
phenomena than are indicated when one begins a priori with the stipulation that
“subjective experience” is something that arises wholly out of, and remains forever
locked away within, brains).
Coming upon Deacon’s provocative synthesis of Peirce re-set the fundamental
terms of inquiry for me, and soon led me to discover the work of Danish biosemi-
otician Jesper Hoffmeyer – and it is from this point that I date my own decision
to become part of the yet nascent interdiscipline of biosemiotics. To this day, I can
still recall the precise moment of my casting of this die. I had only gotten as far as
page 40 in Hoffmeyer’s (1996) Signs of Meaning in the Universe when I came upon
a passage wherein he compares the concept of self-reference in a system with the
perpetual creation of “a map which is so detailed that the cartographer and the map
that he is making are swept up into it.” This elegant little description so perfectly
captured the paradox that most contemporary neuroscientiﬁc theory both entailed
and yet was simultaneously denying and/or attempting to run away from, that at
the end of my reading of that passage – one of many such delightful asides orna-
menting the profound and seriously consequential ideas argued for in this book, I
e-mailed Jesper Hoffmeyer in Copenhagen, and found myself in Denmark a few
weeks later debating the relations between intersubjectivity and mirror neurons at
the First Annual International Gatherings in Biosemiotics conference.
Researchers from eighteen different countries were present at that inaugural
Gatherings conference, with backgrounds ranging from physics and molecular
biology to animal ethology, robotics, evolutionary psychology and philosophy of
semiotics and of mind. Since entering the interdisciplinary project that this group
was in the process of creating, I have learned much about the understandings
attained by the various disciplines from which each of my colleagues has been
informed – as well as about the longer tradition of “theoretical biology” that remains
relatively, and detrimentally, untaught as part of a scientiﬁc education in the United
States.

viii
Preface
The book that you now hold in your hands has been prepared precisely as a
resource for this addressing this lacuna. Like any other such anthology, it does
not pretend to completeness – absent from representation here, for example, are
whole canons of seminally inﬂuential work in physical science (e.g., Schrödinger,
Heisenberg, Einstein, Eigen), in theoretical biology (e.g., Waddington, Rosen,
Kaufmann, Elsasser) and in semiotics (e.g., Deely, Danesi, Merrell, Petrilli) with-
out which the contemporary interdiscipline of biosemiotics would be unthinkable.
Instead, selection for inclusion in the volume was limited to those interdisciplinary
thinkers who self-identify as “biosemioticians,” as well as those “biosemiotic pre-
cursors” who have been retrospectively adopted by the community as such (i.e.,
Peirce, Uexküll and Bateson).
Even within these restricted selection parameters, however, limitations of space
have precluded the inclusion of a number of important works by such “second-
generation” younger biosemioticians such as Argyris Arnellos, Luis Bruni, Yagmur
Denhizen and Yair Neuman, as well as by the more “humanities-based” biosemioti-
cians as Paul Cobley, Marcel Danesi, John Deely, Frederik Stjernfelt and Wendy
Wheeler (to name just a very small sample). Thus, mere non-inclusion in this
introductory volume does not imply non-centrality to the contemporary project of
biosemiotics. Indeed, in many cases, the level of biosemiotic discourse in these
works was found to be too advanced for inclusion in this volume, whose aim is
to provide an introductory overview only. Having once ﬁnished the volume, readers
are strongly encouraged to deepen and to continue their study of biosemiotics by
consulting the texts cited at the end of the individual articles, as well as those listed
in the Bibliography and Further Reading lists appearing at the end of the volume.
Finally, two last points about the current volume should be made: one about the
organization of the book, and one about the intentions behind it.
Essential Readings in Biosemiotics has been organized as both a teaching tool
and as an adventure in thinking. As both a professional teacher and as a lifelong
autodidact myself, I have endeavored to design the book such that it can be read
from start to ﬁnish in the order that the chapters appear for those who will use it for
self-teaching and enrichment. Alternatively, its chapters can be assigned piecemeal
and selectively for classroom teaching, provided that the instructor already has a
sure grasp of the interdiscipline as a whole. For either application, however, it is
strongly recommended that both student and non-student readers alike begin their
study of this volume by reading the Introduction chapter in full, before proceeding
to the selection of reprinted texts. Doing so will provide the necessary grounding
in both the history of biosemiotics as well as in its theory, allowing for a richer
understanding of the subsequent texts.
Of the content of those texts themselves, I will say very little here, having
provided in the following volume what I hope to be “comprehensive enough” intro-
ductory material to each of them so as to orient the reader to each author’s particular
life’s work and its goals. But I must stress to the reader at the outset – as well as
throughout, and also at the conclusion! – that the biosemiotic project is nothing
yet resembling a mature, by which is meant a coherent, “science” – and that this

Preface
ix
volume is not thus a compendium of formulae for “the correct way” of undertak-
ing biosemiotic inquiry. For Biosemiotics is as yet only a proto-science – as will
become obvious once one considers the very many different, and sometimes even
contradictory, approaches to the study of sign relations in biology that are proposed
by the various authors herein.
“I should not like to spare [my reader] the trouble of thinking,” wrote Ludwig
Wittgenstein, famously, in the preface to his Philosophical Investigations, “but to
stimulate [the reader] to thinking new thoughts of his own” (1953 [2001]: xe).
Similarly, to borrow an observation about the sign logic of Charles S. Peirce from
scholar Thomas Lloyd Short, the biosemiotic proposals that you will ﬁnd in this
book are intended, like all such proposals in natural science, as hypotheses – “ideas
not intended as ‘ﬁnal’ but [as working hypotheses] to be applied and developed,
perhaps by others. [In other words,] the arguments for these ideas appear not just
wholly on the page, but consist instead in what can be done with them – just as
pragmatism implies” (2007: xii).
“Nothing is yet settled in biosemiotics, everything is on the move,” writes
biosemiotician Marcello Barbieri, reﬂecting the consensus of the most recent
international biosemiotics conference, “for the scientiﬁc exploration of the newly-
discovered continent of meaning has just begun” (2007: 112). So, too, is the reader
of this volume encouraged to look upon its contents not as a series of dogmatic
pronouncements to be accepted or rejected, but as suggestions made in good faith
and in full awareness of the enormity of the undertaking, regarding how one might
proﬁtably go about starting to develop a scientiﬁcally accountable framework for
the explanation and investigation of the ubiquitous presence of sign relations in the
organization and interaction of biological systems.
Read in this way, one can understand biosemiotics for what it really is, and
can beneﬁt from this volume in the way that it is intended. For the answers to the
questions that biosemiotics asks are not contained within this volume – only some
suggestions for building the frameworks that might answer those questions are con-
tained herein. Accordingly, the most important selection lacking inclusion in this
book is the one that the reader should afterwards feel compelled to write.
“I can see where this group of disparate thinkers have identiﬁed and clariﬁed
what the problems are in trying to address the issues of ‘meaning’ in biology –
and they have even convinced me of the ultimate necessity of this task” writes
an anonymous reviewer of the current book, “But from what I have read here, it
seems like none of them have yet been able to advance a rigorous and detailed
enough methodology, framework or platform so as to enable real collaborative sci-
entiﬁc effort to begin. Thus, as brilliant as certain ideas or even thinkers may be in
isolation – when taken together, ‘biosemiotics’ as a concrete undertaking seems to
have not yet found its footing, and at times gives the impression that it is still ﬂailing
around for a foothold.”
Having spent the last ten years of my life with this group, and as part of this
project, I am actually tempted to agree somewhat with this assessment. But not with-
out this caveat: If one truly recognizes the need for something like a bio-semiotics,

x
Preface
then one owes it to science to put one’s own best thought and effort to the task.
And therefore I ask the reader once again not to approach this volume passively,
but to actively develop what one ﬁnds worthwhile in a given analysis in one’s own
scientiﬁc work and understanding and to improve upon the inevitable shortcomings
that one will by necessity ﬁnd in here as well.
History has shown that at the beginnings of a trans-disciplinary investigation for
which there is as yet no secure, pre-given scientiﬁc framework or vocabulary, an
initial bout “ﬂailing for footholds” may be unavoidable. But if that same history is
a reliable indicator of what is to come, then eventually one of those very ﬂailings
will land on solid ground one day – and at that point, the ﬂailing will have become
irrelevant: instead, the willingness to have begun the project at all will be shown to
have been all along what counted.
Twenty-four attempts at starting this project are included in this volume.
May your reading of it result in a twenty-ﬁfth.
Donald Favareau

Acknowledgments
Conceived at the Sixth Annual International Gatherings in Biosemiotics convened
in Salzurg, Austria in 2006, this book was four long years in the making, during
which time it doubled in size and scope from a projected twelve essay collection
to its present anthology of twenty-four texts plus extensive commentary. To bring
this large project to completion thus required the assistance of many individuals, for
whose help I am deeply grateful.
In particular, I wish to thank all the living authors whose work appears in the
second section of this book for their time and patience in answering my inquiries,
as well as for their permission to reprint their works. Assistance in the translation of
the original texts was generously provided by Prisca Augstyn, Stefan Frazier, Stasia
Getlastname, and Alexander Kravencko, and the introductory material appearing
in this volume was improved immeasurably by critical readings and editorial sug-
gestions made by Peter Barlow, Paul Cobley, John Deely, Peter Harries-Jones and
Kalevi Kull.
The cover photos for this volume were provided by my friend since child-
hood, Gerard Alban of Monkadile Inc, and I was aided in the extremely laborious
manuscript preparation process by my most excellent students at the National
University of Singapore, University Scholars Programme alumni Rebecca Suet Tan,
Roopesh Kumar Singh, Joyce Hui Hui Chen, Lydia Wenxin Lin, and Joy Su Yi
Cheng.
Critically necessary moral support was provided unfailingly throughout the writ-
ing process by my wife Emi Morita, and by all my family and friends, too numerous
to mention here, but individually beloved, all.
Finally, I wish to thank the editors of the book series, Marcello Barbieri and
Jesper Hoffmeyer for giving me complete autonomy in the writing and the compila-
tion in this volume, and most especially of all to Catherine Cotton and Ria Kanters
of Springer Publishers, without whose endless patience and warm encouragement,
this volume never could have been completed.
My own labor on this project I dedicate to all my colleagues in the biosemiotic
community – past, present and future.
Don Favareau
xi

xii
Acknowledgments
Research Funding Acknowledgement: Research necessary to the completion of
this work was supported by two grants from the National University of Singapore
Academic Research Fund, WBS numbers R-377-000-033-112 and R-377-000-036-
112. I am extremely grateful to the National University of Singapore and to the
NUS/USP Academic Research Fund committee for the awarding of these grants.

Contents
1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics . . . . . . .
1
Donald Favareau
Part I
Sebeok’s Precursors and Inﬂuences
2
The Theory of Meaning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
Jakob von Uexküll (1864–1944)
3
The Logic of Signs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
115
Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914)
4
Excerpts from Signs, Language and Behavior
. . . . . . . . . . . .
149
Charles Morris (1901–1979)
5
Excerpts from Universe of the Mind: A Semiotic Theory of Culture .
191
Juri Mikhajloviˇc Lotman (1922–1993)
Part II
The Biosemiotic Project of Thomas A. Sebeok
6
Biosemiotics: Its Roots, Proliferation and Prospects . . . . . . . . .
217
Thomas A. Sebeok (1920–2001)
7
The Clever Hans Phenomenon from an Animal
Psychologist’s Point of View . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
237
Heini K.P. Hediger (1908–1992)
8
Phytosemiotics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
257
Martin Krampen (1928– )
9
Endosemiosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
279
Thure von Uexküll (1908–2004), Werner Geigges (1953– ),
and Jörg Herrmann (1944– )
10
Signs and Codes in Immunology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
323
Giorgio Prodi (1928–1987)
11
From Animal to Man: Thought and Language . . . . . . . . . . . .
337
René Thom (1923–2002)
xiii

xiv
Contents
12
A Semiotic Perspective on the Sciences: Steps Toward a
New Paradigm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
377
Myrdene Anderson (1934– ), John Deely (1942– ), Martin
Krampen (1928– ), Joseph Ransdell (1931– ), Thomas A.
Sebeok (1920–2001), and Thure von Uexküll (1908–2004)
Part III
Independent Approaches to Biosemiotics
13
Theoretical Biology on Its Way to Biosemiotics
. . . . . . . . . . .
417
Kalevi Kull (1952– )
14
Laws of Symbolic Mediation in the Dynamics of Self and Personality 445
Friedrich S. Rothschild (1899–1995)
15
Concepts of Molecular Biosemiotics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
463
Marcel Florkin (1900–1979)
16
Form, Substance and Difference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
501
Gregory Bateson (1904–1980)
17
The Physics and Metaphysics of Biosemiotics
. . . . . . . . . . . .
519
Howard H. Pattee (1926– )
18
Excerpts from The Symbolic Species
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
541
Terrence Deacon (1950– )
Part IV
The Contemporary Interdiscipline of Biosemiotics
19
The Semiotics of Nature: Code-Duality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
583
Jesper Hoffmeyer (1942– )
20
Information and Semiosis in Living Systems: A Semiotic Approach
629
Claus Emmeche (1956– ), João Queiroz (1963– ),
and Charbel El-Hani (1968– )
21
Excerpts from Readers of the Book of Life . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
657
Anton Markoš (1949– )
22
The Cybersemiotic Model of Communication: An
Evolutionary View on the Threshold between Semiosis and
Informational Exchange . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
697
Søren Brier (1951– )
23
Excerpts from The Logos of the Bios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
731
Günther Witzany (1953– )
24
Biosemiotics: A New Understanding of Life . . . . . . . . . . . . .
751
Marcello Barbieri (1940– )
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings . . . . . . . . . . . .
797
Index
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
873

Copyright Permissions
In compiling this anthology, every effort has been made to secure the permission to
reprint material from the owners of the original copyrights. The editor and publisher
thank the following copyright holders for the permission to reprint these works.
The Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics by Donald Favareau. Reprinted from
Introduction to Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis edited by Marcello
Barbieri. Copyright © 2007 by Springer Publishers, Dordrecht, Netherlands.
Reprinted by permission of the publisher.
The Theory of Meaning by Jakob von Uexküll, translated by Barry Stone and
Herbert Weiner. Reprinted from Semiotica 42(1), 25–47. Copyright © 1982 by
Mouton De Gruyter, Berlin, Germany. Reprinted by permission of the publisher.
Universe of Mind: The Semiophere by Yuri Lotman. Reprinted excerpts from
Universe of Mind: A Semiotic Theory of Culture by Yuri M. Lotman; trans-
lated by Ann Shukman. Copyright © 1990 Indiana University Press. Reprinted by
permission of the publisher.
Biosemiotics: Its Roots and Proliferations by Thomas A. Sebeok. Reprinted
from Semiotica 134(1), 18–31. Copyright © 2001 by Mouton De Gruyter, Berlin,
Germany. Reprinted by permission of the publisher.
The Clever Hans Phenomenon by Heini Hediger. Reprinted from The Clever
Hans Phenomenon: Communication with Horses, Whales, Apes and People edited
by Thomas A. Sebeok and Robert Rosenthal. Copyright © 1981 The New York
Academy of Sciences. Reprinted by permission of the publisher.
Phytosemiotics by Martin Krampen. Reprinted from Semiotica 36(3/4),
187–209. Copyright © 1981 by Mouton De Gruyter, Berlin, Germany. Reprinted
by permission of the publisher.
Endosemiotics by Thure von Uexküll, Werner Geigges, and Jörg M. Herrmann.
Reprinted from Semiotica 96(1/2), 5–51. Copyright © 1993 by Mouton De Gruyter,
Berlin, Germany. Reprinted by permission of the publisher.
Signs and Codes in Immunology by Giorgio Prodi. Reprinted from The Semiotics
of Cellular Communication in the Immune System, NATO ASI Series H, Cell Biology
edited by Eli Sercarz. Copyright © 1988 by Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, Germany.
Reprinted by permission of the publisher.
xv

xvi
Copyright Permissions
The Animal Mind by René Thom. Reprinted excerpt from Structural Stability
and Morphogenesis by René Thom; translated by D.H. Fowler. Copyright © 1975
Westview Press, Perseus Books Publishing. Reprinted by permission of the
publisher.
A Semiotic Perspective on the Sciences: Steps to a New Paradigm by Mydrene
Anderson, John Deely, Martin Krampen, Joseph Ransdell, Thomas A. Sebeok
and Thure von Uexküll. Reprinted from Semiotica 52(1/2), 7–47. Copyright ©
1984 by Mouton De Gruyter, Berlin, Germany. Reprinted by permission of the
publisher.
Theoretical Biology on its Way to Biosemiotics by Kalevi Kull. Previously
unpublished. Printed by permission of the author.
Laws of Symbolic Mediation by Freidrich S. Rothschild. Reprinted from The
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 96, 774–784. © 1962 by Wiley
Publishers, New York, NY. Reprinted by permission of the publisher.
Concepts of Molecular Biosemiotics by Marcel Florkin Reprinted from
Comprehensive Biochemistry, Volume 29, Part A edited by Marcel Florkin and
Elmer H. Stotz. Copyright © 1974 Elsevier Scientiﬁc Publishing. Reprinted by
permission of the publisher.
Form, Substance and Difference by Gregory Bateson. Reprinted from Steps to
an Ecology of Mind by Gregory Bateson. Copyright © 1972 University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, Illinois. Reprinted by permission of the publisher.
The Physics and Metaphysics of Biosemiotics by Howard Pattee. Reprinted from
Journal of Biosemiotics 1(1), 281–301. Copyright © 2005 Nova Science Publishers,
Happauge, New York. Reprinted by permission of the publisher.
The Symbolic Species by Terrence W. Deacon. Reprinted excerpts from The
Symbolic Species: The Co-evolution of Language and the Brain, by Terrence W.
Deacon. Copyright © 1997 W.W. Norton & Company, New York. Reprinted by
permission of the publisher.
The Semiotics of Nature: Code-Duality by Jesper Hoffmeyer. Reprinted from
Biosemiotics: An Examination into the Signs of Life and the Life of Signs, by
Jesper Hoffmeyer. Copyright © 2008 by University of Scranton Press, Chicago,
IL. Reprinted by permission of the publisher.
Information and Semiosis in Living Systems by João Queiroz, Claus Emmeche,
and Charbel El-Hani. Reprinted from SEED: The Journal of Semiotics, Evolution,
Energy and Devlopment 5(1), 60–90. Copyright © 2005 University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada. Reprinted by permission of the publisher.
Readers of the Book of Life by Anton Markoš. Reprinted excerpts from Readers
of the Book of Life by Anton Markoš. Copyright © 2002 Oxford University Press.
Reprinted by permission of the publisher.
The Cybersemiotic Model of Communication: An Evolutionary View on the
Threshold between Semiosis and Informational Exchange by Søren Brier. Copyright
© 2006 Triple C: The Journal of Cognition, Communication and Cooperation. Open
Source. Reprinted by permission of the author.

Copyright Permissions
xvii
The Logos of the Bios. by Günther Witzany. Reprinted excerpts from The Logos
of the Bios by Günther Witzany. Copyright © 2007 Umweb, Helsinki, Finland.
Reprinted by permission of the publisher.
Biosemiotics: A New Understanding of Life Marcello Barbieri. Reprinted from
Naturwissenschaften 95(7), 577–599. Copyright © 2008 Springer Publishers and
Naturwissenschaften, Berlin, Germany. Reprinted by permission of the publisher.

Chapter 1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History
of Biosemiotics
Donald Favareau
Abstract1 The present chapter is intended to provide an introductory overview
to the history of biosemiotics, contextualizing that history within and against the
larger currents of philosophical and scientiﬁc thinking from which it has emerged.
Accordingly, to explain the origins of this most 21st century endeavour requires
effectively tracing – at least to the level of a thumbnail sketch – how the “sign” con-
cept appeared, was lost, and now must be painstakingly rediscovered and reﬁned in
science. In the course of recounting this history, this chapter also introduces much
of the conceptual theory underlying the project of biosemiotics, and is therefore
intended to serve also as a kind of primer to the readings that appear in the rest
of the volume. With this purpose in mind, the chapter consists of the successive
examination of: (1) the history of the sign concept in pre-modernist science, (2) the
history of the sign concept in modernist science, and (3) the biosemiotic attempt
to develop a more useful sign concept for contemporary science. The newcomer
to biosemiotics is encouraged to read through this chapter (though lengthy and of
necessity still incomplete) before proceeding to the rest of the volume. For only by
doing so will the disparate selections appearing herein reveal their common unity of
purpose, and only within this larger historical context can the contemporary attempt
to develop a naturalistic understanding of sign relations be properly evaluated and
understood.
1 Pages 1–20 of this chapter originally appeared as The Biosemiotic Turn, Part I in the journal
Biosemiotics (Favareau 2008). The remaining pages appeared as The Evolutionary History of
Biosemiotics in the volume Introduction to Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis (Favareau
2007, in Barbieri, ed.). In keeping with the anthology nature of this volume, I have refrained from
substantially changing the original text, though some citations have been updated to reﬂect the
more recent work done by the scholars discussed herein. Accordingly, the bibliographic informa-
tion for all works published after 2006 appear in the Bibliography and Further Readings at the
back of this volume, rather than in the References list at the end of the chapter.
1
D. Favareau, Essential Readings in Biosemiotics, Biosemiotics 3,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9650-1_1, C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010

2
Donald Favareau
Introduction
When considered together, the following two commonplace observations present an
intransigent paradox for contemporary science:
(1) Biological being is a form of physical organization that has evolved in nature.
(2) A sign is something that stands for something other than itself.
In the physical world of nature, science tells us, things are just what they are:
atoms do not “stand for” other atoms, and the revolution of the earth around the
sun does not mark a new day or night for either of them. With the advent of bio-
logical forms of physical organization, however, all of this changes: atoms in their
physical conﬁguration as ‘odorant’ molecules do “stand for” the presence of nearby
food or potential danger, and the last thing that the reader of these words is cur-
rently considering them as, is precisely what they really are in themselves: utterly
inert and intrinsically meaningless black ink forms present upon a ﬁeld of otherwise
undifferentiated white.
The sign relation of “standing for” is ubiquitous in the biological world, but
the resistance to studying sign processes in nature as genuine sign processes – as
opposed to just studying the interactions of their material substrates – has a long and
principled history in science. It is precisely this history that we need to understand
ﬁrst, if we are ever to understand how something as oddly named as “biosemiotics”
has emerged as neither not an anti-science nor a pseudo-science, but as a genuine
proto-science aimed at scientiﬁcally distinguishing and explaining the use of sign
processes and sign relations both between and within organisms.
“Subjective experience” – which is also an undeniably ubiquitous characteris-
tic of all living systems, provided that one does not conceptually reduce the rich
multiplicity of organismic experience with the evolutionarily anomalous and biolog-
ically minority instance of self-conscious, language-employing human ‘subjective
experience’ – is made possible only by the existence of genuine biological (i.e., non-
human made) sign relations, yet has been shunned in natural science as a subject of
inquiry in its own right.
Indeed, today it is more the norm than the exception for university life science
majors to be instructed right at the outset of their studies that “science only studies
observable phenomena. It functions in the realm of matter and energy [and there-
fore] it is a serious mistake to think that the methods of science can be applied
in areas of investigation involving other aspects of human experience, e.g., matters
of the mind” (Miller and Harley’s Zoology, 1994: 11). Similarly, Nobel Prize win-
ner Eric Kandel writes at the conclusion of his authoritative Principals of Neural
Science: “most neuroscientists and philosophers now take for granted that all bio-
logical phenomena, including consciousness, are properties of matter . . . and some
philosophers and many neuroscientists believe that consciousness is an illusion”
(2000: 1318, italics mine).
And so the question accordingly arises: How did modern science – the commu-
nal knowledge-generating system par excellence – arrive at this sterile impasse –
one where the investigation of individual knowledge-generating systems as

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
3
knowledge-generating systems per se has come to be seen, at best, as a vexingly
paradoxical riddle and, at worst, as falling entirely outside the scope of legitimate
scientiﬁc inquiry?
The ﬁrst half of this history of biosemiotics attempts to partially illuminate the
historical processes by which this particular explanatory Gordion knot was tied.
One might reasonably suppose that an examination into the uniquely inﬂuential
works of René Descartes (1596–1650) would be a logical place to start this dis-
cussion, as Descartes’ work is often seen as emblematic of the bifurcation between
modernity and pre-modernity in both the sciences and in philosophy, and of demar-
cating the bifurcation between the “mental” and the “material” realms that we
continue to continue his struggle to reconcile, in better and worse ways, today.
And, indeed, it will be necessary to discuss Descartes’ role in shaping the trajec-
tory of modern science if the history of biosemiotics is to make sense within its
larger narrative.
Yet Descartes, too, appears within this role informed by a set of prior understand-
ings and explanatory narratives that are themselves contingent products of history.
So if we are to understand the relationship of biosemiotics with regard to the mod-
ern science from which it proceeds, and which it to some extent challenges, we must
also understand the relation of modern science to the practices and understandings
about the natural world from which it proceeded and, for the most part, not merely
challenged but actively proposed to supplant.
Thus, the ﬁrst difference between the two projects of “biosemiotics vis-à-vis
modern science” and of “modern science vis-à-vis everything that preceded it” can
be clearly stated. For as we shall see shortly, the goal of biosemiotics is to extend and
to broaden modern science, while adhering strictly to its foundational epistemolog-
ical and methodological commitments. It does not seek in any genuine sense of the
term to “oppose” much less “supplant” the scientiﬁc enterprise, but to continue and
to develop it, re-tooled for the very challenges that the enterprise itself entails, if not
demands.
Understanding how and why this is so requires that situate the biosemiotics
project within the history of scientiﬁc thinking as a whole, and not just within the
history and thinking of modern science as delimited and deﬁned by Descartes and
his successors.
Thus what better place to begin a history of biosemiotics than with Aristotle,
the West’s ﬁrst genuine biologist? For only by tracing the winding evolutionary
path that begins in the ancients’ observational thinking about life processes, and
continues through the heavily mediated symbolic thinking of the medievals about
sign processes, may we at last begin to get a clearer view of the Gordian conceptual
entanglements between signs and nature that Descartes sought to resolve, not with
a yet more entangled synthesis, but with an Alexandrian cleaving that would leave
these two halves disconnected and the thread that brings forth their unity forever cut.
And since it is the job of biosemiotics to attempt weaving this thread together
again, we must ﬁrst discover just how and why it got tangled up in the way that
it did in the ﬁrst place. We begin our history proper, then, before it ever occurred
to anyone to tie such an explanatory knot out of the naturally occurring continuum
bearing humans, culture, animals and nature.

4
Donald Favareau
Phase One: Semiotics Without Science
There is no philosophical high-road in science, with epistemological signposts. No, we are
in a jungle and ﬁnd our way by trial and error, building our roads behind us as we proceed.
Thus, we do not ﬁnd sign-posts at cross-roads, but our own scouts erect them, to help the
rest. – Max Born (1882–1970), Nobel Prize in Physics 1954 (Born 1943: 44)
Tracing back such sign-posts as the records that we have access to will allow us,
the dawn of what we now call scientiﬁc knowledge and investigation (as opposed to
the practices and dogma of received and “revealed” wisdom as the foundations for
human action and belief) in the West is generally said to start with the efforts of the
retroactively designated natural philosophers of sixth and ﬁfth century BCE Greece.
There, if the signs extant are telling us the truth, the investigations undertaken into
the observable patterns of natural phenomena and the resulting explanations offered
by the pre-Socratics marked a profound cultural and epistemological shift away
from mankind’s earlier ways of explaining the phenomena of the natural world as
manifestations of the wills and whims of a dizzying assortment of intrinsic and
extrinsic gods.2
And, indeed, this is how the narrative of the birth of science in the West is gen-
erally presented: This new form of communal, non-supernatural investigation that
does not require god-cause as part of its explanations about the natural world is at the
root of what we today call science. Historically familiar as that account may be, what
is less often appreciated is the fact that this profound cultural and epistemological
break between god-causal and non-god-causal explanation simultaneously birthed
an even more irresolvable epistemological bifurcation – one that would plague the
entire subsequent history of science for the next twenty-three centuries, as we shall
see. For in the most general terms, writes historian of philosophy John Deely:
the individuals credited with the introduction of philosophical thought into human civiliza-
tions were men who speculated on what constitutes the objects of human experience in so
far as those objects have or involve an existence or being independent of what [any given
agent, be it gods or human beings] may think, feel or do. The philosophers, in other words,
are those individuals who are credited with introducing into human thought the idea of
reality, or something which ‘is what it is’ on its own grounds, regardless of what further
relations it may have ‘to us’ or how it may appear in experience (Deely 2001: 3).
“Soon enough this thinking became reﬂexive,” Deely continues, “and raised the
question of how [and later, if] such knowledge could be possible in the ﬁrst place”
(ibid). This latter observation, while hugely consequential for the history of sci-
ence and sign theory that it is our goal to convey here, nonetheless gets us too
far ahead of our story for the moment. Rather, we need to linger on Deely’s ﬁrst
observation a little longer in order to fully understand all of what is to come, and to
sufﬁciently appreciate the impact of this ﬁrst major “turn” in our history of scientiﬁc
understanding. For as biosemioticians will centuries later convincingly argue, this
ability to apprehend and understand the extra-mental existence of a world that does
2 But see Denhizan 2008 for an illuminating reconsideration of the still lingering effects of the
Mesopotamian worldview upon subsequent Western epistemology.

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
5
not reduce to our own sensational experience of it, is one of the distinguishing
characteristics of our species-speciﬁc human form of cognition (Hoffmeyer 1996,
Deacon 1997, Emmeche 2002, Favareau 2008, and many more).
Ancient Origins: Assuming a Natural Bridge
Between World and Mind
Obviously, the slow-building origins of such a deeply human cognitive ability as
the one described above must have pre-dated the appearance of the pre-Socratic
philosophers by thousands, if not tens of thousands of years. Certainly, one ﬁnds
highly developed evidence of this ability in the myths of ancient Sumer and Egypt,
in the religion of the Caanites, in the burial rituals of Chinese Longshan culture,
and the writing systems of the early Indus Valley dwellers. And by the time of the
Upanishads, the earliest of which is said to date as far back as ninth century BCE,
we ﬁnd that the assumption of a fundamental dichotomy between reality (Brahman)
and the world of experience (maya) is already being posited as the essential human
condition – anticipating Plato, to say nothing of the modernists, by centuries and
millennia, respectively.
A history of the various responses that have been proposed across cultures to this
characteristically human question regarding the proper relations between “mind-
dependant” and “mind-independent” phenomena would indeed be a fascinating
study – although, of course, it is not one that we will have time for here. Restricting
our analysis to just the Western scientiﬁc tradition, however, we can see right from
the start, its recognition of the need to conceptualize a way of bridging the human
apprehension of purely mind-dependent phenomena to the veridical apprehension
of inescapably mind-independent phenomena.
It is for this reason that we ﬁnd Plato (427–328 BCE) arguing for the necessity
of our gaining unmediated access to direct reality in our between-lives apprehen-
sion of the Ideal Forms (e.g., Timaeus 50a–c, Republic 476b–480a; 596a) and, if
we are diligent, through our concerted efforts at retrieving that same knowledge
through the practices of anamnesis during the course of our own lives (e.g., Meno
85d–86; Phaedo 72e–73a, Republic 534b–c). It is also why we ﬁnd Aristotle
(384–322 BCE) arguing, conversely, for the necessity of inherently mediating and
multiply generative “middle terms” of explanation (roughly akin to Peirce’s inter-
pretants) that we create, test and then either discard or adopt in our journey from
brute perception to the more ﬁne-grained understanding of reality (e.g., Posterior
Analytics II 2, 90a7–9). Even more biosemiotically, Aristotle posits that the orga-
nization of all living form is such that nature “prepares the ground” in organisms
for those perceptual capacities that will be necessary to allow them to achieve their
organismic ends, and that “it is for the sake of this that [their] potentialities are
acquired” (Nichomechaen Ethics 1103a32–33; Metaphysics IX 1050a 5–10).
For both Plato and Aristotle, however – and for the majority of their disciples
over the course of the next two millennia – the notion that a reliably traversable

6
Donald Favareau
bridge between mind-dependant experience and mind-independent reality might
be ‘impossible’ for human beings, even in principle, is an unacceptable absurdity
(e.g. Parmenides 135b–c, De Anima iii 3–5).3 Instead, the serious consideration of
this most counter-intuitive idea by a majority of contemporary theorists is a most
characteristically modern notion – and perhaps the one most responsible for bring-
ing the research agenda of biosemiotics into being in the second half of the 20th
century. For it is biosemiotics that will insist that, in the study of biological orga-
nization and agency of every kind, it is precisely the naturalistic establishment of
sign relations that ‘bridges’ subject-dependent experience (such as we ﬁnd both in
animal sensations as well as in human ‘mindedness’) with the inescapable subject-
independent reality of alterity – an alterity that all organisms have to ﬁnd some way
to successfully perceive and act upon in order to maintain themselves in existence.
Interestingly enough, however, the very naturalness of sign relations seems to
have appeared unproblematic for the ancient Greeks, whose investigations into the
patterns of orderliness discoverable in the natural world were predicated, for the
most part, upon the assumption that human beings were built in such a way as to
be able to derive veridical knowledge about the phenomena present before them
in a world existing independently of their experience. Rather, it would be left to
the Hellenistic and medieval Latin scholars who, in their attempts to synthesize the
insights of Greek antiquity with Biblical revelation so as to develop the doctrines
of the Catholic Church, became increasingly alert to the idea that the mediation
between mind-dependant experience and mind-independent reality was not at all a
straightforward one.4 Not at all coincidentally, it is here where we ﬁrst encounter
serious intellectual engagement with the phenomena of signs qua signs.
3 One can detect some resonance with modernist scepticism in one or two of the minor traditions
of the ancient world, most notably those of the “Middle Academy” thinkers Arcesilaus (c. 315–
241 BCE) and Carneades (c. 213–129 BCE), and especially the later neo-Pyrrhonean scepticism
popularized by Sextus Empiricus (c. 150–225 CE). In the case of the Academicians, however, such
doctrine appear to be motivated more by a desire to weaken the stultifying hold that the un-self-
critical “dogmatism” of the competing Stoic school then held on the popular imagination, then
on the attempt to embark upon anything resembling Descartes’ epistemological program of radi-
cal doubt (Long and Sedley 1987). Similarly, the Pyrronean revival of 2nd and 3rd centuries Rome
appears to have used the inarguable conclusions of sceptical logic purely instrumentally in the quest
to cultivate the spirit of ataraxia, or emotionally detached equanimity, as a “practical philosophy”
and recipe for living – a worldview that Diogenes Laertius suggests that Pyrrho may have origi-
nally re-fashioned out of the belief systems he encountered in his time in India with Alexander’s
army (Burnyet and Frede 1997). Most critically: both schools argued in favor of the foundational
epistemological usefulness of precisely those sense-perceptible “appearances” (Pyrro’s phianom-
ena and Carneades’ pithanon) and pragmatic axioms of everyday “folk psychology” (Arcesilaus’
eulogon) that constitute the “mind-dependant illusions” so bewailed by the – let us call them –
“Dogmatic Sceptics” of modernity.
4 Indeed, the briefest time spent with either the neo-Platonic theology of Augustine (354–430) or
the Aristotelian apologetics of Aquinas (1225–1274) will reveal that ‘naïve realism’ is not a charge
that can be levelled against the Latin thinkers (nor their counterparts in the Islamic world, for that
matter).

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
7
Semiotic Analyses of World-Mind Relations in Hellenic Thought
Eco and Marmo (2000: 65) remind us that prior to the Hellenistic period, the word
σημε´ιo (L: semeion) was understood by the Greeks almost exclusively as a medical
term – one roughly akin to the modern concept of symptom, in that referred it only
to the outward manifestations of an internal state of affairs. And it is from this word
semeion, of course, that the word “sign” – “something that suggests the presence or
existence of some other fact, condition, or quality” 5 – proceeds.
Yet the broader understanding that “signs” are, in their ﬁrst and most funda-
mental sense, relations holding over objects as apprehended by some perceiver
(“Signum est res praeter speciem quam ingerit sensibus, aliud aliquid ex se faciens
in cogitationem venire”)6 was ﬁrst articulated in the West by Augustine of Hippo
(354–430), who is thereby generally credited with developing the West’s ﬁrst true
theory of signs qua signs. Augustine’s development of such a theory was purely
an instrumental one, subservient but necessary to his larger epistemological project
of establishing a theory of human knowing that, as he felt all such theories should,
could lead us to discover how it is that the source of all that is, the Divine God, has
constructed we non-divine human beings such that we may partake of justiﬁably
true knowledge of both his Creation and of Him.7
As a result, “it was Augustine,” writes Umberto Eco, “who ﬁrst proposed a gen-
eral ‘science’ or ‘doctrine’ of signs per se – wherein the sign becomes the genus, of
which words [are but a particular] species” (Eco and Marmo 2000: 65). The point is
a critical one for us today, as we attempt to recover from the intractable conceptual
errors introduced by the 20th century “linguistic turn” in failing to make the critical
distinction between signs and symbols, as we shall have much opportunity to dis-
cuss later. What we need to attend to at this point in our narrative, however, is Eco’s
fertile clariﬁcation that signs (σημε´ια) for the Greeks were understood as natural
events acting as symptoms or indices, and [that] they entertain, with that which they
point to, a relation based upon the mechanism of inference [taking the form if →
then]. Words (λ´εξη) for the Greeks, by contrast, stand in quite a different relation
with what they signify [than this if →then relation]” (ibid).
The questions for Augustine and his commentators would then become: How to
understand both: (1) the if →then relations of the natural world, and how these
relations may be reliably inferred by living beings, as well as: (2) the function of
this as yet still unspeciﬁed “different” (or additional) set of epistemological relations
instantiated by human language use?
5 An absolutely ordinary – but quite profound, it turns out – deﬁnition from the American Heritage
Dictionary (Houghton Mifﬂin 2006).
6 “A sign is something which, offering itself to the senses, conveys something other than itself to
the intellect.” De doctrina christiana II 1, 1963, 33 (trans. Meier-Oeser 2003: o.l.).
7 De- theologized, this is a large part of the contemporary biosemiotic project as well – which is
why Augustine’s extra-linguistic notion of the sign will remain important to us as we move from
human knowing to animal sensing to cellular self-organization.

8
Donald Favareau
A theologian, Augustine resolves these questions much in the same way that
René Descartes will attempt to resolve a similar issue thirteen centuries later: by
appeal to an innate power bestowed in us by God. For the purpose of scientiﬁc
explanation, however, this answer merely pushes the question away. Thus, the search
for a more coherent understanding would become the project of a “forgotten” line
of medieval inquiry that is yet rediscoverable as it culminates in the works of the
scholars of the late medieval Iberian school (the so-called Conimbricenses) – and in
particular, in the Tractatus de Signis of John Poinsot (1589–1644), as philosopher
John Deely has been at the forefront of arguing for quite some time.8 In our own
time, the fact that these two tightly interrelated questions remain unresolved, both
conceptually and scientiﬁcally, would become the initial impetus and driving force
for the development of the project of biosemiotics (Sebeok 2002).
The development of that project will be discussed in this history in due time.
Yet hints on how to go about approaching such dilemnas are already evident in
Augustine, where we ﬁnd, for the ﬁrst time in the West, an extended philosophic dis-
cussion on both the similarities and the differences between “natural signs” (signa
naturalia) and what might be called “cultural signs” – or what Augustine himself
called “given signs” (signa data). Signa naturalia, for Augustine, are those signs
that, “apart from any intention or desire of using them as signs, do yet lead to the
knowledge of something else” (389/1963) – one might think of the relations of phys-
ical contiguity, such as the relation of smoke to ﬁre, or the relation of a fossil to the
animal’s body that left it. “Given signs” (signa data), on the other hand, are “those
[signs] which living beings mutually exchange in order to show, as well as they
can, the feelings of their minds, or their perceptions, or their thoughts” (ibid) –
such as exempliﬁed, presumably, talk and gestures and the marks on this page and
Augustine’s Confessions.
Subsequent inquirers into the notion of sign relations will come to realize, how-
ever, that Augustine’s distinctions here raise as many questions as they propose
to answer. Among these many questions: For whom do such natural signs “lead
to knowledge of something else” . . .other than those with the “intention or desire
for using them” as such? Similarly: Must the given signs that “living beings mutu-
ally exchange in order to show . . . the feelings of their minds” be deliberately and
expressly “exchanged” – or may they be subconsciously performed and registered?
Do animals use signa naturalia or signa data? And in what relation towards each
other do these two categories of “natural” and “given” sign relations ontologically
stand? Perhaps most importantly of all: Is it the “perception” and “awareness” on
the part of some agent that gives a sign its representational efﬁcacy – or does the
agent merely “apprehend” a relation in the world that is already there, regardless of
its apprehension or non-apprehension?
8 See especially Deely’s (1985) translation of Poinsot’s Tractatus de Signis and its accompanying
“critical apparatus” – as well as Deely’s detailed explication of the works of the Coimbra school
in Deely (2001) (esp. pp. 411–484) and of Poinsot’s contribution to a post-modernist theory of
perception and understanding in Deely (2007) (passim).

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
9
Not because he did not recognize these sorts of questions, but because they were
extraneous to his purpose of examining how sacrament and scripture function as the
revealed signs of God, did Augustine more or less leave the discussion of signs qua
signs at this point (Deely 2001: 22). Still, as Meir-Oeser observes, “despite all the
internal ruptures and inconsistencies, Augustine’s doctrine of signs is based on a
deﬁnition that, for the ﬁrst time, intends to embrace both the natural indexical sign
and the conventional linguistic sign as [but two sub-]species of an all-embracing
generic notion of sign, thus marking a turning point in the history of semiotics”
(2003: o.l.).
Certainly, from a history of biosemiotics standpoint, Augustine’s early formula-
tion of a sign as primarily being constituted by a relation between one aspect of the
natural world and another aspect of that same natural world (a “perceiver”) is so
manifestly commonsensical and unencumbered with specially-created dichotomies,
that had the contingencies of history been otherwise, and had sign study proceeded
from Augustine’s deﬁnitions, rather than from a radically disemboweled version of
Aristotle, as we shall soon see it do, we may not have found ourselves here today
still trying to establish as a general understanding the idea that the world of sign
relations per se did not start with the advent of homo sapiens – and that a sign rela-
tion is not something that was created ex nihilo by the minds of human beings – but
rather, that the minds of human beings are themselves the product of a de novo use
of absolutely natural and biological sign relations.
Signs Without Being: The Loss of De Anima to Inform
De Interpretatione
The contingencies that have been actualized by history have not been otherwise,
however – and thus the understandings about sign relations that came to be most
generally accepted by the thinkers of post-antiquity were to have dire consequences
for subsequent centuries’ attempts at incorporating the resulting notion of “sign”
relations into the modern project of science. Anticipating brieﬂy: the model of the
scientiﬁc project that we have inherited today descends in a fairly straight line from
the experimentalist instrument of Francis Bacon’s Novum Organon – an historically
situated rejection of what had served as the primary “instrument of logic” and inves-
tigation about the natural world for the medieval scholastics: Aristotle’s six books
on logic known collectively as the Organon.
But in calling for a revolution in the approach of scientiﬁc investigation from the
deductive to the inductive, Bacon and his contemporaries yet inherited an impov-
erished notion of “sign relations” that would devolve into a literally irreconcilable
mind-body dualism at the hands of René Descartes a mere twenty-one years later.
This assumption of an essential dualism between material relations and sign rela-
tions continues to inform the practices and premises of modern science up unto the
present day. And because of this, it is incumbent upon us to spend the necessary
amount of time here retracing the historical trajectory that precluded for centuries

10
Donald Favareau
even the possibility of a science devoted to investigating the myriad ways in which
material relations could come to function as sign relations in the lives of living
beings.
Signiﬁcantly, in the seven centuries that followed Augustine, the churchmen
studying his doctrine of signs did so only in the sacred context in which it was
intended. For examinations into the workings of the world, they turned, of course,
to The Philosopher, Aristotle. But the Aristotle of the early Middle Ages was only
a partial Aristotle at best, consisting only of the six books translated into Latin by
Boethius (480–524) in the sixth century CE. These six books on logic, thought to
have been collected by Andronicus around 40 BC so as to present the reader with
a structured system of logic, would come to be the standard text of non-Biblical
learning in the thousand years between the fall of Rome and the beginnings of the
modern era – so much so that they became collectively known as just the Organon
– the “instrument” of knowledge and well-ordered thought.
Critically, however, these six books were only one small part of Aristotle’s over-
all understanding about the logic of human reasoning and the logic of the natural
world. The rest of Aristotle’s works – and the ones through which one can get an
understanding of how the logic of human relations both comes out of and ﬁts in with
the logic of the natural world (a “biosemiotic” understanding, as it were) – were lost
to the West for over a thousand years. And from these impoverished initial condi-
tions, a magniﬁcent ediﬁce that was yet only half-informed was constructed over
the course of the next ten centuries.
For the centrality of the Aristotelian Organon as the primary “instrument of
logic” throughout the whole of the Middle Ages. Yet without the corresponding
Aristotelian texts on nature and biology (and on the massively interdependent rela-
tions between biological form and function), the focus of the next dozen centuries,
at least as far as the investigation into “sign relations” is concerned, would proceed
from Aristotle’s meditations of the sign exclusively as it is manifested in human
experience. Indeed, De Interpretatione – that book of the Organon that deals most
speciﬁcally with semantics, hermeneutics and propositional logic – focuses entirely
on the relations of “words” and “sentences” and begins thus:
Spoken words are the symbols of mental experience and written words are the symbols
of spoken words. Just as all men have not the same writing, so all men have not the same
speech sounds, but the mental experiences, which these directly symbolize, are the same for
all, as also are those things of which our experiences are the images (De Interpretatione:1).
The implications of this latter notion – i.e., that “those things of which our experi-
ences are the images” are tied in some deep way to “what all men have” in their very
constitution as men (or, more properly, as human beings and as animals) – Aristotle
declines to expand upon in De Interpretatione, mentioning suggestively that it “has
been discussed in my treatise about the soul, [and] belongs to an investigation
distinct from that which lies before us here’” (330 BC /1941: 38). Having access
to the thought of Aristotle only through Boethius’s translation of the six books of
the Organon, however, the ﬁrst six centuries of monastic scholars had no access to

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
11
this referenced “treatise about the soul” and were thus literally prevented from see-
ing how the arguments of De Interpretatione could be understood as but a particular
subset of those in De Anima (and in De Sensu et Sensibilibus).
De Anima, of course, is about life, and the translation of “anima” as “soul” can
be a misleading one to modern English speakers who are not philosophers. For any-
thing resembling the body-separable, spirit-like “soul” of the Platonic, Christian and
(later) Cartesian traditions is antithetical to what Aristotle is referring to by the term
ψ χ´η (Latinized as anima) in this work. And, in some ways, the understandings of
our current science are closer to Aristotle’s ideas about anima than has been the case
at any time since his rediscovery in the West in the 11th century. Thus, a modern
gloss on Aristotle’s famous dictum that “the soul is the ﬁrst actuality of a natural
body that is potentially alive” might today read: “life is the emergent system prop-
erty of the interactions of a self-catalyzing system that can adapt to its environment
to persevere. Similarly, the basics of his hylomorphism may be restated to reﬂect the
uncontroversial scientiﬁc understanding that the biological “form” of such life is the
product of its evolutionary and ontogenetic embedding in the world, and itself con-
sists of those particular sets of systemic relations that serve to organize a material
substrate into a particular kind of organism.
Thus, to the extent that even this (highly oversimpliﬁed) gloss is representative
of the interdependent recursivity of Aristotle’s biology, we can see that for Aristotle:
(1) animal form is shaped in regard to organisms’ interaction with the world, and
vice-versa (anticipating Darwin, although, of course Aristotle was assuming the ﬁx-
ity of these systemic organism-world arrangements, and not their evolution); (2)
the organism’s actions upon the world (which subsequently change that world) are
both enabled by and constrained by the organisms’ systemic biological constitution,
including its perceptual capacities (anticipating von Uexküll); and (3) it follows that
as the result of (1) and (2) there is both a “realism” to sign relations and a deep
necessity for the joining together of the extra-biological relations of external reality
to the embedded biological relations within organisms such that “what occurs in the
case of the perceiving [system] is conceivably analogous to what holds true in that
of the things themselves” (De Sensu vii.). Understood biosemiotically, these are the
“things of which our experience are the images” and that “all men” share as part of
their biology, and that is alluded to in De Interpretatione: not self-subsistent external
objects, but the knowledge-bearing, suprasubjective reality of sign relations.
In perception, as well as in imagination, in other words, “it is not the stone which
is present in the soul but its form” (De Anima viii). Understood within Aristotle’s
overarching conceptual system of hylomorphism, and again translated for mod-
ern ears (especially those conversant with dynamic systems theory), this means
that there exists a semiotic ‘structural coupling’ between the relations constituting
organisms and the relations constituting the external world that ensures a veridical
alignment between the two that holds across the scala naturae. And again, we can
see how the development of evolutionary theory two millennia later (as well as the
study of animal perceptual worlds qua perceptual worlds that we will be discussing
shortly) can further inform this conjunction between bio- and semiotic- reality, mak-
ing the prospects of a either a nominalist or a Cartesian divorce between knowers

12
Donald Favareau
and the world they know the bewitchment of a symbolic overcoding system that
itself no longer recognizes its own grounding in the relations of the material world
(see also: Deacon 1997, Hoffmeyer 1996).
Thus, the breaking apart of the subordinate study of human words and proposi-
tions in De Interpretatione from the superordinate study of animal organization and
interaction in the world that Aristotle develops in De Anima – a more or less acciden-
tal bifurcation owing to the contingencies of history – became the starting point of
a developmental pathway whose alternative trajectory would remain terra incognita
long after the end of the Middle Ages and right up to the last half of the 20th century.
Indeed, the ever-widening bifurcation in the scholastic period between the investi-
gations of bio-logic and the investigation of semeio-logic resulted in the assumption
that it is what the scholastics called the “mental word” (verbum interius) – or what
we might designate more precisely today as “linguistically mediated experience” –
that was to be the natural starting point and, eventually, the exclusive focus of “sign”
study.
Yet this would prove to be a guiding assumption that is at the same too broad
and too narrow; for in understanding the essence of a “sign” per se to be an object
that is mediated through the mental experience of a human being, this assumption
conﬂates what is merely one example from of the superordinate category of “sign
relations” into the very deﬁnition of the entire category itself.
Doing so thus accomplishes a logical conﬂation and an explanatory reduction at
the same time – a misstep that would have profound consequences for the next dozen
centuries of philosophic inquiry, and by extension, for the subsequent foundation of
modern scientiﬁc thought. For it will be precisely the persistent canalization of this
evolutionarily inverted ‘linguistic-mentalist’ conception of what sign relations are
in their essence that will prove a major obstacle in the forestallment of a successful
explication of the biological and semiotic relations making possible animal know-
ing, human language, and the ways in which these sets of relations do and do not
interact and overlap.
Early Medieval Thought: The Conﬂation of Signs
with Mental Tokens
Of the two major “turns” in the history of Western thinking that would lead to the
loss of the non-linguistic “sign” concept as a centrally mediating factor between
observer-dependant and observer-independent reality, the ﬁrst one was gradual and
the second one more abrupt. The gradual turn was one bequeathed to us by the
medieval scholars over the course of the thirteen centuries when they were most
responsible for the shaping of Western thought. Unlike the latter “turn” taken at
the outset of modernity by such self-conscious modernists as Francis Bacon and
René Descartes, the medievals’ gradualist and organic turn was not a self-conceived
rejection of the modes of thinking that came before it; rather, it was intended to
be a progressively developing improvement and reﬁnement of all that had been
discovered thus far.

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
13
For the virtually unparalleled sophistication and subtlety of scholastic thought
was the result of a tradition of rigorous analytical commentary upon currently exist-
ing analysis, with, ideally, each succeeding iteration adding additional explanatory
clarity, reﬁnement, and depth. Such dialogical, community-based inquiry would
give rise in time to the medieval invention of the university – without which, as
Deely (2001: 83–184) reminds us, the later development (as well as the contin-
ued existence of) today’s scientiﬁc “community of inquirers” would be unthinkable.
Within such focused communal practice, writes Meier-Oeser,
great effort [was put] into the conceptual analysis of the basic terms and notions. Thus,
wherever terms like ‘sign’ (signum) or ‘representation’ (repraesentatio) appeared in the
texts commented on, scholastic authors felt obliged either to give an explicit account of
these concepts or at least to be able to refer to a place where this has been done. In view
of this, the fact that Aristotle in his On Interpretation had incidentally called the word a
‘sign’ (semeion, symbol) of the mental concept or that Augustine had termed the sacrament
a ‘sacred sign’ (signum sacrum) became most important for the later development of semi-
otics. For in both cases, the outcome was a large number of detailed explorations of the
nature and divisions of sign (Meier-Oeser 2003: o.l.).
Indeed, there is simply no space here to do even perfunctory justice to the rich
history of the medievals’ inquiry into the nature and taxonomy of sign relations. It
is a history well worth becoming acquainted with for anyone wishing to do 21st
century biology, however, and particularly so in the ﬁeld of Cognitive Science –
given that the late scholastic treatises suggesting the principles required to establish
a naturalistic path of mediation between brute sensation, categorical perception, and
symbolic abstraction far exceed in analytic depth and detail any such analysis that
has yet been offered in our own time.9
Nor should this rich fecundity be surprising, for the scholastics were following
the principles of what we would today call “dynamic systems processing”, and their
central practice of analytical commentary was devised to “build into the process”
of knowledge-generation the opportunities for systemic self-correction, recursive
iteration, and continual, adaptive growth. Thus, far from being the trivial pursuit
and pointlessly hypothetical discourse that the modernists would later self-servingly
characterize it as, the scholastic project of knowledge yielded scientiﬁc riches that,
once lost, would have to be “discovered” again in modernity (as we shall see later
in this instalment) – as well as riches that have yet to be put to scientiﬁc use.
However, the communal scholastic project was a communal human project, after
all – and we now know from the study of such dynamic systems in practice, that
“initial conditions” can have a disproportionate effect on the eventual outcome states
of such a system, and that the continued iteration of certain values at the expense
of others can put such systems on a runaway trajectory of fatally self-perpetuating
9 Readers interested in pursuing this latter project should ﬁnd in Tweedale (1990), Magee (1989),
Broadie (1989) and especially Deely (2007) inspiration on where to begin. Those wishing more
general overviews with which to begin their own investigation into medieval semiotics are strongly
urged to consult Eco and Marmo (2000), Kretzmann (1982, 1988), Gill (1999), and Jackson (1969),
as well as the relevant chapters in Escbach as Trabant (1983) and Deely (2001).

14
Donald Favareau
“locked-in” effects (Kauffman 1995). Something like this can be seen to have hap-
pened to the development of the sign concept during the Middle Ages, when, having
only Boethuis’ (480–525) translations of and commentaries upon Aristotle’s linguis-
tic and logical treatises, the medieval scholars inherited, from Boethius’ Aristotelian
commentaries, the notion of the “ordo orandi” (or “order of speaking”). Therein,
the hierarchy of knowledge is: the things of the external world (res) are signiﬁed
by mental concepts (intellectus) which are then signiﬁed by spoken words (voce)
and these are, in turn, signiﬁed by written characters (scripta) (Magee 1989: 64–
92). And supporting this system is the principle that: “at the fundament of written
and spoken discourse there is a mental speech (oratio mentis) in which thinking is
performed” (Meier-Oeser 2003: o.l.).
As oversimpliﬁed (and dangerously misleading) as it is, this explanatory schema
as Boethius presents it might yet have enabled the development of a naturalistic
understanding of human cognition and communication, given that the word “sig-
nify” (to generate new sign relations) is used instead of “represents” (to appear as a
coded version) throughout. But since the context in which Boethius’ words would
be read, elaborated on and conceptually developed, was one in which, again, the pri-
mary non-Biblical “instrument for understanding” just happened to be, through the
sheer accident of history, Aristotle’s treatises on the internal logic of language and
linguistically-formed propositions – and not his more general treatises on biolog-
ical form, function and development that were lost to the West for the ﬁrst eight
centuries of the medieval period – it is not surprising that the general direction
of the medievals’ thought on cognition was one that took linguistic relations as
paradigmatic of sign relations in general, rather than vice-versa.
Such a “mirror-image” hierarchy of cognition, we know now, is evolutionarily
impossible. But, of course, the medieval scholars were not thinking in terms of an
evolutionary universe, but in terms of a ﬁxed one – and one wherein linear chains of
being, put and held in place by an unselfconciously anthropomorphized God, were
the received explananda demanding logically consistent explanans. Freed from the
demand to provide an evolutionary account of how language-like signs (e.g., the
propositio, the lekta, the semeionenon, etc.) must have had their origin in animal
communication and cognition, the medievals instead had to account for how these
sign relations ﬁt together to comprise (as opposed to merely support) the uniquely
human form of “reason.”
Later Medieval Thought: The Conﬂation of Signs
with Linguistic Mental Tokens
In the 11th century, Anselm of Canterbury (1033–1109) would develop the doc-
trine of “mental images” as the verba naturalia, or “words of thought” common to
all human beings, anticipating 20th century notions of “mentalese” and “universal
grammar” by almost a millenium. Taking such ideas to their logical (if ultimately
futile) extension, the publication of Thomas of Efurt’s (c. 1280–1350) Grammatica
Speculativia at the beginning of the 14th century, inspired whole schools of “modist

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
15
grammarians” to seek to ﬁnd the ways in which the modal syntactic and mor-
phological characteristics or words (modi signiﬁcandi) must somehow derive from
the correspondingly modal conceptual representations of an intellect (modi intelli-
gendi), that has been passively shaped by its interactions with the modalities proper
to the external thing represented (modi essendi). In this way, the science of signs
and the science of language were to become increasingly coextensive, and it is
this epistemologically inverted hybrid of signs as language-like phenomena – rather
than a true science of signs qua signs – that would go on to be incorporated into
the progressive “linguo-mentalization” the sign concept that is the hallmark of late
medieval thought.10
For even with the recovery of the lost texts of Aristotle from the Arab world in
the 13th century, the much needed re-reading of De Interpretatione in light of De
Anima never occurred (and, indeed, it has not truly occurred yet). Not surprisingly,
then, would William of Ockham (c. 1285–1349) exacerbate the incipient dualism
between extra-mental relations and sign relations by asserting that the universal
properties of things were merely the universalizing mental signa (signs) of human
minds. In such ground did the seeds of an increasingly linguaform and mentation-
centric nominalism ﬂourish, and the self-reinforcing “humaniﬁcation of the sign”
progress.
All of this is not to say, however, that the Middle Ages were entirely bereft of
thinkers dedicating their considerable intellects to an examination of the role of sign
relations in life. Most notably, Peter Abelard (1079–1142), Thomas Aquinas (1224–
1274) and Duns Scotus (1266–1308) all struggled to incorporate the reality of
natural, non-linguistic and non-manmade signs (signa naturalia) with the reality of
the signs unique to human cognition (signa rationalis). Similarly, both Roger Bacon
(1214–1293) and the anonymous author known to us today only as “Robert
Kilwardby” (c. 1215–1290) independently called for, and made explicit attempts at
establishing, a “science of signs” (scientia de signis) “in terms of a universal notion
abstracted from the [phenomena of] particular signs” (Meier-Oeser 2003: o.l.).
Both of these latter projects foundered, however, given the prevailing interests
and valences of their time, and were unable to resist the gravitational pull towards
misunderstanding human symbol use as the archetypal relation that one studies when
one studies “sign relations.” For then, as now, the attempt to understand more gen-
eral and fundamental sign processes through the application of criteria that only
apply to more speciﬁc and derivative sign processes, resulted in an unrecognized
“Orwellian rewriting of the evolutionary past in terms of the present”11 that, not
surprisingly, failed to satisfactorily account for the possibility of any sign relations
emerging out of the world of nature per se.
10 And of modernity, as well, which, although determinedly paying little acknowledgement to its
roots in the scholastic tradition has nonetheless inherited unquestioningly the premise that sign
relations are human language-like and should be studied accordingly, and has taken this idea to
extremes undreamt of by the medievals, as we shall have plenty of opportunity to observe shortly.
11 This wonderfully insightful phrase is from Terrence Deacon’s equally insightful The Symbolic
Species (1997: 53), a highly recommended entry point into biosemiotics.

16
Donald Favareau
Approaching Modernity: The Replacement of Signs
with Linguistic Mental Tokens
Much more in the spirit of the times than the projects of Bacon and Kilwardby was
the well-received Summa of Logic of William Ockham, which urged that it is the
‘logical and propositional’ character of the sign that is the proper subject of sign
study. With Ockham, the medieval concept of signiﬁcatio – “the presentation of
some form to the awareness,” becomes subsumed under the naïve realist concept of
“intuitive cognition” (saving him from the descent into radical nominalism that the
more strict followers of his logic would later bear) and henceforth begins its long fall
into neglect as a way of thinking about the centrality of sign relations as constituting
a natural capacity of all sentient beings, while suppositio – “the capacity of substan-
tive terms to stand for something in a propositional context” becomes increasingly
assumed to be the most productive path on which to seek the foundations of human
cognition (Meier-Oeser 2003: o.l.).
As the man who more than any other medieval thinker popularized the notion of
‘nominalism,’ Ockham is often referred to as being simultaneously the last of the
scholastics and the ﬁrst of the moderns – and while the ﬁrst assertion will not bear
scrutiny, it is easy to see in retrospect why the second claim is often made. For in
Ockham we ﬁnd the seeds of those preoccupations that would come to characterise
so much of the quickly approaching age of modernity: the insistence upon a sepa-
ration between faith and reason, between nature and nurture, and between all that is
empirically determinable, and all that which partakes of only “nominal” (in name
only) form.12
With Ockham, the Aristotelian categories of “being” are reduced from ten to two:
substances and (biosemiotically enough!) their properties are the only genuine exis-
tents: while quantity, relation, place, time, position, state, action, and receivability
are only “concepts in our minds” (verba mentis). Such so-called “connotative” con-
cepts, for Ockham, (or may not) be caused by mind-independent substances and
their properties, but in either case, they do not partake of a self-subsisting, mind-
independent “reality” of their own (Spade 2006: o.l.).13 And from this eliminativist
perspective, it is but a few small steps – soon to be taken, as we shall see – to the
modernists’ understanding that only “matter” (if that) is “real.”
12 It is germane to repeat here Deely’s observation that it is precisely those aspects of Ockham’s
writings called the via nominalia that were “presciently called the via moderna” by his successors
at Oxford as the High Middle Ages were coming to a close (2001: 395).
13 The argument that universal properties and sign relations are mere mental nominalisms seems
sound when applied to the attributions of human culture, such as happiness or beauty. It seems
much less sound when applied to the physics of gravity or the ineliminable triadicity of the genetic
code – both of which exert real causal inﬂuence in the world, while being irreducible to their
material particulars. The unique mode of being that is relation, as the sciences of the 20th century
will show us, is in eliminable from any kind of scientiﬁc explanation applicable to the kind of
cosmos we are in. Being, as Aristotle seems to have always understood it, is not a noun, but a verb.
It will be many centuries hence, however, before that common sense notion will be retrieved.

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
17
In retrospect, it is easy to see Ockham’s “proto-modernism” as not just an iso-
lated act of one man’s intellect, but instead as a particularly astute reﬂection of
the underlying Zeitgeist that was surely taking form in his particular time and
place. For the two centuries just preceding his had had ushered in an age of trans-
European commerce and interconnectedness not seen since the time of the Roman
Empire. Along with this came a massive inﬂux of foreign texts both ancient and
contemporary and the arrival of an advanced mathematical technology, including
innovations in observation and measurement, inherited from the Arab world in the
full ﬂower of their centuries-long development (Grant 1996). Rigorously wedding
Ockham’s conceptualist nominalism and his rejection of the Aristotelian categories
with the burgeoning empirical and experimental “turn” started less than a cen-
tury earlier by Robert Grosseteste (1168–1253) and Peter of Maricourt (l. 1269),
Ockham’s proteges Jean Buridan (1295–1357) and Nicole Oreseme (1323–1382)
along with Thomas Bradwardine (1290–1349) and the Merton College school of
“Oxford Calculators,” would soon be arriving at many of the same mathemati-
cal and scientiﬁc conclusions later to be “discovered” by Galileo, Newton and
Descartes.
Thus, the myth of the “birth of modern science” wherein the West is awakened
out of its dogmatic Aristotelian slumber by its reading of Copernicus in the 16th
century turns out to be far too neat by half. More accurate to say, as we will see
happening shortly, that the self-conscious “birthing of modern science” consisted
more in the deliberately public act of “putting to sleep” the old dogs such as Aristotle
and the scholastic thinkers. And it will not be until six or seven centuries later that
science will retrospectively ﬁnd out how wise or unwise of an idea that will have
turned out to be.
The Road Not Taken: Signs as Organizational Relations
Before ending our brief survey of the pre-modern era, however, it will be illumina-
tive to ask: What then of the medieval road that was not taken into modernity?
This road, one that has all but vanished even from modernity’s history of
medieval thought (Deely 2001: 447–484), and the one most relevant to the 21st
century project of biosemiotics, held that a sign, above all, partook of the properties
of a suprasubjective relation. Such relations are understood to be, common-sensibly
enough, genuinely existing phenomena in the real world (e.g., gravity, accelera-
tion, organismic lineage) that, because they are constituted relationally, can never
be explanatorily reduced to the properties of any of (or even to the brute sum of)
their component material relata.
Rather – and as these late medievals saw long before science would develop
the corresponding notions of “emergent properties” “downward causation” and
“autopoeisis” – what gives “relation” qua “relation” its characteristic property and
force is that it is a genuinely existing state of affairs in the world that holds over
the being of two or more material bodies or energy conﬁgurations in their inter-
actions with one another – whether causally by nature (e.g., gravity and solubility

18
Donald Favareau
in physics) or conventionally by culture (e.g., political hierarchy and social status
relationships). Only later will it become clear, as biosemioticians such as Barbieri
(2003a, 2007) and Hoffmeyer (1992, 1996) will point out in our own time, that
such genuinely causal relations of “holding over” two phenomena may also be, and
often are, conventional by nature (e.g., the genetic code, the emergent relations of
the adaptive immune system, and even the accomplished products of Darwinian
evolution that are “organisms” themselves).
So, too, did the many of the now-forgotten scholars of Latinity discover at last
that the unique property of the sign (a misleading term of reiﬁcation for what is in
every instance a sign relation) is that, as a subset of the genuine form of existential
being that is “relation” a sign relation simultaneously “holds over” and exerts a
uniquely organizing inﬂuence upon the relata involved in that sign relation (e.g., a
word and its meaning, or a symptom and its cause). But exactly in what sense this
last formulation is non-trivial, it will be up to centuries-later discoveries in science
and biology – and not in rhetoric or logic per se – to reveal, as will become evident
as this history of biosemiotics unfolds.
Yet as we have already seen, it was not the path of inquiry made available
by proceeding from the understanding that sign relations are a subset of the gen-
uinely causal existential phenomenon of relational organization that became the
“taken road” by the majority of medieval inquirers. Rather, it was the obverse
and absolutely incompatible attempt to understand sign use itself as a subset
of essentially linguistic relations that would continue to be trod into the mod-
ern age, where its fundamental error of reverse derivation would prove fatal
when the modern sciences of biology and chemistry called upon it to account
for how any merely “biochemical set of relations” (i.e., organisms) could con-
ceivably come to “know about” – much less “think about” – the set of physical
relations existing independently of, and external to, those sets of biochemical
reactions.
And yet, lacking anything resembling a theory of biological evolution – much
less the empirical data of neuroscience, immunology, molecular biology, and devel-
opmental embryology – that might have compelled these early thinkers to choose the
more general and primary, rather than the more species-speciﬁc and evolutionarily-
derivative understanding of sign relations, the medieval scholars who pursued a
human-language based understanding of sign relations may perhaps be forgiven,
given the materials that they had inherited to work with.
Yet out of those materials emerged both the notion of signs as a subset of rela-
tional organization and the notion of signs as a subset of linguistically organized
practice. And it was only at the very end of the scholastic period, literally during
its very eclipse by the advent of the scholastic tradition rejecting modern age, that
a successful synthesis between the two understandings would be attained – to lie
undiscovered for centuries, as, once more, this particular owl of Minerva “spread
its wings only with the falling of the dusk.” Let us, then, here brieﬂy trace the
development of this untaken “turn” in Western thought as we conclude our intro-
ductory overview of science and sign theory in the ﬁrst phases of their ongoing
interdevelopment.

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
19
The Sign Concept that Still Lies in Wait
A hard-won realization built from centuries of sublime thought, it was only towards
the absolute twilight of scholasticism and the dawn of the modern period that
a minority of late medieval thinkers, primarily those associated with the Iberian
University of Coimbra, would attempt a reconceptualization of the sign as a relation
that may supercede any given human way of being. Proceeding from a hermeneutic
reconsideration of Augustine’s original assertion that “a sign, in every case, imports
‘something relative to something else’ (aliquid stans pro alio)”, the most prescient
of these Iberians, John Poinsot (1589–1644) in his Tractatus de Signis, refuted both
Platonic realist and Ockhamist nominalist understandings of sign relations with
his conclusion that: “the most formal rationale of a sign consists in being some-
thing substituted for a signiﬁcate, whether as an object external, or as representable
within” (Poinsot 1632/1985: 163; Deely 2001: 426).
In ways which we will expand upon more fully later in this history, Poinsot’s
understanding of the sign as being a phenomenon that is in its very essence a triadic
relation of x as y to z – and only derivatively characterized by any actually instan-
tiated realization of such a relation (whether a mental sign to a human knower,
an odorant molecule to an opossum, or the exchange of Ca+ as a second messen-
ger in the incessant interaction between living cells) – resuscitated the naturalistic
Aristotelian understanding of a world of creatures whose internal organization give
rise to their external interactions and vice-versa. In such a world, mind-dependant
relations and mind-independent relations are tightly woven.
Moreover, Poinsot’s that the term sign stands for a particular kind of relation in
the biological world, instead of a reiﬁed thing reveals, as Deely reminds us “those
‘things’ or ‘perceived objects’ that we [mistakenly] call ‘signs’ – such as trafﬁc
lights, barber poles, words, [thoughts], and so on, are not, technically speaking,
signs – but only vehicles of signiﬁcation” for the system whose intrinsic-extrinsic
relations are arranged accordingly (Deely 2001: 434). Biosemioticians will later
argue that, Rather than being a “purely semantic” distinction, Poinsot’s understand-
ing, if adopted widely, may help constitute a radical corrective to the futile attempts
to discover what it is about neurons (or about nucleotides, or second messenger
molecules, or spoken sounds or the ink marks on this page) per se that “signiﬁes” or
is a “sign” of anything.
So re-oriented, the discoverable relevant relations “holding over” both system x
and (entity, state or event) y – as those relations become actualized during the course
of the interaction whereby y is acted upon as a sign of z, for x – can become the focus
of empirical and falsiﬁable scientiﬁc investigation. While this may sound like a
task only feasible within the massively complex calculations of advanced dynamics
systems theory, one should bear in mind that this was exactly the kind of principled
scientiﬁc and naturalistic “sufﬁcient explanation” that Aristotle was calling for when
he wrote that the relations proper to biologically organized systems are “enmattered
formulable essences” partaking of an interdependent, but absolutely non-mysterian
and scientiﬁcally examinable “double character” that any full explanation of such
systems has to include in its account. “Hence,” writes Aristotle

20
Donald Favareau
a physicist would deﬁne an affection of soul differently from a dialectician . . .the former
assigns the material conditions, the latter the form or formulable essence . . .Thus, [for the
dialectician], the essence of a house is assigned in such a formula as ‘a shelter against
destruction by wind, rain, and heat’; while the physicist would describe it as ‘stones, bricks,
and timbers.’ But there is a third possible description which would say that it was that
form in that material with that purpose or end. Which, then, among these is entitled to be
regarded as the genuine physicist? The one who conﬁnes himself to the material, or the one
who restricts himself to the formulable essence alone? Is it not rather the one who combines
both in a single formula? (De Anima: i).
Thus, from Poinsot’s formulation to our current understanding about the genera-
tive, recursive dynamics of autopoetic systems, it is only one small step to realizing
the full import of Aristotle’s assertion about the “double character” of “enmattered
formulable essences” in biology (where systems really do have locally teleological
“purposes and ends”): i.e., that sign relations are those genuinely existing, mate-
rially manifested relations that join system-internal and system-external relations
into a web of utilizable experience for all organisms – and, indeed, this is one of the
founding premises of the contemporary project of Biosemiotics.
And yet, given the success of the medievals in deepening their understanding of
the fundamental nature of sign relations to this point, one would hardly think that
the time was ripe to abandon the progress made thus far altogether and to assert an
even more radical separation of mind-dependant relations from ‘reality’ – if those
mind dependant relations were not genuine conﬁgurations in the world, but indepen-
dently existing immaterial ‘entities’ with a mysterious kind of origin and ontology of
their own. The modernists will come to refer to these reiﬁed phlogiston-like entities
as “thoughts” and “ideas” – and this mischaracterization will have serious conse-
quences for the development of science as a whole. In the following section, we will
explore this next and most debilitating epistemological turn in the history of sign
theory in science. The will be the onset of a new kind of “Dark Age” wherein an
acknowledgement of the biological reality of the sign qua sign relation, and its pri-
macy in the organization and interaction of living being, becomes temporarily lost
to view.
What will replace the understanding of the natural world as a place of interdepen-
dent and intersecting relations giving rise to a variety of semi-autonomous entities
and forces will be the idea of a world of fundamental entities and forces interact-
ing mechanistically to give rise to only more complexiﬁed versions of themselves.
Causation, in this framework, can only be material and efﬁcient – entity and force –
leaving no room in the world of explanation (and, by extension, in the world) for the
unique forms of causality exerted by formality and ﬁnality per se. Thus, instead of
being understood as kinds of relations that systems can be in such that they exert a
unique kind of causal efﬁcacy of their own – one that would call for a more general
and interdependent understanding of “entity” and “force” – formality and ﬁnality,
having no place in the scheme of atomistic billiard-ball causality, were relegated
to the newly-created ghostyard of explanation that was the impenetrably private
“immaterial mind.”
Such a discontinuous and divisive posit would itself constitute a schism between
the classic-scholastic tradition of thinking and any possible system of cohesive

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
21
thought that could follow. Yet such a schism is, indeed, precisely what René
Descartes had in mind when he announced his project to renounce all prior knowl-
edge, and build the ediﬁce of understanding completely anew, in 1641, in his
nightgown, by the ﬁre.
Phase Two: Science Without Semiotics
What is a man? Shall I say a reasonable animal? Certainly not; for then I should have to
inquire what an animal is, and what is reasonable; and thus from a single question I should
insensibly fall into an inﬁnitude of others more difﬁcult; and I should not wish to waste the
little time and leisure remaining to me in trying to unravel subtleties like these.14
So wrote the mathematical and philosophical genius René Descartes in 1641,
thereby expressing his resistance to the prospect of becoming a biosemiotician, right
at the outset of modernity – a modernity that this particular resistance not only
heralded, but actually helped to bring into being.
The subsequent history of this resistance would ﬁll many volumes. However, no
understanding of the current state of biosemiotics or of the conditions which made
its emergence necessary, if not inevitable, would be genuinely intelligible without a
brief re-telling of an oft-told tale regarding yet another decisive turn in the road that
has led us to our present pass – children of a hostile, and yet impossible, divorce
between not only mind and body, nature and culture but, now too, unexpectedly,
between scientiﬁc explanation and ordinary human understanding – a tale that the
philosopher Bruno Latour has christened “The Strange Invention of an ‘Outside’
World” (1999: 3).
René Descartes: Bifurcating the Natural World
into Body and Spirit
It seems natural to us, as the inheritors of Descartes’ intellectual legacy, to set the
terms of our understanding in the form of an “experiential debate” between that
which is “in the world” independent of any minds, and that which is “in our minds”
independent of what is in the world. As a consequence of the very terms of this expe-
riential debate, however, latter stands in relation to the former as a kind of impotent
Platonic shadow or blind mendicant – and the mind becomes the impenetrable glass
through which we see the world darkly, rather than face-to-face.
Yet this commonplace modern understanding, like all human understandings, no
matter how infrequently considered, has an interesting and illuminative history of
its own. For René Descartes by no means came upon his radical ideas ex nihilo,
regardless of how he would have us understand him doing so (or, indeed, as he him-
self may have understood himself as doing so) in the Meditations of 1641. For by
1641, both the scholastic tradition and the hegemony of Aristotelian explanation of
14 René Descartes, Meditations on First Philosophy, Meditation Two: On the Nature of the Mind,
1641 [1973: 80].

22
Donald Favareau
natural phenomena had all but passed into eclipse in Europe. Modern mathematical
notation – one of the primary instruments with which both Newton and Descartes
would revolutionize our ideas of what it is to “do science” – made its belated arrival
on the continent only in the preceding century (where its initial denunciation by
Church authorities as a “pagan notion” of the Arabs and the Hindus, and thus to be
resisted, stemmed exactly as little of the rising tide of secularity as did their subse-
quent denunciations of the works of Copernicus, Galileo and Kepler, and for much
the same reason: i.e., an exponentially individualistic and mercantile society, the
calculus of utilitarian efﬁciency trumped the zero-sum game of static absolutism).
Yet while the gradual defenestration of Aristotelian physics had already begun
in earnest with the works of Buridan (1300–1358) and Oresme (1323–1382) two
centuries earlier, equally critical to the spirit of Descartes’ project (and to the suc-
cessful way that it resonated through the ensuing three centuries) was the turn away
from received authority and toward the autonomy of the individual that was the zeit-
geist of the later Middle Ages. Humanism, the Renaissance, a bourgeoning urbanite
and merchant population, the Reformation, anticlericalism, the rise of the univer-
sities and the antagonism between change and conservatism that marks any such
period of rapid development all formed the backdrop against which Descartes would
“autonomously” resolve to “abandon the study of the letter, and to seek no knowl-
edge other than that which could be found in myself or else in the great book of the
world” (Disc 1:9).15
This was a move that was to prove critical for the subsequent history of Western
thought, for what Descartes reports he ﬁnds when he looks inside himself is not an
innenwelt of referential relations reaching out into the world and structured through
participation in a ubiquitous human culture of symbolic reference stretching back at
least 12,000 years to the establishment of human settlement (to pick an inarguably
late but, because of that, uncontestable date in the evolution of symbolic culture).
Rather, and bizarrely, he ﬁnds instead an immaterial solipsist who suspects he’s
being lied to.
“I suppose, then,” Descartes writes, “that all the things that I see are false; I
persuade myself that nothing has ever existed of all that my fallacious memory
represents to me. I consider that I possess no senses; I imagine that body, ﬁgure,
extension, movement and place are but the ﬁctions of my mind . . . and of my former
opinions I shall withdraw all that might even in a small degree be invalidated by the
reasons which I have just brought forward, in order that there may be nothing at all
left beyond what is absolutely certain and indubitable” (1641 [1973: 150]).
Descartes’ project, of course, is a quest for “absolute” (read: non-relative) cer-
tainty – and the discovery of at least one contextless and necessarily true axiom or
assertion that will serve as the foundation for a sturdy system of reliable and correct
knowledge to be constructed. Having already devised one such sturdy knowledge-
bearing system – that of analytic geometry and its Cartesian co-ordinate system –
in 1637, Descartes now embarks on a radical version of the subtractive method in
order to successfully discover a single Archimedean point of truth.
15 Discourse on the Method of Rightly Conducting One’s Reason and Seeking the Truth in the
Sciences, 1637 [1973: 24].

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
23
Thus convinced of the need to reject the entirety of received opinion from the
past – as well as to renounce the belief in the primacy of embodied sense experience
as being the most fundamental route to “knowing” – Descartes decides to consider
as “false until proven otherwise” the entirety of both tradition and sensation and
to seek absolute certainty in the only place then left available to him – i.e., “the
thoughts which of themselves spring up in my mind, and which were not inspired by
anything beyond my own nature alone” (ibid).
This decision to assume that methodological solipsism could serve as the
foundation for the construction of a veridical, empirical science was, indeed, a
“bifurcation” from the understandings of an inherently embodied cognition that had
been assumed from antiquity and developed continually, if variously, by the scholas-
tics right up until the time of Descartes himself (e.g., in the works of the Iberian
school and, especially, John Poinsot).
Moreover, Descartes’ attempt to “build anew from the foundation [and in so
doing] establish a ﬁrm and permanent structure in the sciences” (1641 [1973: 144])
by ﬁrst razing to the ground the ediﬁce of inherited error and by then sterilizing him-
self against the deception of bodily interface with the world by denying the efﬁcacy
of embodied relations was ultimately only considered a completely constructive
success by Descartes – who then goes on to build his ediﬁce for the securing of
absolute certainty anew upon his cogito, and its corollary proof of the prerequisite
existence of a benevolent and non-deceiving God.
Yet, “having abjured history as a means to truth,” writes philosopher of sci-
ence Alisdair MacIntyre, “Descartes recounts to us his own history as the medium
through which the search for truth is to be carried on” (1974: 59). And as it
is this account that set the course of the next three centuries of thinking about
“knowing” in the West, it is worth considering MacIntyre’s analysis of Descartes’
history-changing enterprise in full:
“Descartes starts from the assumption that he knows nothing whatsoever until he can dis-
cover a presuppositionless ﬁrst principle on which all else can be founded. [In so doing]
he invents an unhistorical self-endorsed self-consciousness and tries to describe his epis-
temological crisis in terms of it. Small wonder that he misdescribes it. . . .[for ﬁrst among
the many features of the universe and about his own historically embodied being] he does
not recognize that what he is not putting in doubt is his own capacity to use the French and
Latin languages . . . .[as well as] what he has inherited in and with these languages: namely,
a way of ordering both thought and the world expressed in a set of meanings. These mean-
ings have a history . . .[but] because the presence of his languages was invisible to Descartes
[he does not realize that] how much of what he took to be the spontaneous reﬂections of his
own mind is in fact a repetition of sentences and phrases from his school textbooks – even
the Cogito is to be found in Saint Augustine” (1974: 60).
Inspired by the reformationist and revolutionary zeitgeist of his time, however,
Descartes was not the only one of his contemporaries agitating for a clean break
with the medieval past. The feeling had been growing, rather, at least since Petrarch
retroactively designated the preceding thousand years, between the collapse of the
Roman Empire and his own 14th century Italy, to have been “the Dark Ages” of
human thought. The multiple European Renaissances, the Protestant Reformation,
the rise of the mercantilism and the rapid advancement of printing, lens and machine
technologies: all played their parts in laminating this retrospective construction of

24
Donald Favareau
a “backward” time from which humanity was ﬁnally emerging – and contributed
to an idealization of the individual “over and above” history and nature – without
which the self-conscious seeding of a “scientiﬁc revolution” in the ﬁrst part of the
17th century could hardly have fallen upon more fertile ground.
But if we see the coalescing of this scientiﬁc revolution, as most historians rightly
do, as one of the major branching-off nodes in the cladistic history of Western
thought – and, more importantly, as the branch on which we yet now reside – it
will do well for us to examine what Descartes and his radical contemporaries may
have unwittingly ‘left behind’ at this consequential forking of the roads . . .as it just
may be something we are going to have to go back and retrieve today if we are to
carry on the very vision of scientiﬁc progress that Descartes and his contemporaries
have bequeathed to us.
For in “asking how an isolated mind could be absolutely as opposed to relatively
sure of anything in the outside world,” notes historian and anthropologist of science
Bruno Latour, Descartes “framed his question in a way that made it impossible to
give the only reasonable answer . . .[i.e.,] that we are relatively sure of the many
things with which we are daily engaged . . .[But] by Descartes’ time, this sturdy
relativism, based on the number of relations established with the world, was already
in the past, a once-passable path now lost in a thicket of brambles” (1999: 4).
Medievalist John Deely echoes Latour’s point, expanding upon it even more pre-
cisely when he observes that “if we put [late-medievalist John] Poinsot’s claim that
the doctrine of signs transcends in its starting point the division of being into ens
reale and ens rationis into contemporary terms, [then] what is being asserted is that
semiotic [whereby the worlds of mind-dependent relations and mind-independent
relations are bridged for the cognitive agent through the mediating relation of sign
use] transcends the opposition of realism to idealism” that has come to deﬁne the
“mind-body” and the “knowledge/fact” debates initiated by René Descartes and
persisting to this very day (2001: 483).
With Descartes, rather, “the priority of signs to objects becomes lost to view,
and [thus the] objects of experience become not a partial revelation of surrounding
nature and culture, but a screen separating the mind from things” (Deely 2001: 520).
Unfortunately, Descartes was not alone in advocating “radical surgery” that would
amputate res cogitans from the rest of res extensa and banish it to its own little
private world – an immaterial world, moreover, that would soon be recognized as
a scientiﬁcally unexaminable world – and yet the only world, supposedly, in which
something as ghostly and non-localizable as “sign relations” could appropriately be
thought to dwell.
“Nothing Lost”: Modernity Proceeds Apace
Certainly, William of Ockham (1285–1349) may have helped forge the blade for
Descartes’ radical surgery with his own wholesale denial of the existence of mind-
independent universal relations and the reduction of our apprehension as such
to “only thought-objects in the mind (objectivum in anima)” (1323 [1991]) – a

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
25
considerable ontological demotion of Aquinas’ (1225–1274) far more subtle (and
biosemiotic) understanding of the apprehension of such relations – like all sign rela-
tions – as partaking of “a dual being: one in singular things, another in the soul, and
both [contribute their respective] accidents to it” (1252 [1965]). Even more bale-
fully, it can be seen that at the heart of Ockham’s cutting away is a dissection that
offers no complementary implement for then suturing mind and world back together
again.16
The more immediate precedent for Descartes’ dualism, however, was undoubt-
edly Francis Bacon’s Novum Organon – the “new instrument” that, in 1620,
announced the inherent futility of reliance on “a mind that is already, through the
daily intercourse and conversation of life, occupied with unsound doctrines and
beset on all sides by vain imaginations” (1620 [1863], italics mine). Instead, and
again very much in the spirit of his age, Bacon would proclaim twenty years before
Descartes that “Our only remaining hope and salvation is to begin the whole labour
of the mind again. . .[and] that the entire work of the understanding be commenced
afresh” (ibid).
Like Descartes, Bacon saw “error” as a ubiquitous product of the men both of
his time and of all time before him – and, like Descartes, rather than understanding
fallibility to be an intrinsic aspect of the effective functioning of symbolic reason-
ing – sought a “mechanism” designed to subtract it out of the human repertoire
entirely.17 “The mental operation which follows the act of sense I for the most part
reject,” declared Bacon, anticipating Descartes’ dream argument (though not his
ball of wax). “There thus remains but one course for the recovery of a sound and
healthy condition – namely, that the entire work of the understanding be commenced
afresh” – again, preﬁguring Descartes here, but now advancing the completely con-
tradictory prescription that: “the mind itself be from the very outset not left to take its
own course, but guided at every step; and the business be done as if by machinery”
(ibid).
Bacon’s mind-correcting machinery would come from outside: in the com-
munally objective project of empirical experimentalism and induction. Descartes’
16 It would yet be several centuries after Descartes’ attempt to describe the non-minded world of
animals as “mere clockwork mechanisms” (1649/1991: 365–6, 374) – and almost 100 years after
Lloyd Morgan would deploy his Occamite Canon – before biologist Francis Crick would note
that: “While Occam’s razor is a useful tool in the physical sciences, it can be a very dangerous
implement in biology” given that the evolution does not organize living beings “parsimoniously”
in any straightforward kind of sense. “It is thus very rash to use simplicity and elegance as a guide
in biological research” warns Crick (1988).
17 The tradition of seeing the human being as the perpetually duped and deceived animal – homo
decipi, as it were – would turn out to be one of the most enduring, if unfortunate, tropes of all
modernity, snaking its way out of Plato’s cave, through the “revolutionary” pronouncements of
Marx and Freud, and to the “revelationary” pronouncements of neuronal and genetic eliminative
materialism on the one hand, and the pseudo-postmodernism of “radical deconstructionism” on
the other. As I have argued elsewhere (Favareau 2001b), nothing could be more diametrically
opposed to the understandings advanced by biosemiotics than this self-regarding yet internally-
contradictory stance that I hereby dub “the Fallacy fallacy.”

26
Donald Favareau
mind-correcting machinery would come from within: in the irrefutable and eternal
truths of mathematics and logical deduction. Abduction – the mind-producing pro-
cess of acting upon what is presently given in an exploratory fashion, equipped only
with the underdetermined understandings that have proved most effective thus far –
was out of the picture for the interim (at least “ofﬁcially” and in the symbolically
self-reporting human world; the animals, we may assume, were going about their
business as they always do: abductively, but not self-reﬂectively so).
And though neither Bacon’s error-reducing inductive method, nor Descartes’
error-reducing deductive method succeeded in being adopted by their contempo-
raries in toto, the enacted synthesis of their mathematical-experimentalist method-
ologies – when coupled to the engine of generatively recursive collectivism initiated
by the Royal Society in 1660 and still self-developing healthily to this day –
would prove to be the single most effective technology for the securing of veridical
knowledge ever developed by the mind of man.
Descartes’ radical bifurcation, then, was not a failure – rather, in some sense it
succeeded far too well. Which is to say that at least half of the severance was suc-
cessful and went on to germinate beyond any reasonably foreseeable expectation.
For after Descartes, the study of “bodies” would proceed entirely independently
of the study of “mind” – their realms, after all, were separate in their essences –
and thus the truth claims made by science need not be accountable to the truth
claims made by the humanities, and vice-versa. And why should have the science
of Descartes’ time seen this liberation as in any way undesirable? As the more
foundational of the two enterprises – in that the object of its study are those organi-
zational principles of the world that exist extra-mentally and can only derivatively
be “known” by human beings – why assume the additional burden of having to
explain how it is and in what way a human being can come to “know” anything to
begin with?
Bacon’s experimentalism was soon institutionalized by Robert Boyle’s (1627–
1692) foundation of “public science”, and the establishment of the Royal Society
in 1660 made it clear: the laboratory would be the theatre of evidence, and what
could not be shown there was outside the realm of science proper. To this domain
of the visible and the material, the pure truths of mathematics would soon, too,
be admitted, as a result of the works of Isaac Newton (1643–1727), thereby also
vindicating Descartes. Thus armed with the error-correcting mechanisms of both
induction and deduction – and with the exponential power of a group of interacting
agents pursuing individual ends within the telos of a formalized system – the study
of “bodies” and their material relations would allow human beings to actually leave
the planet and return to it in less than another 300 years.
The other half of Descartes’ explanatory bifurcation, unfortunately, did not fare
as well. Amputated from the natural world of material and logical relations from
which it came, “the mind” and all of its internal relations – e.g., sensation, percep-
tion, subjective experience, knowledge and, in the singular case of human beings,
language and symbolic thought – was increasingly ruled unﬁt as an object of genuine
scientiﬁc inquiry, and was as such left to hobble down an increasing impover-
ished back-lane of abstraction, speculation, and pure, virtually ungrounded symbol

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
27
use. For one of the more unfortunate effects of Descartes and his contemporaries’
uniquely inﬂuential attempts to cure subjective error was that the “subject” began
disappearing from scientiﬁc inquiry altogether.
But what needs to be foregrounded here is that it has never been the abso-
lutely natural property of living organization called “the mind” (or, as neuroscientist
Rudolfo Llinás (2001) is quick to clarify, “the property of being minded”) per se
that is to blame for this sad state of affairs. This condition is found everywhere
throughout the animal world, once one realizes that the biological system property
of “mind” is no more synonymous with “human (symbolic, linguaform) mind” than
the term “body-” is synonymous with “human (biped, mammalian) body”– and that
those creatures lacking language and the ability for abstractive thought are no “less”
minded in the functional and biological sense than those lacking opposable thumbs
(or, for that matter, gills or wings) are any “less embodied.” Here, as everywhere in
the natural world, huge differences in capability, capacity, and the structures which
have evolved to meet the real-world challenges of life vary extraordinarily across
species. But respiration remains respiration; digestion, digestion; locomotion, loco-
motion; and reproduction, reproduction regardless of whether we are talking about
live birth and sexual copulation, egg-laying practices, pollination strategies or spore
formation. There, and rightly so, the whole range of relevant and incommensurable
differences is openly acknowledged, in the full acceptance and understanding that
these species-speciﬁc adaptations are all serving precisely the one same biologically
analogous end.
The single most compelling reason that the biological function of “knowing” is
not likewise included in the list of universal attributes of living organisms is not
because it isn’t happening (and happing as variously and as species-speciﬁcally as
does every other biological universal), but because our very conception of what
constitutes “knowing” has been warped by Descartes’ conﬂation of “mindedness”
per se with “human mindedness” – and “knowing” per se with “symbolic cognition”
(again, see Deacon 1997 for a very clear discussion distinguishing between these
two very different life processes whereby organisms “know” the world).
Persistently, in the back of our minds (which might explain something right
there!), we tend to equate “mind” and “knowing” only with our particular form of
adaptation to this universal biological need.18 Yet doing so, presents us with a two-
fold problem: First, if all of the ﬁne-tuned purposive, responsive, evasive, interactive
and anticipatory behavior that we observe taking place ubiquitously throughout the
animal world cannot be calling “knowing,” then what shall we call it when, say, a
previously motionless copepod reacts to the sudden presence of a quickly approach-
ing predator by discharging a bioluminescent “depth charge” that is time-delayed so
as to burst into illumination far from its site of origin in the copepod itself, instantly
alerting the predator and sending it off on a false line of pursuit while the copepod
18 A joke commonly attributed to comedian Steven Wright captures the dilemma well: “Last night
I was all alone in my room and I started thinking, “You know, the human brain is probably the most
magniﬁcent structure ever created in nature.” . . .but then I thought: “Wait a minute. Who’s telling
me this?”

28
Donald Favareau
swims safely away? Are we to say that the self-reﬂexive ability to symbolize its
own experience and to articulate that set of symbols to another are the criteria for
“knowing” per se? If so, then the bee can never “know” what ﬂower to land on, the
deer can never “know” which other animals in its surround to mate with and which
to ﬂee from, the penguin can never “know” which chick is her offspring, and – in
fact – all other living beings except the human remain essentially the input/output
automatons that Descartes claimed they are.
The second problem that this faulty deﬁnition raises is this: If all animals other
than human beings are now and have always been mind-less, how did the human
being “evolve” its own mind ex nihilo? The problem is a classic reductio ad absur-
dum, once “supernatural” explanations are deemed illegitimate. And remember, it
was and is only supernatural explanation that allows Descartes to assume his bifur-
cation in the ﬁrst place: God imparts to man a bit of His own Divine essence –
“mind” – but He pre-programs the organization of all the other animals’ lives “for
them” by building into the mechanics of their mindless input/output actions His
own Divine plan. It all seems a “bit much” to accept so uncritically at this late date,
but not deliberately going back to examine one’s inherited and critically unexam-
ined starting assumptions often results in such odd effects . . .as Descartes himself
realized all too acutely.
Finally, the unexamined conﬂation of “mind” with “human mind” leaves the
entire question of the species-speciﬁc peculiarity of this kind of human “minded-
ness” untouched. If we are, indeed, dealing with yet another product of biological
evolution, what is it that allows the human mind to engage in abstractive, symbolic
reasoning, self-reﬂective intellection, “language games” of all kinds and the ability
to imaginatively manipulate reality “off-line” as it were? What is the nature of this
kind of cognition and sign use – and in what ways is it similar to and different from
its functional counterparts in the lives of the termite and the baboon? Should we
look for its source in the physical structure of the brain, as we look for the source
of generating the ultrasound of echolocation in the larynx of the bat? Or should
we, as Andy Clark (1997) suggests, look also in the distributed cognitive prostheses
of the surrounding environment where we “off-load” our symbolic representations
for cognitive exploitation in the way that the blueﬁn tuna exploits the very water
vortices it produces in order to propel it along at speeds its own body could never
accomplish on its own?
Few of these questions had even been asked prior to the last ten years – and far
too few of them are being asked today, precisely because of the persistence of the
still far too institutionally enshrined Cartesian conﬂation of “mind” with its specif-
ically species-particular form of linguistic representation and symbolic reference –
and, in some cases, its even less intellectually defensible notion as a disembodied
and somehow self-realizing autonomous “entity.” This persistent Cartesian miscon-
ception has been perhaps the single greatest “block [upon] the road to inquiry” (in
the words of Charles S. Peirce), steering natural scientists away from the problem
for centuries, and causing the subsequent “investigations” into its nature by philoso-
phers after Descartes, time to become the embarrassingly fruitless project that it has
been.

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
29
And this is the reason why we have spent so much time discussing this partic-
ular fork in the road. For with the explanatory surgery of Descartes’ “mind-body
bifurcation” now strongly in place by the end of the 17th century, the unparalleled
success of the “body” sciences – including the “body” aspects of the biological
sciences – were all but ofﬁcially absolved from worrying about questions of sub-
jective knowing in general, and thus felt no real pressing need to “waste what little
time and leisure remaining . . .in trying to unravel subtleties like these” (Descartes
1641:[1973: 80]). Equally unhappily, those thinkers who did, felt an increasing
lack of need to consult, or eventually to even be conversant in, science. Descartes’
divorce between “material reality” (res extensa) and “knowing reality” (res cog-
itans) had worked too well, and the subsequent “history” of natural science – a
science that must include beings that both know and are material – was explanatorily
the worse for it.
“History,” however, is a notion that comes to us from the Latin word for “nar-
rative” (historia) which itself derives from the ancient Greek word for “witness”
( στωρ). Thus, unlike the linear record of geological change, history – even scien-
tiﬁc history – has actors and, to paraphrase Chekhov, “if there’s a gun on stage in act
one, chances are that it is going to go off in act three” (1904). And this is precisely
what happened next.
From Dyadic to Triadic Relations: “Information” Invades
the Scene
Running off the momentum of the newly institutionalized Novum Organon of
the Royal Society, the 17th through 19th centuries saw an explosion of biologi-
cal knowledge initiated by Leeuwenhook’s deployment of the microscope. Over
time, the cellular structures of plants and animals, the exchange of nutrients and
gases, the developmental stages of life from inception to death, and the synthesis of
organic compounds from inorganic materials were all discoverable through the use
of laboratory instruments, while ﬁtting in perfectly with a growing but coherent cor-
pus of physical and chemical understandings. It is only with Wilhelm Johannsen’s
(1857–1927) introduction of the “gene” concept in 1909 that “information” per se –
and not merely its physical something that is going to have to be accounted for by
science.
But “information,” under the Cartesian schema, could only be one of two things:
either a relation proper only to the mind – in which case it was scientiﬁcally unex-
aminable perforce – or a pure product of material interactions, operating under
mathematico-logical conditions – in which case it was not truly “information of ”
something, but merely whatever it happened itself to materially be (e.g., a catalyst,
an agonist, etc.). Von Baer’s (1792–1876) discovery of the epigenetic development
of the fertilized ovum into structures expressing hereditary traits, however, made
both these deﬁnitions equally unsatisfactory.
Thus, in coining the word “gene” to denote “the functional unit of heredity” –
whatever it might turn out to be – Johannsen, much like today’s biosemioticians,

30
Donald Favareau
merely thematized – and by so doing explicitly problematized – what was implicitly
being “discussed but not discussed” with the acceptance of von Baer’s non-
preformationist germ layer theory of embryonic development in 1827. For if
preformationism is wrong, and an organism’s cellular structure is not pre-given
but developmental – as von Baer’s experiments in comparative embryology showed
it to be – then some “information exchange” is taking place within the develop-
ing embryo in order for undifferentiated cells to become differentiated tissue and
thereafter, the resulting structures of arms, brains, livers and limbs.
Johannsen, again, had no more insight into what precisely this “unit of hered-
ity” might turn out to be, nor how it functioned as it did, than did Darwin, Galton,
Mendel, Flemming or Weismann – all of whom also posited germ theories of inher-
itance that, at their core, remained wholly unexplicated with regard to exactly how
the interaction of this “germ” with the rest of the cellular material could result in
the development of absolutely novel structure when at all points there is only. . .the
germ and the material.19 That it does so is clear – but just what the process is that
explains its ability to do so was a question that the science of Johannsen’s time had
not even a coherent vocabulary for conceptualizing.
In delineating the distinction between hereditary genotype and metabolic phe-
notype, however, and in assigning a property to this gene that was in essence
informational (in that it served to function for the creation of something other than
itself for the system that it was embedded in as, materially, itself), Johannsen opened
up the “problem of information” in a science that, since Descartes, had nothing but
success in dealing with things that acted merely as what they were materially – and
not things that acted both as what they were materially and what they were not, but
could be used to functionally “stand for.”
And accordingly, while great strides have subsequently been made in our
understanding of the purely material relations underlying “the genetic code” – con-
ceptually unclear still is the absolutely scientiﬁcally legitimate question of just in
what sense information – deﬁned not just as the inanimate sequence of nucleotides
themselves but as the functional relation of those nucleotides to a system for which
they serve as “sequences of code” – can be thought to be an intrinsic property
of things. For Francis Crick, articulating his “central dogma” of genetic inheri-
tance, “information” was synonymous with “the sequence of amino acid residues”
per se (1985: 1); and for Claude Shannon and Warren Weaver, “information” was
the diminution of uncertainty in a system absolutely without regard to cognitive
19 Again, we are in an analogous position when we try to understand how “signs” of any kind – the
ink marks on this page, the waggle dance of bees, a voltage change generated in a cortical neuron –
comes to signify something other than itself, when there is only, physically, itself. And the answer
of course, here and on the genetic level, is that we must look at “information-bearing” things not in
their material isolation – where they are, in fact, nothing but themselves – but also in the function
that they serve in the system that makes use of them as signs, in order to see how they can be both
“nothing but themselves” and “standing for something other than themselves” in the operation of
that system. Exploring this logic of relations within the scientiﬁc paradigm is, of course, the raison
d’être of biosemiotics.

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
31
or semantic considerations (1949: 8). Both Crick’s notion of “information ﬂow”
from gene to protein and Shannon and Weaver’s mathematical theory of “com-
munication across a channel” thus explicitly deny that the “information” that they
are talking about “means” anything in the sense that we associate with the word
“meaning.”
But here again, we see the intransigent Cartestian conﬂation still subtly, and
perniciously, at work, undermining even the possibility that material relations and
symbolic relations might stand in any other relation to one another than that of mind-
lessness to human-minded. And thus, the rationality driving both Crick’s that and
Shannon and Weaver’s denials is based upon the assumption that all “true meaning”
is symbolic meaning – i.e., kind of relation that human beings are exploiting when
they talk using language or think in terms of abstract representations. And in this
sense, of course nucleotides and the exchange of electronic pulses along a length of
wire carry no “symbolic meaning.” Why, then, use this strange word “information”
to describe them?
The lexical decision choice made here – as with the use of the terms “signal” in
molecular biology, “message” in neuroscience and “communicates” in animal ethol-
ogy – is, according to biosemiotician Marcello Barbieri, for all parties to understand
that “the ‘code’ for talking about the genetic code is that the term “genetic code”
is only a metaphor, and should not be understood as denoting what it would denote
in everyday usage” (2003: 229). But if so, and in regard to the other three instances
also: the question reasserts itself this ‘metaphor’ is a metaphor for what? “Processes
we do not yet understand,” certainly. But what kind of processes? It would seem that
the answer is: not just physical processes qua their physics, but exclusively biolog-
ical processes wherein physical phenomena are being acted upon by living systems
as if they were veridically informative, representational and meaning-bearing phe-
nomena. And once the existence of such genuinely semiotic processes in nature is
admitted, a pressing question for science then becomes: How are we to investigate
and understand these processes that are both ineliminably physical and ineliminably
semiotic at the same time?
Yet the refusal to cross the self-imposed Rubicon inherited from the Cartesian
legacy – a refusal born out of fear, generally, that if one does engage with issues of
“meaning” one has automatically “crossed over” and out of the realm of doing real
science – prevents theorists like Watson and Crick and Shannon and Weaver from
seeing in what way their intuitions to use the words “information” and “communi-
cation” can point both them and us to a deeper understanding of those terms, one
which is neither eliminative and reductionististic, nor mystical and unfalsiﬁable, but
utterly naturalistic through and through – if we remain open to the understanding
(that our dedication to science demands of us) that all things in the natural world
evolved out of that natural world and nowhere else.
If, in other words, there are biological creatures that are alive today that use sym-
bols, and exchange meanings, and have culture, and can deal in counterfactuals and
can think abstractly – as undoubtedly there are – and there are other living beings
evolving under the same physical conditions who are constituted from virtually the
exact same genetic material, and who have developed myriad of other capabilities,

32
Donald Favareau
but just not those particular ones last listed – and you deny at the outset that all
of this is the result of a Divine miracle – then ‘thoughts’, ‘meanings’, ‘symbols’,
‘culture’ and everything else that we associate today with the human mind must
be grounded in the structures, events, principles and relations that constitute the
natural world. Understanding this, the research questions then become: What partic-
ular relations in the naturally occurring world does human symbolic understanding
exploit differently, say, than primate indexical understanding does, or that the iconic
relations chemotaxis affords for the amoeba? Are the earlier processes still at work
in the later ones? How much and what kind of environmental restructuring is neces-
sary for the full functioning of each? And is there a primitive organizational sense
whereby the digital “differences” in electronic pulses down a length of wire (or, in
the biological case, an axon), and the sequential differences in base pairs afﬁxed to
the phosphate backbone of a DNA molecule really do in-form the immediate next
moment of consequential change in a living system? How does all this work? And
how does all this work together? These are the questions that biosemiotics will wind
up asking, seeking not a reductionist anthropomorphism of “all things in nature as
human” but just the opposite: a principled evolutionary and biological understanding
of how all things in human (and in animal life) are natural – including “knowing”,
including “meaning”, including “thought” and because of these last three, including
“signs.”
Interestingly enough, however, it is not the biosemioticians who stand ready to
reject the notion that the biological set of relations constituting “sign processes”
are, in fact, massively complex, organically organized material interactions; most
biosemioticians would rejoice at such a discovery. Conversely, it is far too often
the committed physicalist who so closely (and so incorrectly) equates the entire
category of “semiotic processes” with the one limiting case of symbolic, human
mental processes, that to talk about the former is to talk about the latter – in which
case, of course, they are completely right to reject the initial premises. Descartes’
bifurcation, in other words, is continuing to keep the sciences of material interaction
and the sciences of semiotic interaction apart.
But if biosemiotics has any one single most constructive message to give the
mainstream scientiﬁc community, surely it is precisely this: a semiotic process is
not a ghostly, mental, human thought process. Rather, it is, in the ﬁrst instance,
nothing more nor less mysterious than that natural interface by which an organism
actively negotiates the present demands of its internal biological organization with
the present demands of the organization of its external surround. And the fact that
this is done incessantly – by all organisms, and by us – should not blind us to the
signiﬁcant fact that such moment-to-moment activity is always and perpetually an
enacted accomplishment – and thus one that is going to have to be explained, if we
are ever to understand the bio-logical side of living organisms’ material interactions.
Yet so scandalous and counter-intuitive was this notion of genuine sign relations
in nature – so drenched with and indistinguishable from, as it were, their singular
symbolic manifestation as “mental thoughts and human words,” Descartes’ ‘divine
birthright of human intelligence’ – that when Darwin’s contemporary George

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
33
Romanes (1848–1894) presented anecdotal evidence in support of even the possi-
bility of animal intelligence, Edward Thorndike (1874–1949) announced that the
goal of his own work would be dedicated to disprove “the despised theory that
animals reason” (1898: 39). How human intelligence could ever have “evolved”
out of a world of absolutely non-semiotic animal relations then becomes some-
thing of a paradox – and, in fact, J. B. Watson (1878–1958) and B. F. Skinner
(1904–1990) drew out the logical entailments of this view to eventually argue that
human mental states, likewise, were “an illusion” – a position implicitly endorsed
by the approach of many manifestly competent neuroscientists, and explicitly
argued for in the “eliminative materialism” of Paul and Patricia Churchland (1984,
2002). . .still victims of Descartes’ destructive dualism, even after all these years.
Not surprisingly, then, do we begin to see at the dawn of the 20th century, cracks
and ﬁssures arising in the scientiﬁc ediﬁce out of internal tensions generated by the
need to keep “subjectivity” out of science not only in its methodology, but also as a
focus of investigation – despite the absolutely undeniable facts that: (1) the natural
world is full of subjective agents, (2) that the natural world itself must have pro-
duced these subjective agents once one rules out the possibility of supernaturalism
as a legitimate scientiﬁc explanation, and (3) that it is the subjective experiences of
these agents that lead them to act upon the natural world in ways that materially
change that world (and in so doing, change the substrate that world then becomes
for the evolution of subsequent subjective agents. . .). All of this undeniable natu-
ral phenomena only becomes denied as “natural” phenomena with the adoption of
the quite unnatural bifurcation insisted upon by Descartes that puts the entirety of
human “mind” – along with every kind of “knowing” operation one might conceiv-
ably be tempted to assign to the purposive behavior of non-human animals – into
the ghostly realm of the absolutely immaterial . . .and, again, despite the overwhelm-
ing evidence to the contrary of the existence of a plentitude of knowing, material,
purposively acting, biological beings.
Moreover, not only was Descartes’ legacy of ontological bifurcation causing
cracks and ﬁssures to appear in the explanations being offered for any researcher
in the biological sciences who looked too closely at the obviously enacted subjec-
tive experience of living organism and the informational capacity of the genetic
code, but it was also exerting a complementary tectonic pressure on the long line
of philosophers, humanists, and researchers in the social sciences, who found them-
selves on the other side of the Cartesian divide, trying ever unsuccessfully to meet
a challenge that, by its very premises, could never be met. Eventually, a few of the
most frustrated – which may really be to say, the most committed – members of
these two groups started pushing back against their respective ﬁelds’ Procrustean
demands and Cartesian boundaries, and began scouting around on distant coastlines
in an effort to more effectively redraw their disciplinarily inherited, but increasingly
unusable maps.
It is to that ever-growing group of interdisciplinarians that we now turn, for their
work will provide our entrée into the current state of the ﬁeld, constituting, as it
does, the most recent evolutionary turn in the natural history of biosemiotics.

34
Donald Favareau
Phase Three: Science with Semiotics
The key question lying at the root of all this is: How could natural history become cul-
tural history? Or, to put it another way. . .How did something become “someone”? – Jesper
Hoffmeyer, Signs of Meaning in the Universe (1996: viii).
Because the current cohort of scholars constitutes the “ﬁrst generation” of self-
identiﬁed biosemioticians, the history of this cohort as a whole would have to consist
in the history of each member, as he or she – faced with the internal contradictions
or explanatory evasions of their home discipline – made their own unique pilgrim-
age to a place where biology and semiotics merged as one. Although doubtlessly
fascinating, it would be impossible here to recount all these individual journeys
from Istanbul and Los Angeles, Helsinki and Bologna, Toronto and St. Petersburg,
Sao Paolo and Prague, and to describe the many and various disciplinary sites of
origin spanning across biochemistry and philosophy departments, dynamic systems
research labs and anthropological ﬁeld sites, as well as lifelong private research
investigations of individual scholars, many of whose ﬁnal destinations are, as of this
writing, unknown.20
What we must do here instead, in order to bring coherence to this account, is to
focus on just those few ﬁgures most responsible for bringing this diverse group of
scholars together. These would be the outspoken interdisciplinary organizers whose
explicitly stated program of coalescing semiotics and biology increasingly attracted
similarly inclined scholars into their orbit, and whose journals, conferences and
book projects would come to constitute the gravitational center around which the
interdiscipline of biosemiotics would gradually coalesce. And of this handful of
“outspoken interdisciplinary organizers” perhaps none was more outspoken, more
interdisciplinary, and more organizationally active and astute than the late Thomas
A. Sebeok (1920–2001), without whom the current interdiscipline of biosemiotics
would not have taken shape in its present form.
20 Moreover, and by necessity, not every attempt at a science of biological sign-use undertaken
even in the last half century can be included in this short history. Such a survey would, of course, be
impossible given the space available and would, by necessity, involve long discussions on the his-
tory and major ﬁgures of comparative psychology, cognitive science, molecular biology, Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, pharmacology, cognitive neuroscience and much much more. Yet it is only because
of such space limitations that even the individual accomplishments of such generally accepted
“proto-biosemioticians” as Elia Sercarz (1988), Sorin Sonea (1988), Günter Bentele (1984), Yuri
Stepanov (1971), F.S. Rothschild (1962), and Marcel Florkin (1974) are not discussed at length in
this overview. This is not to say, however, that the works of these researchers are insigniﬁcant to the
larger project whose narrative is recounted here. Florkin, Stepanov and Rothschild – a molecular
biologist, a text semiotican, and a psychologist, respectively – each independently coined the term
“biosemiotic” to describe where they wanted their investigations to be heading. But because no
interdisciplinary movement resulted from these individual efforts, I have made the purely editorial
decision to refrain from any in-depth discussion of them overview, and the works of Florkin and
Rothschild are examined in much detail later in this volume. No slight on my part is intended by
these purely editorial decisions, and those wishing to consult the original works are directed to
the bibliography, as well as to the more inclusive “pre-histories” of biosemiotics by Sebeok (1998,
2001a) and Kull (1999a, 1999b, 1999c, 2005).

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
35
Joining Sign Science with Life Science: Thomas A. Sebeok
While a growing number of isolated scholars working in widely-separated dis-
ciplines were all working away at various independent lines of inquiry into the
problems of information processing, intercellular communication, behavioral psy-
chology, neurobiology and animal ecology – and long before the birth of such
self-consciously “interdisciplinary ﬁelds” as “artiﬁcial intelligence” “dynamic sys-
tems research” or “cognitive neuroscience” – an academic polymath who once
described himself as something akin to an “Apis mellifera, who darts solitary from
ﬂower to ﬂower, sipping nectar, gathering pollen [and] serendipitously fertilizing
whatever he touches” (Sebeok, 1995) was to pioneer the practices that the modern-
day university refers to as “interdisciplinarity” in the course of founding the project
that today bears the title of biosemiotics.21
This self-described apis, Thomas A. Sebeok (1920–2001), left his native
Hungary at age sixteen to study at Cambridge University, before immigrating to
the United States, where he received his doctorate in linguistics from Princeton in
1945 while simultaneously doing research under both Roman Jakobson at Columbia
University and Charles Morris at the University of Chicago (Bernard 2001). A
specialist in Finno-Ugric languages, Sebeok’s appointment as the head of the
Department of Uralic and Altaic Studies at Indiana University led to decades worth
of extensive ﬁeldwork not only investigating the internal organization of linguis-
tic systems per se, but also in investigating the higher-order manifestations of such
systems, in the form of anthropology, folklore studies and comparative literature
(ibid).
Sebeok’s growing interest in the organization of semiotic systems in general,
combined with his aforementioned polymath intellect, led him to carry out some of
the ﬁrst computer analyses of verbal texts; to investigate the use of nonverbal signs in
human communication; and to establish, with Charles Osgood, the pioneering inter-
disciplinary ﬁeld of psycholinguistics in 1954. Six years later, during a fellowship
at Stanford University’s Center for Advanced Studies in the Behavioral Sciences,
Sebeok indulged his lifelong passion for biology, studying both nonverbal human
sign behavior as well as the communication practices of animals, both in the wild
and as domesticated by human trainers (Tochon 2000). From this intense period of
study came his programmatic call for the founding of the study of zoösemiotics – “a
discipline within which the science of signs intersects with ethology, devoted to the
scientiﬁc study of signalling behaviour in and across animal species” (1963).22
21 As is evident from the footnote above, Thomas A. Sebeok was not the ﬁrst to coin the compound
noun joining “bio” with “semiotics” (again, see Kull (1999a) for a detailed history of the use of the
term) – however, it is the speciﬁc project that Sebeok initiated and christened as such that is the
subject of this history and this book.
22 Deely notes that it was Margaret Mead who, at the end of a contentious conference about
animal communication that Sebeok had organized in 1962, proposed the speciﬁc form of the word
“semiotics” to denote “patterned communication in all modalities, [whether] linguistic or not”
(Deely 2004) – an understanding perfectly congruent with Sebeok’s growing conviction that human

36
Donald Favareau
Sebeok’s commitment to what he considered to be the two fundamental academic
virtues of “publishing and teaching as much as possible and, equally importantly,
doing one’s best to facilitate the success of one’s colleagues” (1995: 125, as cited in
Kull 2003) led to his refashioning of the Indiana University’s Research Center for
Anthropology, Folklore, and Linguistics – of which he had been appointed chair –
into the Research Center for Language and Semiotic Studies in 1956, and to the co-
founding of the International Association for Semiotic Studies in Vienna in 1969. In
his activities for both these institutions, Sebeok’s reputation as a tireless book edi-
tor, indefatigable conference convener, inveterate journal contributor, and all around
facilitator of academic interaction across continents and disciplines became (and
remains) legendary among his peers.
Thus it was Thomas Sebeok who would be responsible, more than anyone else,
for bringing practitioners from the life sciences and the social sciences into dia-
logue with each other for the course of the next almost forty years, resulting in
the collaborative interdisciplinary project that we today know as Biosemiotics. The
Approaches to Semiotics book series that he founded in 1964 eventually ran to 112
volumes over the course of its almost thirty year run; he was editor-in-chief of the
journal Semiotica from its inception in 1969 until his death in 2001; and the list
of international conferences that Sebeok played a role in initiating with the express
goal of bringing scientists and semiotician together would constitute a document –
and, indeed, it is one that has yet to be compiled.
Sebeok’s Synthesis of East and West
Catalysts, by deﬁnition, enable reactions to occur much faster because of changes
that they induce in their reactants. And so, too, it was with Sebeok who, in the
course of building this interdisciplinary network (or symbiotic niche, as he might
call it), must in addition be credited as the key ﬁgure most responsible for integrating
both the current works and the rich theoretical traditions of otherwise forgotten aca-
demics toiling in the Soviet East into Western academia’s collective consciousness.
This he did often through his own smuggling of desperately proffered manuscripts
across mutually antagonistic Cold War borders in the 1960s and 1970s (as mem-
orably recounted in Sebeok 1998 and 2001) – actions which themselves serve as
a wonderfully apt metaphor for his own “bee-like” approach to the unnecessarily
antagonistic disciplinary partitioning between the science and the humanities that
he devoted his entire career to cross-pollinating.
These trips darting in and out from behind what was then called the Iron Curtain
turned out to have particular signiﬁcance for the development of Sebeok’s zoosemi-
otics program into what he would later call biosemiotics (Sebeok 1998). For while
language “was not much more than that realm of nature where the logosphere – Bakhtin’s dialogic
universe – impinges in infant lives and then comes to predominate in normal adult lives” (Sebeok
2001a).

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
37
acknowledging his debt of understanding to both the Swiss “zoo biologist” Heini
Hediger (1908–1992) for his pioneering work on the communicative practices of
animals (and between animals and humans in the practices of animal training) –
as well as to the Italian oncologist Giorgio Prodi (1929–1988) for his equally
bold investigations into the semiotics of immunology and call for a comprehen-
sive program of “natural semiotics” investigating the genetic, metabolic, neural and
immunological sign exchange processes of the human body (a program that Sebeok
would later characterize as “endosemiotics”) (Sebeok 1976) – it was Sebeok’s 1970
trip to the then “forbidden city” of Tartu in the Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic to
meet the Russian semiologist Juri Lotman (1922–1993) – a trip that he would later
describe as “a singular Mecca-like ﬁeld for us pilgrims laboring in the domain of
semiotics” (Sebeok 1998) – that would forge the link between Sebeok’s lone bee-
like investigations and an entire rich tradition of semiotic thought that, at the time,
was virtually terra incognita in the West.23
The Cold War era was a difﬁcult time for such East-West mutual collaboration,
however, and Soviet émigré Vyacheslav Vsevolodovitch Ivanov (1929– ) recalls that
many scholars’ works that were forbidden to be published in Moscow at this time
had to be surreptitiously channeled to Lotman to be published in Tartu (1991: 36). In
turn, it was Sebeok who was entrusted by Juri Lotman with his seminal biosemiotic
manuscript O Semiofere for translation and publication in the West (Sebeok 1998).24
Lotman’s delineation of the realm of sign relationships permeating human life is, of
course, a cognate of the word biosphere – the organizational space wherein living
beings occur and interact – and was designed to foreground the autopoetic nature of
sets of sign relations (such as “language” and “culture”) as “modeling systems” for
embodied action in the world of things by agents. And in this sense – the sense that
Jesper Hoffmeyer will later use the same term, though unaware of its prior use by
Lotman – it is a deeply biosemiotic notion.
Sebeok, however, found Lotman’s own early explication of the concept – which
largely restricts its scope of inquiry to the human and symbolic realm of interactions
that Vernadsky called the noosphere25 to be an explanatorily necessary concept for
23 Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi’s (1934– ) distinction between a “ﬁeld” and a “domain” remained
one central to Sebeok’s life and thought. In short: A domain refers to an intellectual culture of
shared meanings, deﬁnitions, assumptions, rules and evidentiary procedures (such as “science,” or
more ﬁnely, “medical science”), while a ﬁeld comprises “all the individuals who act as gatekeep-
ers to the domain. . .[and who decide] whether a new idea. . .should be included in the domain”
(Csikszentmihalyi 1997: 27–28). And in 1970, Juri Lotman’s Tartu-Moscow Semiotic School was
by far the closest thing resembling an established ﬁeld of disciplinary gatekeepers for the nascent
world of international semiotic study (see Sebeok 1998, Kristeva 1994, Kull 1999c).
24 The history of this manuscript’s subsequent loss at the hand of a translator is recounted in Sebeok
(1998). Sufﬁce it to note for our purposes that it would not be until twenty years after the event,
in 2005, that the English language translation of Lotman’s manuscript would appear in the journal
that Lotman himself founded in 1964, Trudy po znakovym sistemam – now known in English as
Sign System Studies, Volume 33.1
25 Lotman himself resisted this equivalence (1989: 43), insisting that the ability of cognitive agents
to shape the material surround of their environment (Vernadsky’s noosphere) differed from the

38
Donald Favareau
understanding our species-speciﬁc use of, and immersion in, a world of materially
consequential sign relationships – but not to be an explanatorily sufﬁcient one for
doing so.
For it is one thing merely to assert, as he does himself some time later, that
the human being is “a joint product of both natural and cultural forces” (Sebeok
1986a, b: xi). But in and of such an assertion in itself, it remains unclear if what
is being talked about are two mutually exclusive and possibly antagonistic forces,
or some kind of symbiotic relationship, or merely two largely artiﬁcially designated
extremes along what is, in fact, a continuum. Still left fully unexplicated then, felt
Sebeok, was an explanation of how the set of sign relations constituting the human
symbolic semiosphere emerged from – and in some sense remained dependant on –
our simultaneous existence as biological beings. For that explication, Sebeok would
have to look elsewhere.
Sebeok thus continued his own decades-long study into animal communication
both by reading the majority of research literature then extant and through his hands-
on work with zoobiologist Heini Hediger (Sebeok 2001b). And as he did so, he
became increasingly convinced that the sign relations taking place in animal com-
munication and those in human language – while belonging to a common genus of
interaction in the natural world, were yet divergent species that also needed to be
understood on their own terms. Starting in 1977 and continuing well into the 1990s,
Sebeok published in-depth critiques of the various underestimations, overestima-
tions, anthropomorphism and machino-morphism being then attributed to animal
cognition (e.g. Sebeok 1977, 1980, 1988, 1990a).
In these writings, Sebeok is particularly adamant in insisting that what “ape
language trainers” such as Duane and Sue Savage-Rumbaugh (1977, 1986), Allen
and Beatrix Gardner (1979, 1989) and David and Ann Premack (1977, 1984) were
attempting – or at least what they were succeeding at – should not be confused with
the idea that these apes had acquired the ability to use “language” in the true sense
of the word. Rather, felt Sebeok, such researchers were merely shaping the animals’
behavior along purely iconic and indexical (stimulus-response) levels – without
themselves having a discriminating enough understanding of sign relations to under-
stand the underlying difference between the two phenomena. Thus, by pronouncing
the resulting Skinnerian chain of purely associative reﬂexes to be the equivalent of
“language,” Sebeok concluded, these researchers were “looking in the destination
purely “abstract” cognitive interactions of the semiosphere. The distinction that Lotman fails to
draw here – as is so often the case in such discussions about “mind and world” that yet accept
the assumptions of Cartesian dualism on some fundamentally under-examined level – is the failure
to differentiate between the symbolic level of embodied, biologically based sign processing, and
its equally biological iconic and indexical substrates, with which it is on an experiential contin-
uum. Such delineations are critical to the project of a scientiﬁcally sound biosemiotics that can yet
account for the realities of abstraction and counterfactual reasoning, and we will have much more
to say about these delineations presently. For an edifying discussion of the Lotman/Vernadsky
controversy, see Chang (2002) and Kull (1999c).

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
39
for what should have been sought in the source” (as he succinctly titled his 1980
paper reviewing this work).
Sebeok was convinced that approaching animal communication as a truncated
form of human language, just as Terrence Deacon would argue later in an elegant
book-length consideration of language origins, “inverts evolutionary cause-and-
effect” (1997: 53). For to Deacon – and to Sebeok – the proper question is not:
“Do animals have language the way that we do, and if not, why not?” but rather:
“As animals ourselves, how is it that we have language?” For what makes human
“language” unique, both Sebeok and Deacon agree, is not the mere ability to
map sounds or gestures onto physically co-present things as referents in the ﬁrst
instance – but the far rarer ability to be able to ﬂexibly, systematically and effectively
manipulate representations of non-present, impossible and counterfactual conditions
in the knowledge that we are “manipulating representations” (and not the things
themselves) in doing so.
Yet what modern semiotician ever thinks of signs as other than exclusively human
cultural products? And what modern scientist ever thinks of biological organization
as itself perfused with signs?
The explication that Sebeok was to ﬁnd was one that he himself had to help
to create. And so to understand the synthesis that Sebeok was to propose as the
“starting point” for his proposed interdiscipline joining the life sciences with the
sign sciences – his biosemiotics, as he was soon to call it – one must ﬁrst under-
stand how Sebeok’s long-standing study of the semiotic logic of relations explicated
by the American philosopher and scientist Charles S. Peirce (1839–1914) served
as the substrate upon which Sebeok’s later rediscovery of the research into the
perceptual worlds of animals undertaken by the then all-but forgotten Estonian
biologist Jakob von Uexküll (1864–1944) would act as a powerfully synthesizing
reagent.
Sebeok’s Synthesis of Charles S. Peirce
A laboratory trained chemist, astronomer, mathematician and logician, Peirce
advanced a logic of sign relations – or “semeiotic” (as Peirce had called it) – that
Sebeok was well conversant in, having studied under at least three self-proclaimed
epigones of Peirce – i.e., C.K. Ogden (1889–1957), Roman Jakobson (1896–1982)
and Charles Morris (1901–1979).26
And because Peirce’s “architectonic of triadic logic” deeply informs so much of
Sebeok’s work, it would be impossible to continue this particular “line of emission”
in the history of biosemiotics without providing here at least a summary overview
26 Later, Sebeok himself would be instrumental in tracking down the author of an obscure
unpublished doctoral dissertation on Peirce and commissioning him to revise the all-but-forgotten
manuscript thirty years later for publication. This work (Brent 1993) has since become the
deﬁnitive biography of Peirce.

40
Donald Favareau
(or brief ﬂash, as it were) of this, one of the two main sources of incandescence
illuminating Sebeok’s biosemiotic vision.27
A scientist by training and by temperament, it is germane to note that “sign”
relations for Peirce are a species of a larger genus of relations whereby potentiality
becomes actualized, and the actualized interacts with other likewise realized actual-
ities so as to result in pattern. This, of course, sounds extremely abstract on ﬁrst
glance – but in point of fact, nothing could be more natural (literally) to those
brought up in the scientiﬁc faith. On the inanimate level, for example, the very
“beginning” of our contemporary cosmos was a single point of undifferentiated
energy (if, indeed, “energy” is not already too sophisticated a term) whose “devel-
opment” into our current universe is nothing other than the history of its successive
recursive change as, at each point, literal physical possibilities are made available
only as the result of immediately preceding action, and as one of those possibili-
ties is actualized, a new and slightly changed set of possibilities (and constraints)
come into being. Thus, we see (retrospectively): the uncoupling of the uniﬁed force,
which results in the generation of quarks that then makes possible the generation of
hadrons, the results of whose interaction in the rapidly cooling universe gives rise to
the existence of neutrons, that can then later join together with the protons to form
the universe of atoms that. . .ad inﬁnitum (or ﬁnitum, as the case may eventually be).
The point is that there is nothing mysteriously “metaphysical” about Peirce’s
notions of what he calls ﬁrstness, secondness, and thirdness. Rather, these rela-
tions refer, in a radically fundamental sense, to the scientiﬁcally examinable (and
scientiﬁcally necessary) relations of possibility, actualized existence and law. That
the more recent conceptualizations of chaos and complexity theory have given us
a better vocabulary with which to talk about such utterly natural phenomena (e.g.,
iteration, interaction, emergence, downward causation and – in the case of living
organisms – autopoesis) attests to the richness of Peirce’s “logic of relations.”
A major part of Peirce’s logic is his “semeiotic” – or logic of sign relations. Its
simplest ‘biosemiotic’ formulation begins with the observation that the last-most-
current or “given” state of affairs in the world to the perceiving agent is present to
that agent in its ﬁrstness as an unlabeled “raw feel” (what others have termed its
qualia). Of all the things that unlabeled sensation “could be,” the agent – given the
set of existing possibilities and constraints made possible at that moment by its own
biological organization and set of prior associations – “experiences” that set of feels
as x (hunger, the color red, a ﬂower, etc.), and this secondness of experience builds
a web of brute sensations into a web of meaningful perceptions.
And, ﬁnally, once not just the sensations and the perceptions but the relations
within that web themselves (i.e., of sensations to perceptions, and of perceptions to
other perceptions) become representable ‘as signs’ in their own right (e.g., musical
27 For more in-depth overviews, see Colapietro (1989, 1996), Deely (1990, 2001), Deledalle
(2000), Parmentier (1994), Savan (1976), and the e-resource for all things Peircean, Arisbe, at:
www.cspeirce.com

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
41
notation, mathematical notation, linguistic notation, etc.), the malleable convention-
ality of thirdness becomes available to living organisms, for the re-contexulaization
of both ﬁrstness and secondness (sensation and perception) into what we generally
refer to as symbolic ‘understanding’. And it was precisely the mystery of how and
why it is that human beings have become such “savants” in the use of thirdness,
while the majority of other species have not, that drove Sebeok to search beyond the
elegant theoretical logic of Peirce and into the cacophonous real world of animals
and their sign behavior.
Sebeok’s Synthesis of Jakob von Uexküll
Sebeok recounts how he had come across what is largely considered to be an
execrable translation of an early version of von Uexküll’s Theoretische Biologie
decades earlier, while still a student at Cambridge, but found it both “bafﬂing
murky” and “beyond doubt over my head” – as well not at all germane to his then-
current project as a sixteen year old Hungarian student attempting to learn English
(2001: 64, 1998: 34).
Thirty years later, Sebeok would read von Uexküll’s fully ﬁnished version in the
original German – and this re-reading, in the words of contemporary biosemiotician
Marcello Barbieri, “was a kind of fulguration on the road to Damascus” for Sebeok
(Barbieri 2002: 285). There is much truth in this characterization, as we shall see.
For in his rediscovery of von Uexküll, Sebeok felt had that he had not only found
the long missing piece of the puzzle that he had been looking for, but was also
convinced that he had found what so many other laborers in so many other ﬁelds
should have been looking for all this time as well – i.e., an absolutely naturalistic
way of understanding the link between the human world of signs and the animal
world of signs. So it is to Jakob von Uexküll and his study of the perceptual worlds
of animals that we now turn.
Cited by both Konrad Lorenz (1903–1989) and Nico Tinbergen (1901–1972) as
the founder of the modern discipline of ethology, Estonian-born German biologist
Jakob von Uexküll (1864–1944) devoted his entire life to the study of animals, train-
ing ﬁrst as a zoologist and afterwards going on to the pioneering work in muscular
neurophysiology that would result in Uexküll’s law of neuromuscular regulation,
often cited as the “ﬁrst formulation of the principle of negative feedback [and thus
reafferent control] in living organisms” (Lagerspetz 2001: 646). A dedicated phys-
iologist as well as a biologist, Uexküll drew a distinction between the two projects
that is worth quoting in the words of his contemporary archivist in full:
“Already in his ﬁrst monograph Uexküll (1905) assigned different roles to phys-
iology and biology. Physiology should organize the knowledge about organic sys-
tems by looking for causalities. Having preserved the advantage of the experimental
method, physiology should help to [inform] biology. In distinction to physiology,
biology has to use the scientiﬁc method to go beyond the investigation of causal-
ities by exploring the laws that [account for] the purposefulness of living matter.
Therefore biology should study organisms not as objects, but as active subjects, thus

42
Donald Favareau
focusing on the organism’s purposeful abilities that provide for the active integra-
tion into a complex environment. Biology therefore had to deal with holistic units
and to maintain a broader scope than physiology in order to grasp the interactive
unity of the organism and the world sensed by it. For describing this unity, Uexküll
introduced the term Umwelt (1909)” (Rüting 2004).
A forerunner and conceptual pioneer of the study of feedback and reafferent
control in the workings of what will later come to be called complex adaptive self-
organizing systems, Uexküll had no access to the rich vocabulary of “autopoetic”
explanation that his own groundbreaking work would engender almost a full cen-
tury later. Yet Ludwig von Bertalanffy’s (1901–1972) “general systems theory” –
as well as its increasingly sophisticated descendents (i.e., cybernetics, catastrophe
theory, chaos theory and complexity theory) – all issue from von Uexküll’s notion
of the Funktionskreis or “functional cycle” of perception and action that effectively
“couples” the ever-changing system that is the organism to the ever-changing system
that is the world.
Thus, in the discussion about “causalities” above, Uexküll has no recourse to
the vocabulary of “emergent system properties” “recursive downward causation”
“dynamic instability” or “autopoesis” that would allow him to delineate for his read-
ers the distinction being drawn between the purely material and efﬁcient relations of
brute physiological stimulus-response regularities and the higher-order “systemic”
relations between world and organism (as well as organism parts to whole) that are
the bottom-up product of – as well as the top-down shaper of – those physiological
interactions (both in real-time and in evolutionary time) to begin with.
That said, both Uexküll’s pioneering work on marine biology, as well as his pre-
scient conceptualization of feedback systems, leave him only dimly remembered, if
at all, in the two ﬁelds he most directly spawned (animal ethology and dynamic sys-
tems research).28 And this is undoubtedly due to von Uexküll’s Baerian resistance
to the Darwinism of his time and to the somewhat “telic” understanding of what
he calls “Nature” (1934/1957, 1940/1982). Like von Baer, Uexküll felt that Darwin
“treated the concept of causality incorrectly and did not consider the internal [com-
ponent in the active self-organization and creation] of individual organisms” (cited
in Kull 1999d). Given that all these men – Darwin, no less than von Baer and von
Uexküll – were working long before the development of modern genetic knowl-
edge, it is perhaps no surprise that each of them sees more clearly the “reverse but
complementary” side of the picture that the other neglects.
28 We pass over here, due to the limitations of space, von Uexküll’s inﬂuence on the then-
developing ﬁeld of neuroscience, and especially his inﬂuence upon one of its principal founders,
Charles Scott Sherrington (1857–1952), who credits von Uexküll frequently and whose work on
the neurobiology of reﬂex, posture and muscle movement was a direct outgrowth of von Uexküll’s
earlier experiments (Lagerspetz 2001: 646). Sufﬁce it to say that the notion of the “neural net” is
already preﬁgured in Uexküll (1928: 106) – and while many contemporary neuroscientists and
roboticists take these notions as their starting points, few have worked their way back to von
Uexküll for the purposes of either further enlightenment, nor for the acknowledgement of a debt
(but see Fuster (2003) and Ziemke and Sharkey (2001) for exceptions).

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
43
It can be seen, however, that von Uexküll was working still very much within a
19th century Romantic intellectual culture that was still vibrant in Estonia, while
the science of Darwin’s England was increasingly utilitarian, mechanistic and
Malthusian. Such historical inﬂuence often reveals itself in von Uexküll’s word
choice. Thus, the original wording of the bracketed text in the paragraph above reads
that “Darwin did not consider the internal strive for perfection of individual organ-
isms” in lieu of the less teleologically “loaded” description of what is essentially
the same concept of proximate, systemic interaction towards homeostatic optima
observable in all living organisms that I have substituted for it here.
However, and as Hoffmeyer notes, just as Darwinism needed Mendelian genetics
for its full coherence, “it is only through its integration with the theory of evolution
that [von Uexküll’s] umwelt theory can truly bear fruit” (1996: 58). For just as the
transmutation of species needs a shufﬂing mechanism to allow for the variations
which are then acted upon in natural selection, so too does von Uexküll’s Kantian
notion – i.e., that, as regards the subjective experience of living creatures, “it is
utterly in vain to go seeking in the world for causes that are independent of the sub-
ject; we always come up against objects which owe their construction to the subject”
(1926: xv) – need to be supplemented with a theory of how such subjects themselves
have come to be so uniquely constructed. For von Uexküll, however, this was not
seen a problem, but as the very mark of the limits of Kantian reason. “There lies con-
cealed, eternally beyond the reach of knowledge, the subject – Nature” concludes
von Uexküll, who would also speak unselfconsciously about “nature’s sovereign
plan” (1934/1957: 80).
Sebeok, however, as an epigone of Peirce, believed that in science, as in umwelt,
such ubiquitous law or “plan” is precisely what calls out to be explained. And
thus Sebeok began to undertake the long interdisciplinary project of attempting
to introduce into the framework of mainstream science and evolutionary theory,
an operationalizable synthesis of the Peircean logic of sign relations with the
Uexküllian naturalistic research project of Umweltforschung. With now a clear
vision that the abyss between sign study and biology had found its bridge, Sebeok
began the project that we today call biosemiotics – a project whose goal was nothing
less than a scientiﬁc understanding of how the subjective experience of organism,
as realized differently by each species’ particular biological constitution – comes to
play a genuinely causal role in the ongoing co-organization of nature.
A Project of Mass Cross-Pollination: Sebeok’s Synthesis
of Researchers
As can be inferred from the above, the rediscovery of von Uexküll’s work had a
profound effect on Sebeok’s subsequent work and thought. Two decades later, he
would recollect that his re-reading of Uexküll’s Theoetische Biologie after thirty
intervening years studying human and animal communication practices “unfolded a
wholly unprecedented, innovative theory of signs, the scope of which was nothing
less than ‘semiosis in life processes’ in their entirety” (1998: 7).

44
Donald Favareau
Apt, then – though requiring a little further clariﬁcation – is Barbieri’s (2002)
claim that after experiencing the intellectual “fulguration” that von Uexküll’s
umwelt theory was to him, Sebeok “decided to end his individual search and start
an active campaign of proselytization” (285). For unlike the Biblical Saul, Sebeok
knew full well that his search was not truly “over” – and that in von Uexküll’s
umwelt theory, he had found but one more critically important tool for understand-
ing, with which he could proceed in his ongoing investigations. In this sense, Sebeok
was more like Isaac Newton – or perhaps even Francis Bacon, with his own new-
found Novum Organon, as we have discussed above – than like the spiritually
‘completed’ Saul.
In other ways, however, Barbieri’s charge of “proselytization” is a fair one, given
that many of the scholars laboring in the ﬁelds of biosemiotics today who ﬁnd von
Uexküll’s articulation of umwelt to be a manifestly helpful terminological tool were,
quite directly, brought to this realization through the efforts of Thomas Sebeok
himself.
Indeed, “Sebeok would often point out that the list of those who did semi-
otics without knowing it would ﬁll the pages of an inﬁnitude of books” writes
Sebeok’s frequent collaborator Marcel Danesi as part of his mentor’s obituary: “If
we recall correctly, he referred to this state of affairs as the “Monsieur Jourdain
syndrome.” Monsieur Jourdain was, of course, the character in Molière’s Bourgeois
Gentilhomme who, when told that he spoke good prose, answered by saying that
he didn’t know he spoke in prose. Analogously, Sebeok would point out to some
scholar in a ﬁeld such as psychology, anthropology, or medicine, that he or she
was, like Monsieur Jourdain, doing something of which he or she was not aware –
i.e., semiotics. “The number of converts he made for semiotics in this way are
innumerable” writes Danesi (2002: o.l.).
A turning point came in 1977, when Sebeok delivered his now-famous speech
on “Neglected Figures in the History of Semiotic Inquiry: Jakob von Uexküll” at
the Third Wiener Symposium on Semiotics in Vienna. Thure von Uexküll (1908–
2004), Jakob’s son, was in the audience, and not long after, Sebeok, along with
Thure (a physician whose pioneering work on the semiotics of psychosomatic dis-
order and treatment virtually single-handedly raised the ﬁeld of psychosomatic
medicine to prominence in Germany, where it is now part of the mandatory cur-
riculum for all medical students), and Giorgio Prodi (1929–1988), an oncologist
studying the “endosemiotics” of immunological self-organization and cell signal-
ing – “conducted a week-long open-ended seminar, so to speak, on the practical and
conceivable ins and outs of biosemiotics” (Sebeok 1998: 8).
These “intensive triadic brainstorming” sessions, as Sebeok characterized them,
“led directly to the series of pivotal seminars held annually in the late 1980s and
early 1990s” at the Glotterbad Clinic for Rehabilitative Medicine near Freiburg
(ibid). Drawing an ever widening circle of biologists, physicians, philosophers and
semioticians into his orbit, Sebeok in effect fashioned what he would later come
to term an interdisciplinary “cybernetic loop” or “self-excited circuit” (Sebeok
1998: 9).
A steady stream of international conferences, monographs, journal articles,
special issues, and book collections followed (see Kull 1999a and 2005 for two

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
45
excellent overviews) – most of them either initiated by, or with signiﬁcant contri-
butions from, Thomas Sebeok himself. Indeed, in his memorial remembrance of
Sebeok, seminal biosemiotician Jesper Hoffmeyer remarks that “without Sebeok’s
enormous inﬂuence and prestige to pave the way, the growth of biosemiotics might
well have been seriously hampered through the usual territorial defense mecha-
nisms released more or less automatically in academia whenever somebody attempts
crossing [its] Cartesian divides” (Hoffmeyer 2002: 385).
The resulting “yet even more modern synthesis” of Peircean semiotics with
Uexküllian umwelt theory in the overarching framework of dynamic systems theory
that underpins much of modern biosemiotics and that is the direct result of Thomas
Sebeok’s “proseltylization” in the years following his rediscovery of von Uexküll is
not a synthesis that I have either the space for, nor have been commissioned to, expli-
cate in any minimally sufﬁcient detail here (but see Baer 1987, Brier 2003, Danesi
1998, 2000, Deely 1995a, Pertrilli and Ponzio 2001, Sebeok and Umiker-Sebeok
1992 for thoroughgoing discussions thereof).
Sufﬁce it to say, though, that even those colleagues-in-biosemiotics who today
reject the Peircean perspective, or the primacy of perceptual umwelt, or the likely
success of the project of biosemiotics itself (and there are some loyal skeptics who
most helpfully hold this view, as we shall see) – even these scholars are no longer
scattered researchers working in sterile isolation from one another and in utter igno-
rance of each other’s work, but are instead today “colleagues” in a ﬁeld called
Biosemiotics because of the tireless “proselytization” (and cross-pollination) efforts
of Thomas A. Sebeok throughout the 1970s, 1980s, 1990s and those years of the
21st century ending only with his death.
In effect, summarizes Barbieri, “the making of biosemiotics [in the form of the
ﬁeld that we see it as today] has been heretofore a 40-year-long affair which can
be divided into two phases: the ﬁrst (1961–1977) was a period of uncoordinated
attempts, often of utterly isolated initiatives, while the second (1977–2001) was a
period in which individual ideas could fall on a more receptive ground and con-
tribute, under the discreet supervision of Thomas Sebeok, to the collective growth
of the ﬁeld” (2002: 286).
And, indeed, Sebeok’s obituary states that of all of his accomplishments, “he
was most proud of having brought into being a group of theoretical biologists and
semioticians to pursue this ﬁeld of investigation” (SLIS 2002). It is the ongoing
coalescence of this group that we will turn our attention to now – for the history of
this ongoing coalescence is the extant “history” of Biosemiotics per se (though what
will come out of this coalescence, and where that history will lead, remain matters
of pure potentia at this time).
Sebeok’s Legacy and the Continuation of the Biosemiotic Project
One of the many tributes paid to Sebeok in obituary was made by his long-time
colleague Marcel Danesi, who – summing up a lifetime’s work in ﬁelds as diverse
as anthropology, linguistics, computer science and zoology, reiterated the claim that
what Sebeok himself was most proud of was his having “transformed semiotics

46
Donald Favareau
back into a “life science” – having taken it back, in effect, to its roots in medical
biology [and speciﬁcally, the uninterrupted tradition of symptomology found in all
cultures]. In other words, he uprooted semiotics from the philosophical, linguistic,
and hermeneutic terrain in which it has been cultivated for centuries and replanted
it into the larger biological domain from where it sprang originally” (2002: o.l.).
Interestingly enough – and perhaps a tribute to Sebeok’s underlying vision all
along – it is not “semioticians” per se that one ﬁnds attending the conferences and
penning the journal articles in the ﬁeld called biosemiotics today, but molecular
biologists, embryologists, philosophers of science, zoologists, roboticists, neurobi-
ologists, psychologists and dynamic systems theorists instead. And most of these
have found their way into the ﬁeld through their own unique and surreptitious path-
ways, many of whom hold a variety of views regarding the relationship of signs to
biology that in no way derive from the works of Peirce or von Uexküll, much less
than those of Sebeok himself.
For it turned out that the nerve that was ready to be hit by the promise of a scien-
tiﬁcally informed biosemiotics was not at all one that was calling out for excitation
in the academic world of semiotics (with a few conspicuous exceptions of course,
which will be discussed below). Rather, the priming was taking place variously, but
steadily, over the last 50 years of scientiﬁc advance and inquiry in the West.
For while Sebeok was busy building networks in Scandanavia and in eastern
Europe, back in the West individual researchers in the ﬁelds of neurobiology, clin-
ical psychology, molecular biology, artiﬁcial intelligence, and philosophy of mind
(to name a few) were busily engrossed in their own attempts at either resolving or
undoing the disastrous Cartesian dichotomy separating bodies and minds. In neu-
robiology, for example, one saw the works of Gerald Edelman (1992), Antonio
Damasio (1994), Walter Freeman (2000), and Joaquin Fuster (2003)29 among many
others; in AI, the “distributed cognition” theories of Andy Clark (1997), Rodney
Brooks (1999), Marvin Minsky (1988), and Douglas Hofstadter (1979); in biology
proper, there were the critiques of Walter M. Elsasser (1998), Richard Lewontin
(1992), Robert Rosen (1991), and Howard Pattee (1982a, 1988); and in dynamic
systems theory, the works of Edward Lorenz (1963), René Thom (1989), Ilya
Prigogine (1984), Susan Oyama (1985), and Stuart Kauffman (1995, 2000) – again,
just to mention some few of the most obvious.
But these researchers (and many more, some of whom will eventually make
their way into the interdiscipline of biosemiotics and whom we will be discussing
presently) were, as said, largely pursuing their own independent research agendas,
working and exchanging ideas amongst their own disciplinary colleagues, and were
not actively involved in constructing a network of researchers from widely divergent
academic backgrounds in the sense that Thomas Sebeok was.30
29 “Bio-semiotic” premises are implicitly discoverable – though never fully articulated as such – in
all of these neurobiologists’ works to some extent, though none save Fuster show any acquaintance
with the work of von Uexküll or Peirce that informs much of contemporary biosemiotics.
30 Though perhaps it would be fair to say that Stuart Kauffman eventually did also pursue such a
deliberately interdisciplinary project, via his long-standing participation in the Santa Fe Institute.

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
47
Some small interdisciplinary networking groups were independently breaking
out here and there at this time, however. Kull recalls three regular series seminars
on theoretical biology that arose independently in the Soviet east during the 1970s –
one in St. Petersburg led by Sergei Chebanov, one in Moscow led by Aleksei Sharov,
and one in Tartu, Estonia led by himself that “all later made a shift towards biosemi-
otics” (2005: 21). In the West, geneticist Conrad Hal Waddington (1905 – 1975)
held a series of conferences entitled Towards a Theoretical Biology each year from
1966 to 1969 that attracted such participants as Lewis Wolpert, Brian Goodwin,
R.C. Lewontin, David Bohm, W.L. Elsasser, René Thom, Howard Pattee, Ernst
Mayr, and John Maynard Smith. Yet while all of these participants undoubtedly
both contributed to, as well as came away from, these conferences with an enriched
notion of the phenomenon of “self-organization” in complex systems, these con-
ferences did not result in the creation of any one coherently ongoing “group” or
speciﬁcally focused collective agenda, such as can be found in the current project of
biosemiotics.
Instead, the major line of development that would result in the constitution of
the ﬁeld of biosemiotics as it exists today was a series of informal but increasingly
productive seminars emerging from the University of Copenhagen beginning in the
1980s and culminating in the ongoing international Gatherings in Biosemiotics con-
ferences which have been held annually since 2001. And by almost every account,
the ﬁgure at the center of this activity was then, and remains now, the man whose
name is now most closely associated with the ﬁeld of biosemiotics, the Danish
molecular biologist and public intellectual Jesper Hoffmeyer (1942– ).
Joining Life Science with Sign Science: Jesper Hoffmeyer
Long before beginning his career as a biochemist at the University of Copenhagen in
1968, Jesper Hoffmeyer had already developed, since his days as a student activist in
the mid-1960s, a deep theoretical interest in the complicated relationships between
science and religion, technology and nature, and authority and belief in the lives
of modern individuals. Son of a social reformist physician who had co-edited an
antifascist periodical called Kulturkampen (The Struggle for Culture) in the 1930s,
Hoffmeyer’s own deep interest in the intersection of nature and culture led to his
founding of a journal entitled Naturkampen (The Struggle for Nature) in the 1970s.
A proliﬁc science writer and journalist as well as a working university profes-
sor and molecular biologist, Jesper Hoffmeyer “had, by the 1980s, become one of
the most visible intellectuals in the debate on technology and society in Denmark”
(Emmeche et al. 2002: 38). Deeply inspired by the work of cybernetician and anthro-
pologist Gregory Bateson (1904–1980), Hoffmeyer had been struggling to articulate
a non-reductionist understanding of the relationship of organisms to their genomes
at a time when the rapid advancement of gene sequencing technology was promis-
ing a yet more reductionist understanding of the same, and Richard Dawkins was
capturing the popular imagination (as well as that of some scientists) with his notion
of “the selﬁsh gene” (1976).

48
Donald Favareau
Recalling this period, Hoffmeyer writes that in 1984 it had occurred to him
that “the historical consequence of making dead nature [i.e., physics] the model
of nature at large was that all the talking – and all mindfulness – went on exclu-
sively in the cultural sphere. As a result we now suffer the divided existence
of the two great cultures, the humanities and the scientiﬁc-technological culture”
(2002: 99).
Finding it intuitively unnatural to attempt an explanation of the hereditary efﬁ-
cacy of DNA in isolation from the DNA-organism system in which it always
appears, Hoffmeyer claims that he wanted to invoke in his scientiﬁc colleagues
of that time “a new kind of curiosity, a curiosity directing its attention towards,
what we might call “the wonder of the code” and which does not put that wonder
aside by the enclosure of the codes into one or the other state space [of deter-
ministic physics] or life-world [of pure subjective experience]. For it is the nature
of the “code” to point outside of its own mode of existence – from the continuous to
the discontinuous message, from the physical and therefore law bound message [of
the nucleotide sequence] to the more free message [of the organism whose actions
in the world will or will not result in that nucleotide sequence’s eventual evolution
and survival], and back again in an unending chain” (2002: 99).
“For it is the nature of the ‘code’ to point outside of its own mode of existence.”
Almost certainly unaware then of the maxim of St. Augustine, much less of the
obscure late-scholasticism of John Poinsot, Hoffmeyer’s common-sense apprecia-
tion of the profoundly important distinction between material organization and that
same material organization in its use as a sign for something other than itself led
him, like Sebeok before him, to an investigation into the semiotic logic of rela-
tions between organisms and their environment (1984), between organisms and each
other (1988), within organisms (1992), and in the triadic logic of the 19th century
scientist-philosopher Charles S. Peirce (1996).
By 1985, write his biographers, was committed to the idea of developing “a
semiotics of nature, or biosemiotics as he chose to call this effort – [one that could
intelligibly explain how] all the phenomena of inherent meaning and signiﬁcation
in living nature – from the lowest level of sign processes in unicellular organisms
to the cognitive and social behavior of animals – can emerge from a universe that
was not [so] organized and meaningful from the very beginning” (Emmeche et al.
2002: 41).
In this regard, again like Sebeok, whose path he would not yet cross for several
more years, Hoffmeyer’s personal passion for, and dedication to, this project – as
well as the quality of the work on the subject that he began producing – drew an
ever-growing coterie of like-minded individuals into his orbit. In 1984, his initial
formulation of a theory of analog-digital “code-duality” in biology was published,
and soon thereafter he began his intensive series of collaborations with biologist
Claus Emmeche, who would later go on to head the Center for the Philosophy of
Nature and Science Studies at the University of Copenhagen, and to become a major
ﬁgure in biosemiotics in his own right – in addition to authoring a body of related
work on dynamic systems theory (1992, 2000a), artiﬁcial intelligence (1991, 1994),
and the history and philosophy of science (1999, 2002).

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
49
By 1986 both Hoffmeyer and Emmeche were attending a Copenhagen study
circle with the physicist Peder Voetmann Christiansen wherein the semiotics of
Peirce were much discussed. Philosopher and literary analyst Frederik Stjernfelt
joined this group (known then as the “Helmuth Hansen Study Circle” after the
Danish philosopher) soon thereafter, eventually inviting French mathematician and
theoretical biologist René Thom – whose work also drew heavily upon Peircean
semiotics and Uexküllian umwelt theory – to deliver a lecture on his development
of catastrophe theory (Stjernfelt 2002: 58).
Microbiologist Mogens Kilstrup would later ﬁnd his way into Hoffmeyer’s cir-
cle, as would the biologist and cyberbetician Søren Brier (1995, 1998, 2001) , who
would several years later establish the interdisciplinary journal Cybernetics and
Human Knowing in which many of the Helmuth Hansen group would publish sem-
inal articles.31 During this time, too, Hoffmeyer continued to publish his ideas on
code-duality and self-description, now drawing also upon the works of biophysicist
and systems theorist Howard Pattee (1969, 1972, 1982a).
In 1989, Hoffmeyer published a seminal article on “the semiosis of life” in
Danish, and this was followed by his founding of the proto-biosemiotic journal
OMverden (roughly: “Umwelt”) in 1990. “The journal was an intellectual success,”
writes his biographers, “but a [ﬁnancial] failure for the publishing company, so its
life was brief” (Emmeche et al. 2002: 41). The journal did ﬁnd its way into the hands
of both Thure von Uexküll and Thomas A. Sebeok, however, and when Hoffmeyer
went to attend a conference on psycho-neuro-immunology in Tutzing later that same
year, he met both of these men for the ﬁrst time – having spotted Sebeok walking
around the conference with a copy of OMverden protruding from his jacket pocket
(Hoffmeyer 2002: 384).
The joining together of “Sebeok’s people” with “Hoffmeyer’s people” was a
signal event in the development of the contemporary ﬁeld of biosemiotics. From
Sebeok’s “semioticians exploring biology” side came such accomplished scholars
as John Deely (1986), Myrdene Anderson (1990), Floyd Merrell (1996), and Martin
Krampen (1981)32 – and from Hoffmeyer’s “biologists exploring semiotics” side
came himself, Claus Emmeche, Søren Brier, Mogens Kilstrup, Frederik Stjernfelt
and Peder Voetmann Christensen. It was in the aftermath of this meeting that Sebeok
was to declare the investigations of the life sciences and the sign sciences must
31 A journal dedicated to the study of “second-order cybernetics, autopoesis and cyber-semiotics” –
roughly, the role of feedback and generative recursion in the organization of observing systems,
self-maintaining systems, and sign-using systems – Brier’s journal is deeply inﬂuenced by the
work of biologists Humberto Maturana and Francisco J. Varela (1987), cyberneticians Heinz von
Foerster (1982) and Ernst von Glasersfeld (1987) as well as the pioneering interdisciplinarity of
cybernetician/anthropologist/psychologist Gregory Bateson (1973).
32 These four, along with Sebeok, Thure von Uexküll and Joseph Ransdell issued a polemical call
for a “new paradigm” of semiotically informed science (and vice-versa) at just about the same
time that Hoffmeyer was independently coming to the same conclusion in 1984 (see Anderson
et al. 1984).

50
Donald Favareau
be co-extensive if either was to proceed (1990), and from this point on, the term
biosemiotics is used to refer to this project by all parties involved.
Less than one year later, Hoffmeyer and Emmeche’s seminal two-part paper on
code-duality appeared in Anderson and Merrell’s anthology On Semiotic Modeling
(Hoffmeyer and Emmeche 1991) and in Sebeok’s international journal Semiotica
(Emmeche and Hoffmeyer 1991), winning the publisher’s top annual award, and
bringing the work of the Helmuth Hansen group to an international audience. In
1992, the volume Biosemiotics: The Semiotic Web was published, to which no
less than twenty-seven authors contributed. This exposure served to establish an
ever-growing interface with other biologists and semioticians whose research was
converging along these lines, and so the internationally-minded Danish Society for
the Semiotics of Nature was also ofﬁcially established at this time, with the express
purpose of bringing together researchers from around the world who were interested
in pursuing this new line of inquiry.
It was also in 1992 that theoretical biologist Kalevi Kull, a convener of some of
the earliest conferences on semiotic approaches in theoretical biology taking place
in the Soviet Union in the 1970s and curator of the Jakob von Uexküll Centre at the
University of Tartu in Estonia, would meet Jesper Hoffmeyer at Thure von Uexküll’s
Glottertal conference near Freiburg – and from then on become the de facto histo-
rian both of biosemiotics in the Sebeok-Hoffmeyer tradition and of the tradition of
Eastern European theoretical biology in general. Kull would also begin presenting
an annual lecture course in biosemiotics at the University of Tartu in 1993 that con-
tinues to this day, and has been instrumental in arranging the annual International
Gatherings in Biosemiotics, in addition to his own considerable contributions in
advancing the ﬁeld (e.g. Kull 1998a, b, 2000, 2001a, 2001b).
In 1993, Jesper Hoffmeyer published his ﬁrst full-length monograph on biosemi-
otics En Snegl Pa Vejen: Betydningens naturhistorie (A Snail on the Trail: The
Natural History of Signiﬁcation), and this book was later translated into English
to appear as Signs of Meaning in the Universe (1996). It is this exceedingly read-
able book, perhaps more than any other, that provides most newcomers their entry –
and, in many cases, their impetus – into the ﬁeld, and that most clearly lays out
the project of biosemiotics as an attempt to situate culture within nature, while not
reducing either to the blind forces of purely mechanical efﬁcient causation.
Written in the attempt to popularize the ideas of biosemiotics to the widest
possible audience, the following passage conveys much of the ﬂavor of the work.
After discussing the evolution of single-celled life, multicelluars, and the increasing
variety of animals’ sensory capacities, Hoffmeyer turns to the evolution of human
cultural cognition and writes:
Among all the roles in the ecological theatre there was one pertaining to creatures with
lengthy life histories and an especially well-developed talent for capitalizing on their expe-
riences. Often theses creatures, the apes, had developed brains capable of accommodating
an extremely complex image of their surroundings, a very sophisticated umwelt. [And even-
tually] there came a day when this creature realized that it was itself an umwelt builder; that
its role was, in act, a role; that other creatures performed other roles and had different kinds
of umwelt; that the world was one thing and umwelt another; and that, when one died, this

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
51
umwelt would actually disappear while the world as such would carry on. . . . [Yet over
time, this creature was able to] create a bond of a quite unprecedented nature: a double
bond founded on the need to share the umwelt with one another, i.e., making private expe-
riences public property, turning the subjective into the objective. To cut a long story short,
this creature . . .invented the spoken word. (1996: 34–35)
With its provocative ideas cloaked in the simplest of language, the English lan-
guage publication of Hoffmeyer’s Signs of Meaning was enthusiastically reviewed
(1998) and remains as of the time of this writing probably the single most widely
read and frequently cited text on biosemiotics. Its impact on scholars internation-
ally continues as each year new biosemioticians come into the fold as a result of
their “stumbling upon” this work (as has been frequently recounted at the annual
International Gatherings in Biosemiotics).
And, indeed, directly as a result of the reception to the work’s international avail-
ability in 1996, Hoffmeyer found himself “communicating with a cross-disciplinary
audience of scientists, philosophers and scholars from various specialties [and was]
invited to conferences in the ﬁelds of systems theory, self-organizing complex sys-
tems, cognitive science, general semiotics, media and communication theory and,
of course, an increasing number of workshops and symposia devoted speciﬁcally to
biosemiotics and its relations to other ﬁelds of semiotics and biology” (Emmeche
et al. 2002: 42).
A slew of journal articles and conference presentations on biosemiotics by the
members of the Helmuth Hansen group and their growing coterie of international
colleagues followed (see particularly the special issues of Semiotica of 1998 (Vol
120 3/4) and 1999 (Vol 127 1/4), as well as the Annals of the New York Academy
of Sciences 2000 (Vol 901) and, for a more extensive list of publications covering
this period, Kull 2005: 20). Eventually these second-generation heirs of Sebeok’s
Glottertal conferences were able to bring together a growing group of younger
researchers for whom the idea of dynamism in autopoetic systems was no longer
a “radical proposal” – but was, instead, the starting point from which to proceed to
try to build a coherent interdiscipline. And by the middle of the year 2000, the ﬁrst
annual International Gatherings in Biosemiotics was being planned.
A Diverse Ecosystem of Researchers: The Gatherings
in Biosemiotics
Thomas Sebeok was most content, it seems, when he was bearing many torches –
and after his death at age eighty-one in 2001, each of these had to be picked up and
passed on.
Already by this time, however, the center of gravity for the biosemiotics project
had been establishing itself at the University of Copenhagen under the auspices
of Jesper Hoffmeyer and Claus Emmeche who, along with theoretical biologist
Kalevi Kull and cybernetician Søren Brier, established the Biosemiotics Group at
the University of Copenhagen in the early 1990s.

52
Donald Favareau
And it was this group that, in 2001, ﬁnally succeeded in inaugurating an annual
international conference devoted exclusively to biosemiotics.
Quite unsure at the time about who, if anyone besides themselves, would show
up, the ﬁrst International Gatherings in Biosemiotics turned out to be an unprece-
dented success. Held on May 24–27, 2001 at the Institute for Molecular Biology
at the University of Copenhagen (in the very room, it was noted, that Wilhelm
Johannsen ﬁrst introduced the word “gene” into science in 1909) the ﬁrst of these
annual conferences was attended by over 30 presenters from 18 countries and pro-
duced papers in neurobiology, zoology, artiﬁcial intelligence, linguistics, molecular
biology, cybernetics, meta-systems transition theory, and the history and philosophy
of science.33
The international Gatherings have been held ﬁve times since then, and while not
every researcher working in the ﬁeld of biosemiotics attends these annual meetings,
many – if not most – of the principal contributors to the ﬁeld do. There, the second-
generation heirs of Sebeok’s Glottertal conferences bring together a growing group
of formerly independent researchers and their younger colleagues for whom the idea
of dynamism in autopoetic systems is no longer a “radical proposal” – but is, instead,
the starting point from which to proceed to try to build a coherent interdiscipline.
In addition, with the inaugural publication this year of the peer-review Journal of
Biosemiotics and the establishment of the long-planned International Society for
Biosemiotic Study in 2005, this “third phase” in the growth and development of
biosemiotics promises dramatic changes to the ﬁeld – most of the more interesting
ones, of course, being unforeseeable.
Even from this early standpoint, however, we can discern certain patterns and
currents that are sure to play a role. The following selective list of just the most
regular of the international conference’s participants gives a ﬂavor of the interdis-
ciplinary convergences – and divergences – of approach in the quest to articulate a
truly comprehensive science of life and sign processes.34
33 Many of these papers have since been published in Sign Systems Studies, Vol 30.1 (2002).
34 This history would not be complete without mentioning those related researchers who, although
not regular attendees at the Gatherings, continue to produce work that has particular relevance
for most biosemioticians. Among these scholars must surely be included Stanley Salthe (1993),
Kochiro Matsuno (1999), Luis Rocha (2001), Peter Cariani (2001), Robert Ulanowicz (1986),
Mark Bickhard (1999), John Collier (1999), Merlin Donald (1991), David Depew (1996), Bruce
Weber (2000) and perhaps most important of all Terrence Deacon (2003), whose 1997 The
Symbolic Species is perhaps the clearest and most compelling application of Peircean semiotic
to evolutionary biology yet produced. And while Deacon does not identify himself as a ‘biosemi-
otician’ per se, seminal biosemiotician Claus Emmeche spoke for many when he remarked at the
recent Gregory Bateson Centennial Symposium in Copenhagen that “Many biosemioticians con-
sider themselves not only Peirceans, but Deaconians as well.” Accordingly, Deacon’s work is well
represented in the present volume.

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
53
Pre-Gatherings Contributions from Outside the Copenhagen-Tartu
Nexus
One of the approaches that did not come strictly out of the Copenhagen-Tartu
lineage was represented at the inaugural Gatherings conference by Prague cell phys-
iologists Anton Markoš and Fatima Cvrˇcková (2002, 2002a, 2002b) who advance an
understanding of living systems that is fundamentally hermeneutic. Representatives
of a growing interdisciplinary movement towards theoretical biology and interdis-
ciplinary study in the Czech Republic,35 Markoš and Cvrˇcková view the current
work being done within the contemporary biological paradigm (including their own
work) to be an effective – but by necessity only partial – illumination of processes
that exceed the potential of formalized representation to exhaustively map them.
Taking an approach towards living organisms that owes as much to the “histori-
cally effected hermeneutics” of Hans-Georg Gadamer (1900–2002) as it does to the
self-regulatory symbiotic systems theories of Lovelock (1996) and Margulis (1987),
Markoš writes that: “[Since the moment of its inception,] life has never ceased to
exist and has again and again been confronted by actual conditions, by memory, by
forgetting, and by re-interpretations of the remembered” (2002: 163). As Markoš
reminds us in his masterful exegesis of scientiﬁc study, Readers of the Book of Life,
the living organization of an organism changes itself and its relations to its surround
on a moment-to-moment (as well as on an evolutionary) basis in a way that no
machine logic or mathematical formalization could ever (predictively) account for,
and it is this very embodiment of a possibility-collapsing “non-logic” that allows
a living system to effectively explore and to creatively exploit novel state spaces,
giving it “the characteristics of a ﬁeld, a culture, a statement, and of course, [only]
sometimes also of a machine” (2002: 163).
With Gadamer, Markoš asserts that “the nature of knowledge is hermeneutical
and is rooted in experience, history and in structures” that are themselves ever-
changing as each new moment is changed as a result of the actions taken in the
one prior. Attempting to reduce this rich world of living-acting-perceiving-and-
signifying onto the “necessarily incomplete, reduced, ﬂattened” descriptions of the
objectivist scientiﬁc model (Cvrˇcková 2002: 184) would be akin to attempting to
realize Hoffmeyer’s self-referential notion of creating “a map which is so detailed
that the map maker and the map that he is making are swept up into it” – something
that not even the world-modeling organism itself can ever fully objectify, much
less make static (1996: 40). Self-described “working biologists just like any oth-
ers,” Cvrˇcková and Markoš remind us never to lose sight of Korzybski’s admonition
that “the map is not the territory” – lest we ﬁnd ourselves taking seriously such
35 This movement also includes biologist and philosopher of science Zdenˇek Neubauer, systems
theorist Ervin Laszlo, cognitive scientist Ivan Havel, animal ethologist Karel Kleisner, and geolo-
gist Václav Cílek. An excellent English language introduction to their ideas can be found in Havel
and Markoš (2002), which collects the proceedings of a conference that also features contributions
from Giuseppe Sermonti, Pier Luigi Luisi, and Mae-Wan Ho. Markoš, Grygar et al.’s Life as its
own Designer (2009) offers a more in-depth presentation of the group’s ideas.

54
Donald Favareau
map-sensible but experientially-nonsensical claims as “the genetic code is just a
metaphor” and “consciousness is an illusion” (“an illusion. . .”, one should always
ask of such a pronouncement, “. . .of what?”).
Likewise making the acquaintance of the biosemiotician at the ﬁrst Gatherings
were Ya˘gmur Denizhan and Vefa Karatay (1999, 2002) a dynamic systems engi-
neer and a molecular biologist, respectively, from Bo˘gaziçi University in Istanbul,
who build upon the work of theoretical physicist and computer scientist Valentin
Turchin’s (1931– ) meta-systems transition theory in order to model the dynamics
of self-increasing complexity in embedded systems, and the subsequent emergence
of bottom-up system properties that then come to function recursively as top-down
biases and constraints.
Also presenting their work were Physicsts Edwina Taborsky (1998) and Peder
Voetmann Christensen (2000), who, almost alone among biosemioticians, have
sought to explicate Peirce’s own understanding of his semeiotic as being a sub-
set of a logic of relations that can be used to understand how any set of relations
hold together. Peirce’s highly complex architectonic regarding (roughly) possibility,
being, and law may yet prove to be rich mine for physicists, as well as for biosemi-
oticians, and Taborsky and – along with systems theorists Stanley Salthe (1993) and
Koichiro Matsuna (1999) – Christensen are among the ﬁrst to be blazing this trail.
Relatedly, while physicists Christensen and Taborsky are approaching the orga-
nization and interactions of energy and matter from a triadically interactive per-
spective, biophysicist Howard Pattee has devoted the last 37 years of his life to the
study of “precisely those dynamical aspects of physics (time, energy) that are neces-
sary to implement codiﬁed instructions” – or, in other words: What are the physics
necessary (if not sufﬁcient) for semiosis? (Umerez 2001).
One of the original attendees at Waddington’s “Towards a Theoretical Biology”
conferences of 1969–1972 Pattee was forecasting, as early as 1965, those few who
would listen, that “we may expect that the origin of life problem will shift away
from the evolution of the building blocks and the elementary operations of joining
them together, to the more difﬁcult problem of the evolution of control in complex
organizations. This problem is more difﬁcult because the idea of “control” is not
deﬁned in the same sense as we can deﬁne biochemicals [per se]. . .A live cell and
a dead collection of the identical biochemicals in the same structural organization
differ essentially in the amount of intermolecular control that exists in each unit
(1965: 405–406).
Like so many whose work we’ve had the occasion to overview here, Pattee’s pre-
cisely articulated questions would in time help generate the conceptual frameworks
and vocabularies needed for addressing them. Thus, the general principles behind
such bottom-up and top-down “intermolecular control” would later be codiﬁed as
“autopoiesis” by Maturana and Varela (1973, 1974) and as “dissipative structure”
by Ilya Prigogine (1969), while for Pattee, the notions of the epistemic cut and
semantic closure are necessary to a complete understanding of how and in what
scientiﬁcally examinable way, matter can come to “stand for” something other than
itself in and to a system – and this, of course, is the ultimate research question of
biosemiotics.

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
55
Developments and Challenges 2001–2010
It would require a book-length monograph of its own to detail the interdisciplinary
research interests and data presented annually, at the International Gatherings in
Biosemiotics – all of which, in one way or the other, are devoted to the central
question of the non-mystical role of “representation” and its “meaning” in the
organization and interactions of living organisms. Rather, the most that I can do
here is to present a short and by no means complete list of some of the more
regular contributors to these conferences and their respective ﬁelds of interest, and
to strongly encourage the reader to these scholars’ work in the original.36
In the areas of animal studies, ethology and zoology, Mette Böll (2002), Karel
Kleisner (2007, 2008), Dominique Lestel (2002), Timo Maran (2003), Dario
Martinelli (2005), Stephen Pain (2007), Morten Tønnessen (2003), and Aleksei
Turovski (2000) are all pursuing biosemiotic lines of investigation in their work.
Examination into the relations of intercellular signaling processes are being under-
taken by molecular biologists Luis Emilio Bruni (2007, 2008), Mia Trolle Borup
(2005), Franco Giorgi (2009), Abir Igamberdiev (1999), and Mogens Kilstrup
(1997), as well as by immunologist Marcella Faria (2005), embryologists Johannes
Huber and Ingolf Schmid-Tannwald (2005), cell biologists Michal Schmoranz
(2009) and and Jana Švorcovaá (2009), and pharmocologist Sungchul Ji (2002).
Researchers into dynamic systems theory who are incorporating biosemiotics
into their models include Victoria Alexander (2009), Eugenio Andrade (2003),
Arnellos Argyris (2007, 2010), Stephan Artmann (2007), Martien Brands (2006),
Hernán Burbano (2005), John Collier (2005, 2008), John Darzentis (2006),
Yagmur Denizhen (2002, 2008), Assen Dimitrov (2004), László Hajnal (2003),
Wolfgang Hofkirchner (2002), Vefa Karatay (2006), Koichiro Matsuno (2007,
2008), Toshiyuki Nakajima (2005), Stanley Salthe (1993, 2008), and Edwina
Taborsky (1998, 2001).
Neurosemiotic approaches to brain research and consciousness studies have
been proposed by Peter Cariani (2001), Terrence Deacon (1997, 2010), Donald
Favareau (2001, 2002, 2008a); Anton Fürlinger (1998), Franco Giorgi (2009),
Yair Neuman (2003, 2008, 2009), Sidarta Ribeiro (2003), Andreas Roepstorff
(2004), and Allessandro Villa (2005). Relatedly, biosemiotically informed approach
to Artiﬁcial Intelligence and cognitive robotics has been undertaken by Ryad
Benosman (2001), Noel and Amanda Sharkey (1999, 2002), Douglas A. Vakoch
(2004, 2008), Stacey Ake (2007), and Tom Ziemke (2003).
Edward J. Baeziger (2009), Franitsek Baluska (2004, 2006), Peter Barlow
(2007), Almo Farina (2004), Pierre Madl (2005), Maricela Yip (2005), and Gregory
Bateson’s biographer Peter Harries-Jones (1995, 2008) all apply a biosemiotic
approach to their research into sustainable ecosystems, while anthropologists
and cultural theorists Myrdene Anderson (1999), Thierry Bardini (2001), Mark
36 Bibliographic information for works cited in this section, but published after 2006 can be found
in the Bibliography and Further Readings section appearing at the end of this volume.

56
Donald Favareau
Reybrouck (2005) and Wendy Wheeler (2007) focus on the cultural semiotics
of human-to-human interaction, and researchers associated with the Distributed
Language Group such as Stephen J. Cowley (2008, 2009), Charles Goodwin (2006,
2007), Alexander Kravchenko (2009), Joanna R ˛aczaszek-Leonardi (2009), and
John Schumann(2005, 2009) are extending the notions of distributed cognition,
interaction, and mind.
Enriching and informing all of this discussion is the work of semiotic schol-
ars and philosophers Stacey Ake (2006), Pricsa Augustyn (2005, 2009), Han-Liang
Chang (2005, 2008), Sergey Chebanov (1994), Juipi Chien (2004, 2007), Paul
Cobley (2006, 2009, 2010), Marcel Danesi (2000, 2007), John Deely (2008, 2009,
2010), Eliseo Fernandez (2008, 2009), Johnathan Hope (2008, 2009), Tuomo Jämsä
(2005), Konrad Talmont-Kaminski (2005, 2007), Andres Luure (2002), Aleksei
Sharov (2002), Adam Skibinski (2004), Frederik Stjernfelt (2007, 2009), and
Tommi Vekhavaara (2002, 2003, 2007), as well archivist for the Jakob von Uexküll
Institute for Umweltforschung, Torsten Rüting (2004).
And as the result of this intense collaboration and international exchange of ideas,
the biosemiotic project of examining the sign processes in life processes is becoming
more interdisciplinary and more international every year. In 2005, the International
Society for Biosemiotic Study that Thomas Sebeok had proposed over a decade ago
was ofﬁcially founded, and in 2005, the ﬁrst issue of the international Journal of
Biosemiotics appeared.
Moreover, and as the surest sign of growth, principled divisions within the
biosemiotic project are already beginning to appear. The reach of biosemiotics is
growing, and bringing into its orbit those from farther ﬁelds. Thus, no longer can it
be agrees that a self-identiﬁed “biosemiotician” agrees that the semiotic categories
of Peirce – or even the Umweltforschung of von Uexküll – are the proper starting
points on which to build a scientiﬁc articulation of sign processes in biology.
Rather, in the nine years since Sebeok’s death, the annual International
Gatherings in Biosemiotics have been blessed with a steady stream of exter-
nal challengers and internal self-critique. Tommi Vehkavaara (2002, 2007) and
Stefan Artmann (2005, 2007) have been most vocal, and most productive, in
challenging the assumptions of the consensus articulation in informed and infor-
mative ways. Such informed criticism is of inestimable value to a growing ﬁeld
whose members spend the majority of their year responding to uniformed criti-
cism (“No, it’s not sociobiology; no, it isn’t spiritualist or vitalist; no, we don’t
think that an amoeba has thoughts; or that you can attract a spouse using subliminal
Neuro-Linguistic-Programming techniques. . .”).
And as productive as these meetings have been for the exchange of ideas and the
development towards a common goal, equally important is the fact that they have
also resulted in a series of penetrating critiques. Such critiques, coming from within
the circle of those who have spent considerable time with the published materials
(as opposed to those critics from the outside who, upon hearing the term “biosemi-
otics,” simply conﬂate the project with “sociobiology” “anthropomorphism” or
some variant of New Age pseudo-philosophy and then proceed – as they should,
were the equation to be correct – to dismiss it out of hand as a pseudo-science), offer

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
57
penetrating analyses of both the existing shortcomings as well as the future problems
that may be inherent in the current articulation of the biosemiotic project as it stands
today, and suggest alternative possible ways to develop a semiotically-informed
biology without reliance upon the ideas of von Uexküll or Peirce.
Philosopher of science Stefan Artmann, for example, sees biosemiotics as an
example of a consilience-seeking “structural science” which he deﬁnes (with
Küppers 2000) as: any “transdisciplinary formalization programme that tries to dis-
cover abstract analogies between research problems of different empirical sciences
in order to contribute to their solution” (2005: 234). Along with the majority of
biosemioticians, Artmann believes that the more such work is successful, the faster
“biosemiotics” will become just an uncontroversial part of everyday biology. “This
is the ironic fate of every productive structural science,” writes Artmann, “It begins
as educated analogizing, constructs step by step an interdisciplinary bridge between
disciplines, transforms their way of thinking, supports the progress of scientiﬁc
knowledge with the help of its transdisciplinary formal reasoning – and eventually
becomes superﬂuous” (2005: 238).
Such an evolution, I feel justiﬁed in asserting, is exactly what most proponents
of biosemiotics are hoping for – the “best case scenario” resulting from all their
efforts to articulate the natural history, and the natural constitution, of the use of sign
relations in the biological world. Unlike the practitioners of what he suggestively
calls the “Copenhagen interpretation” of biosemiotics (e.g., Hoffmeyer, Emmeche,
Kull, et al.), however, Artmann (2005) proposes that a “model-theoretic” approach
incorporating mathematical representations of sign relational possibilities (some-
what akin to formalisms of Artiﬁcial Intelligence/Artiﬁcial Life research) will be
critical if the ﬁeld is to move forward – yet Artmann ﬁnds a strong resistance among
the Peirceans towards “reducing” sign relations in this way.37
Philosopher Tommi Vehkavaara similarly objects that “Charles Peirce’s and
Jacob von Uexküll’s concepts of sign assume an unnecessarily complex semiotic
agent” (2003: 547) and that in order for these concepts to be naturalizable for use in
an effective biology, they must be shown as arising out of “more primitive forms of
representation” (2002: 293). For Vehkavaara, “the minimal concept of representa-
tion and the source of normativity that is needed in its interpretation can be based on
the “utility-concept” of function” in a self-maintaining system that is able to switch
“appropriately between two or more means of maintaining themselves” while in
continuous interaction with their environment (2003: 547). Vehkavaara thus urges
the adoption of concepts from Mark Bickhard’s (1999, 2003) “interactivist” mod-
els of autonomous agency as prerequisites to the emergence of the kind of triadic
37 It should also be noted here that many of the “non-Peirceans” from outside of the Copenhagen
school – such as Prague physiologists Anton Markoš and Fatima Cvrˇcková – also eschew the idea
that formalized equations between “digital signs and bodily (or analog) entities [could] be reduced
to an unequivocal correspondence” (Cvrˇcková and Markoš 2005: 87). Rather, for the majority of
more complex organisms (and certainly for mammals), the action of interpretation upon a sign is
“its own shortest description” (a la the incompressible algorithms discussed by Kauffman 2000).

58
Donald Favareau
sign relations discussed in higher animals by von Uexküll and, mutatis mutandis, by
Peirce.
Without a doubt, though, the most radical challenge to the Peircean approach
to understanding the sign relations of living systems comes from embryologist and
Systema Naturae (and now also Journal of Biosemiotics) editor Marcello Barbieri,
who posits an alternative biosemiotic paradigm that is not organicist and qualitative
in its origins, but mechanist and quantitative through and through.
Marcello Barbieri: Not Interpretation, but Organic Codes
A molecular biologist and experimental geneticist for over thirty years, Barbieri ﬁrst
proposed his “ribotype theory” of the origin of life in 1981. Working in the tradi-
tion of Manfred Eigen (1977), Freeman Dyson (1985) and Graham Cairns-Smith
(1982), Barbieri realized from his work in embryology that just as the epigenesis
of embryonic development requires an “endogenous increase in complexity” that
“reconstructs” the phenotype from the “incomplete projection” of information that
is the genotype (2003: 213–215), so, too must have this embodied logic or “natu-
ral convention” have had to evolve for doing so at the time when the esopoesis of
precellular molecular aggregation was evolving into the endopoesis of polymerizing
ribosoids (and, eventually, into the true autopoesis of “cells”) (2003: 142).
For Barbieri, this naturally evolved “convention” – though interactive always in a
triadic relationship of genotype, phenotype and ribotype – is not to be explained (or
non-explained, as he would argue) as being so fundamentally coextensive with life
that it – like growth, metabolism, and self-initiated movement – is merely assumed
to be a “ﬁrst principle” of living organization from which the rest of the investigation
of biology is to proceed – a position that he feels the Copenhagen school is guilty
of perpetuating.38
Rather, posits Barbieri, the earliest macromolecular precursors to tRNA not only
predated, but actually brought into existence cellular genotypes and phenotypes,
through their own physical constitution’s ability to establish a reliable correspon-
dence between freestanding nucleic and amino acid aggregates. “Any organic code
is a set of rules [or conventions] that establish a correspondence between two
independent worlds, and this necessarily requires molecular structures that act like
adaptors, i.e. that perform two independent recognition processes,” writes Barbieri,
“This gives us an objective criterion for the search for organic codes, and their exis-
tence in nature becomes therefore, ﬁrst and foremost, an experimental problem”
(2005: 119).
38 In all fairness, not all members of the so-called Copenhagen tradition subscribe to this line of
thinking – Taborsky (2001) and Christiansen (2002), for example, certainly do not – nor, indeed,
did Peirce himself. Artmann (in preparation) and Barbieri (2001, this volume) have argued con-
vincingly, however, that the assumption that true sign processes start with life (and, for all practical
purposes, vice-versa) is retrievable in the works of Hoffmeyer, Emmeche, Kull, et al., and I do
believe that this assertion is a reasonable one.

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
59
“The cell is the unity of life,” writes Barbieri, “and biosemiotics can become
a science only if we prove that the cell is a semiotic system.”39 And since at least
1981, this is exactly what Barbieri has been proposing. “Historically we are still very
much in a period of DNA supremacy,” he wrote back then, “and it will take perhaps a
new generation of biologists to realize that genes alone could not have started life on
earth any more than proteins alone could. The reason for this is that we are imbued
with the concept that a cell is essentially a throwaway survival machine built by the
genes, and a genuinely new attitude toward the origin of life will become popular
only when this view is replaced by a different one (1981: 571).
Highlighting the introduction of yet another limiting and still far-too-
consequential dichotomy into the narrative of Western science, Barbieri argued in
his 1981 article that Wilhelm Johannsen did for molecular biology exactly what
Descartes did for traditional biology, divorcing genotype from phenotype just as
Descartes divorced the mind from body – and in so doing introduced an irre-
solvable explanatory dualism that is incompatible with the biological reality of
interdependent levels of organization.
Rather, argues Barbieri, “the very deﬁnition of phenotype leads us therefore
to conclude that the genotype-phenotype duality cannot be a complete theoreti-
cal description of an organism. It is a didactic concept which was introduced by
Johannsen in 1909 to differentiate between hereditary and phenomenological char-
acteristics, and it was only an unfortunate accident that the duality has been elevated
to the status of a theoretical category” (1981: 577).
Indeed, he continues “the real distinction between genotype and phenotype is
based therefore on the distinction between the one-dimensional world of informa-
tion and the three-dimensional world of physical structures. The critical point is
that there is no direct communication between these two dimensions of reality. A
gene cannot build a protein any more than a protein can instruct a gene. The central
dogma states that information does ﬂow from genes to proteins, but only because it
has been “taken for granted” that a third party exists which can actually implement
the transition. What is not usually emphasized is that such an intermediary cannot
be either another group of genes or another group of proteins” (ibid).
In pointing to the need for a triadic explanation of not just genes and proteins, but
genes (one-dimensional information sequences), proteins (three-dimensional phys-
ical structures), plus whatever it is joins them explanatorily, and that uses genes to
make proteins, Barbieri was not just calling for a new way of thinking about how
living cells operate today – but also of how living cells came to be in the ﬁrst place.
Thus was what he then called semantic theory of evolution necessary, along with a
semantic theory of the cell – and from 1981 to 1985, Barbieri worked virtually in
isolation to articulate them both.
The gene-carrying cell that we know today, he posited, may have begun as a
colony of ribonucleoproteins engaged in producing other colonies of ribonucleo-
proteins. Proposed before the Cech and Altman’s Nobel prize-winning discovery
39 Personal correspondence with the author April 21, 2006.

60
Donald Favareau
ribozymes in 1989, Barbieri had already forseen the possibility of – and, per-
haps more importantly, the need for – something that would play the role of a
polymerizing ribosoids in 1981. This “ribotype” as he dubbed it, itself had the char-
acter of a primitive RNA molecule, yet also had the capacity to catalyze a peptide
bond between amino acids. It thus served to bring together the previously distinct
worlds of RNA molecules and amino acids, introducing into the world the geno-
type, phenotype and ribotype relation that today constitutes the self-replicating cell.
Overlooked as a derivative “intermediary” in its modern instantiation as “transfer
RNA,” such primitive ribotypes were, in fact, the seat of the genetic code and the
ﬁrst “codemakers” to appear in the history of life. Thus, claims Barbieri, “there was
no real discontinuity between precellular and cellular evolution. Only the acqui-
sition of sophisticated replication mechanisms brought about by the evolution of
quasi-replication mechanisms which had been developed by the ancestral ribosoids
to produce other ribosoids” (1981: 573–574).
A revolutionary re-thinking of both the origin of cellular life and of its ongoing
internal relations even today, these ideas were expanded upon by Barbieri in his
1985 book entitled The Semantic Theory of Evolution – a work that was enthusiasti-
cally received both by mathematician René Thom (1923–2002) and by philosopher
of science Sir Karl Popper (1902–1994). Almost 25 years worth of theoretical
reﬁnement later, Barbieri would present the mature form of his theories in his 2003
masterwork The Organic Codes: An Introduction to Semantic Biology. There he
would lay out the empirical evidence that has been gathered, in the interim between
1981 and 2003, for existence of a whole array of organic codes that he postulated in
the earlier work, including the RNA splicing codes (97–100), the intercellular sig-
nal transduction and integration codes (101–108), cellular migration and adhesion
codes (112–114), and the cytoskeletal arrangement codes (172–173).
In these codes, as in the genetic code, there is no physical or chemical neces-
sity between, say, the release of a certain neurotransmitter and the cascade of events
that follow save the presence of the set of conventional internal relationships that
have been selected evolutionarily and are embodied in the form of the complex of
mediating molecules joining the so-called “ﬁrst” and “second” messengers. This
set of physically realized, biological relationships is the extra-genetic code whereby
biological speciﬁcity is ensured. Thus, argues Barbieri, we have to add the pro-
cesses of natural conventions in addition to the processes of natural selection to
our study and understanding of the organization and evolution of the natural world
(2003: 153).
In its triadicity and interactivity, Barbieri’s semantic theory of the cell and its evo-
lution seems to fall well within the biosemiotic perspective we have been discussing
above. Yet Barbieri has a challenge for the Peircean-von Uexküllian tradition of
Sebeok and Hoffmeyer, in that primordially, for Barbieri, “meaning” is “completely
accounted for by objective and reproducible entities” (this volume). In fact, for
Barbieri, “any time that we discover that the link between two organic worlds [read:
between two dissimilar sets of internally convergent or autopoetic relations] requires
not only catalysts but also adaptors, we are very likely to be in the presence of an
organic code, and therefore of organic meaning” (2002: 293).

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
61
This focus on the endogenous organization of organisms as the primordial site
of meaning-making – and the corollary conclusion that such meaning-making is, in
its ﬁrst instance, mechanical and derivative, rather than experiential and primitive –
leads Barbieri to posit a semiotic/hermeneutic threshold in the evolution of living
beings:
“The ﬁrst semiotic structure that appeared in the history of life was the [ribonucleoprotein]
apparatus of protein synthesis, and the genetic code [joining nucleotides to amino acids]
was the ﬁrst code, but not the only one. The evolution of semiosis was essentially due to the
appearance of other organic codes, especially in eukaryotic cells, and it was these new codes
that increased the complexity of the eukaryotes and eventually allowed them to produce
semiotic systems capable of interpretation, i.e. hermeneutic systems. The model of Peirce
and Sebeok, therefore, is still valid but only for hermeneutic systems. The origin of semiosis
(the semiotic threshold) and the origin of interpretation (the hermeneutic threshold) were
separated by an extremely long period of evolution, because interpretation is dependent
on context, memory and learning, and probably evolved only in multicellular systems. The
history of semiosis, in short, was a process that started with context-free codes and produced
codes that were more and more context-dependent. Today, our cultural codes are so heavily
dependent on context that we can hardly imagine semiosis without interpretation, and yet
these are distinct processes and we need to keep them apart if we want to understand their
origin and their evolution in the history of life” (2008: 596)
The subjective experience of animals interpreting their surrounds as highlighted
by von Uexküll, and even the triadic logic of relations developed by Peirce, claims
Barbieri, can only function as “descriptive sciences, not explanatory ones. . .[for
in this framework] semiosis requires three basic elements – object, interpreter and
sign – which are preconditional and therefore primitive entities. [As] consubstantial
agents of semiosis . . .they are the starting point [whereby a sign relation comes into
being] and therefore cannot be reduced any further” (2007: 109).
Thus, although the Peircean/Uexküllian tradition shows us that sign relations are
critical to the organization and interaction of the biological world, claims Barbieri,
they do not show us how the underlying physical mechanisms work. For that, he
suggests that biosemiotics needs to turn away from qualitative organicism in its
approach and instead adopt “good rational, old-fashioned machine-like models”
in the investigation of the roles of codes, signs, and meaning in living systems
(202: 294).
Such machine models, Barbieri stresses, do not have to be eliminative-
reductionist (“for a machine is a machine not when it is reduced to pieces, but
precisely when it is put together into a functioning whole”), nor does it have to
be physically constructed (e.g., a Turing machine), nor necessarily a set of math-
ematical equations. “Natural selection,” writes Barbieri, “is a mechanistic model
which is entirely expressed in words. The important point is that the model has the
logic of a machine” (2002: 289).40
40 It is precisely this assertion that, I think, is most strenuously argued against in Anton Markoš’
Readers of the Book of Life, as discussed above (see also Markoš 2002a: 136, 2002: 221, 2005:
87). Hoffmeyer (1996: 38, 95) and Emmeche (2001: 659) have similarly voiced their opposition to
this idea.

62
Donald Favareau
In so arguing against the organicist orientation of the Copenhagen school, Barbieri aligns
himself with the mechanistic tradition of “Descartes, Newton, Lamarck, Darwin . . .and
Jacques Monod” over and against the representative group of biosemiotic precursors cited
by Stjernfelt: “Saint-Hilaire, von Baer, D’arcy Thompson, Spemann . . .Brian Goodwin,
René Thom and Stuart Kauffman” (Barbieri 2002: 284; Stjernfelt 2002: 79).
It remains an open and ongoing question as to whether Barbieri will be successful
in his efforts to refashion the primary biosemiotic articulation from one of “signs” to
“codes” – or if, indeed, contrary to Barbieri’s own current position, a coherent syn-
thesis between his articulation and the presently predominant Peircean-Uexküllian
articulation can be achieved.
Untold more possibilities exist, of course, for as Hoffmeyer reminds all new-
comers to biosemiotics in the introduction of his seminal work, “To be decent
scientists, we must take one another’s realities seriously enough to try to eliminate
the contradictions” (1996: ix). Biosemiotics, he continues, “suggests one way of
doing this” – and then he adds with characteristic humanist-scientist understanding,
“There may, of course, be other ways” (ibid).
Epilogue: On the Future History of Biosemiotics
A heuristic formula for the development of any kind of scientiﬁc inquiry might
consist in successive initial phases of: observation, intuition, articulation and exper-
imentation – which, if felicitous, then begin to cycle into one other generatively and
recursively. If this formulation can serve as even a rough guide to the progression
of scientiﬁc inquiry, then biosemiotics today is surely well past phases one and two,
and is working diligently within phase three with a look to the arrival of phase four,
at which time it will no longer be a “revolutionary science” in the Kuhnian sense,
but quite simply, part of the background assumptions and paradigm of the everyday
“normal science” of biology.41
Whether or not this day will come, only the histories that will be written long
after this history will reveal. Certainly, the study of sign processes within life pro-
cesses cannot be forestalled forever, as the more we learn about the former, the more
we ﬁnd ourselves confronted with the latter. Eventually, the “blind faith” that these
sign processes can be studied only in their material aspects and not also in their
aspects as signs qua signs for the systems that are using them as such, will be forced
to give way under the weight of empirical evidence that is even now pouring in daily
from the research being done in every area of the life sciences.
41 Bruno Latour (1987) distinguishes these two phases in the construction of knowledge as, ﬁrst,
“science in the making” – which is characterized by uncertainty, debate, personality, happenstance
and abduction; followed by “ready made science” – which is characterized by relatively uncon-
tentious induction using formulae, models, vocabulary, theories, methodologies and technologies
that have been vetted in the earlier phase. The layperson’s notion of “science” is generally the lat-
ter; the scientist’s experience, the former – but as Latour argues against Kuhn, the relation between
the two enterprises is not revolutionary struggle, but evolutionary dialectic.

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
63
Yet many working scientists do not feel comfortable working at a “science” that
is still in its articulation phase. For the claim that “articulation” must come before
“experimentation” so as to arrive at “understanding” may seem strange to those
scientists who are working in long-established ﬁelds where the deﬁning and funda-
mental articulations have already been settled – and, indeed, who may already be
on their third and fourth re-articulations, as in physics. But MacIntyre (1974) has
argued well that the history of all sciences have followed this chronology of obser-
vation, intuition, and articulation before experimentation – for, indeed, how would
one know what one was experimenting “on” or “for” if one did not already have in
place at least a provisional articulation of what one has intuited based on observa-
tion? And success in science has long followed the path, from the pre-Socratics to
Copernicus, Newton to Darwin, Einstein and Bohr to Watson and Crick.
“You won’t look for something if you don’t believe it’s even there,” notes
Marcello Barbieri frequently, and in his (2003) The Organic Codes, he relates how
In the 1950s, it became clear that protein synthesis required a transfer of information from
nucleic acids to proteins, and people realized that such a process must necessarily use a
code. The existence of the genetic code, in other words, was predicted before doing the
experiments that actually discovered it, and the results of those experiments were correctly
interpreted as proof of the code’s existence. [Contrarily,] in the case of signal transduction,
the experiments were planned from the very beginning as a means of studying the biochem-
ical steps of the phenomenon, and not as a search for codes, and the biological reactions of
that ﬁeld were regarded a priori as normal catalyzed process, not as codiﬁed processes. No
code had been predicted, therefore no code was discovered. . . .[and this is how molecular
signal transduction] has been studied ever since” (2003: 233)
Moreover, the fact that researchers were “looking for” a genetic code at all has
its roots in the process of observation, intuition and articulation that led Wilhelm
Johannsen to propose the existence of a “gene” in the ﬁrst instance. There again, an
observation (about familial sameness) led to an intuition (about material transmis-
sion) that had to be articulated [as the “theoretical unit of hereditary” – whatever
that might turn out to be and some possible candidates were: cell, protein, blood, and
vapor, among many others]). In order to articulate his conceptual posit, Johannsen
designated this theoretical unit of analysis as a “gene.” Only then could researchers
start conducting experiments to ﬁnd out if this so-called “unit of hereditary” actually
existed and, if so, what it physically was and how it worked.
The twisted ladder of the double-helix DNA molecule, could Johannsen or any
of his contemporaries had somehow seen it back then, would never have suggested
itself as anything other than just a spirally molecule – which, of course, on one level,
is all it is. But its function is something more, and that is not something that can be
ascertained just by looking at its material form alone. Rather, only by looking at its
material form in a context of an explanation – an articulation, or provisional theory –
can one begin to do the experiments that will lead to the warranted conclusion that
this molecule functions as the “unit of heredity” in this particular set of material
interactions that constitutes the “organismic reproduction.”
Precisely analogous to the above situation is the current status of the “sign” as
a legitimate “unit of analysis” in biology, and particularly in neurobiology. There

64
Donald Favareau
– as in genetics, as in pharmacology, and as in animal behavior study – of one is not
looking for the biological construction of a “sign relation” per se within the set of
material interactions that constitutes brain activity, then one can see all the chemical-
electrical activity there is to be seen – but one will never know how to see it as any
particular kind or category of “sign activity” until one has a provisional theory –
or articulation – positing in just what a “biological sign relation” consists. Even
the ﬁnest microscope can only present – it cannot “make sense of” or explanatorily
“reveal.” For that one needs a theory – i.e., is an articulation, based on the logical
analysis of observed phenomena, which is then subject to informed scientiﬁc testing.
Without this, for example, neuronal activation may be mapped down to the nano-
volt, for its chemical and electrical properties – which we already understand quite
well today – are not going to change. But whether or not we ever even look to see
if any particular neuron’s activation is currently functioning as part of an indexical
circuit, an iconic one, or a symbolic one – to such questions, we will never get an
answer, so long as “sign processes” remain misunderstood as equivalent to “human
cultural constructs” and not the fundamental biological relations that biosemiotics
insists that they are.
In science, one can only get an answer to those questions that it is “legitimate” to
ask – and thus the job of biosemiotics right now is to articulate its intuitions about
sign processes in biology such that they become accepted as legitimate scientiﬁc to
ask. Currently, many of these questions are often still avoided as being “not quite
legitimate” questions to ask – even despite the repeated insistence of virtually every-
one working to advance the biosemiotic project, that what is being asked for is not
a retreat into mysticism, supernaturalism, immaterialism, or reiﬁcation of some sci-
entiﬁcally unexaminable thing or element called “the sign” per se – but, rather, the
same type of rigorous, repeatable, falsiﬁable examinations into a set of naturally-
occurring relations in the world that living beings both need (internally) and use
(externally) in order to survive.
One can examine these phenomena in their aspects as sign phenomena (i.e., in
their aspects as substitution relations for some non-immediately present other) and
still be doing actual science – this is the biosemiotic “message” in a nutshell. But the
long legacy of Cartesian reductionism that has allowed modern science to examine
the inanimate aspects of the world (Descartes’ res extensa) so successfully, has kept
it closed off from the equally natural product of nature that is “knowing relations”
or “cognition” (Descartes’ res cogitans).
Thus, despite all the problems that Cartesian body-mind dualism keeps increas-
ingly forcing upon life scientists, the majority of experiments being done today –
in neuroscience, molecular biology, immunology, pharmacology, etc. – are all
informed by a theory that precludes, under the very terms of its bifurcated ontol-
ogy, even the possibility of coherently – much less scientiﬁcally – understanding the
phenomena under investigation: phenomena like messaging, signaling, representa-
tion, communication, understanding, and sign. Biosemioticians have thought these
matters through from both their biological and their semiotic sides, and have come
to the conclusion that the problem is not in the phenomena, but in the unnecessary
restrictiveness of the informing theories.

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
65
Biosemioticians would argue the absolutely legitimate fear of contaminating
science with spiritualism, vitalism, anthropomorphism and anti-scientism of every
stripe has had the unintended consequence of forcing life-science into the unnatural
and reactionary position of materialist reductionism. This, in turn, has dimin-
ished it and closed off its explanatory possibilities towards system phenomena
that cannot be so reduced – not because such phenomena are spiritual or imma-
terial, but simply because of their nature as an agent-object-action relations of a
biological organism. For any system that is alive must maintain itself in a con-
stant state of self-reconstruction – this means that it must simultaneously and
incessantly negotiate the organization of both its own internal set of intra-system
relations, as well as the organization of its macro-system level interactions with
an externality that is constituted by a third set of non-isomorhic causal relations
of its own. Merely to survive this incessant triadic existential demand (much
less to evolve within it) necessarily introduces into the phenomena under exam-
ination the proximate and system-centric mediating relations of function, use,
purpose, and goal – as well as the superordinate relation needed to achieve all of
these relations, the relation of substitution or “standing for” – i.e., the biological
relation of sign.
Thus, while biosemioticians are not challenging in any way the absolute need and
manifest success of examining the material aspects of these phenomena qua those
material (and not “material and also relational”) aspects, they do believe that the
continued performance of lab experiments uninformed by a strong sign theory will
not advance our scientiﬁc understanding to the fullest. Rather, biosemioticians will
see a neuron ﬁring and say that is a “sign” whose vehicle is this chemical-electrical
event – while mainstream neuroscientists will see the same neuron ﬁring and say
that parsimony demands we say no more than just: this is a chemical-electrical
event. But to the organism that neuron is ﬁring in, which of these two understand-
ings is the more inclusive and veridical? And is it not this organism – this system
of interactions – that we are ultimately trying to understand in all its fullness? Left
only with what can be seen “iconically,” we are back to seeing the DNA molecule
before there is a coherent theory of genetic inheritance in place. The data and the
experimental results will always be the same for both the biosemiotician and the
non-biosemiotician in their capacities as “objective” observers. Thus, the burden of
proof, quite rightfully, is now on the biosemioticians to articulate why the biosemi-
otic insistence that the same phenomena must also be explicated from the “subject-
ive” standpoint of the system under examination is not only possible and warranted,
and worthy of the development of new scientiﬁc conceptual tools – but is also the
understanding that may prove to be more predictive, more knowledge-generating,
or more explanatorily sufﬁcient than the current biological models that are
now in use.
Like Aristotle’s ideal naturalist who was able to successfully capture both the
material nature of a phenomenon as well as its “meaning” in the lives of the
organisms involved with it, without losing the essential aspects of either, biosemi-
otics strives for an explanatory subjective knowledge/objective knowledge synthesis
in order to explain nature’s genuine subject/object synthesis that is biology. But

66
Donald Favareau
whether or not anyone currently working in the ﬁeld of biosemiotics can actually
accomplish this explanatory synthesis, of course, remains to be seen. To date, the
majority of our efforts have been expended trying to convince our colleagues in the
sciences and the humanities that such a synthesis is even necessary. And as premier
biosemiotician Claus Emmeche reminds us, while the biosemiotic understanding of
sign relations as genuine relations of the natural world may seem to its adherents as
a “robust, sophisticated, coherent, well founded, fruitful and comprehensive scheme
of thought. . .in the long run, it cannot escape being judged by its fruits, and we do
not yet know the historical result of that judgment” (2000b: 224).
And thus we end this brief overview of the ongoing history of biosemiotics as we
started it – in media res. For while Thomas Sebeok (2001a) referred to the 1970s
as the “prehistory” of biosemiotics, and Marcello Barbieri (2002), writing of the
1990s, opined that biosemiotics was as yet still coming into its “adolescence” – it is
difﬁcult not to feel as we end this as-yet preliminary “history” that both the reader
and I have arrived here at the present moment in 2010 just as the real history of
biosemiotics is about to get underway.
That said, all that is now left for me to do as a historian of the project is to
welcome all our readers to this exciting young interdiscipline, and on behalf of my
colleagues in biosemiotics everywhere, to invite you to actively contribute to its
ongoing history.
References
Anderson, M. (1990). Biology and semiotics. In: Koch, W. A. (Ed.) Semiotics in the Individual
Sciences. Bochum: Universitätsverlag Dr. N. Brockmeyer, pp. 254–281.
Anderson, M., Deely, J., Krampen, M., Ransdell, J., Sebeok, T.A., von Uexküll, T.
1984. A semiotic perspective on the sciences: steps toward a new paradigm. Semiotica
52-1/2, 7-47.
Aristotle. De Anima. (330 BC/1941) Translator: J. A. Smith. In McKeon, Richard. The Basic Works
of Aristotle. New York: Basic Books, pp. 533–603.
Aristotle. De Interpretatione. (330 BC/1941) Translator: E. M. Edghill. In McKeon, Richard
(1941). The Basic Works of Aristotle. New York: Basic Books, pp. 38–61.
Aristotle. De Sensu et Sensibilius. (c350/2004). Translator: J.I. Beare. Available online as e-book
at: http://etext.library.adelaide.edu.au/a/aristotle/sense/
Artmann, S. (2005). Biosemiotics as a structural science: between the forms of life and the life of
forms. Journal of Biosemiotics 1, 229–265.
Artmann, S. (2007). Computing codes versus interpreting life: two alternative ways of synthe-
sizing biological knowledge through semiotics. In: Marcello, Barbieri (Ed.) Introduction to
Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis. Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 209–234.
Augustine of Hippo (387/1975). De dialectica. In: J. Pinborg (Ed.) translation with introd. and
notes by B. Darrel Jackson, Dordrecht: Reidel.
Augustine of Hippo (389/1963). De Doctrina Christiana. In: W. M. Green (Ed.) Sancti Augustini
Opera. Vienna: CSEL 80. Cited in Meir-Oeser (2003).
Augustyn, P. (2009). Uexküll, Peirce, and other afﬁnities between biosemiotics and biolinguistics.
Biosemiotics 2(1), 1–17.
Aquinas, T. (1252/1965). De Ente et Essentia (On Being and Essence). In Bobik, Joseph (Trans.)
Aquinas on Being and Essence: A Translation and Interpretaion. Notre Dame: Notre Dame
University Press.

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
67
Bacon, F. (1620/1863). Novum Organum. In James Spedding, Robert Leslie Ellis, and Douglas
Denon Heath in Francis Bacon’s Works (Vol. VIII) Boston: Taggard and Thompson. Available
Online at: http://www.constitution.org/bacon/nov_org.htm
Baer, E. (1987). Thomas A. Sebeok’s Doctrine of Signs. In Krampen, M. (Ed.) Classics of
Semiotics. New York: Plenum Press, pp. 181–210.
Barbieri, M. (1981). The ribotype theory of the origin of life. Journal of Theoretical Biology 91,
545–601.
Barbieri, M. (1985). The Semantic Theory of Evolution. New York: Harwood Academic.
Barbieri, M. (2002). Has biosemiotics come of age? Semiotica 139(1/4), 283–295.
Barbieri, M. (2003a). The Organic Codes : An Introduction To Semantic Biology. Cambridge, UK,
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Barbieri, M. (2003b). Biology with information and meaning. History and Philosophy of the Life
Sciences 25, 243–254.
Barbieri, M. (2005). Life is artifact-making. Journal of Biosemiotics 1, 107–134.
Bardini, T. (2001). Bootstrapping: Douglas Engelbart, Coevolution, and the Origins of Personal
Computing. Stanford: Stanford University Press
Bateson, G. (1973). Steps to An Ecology of Mind; Collected Essays In Anthropology, Psychiatry,
Evolution, And Epistemology. San Francisco: Chandler Pub. Co.
Bentele, G. (1984). Zeichen und Entwicklung: Vorüberlegungen zu einer genetischen Semiotik.
Tübingen: G. Narr.
Bernard, J. (2001). Obituary: Thomas A. Sebeok November 9, 1920 – December 21,
2001. Available at the website for the International Association for Semiotic Studies
page:
http://www.uni-ak.ac.at/culture/withalm/semiotics/AIS/sem-people/sebeok/TASebeok-
obit.html
Bickhard, M. H. (1999). Representation in natural and artiﬁcial agents. In: E. Taborsky (Ed.)
Semiosis. Evolution. Energy: Towards a Reconceptualization of the Sign. Aachen: Shaker
Verlag, pp. 15–25.
Bickhard, M. H. (2003). The biological emergence of representation. In: T. Brown, L. Smith (Ed.)
Emergence and Reduction: Proceedings of the 29th Annual Symposium of the Jean Piaget
Society. Mahwah: Erlbaum, pp. 105–131.
Böll, M. (2002). The Evolution of Empathy in Social Systems. Paper Presented at the International
Gatherings in Biosemiotics Conference 2, the University of Tartu, Estonia. June 14–17.
Born, M. (1943). Experiment and Theory in Physics. New York: Dover Books.
Brent, J. (1993). Charles Sanders Peirce: A Life. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Brier, S. (Ed.) (1995). Cyber-semiotics: on autopoesis, code-duality and sign games in biosemi-
otics. Cybernetics and Human Knowing 3(1), pp. 3–14.
Brier, S. (Ed.) (1998). Cyber-semiotics: A transdisciplinary framework for information studies.
Biosystems 46, pp. 185–191.
Brier, S. (Ed.) (2001). Cybersemiotics and Umweltlehre. Semiotica 134(1/4), pp. 779–814.
Brier, S. (Ed.) (2003). Thomas Sebeok and the biosemiotic legacy. Special Memorial Issue of
Cybernetics and Human Knowing 10.1.
British Medical Journal. (2004). Obituary: Thure von Uexküll. (October 30) 329: 1047. Available
at: http://bmj.bmjjournals.com/cgi/content/full/329/7473/1047
Broadie, A. (1989). Notion and Object. Aspects of Late Medieval Epistemology. Oxford:
Clarendon.
Brooks, R. (1999). Cambrian Intelligence: The Early History of the New AI. Boston: MIT Press.
Bruni, L. E. (1997). Cultura, determinismo económico y la confusión del mapa con
el
territorio.
Venezuela
Analitica
Revista
Electrónica
Bilingüe
13.
Available
at:
http://www.analitica.com/archivo/vam1997.03/lit2.htm
Bruni, L. E. (2001). Biosemiotics and ecological monitoring. Sign System Studies 29(1), 293–312.
Burbano, H. A. (2005). Determinism, Indeterminism and Semiotic Election. Paper Presented at the
International Gatherings in Biosemiotics Conference 5, Urbino University, Italy. July 20–24.
Burnyeat, M., Frede, M. (Eds.) (1997). The Original Sceptics: A Controversy. Indianapolis:
Hackett.

68
Donald Favareau
Campbell, D. T. (1974). Evolutionary epistemology. In: P. A. Schilpp (Ed.) The Philosophy of Karl
R. Popper. LaSalle: Open Court, pp. 412–463.
Cariani, P. (2001). Symbols and dynamics in the brain. Biosystems 60, 59–83.
Chalmers, D. (1995). Facing up to the problem of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies
2(3), 200–19.
Chang, H.-L. (2002). Is Language a Primary Modeling System? – On Juri Lotman’s Semiosphere.
Paper presented at the International Conference on Cultural Semiotics: Cultural Mechanisms,
Boundaries, Identities. University of Tartu, Estonia, February 26 – March 2, 2002.
Chang, H.-L. (2005). Biosemiotics: nature in culture or culture in nature? Chung Wai Literary
Monthly 34(7).
Chebanov, S. V. (1994). Man as participant to natural creation: enlogue and ideas of hermeneutics
in biology. Rivista di Biologia 87(1), 39–55.
Chekhov, A. (1904). Teatr I iskusstvo. No. 28, 11 July, p. 521.
Chien, J. A. (2003): Diagramming as a Convergence of C.S. Peirce, Jakob von Uexküll, and
E. Gombrich. Paper Presented at the International Gatherings in Biosemiotics Conference 3,
University of Copenhagen, Denmark. July 11–14.
Chien, J. (2006). Of animals and men: A study of umwelt in Uexküll, Cassirer, and Heidegger.
Concentric: Literary and Cultural Studies, 32.1, 57–79. Taipei: National Taiwan Normal
University.
Christiansen, P. V. (2000). Macro and Micro-Levels in Physics. In: P. B. Andersen, C. Emmeche,
N. O. Finnemann and P. V. Christiansen (Eds.) Downward Causation: Minds, Bodies and
Matter. Århus: Aarhus University Press, pp. 51–62
Churchland, P. (1984). Eliminative materialism. In: Matter and Consciousness. Cambridge: MIT
Press, pp. 43–49.
Churchland, P. S. (1986). Neurophilosophy : Toward A Uniﬁed Science Of The Mind-Brain.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Churchland, P. S. (2002). Brain-Wise : Studies In Neurophilosophy. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Clark, A. (1997). Being There : Putting Brain, Body, And World Together Again. Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Clarke, D. (1987). Principles of Semiotic. London: Routledge.
Cobley, P. (Ed.) (2006). Communication Theories 4 volumes (Critical Concepts series). New York:
Routledge.
Cobley P. (Ed.) (2009). The Routledge Companion to Semiotics. London: Routledge.
Cobley, P. (Ed.) (2010). Realism for the 21st Century: A John Deely Reader. Scranton and London:
University of Scranton Press.
Cowley, S. J. (2007a). How human infants deal with symbol grounding. Interaction Studies 8/1,
81–104.
Cowley, S. J. (2007b). The codes of language: Turtles all the way up? In: Barbieri, M. (Ed.) The
Codes of Life. Berlin: Springer, pp. 319–345.
Cowley, S. J. (2009). Language ﬂow: opening the subject. Cognitive Semiotics, 4, 64–92.
Colapietro. V. (1989). Peirce’s Approach to the Self: A Semiotic Perspective on Human Subjectivity.
New York: State Univ of New York Press.
Colapietro, V., Thomas, O. (1996). (Eds.) Peirce’s Doctrine of Signs. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Collier, J. (1999). The dynamical basis of information and the origins of semiosis. In: E. Taborsky
(Ed.) Semiosis. Evolution. Energy Towards a Reconceptualization of the Sign. Aachen: Shaker
Verlag, pp. 111–136.
Collier, J. (2008). Information in biological systems. In: P. Adriaans and J. van Benthem (Eds.)
Handbook of Philosophy of Science, Volume 8, Philosophy of Information. Amsterdam:
Elsevier.
Crick, F. (1958). On protein synthesis. Symposium for Experimental Biology XII, 139–163.
Crick, F. (1988). What Mad Pursuit: A Personal View of Scientiﬁc Discovery. New York: Basic
Books.

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
69
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1977). Creativity: Flow and the Psychology of Discovery and Invention.
New York: HarperCollins.
Cvrˇcková, F. (2002). The Darwinian purpose enters the post-genomic era: a case study. In: I. Havel
and A. Markoš (Eds.) Is There a Purpose in Nature? How to Navigate Between the Scylla of
Mechanism and the Charybdis of Teleology. Czech Republic: Vesmir, pp. 175–184.
Cvrˇcková, F., Markoš, A. (2005). Beyond bioinformatics: can similarity be measured in the digital
world? Journal of Biosemiotics 1, 87–105.
Damasio, A. (1994). Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason, And The Human Brain. New York:
Putnam.
Danesi, M. (1998). (Ed.) The Body in the Sign: Thomas A. Sebeok and Semiotics. Ottawa: Legas.
Danesi, M. (2000). The biosemiotic paradigm of Thomas A. Sebeok. In Tarasti, E. Commentationes
in Honorem Thomas A. Sebeok Octogenarii. Imatra: ISI, pp. 5–29.
Danesi, M. (2002). Thomas A. Sebeok (1920–2001) remembered. SIGN Journal 3.1, Available at:
http://vicu.utoronto.ca/courses/semiotics/SIGN_Danesi_TAS.htm
Deacon, T. W. (1997). The Symbolic Species : The Co-Evolution Of Language And The Brain.
New York: W.W. Norton.
Deacon, T. W. (2003). The heirarchic logic of emergence: untangling the interdependence of evo-
lution and self-organization. In: B. H. W. a., D. J. Depew (Ed.) Evolution and Learning: The
Baldwin Effect Reconsidered. Cambridge: MIT Press, pp. 273–308.
Deely, J. (1990). Basics of Semiotics. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Deely, J. (1995a). What happened to philosophy between Aquinas and Descartes? The Thomist
58.4, 543–568.
Deely, J. (1995b). Thomas A. Sebeok: Bibliography 1942–1995. Bloomington: Eurolingua.
Deely, J. (2001). Four Ages of Understanding : The First Postmodern Survey of Philosophy from
Ancient Times to the Turn of the Twenty-First Century. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Deely, J. (2002). What Distinguishes Human Understanding? South Bend: St. Augustine’s Press.
Deely, J. (2003). The semiotic animal. In: R. Williamson et al. (Eds.) Semiotics. Ottowa: Legas,
pp. 111–126.
Deely, J. (2007). Intentionality and Semiotics. Chicago: University of Scranton Press.
Deely, J. (2004). Thomas Albert Sebeok, “Biologist Manqué.” International Association for
Semiotic Studies 2004 World Congress, Lyon. (Sebeok Memorial Essay) available at:
http://carbon.cudenver.edu/~mryder/itc/sebeok.html
Deely, J. N., Williams, B., Kruse, F.E. (Eds.) (1986). Frontiers in Semiotics. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press.
Deledalle, G. (2000). Charles S. Peirce’s Philosophy of Signs. Bloomington: Indiana University
Press.
Denizhan, Y., Karatay, V. (2002). Evolution of the “window.” Sign System Studies 30(1), 259–270.
Denizhan, Y. (2008). Roots of the contemporary epistemological model in Mesopotamian mythol-
ogy. The American Journal of Semiotics: Special Issue in Biosemiotics 24.1/3: 145–158.
Depew, D. (1996). Darwinism Evolving: Systems Dynamics and the Genealogy of Natural
Selection. Boston: MIT Press.
Descartes, R. (1637/1973). Discourse on the method of rightly conducting the reason. In
The Philosophical Works of Descartes, translated by E. Haldane and G. Ross, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, pp. 79–130.
Descartes, R. (1641/1973). Meditations on First Philosophy. In The Philosophical Works of
Descartes, translated by E. Haldane and G. Ross, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
pp. 131–200.
Dimitrov, A. I. (2004). Intelligence: Not Seeking Algorithm, But Meaning. Faber: Bulgarian
Academy of Sciences.
Donald, M. (1991). Origin of the modern mind: Three stages in the evolution of culture and
cognition. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Eco, U., Marmo, C. (2000). On the Medieval Theory of Signs. Shona Kelly (Trans). Amsterdam:
Benjamins.

70
Donald Favareau
Edelman, G. (1992). Bright Air, Brilliant Fire: On The Matter Of The Mind. New York:
BasicBooks.
Edelman, G., Tononi, G. (2000). A Universe Of Consciousness: How Matter Becomes Imagination.
New York: Basic Books.
Elsasser, W. M. (1998). Reﬂections on a Theory of Organisms. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins
University Press.
Emmeche, C. (1991). A semiotical reﬂection on biology, living signs and artiﬁcial life. Biology &
Philosophy 6(3), 325–340.
Emmeche, C. (1994). The Garden in the Machine: The Emerging Science of Artiﬁcial Life.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Emmeche, C. (1998). Deﬁning life as a semiotic phenomenon. Cybernetics & Human Knowing
5(1), 3–17.
Emmeche, C. (1999). The biosemiotics of emergent properties in a pluralist ontology. In
E. Taborsky (Ed.) Semiosis, Evolution, Energy: Towards a Reconceptualization of the Sign.
Aachen: Shaker Verlag, pp. 89–108.
Emmeche, C. (2000a). Closure, semiosis, autopoiesis, and autocatalysis – closure, function, emer-
gence, semiosis, and life: the same idea? Reﬂections on the concrete and the abstract in
theoretical biology. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 901, 11.
Emmeche, C. (2000b). Transdisciplinarity, theory-zapping and the growth of knowledge. Semiotica
131(3/4), 217–228.
Emmeche, C. (2001). Does a robot have an Umwelt? Reﬂections on the qualitative biosemiotics of
Jakob von Uexküll. Semiotica 134(1/4): 653–693.
Emmeche, C. (2002). Taking the semiotic turn, or how signiﬁcant philosophy of biology should be
done. Sats, The Nordic Journal of Philosophy 3(1), 155–162.
Emmeche, C., Hoffmeyer, J. (1991). From language to nature: the semiotic metaphor in biology.
Semiotica 84(1/2), 1–42.
Emmeche, C., Kull, K., Stjernfelt, F. (2002). Reading Hoffmeyer, Rethinking Biology. Tartu: Tartu
University Press.
Eschbach, A., Trabant, J. (1983). History of Semiotics. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Faria, M. (2005). RNAs as code makers: A biosemiotic view of RNAi and cell immunity. Paper
Presented at the International Gatherings in Biosemiotics Conference 5, Urbino University,
Italy. July 20–24.
Farina, A. (2004). Eco-ﬁeld versus habitat: Shifting a paradigm in developing a cognitive ecol-
ogy. Paper Presented at the International Gatherings in Biosemiotics Conference 4, Charles
University, Prague. June 1–5.
Favareau, D. (2001a). Beyond self and other: The neurosemiotic emergence of intersubjectivity.
Sign Systems Studies 30(1), 57–101.
Favareau, D. (2001b). “Phenomenal Epiphenomena: Deconstructing the Fallacy Fallacy.”
Invited seminar presentation, First International Gatherings in Biosemiotics, University of
Copenhagen, Denmark. May 24–27.
Favareau, D. (2002). Constructing representema: On the neurosemiotics of self and vision.
Semiotics, Evolution, Energy and Development Journal 2(4), 1–39.
Favareau, D. (2007). The evolutionary history of biosemiotics. In: M. Barbieri (Ed.) Introduction
to Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis. Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 1–67.
Favareau, D. (2008). Collapsing the wave function of meaning. In: J. Hoffmeyer (Ed.) A Legacy
for Living Systems: Gregory Bateson as a Precursor to Biosemiotics. Dordrecht: Springer (to
appear).
Fernández, E. (2008). Signs and instruments: the convergence of Aristotelian and Kantian
intuitions in biosemiotics. Biosemiotics 1(3), 347–359.
Florkin, M. (1974). Concepts of molecular biosemiotics and of molecular evolution. In
Comprehensive Biochemistry 29A, 1–124.
Freeman, W. J. (2000). Neurodynamics : An exploration in Mesoscopic Brain Dynamics. London;
New York: Springer.

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
71
Fürlinger, A. (1998). Locomotion and cognition: from ﬁsh to hominids. Proceedings of the 26th
Goettingen Neurobiology Conf. 1998 Vol. 1.
Fuster, J. M. (2003). Cortex And Mind: Unifying Cognition. Oxford; New York: Oxford University
Press.
Gill, H. S. (1999). The abélardian tradition of semiotics. In: H. Singh Gill and G. Manetti (Eds.)
Signs and Signiﬁcation. New Delhi: Bahri, pp. 35–67.
Grant, E. (1996). The Foundations of Modern Science in the Middle Ages: Their Religious,
Institutional, and Intellectual Contexts. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Grifﬁth, P. E. (2001). Genetic information: a metaphor in search of a theory. Philosophy of Science
68, 394–412.
Hajnal, L. (2003). A new model for biology? Paper Presented at the International Gatherings in
Biosemiotics Conference 3, the University of Copenhagen, Denmark. July 11–14.
Harries-Jones, P. (1995). A Recursive Vision: Ecological Understanding and Gregory Bateson.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Havel, I., Markoš, A. (2002). Is There a Purpose in Nature? How to Navigate between the Scylla
of Mechanism and the Charybdis of Teleology. Czech Republic: Vesmir.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1984). Naturen I Hovedet. Om Biologisk Videnskab. København: Rosinante.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1988). Bioinformation techniques and the view of nature. In Thill, G. and Kemp, P.
(Eds.) The Triumph of Biotechnologies: The Domestication of the Human Animal. Namur:
Presse Universitaires de Namur, pp. 107–115.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1992). Some semiotic aspects of the psycho-physical relation: the endo-exosemiotic
boundary. In: T. S. a. J. U. Sebeok (Ed.), Biosemiotics: The Semiotic Web. Berlin: Mouton de
Gruyter, pp. 101–124.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1996). Signs of Meaning in the Universe. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1998). Semiosis and biohistory: a reply. In: Semiotics in the Biosphere: Reviews
and Rejoinder. Special issue of Semiotica 120(3/4), 455–482.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2000a). The biology of signiﬁcation. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine 43(2),
252–268.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2000b). Life and reference. Bio systems 60(1), 8.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2001). Seeing virtuality in nature. Semiotica 134(1–4), 18.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2002). Code duality revisted. Semiotics, Evolution, Energy and Devlopment Journal
2(1), 98–117
Hoffmeyer, J., Emmeche, C. (1991). Code-duality and the semiotics of nature. In: M. Anderson
and F. Merrell (Eds.) On Semiotic Modeling. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 117–166.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2008). Biosemiotics: An Examination into the Signs of Life and the Lives of Signs.
Chicago: University of Scranton Press.
Hofkirchner, W. (2002). The status of biosemiotics. Semiosis, Energy, Evolution And Development
Journal 3, 4–15.
Hofstadter, D. (1979). Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid. Middlesex: Penguin.
Hope, J., Pierre-Louis, P. (2009). A biosemiotic approach to wine-tasting. Does a glass of white
wine taste like a glass of Domain Sigalas Santorini Asirtiko Athiri 2005? In: M. Barbieri (Ed.)
Biosemiotics 2(1). Berlin: Springer Publishers, pp. 65–76.
Huber, J., Schmid-Tannwald, I. (2005). Epigenetic mechanisms following mammalian fertiliza-
tion reveal basic principles of constructivist epistemology. Paper Presented at the International
Gatherings in Biosemiotics Conference 5, Urbino University, Italy. July 20–24.
Igamberdiev, A. (1999). Foundations of metabolic organization: Coherence as a basis of computa-
tional properties in metabolic networks. BioSystems 50(1): 1–6.
Jackson, B. D. (1969). The theory of signs in St. Augustine’s De doctrina christiana. Revue des
Études Augustiniennes 15: 9–49.
Jämsä, T. (2005). Language and Nature. Magisterial Lecture Presented at the International
Gatherings in Biosemiotics Conference 5, Urbino University, Italy. July 20–24.
Ji, S. (2002). Microsemiotics of DNA. Semiotica 138(1/4), 15–42.
Kandel, E., Schwartz, J., Jessell, T. (2002). Principles of Neural Science. New York: McGraw-Hill.

72
Donald Favareau
Karatay, V., Denizhan, Y. (1999). The non-decreasing character of complexity: A biological
approach. Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Computing Anticipatory
Systems. Volume 5. Liège: Belgium.
Kauffman, S. (1995). At Home In The Universe : The Search For Laws Of Self-Organization And
Complexity. New York: Oxford University Press.
Kauffman, S. (2000). Investigations. Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press.
Kilstrup, M. (1997). Biokemi og semiotik: Molekylær biosemiotik. In: Anvendt Semiotik, pp. 97–
123.
Kleisner, K. (2004). GENES – MEMES – SEMES. Towards the new concept of mimicry. Paper
Presented at the International Gatherings in Biosemiotics Conference 4, Charles University,
Prague. June 1–5.
Kotov, K. (2002). Semiosphere: a chemistry of being. Sign Systems Studies, 30(1), 41–56.
Krampen, M. (1981). Phytosemiotics. Semiotica, 36.3/4, 187–209; reprinted Deely, Williams and
Kruse. 96–103.
Kretzmann, N. (Ed.) (1988). Meaning and Inference in Medieval Philosophy. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Kretzmann, N., Kenny, A., Pinborg, J. (1982). Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kristeva, J. (1994). On juri lotman. Publications of the Modern Language Association 109(3),
375–376.
Kull, K. (1998a). Organism as a self-reading text: anticipation and semiosis. International Journal
of Computing Anticipatory Systems 1, 93–104.
Kull, K. (1998b). On semiosis, Umwelt, and semiosphere. Semiotica 120(3/4), 299–310.
Kull, K. (1999a). Biosemiotics in the twentieth century: a view from biology. Semiotica 127(1/4),
385–414.
Kull, K. (1999b). On the history of joining bio with semio: F.S. Rothschild and the biosemiotic
rules. Sign Systems Studies 27, 128–138.
Kull, K. (1999c). Towards biosemiotics with Yuri Lotman. Semiotica 127(1/4), 115–131.
Kull, K. (1999d). A teleology of the Estonian research tradition” talk given for the Baltic
and Finnish Studies Association at Indiana University, November 9, 1999. Summary here:
http://www.iub.edu/~bafsa/articles.html
Kull, K. (2000a). An introduction to phytosemiotics: Semiotic botany and vegetative sign systems.
Sign Systems Studies 28, 326–350.
Kull, K. (2000b). Organisms can be proud to have been their own designers. Cybernetics & Human
Knowing 7(1), 45–55.
Kull, K. (2000c). Part V Closure, Information, and Thermodynamics – Active Motion,
Communicative Aggregations, and the Spatial Closure of Umwelt. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences 901, 8.
Kull, K. (2001a). Jakob von Uexküll: an introduction. Semiotica 134(1/4), 1–59.
Kull, K. (2001b). Living forms are communicative structures, based on the organic codes.
Cybernetics and Human Knowing 8(3), 91–94.
Kull, K. (2003). Thomas A. Sebeok and biology: building biosemiotics. Cybernetics and Human
Knowing 10(1), 47–60.
Kull, K. (2005). “A brief history of biosemiotics.” Journal of Biosemiotics Vol 1, pp. 1–34.
Küppers, B.-O. (2000). Information and the Origin of Life. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Lagerspetz, K. (2001). Jacob von Uexkull and the origins of cybernetics. Semiotica 134(1–4),
643–651.
Latour, B. (1987). Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists and Engineers through Society.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Latour, B. (1999). Pandora’s Hope: Essays on the Reality of Science Studies. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Lestel, D. (2002). Human/animal communications, language and evolution. Sign Systems Studies
30(1), 201–212.
Lewontin, R. (1992). The dream of the human genome. New York Review of Books May 28, pp.
31–40.

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
73
Llinás, R. R. (2001). I of the Vortex: From Neurons to Self (1st ed.). Cambridge: MIT Press.
Long, A., Sedley, D. (1987). The Hellenistic Philosophers. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Lotman, J. (1984 /2005). On the semiosphere. Sign Systems Studies 33(1), 215–239.
Lorenz, E. (1963). Deterministic nonperiodic ﬂow. Journal of Atmospheric Sciences 20, 130–141.
Luure, A. (2002). Understanding life: trans-semiotic analogies. Sign Systems Studies 30(1), 315–
326.
MacIntyre, A. C. (1974/1980). Epistemological crises, dramatic narrative, and the philosophy
of science. In: G. Gutting (Ed.) Paradigms and Revolutions: Appraisals and Applications of
Thomas Kuhn’s Philosophy of Science. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame, pp. 54–74.
Magee, J. (1989). Boethius on Signiﬁcation and Mind. Leiden: Brill.
Maran, T. (2003). Mimesis as a phenomenon of semiotic communication. Sign Systems Studies
31.1, pp. 191–215.
Margulis, L., Sagan, D. (1987). Microcosmos: Four Billion Years of Evolution from Our Microbial
Ancestors. Boston: Allen & Unwin.
Markoš, A. (2002a). Evolution, purpose, teleology. In I. Havel and A. Markoš (Eds.) Is There a
Purpose in Nature? How to Navigate Between the Scylla of Mechanism and the Charybdis of
Teleology. Czech Republic: Vesmir, pp. 113–128.
Markoš, A. (2002b). Purpose and biology. In: I. Havel and A. Markoš (Eds.) Is There a Purpose
in Nature? How to Navigate Between the Scylla of Mechanism and the Charybdis of Teleology.
Czech Republic: Vesmir, pp. 42–64.
Markoš, A. (2002c). Readers of the Book of Life: Contextualizing Developmental Evolutionary
Biology. Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press.
Martinelli, D. (2005). A whale of a sonata – Zoomusicology and the question of musical structures.
Semiosis, Energy, Evolution and Development Journal 2005(1), 2–29.
Matsuno, K., Swenson, R. (1999). Thermodynamics in the present progressive mode and its role
in the context of the origin of life. BioSystems 51, 53–61.
Matsuno, K. (2008). Molecular semiotics toward the emergence of life. Biosemiotics 1, 131–144.
Maturana, H., Varela, F. ([1st edition 1973] 1980). Autopoiesis and Cognition: the Realization of
the Living. In: R. S. Cohen and M. W. Wartofsky (Eds.) Boston Studies in the Philosophy of
Science, Vol. 42. Dordecht: D. Reidel Publishing Co.
McCord Adams, M. (1987). William Ockham. Notre Dame: Notre Dame Press.
McGinn, C. (1999). The Mysterious Flame: Conscious Minds in a Material World. New York:
Basic Books.
Meier-Oeser, S. (2003). Medieval semiotics. In: E. N. Zalta (Ed.) The Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy (Winter 2003 Edition). Available at: http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2003/
entries/semiotics-medieval.
Merrell, F. (1996). Signs Grow: Semiosis and Life Processes. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Miller, S. A., Harley, J. P. (1994). Zoology (2nd ed.). Dubuque: Wm. C. Brown Publishers.
Minsky, M. (1988). Society of Mind. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Nakajima, T. (2005). Managing uncertainty of events by semiosis in living systems. Paper Presented
at the International Gatherings in Biosemiotics Conference 5, Urbino University, Italy. July
20–24.
Ockham, W. (1323/1991). Quodlibetal Questions. Alfred J. Freddoso and Francis E. Kelley, trans.,
2 vols., Yale Library of Medieval Philosophy, New Haven: Yale University Press.
Neuman, Y. (2003). Processes and Boundaries of the Mind: Extending the Limit Line. New York:
Kulwer Academic.
Oyama, S. (1985). The Ontogeny of Information: Developmental Systems and Evolution.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Pain, S. (2002). Introduction to biorhetorics: applied rhetoric in the life sciences. Paper Presented
at the International Gatherings in Biosemiotics Conference 2, the University of Tartu, Estonia.
June 14–17.
Parmentier, R. J. (1994). Signs in Society: Studies in Semiotic Anthropology. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press.

74
Donald Favareau
Pattee, H. (1965). Experimental approaches to the origin of life problem. In: F. F. Nord (Ed.)
Advances in Enzymology, Vol. 27. New York: Wiley, pp. 381–415.
Pattee, H. (1969). The physical basis of coding and reliability in biological evolution. In:
C. H. Waddington (Ed.) Towards a Theoretical Biology, Vol. 1. Edinburgh: Edinburgh Univ.
Press, pp. 67–93.
Pattee, H. (1972). Laws and constraints, symbols and languages. In: C. H. Waddington (Ed.)
Towards a Theoretical Biology, Vol. 4. Edinburgh: Edinburgh Univ. Press, pp. 248–258.
Pattee, H. (1977). Dynamic and linguistic modes of complex systems. International Journal for
General Systems 3, 259–266.
Pattee, H. (1982a). The need for complementarity in models of cognitive behavior. In: W. Weimer
and D. Palermo (Eds.) Cognition and the Symbolic Process, Vol 2. Hillsdale: Erlbaum, pp.
21–34.
Pattee, H. (1982b). Cell psychology: an evolutionary approach to the symbol-matter problem.
Cognition and Brain Theory 5(4), 325–341.
Pattee, H. (1988). Simulations, realizations, and theories of life. In: C. Langton (Ed.) Artiﬁcial Life.
Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of Complexity. Reading: Addison-Wesley, pp. 63–77.
Pattee, H. (2001). The physics of symbols: bridging the epistemic cut. In BioSystems 60, 5–21.
Pattee, H. (2005). The physics and metaphysics of biosemiotics. Journal of Biosemiotics 1, 281–
301.
Peirce, C. S. (1931–1935). Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, Vol. 1–6. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1958). Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, Vol. 7–8. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Petrilli, S., Ponzio, A. (2001). Thomas Sebeok and the Signs of Life. Great Britain: Icon Books.
Plato. (399–347 BCE/1997). The Dialogues of Plato. In: B. Jowett (Ed. and Trans.). London:
Thoemmes Continuum.
Ponzio, A. (1990). Man as a Sign: Essays on the Philosophy of Language. Berlin: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Poinsot, J. (1632/1985). Tractatus de Signis. With English translation by John Deely. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Prigogine, I. (1969). Structure, Dissipation and Life. Theoretical Physics and Biology, Versailles,
1967. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publ. Company.
Prigogine, I., Stengers, I. (1984). Order Out of Chaos : Man’s New Dialogue with Nature. Toronto;
New York: Bantam Books.
Queiroz, J., Emmeche, C., El-Hani, C. N. (2005). Information and semiosis in living systems: a
semiotic approach. Semiosis, Energy, Evolution and Development Journal (1), 60–90
Reybrouck, M. (2005). The musical code between nature and nurture: Biosemiotic and ecological
claims. Paper Presented at the International Gatherings in Biosemiotics Conference 5, Urbino
University, Italy. July 20–24.
Ribeiro, S., Queiroz, J., de Araújo, I. (2003). The emergence of referential symbolic process in
non-human primates communication: A zoosemiotic analysis based on the Peircean extended
theory of sign. Paper Presented at the International Gatherings in Biosemiotics Conference 3,
the University of Copenhagen, Denmark. July 11–14.
Ulanowicz, R.E. (1986). Growth and Development: Ecosystems Phenomenology. San Jose: Excel
Press.
Rocha, L. M. (2001). Evolution with material symbol systems. Biosystems 60, 95–121. LAUR
00-1604.
Roepstorff, A. (2004). Cellular neurosemiotics: outline of an interpretive framework. In J.
Schult (Ed.) Studien zur Theorie der Biologie, Vol. 6: Biosemiotik - Praktische Anwendung
und Konsequenzen für die Einzeldisziplinen. Berlin: VWB – Verlag für Wissenschaft und
Bildung.
Rosen, R. (1991). Life itself: a comprehensive inquiry into the nature, origin, and fabrication of
life. New York: Columbia University Press.

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
75
Rothschild, F. S. (1962). Laws of symbolic mediation in the dynamics of self and personality.
Annals of New York Academy of Sciences 96, 774–784.
Rüting, T. (2004). Jakob von Uexküll: Theoretical Biology, Biocybernetics and Biosemiotics.
Available at: www.math.uni-hamburg.de/home/rueting/UexECMTB.doc
Rüting, T. (2003). Uexküll’s “Institut für Umweltforschung” – Biosemiotics in action? Paper
Presented at the International Gatherings in Biosemiotics Conference 3, the University of
Copenhagen, Denmark. July 11–14.
Salthe, S. N. (1993). Development and Evolution: Complexity and Change in Biology. Cambridge:
The MIT Press.
Salthe, S. N. (2006). Purpose in nature. Available online at: http://www.nbi.dk/~natphil/salthe/
Purpose_In_Nature.pdf
Savan, D. (1976). Peirce’s Semiotic. Toronto: Victoria College.
Sebeok, T. A. (1963). Communication among social bees; porpoises and sonar; man and dolphin.
Language 39, 448–466.
Sebeok, T. A. (1969). Semiotics and ethology. In: T. A. Sebeok and A. Ramsay (Eds.) Approaches
to Animal Communication. The Hague: Mouton, pp. 200–231.
Sebeok, T. A. (1976). Contributions to the Doctrine of Signs. Lisse, The Netherlands: The Peter de
Ridder Press.
Sebeok, T. A. (1977a). Ecumenicalism in semiotics. In: T. A. Sebeok (Ed.) A Perfusion of Signs.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, pp. 180–206.
Sebeok, T. A. (Ed.) (1977b). How Animals Communicate. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Sebeok, T. A. (1977c). Neglected ﬁgures in the history of semiotic inquiry: Jakob von Uexkull. In
The Sign and Its Masters. Lanham: University Press of America, pp. 187–207.
Sebeok, T. A. (1980). Speaking of Apes: A Critical Anthology of Two-Way Communication with
Man. New York: Plenum Press.
Sebeok, T. A. (1986a). Encyclopedic Dictionary of Semiotics. Berlin; New York: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Sebeok, T. A. (1986b). I Think I Am a Verb: More Contributions to the Doctrine of Signs.
New York: Plenum Press.
Sebeok, T. A. (1988). ‘Animal’ in biological and semiotic perspective. In: T. Ingold (Ed.) What Is
an Animal?. London: Unwin Hyman, pp. 63–76.
Sebeok, T. A. (1990a). Essays in Zoosemiotics. Toronto: Toronto Semiotic Circle.
Sebeok, T. A. (1990b). Sign science and life science. In: J. Deely (Ed.) Semiotics 1990. Lanham:
University Press of America, pp. 243–252.
Sebeok, T. A. (1995). Into the rose-garden. In: J. Deely (Ed.) Thomas A. Sebeok: Bibliography
1942–1995. Bloomington: Eurolingua, pp. 116–125.
Sebeok, T. A. (1998). The Estonian connection. Sign Systems Studies 26, 20–41.
Sebeok, T. A. (1999). “Biosemiotica I.” ed. with “Biosemiotica II.” guest-ed. Jesper Hoffmeyer
and Claus Emmeche, Special Issue Semiotica 127-1/4.
Sebeok, T. A. (2001a). Biosemiotics: Its roots, proliferation, and prospects. Semiotica
134(1), 18.
Sebeok, T. A. (2001b). The Swiss Pioneer: In Nonverbal Communication Studies, Heini Hediger
(1908–1992). Ottawa: Legas Press.
Sebeok, T. A., Umiker-Sebeok, J. (1980). Speaking of Apes: A Critical Anthology of Two-Way
Communication with Man. New York: Plenum.
Sebeok, T. A., Rosenthal, R. (Eds.) (1981). The Clever Hans Phenomenon: Communication with
Horses, Whales, Apes, and People. New York: The New York Academy of Sciences.
Sebeok, T. A., Umiker-Sebeok, J. (Eds.) (1992). Biosemiotics: The Semiotic Web 1991. Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Sercarz, E. E., Celada, F., Mitchison, N. A., Tada, T. (Eds.) (1988). The Semiotics of Cellular
Communication in the Immune System. Berlin: Springer.
Shannon, C., Weaver, W. (1949). The Mathematical Theory of Communication. Urbana: University
of Illinois Press.

76
Donald Favareau
Sharkey, A. J. C. (1999). Combining Artiﬁcial Neural Nets: Ensemble and Modular Multi-Net
Systems. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Sharkey, N. E. (2002), Biologically Inspired Robotics. In: M. Arbib (Ed.) Handbook of Brain
Theory and Neural Networks. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Sharov, A. (1992). Biosemiotics: A functional-evolutionary approach to the analysis of the sense
of information. In: T. A. Sebeok and J. Umiker-Sebeok (Eds.) Biosemiotics: The Semiotic Web
1991. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 345–373.
Sharov, A. (2002). Pragmatics and biosemiotics. Sign System Studies 30(1), 245–258.
Skibinski, A. (2004). Metalogy: a commentary on mind, recursion and topological inference.
Semiosis, Energy, Evolution And Development Journal 2004(1), 70–90.
SLIS
Press
News
(2002).
Thomas
A.
Sebeok,
Senior
Fellow
at
SLIS,
Passes
On.
School of Library and Information Science News, Indiana University. Available at:
http://www.slis.indiana.edu/news/story.php?story_id=364
Sonea, S. (1992). Half of the living world was unable to communicate for about one billion years.
In: T. A. Sebeok and J. Umiker-Sebeok (Eds.) Biosemiotics: The Semiotic Web 1991. Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 375–392.
Spade, P. V. (1994). Five Texts on the Mediaeval Problem of Universals: Porphyry, Boethius,
Abelard, Duns Scotus, Ockham. Indianapolis: Hackett. Includes a complete translation of
Ockham’s discussion of universals from Sent. I.2.4-8.
Spade, P. V. (2006). William of Ockham. In: E. N. Zalta (Ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy (Fall 2006 Edition). http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2006/entries/ochkham
Steckner, C. (2004). Environmental misﬁt in vision and grasp. Paper Presented at the International
Gatherings in Biosemiotics Conference 4, Charles University, Prague. June 1–5.
Stepanov, Y. S. (1971). Semiotika. Moscow: Nauka.
Stjrnfelt, F. (1992). Categorical perception as a general prerequisite to the formation of signs.
In: T. A. Sebeok and J. Umiker-Sebeok (Eds.) Biosemiotics: The Semiotic Web 1991. Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 427–454.
Stjernfelt, F. (2000). Mereology and semiotics. Sign Systems Studies 28, 73–98.
Stjernfelt, F. (2002). Recollections. In: C. Emmeche, K. Kull, and F. Stjernfelt (Eds.) Reading
Hoffmeyer, Rethinking Biology. Tartu: Tartu University Press. pp. 57–60.
Taborsky, E. (1998). Architectonics of Semiosis (1st ed.). New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Taborsky, E. (2001a). The internal and the external semiosic properties of reality, from
http://www.library.utoronto.ca/see/SEED/Vol1-1/Taborsky-Journal1.html
Taborsky, E. (2001b). What is a sign? Journal of Literary Semantics 30(2), 12.
Thom, R. (1989). Structural Stability and Morphogenesis an Outline of a General Theory of
Models. Boulder: Westview Press.
Thompson, D. W. (1917). On Growth and Form. Cambridge: University Press.
Thorndike, E. L. (1898). Animal intelligence: an experimental study of the associative processes
in animals. Psychological Review, Monograph Supplements No. 8. New York: Macmillan.
Tochon, F. V. (2000). Review of the Swiss pioneer in nonverbal communication studies: Heini
Hediger (1908–1992) by Thomas A. Sebeok. International Journal of Applied Semiotics 3(1),
137–143.
Trolle Borup, M. (nee Krause, Mia) (2005). Genotype-phenotype relations. On the modeling of
biological phenomena in genetics and molecular biology. Doctoral Dissertation, Niels Bohr
Institute, University of Copenhagen.
Turovski,
A.
(2000).
The
semiotics
of
animal
freedom.
Sign
Systems
Studies
28,
380–387.
Tweedale, M. (1990). Mental representation in later medieval scholasticism. In: J.C. Smith (Ed.)
Historical Foundations of Cognitive Science. Dordrecht: Kluwer, pp. 35–52.
Umerez, J. (2001). Howard Pattee’s theoretical biology: a radical epistemological stance to
approach life, evolution and complexity. Biosystems 60, 159–177.
Varela, F. J., Maturana, H. R., Uribe, R. (1974). Autopoiesis: the organization of living systems, its
characterization and a model. Biosystems 5, 187–196.

1
Introduction: An Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics
77
Vehkavaara, T. (2002). Why and how to naturalize semiotic concepts for biosemiotics. Sign Systems
Studies 30(1), 293–313.
Vehkavaara, T. (2003). Natural self-interest, interactive representation, and the emergence of
objects and Umwelt: An outline of basic semiotic concepts for biosemiotics. Sign Systems
Studies 31(2), 547–587.
Vehkavaara, T. (2007). From the logic of science to the logic of the living: The relevance of Charles
Peirce to biosemiotics. In: Barbieri, Marcello (Ed.) Introduction to Biosemiotics: The New
Biological Synthesis. Berlin: Springer, pp. 257–282.
Villa, A. E. P. (2005). The Neuro-Heuristic paradigm. Paper Presented at the International
Gatherings in Biosemiotics Conference 5, Urbino University, Italy. July 20–24.
Von Foerster, H. (1982). Observing Systems. Seaside: Intersystems Publications.
Von Glasersfeld, E. (1987). Construction of Knowledge. Seaside: Intersystems Publications.
Von Uexküll, J. (1905). Leitfaden in das Studium der Experimentellen Biologie der Wassertiere.
Weisbaden: J.F. Bergmann Verlag.
Von Uexküll, J. (1909). Umwelt und Innenwelt der Tiere. Berlin: Julius Springer Verlag.
Von Uexküll, J. (1926). Theoretical Biology. Trans. By D.L. Mackinnon. London: Kegan Paul.
Von Uexküll, J. (1928). Theoretische Biologie (2nd ed.). Berlin: Julius Springer Verlag.
Von Uexküll, J. (1934/1992). A stroll through the worlds of animals and men: A picture book of
invisible worlds. In Semiotica 89(4), 319–391.
Von Uexküll, J. (1940/1982). The theory of meaning. Semiotica 42(1), 25–87.
Von Uexküll, T. (1986). Medicine and Semiotics. Semiotica 61, 201–217.
Waddington, C. H. (Ed.) (1905–1975), Towards a Theoretical Biology. An IUBS Symposium.
Chicago: Aldine Pub. Co. 1968–1972.
Weber, A. (2001). Cognition as expression: The autopoetic foundations of an aesthetic theory of
nature. Sign Systems Studies 29(1), 153–168.
Weber, B., Deacon, T. (2000). Thermodynamic cycles, developmental systems, and emergence.
Cybernetics & Human Knowing 7(1), 21–43.
Wheeler, W. (2006). The Whole Creature: Complexity, Biosemiotics and the Evolution of Culture.
London: Lawrence & Wishart.
Wheeler, W. (2009). The biosemiotic turn: Abduction, or, the nature of creative reason in nature and
culture. In A. Goodbody and K. Rigby (Eds.) Ecocritical Theory: New European Approaches.
Charlottesville: Virginia University Press.
Witzany, G. (2000). Life: The Communicative Structure. A New Philosophy Of Biology.
Norderstedt: Libri Books.
Yip, M., Madl, P. (2005). Semiosis aspects of ecosystems of the invasive Caulerpa taxifolia. Paper
Presented at the International Gatherings in Biosemiotics Conference 5, Urbino University,
Italy. July 20–24.
Ziemke, T. (2003). Robosemiotics and embodied enactive cognition. Semiosis, Energy, Evolution
And Development Journal (3), 112–124:
Ziemke, T., Sharkey, N. (2001). A stroll through the worlds of robots and men: applying Jakob von
Uexkull’s theory of meaning to adaptive robots and artiﬁcial life. Semiotica 134(1/4), 701–746.

Part I
Sebeok’s Precursors and Inﬂuences

Chapter 2
The Theory of Meaning
Jakob von Uexküll (1864–1944)
Introduction and Commentary: Jakob von Uexküll
The average person is only aware of their own subjective view of the world, its space and
time, sounds, smells, and colors. Science is trying to manipulate this naïve world view in
two different ways. Physics is trying to convince the observer that this view of the world
is full of subjective illusions, and that the real world is no more than an incessant dance
of atoms controlled by natural laws of causality. Biology, on the other hand, shows the
untrained observer that he sees far too little, that the real world consists of a multitude
of subjective worlds that may be similar to his own, but whose variations he could spend a
lifetime studying and never reach an end. By exploring the Umwelten of other organisms we
add to our own a host of different worlds; and the richness of our own world will increase
in immeasurable ways. While physics is bound to impoverish the average thinker’s view of
the world, biology will enrich it beyond measure.
J. von Uexküll (1928: 22).
As is well evidenced in the history of biosemiotics that opens this volume, the
work of Estonian naturalist and experimental biologist Jakob Johann von Uexküll
occupies a singularly prominent position in the contemporary attempt to develop a
biological science of signs. “When we talk about [Uexküll’s bio-analytical concept
of] Umwelt,” writes historian of ideas John Deely, “we are talking about the cen-
tral category of zoösemiosis and anthroposemiosis alike” (1990: 120). Accordingly,
Thomas A. Sebeok, whose revival of Uexküll’s all but forgotten work was integral to
the launching of the project of biosemiotics proper, never failed to acknowledge his
debt to the man whom he considered “single-handedly brought biosemiotics about –
avant, so to speak, la lettre – [with his] wholly unprecedented, innovative theory of
signs, the scope of which was nothing less than [the scientiﬁc investigation of the
manifold of] semiosis in life processes in their entirety” (1998 [2001]:168–169).
Most suggestively of all, perhaps, Tartu Professor of Biosemiotics Kalevi Kull
has written that
Uexküll’s work is considered to be a foundation for theoretical biology and for the exper-
imental study of organisms’ behavior. Uexküll wanted to make a new biology, one which
would not suffer from Bedeutungsblindheit [‘meaning blindness’]. Thus, in doing one thing,
he has been interpreted as doing two: biology and semiotics. Which means that through
him, these two ﬁelds fuse, or at least cohere, and the study of sign systems is simultane-
ously both biology and semiotics. However, this is certainly not all that needs to be said
about the importance of Jakob von Uexküll (Kull 2001: 3).
81
D. Favareau, Essential Readings in Biosemiotics, Biosemiotics 3,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9650-1_2, C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010

82
Jakob von Uexküll (1864–1944)
Heeding Kull’s admonition – and given the fact that both Sebeok’s rediscovery
of Uexküll, as well Uexküll’s central organizing concepts of Umwelt and of
Funktionkreiss have already been described in this volume and are discussed in
much more penetrating detail throughout it subsequently (most notably in the selec-
tion that follows, but also in the selections from Sebeok, Hoffmeyer, Krampen,
Thure von Uexküll and Brier) – we will examine here at some length more than
usual, the biography of this at one time all but forgotten biosemiotic pioneer.
Baron Jakob Johann von Uexküll was born into an aristocratic Baltic-German
family on the manor of Keblaste, Estonia on September 8, 1864. His family’s linage
of nobility could be traced back 700 years at the time of his birth, leading the his-
torian Astaf von Transehe to remark that “to write the history of the Uexkülls is to
write the history of the Livlands (now Baltics)” (quoted in Harrington 1996: 37).
Privately tutored for the ﬁrst few years of his life, Uexküll attended Gymnasium
in Coburg, Germany from 1875 to 1877, and Domschule in Reval (now Tallinn),
Estonia from 1878 to 1883. In 1884, he enrolled in Dorpat (now Tartu) University,
where he studied zoology and marine biology, receiving his degree in zoology in
1889. After graduating from university, Uexküll spent the next decade at the Institute
of Physiology of the University of Heidelberg in Germany, performing experimental
research and studying in the physiology laboratory of Wilhelm Kühne (1837–1900),
who was the student of Johannes Müller (1801–1858), the successor in the position
to Hermann von Helmoltz (1821–1894) and the originator the concept of “enzyme”
in biology (Kull 2001: 10).
Uexküll’s research at this time centered around the mechanisms responsible for
the neuro-muscular phenomena in sea urchins, octopuses, peanut worms and brit-
tlestars, investigations which took him to both the famous Zoological Station of
Anton Dohn (1840–1909) in Naples, as well as to the Paris laboratory of physiolo-
gist Etienne Jules Marey (1830–1904), who was the ﬁrst to use the new technology
of cinéma to produce time-lapse “moving pictures” of animal movements (Rüting
2004: 39). In Paris, Uexküll employed this new “chrono-photographic” method to
research the movements of dragonﬂies, starﬁsh and butterﬂies – work that would
later have a profound inﬂuence on his thinking about the subjective nature of
animals’ experience of “time.”
During this period, too, together with his colleagues in Naples, Albrecht Bethe
and Theodor Beer, Uexküll produced an inﬂuential paper (Beer, Bethe and Uexküll
1899) that “attacked the use of anthropomorphic terminology in sensory physiol-
ogy, and proposed a new ‘objective’ terminology instead – substituting, for example,
‘seeing’ with photoreception and ‘smelling’ with stiboreception. This paper turned
out to have a broad impact on the development of behaviorism in the United States
and on the ‘reﬂex’ concepts of Pavlov and Bejhterev in Russia” (Rüting 2004: 40).
Continuing his laboratory research while at the same time becoming deeply con-
vinced of the need for a more fully explanatory and less naively reductionist biology,
Uexküll’s discovery that the ﬂow of energy in the stimulated nerve net of an inver-
tebrate always moves in the direction of the extended muscle (the now well-known
“Uexküll’s law” of neuromuscular physiology) was recognized by the awarding of
an honorary medical doctorate by the University of Heidelberg in 1907.

2
The Theory of Meaning
83
Ever more concerned with the explanatory shortcomings of the “biological
machine” approach to the investigation of living systems (the obverse error of the
anthropomorphic approach that he had condemned in 1899), by 1909, Uexküll had
outlined the basics of his subject-oriented approach to the study of animal behavior
in his ﬁrst major monograph, Umwelt und Innenwelt der Tiere (roughly: The Outer
World and the Inner World of Animals). This monograph, full of rich empirical data,
is where Uexküll would articuate for the ﬁrst time his revolutionary Umwelt notion –
the notion of a biologically instantiated and causally efﬁcacious set of agent-object
relations reducible neither to the organization of the subject nor to the organization
of the environment but always as the product of the interaction between the two –
as well as his conviction that these relations of seemingly “private and subjective
experiences” were examinable, within the standard reasonable limits, by science.
For Uexküll, Umweltforschung – the scientiﬁc study of animals’ perception and
behavior – was to be the leading wedge in the expansion of biology beyond just
what is discoverable by chemistry and physics.
It was just at this time, however, that Uexküll’s personal fortunes began to dete-
riorate, as widespread Russian hostility against “the Baltic barons” in the wake of
the Russo-Japanese war of 1905 resulted in the burning to the ground of his ances-
tral manor house at Heimar. In next few years, the combination of World War I
and the Russian Revolution resulted in the loss of almost all his property in the
Baltic states, and his all but total ﬁnancial devastation. “If the Balts had led a spe-
cial existence up to this point as wayfarers between the East and the West,” recalls
Uexküll’s wife, with the outbreak of World War I in 1914, “the narrow path that
permitted this travel was abruptly washed away. Now, there were only ‘Germans’
and ‘Russians’” (1964; quoted in Harrington 1996: 55). And, like many of the other
of the former Baltic aristocracy now facing ruin in Weimar, notes current director of
the Uexküll Archive in Heidelberg, Torsten Rüting, Uexküll considered the ascen-
dance of a strong German state as the best, last hope for his ancestral homeland
(2004: 42).
Accordingly, when not working on his scientiﬁc projects, Uexküll spent much
of the next two decades penning nationalistic manifestos – comparing health and
decay in the organism with health and decay in the State, and exalting the “holy
idealism” of responsible, Kantian-ethic guided “German family life” as against the
capitalism-corrupted power fetishism of “English social Darwinism” (Uexküll 1920,
1917). The rhetoric of these interwar writings, it has been charged, may have both
been part of, as well as have contributed to, the groundswell of national feelings
of persecution and ethnocentrism that Adolf Hitler would later exploit, with such
tragic consequences, in the decade from 1935 to 1945.
Yet Uexküll, it has been reliably established, for all his pre-World War II nation-
alistic fervor, never joined the Nazi party, nor exerted any particular effort towards
helping it; was alternately accepted and suspected by the Nazi administrators tasked
with reviewing his work; feared the invasion into biology of Nazi “race research”;
and was a public critic – to the extent one could be – of what he called the “barbaric”
anti-Jewish laws in Russia and in Nazi Germany (Rüting 2004: 40–46; Harrington
1996: 54–71). Still, and for whatever what one believes it says about the man,

84
Jakob von Uexküll (1864–1944)
Uexküll, like perhaps the majority of his countrymen, primarily “watched after
his own interests” at this time, neither substantively supporting nor substantively
challenging Hitler’s regime. Surely, however, Uexküll did his own later intellec-
tual reputation no credit with his impassioned nationalistic advocacy writings of the
1915–1933 period.1
Uexküll’s academic career likewise experienced a professional stall between the
relatively unnoticed publication of his Umwelt und Innenwelt de Tiere in 1909 and
the much more well-received publication of Theoretische Biologie in 1921 – and
much of this was due to his outspoken rejection of “mechanist” models then seen
as the “future” of in biology. Instead, along with his friend embryologist Hans
Driesch, Uexküll argued for the existence of non-mechanical and teleological princi-
ples inherent to living systems (e.g., Driesch’s entelechy; Uexküll’s Bauplan) – ideas
which were seen, justiﬁably or not, as “mystical” and “unscientiﬁc” by the ortho-
dox thinkers of the late nineteenth-century scientiﬁc community in Germany. Thus,
in 1913, Uexküll’s application to head the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Biology –
which he would presumably re-tool to include Umweltforschung – was turned down
in favor of the hire of a more orthodox thinker.
Instead, Uexküll was awarded a grant to set up working laboratories in the
aquaria of all the zoological gardens in Germany. With the outbreak of World War
I, this plan was shelved and the money rescinded. Unable to continue his research,
Uexküll used this time to review and prepare for publication the results of his many
years of work. Theoretische Biologie (1920), the monograph that emerged from this
labor, set out Uexküll’s Umweltlehre in its most perspicuous form yet, and is the
book that Thomas A. Sebeok claims posthumously germinated “the ﬂowering of
biosemiotics” half a century later.2
Theoretische Biologie was well received, though mechanist biologists such as
Jacques Loeb (1859–1924) and Richard Goldschmidt (1878–1958) both publicly
took umbrage with it. Nevertheless, Uexküll remained without an institutional posi-
tion until Otto Kestner (1873–1953), a former student of Uexküll’s who had recently
1 For insightful accounts of Uexküll’s scientiﬁc and civilian activities during the time of Nazi
rule (which consisted almost entirely of continued attempts to keep his research programs from
being de-funded by the government) as well of his intellectual friendship and Kantian/Romanticist
kinship with the English naturalist turned German nationalist philosopher Houston Stewart
Chamberlain (1855–1927), see G. von Uexküll (1964), Schmidt (1975), Harrington (1996) and
Rüting (2004).
2 One of Sebeok’s many disquisitions on the role of Jakob von Uexküll in the development of
biosemiotics appears within the selection included in this volume (Chapter Six). For the most
in-depth discussion of Uexküll’s sign theory in this regard, however, the reader is emphatically
directed to consult both Sebeok’s fullest account of Uexküll’s Umweltlehre, “Neglected Figures
in the History of Semiotic Inquiry” (1977), as well as semiotician John Deely’s seminal 2001
article, “Umwelt.” Estonian Professor of Biosemiotics Kalevi Kull’s entry in this volume (Chapter
Thirteen) provides an illuminating account of the intellectual milieu in which Uexküll worked to
help found the discipline of Theoretical Biology. Critically, the Semiotica (2001) “Special Issue on
Jakob von Uexküll” that Kull edited contains over two dozen scholarly articles on Uexküll’s work,
as considered from almost a dozen different disciplines, as well as the most complete Uexküll
bibliography extant.

2
The Theory of Meaning
85
been appointed Ordinarius of the Physiology Department in the newly-founded
University of Hamburg in 1919, secured a position for him in charge of the
long-neglected Hamburg aquarium in 1925. Already sixty-one years old at this
time, Uexküll used the meagre funds available to him to set up a small labora-
tory for the investigation of marine animal behaviour in a kiosk adjacent to the
aquarium in 1925. One year later, he had fully set up his long-awaited Institut für
Umweltforschung and was appointed as an Honorarprofessor at the University of
Hamburg.
Uexküll’s Institut für Umweltforschung “ﬂourished into a vital research center,
and [from 1926] until 1934 produced more than seventy scientiﬁc papers under
the direct supervision of its head” notes the Institut’s current archivist–noting, too,
that because researchers coming to the Institut “came from different faculties of
science and often brought their subjects with them, the works produced were very
heterogeneous:
There was no one single ‘model’ organism and the subjects covered a broad range of sci-
entiﬁc questions. There were works on the physiology of muscles, sense organs, body
movements, and works on different aspects of behavior and communication, performed
with different animals from marine animals to cockroaches to snakes to dogs. [Of primary
importance] was the investigation of the capacity of the sense organs. This basic research
could only reveal a ﬁrst outline of the realizable Umwelt of the animal. However, by inves-
tigating the animal’s ability to perceive and discriminate different physical stimuli, Uexküll
tried to obtain initial indications [of these stimuli’s] signiﬁcance for the animal’s behavior –
and the ﬁrst ideas about the signs that might constitute the animal’s Umwelt. For Uexküll,
this was the basic methodology to analyze the ‘subjective space’ of the animal. (Rüting
2004: 55)3
Uexküll drew upon some of the Institut’s research ﬁndings from their perceptual-
behavioral experiments with dogs, hermit crabs, sea anemones and chickens in his
most well-known work in the English-speaking world, his empirically rich and
marvelously illustrated 1934 volume Streifzüge durch die Umwelten von Tieren
und Menschen. At only a little more than 50 pages, the entire small volume was
translated and reprinted by Claire Schiller in 1957 as A Stroll through the Worlds
of Animals and Men for one of the ﬁrst comprehensive anthologies in animal
ethology – the scientiﬁc discipline that Jakob von Uexküll and his Institut für
Umweltforschung is generally credited with inaugurating.
3 Exegeses by Thure von Uexküll (1987) and Thomas A. Sebeok (1977) clarify Uexküll’s method-
ology, lest there be any misapprehension about “attempts to read an animal’s mind”. Writes von
Uexküll: “This method of observation means ﬁrst of all ascertaining which of those signs regis-
tered by the scientiﬁc observer are also registered [analogously, not necessarily identically] by the
living being under observation”(1987: 149). Writes Sebeok: “The Umweltlehre of von Uexküll
requires no more than that the categories of experience and knowledge [be pragmatically aligned
with the extra-mental regularities of] the real universe – not that the two halves of the cycle fully
correspond with one another, let alone that the Innenwelt completely ‘represents’ the world. A
rather circumscribed repertoire of guiding signs sufﬁciently serves the purpose of the organism,
which is the sustenance of its survival” (1977: 203). Colloquially: The goal is not to try to ﬁnd out
what (or if) an animal “is thinking” – but, rather, what its behavior, when confronted with a certain
stimuli, reveals that such stimuli, at that moment and in that situation, “means.” The ﬁrst project
has nothing at all to do with biosemiotics – the second is at the heart of it.

86
Jakob von Uexküll (1864–1944)
In 1940, at seventy-six years of age, Uexküll left the directorship of the Institut
für Umweltforschung in the hands of his assistant, Friedrich Brock (1898–1958) and
published his ﬁnal major work, Bedeutungslehre, which Thomas Sebeok called “a
reasoned conspectus for a vast program of research [that holds great] no less than
biological, import” and which appears here as the following selection (albeit in a
necessarily abbreviated form).
Jakob von Uexküll died on July 25, 1944 on the Allied-occupied island of Capri,
where he had been living since his retirement from the Institut für Umweltforschung
in 1940.
At the time of his death, observes historian of science Anne Harrington,
“Uexküll’s reputation in Germany was of such a high nature, that the University
of Hamburg decided to nominate him for one of Germany’s most prestigious
national awards, the Goethe Prize for Art and Science” (1996: 71). In life, Uexküll
counted among his colleagues and admirers such contemporary luminaries as Ernst
Cassier (1874–1945), Rudolf Magnus (1873–1927), Cosima Wagner (1837–1930),
Martin Heidegger (1889–1976), Adolf Meyer-Abich (1893–1971), Walter Benjamin
(1892–1940) and Rainer Maria Rilke (1875–1926). Indeed, notes Harrington,
Uexküll’s renown among the scientists of his own time was such that
Jakob von Uexküll could well have anticipated that his would be an enduring legacy in the
annals of holistic life and mind science . . .The physiologist Albrecht Bethe would subse-
quently hail Uexküll’s early comparative physiological work as the most successful science
of his peer group. Ethologist Konrad Lorenz saluted him as someone who “knew the strings
by which an animal is suspended in its environment to a degree hardly ever surpassed by
an ethnologist.” Martin Heidegger4 called Uexküll “one of the shrewdest biologists of our
time,” while his friend and physiological colleague, Otto Kestner, nominated him twice for
the Nobel Prize (1996: 34).
Yet for all this, and as Harrington acutely notes, “today, Uexküll’s work remains
less widely known, especially in the English-speaking world, than he and his
admiring colleagues probably would have anticipated” (1996: 34).
Since the time of Harrington’s appraisal a mere thirteen years ago, Uexküll’s
stature in the scientiﬁc and humanities communities has only grown. Within the
sciences, animal physiologist Kari Lagerspetz (2001) has cited Uexküll’s 1920 work
on neuromuscular recursion (see Fig. 2.1) as the ﬁrst “cybernetic” model of negative
feedback and reafferent control in biology; neurobiologist Joaquin Fuster (2003) has
employed Uexküll’s Funktionkreiss concept as the basis for an embodied theory of
cognition; and cognitive scientists and roboticists Noel Sharkey and Tom Ziemke
(2001) have recognized Uexküll’s pioneering notion of parallel neural networking in
4 Harrington notes that the recently released Heidegger lecture notes of 1929–1930 reveal that the
philosopher had “studied Uexküll’s works at remarkable length, particularly Theoretical Biology
(1920) and The Inner and Outer Worlds of Animals (1909) [and that] it may well be that Uexküll’s
Umwelt concept contributed, in a way not yet properly recognized, to Heidegger’s intriguingly sim-
ilar central concept of ‘Being-in-the-world’ which Heidegger had ﬁrst comprehensively articulated
in Being and Time” in 1927 (1996: 53–54).

2
The Theory of Meaning
87
Fig. 2.1 Hand-drawn diagrams that Uexküll inserted into the 1920 text of Theoretische Biologie
to illustrate his original and revolutionary ideas of biological feedback, negative feedback, and
reafferent control (reprinted in Rüting 2004)
biology (see Fig. 2.2), sixty years prior to its development by Artiﬁcial Intelligence
researchers Runelhart and McClelland in 1986.
In the humanities, philosopher Brett Buchanan (2008) has performed the deep
archival and exegetical work revealing the profound inﬂuence of Uexküll’s thought
on philosophers Maurice Merleau-Ponty (1908–1961) and Gilles Deleuze (1925–
1995); semioticians Thomas A. Sebeok and Marcel Danesi (2000) have developed
their wide-ranging Modelling Systems Theory (MST) upon the foundation of a
synthesis of Uexküllian, Peircean and Lotmanian ideas; and comparative linguist
and historian of ideas Prisca Augustyn (2009) has just recently initiated the long-
overdue project of translating the still largely-untranslated Uexküll corpus into
modern scientiﬁc English, noting, among other relevancies, pioneering linguist
Noam Chomsky’s consistent and deliberate “use of the term Umwelt throughout
his 50 year campaign for the understanding of linguistics as [a form of] theoretical
biology” (2009: 2).
Fig. 2.2 Uexküll’s depiction
of parallel and interconnected
neural networks; appended to
the revised edition of
Theoretische Biologie 1928
(p. 106) – a precursor, writes
Lagerspetz, of Rosenblatt’s
1958 “perceptron” model for
pattern recognition and
information storage that led
to the still later development
of artiﬁcially intelligent
“neural nets”

88
Jakob von Uexküll (1864–1944)
Most importantly of all, perhaps, biosemioticians such as Jesper Hoffmeyer,
Kalevi Kull, Søren Brier and Claus Emmeche have shown how Uexküll’s
Umweltlehre, when wedded with an equally expanded understanding of post-
Darwinian evolution, offers us a scientiﬁc way of understanding that the “subjective
experience” of organisms – far from being either the animal version of human
symbolic experience or a ghostly epiphenomomenon to be, in a scientiﬁcally
Victorian fashion, disingenuously shunned and denied – is instead, not only a gen-
uinely existing and biologically instantiated set of agent-object relations, but is, as
such, an organizing principle in the ongoing co-development, co-evolution and co-
maintenance of interdependent living systems: a generative and recursive engine of
both evolutionary stability and change.5
Jakob von Uexküll could not accept the implications of “nature’s meaning-
lessness” that he saw lying at the heart of his contemporaries’ Darwinism.
Contemporary biosemiotics, in a small but profound shift of emphasis, remains
agnostic about “nature’s meaninglessness” (i.e., about the ultimate signiﬁcance of
the totality of nature, and about whether or not the existential predicate “mean-
ingless” can be properly applied to this totality), but ﬁnds far too much evidence
to the contrary in the scientiﬁc literature to believe in nature’s internally operative
“meaninglessness” – i.e., the radical misunderstanding that “meaninglessness” is a
property that permeates the organization of living systens and characterizes the way
that the organisms of the biological world interact and have evolved. This shift from
a defence of “nature’s meaningfulness” to one of nature’s “meaning-fullness” does
not put the contemporary project of biosemiotics at odds with the critically impor-
tant insights offered by evolutionary biology in the way that Uexkull understood his
own ideas to be. But without the pioneering work done by Jakob von Uexküll in
the early 20th century, the 21st century, it is not at all certain that the 21st century
interdiscipline of biosemiotics may have ever taken form.
Yet perhaps one more brief word about the following selection is now in order:
Coming out of an earlier tradition in scientiﬁc discourse that has now been almost
entirely eclipsed, many of Uexküll’s ideas and terminology in this selection may
at ﬁrst seem strange to modern ears: his early acceptance of Darwin’s then-new
theory was eventually replaced by his principled (if perhaps too entire) rejection
of it; the milieu in which he lived and worked was still imbued with elements of
the previous generation’s high esteem for German Romanticism, and there were
no ready-made terms or concepts from “cybernetics”, “dynamic systems theory”,
“holistic biology”, “gestalt theory” or “complexity theory” that would enable him
to express his insights in ways that we today would more clearly associate with
5 Uexküll’s renown within the biosemiotic community is now such that the Jakob von Uexküll
Centre for biosemiotic research was opened at the University of Tartu in 1993, and the Jakob von
Uexküll Archiv für Umweltforschung und Biosemiotik inaugurated at the site of Uexküll’s original
Umwelt-study laboratory at the University of Hamburg in 2004. Still, not all biosemioticians are
convinced that proceeding from even an evolutionarily modiﬁed Uexküllian framework is the most
fruitful possible framework for biosemiotics. See Barbieri (2001 and Chapter Twenty Four of this
volume) for an explicit discussion of principled objections to such an approach.

2
The Theory of Meaning
89
scientiﬁc discourse. Instead, Uexküll often relied on musical metaphors as a way of
pointing his readers towards the ineliminable aspect of subjectivity that is entailed
by the agent-object operations observable in organisms.
Accordingly, the reader may want to make a mental note to keep in mind the very
different scientiﬁc milieu in which the following selection was written, and to make
the appropriate mental emendations – Uexküll’s ego-tone we would now call qualia;
his meaning-carrier properties of objects are the precursors of Gibson’s (1977)
sensori-motor affordances; and his contrapuntal duets or counter-points refer to
nothing more nor less that the interdependent nature of species evolution, wherein
the “perceptual and effector cues” of the bat act as “selection pressures” for the
morphology of the moth, and vice versa, generatively and recursively. Perhaps most
beneﬁcially of all, the reader may also want to re-read this selection anew after hav-
ing ﬁnished reading the rest of this volume – at which point, hopefully, the reader
will ﬁnd some part of their own conceptual Umwelt has changed – and that much of
what might seem merely “poetic” in the following selection now, may reveal itself
as actually being “science in a another language,” in retrospect.

90
Jakob von Uexküll (1864–1944)
The Theory of Meaning (1940)
Preface (From: A Stroll Through the Worlds of Animals
and Men [1934])
This little monograph does not claim to point the way to a new science. Perhaps it
should be called a stroll into unfamiliar worlds; worlds strange to us but known to
other creatures, manifold and varied as the animals themselves. The best time to set
out on such an adventure is on a sunny day. The place, a ﬂower-strewn meadow,
humming with insects, ﬂuttering with butterﬂies. Here we may glimpse the worlds
of the lowly dwellers of the meadow. To do so, we must ﬁrst blow, in fancy, a soap
bubble around each creature to represent its own world, ﬁlled with the perceptions
which it alone knows. When we ourselves then step into one of these bubbles, the
familiar meadow is transformed. Many of its colorful features disappear, others no
longer belong together but appear in new relationships. A new world comes into
being. Through the bubble we see the world of the burrowing worm, of the butterﬂy,
or of the ﬁeld mouse; the world as it appears to the animals themselves, not as
it appears to us. This we may call the phenomenal world or the self-world of the
animal.
To some, these worlds are invisible. Many a zoologist and physiologist, clinging
to the doctrine that all living beings are mere machines, denies their existence and
thus boards up the gates to other worlds so that no single ray of light shines forth
from all the radiance that is shed over them. But let us who are not committed to
the machine theory consider the nature of machines. All our useful devices, our
machines, only implement our acts. There are tools that help our senses, spectacles,
telescopes, microphones, which we may call perceptual tools. There are also tools
used to effect our purposes, the machines of our factories and of transportation,
lathes and motor cars. These we may call effector tools.
Now we might assume that an animal is nothing but a collection of percep-
tual and effector tools, connected by an integrating apparatus which, though still
a mechanism, is yet ﬁt to carry on the life functions. This is indeed the position of
all mechanistic theorists, whether their analogies are in terms of rigid mechanics or
more plastic dynamics. They brand animals as mere objects. The proponents of such
theories forget that, from the ﬁrst, they have overlooked the most important thing,
the subject which uses the tools, perceives and functions with their aid.
The mechanists have pieced together the sensory and motor organs of animals,
like so many parts of a machine, ignoring their real functions of perceiving and
acting, and have even gone on to mechanize man himself. According to the behav-
iorists, man’s own sensations and will are mere appearance, to be considered, if at
all, only as disturbing static, But we who still hold that our sense organs serve our
perceptions, and our motor organs our actions, see in animals as well not only the
mechanical structure, but also the operator, who is built into their organs, as we
are into our bodies. We no longer regard animals as mere machines, but as sub-
jects whose essential activity consists of perceiving and acting. We thus unlock

2
The Theory of Meaning
91
the gates that lead to other realms, for all that a subject perceives becomes his
perceptual world and all that he does, his effector world. Perceptual and effector
worlds together form a closed unit, the Umwelt. These different worlds, which are
as manifold as the animals themselves, present to all nature lovers new lands of such
wealth and beauty that a walk through them is well worth while, even though they
unfold not to the physical but only to the spiritual eye. So, reader, join us as we
ramble through these worlds of wonder.
The Theory of Meaning [1940]
. . .Only he who is a biologist investigates the planful processes of life and deter-
mines their changing meanings. This way of conceptualizing biology has almost
vanished; for most investigators the lawfulness of meaning relations is terra incog-
nita. I am, therefore, forced to start with the simplest examples, in order initially to
convey to the reader some idea about how meaning is to be understood, and then
to demonstrate to him that life can only be understood when one has acknowledged
the importance of meaning.
I must also state that it is deceptive to: (1) commission a chemist, rather than an
art historian, to judge a painting; (2) entrust the critique of a symphony to a physicist
instead of to a musicologist; (3) concede to a mechanist, and not a biologist, the right
to limit the study of the reality of the behaviors of all living organisms to the law
of the Conservation of Energy. Behaviors are not mere movements or tropisms, but
they consist of perception of (Merken) and operation upon (Wirken); they are not
mechanically regulated, but meaningfully organized.
This concept naturally deﬁes the “Law of simple explanations” (Denkokonomie)
that guides the mechanists and has made their investigations easy! But to push prob-
lems aside does not solve them. Progress in the life sciences in the last few decades
is characterized by behaviorism and the study of conditioned reﬂexes; one can cer-
tainly concede that experiments have become more and more complex, but must
declare that [the quality of] scientiﬁc thought has become easier and cheaper. Cheap
thought has the same effect as an infectious disease – it spreads, and suffocates
all attempts at an independent Weltanschauung – I ask each naturalist whether he
wishes to steer the public to that goal.
The Meaning-Carrier
The sight of winged insects, such as bees, bumblebees, and dragonﬂies, ﬂying about
a ﬂower-ﬁlled meadow reawakens in us the impression that the whole world lies
open for these enviable creatures. Even earth-bound animals, such as frogs, mice,
snails, and worms, appear to move freely in nature. This impression is deceptive. In
truth, every free-moving animal is bound to a speciﬁc habitat and it remains the task
of the ecologist to investigate its limits.

92
Jakob von Uexküll (1864–1944)
We do not doubt that a comprehensive world is at hand, spread out before our
eyes, from which each animal can carve out its speciﬁc habitat. Observation teaches
us that each animal moves within its habitat and confronts a number of objects, with
which it .has a narrower or wider relationship. Because of this state of affairs, each
experimental biologist seems to have the task of confronting various animals with
the same object, in order to investigate the relationships between the animal and the
object. In this procedure, the same object represents a uniform standard measure in
every experiment.
American researchers, for example, have attempted indefatigably, in thousands of
experiments, starting with white rats, to investigate the relationship of a vast variety
of animals to a labyrinth. The unsatisfactory results of this work, despite the most
exact techniques of measurement and their most reﬁned mathematical treatment,
could have been predicted, because it was based on the false assumption that an
animal can at any time enter into a relationship with a neutral object.
The proof of this seemingly surprising assertion is easy to demonstrate by means
of a simple example: Let us suppose that an angry dog barks at me on a country
road. In order to drive it off, I pick up a stone and frighten it off with an adept throw.
Nobody who observes this process and afterwards picks up the stone would doubt
that it was the same object, “stone”, which ﬁrst lay on the road and then was thrown
at the dog. Neither the shape, nor the weight, nor the other physical and chemical
properties of the stone have altered. Its color, its hardness, and its crystal formation
have remained the same and yet, a fundamental transformation has taken place: It
has changed its meaning. As long as the stone was incorporated in the country road,
it served as a support for the walker’s feet. Its meaning in that context lay in its
playing a part in the performance of the path, we might say that it had acquired a
“path-quality.” This changed fundamentally when I picked up the stone to throw it
at the dog. The stone became a missile – a new meaning became imprinted upon it.
It had acquired a “throw-quality.”
The stone lies in the objective observer’s hand as a neutral object, but it is trans-
formed into a meaning-carrier as soon as it enters into a relationship with a subject.
Because no animal ever plays the role of an observer, one may assert that they never
enter into relationships with neutral objects. Through every relationship the neu-
tral object is transformed into a meaning-carrier, the meaning of which is imprinted
upon it by a subject. The inﬂuence that the transformation of meaning exercises on
the properties of the object is clariﬁed by two further examples. I take a domed glass
dish, which can serve as a neutral object because it has not performed any previous
function for human beings. I insert the glass dish into the outside wall of my house
and transform It m this way into a window that lets in the sunlight; but, because it
also reﬂects light, it screens out the glances of the passers-by. However, I can also
place the glass dish on a table, ﬁll it with water, and use it as a ﬂower-vase.
The properties of this neutral object are not altered at all during these transfor-
mations. But as soon as the glass dish has been transformed into a meaning-carrier,
“window” or “vase”, its various properties acquire a rank-order of importance. The
transparency of the glass is a “key” property of the window, while its curvature
represents a subsidiary property. In the case of the vase, the obverse is true: The

2
The Theory of Meaning
93
curvature is the key property and the transparency the subsidiary property. Through
this example, we can understand why the scholastics divided the properties of
objects into “essentia” and “accidentia”. In so doing they had only meaning-carriers
in mind; because the properties of neutral objects are not meaning-carriers, they
cannot be rank-ordered by importance. Only the tighter or the looser bond between
the meaning-carrier and the subject makes possible the separation of the properties
into key (essential = essentia) and subsidiary (inessential = accidentia) ones.
Are we not taught by this example that the forest, for instance, which the poets
praise as the most beautiful place of sojourn for human beings, is in no way grasped
in its full meaning if we relate it only to ourselves? . . .
The meaning of the forest is multiplied a thousandfold if its relationships are
extended to animals, and not only limited to human beings: There is, however, no
point in becoming intoxicated with the enormous number of Umwelts (subjective
universes) that exist in the forest. It is much more instructive to pick out a typical
case in order to take a look into the relationship-network of the Umwelts. Let us
consider, for example, the stem of a blooming meadow-ﬂower and ask ourselves
which roles are assigned to it in the following four Umwelts:
(1) In the Umwelt of a girl picking ﬂowers, who gathers herself a bunch of colorful
ﬂowers that she uses to adorn her bodice;
(2) In the Umwelt of an ant, which uses the regular design of the stem-surface as
the ideal path in order to reach its food-area in the ﬂowerpetals;
(3) In the Umwelt of a cicada-larva, which bores into the sap-paths of the stem and
uses it to extract the sap in order to construct the liquid walls of its airy house;
(4) In the Umwelt of a cow, which grasps the stems and the ﬂowers in order to push
them into its wide mouth and utilizes them as fodder.
According to the Umwelt-stage on which it appears, the identical ﬂower stem at
times plays the role of an ornament, sometimes the role of a path, sometimes the role
of an extraction-point, and ﬁnally the role of a morsel of food. This is very aston-
ishing. The stem itself, as part of a living plant, consists of well-planned interwoven
components that represent a better developed mechanism than any human machine.
The same components that are subjected to a certain building-plan (Bauplan) in the
ﬂower stem are torn asunder into four different Umwelts and are integrated, with
the same certainty, into various new building plans (Baupläne). Each component of
an organic or inorganic object, on appearing in the role of a meaning-carrier on the
life-stage of an animal subject, has been brought into contact with a “complement”
[later: Kontrapunkt, or “counterpoint”], so to speak, in the body of the subject that
becomes the meaning-utilizer. This conclusion draws our attention to an apparent
contradiction in the fundamental features of living nature. The fact that the body
structure is ordered according to a plan (Planmässigkeit) seems to contradict the
idea that the Umwelt structure is also ordered according to a plan (Planmässigkeit).
One must not be under the illusion that the plan to which the Umwelt structure
accords is less systematically complete than the plan according to which the body
structure is ordered. Each Umwelt forms a closed unit in itself, which is governed,

94
Jakob von Uexküll (1864–1944)
in all its parts, by the meaning it has for the subject. According to its meaning for
the animal, the stage on which it plays its life-roles (Lebensbühnei) embraces a
wider or narrower space. This space is built up by the animal’s sense organs, upon
whose powers of resolution will depend the size and number of its [possibilities for
sensorimotor interaction]. The girl’s ﬁeld of vision resembles ours, the cow’s ﬁeld
of vision extends away over its grazing-area, while the diameter of the ant’s ﬁeld of
vision does not exceed 50 cm and the cicada’s only a few centimeters.
The [sensorimotor possibilities] are distributed differently in each space: The ﬁne
pavement the ant feels while crawling up the ﬂower stem does not exist for the girl’s
hands and certainly not for the cow’s mouth. The structure of the ﬂower stem and its
chemistry do not play any part on the stages upon which the girl or the ant play their
life-roles. The digestibility of the stem is, however, essential to the cow. The cicada
sucks out the sap it needs from the ﬁnely-structured sap-paths of the stem. It is even
able, as Fabre6 has shown, to obtain completely harmless sap for its foam-house
from the poisonous spurgeplant. Everything that falls under the spell of an Umwelt
(subjective universe) is altered and reshaped until it has become a useful meaning-
carrier; otherwise it is totally neglected. In this way the original components are torn
apart without any regard to the building-plan that governed them until that moment.
The contents of the meaning-carriers are different in the various Umwelts, although
they remain identical in their structures. Part of their properties serve the subject at
all times as perceptual cue-carriers, another part as effector cue-carriers.
The color of the blossom serves as an optical perceptual cue in the girl’s Umwelt,
the ridged surface of the stem as a feeling perceptual cue in the Umwelt of the
ant. The extraction-point presumably makes itself known to the cicada as a smell
perceptual cue. And in the cow’s Umwelt, the sap from the stem serves as a taste
perceptual cue. The effector cues are mostly imprinted upon other properties of the
meaning-carrier by the subject: The thinnest point of the stem is torn apart by the
girl as she picks the ﬂower. The unevenness of the stem’s surface serves the ant both
as a touch perceptual cue for its feelers and as an effector cue-carrier for its feet. The
suitable extraction-point that is made known by its smell is pierced by the cicada,
and the sap that ﬂows out serves as building material for its house of air. The taste
perceptual cue of the stem causes the grazing cow to take more and more stems into
its chewing mouth.
Because the effector cue that is assigned to the meaning-carrier extinguishes in
every case the perceptual cue that caused the operation, each behavior is ended,
no matter how varied it may be. The picking of the ﬂower transforms it into an
ornamental object in the girl’s world. Walking along the stem changes the stem
into a path in the ant’s world, and when the cicada-larva pierces the stem, it is
transformed into a source for building material. By grazing, the cow transforms the
ﬂower stem into wholesome fodder. Every action, therefore, that consists of per-
ception and operation imprints its meaning on the meaningless object and thereby
makes it into a subject-related meaning-carrier in the respective Umwelt (subjective
6 Henri Fabre (1829–1915), French insect researcher.

2
The Theory of Meaning
95
Fig. 2.3 Uexküll’s Funktionkreis (trans, Schiller 1957)
universe). Because every behavior begins by creating a perceptual cue and ends by
printing an effector cue on the same meaning-carrier, one may speak of a functional
circle that connects the meaning-carrier with the subject (Fig. 2.3).
Due to its integration into a functional circle (Funktionkreis), every meaning-
carrier becomes a [contrapuntal] complement of the animal subject. In the process,
particular properties of the meaning-carrier play a leading role as perceptual cue-
carriers or effector cue-carriers; and other properties, on the other hand, play only a
subsidiary role. The biggest part of the body of a meaning-carrier frequently serves
as an undifferentiated objective connecting structure (Gegengefüge) whose function
is only to connect the perpetual cue-carrying parts with the effector cue-carrying
parts. – In individual instances, it is enough to trace out the articulation between
speciﬁc meaning-utilizers and speciﬁc meaning-carriers so as to gain an insight into
the web of the Umwelts (Umweltgewebe).
The Utilization of Meaning
. . .Meaning is the guiding star that biology must follow. The rule of causality is
a poor guide: causal relationships deal only with antecedents and consequences,
thereby completely concealing from us broad biological interrelationships and inter-
actions. Whoever invites scientists to follow a new guiding principle must ﬁrst
convince them that it opens up new vistas that advance our knowledge more than

96
Jakob von Uexküll (1864–1944)
the previous ones did. He must also be able to direct attention to hitherto unsolved
problems, whose solution can only come about with the help of this new guiding
principle.. . .
Loeb’s7 theory of tropism8 has exercised the largest inﬂuence on recent biol-
ogy. Loeb was a conﬁrmed physicist. He only recognized the interaction between
objects, discounting the subject’s inﬂuence on natural events. In his opinion, only an
operational world (Wirkwelt) existed, in which all physical and chemical processes
took place. One object acts upon the other like a hammer on an anvil, or a spark
on a powder keg. The counteraction is due to the kinetic energy conveyed by an
agent and the potential energy stored in the affected object. The counter-action of
plants resides in the shape and arrangement of the substances in their organs. We
need only think about the gutters in the leaves of a tree and about the grains of
starch in wheat-seed that may be understood as potential energy. In doing so, one
naturally disregards the complete form of the plant, whose structure results from the
planned action of impulses of living cell subjects. Certainly, plants do not possess
sense organs or nerves – and, therefore, their whole existence seems to take place in
an operational world.
Loeb’s theory only acknowledged that an operational world exists for animals as
well; he refused to recognize a perceptual world by means of a very simple trick. No
matter how complicated an animal’s performance may be, it will in the end always
approach or distance itself from an affecting object. Loeb equated this simple, spa-
tial component of each animal’s performance with the performance itself, and thus
classiﬁed all performances into “turning toward” actions or “turning away” actions.
Instead of performances, he named these actions tropisms, with the result that he
transformed all living animal subjects into nonliving machines that arrange them-
selves separately in space. Even the simple magnet, by attracting iron, acts as a
positive ferrotrop, and the magnetic needle as a negative polotrop. Loeb’s theory
became decisive for the way a whole generation of biologists viewed the world.
If we stand before a meadow covered with ﬂowers, full of buzzing bees, ﬂutter-
ing butterﬂies, darting dragonﬂies, grasshoppers jumping over blades of grass, mice
scurrying, and snails crawling about, we would be inclined to ask ourselves the unin-
tended question: Does the meadow present the same view to the eyes of so many
various animals as it does to ours? A naive person will answer this question, without
further thought: “Deﬁnitely – it is still the same meadow to every eye.” A follower
of Loeb, however, would give a completely different answer. Because all animals
are mere mechanisms, steered here and there by physical and chemical agents, the
meadow consists of a confusion of light waves and air vibrations, ﬁnely-dispersed
clouds of chemical substances, and contacts, which operate the various objects in
it. The Umwelt theory contradicts both of these interpretations of the meadow,
7 Jacques Loeb (1859–1924), German-American biologist.
8 Tropism is regular movement in a speciﬁc direction in the case of plants and lower forms of
animal life, as a reaction to speciﬁc stimuli.

2
The Theory of Meaning
97
because – to cite but one example – the honey-gathering bee does not see the
meadow with human eyes, nor is it insensible like a machine.
Colors are light waves that have become sensations: This means that they are
not electrical stimuli to the cells of our cerebral cortex, but the Ich-Ton [qualia,
or self-qualities] of these cells. [. . .This is so because] the colors are the speciﬁc
energies of cerebral cortical cells that are inﬂuenced by the eye. The eye sorts out
the light waves and, after transforming them into nerve impulses, transmits them to
the cerebral cortex. Similarly, sound-tones are the speciﬁc energies of those brain
cells that are connected with the ear. The ear records certain vibrations in the air [and
yet], the laws of tones are contained in the theory of music. Consonants, dissonants,
octaves, fourths, ﬁfths, and so on owe their existence to tone perception and have
no separate physical existence. Anyone is invited to explain the tone-sequence of a
melody using the law of causality that is valid for all physical processes.
[Moreover,] our sense organs – the eye, ear, nose, palate, and skin – are built
according to the principles of a safety-match box. Safety matches only react to
selected outside inﬂuences. Stimuli also selectively excite sense organs to pro-
duce nerve impulses, which are then transmitted to the cerebrum. These mechanical
events accord with the law of causality. At this point we arrive at the inner boundary
of the sense organs, which takes the form of a living chime whose individual bells
are the cells that sound the various ich-tons. Is this structural model of the sense
organs also found in animals? No doubt the mechanical part of the sense organs in
animals is constructed in an analogous manner: They may therefore be regarded as
receptor organs. But what about their inner boundary?
Although we cannot know the sense perceptions of our fellow men, their eyes
undoubtedly receive visual signs that we call colors. No doubt their ears also receive
auditory signs that we call tones. Their noses have the capacity to detect olfac-
tory signs, their palates, taste signs, and their skin, tactile signs. All these signs
consist exclusively of ego-qualities. We classify all these qualitatively different sen-
sory signs as “perceptual signs”, which are then projected onto external objects as
perceptual cues.
Now we may ask ourselves: When the receptor organs of animals are stimulated,
do perceptual signs also occur that correspond to the speciﬁc sensory-energies of
their brain cells? And are these also projected outward to be used as perceptual
cues from which the attributes of all things of the animal’s life-stage (Lebensbühne)
stem? The pure mechanists deny this scheme. They assert that the receptor organs
of animals possess no inner boundary at all but serve only to collect various kinds
of external stimuli and put them through to the corresponding parts of the brain.
Are the sense organs the expression of various sensory circles, or, functioning as
receptor organs, do they merely express various physicochemical kinds of effects of
the outside world? Has the eye been shaped by light waves or by colors? Has the ear
been shaped by air waves or by tones? Is the nose a product of an air saturated with
gases and aroma-particles, or of the olfactory signs of the animal subject? Do taste
buds owe their origin to chemical substances dissolved in water or to the subject’s
taste signs? Are the receptor organs of animals the product of an outer physical
boundary or of an internal nonphysical perceptual boundary?

98
Jakob von Uexküll (1864–1944)
Because the sense organs of human beings are organs that connect the outer
boundary with the inner boundary, it is likely that they perform the same function
in animals as well; therefore their construction is due both to the outer and the inner
boundary. We cannot consider the receptor organs of animals as merely the product
of the outer boundary – proof for this statement is found in the case of ﬁsh, which
only come in contact with substances dissolved in water; nevertheless, they possess
a taste organ as well as a distinct organ of smell. Yet birds, which have the best
chance of developing both organs, do not have an organ of smell.
Only when we have clearly understood the problem of the sense organs will the
manner in which the whole organism is built become clear. At the outer bound-
ary, they serve as a gutter for the physico-chemical effects of the outside world.
Only such effects as hold meaning for the animal subject are transformed into nerve
impulses. In turn, the nerve impulses evoke the perceptual signs at the inner bound-
ary of the brain. In this manner the outer boundary also affects the inner boundary
and determines the number of visual, auditory, olfactory, tactile, and taste signs that
can appear in the perceptual circles of the respective animal subject. In this way the
structure of the Umwelts is built up, because each subject is only able to transform
the available perceptual signs into the perceptual cues [that inform] its Umwelt.
[. . .Accordingly,] the process by which the subject is progressively differenti-
ated from [the single notes of] cell-qualia, through to the melody of an organ, [and
ﬁnally] to the symphony of the organism, stands in direct contrast to all mechanical
processes, which consist of the [mere causally efﬁcient] action of one object upon
another. The former process is on the same plane as every musical composition.
The effect of the meaning-factors of plants and of the meaning-carriers of animals
on their meaning-utilizers demonstrates this point very clearly. As the two parts of
a duet must be composed in harmony – note for note, point for point – so in nature
meaning-factors are related contrapuntally to meaning-utilizers. The shaping of the
form of living beings will be more understandable only when we have succeeded in
deriving a theory of the composition of nature from it.
The Theory of the Composition of Nature
Nature offers us no theories, so the expression “a theory of the composition of
nature” may be misleading. By such a theory is only meant a generalization of the
rules that we believe we have discovered in the study of the composition of nature.
[Understood metaphorically,] the composition theory of music can serve as a
model; it starts from the fact that at least two tones are needed to make harmony. In
composing a duet, the two parts that are to blend into harmony must be written note
for note and point for point for each other. On this principle the theory of counter-
point in music is based. We must also look for two factors that form a unit in the
examples taken from nature. Therefore we always begin with a subject that ﬁnds
itself in its Umwelt (subjective universe) and we examine its harmonious relation-
ships with individual objects that have appeared as meaning-carriers to that subject.

2
The Theory of Meaning
99
The organized body (Organismus) of the subject represents the meaning-utilizer or,
at least, the meaning-receiver. If these two factors are joined by the same meaning,
then they have been jointly composed by nature. The content of the theory of the
composition of nature consists of the rules that govern such pairings.
When two living organisms enter a harmonious meaning relationship with each
other, we must ﬁrst decide which one of the two is to be designated as the subject and
meaning-utilizer, and which is to be assigned the role of the meaning-carrier. Next
we will have to look for their mutual properties that are related in the manner that
point and counterpoint are. If, in a given case, we know enough about the functional
circles (meaning-circles) that join a subject to its meaning-carrier, then we can look
for the counterpoint on the perceptual side as well as on the side of the effector. This
search will enable us to determine the special meaning rule that the composition has
followed.
. . .Let us take, as the ﬁrst example, the octopus, designated as the subject in
its relationship to sea-water as the meaning-carrier. We will immediately perceive
a contrapuntal relationship. The fact that water cannot be compressed is the pre-
condition for the construction of the octopus muscular swim-bag. The pumping
movements of the swim-bag have a mechanical effect on the noncompressible water
that propels the animal backwards. The rule that governs the properties of sea-water
acts upon the composition of the cells of protoplasm of the octopus embryo. It
shapes the melody of the development of the octopus form to express the prop-
erties of sea-water in a counterpoint; ﬁrst and foremost, an organ is produced whose
muscular walls force the water in and out. The rule of meaning that joins point and
counterpoint is expressed in the action of swimming.
The same meaning rule in numerous variations governs the development of the
living forms of all marine animals: Sometimes they swim forwards, sometimes
backwards, sometimes sideways; sometimes they propel themselves with wave-like
movements of the tail, sometimes by ﬁns, and sometimes by legs through the water;
but the characteristics of the organism bear the same relationship to the properties of
the water as point to counterpoint. In each case, the composition that has a common
meaning can be proven.
The same applies to all the various circles of the physical medium, whether the
animal lives in water, on the land, or in the air. In every case the effector organs for
running, jumping, climbing, ﬂuttering, ﬂying, or soaring are formed contrapuntally
to the properties of the respective medium. In the case of many insects that live in
the water when they are young and in the air when they are older, one can ascertain
in the second larval stage how easily the constitution-rule of the new medium causes
the initial organs to disappear and new ones to emerge. Inspection of the relationship
between the subject’s receptors and the medium teaches the same lesson. A sensory
organ formed as a counterpoint is always present when a subject meets an obstacle:
In the case of light it is the eye, and of darkness, tactile organs or the ear. From
the very beginning the bat, like the swallow, is equipped with different means to
perceive obstacles in its path of ﬂight.
These, you will reply, are nothing but banalities. Certainly they are everyday
experiences that can everywhere be seen. But why has one neglected to draw the

100
Jakob von Uexküll (1864–1944)
only possible conclusion from these experiences? Nothing is left to chance in nature.
In every instance a very intimate meaning rule joins the animal and its medium;
they are united in a duet, in which the two partners’ properties are contrapuntally
made for each other. . . The ﬁrst requirement necessary for a successful composi-
tion of nature is that the meaning-carrier stand out distinctly in the Umwelt of the
meaning-receiver. The most diverse perceptual cues can be used to attain this goal.
Fabre reports that the female emperor moth makes pumping movements with its
hindquarters in order to press its scent glands to the ground. The scent that rises up
from the ground is so potent in the male moth’s Umwelt that they are attracted to the
scented spot from all sides, and are not distracted by any other smells, all of which
sink beneath their perceptual threshold. The attraction of this smell is so strong that
when a female is placed in a glass case in the path of the males to make her visible
but odorless, they are not distracted [by her] from their efforts to reach the scented
ground: the meaning-carrier.
[. . .Likewise], inspection of the functional circles of enemy and food shows us
that their range knows no limits, and that the properties of the remotest objects can
be contrapuntally connected. I have already discussed the bridging of the constitu-
tion rule of the bat and the constitution rule of the night moth by the meaning rule.
On one side stands the bat as meaning-carrier, producing only one tone, and on the
other side stands the night moth, which can receive only one tone because of its
very specialized hearing organ. In both animals this tone is identical. The mean-
ing rule that has created this coordination consists of the relationship between the
enemy’s attack and its being warded off by the prey. The tone exists as a sign by
which bats recognize each other, while it also serves as a signal for the night moth
to escape. In the bat’s Umwelt it is a “friend-tone” and in the night moth’s Umwelt,
an “enemy-tone”. According to its different meanings, the same tone creates two
completely different hearing organs. Because the bat is able to hear many tones, its
ear is adapted to resonate broadly. However, it can only emit this one tone.
It would be equally interesting to trace the bridge formed between the tick and
the mammal by the use of the meaning rule. The tick sits motionless on the tip of
a branch until a mammal passes below it. The smell of the butyric acid awakens it
and it lets itself fall. It lands on the coat of its prey, through which it burrows to
reach and pierce the warm skin with its sting. It then pumps the liquid blood into
itself; it does not possess an organ of taste. The pursuit of this simple meaning rule
constitutes almost the whole of the tick’s life.
The deaf and blind tick is solely constituted to make every mammal in its Umwelt
appear as the same meaning-carrier. This meaning-carrier can be described as an
extremely simple mammal without the visible or audible properties that usually dif-
ferentiate the various species of mammals. For the tick, the meaning-carrier has only
one smell, which comes from the sweat common to all mammals. That meaning-
carrier is also tangible and warm, and allows itself to be bored into and to have
blood extracted from it. In this way it is possible to reduce all mammals – no mat-
ter how greatly they differ in shape, color, sound, and smell in our Umwelt – to a
common denominator. On approach, the properties of any mammal – be it a human,
a dog, a deer, or a mouse – contrapuntally activate the life-rule of the tick.

2
The Theory of Meaning
101
In our human Umwelt a mammal does not in itself appear as a vivid object, but
as a mental abstraction, a concept to be used to classify, not as an object we ever
encounter. The case of the tick is quite different. A vivid mammal exists in the tick’s
Umwelt that has a few properties capable of serving as counter-points and exactly
meeting the tick’s needs. . . .If one only searches for mechanical explanations, the
ﬁt of the hermit crab in the snail shell must rank as a special enigma. This ﬁtting-in
cannot be interpreted as a gradual adaption through any modiﬁcations in anatomy.
However, as soon as one gives up such fruitless endeavors and merely ascertains
that the hermit crab has developed a tail as a prehensile “organ to grasp snail shells,
not as a swimming organ, as other long-tailed crabs have, the hermit crab’s tail is
no more enigmatic than is the rudder-tail of the crayﬁsh.” The prehensile tail is
composed as a counterpoint to the snail shell, just as the rudder-tail of the crayﬁsh
is to the water.
Hertz (1937, 1939) made the interesting discovery that honey-collecting bees
are only able to differentiate between two shapes: open and closed ones. Beam-
shapes and polygons of every kind attract the bees, while closed shapes, like circles
and squares, repel them. The gestalt-theorists claim that the reason for this is that
the open shapes possess a greater stimulus-value. This point can be conceded to
them. But what does this idea mean? The answer becomes immediately apparent
the moment we say the following: All inaccessible buds, which the bees shun, have
closed shapes. Blossoms that offer them their honey have open shapes. Two spatial-
perceptual schemata for blossoms and buds are incorporated into the shape-forming
rule of bees because the collection of honey follows the meaning rule. In this man-
ner, the two schemata are ﬁrmly joined in counterpoint with the two principal shapes
of ﬂowers. But how does nature manage when an animal subject depends on dif-
ferentiating between shapes but possesses a very primitive central nervous system
incapable of forming shape-schemata?
The earthworm pulls linden or cherry tree leaves into its narrow hole. The leaves
simultaneously serve as food and protection. It grasps the leaves by their tips in
order to roll them up easily. If the earthworm were to try to grasp the leaves at
their base, they would resist being pulled and rolled. However, the earthworm’s
structure does not permit the formation of shape-schemata; to compensate for this
deﬁcit it possesses a particularly ﬁne sense organ for taste. We owe to Mangold9
the discovery that the earthworm can nevertheless distinguish between the pieces
that belong to the bases and those that belong to the tips of ﬁnely-chopped leaves.
The tips of the leaves do not taste the same to the earthworm as do their bases:
This distinction allows the worms to treat them separately. Taste perceptual cues,
acting as counterpoints, take the place of shape-schemata to make it possible for the
earthworms to pull in the leaves, an action that is essential for the survival of the
earthworms. In this example one can speak of nature’s reﬁned composition.
9 Otto August Mangold (born 1891), zoologist, student of Spemann, since 1946 head of the depart-
ment in Heiligenberg (Max Planck-Institut). He has been occupied, among other things, with
embryonal cells.

102
Jakob von Uexküll (1864–1944)
Experience has taught human anglers that, when angling for ﬁsh of prey, they do
not need to afﬁx an exact likeness of the prey to the hook. Rather it is enough to offer
the pike as bait a simple little silver plate that is a very general facsimile of white-
bait. Nature, however, does not need to be taught this lesson. Lophius piscatorius,
the angler-ﬁsh, is a wide-mouthed ﬁsh, next to whose upper lip is a long movable
bone that causes a silver band to ﬂutter. This band attracts smaller ﬁsh of prey that,
on snapping at this bait, are sucked into the wide mouth that suddenly produces
a whirlpool. The range of the meaning rule is further extended by this example,
because it does not connect the form-shaping rule of Lophius with its prey’s form-
shaping rule. The victims are themselves predators who respond to a very simpliﬁed
image (presented by Lophius) of their own prey in their Umwelt and are caught.
A similar example occurs in the case of those butterﬂies that are decorated with
spots resembling eyes. By opening their wings they chase away the small birds that
pursue them: These birds automatically ﬂyaway at the sight of the eyes of other
small predators that may suddenly appear. In the same way that Lophius is unaware
how the prey it catches looks in the Umwelt of the ﬁsh of prey, the butterﬂy does not
know that the sparrow ﬂees at the sight of a cat’s eyes. However, that which brings
these Umwelt-compositions into being exhibits an awareness of these facts.
The Tolerance of Meaning
We are already familiar with the example of the ﬂower stem and its transformation in
the four Umwelts of the girl, the ant, the cicada larva, and the cow. The ﬂower stem,
acting as a meaning-carrier, was in each instance confronted with a new meaning-
receiver that could also be described as a meaning-utilizer. The meaning-utilizer
used the ﬂower stem as decoration, as path, as supplier of material for the building
of a house, and as food, respectively. However, this example has another aspect to it
that becomes apparent when we substitute the whole plant for the ﬂower stem. The
whole plant then becomes a subject of the ﬂower stem and can be added to the pre-
vious four subjects, which become meaning-factors for the ﬂower-stem. The plant
cannot then be spoken about as a meaning-utilizer. The reception of meaning can
only be equated with a tolerance of meaning. This tolerance has various gradations.
The transformation of the stem into an ant-path is easy to tolerate. The extraction of
the sap for building the cicada larva’s house also causes only slight damage to the
plant. However, the picking of the ﬂower by the girl and the grazing of the cow can
be fatal for the plant.
In none of these four examples can a meaning rule that is in the plant’s interest
be discovered. The meaningful role of the spider’s web in the life of the ﬂy is in
no way in the ﬂy’s interest – in fact, it contradicts it. The ﬂy, entangled in the web,
cannot use this meaning-carrier in its Umwelt at all: it can only tolerate it. The pea-
beetle larva, having bored its tunnel through the pea in order to prepare in good
time for its future before the pea hardens, is confronted with the meaning-carrier
“ichneumon ﬂy”, and can only tolerate its assassin without being able to defend

2
The Theory of Meaning
103
itself. The signiﬁcance of these apparent contradictions of meaning is immediately
clariﬁed when we disregard the particular individual and consider only the species
as a whole.
The basis of all life is the submergence of the ephemeral individuals for the sake
of the long-lived species. The individuals of every generation mate in pairs to pro-
duce a new generation. The number of offspring always exceeds that of the parents.
In order to maintain the members of a species at the same number, the supernu-
merary ones must perish. Consequently, the same number of parents of the next
generation provides for the further propagation of the species. The elimination of
the excessive members occurs in many different ways. In the case of most species,
the duration of life of the individuals is determined by the change in seasons. Each
year all one-year-old individuals make way for the individuals of the next genera-
tion. Wasp colonies consisting of thousands upon thousands of individuals die out
completely every autumn. Only a few females hibernate and establish the same num-
ber of new colonies the next year. Our houseﬂies perish in the autumn; one would
think they had all died, and yet in the following spring, they appear in the same
numbers. The number of ﬂies that meet a premature end in the web of their enemy
– the spider – plays a minute role in the regulation of their population. Migration is
a great strain on birds; year after year it eliminates supernumerary individuals not
equal to the journey. The number of individuals is not the only important factor for
a species; their powers of resistance also play a role. Therefore we can recognize
that injury is tolerated because it eliminates weaker individuals so that they do not
produce weak offspring.
Hawks and foxes beneﬁt the species upon which they prey; they catch the weak
members of the species. When foxes are exterminated, rabbits perish in an epidemic
because those infected have not been eradicated in time. Sick animals are impeded
in their movements; therefore they have a particular attraction for their enemies.
Some birds take advantage of this fact. When the lapwing’s eggs are threatened by
the approach of an enemy, it does not simply ﬂyaway, but pretends to be lame. Its
apparent inability to ﬂy attracts its enemies and diverts them far enough away from
the nest, until it ﬂies away to complete safety. The ichneumon ﬂy pursues the pea-
beetle larva, thereby protecting the peas, which would otherwise be sacriﬁced by a
supernumerary number of the larvae.
. . .Australia provides us with a remarkable example of the importance of spe-
ciﬁc enemies for the fauna and ﬂora of a country. A hundred years ago, a South
American woman brought a cutting of a Barberry ﬁg cactus to Australia. It thrived
in its new homeland. It soon became apparent how useful the prickly plant was for
fencing in gardens and farms. The cactus was, therefore, planted everywhere. But it
transformed itself into a public menace. It spread over gardens and farms, although
it was supposed to be protecting them. It encroached upon forests and strangled all
plant life. The authorities intervened when wide areas of land were completely dev-
astated. With hoes and ﬁre they fought the new enemy. When these measures had no
effect, they scattered poison from aircraft on the forests overrun by the cactus. The
only result of this measure was that all the other plants totally perished but the cac-
tus continued to thrive. In their desperation, the authorities consulted the botanical

104
Jakob von Uexküll (1864–1944)
institutes of universities, who in turn dispatched a number of able researchers to the
cactus’s original homeland. These experienced observers succeeded in discovering
a small caterpillar, belonging to a species of moth, that feeds exclusively on the cac-
tus’s ﬂesh. After several years of experiments, millions of eggs of this enemy of the
cactus were bred. They were then scattered over the cactus deserts. Lo and behold,
within a few years, the cactus jungles were successfully destroyed and the land was
reclaimed for cultivation.
It is highly attractive to study the compositions of nature, and to determine the
meaning attributable to the tolerance of meaning. Two aspects of this problem must
be considered; ﬁrst, the tolerance of meaning lies behind the elimination of indi-
viduals in the interest of the species. In this way all unhealthy and less resistant
individuals are gotten rid of. Second, the removal of surplus individuals occurs in the
interest of the balance of nature. Von Baer10 believes that supernumerary gnat-larvae
and tadpoles serve ﬁsh as food. Spencer11 made a basic error when he interpreted
the destruction of supernumerary offspring as supporting the notion of the “survival
of the ﬁttest”, in order to support the theory of progress in the evolution of living
beings. The question is not the survival of the ﬁttest, but the survival of the normal
so as to further the existence of the species.
The Technics of Nature
It was, as far as I can recall, a Mahler symphony that Mengelberg ravishingly con-
ducted in the Amsterdam Konzertgebouw. The great orchestra, reinforced by a male
and female choir, rang out in overwhelming splendor and fullness. Next to me sat a
young man who was totally immersed in the score and who, with a sigh of satisfac-
tion, closed his copy of the music as the last chord died away. My lack of musical
knowledge made me ask him what pleasure he derived from following the writ-
ten notes with his eyes when his ear could perceive the musical tones directly. He
answered me with ardent zeal that only he who follows the score can obtain the
full conception of a musical work of art. He went on to explain that each voice,
whether human or instrumental, is a separate being that through point and coun-
terpoint melds with the other voices into a higher form. In its turn, this new form
continues to increase and grow in richness and beauty to form an entity that conveys
the mind of the composer to us. By reading the score; one may follow the growth
and distribution of the individual voices, which carry the score like pillars of a cathe-
dral support its all-embracing dome. Only in this way can an insight into the form of
a performed work of art be gained; its form is composed of many parts. The young
man’s answer was very convincing, and raised the question in me whether it is not
the task of biology to write a score of nature.
10 Karl Ernst von Baer (1792–1876), zoologist, originator of a modern theory of evolution that
differs from Darwin’s.
11 Herbert Spencer (1820–1903), philosopher, adherent of the biological theory of evolution.

2
The Theory of Meaning
105
I was already familiar with the contrapuntal relationships of Umwelt to Umwelt
at that time. I began to pursue further the example of the ﬂower stem and its relation-
ships with the four other Umwelts. The girl presented a bunch of ﬂowers to decorate
her beloved so the ﬂower stem entered into a love-duet. The ant used the stem as a
path and ran along it to the ﬂower pistils, there to milk its “dairy cows”, the aphids,
while the cow transformed the fodder that contained the stem into milk. The cicada
larva, having developed in its foam-house made from the sap of the stem, soon ﬁlled
the meadow with its soft love-chirp. Other Umwelts supervened. The bees, joined
in a counterpoint with the scent, color, and shape of the blossoms, ﬂew by. Having
saturated themselves with honey, they informed their hive-companions of the new
sources by way of impressive dances (described in detail by von Frisch12). The color
of the ﬂower, although not the same to the bees as it is to us, serves them, neverthe-
less, as a positive perceptual cue because the ﬂower and the bees are composed in
counterpoint to each other. Although this is a modest start, it is nonetheless a start
in solving the problem that the score of nature confronts us with.
. . .The task of animals and plants in the meadow is not only to display their col-
ors, sounds, and scents. These displays must ﬁrst appear in the Umwelts of other
animals and then be transformed into perceptual signs. The relationships of living
things can then be translated into a musical idiom; and we may speak about percep-
tual and effector tones of the various animal subjects that are joined to each other
in counterpoint. Only then can one arrive at nature’s score. In nature the perceptual
tones of various animals can be used as counterpoint: The tone that attracts bats in
the bat-Umwelt is at the same time a warning-tone in the Umwelt of the night moth.
The shell worn by the snail has a dwelling-quality for the snail. After the death of
the snail its empty shell remains behind to acquire a corresponding dwelling-quality
for the hermit crab. This unison of qualities is fully exploited in the snail-hermit
crab composition. . . .
The way a comparison to music can be made in the ﬁeld of biology is by expand-
ing the meaning of the word “tone” or quality: Mere [seeing-, touching-, smelling-
or] hearing-qualities become meaning-qualities of the objects, so that they appear
as meaning-carriers in the Umwelt of a subject. In its role as a counterpoint, the
shell’s dwelling-quality in the snail’s Umwelt and its dwelling-quality in the her-
mit crab’s Umwelt are mutually interchangeable, the implication being that each
one of the two qualities, although not identical with the other, can nevertheless be
adapted by one of nature’s compositions to become the other, because they share the
same meaning. Meaning in nature’s score serves as a connecting link, or rather as a
bridge, and takes the place of harmony in a musical score; it joins two of nature’s
factors. Every bridge has a support on each bank of a river; they are joined as point
and counterpoint to each other by the bridge. Point and counterpoint in music are
joined by the harmony and in nature by the same meaning. With numerous exam-
ples, enough to weary the reader, I have proved that such real factors exist in nature,
12 Karl von Frisch (born 1886), German zoologist honored with the Nobel Prize for his research
work with ﬁsh and bees.

106
Jakob von Uexküll (1864–1944)
and not merely [a human observer’s] logical constructs. We have now reached the
point where we may indicate that the meaning-score is a description of nature, just
as the score written in notes may be equated with description of music.
If we look at an orchestra, we can see that each individual instrument has a music
stand, upon which are found the written notes it will play. The complete score of
the work rests on the conductor’s desk. We can, however, also see the instruments
themselves, and we ask ourselves whether these instruments are possibly attuned to
each other by virtue not only of the respective tones they emit, but also of the manner
of their entire construction: that is, do they form not merely a musical but also a
technical unit? Because most of the instruments to be found in an orchestra are also
able by themselves to produce performances of musical compositions, this question
cannot immediately be answered in the afﬁrmative. Anyone who has listened to
clowns play music with instruments that otherwise are only used for making noise –
such as combs, cowbells, and the like – will be convinced that they can indeed
produce a cacophony but not a symphony with such an orchestra. If one inspects the
instruments of a real orchestra closely, one sees that even their structures are related
to each other as counterpoints. This point is even more evident in the orchestra of
nature as seen in a meadow: We need merely to think of the ﬂower in the four
Umwelts. The relationship between the structures of the ﬂower and of the bee is
most striking; in fact, one could say that:
If the ﬂower were not bee-like
And the bee were not ﬂower-like
The unison could never be successful.
Thereby, the fundamental theme of all the technics of nature is expressed. In this
statement we can recognize Goethe’s wisdom once again:
If the eye were not sun-like,
It could never behold the sun.
But now we can also complete the quotation from Goethe and say:
If the sun were not eye-like,
It could not shine in any sky.
The sun is a celestial light. However, the sky is a product of the eye; it establishes
its own furthest plane that embraces the dimensions of the Umwelt. Eyeless living
beings know neither sky nor sun.
The Counterpoint as the Motive for the Shaping of Form
We can now apply the technical basic rule (expressed in the bee’s “ﬂower-likeness”
and in the “bee-likeness” of the ﬂower) to other previously mentioned examples.
The spider’s web is certainly formed in a “ﬂy-like” manner, because the spider itself
is “ﬂy-like”. To be “ﬂy-like” means that the body structure of the spider has taken on
certain of the ﬂy’s characteristics – not from a speciﬁc ﬂy, but rather from the ﬂy’s
archetype. To express it more accurately, the spider’s “ﬂy-likeness” comes about

2
The Theory of Meaning
107
when its body structure has adopted certain themes from the ﬂy’s melody. The tick’s
body plan also expresses certain distinctive mammalian themes. The inﬂuence of
the bat’s theme in forming the night moth’s ear is the clearest example of the rule.
In each case, the counterpoint represents the theme in the structure. We should be
familiar with this point after considering the construction of the utensils we use.
The handle of a coffee-cup demonstrates without doubt the contrapuntal relation-
ship of the coffee and the human hand. These counterpoints are the main inﬂuences
on the themes for making the cup: They are indeed more important than the material
of which the cup is made. It sounds banal and self-evident to say that the coffee-cup
is “coffee-like”. However, this statement implies more than is initially apparent:
It implies that the cup performs its function by accommodating coffee, but also
that this performance was the theme for producing the cup. The theory of meaning
culminates in explicating this connection. The meaning to us of our household uten-
sils lies in their performance. Their performance can always be traced back to the
bridge that is built between our and the utensils’ counterpoints. At the same time,
the performance expresses the theme of this joining together. The chair is a seating
accommodation that rises from the ﬂoor, whose meaning lies in its being a number
of bridges to various counterpoints. Its seating surface, back and armrests ﬁnd their
counterpoint in the human body, to which they form bridges, while the legs of the
chair form distinct bridges to the counterpoint, ground. All these counterpoints are
simultaneous themes for the cabinet-maker in building the chair.
Time does not permit me to cite even more obvious examples. It should sufﬁce
to point out that with all our utensils we have built bridges between ourselves and
nature. In so doing, we have come no closer to nature; in fact, we have removed our-
selves from her. We have begun with ever-increasing speed to build these bridges
to other bridges by constructing simple machines, which cannot be disregarded by
man, if he wishes to remain close to nature. In the city we are exclusively surrounded
by artifacts. The trees and ﬂowers in our parks and gardens are removed and trans-
planted at will; we have torn them in toto from nature, and converted them into
utensils. The much-lauded human technology has lost all feeling for nature: Indeed,
it presumes to solve the most profound questions of life – such as the relationship
between man and god-like nature – with totally inadequate mathematics.
All this is incidental. It is much more important to gain an idea about the meth-
ods nature uses to evoke her creatures (which she does not make from individual
parts in the way we construct objects) from undifferentiated germ-plasma. Arndt’s
ﬁlm about the origin of the slime mold showed us that in its ﬁrst phase of life an
ever-increasing number of free-living cells are formed, built in counterpoint to their
bacterial food. After the food has been consumed, a new counterpoint steps in imme-
diately as a new theme, to transform the single cells by pushing them on top of each
other into tissue cells of a plant that is situated in the wind. If we look at the very
limited habitat of the slime mold, we ﬁnd that it lives in a ﬁlamentous form on a ball
of old horse dung and as a seed-carrier in the wind that scatters its seeds and is its
sole effective factor in nature. The seed-carrier and the seed-disperser play a duet
together. The free cells ﬁrst play a living chime with their identical-sounding ego-
qualities. Nature then plays with the single cells together and transforms them by

108
Jakob von Uexküll (1864–1944)
means of a new theme into tissue cells in order to construct a seed-carrying form that
presents itself to the wind. We ﬁnd this process just as mysterious as the change of
themes in a Beethoven sonata. However, our task is not to compose a nature sonata
but rather it is to write down its score.
We are still in the very early stages of asking such technical questions about the
vertebrates. The “bud-like” origin of the organ is bound to an elementary building-
plan, and the meaning of each bud is determined by its position in the whole
organism, so that its meaning is not lost, and it does not form structures in dupli-
cate. This determination is so certain that, as Spemann has shown, a graft of tadpole
epidermis becomes a tadpole mouth after being implanted into the location of the tri-
ton’s future mouth in the triton embryo: the score for the development for the frog’s
mouth was simultaneously transferred with the frog’s cells. A similar discrepancy
would ensue if one tore a sheet out of the music score containing the ﬁrst violin’s
part and put it into the corresponding place in the cello’s part. The tunnel-boring
activity of the pea-beetle larva tells us a great deal about the scores for the shaping
of form. In this example, the counterpoint that becomes the theme for the boring of
the tunnel is the shape of the fully-developed beetle, which only develops somewhat
later. The adult beetle would surely perish if it were not for the tunnel exit built by
the larva. The future form can, therefore, play the role of a theme in the development
of shape. This fact opens up further possibilities. If the future shape that is the goal
of development can itself become a theme, then von Baer is correct when he speaks
of goal-directedness in the origin of living creatures. However, he does not grasp all
the implications of his statement.
When the spider weaves its web, the various stages of the formation of the web,
such as the radial construction of its frame, can be described as the goal of and the
theme for forming the frame. The web itself can certainly be designated as the goal
of its forming that can in no way be attributed to the ﬂy. However, the ﬂy certainly
serves as the counterpoint and as the theme for forming the web. The accomplish-
ment of the boll-weevil is a striking example of the many puzzles with which the
technics of nature will continue to face us. Two partners confront each other in coun-
terpoint: the small weevil with a fret-saw as proboscis and the large birch leaf whose
fate it is to be sawn up. The saw must take such a direction that the weevil can later
easily roll the lower part of the leaf into a bag in which to lay its eggs. The path of
the saw has a characteristic curvature and remains the same for all weevils, although
its outline is not traced on the birch leaf. Is “the constancy of the path” the theme
that lies behind its trace?
The answer to this riddle is one of the secrets of nature’s composition, which we
encounter everywhere in our research on the technics of nature. The ﬁrst investi-
gator to busy himself with the problems of the technics of nature appears to have
been Lamarck.13 In any event, his experiment, in which he attempted to reconcile
13 Jean Baptiste Antoine Pierre De’ Monet de Lamarck (1744–1829), French zoologist who intro-
duced a new system into the animal kingdom. He developed the ﬁrst theory of evolution and
expounded the principles of acquired characteristics.

2
The Theory of Meaning
109
the origin of the giraffe’s long neck with the tall trunks of palm trees, contains the
ﬁrst reference to a contrapuntal relationship. Interest in the technics of nature later
disappeared completely and was replaced, mainly because of Haeckel,14 with spec-
ulations about the inﬂuence of ancestors on later generations. No one will be able to
acknowledge a technical achievement in the assertion that amphibians have resulted
from ﬁsh. The wishful thinking that so-called “rudimentary” organs exist has been
responsible for diverting attention from the truly technical problems that face liv-
ing creatures. Only the proof furnished by Driesch that two complete half-sized sea
urchins, and not two halves of a sea urchin, develop when a whole sea urchin embryo
is cut in two cleared the path for a deeper understanding of the technics of nature.
Everything that is physical – but not a melody – can be cut in two by a knife. The
melody of a song played by the free chime of living bells remains unchanged, even
if it directs only half the number of bells.
Progress
This time as I listened to St. Matthew’s Passion in beautiful St. Michael’s church
in Hamburg the biological parallels to music forced themselves upon me once
again. This supreme work interwoven with the most beautiful hymns proceeds in
the gravest, most fateful manner. However, this was certainly not the progression
that investigators in their phantasies attributed to the temporal progression of all
that occurs in nature. Why should the mighty drama of nature have unfolded on
earth since life ﬁrst appeared in a manner different from Bach’s Passion, which is
composed of high and low tones? Was the highly valued advance that is said to have
led living creatures from imperfect beginnings to increasingly higher perfection per-
haps nothing but a bourgeois speculation on the pragmatics of the market place? In
any event, no trace of their imperfection had ever occurred to me even in the case of
the simplest animals. As far as I could judge, the material available for building their
structure has always been exploited in the best possible way. Each animal has ﬁlled
its own stage of life with all the objects and fellow actors meaningful to its life. The
properties of the animal and the properties of its fellow actors harmonize in every
case like point and counterpoint of a polyphonic choir. It was as if the same master’s
hand had from time immemorial been gliding over the keys of life. One composition
followed the next without end – some of them difﬁcult, some easy, some splendid,
some dreadful.
Simple, but fully-developed crabs are to be found scurrying about in the ocean
tides that once completely covered the earth. After a long period of time had
elapsed, the rule of the cephalopodes came to an end when they were wiped out’
by the sharks. The Saurians emerged from the warm marshes of the mainland,
their gigantic bodies grotesque caricatures of life. The master’s hand, however,
continued to glide. New forms of untold varieties developed from the tree of life
14 Ernst Haeckel (1834–1919), German zoologist, follower of Darwin.

110
Jakob von Uexküll (1864–1944)
into new melodies without ever showing an improvement from the imperfect to
the more perfect. The Umwelts were certainly less complicated at the outset of
the world drama than later. However, each meaning-carrier was always confronted
with a meaning-receiver, even in those earlier Umwelts. Meaning ruled them all.
Meaning tied changing organs to a changing medium. Meaning connected food and
the destroyer of food, enemy and prey, and above all, male and female in astonish-
ing variations. In every case an advance occurred, but never progress in the sense of
the survival of the ﬁttest; never selection of the superior one, through an unplanned,
furious struggle for existence. Instead a melody prevailed, embracing both life and
death. . . .
I decided to present the following question to our greatest historian: “Has any
progress occurred in the history of human beings?”
Leopold von Ranke writes in his Epochs of Modern History:
If one wanted . . . to presume that progress consisted in the fact that the life mankind devel-
ops in each epoch to a higher level- that each generation, therefore, surpasses the previous
one in every way – the latest generation would as a result of progress always be the favored
one. The previous generations would, however, only be the load-carriers of the succeeding
generations – and that would be an injustice done by God. A mediatized (dismissed) gen-
eration of this kind would have no meaning in its own right: it would only have meaning
insofar as it would be a step upon which the succeeding generation raises itself in a manner
that bears no direct relation to the Divine. I assert, however: each epoch is close to God; its
value does not reside in what emerges from it, but rather lies in its own existence, in its own
self.
Ranke rejects the idea of progress in the history of mankind, because all epochs
can directly be traced back to God, and none, therefore, can be more perfect than the
previous one. What can we understand by an “epoch”, in Ranke’s sense of the word,
other than a homogenous group of human Umwelts within a limited period of time?
. . .A particular individual obtains a very small amount of matter from his parents
in the form of a germ-cell, itself capable of division, and a keyboard composed
of genes. With each cell division these genes are distributed in the same number
to the daughter cells. This keyboard is played upon by the form-shaping melodies
like the keys of a piano, in order to produce the development of form. Each gene
that is set into action acts as a differential stimulus to the protoplasm of its cells to
build structures. The form-shaping melodies that produce structure in this manner
derive their themes from the form-shaping melodies of other subjects, which they
encounter on their stage of life.
If the ﬂower were not bee-like,
And the bee were not ﬂower-like,
The unison would never be successful.
These themes at times derive from the food cycle, at other times from the enemy
cycle, and at still other times from the sex cycle. The form-shaping melody draws
most of its themes from the medium cycle, e.g., the structure of our eye is sun-
like and the construction of the maple leaf’s gutters, rain-like. Thanks to the fact
that extraneous themes are taken over, each subject’s body assumes the form of a
meaning-receiver for those meaning-carriers whose melodies are the themes that

2
The Theory of Meaning
111
determine its shape. The ﬂower is a collection of counterpoints that act upon the
bee; its form-shaping melody is rich in themes and has contributed to the shaping
of the bee, and vice versa. The sun, as the most important of nature’s components
for us, beams down on me from my sky only because it has been the main theme in
building of my eye’s structure.
The sun’s inﬂuence in forming the structure of an animal’s eye is just as great as
the sun appears to be to it. It may be large and radiant or small and insigniﬁcant in the
Umwelt-sky of the eye in whose formation it has taken great or little part (little, e.g.,
in the case of the mole’s eye). Let us now consider the moon instead of the sun: if
its meaning is relevant to an animal’s eye, then it will be a theme in the development
of that eye’s form. [Similarly], the meaning of mammals reaches into the tick’s
Umwelt: the melody of the development of mammalian shapes is the theme that
also inﬂuences the development of the tick’s shape. These themes are the smell of
butyric acid, the resistance of hair, and the warmth of and ease with which the skin
is pierced, That mammals have thousands of other characteristics is of no concern
to the tick. Only those characteristics that are common to all mammals appear as
themes in the building of the tick; they inﬂuence the structure of its perceptual and
also its effector organs.
We are always on the wrong track when we try to judge the world of animals by
the standards of our own world. I could, of course, claim that the whole of nature has
taken part in and has been the theme for the development of my personality, body,
and mind: if this were not so, I would lack the organs needed to recognize nature.
I can also express this point more modestly and state: I am a part of nature to the
extent that she has integrated me into one of her compositions. I am not a product
of all of nature, but only a product of human nature, beyond which I have not been
granted the powers to perceive. Just as the tick is only a product of tick nature, the
human being is tied to his human nature, from which every individual human being
begins anew.
The advantage we have over animals lies in the fact that we are able to extend
the range of our inborn human nature. Of course we cannot create new organs, but
we can assist the functions of our organs. We have developed perceptual aids and
effector tools that make us able providing we know how to use them – to broaden
and deepen our Umwelt. But we cannot go beyond the perimeter of our Umwelt.
Only when we recognize that everything in nature is created by its meaning, and
that all the Umwelts are but voices that take part in a universal score, will the way
be open to lead us out of the narrow conﬁnes of our own Umwelt.
Summary and Conclusion
. . .One should remember that the body of each being is made of living cells, which
together form a living chime. The living cell contains a speciﬁc energy that enables
it to answer every external effect with which it comes into contact with an ego-
quality. The qualities can be joined with each other through melodies; they can
inﬂuence each other despite the fact that they may not be in mechanical contact.

112
Jakob von Uexküll (1864–1944)
The bodies of most animals are basically similar in that they have organs needed for
the metabolism of food; energy obtained from food makes the animal’s life-tasks
possible. Perception and action are the life tasks of the animal subject acting as a
meaning-receiver.
Perception depends on the sense organs, which serve to sort out the stimuli that
impinge on them from all sides. They screen out the unnecessary stimuli, and trans-
form those that are of use to the body into nerve impulses. When these impulses have
reached the brain, the living chime of the brain cells resounds. The ego-qualities
of the chime serve as perceptual signs for outer events. They are imprinted upon
the respective sources of the stimuli as corresponding perceptual cues, no matter
whether they are sound, visual, smell, or other signs. At the same time, the cell
“bells” resound in the organ of perception and in the central effector organ, which
in turn translates its own ego-qualities into impulses that activate and direct the
movements of the effector muscles. Therefore, a kind of musical process is set in
motion by the properties of the meaning-carrier, to which it is led back. And one
can conceive of the receptor and the effector organs of the meaning-receiver as
counterpoints that correspond to the meaning-carrier’s properties. One is persuaded
anew that most animal subjects possess an intricate anatomy – the prerequisite for
smoothly bridging the gap between them and the meaning-carrier.
The structure of the animal’s body is never preformed. The body begins its devel-
opment as a single cell – a bell – that divides, and whose ontogenetic chime is
attuned to a developmental melody. How does it come to pass that two objects
such as a bumble-bee and the ﬂower of a snapdragon, whose origins are so dif-
ferent, are constructed in such a way that they harmonize perfectly in every detail?
Apparently, their developmental melodies mutually inﬂuence each other; the snap-
dragon’s melody appears as a theme in the bumble-bee’s developmental melody,
and vice versa. What holds true for the bee is also true for the bumble-bee; its
development would be unsuccessful if its body were not “ﬂower-like.”
Once this cardinal principle of nature’s technique is understood, we can state
that no progression occurs from the less to the more perfect. Because if a vari-
ety of themes of meaning extraneous to the animal inﬂuence its development, it
is impossible to see how successive generations could alter this situation. Having
eschewed speculations about the ancestry (of living things), we are on ﬁrmer ground
in studying nature’s techniques. Yet a major disappointment awaits us. The triumphs
of nature’s techniques are readily apparent, but the manner in which its melodies are
created cannot be [directly] investigated.
Nature’s techniques share common features with the creation of a work of art. We
can, of course, see the painter’s hand apply one color after the other to the canvas
until he has completed the painting, but the creative melody that moves his hand is
wholly hidden from us. We can certainly understand how a musical clock produces
its melodies but we can never understand how a melody constructs such a clock.
That is exactly the question that the creation of every living being poses. Every
germ cell contains the requisite material, and the keyboard is represented by the
genes. Only the melody that brings about the organisms’s construction is missing:
From whence does it come?

2
The Theory of Meaning
113
Every musical clock contains a cylinder, from which spikes protrude. As the
cylinder turns, these spikes strike strips of metal of different lengths to set the air
vibrating; our ears perceive these vibrations as tones. By observing the position of
the spikes on the cylinder, a musician will easily be able to recognize the score of
the melody the clock plays. Let us for a moment forget that the clock was made
by human hands, and let us assume that it is a product of nature. We could then
state that we are presented with the physical embodiment in three dimensions of
a score that has crystallized out of the melody: The melody represents the clock’s
“germ of meaning” (Bedeutungskeim), provided that enough adaptive material is at
hand. . .Meaning is a decisive factor in nature; it appears always, often in novel and
surprising guises.
Let us allow the Umwelts [of other creatures] to pass in review before our mind’s
eye. We will observe wondrous forms in the gardens that surround the bodies that
house the subject; these forms are the meaning-carriers, whose meaning is often very
difﬁcult to divine. We will therefore have the impression that the meaning-carriers
represent a secret sign or symbol that members of the same species can understand,
but that those of another species cannot comprehend. The silhouette of, and the
water currents produced by, the fresh-water mussel are the love symbols of the
bitterling. The earthworm uses the difference in the taste of the tips and stalks of
leaves as a symbol of their shapes. The same tone symbolizes “friend” to a bat but
“foe” to a night moth. And so on . . . and on.
Once we are ﬁnally convinced by an overwhelming number of examples that each
Umwelt is at base ﬁlled only with meaningful symbols, then a second even more
astonishing fact forces itself upon us: Each subject’s symbol is at the same time
a meaningful theme for the structure of the subject’s body. The body that houses
the subject on the one hand produces the symbols that populate the surrounding
garden and is, on the other hand, the product of these very same symbols that are
the meaningful themes in constructing it. The sun owes its shine and its form high
up in the sky that extends over the garden to the eye, as the window of the body
that houses ourself. At the same time, the sun is the theme guiding the construction
of the window. This principle applies to both animal and man; the same factor of
nature manifests itself in both cases.
Let us assume that some natural phenomenon has caused all the night moths
to die out. With the help of nature’s techniques, we are now faced with the task
of correcting this gap in nature’s keyboard. How would we proceed? We would
probably retrain a day moth to search out ﬂowers that are open during the night; it
would also have to develop its sense of smell at the expense of its sense of vision.
The newly-trained moth would, however, be defenseless against ﬂying bats. We
would have to devise a sign that would identify the predator, so that the major-
ity of moths could evade it in good time. We would use the squeak of the bat,
which is a friendly signal to other bats, as an inimical sign for the moth. The moth
would have to be rebuilt and provided with a hearing device to enable it to per-
ceive the bat’s squeak. This sign would then enter as a theme in the construction
of the bat.

114
Jakob von Uexküll (1864–1944)
If the night moth were not ‘bat-like’,
Its life would soon end.
One can imagine that the tick came about to close a gap in nature’s keyboard.
If so, the meaning-carrier that has general mammalian characteristics would at the
same time symbolize “prey” and be a theme in the plan for constructing the tick.
Finally, we will attempt to take a look from outside at our own body, which is
like a house with its surrounding garden. We now know that our sun in our sky
and our garden, full of ﬂowers, animals, and people, are but symbols of an all-
encompassing symphony or composition of nature, which ranks all things according
to their signiﬁcance and meaning.
This overview deﬁnes the boundaries of our world. The development of progres-
sively more reﬁned machines and equipment, with which to investigate objects, will
not enable us to develop new sense organs. The properties of objects, even when
analyzed into their constituent atoms and electrons, will continue to remain sensory
and perceptual cues.
When we die, our sun, sky, and earth will vanish; but they will continue to exist
in a similar form in the Umwelts of succeeding generations. There are not only the
two varieties of space and time, in which objects are distributed. There is also the
variety of Umwelts, in which objects assume a multiplicity of ever new and different
forms. At this third level, the countless Umwelts represent the keyboard upon which
nature plays its symphony of meaning, which is not constrained by space and time.
In our lifetime and in our Umwelt we are given the task of constructing a key in
nature’s keyboard, over which an invisible hand glides.
Translators
Streifzüge durch die Umwelten von Tieren und Menschen (1934) Translated by Claire H. Schiller
(1957)
Bedeutungslehre (1940) Translated and footnoted annotation by Barry Stone and Herbert Weiner
(1982)

Chapter 3
The Logic of Signs
Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914)
Introduction and Commentary: Charles Sanders Peirce
I have formed the opinion that the proper sphere of any science in a given stage of devel-
opment is the study of such questions as one social group of men can properly devote their
lives to answering; and it seems to me that in the present state of our knowledge of signs,
the whole doctrine of the classiﬁcation of signs and of what is essential to a given kind of
sign, must be studied by one group of investigators.
C.S. Peirce (CP 4.9, c. 1906)1
For very many biosemioticians – and certainly for Thomas A. Sebeok, who
would lay the foundations for what would become the contemporary project of
biosemiotics in the 1970s – the lifelong investigation into “the logic of signs” under-
taken by scientist and philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce serves as a model for
those wishing to begin the investigation into the bio-logic of sign relations in living
systems.
Peirce’s biographer Joseph Brent tell us that Charles Sanders Peirce “was a
singular man: a prodigious, protean, brilliant and productive intellect who lived a
humiliating and tragic life” (Brent 2000:1). And while Peirce’s contributions to sign
logic are what have earned him his singular place in the history of biosemiotics,
it will do well to devote just our ﬁrst two pages here to detailing the circumstances
under which Peirce pursued that work, for without this backstory, the relative obscu-
rity of a man who contributed so much to so many different branches of science –
and whose scientiﬁc innovations are only coming to be appreciated now – will
remain enigmatic.
Born in Cambridge, Massachusetts on September 10, 1839, Charles Sanders
Peirce was the second son of Benjamin Peirce (1809–1880), a pioneering pro-
fessor of mathematics and astronomy at Harvard University who helped found
both the Smithsonian Institute and the National Academy of Sciences. Growing
1 Peirce’s words are cited throughout this volume by using the standard notation employed by
Peirce scholars and codiﬁed by the Peirce Edition Project, which is in charge of preparing the
deﬁnitive scholarly editions of Peirce’s work. The abbreviations used throughout this volume are
the standard ones employed in Peirce scholarship: CP refers to the Collected Papers (volume and
paragraph); while EP refers to the Essential Peirce (volume and page).
115
D. Favareau, Essential Readings in Biosemiotics, Biosemiotics 3,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9650-1_3, C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010

116
Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914)
up in a university-centered neighborhood which included his contemporaries and
future colleagues William James (1842–1910), Chauncey Wright (1830–1875), and
Oliver Wendell Holmes (1841–1935), Peirce inherited his father’s deep love of
mathematics, and his conviction that its applicability in science was an expression
of the natural world’s continuity with, and ultimately knowability by, human beings
(1889:2974).
Peirce was an impulsive and impatient student, however, and suffered since his
youth from the debilitatingly painful neurological disease of trigeminal neuralgia.
This condition, in turn, led to a lifetime of drug dependence that, in combination
with the incessant pain from the neuralgia, either caused or exacerbated a lifetime
of severe manic depression. Moreover, as a student at Harvard University, Peirce
was apparently both arrogant and rebellious, alienating his chemistry professor, Dr.
Charles W. Eliot (1834–1926) to such an extent that Eliot – who later became pres-
ident of Harvard (1869–1909) and a major ﬁgure in American academia for the
entire period that covered what would have been Peirce’s working years – took every
opportunity presented to him to see to it that Peirce would never gain employment
within American academia (Brent 2000: 108–111, 245, 280).
According to Peirce’s biographer, Eliot was joined in this effort by the
astronomer Simon Newcomb (1835–1909) who – apparently, out of personal ani-
mosity, but ostensibly “outraged” at Peirce’s “public immorality of living with a
woman to whom he was not yet married” during his brief post-graduate employ-
ment as part-time lecturer at Johns Hopkins University – also played an active role
in repeatedly sabotaging Peirce’s grant application, publication and employment
opportunities (Brent 2000: 150–155, 245, 280).
Peirce graduated from Harvard without distinction in 1859, going on to study
natural history and paleontology at Cambridge. He later returned to Harvard to
do post-graduate work in chemistry, where he eventually earned the school’s ﬁrst
summa cum laude Bachelor’s Degree in that discipline. During this time, Peirce
also began working for the United States Coast Survey as a geodesist and gravi-
metrician this was the work that would provide the main source of his increasingly
meager income for the rest of his life (though also toiled brieﬂy at the Harvard
Astronomical Observatory from 1869 to 1872, where he produced the world’s ﬁrst
photometric star catalogue, establishing each star’s relative brightness magnitude).
For the majority of the ﬁfty-ﬁve years of his life after graduation from university,
however, Peirce was effectively blackballed from academia, and supported himself
by writing dictionary and encyclopedia entries, as well articles on logic and general
scientiﬁc topics for venues such as Popular Science. He became almost a complete
recluse, and for the last two decades of his life, he and his wife were virtually pen-
niless, and often bereft of both heat and food. They were kept alive by aid from
Peirce’s older brother, James Mills Peirce (1934–1906), from neighbors who took
pity upon them, and from Peirce’s only two genuine friends and benefactors, the
philosophers Lady Victoria Welby (1837–1912) and William James (1842–1910).
Peirce died on April 19, 1914 – leaving behind over 80,000 pages of unpublished
manuscript containing the record of his solitary lifetime’s worth of investigation into
logic, mathematics, philosophy and the nature of signs.

3
The Logic of Signs
117
The manuscript pages that Peirce left behind have a fascinating history of
their own, well recounted in Houser (1992). Neglected for decades, partially and
incoherently re-assembled in the 1930s, and still not fully catalogued, the ongoing
re-discovery of those manuscripts’ contents in the last three decades constitutes one
of the great intellectual re-awakenings in our lifetime. In them, the neglected and
often despised Peirce is revealed to be “the ﬁrst modern experimental psycholo-
gist in the Americas, the ﬁrst metrologist to use a wavelength of light as a unit of
measure, the inventor of the quincuncial projection of the sphere, the ﬁrst known
conceiver of the design and theory of an electric switching-circuit computer, and
the founder of ‘the economy [method] of research’” (Fisch 1981:17).
“In the extensiveness and originality of his contributions to mathematical logic,
Peirce is almost without equal,” writes Robert Burch in the entry on Peirce in
the 2008 Stanford Encylopedia of Philosophy. Peirce “introduced the material-
conditional operator into logic,” notes Burch, “developed the Sheffer stroke and
dagger operators 40 years before Sheffer, and developed a full logical system based
only on the stroke function. As Garret Birkhoff notes in his Lattice Theory, it was
in fact Peirce who invented the concept of a lattice around 1883” (ibid). Moreover,
notes Birkhoff:
Peirce was one of the ﬁrst scientiﬁc thinkers to argue in favor of the actual existence of inﬁ-
nite sets . . . invented dozens of different systems of logical syntax, including a syntax based
on a generalization of de Morgan’s relative product operation, an algebraic syntax that mir-
rored Boolean algebra to some extent, a quantiﬁer-and-variable syntax that (except for its
speciﬁc symbols) is identical to the much later Russell-Whitehead syntax. He even invented
two systems of graphical two-dimensional syntax . . . framed an updated conception of
continua that seems to embrace Cantor’s Paradox but to avoid the outright contradiction
. . .published a long paper “Description of a Notation for the Logic of Relatives” in which
he introduced for the ﬁrst time in history, two years before Frege’s Begriffschrift, a complete
syntax for the logic of relations of arbitrary adity . . . [created a] logical system that became
the basis for Ernst Schroeder’s great three-volume treatise on logic, the Vorlesungen ueber
die Algebra der Logik . . . and by 1883, along with his student O. H. Mitchell, Peirce had
developed a full syntax for quantiﬁcational logic that was only a very little different (as was
mentioned just above) from the standard Russell-Whitehead syntax, which did not appear
until 1910 (yet with no adequate citations of Peirce). . . . Peirce [has since become] widely
regarded as the greatest logician of his day. But by all who are familiar with his work, he is
considered one of the greatest logicians who ever lived. (Burch 2008:o.l.)
Mathematician, chemist, geodesist, and philosopher, Peirce understood him-
self primarily as a logician, claiming that from the time he read Bishop Richard
Whately’s (1787–1863) Elements of Logic at age twelve, he “could no longer think
of anything except in terms of logic” (EP1:xxix). Indeed, it is precisely Peirce’s
“sign logic” that is of such value to biosemioticans. For as Peirce scholars Nathan
Hauser and Christian Kloesel remind us in their introduction to the ﬁrst volume
of the collected writings The Essential Peirce: “Although Peirce’s many contri-
butions to ‘technical’ logic – including his 1881 axiomatization of the natural
numbers, his 1885 quantiﬁcation theory and introduction of truth-functional anal-
ysis, and his lifelong development of the logic of relations – have considerable
importance for the foundations of mathematics, Peirce’s main concern was to build

118
Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914)
an adequate theory of science and an objective theory of rationality” (EP1: xxx,
italics mine).
For Peirce, formal logic was merely one derivative and evolutionarily late version
of an all-encompassing “sign logic” by which any organism (or system) “capable of
learning by experience” comes to know the world.2 Thus, it is as only as a means
towards the accomplishment of his over-arching lifetime’s project of developing
a semeiotic – or “theory of signs” – that his pragmaticism (theory of meaning),
his fallibilism (theory of knowledge), his tychism (doctrine of natural chance), his
synechism (doctrine of natural continuity), his agapsim (doctrine of evolutionary
agency), and his epistemological and ontological categories of generative and inter-
dependent being arise and have their place. For these are all mere elements of
Peirce’s singular and lifelong effort to discover and to systematize that logic of rela-
tions that would “have to be the case” in order for the logic of our inquiry to be
able result in veridical knowledge about the logic of the natural world into which it
inquires.
Since the intellectual re-discovery of Peirce in 1980s, the amount of scholar-
ship on his life and thought has multiplied – and continues to multiply – at a
such a rate that ‘Peirce scholar’ is a now a recognized professional designation
in academia – perhaps ironically enough, given the history of Peirce’s struggles
in this regard during his lifetime. Yet with the existence of over 80,000 pages of
published and manuscript writings extant, and already hundreds of recent volumes
dedicated to examining his deeply complex work, it would be both presumptuous
and counter-productive to try to offer any but the most cursory overview of what is
an often daunting system of thought. Nor does any one of Peirce’s published papers,
which are ultimately but fragments of his ever-evolving logical system, in itself
offer sufﬁciently full insight into the applicability of Peirce’s semiotic for modern-
day biologists. Like any other scientiﬁc paper, they are not written to “stand alone”
but to be read as part of an ongoing investigation into an external system that will
continue to reveal new levels of complexity, and new levels of our current state of
ignorance, as the very result of our progress in correctly understanding it.3
2 A recurrent problem in understanding Peirce’s formulations before one has grasped the logic of
his overall system is exhibited by just this statement, which, if read naively, may give the mistaken
impression that Peirce’s sign logic is essentially “cognitive”. In Peirce’s system of signs, however,
terms like “knowing”, “cognition” and “mind” take on technical meanings so far beyond their
more circumscribed conventional usage, that one can only proceed with providing introductory
explanations of his work knowing that the more sophisticated understandings cannot be introduced
until later. Thus, the preceding formulation could have more accurately been written as: “. . .a sign
logic by which any mode of being capable of taking habits comes to participate effectively in
making the supra-sensible at least potentially sensible.” But that is not the way to begin discussing
Peirce if one wants to cultivate a hearing for his views, I have discovered (which is why several of
his seminal but denser writings, such as his “On a New List of Categories” (1867), have not been
included here).
3 The “Further Readings” section at the end of this volume is intended to provide sufﬁcient enough
guidance to the major introductory materials, so as to lead unto a lifetime of Peirce study, for those
so inspired. At the minimum, the two-volume Essential Peirce anthology assembled by the scholars
at the University of Indianapolis’ Peirce Edition Project includes those major texts by Peirce with

3
The Logic of Signs
119
Indeed, the “key to unlocking Peirce” – and to understanding the precise value
of his role today in contemporary biosemiotics – is well-captured in the words of
Peirce scholar T.L. Short, who explains why Peirce’s architectonic of sign logic is
fundamentally a scientiﬁc, rather than a philosophic, undertaking, and how it was
designed to be so by the logician Peirce. Unlike the grand pronouncements of the
armchair philosopher, writes Short:
Peirce’s theses are like hypotheses in natural science: based on observations, they are
nonetheless not fully justiﬁed by observations already made, but must prove themselves
by their fruitfulness to further research, in competition with alternative hypotheses . . .
Indeed, no philosopher was ever more besotted with science than Peirce, who made phi-
losophy itself a science, or a set of sciences, to be pursued in relation to the other sciences.
[It is for this reason that] Peirce wrote philosophy like a scientist, setting out ideas not
intended as ‘ﬁnal’ – but to be applied and developed, perhaps by others. The arguments for
those ideas appear not just wholly on the page, but consists, instead, in what can be done
with them – just as Peirce’s pragmatism implies (2007: 307, 65, xii, penultimate italics
added).
In short, Peirce left behind a library’s worth of writing – but not as philosophical
dogma that he wished others to uncritically defend. Instead, like the scientist that
he was, Peirce struggled in his work to make ever more precise and usable a coher-
ent set of hypotheses for the explication and investigation of the systemic relations
constituting sign logic of any kind. But this investigation, like all such genuinely
knowledge-bearing investigation, could only be completed, Peirce understood by a
community of scholars actively working on (which necessitates reﬁning, changing,
and replacing) the hypotheses over time. “The real, then,” writes Peirce, “is that
which, sooner or later, information and reasoning would ﬁnally result in, and which
is therefore independent of the vagaries of me and you. Thus, the very origin of the
conception of reality shows that this conception essentially involves the notion of a
community, without deﬁnite limits, and capable of a deﬁnite increase of knowledge”
(CP 5.311, 1868, emphasis in the original).
Accordingly, only by attempting to apply Peirce’s hypotheses to the concrete
instances of sign logic observable in language, in animal communication, and even
in the intercellular signals that hold organisms together coherently – and that, on a
much more complex and reafferent level, allow for the emergence of “thought” in
human beings – can biosemiotics determine how much of nature’s bio-logic is accu-
rately captured by, and therefore made amenable to, further knowledge-generating
investigation by Peirce’s sign logic. Indeed, in this volume alone, the reader will
ﬁnd biosemioticians using Peircean tools of analysis to provide explanatory frame-
works for such variegated biological phenomena as genetic expression (Queiroz
et al.), animal behavior (Morris), ﬁrst-person experience (Brier) and the emergence
of symbolic thought and language (Deacon).
For as contemporary biosemioticians undertake the project to understand and
explain the manifold of sign relations occurring in the natural world, it becomes
which all biosemioticians should at least be conversant, whether or not one wants to adopt the
Peircean approach to biosemiotics.

120
Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914)
all too readily apparent that contemporary biology has as yet no useable vocabu-
lary – much less a ﬁrm conceptual framework – for talking about signs as signs on
any of the manifold biological levels whereupon signs processes appear. Creating
such explanatorily viable vocabulary – and developing such scientiﬁcally applica-
ble frameworks – for empirical biology constitute the two main (and, of course,
inherently interconnected) tasks of biosemiotics today. It is the nature of these tasks
that they require new conceptual tools that can work within the massively success-
ful intellectual ediﬁce that is contemporary science – a science that, quite rightfully,
awaits convincing evidence of the viability of their use.
The language of semiotics – “message”, “sign of”, “representation”, “codes”,
“communicates”, “signals”, “displays”, “signiﬁes”, “informs”, etc. – runs inelim-
inably throughout the many related disciplines comprising biology, and yet a uniﬁed
scientiﬁc framework for understanding the underlying phenomenon that these terms
refer to is still at this time lacking, as was discussed in some detail in the introduction
to this volume and is alluded to, in one sense or another, by virtually all the subse-
quent texts, as well. Terrence Deacon’s selection in this volume (Chapter Eighteen),
however, provides a sterling example of how Peirce’s icon, index and symbol distinc-
tion is one just such example wherein whole generations of misunderstanding and
confusion about “signs” (e.g., as a general synonym for what are at best sign vehi-
cles – a conﬂation that does therefore not allow us to distinguish between the ‘brute
perceptual’, the ‘reliably associative’, and the maximally ﬂexible virtual levels of
sign relations used by living organisms to detect, categorize, and act appropriately
upon the world) can be helpfully surmounted, and real advancement in our scientiﬁc
understandings can be made.
Like all such tools and scientiﬁc instruments, whether material or formal, how-
ever, genuine advance and creativity comes not with the mere mindless application
of the tool, but with discovering new ways in which such tools can be made or mod-
iﬁed to yield veridical new useable insights. Charles Sanders Peirce famously wrote
that he considered himself “a pioneer, or rather a backwoodsman, in the work of
clearing and opening up what I call semiotic, that is, the doctrine of the essential
nature and fundamental varieties of possible semiosis” (CP 5.488). He also noted,
close to the end of his life, and in a part of the same quotation that is often deleted,
“I ﬁnd the ﬁeld too vast, the labor too great, for a ﬁrstcomer” such as himself (ibid).
Peirce’s plaintive quote recalls that of another pioneering scientist, Nobel Prize
winning physicist Max Born (1882–1970), who reminds us that “there is no philo-
sophical high-road in science, with epistemological signposts. No, we are in a
jungle, and we ﬁnd our way by trial and error, building our roads behind us as
we proceed. Indeed, we do not ﬁnd sign-posts at cross-roads, but our own scouts
erect them, to help the rest” (1943: 44). As was the case with many of his innova-
tions in mathematics, geodesy, and technical logic, it has taken almost a century for
the path that Peirce was blazing to be rediscovered, and for the tools that he had
fashioned for doing so, to be taken up once again. Accordingly, the present volume
itself may be seen as conﬁrmation of the quote that Peirce scholar David Savan
opens his monograph on Peirce’s sign logic: “When the materials are all prepared
and ready, the architects will appear” (Whitman, Leaves of Grass).

3
The Logic of Signs
121
The Logic of Signs: Selections from the Writings
of Charles Sanders Peirce
From: Logic as Semiotic: The Theory of Signs (1893–1910 )4
I. What Is a Sign? Three Divisions of Logic
Logic, in its general sense, is, as I believe I have shown, only another name for semi-
otic (σημειωτικ´η), the quasi-necessary, or formal, doctrine of signs. By describing
the doctrine as “quasi-necessary,” or formal, I mean that we observe the characters
of such signs as we know, and from such an observation, by a process which I will
not object to naming Abstraction, we are led to statements, eminently fallible and
therefore in one sense by no means necessary, as to what must be the characters of
all signs used by a “scientiﬁc” intelligence, that is to say, by an intelligence capa-
ble of learning by experience. As to that process of abstraction, it is itself a sort of
observation. The faculty which I call abstractive observation is one which ordinary
people perfectly recognize, but for which the theories of philosophers sometimes
hardly leave room.
It is a familiar experience to every human being to wish for something quite
beyond his present means, and to follow that wish by the question, “Should I wish
for that thing just the same, if I had ample means to gratify it?” To answer that
question, he searches his heart, and in doing so makes what I term an abstractive
observation. “He makes in his imagination a sort of skeleton diagram, or outline
sketch, of himself, considers what modiﬁcations the hypothetical state of things
would require to be made in that picture, and then examines it, that is, observes what
he has imagined, to see whether the same ardent desire is there to be discerned.”
By such a process, which is at bottom very much like mathematical reasoning,
we can reach conclusions as to what would be true of signs in all cases, so long as the
intelligence using them was scientiﬁc. The modes of thought of a God, who should
possess an intuitive omniscience superseding reason, are put out of the question.
Now the whole process of development among the community of students of those
formulations by abstractive observation and reasoning of the truths which must hold
good of all signs used by a scientiﬁc intelligence is an observational science, like any
other positive science, notwithstanding its strong contrast to all the special sciences
4 This ﬁrst section entry is a compilation of Peirce’s writing on sign logic that has traditionally
been found to be a clear and helpful starting point for those coming fresh to the study of Peirce.
It was compiled and titled by Justus Buchler in the volume entitled The Philosophical Writings
of Peirce (New York: Dover, 1955). Buchler details the sources: “The ﬁrst of the three selections
in I is from MS c. 1897 (CP 2.227–9), the third from MS. c. 1910 (CP 2.231–2). The second
selection in I, IIIb, the second selection in IIIc, and IIId are from MSs. c. 1902, c. 1895, and c. 1893
(CP 2.274–302). II is from ms. c. 1903 (CP 2.243–52,254–65). IIIa is from the article “Sign” in
Baldwin’s Dictionary of Philosophy and Psychology 1902 (CP 2.304). The ﬁrst selection in IIIc is
from the article “Index” in Baldwin (CP 2.305, 306).”

122
Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914)
which arises from its aiming to ﬁnd out what must be and not merely what is in the
actual world.
A sign, or representamen, is something which stands to somebody for something
in some respect or capacity. It addresses somebody, that is, creates in the mind of
that person an equivalent sign, or perhaps a more developed sign. That sign which
it creates I call the interpretant of the ﬁrst sign. The sign stands for something, its
object. It stands for that object, not in all respects, but in reference to a sort of idea,
which I have sometimes called the ground of the representamen. “Idea” is here to
be understood in a sort of Platonic sense, very familiar everyday talk; I mean in that
sense in which we say that one man catches another man’s idea, in which we say
that when a man recalls what he was thinking of at some previous time, he recalls
the same idea, and in which when a man continues to think anything, say for a tenth
of a second, in so far as the thought continues to agree with itself during that time,
that is to have a like content, it is the same idea, and is not at each instant of the
interval a new idea.
In consequence of every representamen being thus connected with three things,
the ground, the object, and the interpretant, the science of serniotic has three
branches. The ﬁrst is called by Duns Scotus grammatica speculativa. We may term
it pure grammar. It has for its task to ascertain what must be true of the repre-
sentamen used by every scientiﬁc intelligence in order that they may embody any
meaning. The second is logic proper. It is the science of what is quasi-necessarily
true of the representamina of any scientiﬁc intelligence in order that they may hold
good of any object, that is, may be true. Or say, logic proper is the formal science
of the conditions of the truth of representations. The third, in imitation of Kant’s
fashion of preserving old associations of words in ﬁnding nomenclature for new
conceptions, I call pure rhetoric. Its task is to ascertain the laws by which in every
scientiﬁc intelligence one sign gives birth to another, and especially one thought
brings forth another.
A Sign, or Representamen, is a First which stands in such a genuine triadic rela-
tion to a Second, called its Object, as to be capable of determining a Third, called
its Interpretant, to assume the same triadic relation to its Object in which it stands
itself to the same Object. The triadic relation is genuine, that is its three members
are bound together by it in a way that does not consist in any complexus of dyadic
relations. That is the reason the Interpretant, or Third, cannot stand in a mere dyadic
relation to the Object, but must stand in such a relation to it as the Representamen
itself does. Nor can the triadic relation in which the Third stands be merely similar
to that in which the First stands, for this would make the relation of the Third to
the First a degenerate Secondness merely. The Third must indeed stand in such a
relation, and thus must be capable of determining a Third of its own; but besides
that, it must have a second triadic relation in which the Representamen, or rather the
relation thereof to its Object, shall be its own (the Third’s) Object, and must be capa-
ble of determining a Third to this relation. All this must equally be true of the Third’s
Thirds and so on endlessly; and this, and more, is involved in the familiar idea of a
Sign; and as the term Representamen is here used, nothing more is implied. A Sign is
a Representamen with a mental Interpretant. Possibly there may be Representamens
that are not Signs. Thus, if a sunﬂower, in turning toward the sun, becomes by that

3
The Logic of Signs
123
very act fully capable, without further condition, of reproducing a sunﬂower which
turns in precisely corresponding ways toward the sun, and of doing so with the same
reproductive power, the sunﬂower would become a Representamen of the sun. But
thought is the chief, if not the only, mode of representation.
The Sign can only represent the Object and tell about it. It cannot furnish acquain-
tance with or recognition of that Object; for that is what is meant in this volume
by the Object of a Sign; namely, that with which it presupposes an acquaintance
in order to convey some further information concerning it. No doubt there will be
readers who will say they cannot comprehend this. They think a Sign need not relate
to anything otherwise known, and can make neither head nor tail of the statement
that every sign must relate to such an Object. But if there be anything that con-
veys information and yet has absolutely no relation nor reference to anything with
which the person to whom it conveys the information has, when he comprehends
that information, the slightest acquaintance, direct or indirect-and a very strange
sort of information that would be the vehicle of that sort of information is not, in
this volume, called a Sign.
Two men are standing on the seashore looking out to sea. One of them says to the
other, “That vessel there carries no freight at all, but only passengers.” Now, if the
other, himself, sees no vessel, the ﬁrst information he derives from the remark has
for its Object the part of the sea that he does see, and informs him that a person with
sharper eyes than his, or more trained in looking for such things, can see a vessel
there; and then, that vessel having been thus introduced to his acquaintance, he is
prepared to receive the information about it that it carries passengers exclusively.
But the sentence as a whole has, for the person supposed, no other Object than
that with which it ﬁnds him already acquainted. The Objects-for a Sign may have
any number of them-may each be a single known existing thing or thing believed
formerly to have existed or expected to exist, or a collection of such things, or a
known quality or relation or fact, which single Object may be a collection, or whole
of parts, or it may have some other mode of being, such as some act permitted
whose being does not prevent its negation from being equally permitted, or some-
thing of a general nature desired, required, or invariably found under certain general
circumstances.
II. Three Trichotomies of Signs
Signs are divisible by three trichotomies; ﬁrst, according as the sign in itself is a
mere quality, is an actual existent, or is a general law; secondly, according as the
relation of the sign to its object consists in the sign’s having some character in
itself, or in some existential relation to that object, orin its relation to an interpretant;
thirdly, according as its Interpretant represents it as a sign of possibility or as a sign
of fact or a sign of reason.
According to the ﬁrst division, a Sign may be termed a Qualisign, a Sinsign, or a
Legisign.
A Qualisign is a quality which is a Sign. It cannot actually act as a sign until it is
embodied; but the embodiment has nothing to do with its character as a sign.

124
Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914)
A Sinsign (where the syllable sin is taken as meaning “being only once,” as in
single, simple, Latin semel, etc.) is an actual existent thing or event which is a sign. It
can only be so through its qualities; so that it involves a qualisign, or rather, several
qualisigns. But these qualisigns are of a peculiar kind and only form a sign through
being actually embodied.
A Legisign is a law that is a Sign. This law is usually established by men. Every
conventional sign is a legisign [but not conversely]. It is not a single object, but a
general type which, it has been agreed, shall be signiﬁcant. Every legisign signiﬁes
through an instance of its application, which may be termed a Replica of it. Thus,
the word “the” will usually occur from ﬁfteen to twenty-ﬁve times on a page. It
is in all these occurrences one and the same word, the same legisign. Each single
instance of it is a Replica. The Replica is a Sinsign. Thus, every Legisign requires
Sinsigns. But these are not ordinary Sinsigns, such as are peculiar occurrences that
are regarded as signiﬁcant. Nor would the Replica be signiﬁcant if it were not for
the law which renders it so.
According to the second trichotomy, a Sign may be termed an Icon, an Index, or
a Symbol.
An Icon is a sign which refers to the Object that it denotes merely by virtue
of characters of its own, and which it possesses, just the same, whether any such
Object actually exists or not. It is true that unless there really is such an Object, the
Icon does not act as a sign; but this has nothing to do with its character as a sign.
Anything whatever, be it quality, existent individual, or law, is an Icon of anything,
in so far as it is like that thing and used as a sign of it.
An Index is a sign which refers to the Object that it denotes by virtue of being
really affected by that Object. It cannot, therefore, be a Qualisign; because quali-
ties are whatever they are independently of anything else. In so far as the Index is
affected by the Object, it necessarily has some Quality in common with the Object,
and it is in respect to these that it refers to the “Object.” It does, therefore, involve
a sort of Icon, although an Icon of a peculiar kind; and it is not the mere resem-
blance of its Object, even in these respects which makes it a sign, but it is the actual
modiﬁcation of it by the Object.
A Symbol is a sign which refers to the Object that it denotes by virtue of a law,
usually an association of general ideas, which operates to cause the Symbol to be
interpreted as referring to that Object. It is thus itself a general type or law, that
is, is a Legisign. As such it acts through a Replica. Not only is it general itself,
but the Object to which it refers is of a general nature. Now that which is general
has its being in the instances which it will determine. There must, therefore, be
existent instances of what the Symbol denotes, although we must here understand by
“existent,” existent in the possibly imaginary universe to which the Symbol refers.
The Symbol will indirectly, through the association or other law, be affected by those
instances; and thus the Symbol will involve a sort of Index, although an Index of a
peculiar kind. It will not, however, be by any means true that the slight effect upon
the Symbol of those instances accounts for the signiﬁcant character of the Symbol.
According to the third trichotomy, a Sign may be termed a Rheme, a Dicisign or
Dicent Sign (that is, a proposition or quasiproposition), or an Argument.

3
The Logic of Signs
125
A Rheme is a Sign which, for its Interpretant, is a Sign of qualitative Possibility,
that is, is understood as representing such and such a kind of possible Object. Any
Rheme, perhaps, will afford some information; but it is not interpreted as doing so.
A Dicent Sign, is a Sign, which, for its Interpretant, is a Sign of actual existence.
It cannot, therefore, be an Icon, which affords no ground for an interpretation of
it as referring to actual existence. A Dicisign necessarily involves, as a part of it, a
Rheme, to describe the fact which it is interpreted as indicating. But this is a peculiar
kind of Rheme; and while it is essential to the Dicisign, it by no means constitutes it.
An Argument is a Sign which, for its Interpretant, is a Sign of law. Or we may say
that a Rheme is a sign which is understood to represent its object in its characters
merely; that a Dicisign is a sign which is understood to represent its object in respect
to actual existence; and that an Argument is a Sign which is understood to represent
its Object in its character as Sign. Since these deﬁnitions touch upon points at this
time much in dispute, a word may be added in defence of them. A question often
put is: What is the essence of a Judgment? A judgment is the mental act by which
the judger seeks to impress upon himself the truth of a proposition. It is much the
same as an act of asserting the proposition, or going before a notary and assuming
formal responsibility for its truth, except that those acts are intended to affect others,
while the judgment is only intended to affect oneself. However, the logician, as such,
cares not what the psychological nature of the act of judging may be. The question
for him is: What is the nature of the sort of sign of which a principal variety is called
a proposition, which is the matter upon which the act of judging is exercised? The
proposition need not be asserted or judged. It may be contemplated as a sign capable
of being asserted or denied. This sign itself retains its full meaning whether it be
actually asserted or not. The peculiarity of it, therefore, lies in its mode of meaning;
and to say this is to say that its peculiarity lies in its relation to its interpretant. The
proposition professes to be really affected by the actual existent or real law to which
it refers. The argument makes the same pretension, but that is not the principal
pretension of the argument. The rheme makes no such pretension.
III. Icon, Index, and Symbol
A) Synopsis
A sign is either an icon, an index, or a symbol. An icon is a sign which would possess
the character which renders it signiﬁcant, even though its object had no existence;
such as a lead-pencil streak as representing a geometrical line. An index is a sign
which would, at once, lose the character which makes it a sign if its object were
removed, but would not lose that character if there were no interpretant. Such, for
instance, is a piece of mould with a bullet-hole in it as sign of a shot; for without
the shot there would have been no hole; but there is a hole there, whether anybody
has the sense to attribute it to a shot or not. A symbol is a sign which would lose the
character which renders it a sign if there were no interpretant. Such is any utterance
of speech which signiﬁes what it does only by virtue of its being understood to have
that signiﬁcation.

126
Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914)
B) Icon
While no Representamen actually functions as such until it actually determines
an Interpretant, yet it becomes a Representamen as soon as it is fully capable of
doing this; and its Representative Quality is not necessarily dependent upon its ever
actually determining an Interpretant, nor even upon its actually having an Object.
An Icon is a Representamen whose Representative Quality is a Firstness of it as a
First. That is, a quality that it has qua thing renders it ﬁt to be a representamen. Thus,
anything is ﬁt to be a Substitute for anything that it is like. (The conception of “sub-
stitute” involves that of a purpose, and thus of genuine thirdness.) Whether there are
other kinds of substitutes or not we shall see. A Representamen by Firstness alone
can only have a similar Object. Thus, a Sign by Contrast denotes its object only by
virtue of a contrast, or Secondness, between two qualities. A sign by Firstness is an
image of its object and, more strictly speaking, can only be an idea. For it must pro-
duce an Interpretant idea; and an external object excites an idea by a reaction upon
the brain. But most strictly speaking, even an idea, except in the sense of a possibil-
ity, or Firstness, cannot be an Icon. A possibility alone is an Icon purely by virtue of
its quality; and its object can only be a Firstness. But a sign may be iconic, that is,
may represent its object mainly by its similarity, no matter what its mode of being.
If a substantive be wanted, an iconic representamen may be termed a hypoicon. Any
material image, as a painting, is largely conventional in its mode of representation;
but in itself, without legend or label it may be called a hypoicon.
Hypoicons may be roughly divided according to the mode of Firstness of which
they partake. Those which partake of simple qualities, or First Firstnesses, are
images; those which represent the relations, mainly dyadic, or so regarded, of the
parts of one thing by analogous relations in their own parts, are diagrams; those
which represent the representative character of a representamen by representing a
parallelism in something else, are metaphors.
The only way of directly communicating an idea is by means of an icon; and
every indirect method of communicating an idea must depend, for its establishment
upon the use of an icon. Hence, every assertion must contain an icon or set of icons,
or else must contain signs whose meaning is only explicable by icons. The idea
which the set of icons (or the equivalent of a set of icons) contained in an assertion
signiﬁes may be termed the predicate of the assertion.
Turning now to the rhetorical evidence, it is a familiar fact that there are such rep-
resentations as icons. Every picture (however conventional its method) is essentially
a representation of that kind. So is every diagram, even although there be no sensu-
ous resemblance between it and its object, but only an analogy between the relations
of the parts of each. Particularly deserving of notice are icons in which the likeness is
aided by conventional rules. Thus, an algebraic formula is an icon, rendered such by
the rules of commutation, association, and distribution of the symbols. It may seem
at ﬁrst glance that it is an arbitrary classiﬁcation to call an algebraic expression an
icon; that it might as well, or better, be regarded as a compound conventional sign.
But it is not so. For a great distinguishing property of the icon is that by the direct
observation of it other truths concerning its object can be discovered than those

3
The Logic of Signs
127
which sufﬁce to determine its construction. Thus, by means of two photographs a
map can be drawn, etc. Given a conventional or other general sign of an object, to
deduce any other truth than that which it explicitly signiﬁes, it is necessary, in all
cases, to replace that sign by an icon. This capacity of revealing unexpected truth is
precisely that wherein the utility of algebraical formulae consists, so that the iconic
character is the prevailing one.
That icons of the algebraic kind, though usually very simple ones, exist in all
ordinary grammatical propositions is one of the philosophic truths that the Boolean
logic brings to light. In all primitive writing, such as the Egyptian hieroglyphics,
there are icons of a non-logical kind, the ideographs. In the earliest form of speech,
there probably was a large element of mimicry. But in all languages known, such
representations have been replaced by conventional auditory signs. These, how-
ever, are such that they can only be explained by icons. But in the syntax of every
language there are logical icons of the kind that are aided by conventional rules.
Photographs, especially instantaneous photographs, are very instructive, because
we know that they are in certain respects exactly like the objects they represent. But
this resemblance is due to the photographs having been produced under such cir-
cumstances that they were physically forced to correspond point by point to nature.
In that aspect, then, they belong to the second class of signs, those by physical con-
nection. The case is different if I surmise that zebras are likely to be obstinate, or
otherwise disagreeable animals, because they seem to have a general resemblance to
donkeys, and donkeys are self-willed. Here the donkey serves precisely as a prob-
able likeness of the zebra. It is true we suppose that resemblance has a physical
cause in heredity; but then, this hereditary afﬁnity is itself only an inference from
the likeness between the two animals, and we have not (as in the case of the pho-
tograph) any independent knowledge of the circumstances of the production of the
two species. Another example of the use of a likeness is the design an artist draws
of a statue, pictorial composition, architectural elevation, or piece of decoration,
by the contemplation of which he can ascertain whether what he proposes will be
beautiful and satisfactory. The question asked is thus answered almost with certainty
because it relates to how the artist will himself be affected. The reasoning of math-
ematicians will be found to turn chieﬂy upon the use of likenesses, which are the
very hinges of the gates of their science. The utility of likenesses to mathematicians
consists in their suggesting in a very precise way, new aspects of supposed states
of things.
Many diagrams resemble their objects not at all in looks; it is only in respect
to the relations of their parts that their likeness consists. Thus, we may show the
relation between the different kinds of signs by a brace, thus:
Signs {Icons, Indices, symbols} .
This is an icon. But the only respect in which it resembles its object is that the
brace shows the classes of icons, indices, and symbols to be related to one another
and to the general class of signs, as they really are, in a general way. When, in
algebra, we write equations under one another in a regular array, especially when

128
Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914)
we put resembling letters for corresponding coefﬁcients, the array is an icon. Here
is an example:
a1x + b1y = n1,
a2x + b2y = n2.
This is an icon, in that it makes quantities look alike which are in analo-
gous relations to the problem. In fact, every algebraical equation is an icon, in
so far as it exhibits, by means of the algebraical signs (which are not themselves
icons), the relations of the quantities concerned. It may be questioned whether all
icons are likenesses or not. For example, if a drunken man is exhibited in order
to show, by contrast, the excellence of temperance, this is certainly an icon, but
whether it is a likeness or not may be doubted. The question seems somewhat
trivial.
C) Index
[An index is] a sign, or representation, which refers to its object not so much
because of any similarity or analogy with it, nor because it is associated with gen-
eral characters which that object happens to possess, as because it is in dynamical
(including spatial) connection both with the individual object, on the one hand, and
with the senses of memory of the person for whom it serves as a sign, on the other
hand. While demonstrative and personal pronouns are, as ordinarily used, “genuine
indices,” relative pronouns are “degenerate indices”; for though they may, acciden-
tally and indirectly, refer to existing things, they directly refer, and need only refer,
to the images in the mind which previous words have created.
Indices may be distinguished from other signs, or representations, by three char-
acteristic marks: ﬁrst, that they have no signiﬁcant resemblance to their objects;
second, that they refer to individuals, single units, single collections of units, or
single continua; third, that they direct the attention to their objects by blind compul-
sion. But it would be difﬁcult, if not impossible, to instance an absolutely pure index,
or to ﬁnd any sign absolutely devoid of the indexical quality. Psychologically, the
action of indices depends upon association by contiguity, and not upon association
by resemblance or upon intellectual operations.
An Index or Seme (σ´ημα) is a Representamen whose Representative character
consists in its being an individual second. If the Secondness is an existential relation,
the Index is genuine. If the Secondness is a reference, the Index is degenerate. A
genuine Index and its Object must be existent individuals (whether things or facts),
and its immediate Interpretant must be of the same character. But since every indi-
vidual must have characters, it follows that a genuine Index may contain a Firstness,
and so an Icon as a constituent part of it. Any individual is a degenerate Index of its
own characters.
Subindices or Hyposemes are signs which are rendered such principally by an
actual connection with their objects. Thus a proper name, personal demonstrative,
or relative pronoun or the letter attached to a diagram, denotes what it does owing

3
The Logic of Signs
129
to a real connection with its object, but none of these is an Index, since it is not an
individual.
Let us examine some examples of indices. I see a man with a rolling gait. This is
a probable indication that he is a sailor. I see a bowlegged man in corduroys, gaiters,
and a jacket. These are probable indications that he is a jockey or something of
the sort. A sundial or a clock indicates the time of day. Geometricians mark letters
against the different parts of their diagrams and then use these letters to indicate
those parts. Letters are similarly used by lawyers and others. Thus, we may say: If
A and B are married to one another and C is their child while D is brother of A,
then D is uncle of C. Here A, B, C, and D fulﬁll the ofﬁce of relative pronouns, but
are more convenient since they require no special collocation of words. A rap on the
door is an index. Anything which focuses the attention is an index. Anything which
startles us is an index, in so far as it marks the junction between two portions of
experience. Thus a tremendous thunderbolt indicates that something considerable
happened, though we may not know precisely what the event was. But it may be
expected to connect itself with some other experience.
A low barometer with a moist air is an index of rain; that is we suppose that
the forces of nature establish a probable connection between the low barometer
with moist air and coming rain. A weathercock is an index of the direction of the
wind; because in the ﬁrst place it really takes the self-same direction as the wind;
so that there is a real connection between them, and in the second place we are so
constituted that when we see a weathercock pointing in a certain direction it draws
our attention to that direction, and when we see the weathercock veering with the
wind, we are forced by the law of mind to think that direction is connected with the
wind. The pole star is an index, or pointing ﬁnger, to show us which way is north. A
spirit-level, or a plumb bob, is an index of the vertical direction. A yard-stick might
seem, at ﬁrst sight, to be an icon of a yard; and so it would be, if it were merely
intended to show a yard as near as it can be seen and estimated to be a yard. But
the very purpose of a yard-stick is to show a yard nearer than it can be estimated by
its appearance. This it does in consequence of an accurate mechanical comparison
made with the bar in London called the yard. Thus it is a real connection which gives
the yardstick its value as a representamen; and thus it is an index, not a mere icon.
When a driver to attract the attention of a foot passenger and cause him to save
himself, calls out “Hi!” so far as this is a signiﬁcant word, it is, as will be seen
below, something more than an index; but so far as it is simply intended to act
upon the hearer’s nervous system and to rouse him to get out of the way, it is an
index, because it is meant to put him in real connection with the object, which
is his situation relative to the approaching horse. Suppose two men meet upon a
country road and one of them says to the other, “The chimney of that house is
on ﬁre.” The other looks about him and descries a house with green blinds and a
verandah having a smoking chimney. He walks on a few miles and meets a second
traveler. Like a Simple Simon he says, “The chimney of that house is on ﬁre.” “What
house?” asks the other. “Oh, a house with green blinds and a verandah,” replies the
simpleton. “Where is the house?” asks the stranger. He desires some index which
shall connect his apprehension with the house meant. Words alone cannot do this.

130
Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914)
The demonstrative pronouns, “this” and “that,” are indices. For they call upon the
hearer to use his powers of observation, and so establish a real connection between
his mind and the object; and if the demonstrative pronoun does that without which its
meaning is not understood-it goes to establish such a connection; and so is an index.
The relative pronouns, who and which, demand observational activity in much the
same way, only with them the observation has to be directed to the words that have
gone before. Lawyers use A, B, C, practically as very effective relative pronouns. To
show how effective they are, we may note that Messrs. Allen and Greenough, in their
admirable (though in the edition of 1877, too small) Latin Grammar, declare that no
conceivable syntax could wholly remove the ambiguity of the following sentence,
“A replied to B that he thought C (his brother) more unjust to himself than to his
own friend.” Now, any lawyer would state that with perfect clearness, by using A,
B, C, as relatives, thus:
A replied B that he
A
B

thought C (his
 A’s
B’s

brother) more unjust to himself,
⎧
⎨
⎩
A
B
C
⎫
⎬
⎭than to his
⎧
⎨
⎩
A’s
B’s
C’s
⎫
⎬
⎭own friend.
The terminations which in any inﬂected language are attached to words “gov-
erned” by other words, and which serve to show which the governing word is, by
repeating what is elsewhere expressed in the same form, are likewise indices of the
same relative pronoun character. Any bit of Latin poetry illustrates this, such as the
twelve-line sentence beginning, “Jam satis terris.” Both in these terminations and in
the A, B, C, a likeness is relied upon to carry the attention to the right object. But this
does not make them icons, in any important way; for it is of no consequence how
the letters A, B, C, are shaped or what the terminations are. It is not merely that one
occurrence of an A is like a previous occurrence that is the important circumstance,
but that there is an understanding that like letters shall stand for the same thing, and
this acts as a force carrying the attention from one occurrence of A to the previous
one. A possessive pronoun is two ways an index: ﬁrst it indicates the possessor, and,
second, it has a modiﬁcation which syntactically carries the attention to the word
denoting the thing possessed.
Some indices are more or less detailed directions for what the hearer is to do
in order to place himself in direct experiential or other connection with the thing
meant. Thus, the Coast Survey issues “Notices to Mariners,” giving the latitude and
longitude, four or ﬁve bearings of prominent objects, etc., and saying there is a
rock, or shoal, or buoy, or lightship. Although there will be other elements in such
directions, yet in the main they are indices.
Along with such indexical directions of what to do to ﬁnd the object meant,
ought to be classed those pronouns which should be entitled selective pronouns
[or quantiﬁers] because they inform the hearer how he is to pick out one of the
objects intended, but which grammarians call by the very indeﬁnite designation of
indeﬁnite pronouns. Two varieties of these are particularly important in logic, the

3
The Logic of Signs
131
universal selectives, such as quivis, quilibet, quisquam, ullus, nullus, nemo, quisque,
uterque, and in English, any, every, all, no, none, whatever, whoever, everybody,
anybody, nobody. These mean that the hearer is at liberty to select any instance he
likes within limits expressed or understood, and the assertion is intended to apply
to that one. The other logically important variety consists of the particular selec-
tives, quis, quispiam, nescio quis, aliquis, quidam, and in English, some, something,
somebody, a, a certain, some or other, a suitable, one.
Allied to the above pronouns are such expressions as all but one, one or two, a
few, nearly all, every other one, etc. Along with pronouns are to be classed adverbs
of place and time, etc. Not very unlike these are, the ﬁrst, the last, the seventh,
two-thirds of, thousands of, etc.
Other indexical words are prepositions, and prepositional phrases, such as, “on
the right (or left) of.” Right and left cannot be distinguished by any general descrip-
tion. Other prepositions signify relations which may, perhaps, be described; but
when they refer, as they do oftener than would be supposed, to a situation rela-
tive to the observed, or assumed to be experientially known, place and attitude of
the speaker relatively to that of the hearer, then the indexical element is the dom-
inant element. Icons and indices assert nothing. If an icon could be interpreted by
a sentence, that sentence must be in a “potential mood,” that is, it would merely
say, “Suppose a ﬁgure has three sides,” etc. Were an index so interpreted, the mood
must be imperative, or exclamatory, as “See there!” or “Look out!” But the kind of
signs which we are now coming to consider are, by nature, in the “indicative,” or,
as it should be called, the declarative mood. Of course, they can go to the expres-
sion of any other mood, since we may declare assertions to be doubtful, or mere
interrogations, or imperatively requisite.
D) Symbol
A Symbol is a Representamen whose Representative character consists precisely in
its being a rule that will determine its Interpretant. All words, sentences, books, and
other conventional signs are Symbols. We speak of writing or pronouncing the word
“man”; but it is only a replica, or embodiment of the word, that is pronounced or
written. The word itself has no existence although it has a real being, consisting in
the fact that existents will conform to it. It is a general mode of succession of three
sounds or representamens of sounds, which becomes a sign only in the fact that a
habit, or acquired law, will cause replicas of it to be interpreted as meaning a man
or men. The word and its meaning are both general rules; but the word alone of the
two prescribes the qualities of its replicas in themselves. Otherwise the “word” and
its “meaning” do not differ, unless some special sense be attached to “meaning.”
A Symbol is a law, or regularity of the indeﬁnite future. Its Interpretant must
be of the same description; and so must be also the complete immediate Object,
or meaning. But a law necessarily governs, or “is embodied in” individuals, and
prescribes some of their qualities. Consequently, a constituent of a Symbol may be
an Index, and a constituent may be an Icon. A man walking with a child points his
arm up into the air and says, “There is a balloon.” The pointing arm is an essential
part of the symbol without which the latter would convey no information. But if

132
Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914)
the child asks, “What is a balloon,” and the man replies, “It is something like a
great big soap bubble,” he makes the image a part of the symbol. Thus, while the
complete object of a symbol, that is to say, its meaning, is of the nature of a law,
it must denote an individual, and must signify a character. A genuine symbol is a
symbol that has a general meaning. There are two kinds of degenerate symbols, the
Singular Symbol whose Object is an existent individual, and which signiﬁes only
such characters as that individual may realize; and the Abstract Symbol, whose only
Object is a character.
Although the immediate Interpretant of an Index must be an Index, yet since
its Object may be the Object of an Individual [Singular] Symbol, the Index may
have such a Symbol for its indirect Interpretant. Even a genuine Symbol may be an
imperfect Interpretant of it. So an icon may have a degenerate Index, or an Abstract
Symbol, for an indirect Interpretant, and a genuine Index or Symbol for an imperfect
Interpretant.
A Symbol is a sign naturally ﬁt to declare that the set of objects which is denoted
by whatever set of indices may be in certain ways attached to it is represented by an
icon associated with it. To show what this complicated deﬁnition means, let us take
as an example of a symbol the word “loveth.” Associated with this word is an idea,
which is the mental icon of one person loving another, Now we are to understand
that “loveth” occurs in a sentence; for what it may mean by itself, if it means
anything, is not the question. Let the sentence, then, be “Ezekiel loveth Huldah.”
Ezekiel and Huldah must, then, be or contain indices; for without indices it is impos-
sible to designate what one is talking about. Any mere description would leave it
uncertain whether they were not mere characters in a ballad; but whether they be so
or not, indices can designate them. Now the effect of the word “loveth” is that the
pair of objects denoted by the pair of indices Ezekiel and Huldah is represented by
the icon, or the image we have in our minds of a lover and his beloved.
The same thing is equally true of every verb in the declarative mood; and indeed
of every verb, for the other moods are merely declarations of a fact somewhat dif-
ferent from that expressed by the declarative mood. As for a noun, considering the
meaning which it has in the sentence, and not as standing by itself, it is most con-
veniently regarded as a portion of a symbol. Thus the sentence, “every man loves a
woman” is equivalent to “whatever is a man loves something that is a woman.” Here
“whatever” is a universal selective index, “is a man” is a symbol, “loves” is a sym-
bol, “something that” is a particular selective index, and “is a woman” is a symbol.
The word Symbol has so many meanings that it would be an injury to the lan-
guage to add a new one. I do not think that the signiﬁcation I attach to it, that of a
conventional sign, or one depending upon habit (acquired or inborn), is so much a
new meaning as a return to the original meaning. Etymologically, it should mean a
thing thrown together, just as ´εμβoλoυ (embolum) is a thing thrown into something,
a bolt, and παρ´αβoλoυ (parabolum) is a thing thrown besides, collateral security,
and υπ´oβoλoυ (hypobolum) is a thing thrown underneath, an antenuptial gift. It is
usually said that in the word symbol the throwing together is to be understood in
the sense of “to conjecture”; but were that the case, we ought to ﬁnd that sometimes
at least it meant a conjecture, a meaning for which literature may be searched in

3
The Logic of Signs
133
vain. But the Greeks used “throw together” (συμβ´αλλειυ) very frequently to sig-
nify the making of a contract or convention. Now, we do ﬁnd symbol (σ´υμβoλoυ)
early and often used to mean a convention or contract. Aristotle calls a noun a “sym-
bol,” that is, a conventional sign. In Greek, watch ﬁre is a “symbol,” that is, a signal
agreed upon; a standard or ensign is a “symbol,” a watchword is a “symbol,” a
badge is a “symbol”; a church creed is called a “symbol,” because it serves as a
badge or shibboleth; a theatre ticket is called a “symbol”; any ticket or check enti-
tling one to receive anything is a “symbol.” Moreover, any expression of sentiment
was called a “symbol.” Such were the principal meanings of the word in the original
language. The reader will judge whether they sufﬁce to establish my claim that I am
not seriously wrenching the word in employing it as I propose to do.
Any ordinary word, as “give,” “bird,” “marriage,” is an example of a symbol. It
is applicable to whatever may be found to realize the idea connected with the word;
it does not, in itself, identify those things. It does not show us a bird, nor enact
before our eyes a giving or a marriage, but supposes that we are able to imagine
those things, and have associated the word with them.
A regular progression of one, two, three may be remarked in the three orders of
signs, Icon, Index, Symbol. The Icon has no dynamical connection with the object
it represents; it simply happens that its qualities resemble those of that object, and
excite analogous sensations in the mind for which it is a likeness. But it really stands
unconnected with them. The index is physically connected with its object; they make
an organic pair, but the interpreting mind has nothing to do with this connection,
except remarking it, after it is established. The symbol is connected with its object
by virtue of the idea of the symbol-using mind, without which no such connection
would exist.
Every physical force reacts between a pair of particles, either of which may serve
as an index of the other. On the other hand, we shall ﬁnd that every intellectual
operation involves a triad of symbols. A symbol, as we have seen, cannot indicate
any particular thing; it denotes a kind of thing. Not only that, but it is itself a kind
and not a single thing. You can write down the word “star,” but that does not make
you the creator of the word, nor if you erase it have you destroyed the word. The
word lives in the minds of those who use it. Even if they are all asleep, it exists in
their memory. So we may admit, if there be reason to do so, that generals are mere
words without at all saying, as Ockham supposed, that they are really individuals.
Symbols grow. They come into being by development out of other signs, particu-
larly from icons, or from mixed signs partaking of the nature of icons and symbols.
We think only in signs. These mental signs are of mixed nature; the symbol-parts of
them are called concepts. If a man makes a new symbol, it is by thoughts involving
concepts. So it is only out of symbols that a new symbol can grow. Omne symbolum
de symbolo. A symbol, once in being, spreads among the peoples. In use and in
experience, its meaning grows. Such words as force, law, wealth, marriage, bear for
us very different meanings from those they bore to our barbarous ancestors. The
symbol may, with Emerson’s sphynx, say to man:
Of thine eye I am eyebeam.

134
Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914)
From: New Elements (Kαιν¬´α στoιχε´ια) (1904)
III
1. I now proceed to explain the difference between a theoretical and a practical
proposition, together with the two important parallel distinctions between deﬁnite
and vague, and individual and general, noting, at the same time, some other dis-
tinctions connected with these terms. A sign is connected with the “Truth,” i.e. the
entire Universe of being, or, as some say, the Absolute, in three distinct ways. In the
ﬁrst place, a sign is not a real thing. It is of such a nature as to exist in replicas. Look
down a printed page, and every the you see is the same word, every e the same letter.
A real thing does not so exist in replica. The being of a sign is merely being rep-
resented. Now really being and being represented are very different. Giving to the
word sign the full scope that reasonably belongs to it for logical purposes, a whole
book is a sign; and a translation of it is a replica of the same sign. A whole literature
is a sign. The sentence “Roxana was the queen of Alexander” is a sign of Roxana
and of Alexander, and though there is a grammatical emphasis on the former, logi-
cally the name “Alexander” is as much a subject as is the name “Roxana”; and the
real persons Roxana and Alexander are real objects of the sign. Every sign that is
sufﬁciently complete refers to sundry real objects. All these objects, even if we are
talking of Hamlet’s madness, are parts of one and the same Universe of being, the
“Truth.” But so far as the “Truth” is merely the object of a sign, it is merely the
Aristotelian Matter of it that is so.
In addition however to denoting objects, every sign sufﬁciently complete signiﬁes
characters, or qualities. We have a direct knowledge of real objects in every experi-
ential reaction, whether of Perception or of Exertion (the one theoretical, the other
practical). These are directly hic et nunc. But we extend the category, and speak of
numberless real objects with which we are not in direct reaction. We have also direct
knowledge of qualities in feeling, peripheral and visceral. But we extend this cate-
gory to numberless characters of which we have no immediate consciousness. All
these characters are elements of the “Truth.” Every sign signiﬁes the “Truth.” But it
is only the Aristotelian Form of the universe that it signiﬁes. The logician is not con-
cerned with any metaphysical theory; still less, if possible, is the mathematician. But
it is highly convenient to express ourselves in terms of a metaphysical theory; and we
no more bind ourselves to an acceptance of it than we do when we use substantives
such as “humanity,” “variety,” etc. and speak of them as if they were substances, in
the metaphysical sense. But, in the third place, every sign is intended to determine a
sign of the same object with the same signiﬁcation or meaning. Any sign, B, which
a sign, A, is ﬁtted so to determine, without violation of its, As, purpose, that is, in
accordance with the “Truth,” even though it, B, denotes but a part of the objects
of the sign, A, and signiﬁes but a part of its, A’s, characters, I call an interpretant
of A. What we call a “fact” is something having the structure of a proposition, but
supposed to be an element of the very universe itself. The purpose of every sign
is to express “fact,” and by being joined with other signs, to approach as nearly
as possible to determining an interpretant which would be the perfect Truth, the

3
The Logic of Signs
135
absolute Truth, and as such (at least, we may use this language) would be the very
Universe. Aristotle gropes for a conception of perfection, or entelechy, which he
never succeeds in making clear. We may adopt the word to mean the very fact, that
is, the ideal sign which should be quite perfect, and so identical – in such identity as
a sign may have – with the very matter denoted united with the very form signiﬁed
by it. The entelechy of the Universe of being, then, the Universe qua fact, will be
that Universe in its aspect as a sign, the “Truth” of being. The “Truth,” the fact that
is not abstracted but complete, is the ultimate interpretant of every sign.
2. Of the two great tasks of humanity, Theory and Practice, the former sets out
from a sign of a real object with which it is acquainted, passing from this, as its
matter, to successive interpretants embodying more and more fully its form, wishing
ultimately to reach a direct perception of the entelechy; while the latter, setting out
from a sign signifying a character of which it has an idea, passes from this, as
its form, to successive interpretants realizing more and more precisely its matter,
hoping ultimately to be able to make a direct effort, producing the entelechy. But
of these two movements, logic very properly prefers to take that of Theory as the
primary one. It speaks of an antecedent as that which, being known, something else,
the consequent, may also be known. In our vernacular, the latter is inaccurately
called a consequence, a word that the precise terminology of logic reserves for the
proposition expressing the relation of any consequent to its antecedent, or for the
fact which this proposition expresses. The conception of the relation of antecedent
and consequent amounts, therefore, to a confusion of thought between the reference
of a sign to its meaning, the character which it attributes to its object, and its appeal
to an interpretant. But it is the former of these which is the more essential.
The knowledge that the sun has always risen about once in each 24 h (sidereal
time) is a sign whose object is the sun, and (rightly understood) a part of its signiﬁ-
cation is the rising of the sun tomorrow morning. The relation of an antecedent to its
consequent, in its confusion of the signiﬁcation with the interpretant, is nothing but
a special case of what occurs in all action of one thing upon another, modiﬁed so as
to be merely an affair of being represented instead of really being. It is the represen-
tative action of the sign upon its object. For whenever one thing acts upon another
it determines in that other a quality that would not otherwise have been there. In the
vernacular we often call an effect a “consequence,” because that which really is may
correctly be represented; but we should refuse to call a mere logical consequent an
“effect,” because that which is merely represented, however legitimately, cannot be
said really to be. If we speak of an argumentation as “producing a great effect,” it is
not the interpretant itself, by any means, to which we refer, but only the particular
replica of it which is made in the minds of those addressed.
If a sign, B, only signiﬁes characters that are elements (or the whole) of the
meaning of another sign, A, then B is said to be a predicate (or essential part) of
A. If a sign, A, only denotes real objects that are a part or the whole of the objects
denoted by another sign, B, then A is said to be a subject (or substantial part) of
B. The totality of the predicates of a sign, and also the totality of the characters it
signiﬁes, are indifferently each called its logical depth. This is the oldest and most
convenient term. Synonyms are the comprehension of the Port-Royalists, the content

136
Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914)
(Inhalt) of the Germans, the force of DeMorgan, the connotation of J.S. Mill. (The
last is objectionable.) The totality of the subjects, and also, indifferently, the totality
of the real objects of a sign is called the logical breadth. This is the oldest and
most convenient term. Synonyms are the extension of the Port-Royalists (ill-called
extent by some modern French logicians), the sphere (Umfang) of translators from
the German, the scope of DeMorgan, the denotation of J.S. Mill.
Besides the logical depth and breadth, I have proposed (in 1867) the terms infor-
mation and area to denote the total of fact (true or false) that in a given state of
knowledge a sign embodies.
3. Other distinctions depend upon those that we have drawn. I have spoken of
real relations as reactions. It may be asked how far I mean to say that all real rela-
tions are reactions. It is seldom that one falls upon so fascinating a subject for a
train of thought as the analysis of that problem in all its ramiﬁcations, mathemat-
ical, physical, biological, sociological, psychological, logical, and so round to the
mathematical again. The answer cannot be satisfactorily given in a few words; but
it lies hidden beneath the obvious truth that any exact necessity is expressible by a
general equation; and nothing can be added to one side of a general equation without
an equal addition to the other. Logical necessity is the necessity that a sign should be
true to a real object; and therefore there is logical reaction in every real dyadic rela-
tion. If A is in a real relation to B, B stands in a logically contrary relation to A, that
is, in a relation at once converse to and inconsistent with the direct relation. For here
we speak not of a vague sign of the relation but of the relation between two individ-
uals, A and B. This very relation is one in which A alone stands to any individual,
and it to B only. There are, however, degenerate dyadic relations – degenerate in the
sense in which two coplanar lines form a degenerate conic – where this is not true.
Namely, they are individual relations of identity, such as the relation of A to A. All
mere resemblances and relations of reason are of this sort.
Of signs there are two different degenerate forms. But though I give them this
disparaging name, they are of the greatest utility, and serve purposes that genuine
signs could not. The more degenerate of the two forms (as I look upon it) is the icon.
This is deﬁned as a sign of which the character that ﬁts it to become a sign of the
sort that it is, is simply inherent in it as a quality of it. For example, a geometrical
ﬁgure drawn on paper may be an icon of a triangle or other geometrical form. If
one meets a man whose language one does not know and resorts to imitative sounds
and gestures, these approach the character of an icon. The reason they are not pure
icons is that the purpose of them is emphasized. A pure icon is independent of any
purpose. It serves as a sign solely and simply by exhibiting the quality it serves to
signify. The relation to its object is a degenerate relation. It asserts nothing. If it
conveys information, it is only in the sense in which the object that it is used to
represent may be said to convey information. An icon can only be a fragment of a
completer sign.
The other form of degenerate sign is to be termed an index. It is deﬁned as a sign
which is ﬁt to serve as such by virtue of being in a real reaction with its object. For
example, a weather-cock is such a sign. It is ﬁt to be taken as an index of the wind
for the reason that it is physically connected with the wind. A weather-cock conveys

3
The Logic of Signs
137
information; but this it does because in facing the very quarter from which the wind
blows, it resembles the wind in this respect, and thus has an icon connected with
it. In this respect it is not a pure index. A pure index simply forces attention to the
object with which it reacts and puts the interpreter into mediate reaction with that
object, but conveys no information. As an example, take an exclamation “Oh!” The
letters attached to a geometrical ﬁgure are another case. Absolutely unexceptionable
examples of degenerate forms must not be expected. All that is possible is to give
examples which tend sufﬁciently towards those forms to suggest what is meant. It
is remarkable that while neither a pure icon nor a pure index can assert anything, an
index which forces something to be an icon, as a weather-cock does, or which forces
us to regard it as an icon, as the legend under a portrait does, does make an assertion,
and forms a proposition. This suggests the true deﬁnition of a proposition, which is
a question in much dispute at this moment. A proposition is a sign which separately,
or independently, indicates its object. No index, however, can be an argumentation.
It may be what many writers call an argument; that is, a basis of argumentation; but
an argument in the sense of a sign which separately shows what interpretant it is
intended to determine it cannot be.
It will be observed that the icon is very perfect in respect to signiﬁcation, bringing
its interpreter face to face with the very character signiﬁed. For this reason, it is
the mathematical sign par excellence. But in denotation it is wanting. It gives no
assurance that any such object as it represents really exists. The index on the other
hand does this most perfectly, actually bringing to the interpreter the experience of
the very object denoted. But it is quite wanting in signiﬁcation unless it involves an
iconic part.
We now come to the genuine sign, for which I propose the technical designa-
tion symbol, following a use of that word not infrequent among logicians including
Aristotle. A symbol is deﬁned as a sign which is ﬁt to serve as such simply because
it will be so interpreted.
To recapitulate:
An icon
An index
A symbol
⎫
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎬
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎭
is a sign ﬁt to be used as such because
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
it possesses the quality
signiﬁed.
it is in real relation with the
object denoted.
it determines the interpretant
sign.
Language and all abstracted thinking, such as belongs to minds who think in
words, is of the symbolic nature. Many words, though strictly symbols, are so far

138
Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914)
iconic that they are apt to determine iconic interpretants, or as we say, to call up
lively images. Such, for example, are those that have a fancied resemblance to
sounds associated with their objects; that are onomatopoetic, as they say. There
are words, which although symbols, act very much like indices. Such are personal,
demonstrative, and relative pronouns, for which A, B, C, etc. are often substituted.
A Proper Name, also, which denotes a single individual well known to exist by the
utterer and interpreter, differs from an index only in that it is a conventional sign.
Other words refer indirectly to indices. Such is “yard” which refers to a certain
bar in Westminster, and has no meaning unless the interpreter is, directly or indi-
rectly, in physical reaction with that bar. Symbols are particularly remote from the
Truth itself. They are abstracted. They neither exhibit the very characters signiﬁed
as icons do, nor assure us of the reality of their objects, as indices do. Many prover-
bial sayings express a sense of this weakness; as “Words prove nothing” and the
like. Nevertheless, they have a great power of which the degenerate signs are quite
destitute. They alone express laws. Nor are they limited to this theoretical use. They
serve to bring about reasonableness and law. The words justice and truth, amid a
world that habitually neglects these things and utterly derides the words, are never-
theless among the very greatest powers the world contains. They create defenders
and animate them with their strength. This is not rhetoric or metaphor: it is a great
and solid fact of which it behooves a logician to take account.
From: A Guess at the Riddle (1887–1888)
Chapter I – Trichotomy
Perhaps I might begin by noticing how different numbers have found their cham-
pions. Two was extolled by Peter Ramus, Four by Pythagoras, Five by Sir Thomas
Browne, and so on. For my part, I am a determined foe of no innocent number; I
respect and esteem them all in their several ways; but I am forced to confess to a
leaning to the number Three in philosophy. In fact, I make so much use of threefold
divisions in my speculations, that it seems best to commence by making a slight pre-
liminary study of the conceptions upon which all such divisions must rest. I mean no
more than the ideas of ﬁrst, second, third – ideas so broad that they may be looked
upon rather as moods or tones of thought, than as deﬁnite notions, but which have
great signiﬁcance for all that. Viewed as numerals, to be applied to what objects
we like, they are indeed thin skeletons of thought, if not mere words. If we only
wanted to make enumerations, it would be out of place to ask for the signiﬁcations
of the numbers we should have to use; but then the distinctions of philosophy are
supposed to attempt something far more than that; they are intended to go down to
the very essence of things, and if we are to make one single threefold philosophical
distinction, it behooves us to ask beforehand what are the kinds of objects that are
ﬁrst, second, and third, not as being so counted, but in their own true characters.
That there are such ideas of the really First, Second, and Third, we shall presently
ﬁnd reason to admit.

3
The Logic of Signs
139
The First is that whose being is simply in itself, not referring to anything nor
lying behind anything. The second is that which is what it is by force of something
to which it is second. The third is that which is what it is owing to things between
which it mediates and which it brings into relation to each other.
The idea of the absolutely First must be entirely separated from all conception
of or reference to anything else; for what involves a second is itself a second to that
second. The First must therefore be present and immediate, so as not to be second
to a representation. It must be fresh and new, for if old it is second to its former
state. It must be initiative, original, spontaneous, and free; otherwise it is second
to a determining cause. It is also something vivid and conscious; so only it avoids
being the object of some sensation. It precedes all synthesis and all differentiation;
it has no unity and no parts. It cannot be articulately thought: assert it, and it has
already lost its characteristic innocence; for assertion always implies a denial of
something else. Stop to think of it, and it has ﬂown! What the world was to Adam
on the day he opened his eyes to it, before he had drawn any distinctions, or had
become conscious of his own existence – that is ﬁrst, present, immediate, fresh,
new, initiative, original, spontaneous, free, vivid, conscious, and evanescent. Only,
remember that every description of it must be false to it.
Just as the ﬁrst is not absolutely ﬁrst if thought along with a second, so like-
wise to think the Second in its perfection we must banish every third. The Second
is therefore the absolute last. But we need not, and must not, banish the idea of the
ﬁrst from the second; on the contrary, the Second is precisely that which cannot be
without the ﬁrst. It meets us in such facts as Another, Relation, Compulsion, Effect,
Dependence, Independence, Negation, Occurrence, Reality, Result. A thing cannot
be other, negative, or independent, without a ﬁrst to or of which it shall be other,
negative, or independent. Still, this is not a very deep kind of secondness; for the
ﬁrst might in these cases be destroyed yet leave the real character of the second
absolutely unchanged. When the second suffers some change from the action of
the ﬁrst, and is dependent upon it, the secondness is more genuine. But the depen-
dence must not go so far that the second is a mere accident or incident of the ﬁrst;
otherwise the secondness again degenerates. The genuine second suffers and yet
resists, like dead matter, whose existence consists in its inertia. Note, too, that for
the Second to have the Finality that we have seen belongs to it, it must be deter-
mined by the ﬁrst immovably, and thenceforth be ﬁxed; so that unalterable ﬁxity
becomes one of its attributes. We ﬁnd secondness in occurrence, because an occur-
rence is something whose existence consists in our knocking up against it. A hard
fact is of the same sort; that is to say, it is something which is there, and which
I cannot think away, but am forced to acknowledge as an object or second beside
myself, the subject or number one, and which forms material for the exercise of
my will.
The idea of second must be reckoned as an easy one to comprehend. That of
ﬁrst is so tender that you cannot touch it without spoiling it; but that of second is
eminently hard and tangible. It is very familiar, too; it is forced upon us daily; it is
the main lesson of life. In youth, the world is fresh and we seem free; but limitation,
conﬂict, constraint, and secondness generally, make up the teaching of experience.

140
Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914)
With what ﬁrstness
The scarfed bark puts from her native bay
with what secondness
doth she return,
With overweathered ribs and ragged sails 5
But familiar as the notion is, and compelled as we are to acknowledge it at every
turn, still we never can realize it; we never can be immediately conscious of ﬁnite-
ness, or of anything but a divine freedom that in its own original ﬁrstness knows no
bounds.
First and Second, Agent and Patient, Yes and No, are categories which enable us
roughly to describe the facts of experience, and they satisfy the mind for a very long
time. But at last they are found inadequate, and the Third is the conception which is
then called for. The Third is that which bridges over the chasm between the abso-
lute ﬁrst and last, and brings them into relationship. We are told that every science
has its Qualitative and its Quantitative stage; now its qualitative stage is when dual
distinctions – whether a given subject has a given predicate or not – sufﬁce; the
quantitative stage comes when, no longer content with such rough distinctions, we
require to insert a possible halfway between every two possible conditions of the
subject in regard to its possession of the quality indicated by the predicate. Ancient
mechanics recognized forces as causes which produced motions as their immediate
effects, looking no further than the essentially dual relation of cause and effect. That
was why it could make no progress with dynamics.
The work of Galileo and his successors lay in showing that forces are accelera-
tions by which a state of velocity is gradually brought about. The words cause and
effect still linger, but the old conceptions have been dropped from mechanical phi-
losophy; for the fact now known is that in certain relative positions bodies undergo
certain accelerations. Now an acceleration, instead of being like a velocity a rela-
tion between two successive positions, is a relation between three; so that the new
doctrine has consisted in the suitable introduction of the conception of Threeness.
On this idea, the whole of modern physics is built. The superiority of modern geom-
etry, too, has certainly been due to nothing so much as to the bridging over of the
innumerable distinct cases with which the ancient science was encumbered; and we
may go so far as to say that all the great steps in the method of science in every
department have consisted in bringing into relation cases previously discrete.
We can easily recognize the man whose thought is mainly in the dual stage by
his unmeasured use of language. In former days, when he was natural, everything
with him was unmitigated, absolute, ineffable, utter, matchless, supreme, unqual-
iﬁed, root and branch; but now that it is the fashion to be depreciatory, he is just
as plainly marked by the ridiculous inadequacy of his expressions. The principle
of contradiction is a shibboleth for such minds; to disprove a proposition they will
always try to prove there lurks a contradiction in it, notwithstanding that it may
5 Shakespeare, The Merchant of Venice, 2.6.15–18.

3
The Logic of Signs
141
be as clear and comprehensible as the day. Remark for your amusement the grand
unconcern with which mathematics, since the invention of the calculus, has pursued
its way, caring no more for the peppering of contradiction-mongers than an ironclad
for an American fort.
We have seen that it is the immediate consciousness that is preeminently ﬁrst, the
external dead thing that is preeminently second. In like manner, it is evidently the
representation mediating between these two that is preeminently third. Other exam-
ples, however, should not be neglected. The ﬁrst is agent, the second patient, the
third is the action by which the former inﬂuences the latter. Between the beginning
as ﬁrst, and the end as last, comes the process which leads from ﬁrst to last.
According to the mathematicians, when we measure along a line, were our yard-
stick replaced by a yard marked off on an inﬁnitely long rigid bar, then in all the
shiftings of it which we make for the purpose of applying it to successive portions
of the line to be measured, two points on that bar would remain ﬁxed and unmoved.
To that pair of points, the mathematicians accord the title of the absolute; they are
the points that are at an inﬁnite distance one way and the other as measured by that
yard. These points are either really distinct, coincident, or imaginary (in which case
there is but a ﬁnite distance completely round the line), according to the relation of
the mode of measurement to the nature of the line upon which the measurement is
made. These two points are the absolute ﬁrst and the absolute last or second, while
every measurable point on the line is of the nature of a third. We have seen that the
conception of the absolute ﬁrst eludes every attempt to grasp it; and so in another
sense does that of the absolute second; but there is no absolute third, for the third is
of its own nature relative, and this is what we are always thinking, even when we
aim at the ﬁrst or second.
The starting-point of the universe, God the Creator, is the Absolute First; the
terminus of the universe, God completely revealed, is the Absolute Second; every
state of the universe at a measurable point of time is the third. If you think the
measurable is all there is, and deny it any deﬁnite tendency whence or whither, then
you are considering the pair of points that makes the absolute to be imaginary and
are an Epicurean. If you hold that there is a deﬁnite drift to the course of nature as
a whole, but yet believe its absolute end is nothing but the nirvana from which it set
out, you make the two points of the absolute to be coincident, and are a pessimist.
But if your creed is that the whole universe is approaching in the inﬁnitely distant
future a state having a general character different from that toward which we look
back in the inﬁnitely distant past, you make the absolute to consist in two distinct
real points and are an evolutionist.6
This is one of the matters concerning which a man can only learn from his own
reﬂections, but I believe that if my suggestions are followed out, the reader will
6 The last view is essentially that of Christian theology, too. The theologians hold the physical
universe to be ﬁnite, but considering that universe which they will admit to have existed from all
time, it would appear to be in a different condition in the end from what it was in the beginning,
the whole spiritual creation having been accomplished, and abiding.

142
Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914)
grant that One, Two, Three, are more than mere count-words like “eeny, meeny,
mony, mi,” but carry vast, though vague ideas.
But it will be asked, why stop at three? Why not go on to ﬁnd a new conception
in a distinct idea for Four, Five, and so on indeﬁnitely? The reason is that while
it is impossible to form a genuine three by any modiﬁcation of the pair, without
introducing something of a different nature from the unit and the pair, four, ﬁve, and
every higher number can be formed by mere complications of threes. To make this
clear, I will ﬁrst show it in an example. The fact that A presents B with a gift C, is
a triple relation, and as such cannot possibly be resolved into any combination of
dual relations. Indeed, the very idea of a combination involves that of thirdness, for
a combination is something which is what it is owing to the parts which it brings
into mutual relationship. But we may waive that consideration, and still we cannot
build up the fact that A presents C to B by any aggregate of dual relations between
A and B, B and C, and C and A. A may enrich B, B may receive C, and A may part
with C, and yet A need not necessarily give C to B. For that, it would be necessary
that these three dual relations should not only coexist, but be welded into one fact.
Thus we see that a triad cannot be analyzed into dyads. But now I will show by an
example that a four can be analyzed into threes. Take the quadruple fact that A sells
C to B for the price D. This is a compound of two facts: ﬁrst, that A makes with
C a certain transaction, which we may name E; and second, that this transaction
E is a sale of B for the price D. Each of these two facts is a triple fact, and their
combination makes up as genuine a quadruple fact as can be found. The explanation
of this striking difference is not far to seek. A dual relative term, such as “lover”
or “servant,” is a sort of blank form, where there are two places left blank. I mean
that in building a sentence round “lover,” as the principal word of the predicate,
we are at liberty to make anything we see ﬁt the subject, and then, besides that,
anything we please the object of the action of loving. But a triple relative term such
as “giver” has two correlates, and is thus a blank form with three places left blank.
Consequently, we can take two of these triple relatives and ﬁll up one blank place
in each with the same letter, X, which has only the force of a pronoun or identifying
index, and then the two taken together will form a whole having four blank places;
and from that we can go on in a similar way to any higher number. But when we
attempt to imitate this proceeding with dual relatives, and combine two of them by
means of an X, we ﬁnd we only have two blank places in the combination, just
as we had in either of the relatives taken by itself. A road with only three-way
forkings may have any number of termini, but no number of straight roads put end
on end will give more than two termini. Thus any number, however large, can be
built out of triads; and consequently no idea can be involved in such a number,
radically different from the idea of three. I do not mean to deny that the higher
numbers may present interesting special conﬁgurations from which notions may be
derived of more or less general applicability; but these cannot rise to the height of
philosophical categories so fundamental as those that have been considered.
The argument of this book has been developed in the mind of the author, sub-
stantially as it is presented, as a following out of these three conceptions, in a sort of
game of “follow my leader” from one ﬁeld of thought into another. Their importance

3
The Logic of Signs
143
was originally brought home to me in the study of logic, where they play so remark-
able a part that I was led to look for them in psychology. Finding them there again,
I could not help asking myself whether they did not enter into the physiology of
the nervous system. By drawing a little on hypothesis, I succeeded in detecting
them there; and then the question naturally came how they would appear in the the-
ory of protoplasm in general. Here I seemed to break into an interesting avenue of
reﬂections giving instructive aperçus both into the nature of protoplasm and into the
conceptions themselves; though it was not till later that I mapped out my thoughts
on the subject as they are presented in Chapter 5. I had no difﬁculty in following
the lead into the domain of natural selection; and once arrived at that point, I was
irresistibly carried on to speculations concerning physics. One bold saltus landed
me in a garden of fruitful and beautiful suggestions, the exploration of which long
prevented my looking further. As soon, however, as I was induced to look further,
and to examine the application of the three ideas to the deepest problems of the
soul, nature, and God, I saw at once that they must carry me far into the heart of
those primeval mysteries. That is the way the book has grown in my mind: it is also
the order in which I have written it; and only this ﬁrst chapter is more or less an
afterthought, since at an earlier stage of my studies I should have looked upon the
matter here set down as too vague to have any value. I should have discerned in
it too strong a resemblance to many a crack-brained book that I had laughed over.
A deeper study has taught me that even out of the mouths of babes and sucklings
strength may be brought forth, and that weak metaphysical trash has sometimes con-
tained the germs of conceptions capable of growing up into important and positive
doctrines.
Thus, the whole book being nothing but a continual exempliﬁcation of the triad
of ideas, we need linger no longer upon this preliminary exposition of them. There
is, however, one feature of them upon which it is quite indispensable to dwell. It is
that there are two distinct grades of Secondness and three grades of Thirdness. There
is a close analogy to this in geometry. Conic sections are either the curves usually so
called, or they are pairs of straight lines. A pair of straight lines is called a degenerate
conic. So plane cubic curves are either the genuine curves of the third order, or they
are conics paired with straight lines, or they consist of three straight lines; so that
there are the two orders of degenerate cubics. Nearly in this same way, besides gen-
uine Secondness, there is a degenerate sort which does not exist as such, but is only
so conceived. The medieval logicians (following a hint of Aristotle) distinguished
between real relations and relations of reason. A real relation subsists in virtue of a
fact which would be totally impossible were either of the related objects destroyed;
while a relation of reason subsists in virtue of two facts, one only of which would
disappear on the annihilation of either of the relates. Such are all resemblances:
for any two objects in nature resemble each other, and indeed in themselves just as
much as any other two; it is only with reference to our senses and needs that one
resemblance counts for more than another. Rumford and Franklin resembled each
other by virtue of being both Americans; but either would have been just as much
an American if the other had never lived. On the other hand, the fact that Cain killed
Abel cannot be stated as a mere aggregate of two facts, one concerning Cain and the

144
Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914)
other concerning Abel. Resemblances are not the only relations of reason, though
they have that character in an eminent degree. Contrasts and comparisons are of the
same sort. Resemblance is an identity of characters; and this is the same as to say that
the mind gathers the resembling ideas together into one conception. Other relations
of reason arise from ideas being connected by the mind in other ways; they consist
in the relation between two parts of one complex concept, or, as we may say, in the
relation of a complex concept to itself, in respect to two of its parts. This brings us
to consider a sort of degenerate Secondness that does not fulﬁll the deﬁnition of a
relation of reason. Identity is the relation that everything bears to itself: Lucullus
dines with Lucullus. Again, we speak of allurements and motives in the language
of forces, as though a man suffered compulsion from within. So with the voice of
conscience: and we observe our own feelings by a reﬂective sense. An echo is my
own voice coming back to answer itself. So also, we speak of the abstract quality of
a thing as if it were some second thing that the ﬁrst thing possesses. But the rela-
tions of reason and these self-relations are alike in this, that they arise from the mind
setting one part of a notion into relation to another. All degenerate seconds may be
conveniently termed internal, in contrast to external seconds, which are constituted
by external fact, and are true actions of one thing upon another.
Among thirds, there are two degrees of degeneracy. The ﬁrst is where there is in
the fact itself no thirdness or mediation, but where there is true duality; the second
degree is where there is not even true secondness in the fact itself.
Consider, ﬁrst, the thirds degenerate in the ﬁrst degree. A pin fastens two things
together by sticking through one and also through the other: either might be anni-
hilated, and the pin would continue to stick through the one which remained. A
mixture brings its ingredients together by containing each. We may term these acci-
dental thirds. “How did I slay thy son?” asked the merchant, and the genie replied,
“When thou threwest away the date-stone, it smote my son, who was passing at the
time, on the breast, and he died forthright.” Here there were two independent facts,
ﬁrst that the merchant threw away the date-stone, and second that the date-stone
struck and killed the genie’s son. Had it been aimed at him, the case would have
been different; for then there would have been a relation of aiming which would
have connected together the aimer, the thing aimed, and the object aimed at, in one
fact.
What monstrous injustice and inhumanity on the part of that genie to hold that
poor merchant responsible for such an accident! I remember how I wept at it, as I
lay in my father’s arms and he ﬁrst told me the story. It is certainly just that a man,
even though he had no evil intention, should be held responsible for the immediate
effects of his actions; but not for such as might result from them in a sporadic case
here and there, but only for such as might have been guarded against by a reason-
able rule of prudence. Nature herself often supplies the place of the intention of a
rational agent in making a thirdness genuine and not merely accidental; as when a
spark, as third, falling into a barrel of gunpowder, as ﬁrst, causes an explosion, as
second. But how does nature do this? By virtue of an intelligible law according to
which she acts. If two forces are combined according to the parallelogram of forces,
their resultant is a real third. Yet any force may, by the parallelogram of forces, be

3
The Logic of Signs
145
mathematically resolved into the sum of two others, in an inﬁnity of different ways.
Such components, however, are mere creations of the mind. What is the difference?
As far as one isolated event goes, there is none; the real forces are no more present
in the resultant than any components that the mathematician may imagine. But what
makes the real forces really there is the general law of nature which calls for them,
and not for any other components of the resultant. Thus, intelligibility, or reason
objectiﬁed, is what makes thirdness genuine.
We now come to thirds degenerate in the second degree. The dramatist Marlowe
had something of that character of diction in which Shakespeare and Bacon agree.
This is a trivial example; but the mode of relation is important. In natural history,
intermediate types serve to bring out the resemblance between forms whose simi-
larity might otherwise escape attention, or not be duly appreciated. In portraiture,
photographs mediate between the original and the likeness. In science, a diagram
or analogue of the observed fact leads on to a further analogy. The relations of
reason which go to the formation of such a triple relation need not be all resem-
blances. Washington was eminently free from the faults in which most great soldiers
resemble one another. A centaur is a mixture of a man and a horse. Philadelphia lies
between New York and Washington. Such thirds may be called Intermediate thirds
or Thirds of comparison.
Nobody will suppose that I wish to claim any originality in reckoning the triad
important in philosophy. Since Hegel, almost every fanciful thinker has done the
same. Originality is the last of recommendations for fundamental conceptions. On
the contrary, the fact that the minds of men have ever been inclined to threefold
divisions is one of the considerations in favor of them. Other numbers have been
objects of predilection to this philosopher and that, but three has been prominent at
all times and with all schools. My whole method will be found to be in profound
contrast with that of Hegel; I reject his philosophy in toto. Nevertheless, I have a
certain sympathy with it, and fancy that if its author had only noticed a very few
circumstances he would himself have been led to revolutionize his system. One of
these is the double division or dichotomy of the second idea of the triad. He has
usually overlooked external secondness, altogether. In other words, he has commit-
ted the triﬂing oversight of forgetting that there is a real world with real actions
and reactions. Rather a serious oversight that. Then Hegel had the misfortune to be
unusually deﬁcient in mathematics. He shows this in the very elementary character
of his reasoning. Worse still, while the whole burden of his song is that philosophers
have neglected to take thirdness into account, which is true enough of the theolog-
ical kind, with whom alone he was acquainted (for I do not call it acquaintance to
look into a book without comprehending it), he unfortunately did not know, what it
would have been of the utmost consequence for him to know, that the mathematical
analysts had in great measure escaped this great fault, and that the thorough-going
pursuit of the ideas and methods of the differential calculus would be sure to cure it
altogether. Hegel’s dialectical method is only a feeble and rudimentary application
of the principles of the calculus to metaphysics. Finally Hegel’s plan of evolving
everything out of the abstractest conception by a dialectical procedure, though far
from being so absurd as the experientialists think, but on the contrary representing

146
Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914)
one of the indispensable parts of the course of science, overlooks the weakness of
individual man, who wants the strength to wield such a weapon as that.
On Pragmatism and Pragmaticism from: A Neglected Argument
for the Reality of God (1908)
Since I have employed the word Pragmaticism, and shall have occasion to use it
once more, it may perhaps be well to explain it. About forty years ago, my stud-
ies of Berkeley, Kant, and others led me, after convincing myself that all thinking
is performed in Signs, and that meditation takes the form of a dialogue, so that
it is proper to speak of the “meaning” of a concept, to conclude that to acquire
full mastery of that meaning it is requisite, in the ﬁrst place, to learn to recognise
the concept under every disguise, through extensive familiarity with instances of
it. But this, after all, does not imply any true understanding of it; so that it is fur-
ther requisite that we should make an abstract logical analysis of it into its ultimate
elements, or as complete an analysis as we can compass. But, even so, we may
still be without any living comprehension of it; and the only way to complete our
knowledge of its nature is to discover and recognise just what general habits of con-
duct a belief in the truth of the concept (of any conceivable subject, and under any
conceivable circumstances) would reasonably develop; that is to say, what habits
would ultimately result from a sufﬁcient consideration of such truth. It is necessary
to understand the word “conduct,” here, in the broadest sense. If, for example, the
predication of a given concept were to lead to our admitting that a given form of
reasoning concerning the subject of which it was afﬁrmed was valid, when it
would not otherwise be valid, the recognition of that effect in our reasoning would
decidedly be a habit of conduct.
In 1871, in a Metaphysical Club in Cambridge, Mass., I used to preach this prin-
ciple as a sort of logical gospel, representing the unformulated method followed
by Berkeley, and in conversation about it I called it “Pragmatism.” In December
1877 and January 1878 I set forth the doctrine in the Popular Science Monthly,
and the two parts of my essay were printed in French in the Revue Philosophique,
volumes vi. and vii. Of course, the doctrine attracted no particular attention, for,
as I had remarked in my opening sentence, very few people care for logic. But in
1897 Professor James remodelled the matter, and transmogriﬁed it into a doctrine
of philosophy, some parts of which I highly approved, while other and more promi-
nent parts I regarded, and still regard, as opposed to sound logic. About the time
Professor Papirie discovered, to the delight of the Pragmatist school, that this doc-
trine was incapable of deﬁnition, which would certainly seem to distinguish it from
every other doctrine in whatever branch of science, I was coming to the conclusion
that my poor little maxim should be called by another name; and accordingly, in
April 1905, I renamed it Pragmaticism. I had never before digniﬁed it by any name
in print, except that, at Professor Baldwin’s request, I wrote a deﬁnition of it for his
Dictionary of Psychology and Philosophy. I did not insert the word in the Century

3
The Logic of Signs
147
Dictionary, though I had charge of the philosophical deﬁnitions of that work; for I
have a perhaps exaggerated dislike of réclame.
It is that course of meditation upon the three Universes which gives birth to the
hypothesis and ultimately to the belief that they, or at any rate two of the three, have a
Creator independent of them, that I have throughout this article called the Neglected
Argument (N.A.), because I think the theologians ought to have recognised it as a
line of thought reasonably productive of belief. This is the “humble” argument, the
innermost of the nest. In the mind of a metaphysician it will have a metaphysical
tinge; but that seems to me rather to detract from its force than to add anything to
it. It is just as good an argument, if not better, in the form it takes in the mind of the
clodhopper.
The theologians could not have presented the N.A.; because that is a living course
of thought of very various forms. But they might and ought to have described it, and
should have defended it, too, as far as they could, without going into original log-
ical researches, which could not be justly expected of them. They are accustomed
to make use of the principle that that which convinces a normal man must be pre-
sumed to be sound reasoning; and therefore they ought to say whatever can truly be
advanced to show that the N.A., if sufﬁciently developed, will convince any normal
man. Unfortunately, it happens that there is very little established fact to show that
this is the case. I have not pretended to have any other ground for my belief that it is
so than my assumption, which each one of us makes, that my own intellectual dis-
position is normal. I am forced to confess that no pessimist will agree with me. I do
not admit that pessimists are, at the same time, thoroughly sane, and in addition are
endowed in normal measure with intellectual vigour; and my reasons for thinking
so are two.
The ﬁrst is, that the difference between a pessimistic and an optimistic mind is of
such controlling importance in regard to every intellectual function, and especially
for the conduct of life, that it is out of the question to admit that both are normal,
and the great majority of mankind are naturally optimistic. Now, the majority of
every race depart but little from the norm of that race. In order to present my other
reason, I am obliged to recognise three types of pessimists. The ﬁrst type is often
found in exquisite and noble natures of great force of original intellect whose own
lives are dreadful histories of torment due to some physical malady. Leopardi is a
famous example. We cannot but believe, against their earnest protests, that if such
men had had ordinary health, life would have worn for them the same colour as
for the rest of us. Meantime, one meets too few pessimists of this type to affect the
present question. The second is the misanthropical type, the type that makes itself
heard. It sufﬁces to call to mind the conduct of the famous pessimists of this kind,
Diogenes the Cynic, Schopenhauer, Carlyle, and their kin with Shakespeare’s Timon
of Athens, to recognise them as diseased minds. The third is the philanthropical type,
people whose lively sympathies, easily excited, become roused to anger at what they
consider the stupid injustices of life. Being easily interested in everything, without
being overloaded with exact thought of any kind, they are excellent raw material for
littérateurs: witness Voltaire. No individual remotely approaching the calibre of a
Leibniz is to be found among them.

148
Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914)
The third argument, enclosing and defending the other two, consists in the devel-
opment of those principles of logic according to which the humble argument is the
ﬁrst stage of a scientiﬁc inquiry into the origin of the three Universes, but of an
inquiry which produces, not merely scientiﬁc belief, which is always provisional,
but also a living, practical belief, logically justiﬁed in crossing the Rubicon with
all the freightage of eternity. The presentation of this argument would require the
establishment of several principles of logic that the logicians have hardly dreamed
of, and particularly a strict proof of the correctness of the maxim of Pragmaticism.
My original essay, having been written for a popular monthly, assumes, for no better
reason than that real inquiry cannot begin until a state of real doubt arises and ends as
soon as Belief is attained, that “a settlement of Belief,” or, in other words, a state of
satisfaction, is all that Truth, or the aim of inquiry, consists in. The reason I gave for
this was so ﬂimsy, while the inference was so nearly the gist of Pragmaticism, that I
must confess the argument of that essay might with some justice be said to beg the
question. The ﬁrst part of the essay, however, is occupied with showing that, if Truth
consists in satisfaction, it cannot be any actual satisfaction, but must be the satis-
faction which would ultimately be found if the inquiry were pushed to its ultimate
and indefeasible issue. This, I beg to point out, is a very different position from that
of Mr Schiller and the pragmatists of to-day. I trust I shall be believed when I say
that it is only a desire to avoid being misunderstood in consequence of my relations
with pragmatism, and by no means as arrogating any superior immunity from error
which I have too good reason to know that I do not enjoy, that leads me to express
my personal sentiments about their tenets. Their avowedly undeﬁnable position, if
it be not capable of logical characterisation, seems to me to be characterised by an
angry hatred of strict logic, and even some disposition to rate any exact thought
which interferes with their doctrines as all humbug.
At the same time, it seems to me clear that their approximate acceptance of
the Pragmaticist principle, and even that very casting aside of difﬁcult distinctions
(although I cannot approve of it), has helped them to a mightily clear discernment
of some fundamental truths that other philosophers have seen but through a mist,
and most of them not at all. Among such truths – all of them old, of course, yet
acknowledged by few – I reckon their denial of necessitarianism; their rejection
of any “consciousness” different from a visceral or other external sensation; their
acknowledgment that there are, in a Pragmatistical sense, Real habits (which Really
would produce effects, under circumstances that may not happen to get actualised,
and are thus Real generals); and their insistence upon interpreting all hypostatic
abstractions in terms of what they would or might (not actually will) come to in the
concrete. It seems to me a pity they should allow a philosophy so instinct with life
to become infected with seeds of death in such notions as that of the unreality of all
ideas of inﬁnity and that of the mutability of truth, and in such confusions of thought
as that of active willing (willing to control thought, to doubt, and to weigh reasons)
with willing not to exert the will (willing to believe).

Chapter 4
Excerpts from Signs, Language and Behavior
Charles Morris (1901–1979)
Introduction and Commentary: Charles Morris
The properties of ‘being’ a sign, a designatum, an interpreter, or an interpretant are rela-
tional properties which things take on by participating in the functional process of semiosis.
Semiotic, then, is not concerned with the study of a particular kind of object, but with
ordinary objects in so far (and only in so far) as they participate in semiosis.
C. Morris (1938: 4)
In 1929, in an attempt to codify the tenets of ‘logical positivism’ in a man-
ifesto for the Vienna Circle, mathematician Hans Hahn (1879–1934), political
economist Otto Neurath (1882–1945) and philosopher Rudolf Carnap (1891–1970)
proclaimed:
We have characterised the scientiﬁc world-conception essentially by two features:
First it is empiricist and positivist: there is knowledge only from experience, which rests on
what is immediately given. This sets the limits for the content of legitimate science. Second,
the scientiﬁc world-conception is marked by application of a certain method, namely logical
analysis. The aim of scientiﬁc effort is to reach the goal, uniﬁed science, by applying logical
analysis to the empirical material. Since the meaning of every statement of science must be
statable by reduction to a statement about the given, likewise the meaning of any concept,
whatever branch of science it may belong to, must be statable by step-wise reduction to
other concepts, down to the concepts of the lowest level which refer directly to the given.
If such an analysis were carried through for all concepts, they would thus be ordered into
a reductive system, a constitutive system. Investigations towards such a constitutive system,
the constitutive theory, thus form the framework within which logical analysis is applied by
the scientiﬁc world-conception (1929; in Sarkar 1996: 331).
Around the same time, on the other side of the Atlantic, philosopher and social
theorist George Herbert Mead (1863–1931) was articulating the fundaments of a
decidedly non-positivistic ‘pragmatic social psychology’:
‘Mentality’, on our approach, simply comes in when the organism is able to point out
meanings to others and to himself. This is the point at which mind appears, or if you like,
emerges. . . It is absurd to look at ‘the mind’ simply from the standpoint of the individual
human organism; for, although it has its focus there, it is essentially a social phenomenon;
. . . The self is something which has a development; it is not initially there, at birth, but arises
in the process of social experience and activity, that is, develops in the given individual as a
result of his relations to that process as a whole and to other individuals within that process
(1934: 132–133; 135).
149
D. Favareau, Essential Readings in Biosemiotics, Biosemiotics 3,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9650-1_4, C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010

150
Charles Morris (1901–1979)
A proponent for the uniﬁcation of the seemingly incommensurable doctrines
of both logical positivism and pragmatic social psychology, philosopher Charles
William Morris (1901–1979) labored for over forty years to establish what he hoped
would be the ‘foundations for a science of signs.’ Born in Denver, Colorado on
May 23, 1901, Morris studied biology, philosophy and engineering at Northwestern
University, receiving a Bachelor of Science degree in psychology in 1922. The fol-
lowing year, he became a student of pragmatist philosopher and social psychologist
George Herbert Mead (1863–1931) at the University of Chicago, under whose men-
torship he completed a dissertation entitled Symbolism And Reality: A Study in the
Nature of the Mind in 1925. Morris’ ﬁrst job after receiving his doctorate in phi-
losophy was as lecturer at Rice Institute in Texas, where he worked from 1925 to
1931, publishing extensively on pragmatism and the philosophy of mind. In 1932,
Morris gained widespread recognition for his comparative philosophical history, Six
Theories of Mind, and for editing the collection of lectures that comprises George
Herbert Mead’s Mind, Self and Society in 1934. During this time, Morris also trav-
elled to Europe, where he became intimately involved with the scientiﬁc projects
and philosophy of the Vienna Circle.
In 1935, he participated in the group’s ﬁrst International Congress for the
Unity of Science, where the project to create an International Encyclopedia
of Uniﬁed Science was launched by philosopher of science Moritz Schlick
(1882–1936). Morris published Logical Positivism, Pragmatism, and Scientiﬁc
Empiricism (including the chapter “Semiotic and Scientiﬁc Empiricism”) in 1937,
and Foundations to a Theory of Signs in 1938. The ﬁrst volume of the International
Encyclopedia of Uniﬁed Science, entitled Encyclopedia and Uniﬁed Science, with
entries by Morris, Otto Neurath, Niels Bohr, John Dewey, Bertrand Russell, and
Rudolf Carnap, also appeared that year; and in 1938, Morris’ single-authored
Foundations to a Theory of Signs was issued as the Encyclopedia’s second vol-
ume. Morris’ personal and professional relationship with the members of the Vienna
Circle long outlasted the unity of the group, however, and he was personally respon-
sible for helping Rudolf Carnap and several other scholors to relocate to America in
order to escape persecution by the Nazis during World War II.
Dedicated to the creation of an empirically grounded ‘science of signs’, Charles
Morris “showed from the start that he was a philosopher of mediation and synthe-
sis,” writes semiotics scholar Ronald Posner, claiming that Morris “was one of the
ﬁrst to recognize that the leading philosophical movements of his time, pragma-
tism, empiricism, and logical positivism, were not antithetical, but ‘complementary
phases of the scientiﬁc temper’ (Morris 1937: 21; quoted in Posner 1998: 567).
From his doctoral advisor, George Herbert Mead, Morris took the fundamental
insight of Peirce’s pragmatic maxim: “Consider what effects, that might conceivably
have practical bearings, we conceive the object of our conception to have. Then, our
conception of these effects is the whole of our conception of the object” (CP 5.402) –
and, in an effort to provide a step-by-step, empiricist and positivist account of the
sign use and its consequences, wedded it to a keen appreciation of Mead’s concept
of the relations between our analyzed and unanalyzed concepts regarding “the world
that is there” (Mead 1932: 140).

4
Excerpts from Signs, Language and Behavior
151
The reasoning of Morris’ logic was as follows: The Vienna Circle manifesto to
which Morris adhered in his efforts to advance a ‘uniﬁed science’, insisted that
every statement made and every concept used in a genuinely scientiﬁc account
or theory must be “statable by reduction to a statement about the given” (1929,
in Sarkar 1996: 331). Yet Mead’s pragmatic “philosophy of the act” showed
that scientists themselves can only intelligently analyze certain puzzling features
about the world by “using or appealing to other features of the world that, for
the time being, are not puzzling and do not themselves require analysis; they
can devise experiments and test their hypotheses only by means of perceptual
objects whose meaningful characters are, for the time being, taken for granted”
(Cook 1993: 178).
Morris’ examination of both the analyzed and unanalyzed concepts used in the
language of scientists led him to the conclusion that both the experienced envi-
ronment – i.e., both Mead’s “world that is there” pre-conceptually, as well as the
“statable reduction to yet more primitive statements” by which all language users
consciously or unconsciously understand the world – work together to produce the
“dual control of thought” (1937: 50) that is reﬂected in Peirce’s pragmatic maxim.
And thus, because any and every “language involves a formal structure (as ana-
lyzed by logical positivism), a relation between signs and objects (as analyzed by
empiricism), and social conventions of communication (as analyzed by pragma-
tism),” reasoned Morris, it would be possible to “include, without remainder” the
entirety of scientiﬁc study “under the study of the language of science” (Posner
1998: 565).
Morris christened the science that he created through a synthesis of empiricist,
logical positivist and pragmatist inquiry, “semiotic” – in acknowledgment of his
indebtedness to Peirce, whose “backwoodsman’s work in opening up” a theoretical
science of signs, Morris felt that he himself was carrying on with his own yet even
more empiricist study of signs (Morris 1948: 434, 445). “A sign is exhaustively
analyzed when its relations to other signs, to what it denotes or can denote, and to
its interpreters, are speciﬁed,” writes Morris, and “the speciﬁcation of such relations
in concrete cases of semiosis is called sign analysis” (1939: 133), a diagrammatic
depiction of which Morris provides in Fig. 4.1.
Clearly, Morris’ diagram depicts what he considers to be the three dimen-
sions of semiois – “the syntactical dimension, the semantical dimension, and the
pragmatic dimension” (1939: 133) – that obtain in any given concrete instance of
sign use, along with the three dimensions of semiotic study, whereby the investigator
explicates the sign’s relations: to the object that it is standing for, to the conse-
quences and conditions of its use, and to its placement within a system of other
signs. One would have thought that Morris’ repeated use of the word dimensions in
his analysis would have forestalled any atomizing trifurcation of this concept – yet
soon Morris’ holistic description of how each and every sign relation was to be stud-
ied became the source of ever less integrated divisions of sign study (and ever less
integrated deﬁnitions) that persist even to this day. “Otto Neurath warned me years
ago that these terms would engender pseudo-problems and distract attention from
genuine problems,” writes Morris twelve years after the terms are ﬁrst introduced

152
Charles Morris (1901–1979)
Fig. 4.1 Morris’ minimal explanatory requirements for the correct analysis of any sign (from
Morris 1939: 133, re-drawn for this volume)1
in Foundations of the Theory of Signs, “and the course of events has proved, in part,
the legitimacy of his fears” (1948: 217).
As we have seen, Morris was attempting to formulate a “uniﬁed science” that
would reveal the “systematic connection among three historical currents of thought
[empiricism, pragmatism, and logical positivism], legitimatizing each of them with-
out rendering the others superﬂous” (Posner 1998: 566). Morris’ point, rather, is
that a too exclusive focus on any one of the three dimensions of investigation at
the expense of the other two would be ruinous to any science, given that “signs
are simply the objects studied by the biological and physical sciences, related in
certain complex functional processes [and that] signs are also the instruments used
by all sciences, since every science makes use of and expresses its results in terms
of signs” (1938: 2).
Flawed, then, because not rising to the level of a constitutive framework
demanded by a truly uniﬁed science, would be an investigation of sign’s formal rela-
tions to other signs (e.g., the syntactic method of logical positivism) that ignored the
pragmatic dimension of the sign use in a social community in its study; or a study
of the relationship between a sign and its interpreter (e.g., the pragmatic methods
of social science or phenomenology) that ignored the semantic dimension of signs’
relationship with their real-world objects; or a semantic ontology of “what there
is” (e.g., the reductionist empiricism of laboratory science) that fails to recognize
1 Morris draws a box to surround the words sign vehicle in the original, but here I follow the prece-
dent of Nöth (1990: 50) and Posner (1998: 567), in depicting the locus where these dimensions
meet, and in so doing, comprise a semiotic triad, as a triangle.

4
Excerpts from Signs, Language and Behavior
153
the constitutive roles that language and community play in the delineation of such
objects of study.2
“The main misunderstanding,” writes semiotics scholar Susan Petrilli, “relates to
the fact that ‘meaning’ has generally been associated exclusively to the semantical
dimension, when, in fact, it is present in all three dimensions” (2005: 193).
We have spent a good deal of time situating Morris’ work in relation to its own
time in this introduction, because Morris is, for the most part, misunderstood and
perhaps unfairly neglected today, both in academic circles and in biosemiotic circles.
In the former, he was, at least for much of the last century, misunderstood as the
semiotic successor to Peirce, and one can ﬁnd many instances of academic authors
relying on their readings of Morris for procuring their understandings of Peirce.3
Reading Morris as a “substitute” (or synonym) of Peirce – or vice versa – is
extremely misguided, as Morris himself would doubtlessly have concurred. For
Morris’ sign theory and Peirce’s sign theory differ in fundamental and critically
different ways, particularly with regard to the key notion of the interpretant, though
this discussion goes far beyond what there is space to discuss in this introduction
(nor is that the purpose of this introduction to Morris and his work; for illuminat-
ing discussions on these differences, however, see Petrilli (1999: 67–102), Deledalle
(2000: 114–120); and Petrilli and Ponzio (2005: 167–201)). With the marked rise in
the quantity and quality of Peirce scholarship in the last two decades, however, this
misunderstanding seems to be abating.
In the biosemiotic community, almost the polar opposite mischaracterization of
Morris is often to be found – i.e., that of Morris as a crude epigone of Peirce, an
“eliminative behaviorist” in the fashion of John B. Watson (1878–1958) or B.F.
Skinner (1904–1990). Much like the Morrisians of yesteryear who did not read
Peirce, many of the Peirceans looking to develop a biological sign-science today
have not bothered to read Morris – or to read him very deeply, with an eye towards
distilling and precipitating the useful elements in his work for use in biosemiotics.
Semiotic scholars Susan Petrilli and Augusto Ponzio, however, effectively argue that
Charles Morris’s behavioristic (not behaviorist) biosemiotics is one worthy of the
name:
“All Morris’ research” – from the writing of his 1925 university disserta-
tion, Symbolism and Reality, through his major works Foundation of a Theory of
Signs (1938), Signs, Language, and Behavior (1946), Signiﬁcation and Signiﬁcance
(1964) and his collected Writings on the General Theory of Signs (1971) – “can
be described as biosemiotic in orientation, and in this sense shows a tightly woven
2 Anderson et al. (Chapter Twelve, this volume) argue that it was precisely such pars pro toto
misunderstandings that ascended to dominance in academia in the latter half of the twentieth
century – in good measure, and to the detriment of Morris’s project and career.
3 A sure sign of this is when the author claims a four-part deﬁnition of the sign that includes a foun-
dational interpreter responsible for bringing together the “sign” relation – for this is where Morris
most fundamentally diverges from Peirce, and why John Dewey (1859–1952) deemed Morris’
semiotics “a complete inversion of Peirce” (Morris 1971: 444).

154
Charles Morris (1901–1979)
continuity” writes Petrilli and Ponzio, “in that what remains constant is the tenac-
ity that characterizes his search for a method and for rigorously scientiﬁc terms for
constructing a science that can account for ‘signs’ in all their [biological] forms and
manifestations” (2005: 186, 191).
Charles Morris pursued this project until his death on January 15, 1979, in
Gainesville, Florida. In the following selection, we ﬁnd Morris at the outset of what
would ultimately turn out to be his lifelong one-person project, in a position very
similar to the one where the newly coalescing community of contemporary biosemi-
otics ﬁnds itself today. “The need of furthering a genuine science of signs is so basic
that we must move in this direction as speedily as possible,” writes Morris (1938:
22). Yet he is aware from the outset that if one proceeds with either a too-loosely
assumed, or a too-rigidly pre-ﬁxed, idea about the object of this analysis – i.e., the
“sign” relation – then one may wind up not proceeding scientiﬁcally, or not actually
investigating the phenomenon that one ﬁrst set out to investigate at all. Thus, the ﬁrst
and most important job to undertake at this opening phase of the establishment of
(bio)semiotics, insists Morris, is to develop a scientiﬁc vocabulary that clearly states
the criteria whereby something does or does not meet the operational deﬁnition of
the sign phenomena in question.
As a keenly intuitive semiotician himself, Morris distinguished between the
‘analyzed terms’ that a science needs in order to make progress in its work (e.g.,
“phenotype”, “induction”, “catalyst”) and the great mass of ‘unanalysed’ terms,
(e.g., “similar”, “cause”, “change”) that support those analyzed terms, and that
themselves do not need nor receive analysis by the science, lest one embark upon
a potentially inﬁnite regress. Writes Petrilli: “Morris’ aim was to ensure that the
key words in the ‘science of signs’ were all analyzed terms; [terms so analyzed] by
Morris include interpreter, interpretant, denotatum, signﬁcatum, sign-vehicle, sign-
family, signal, symbol, comsign, lansign, ascriptor, designator, appraisor, formator,
preparatory stimulus, disposition to respond, stimulus, response, response-sequence
and behaviour family” (2005: 180). To do so, writes Petrilli, Morris
draws from the biological and physical sciences for unanalyzed terms such as organism,
reaction, sensory organ, need, energy, and so on. These are combined with other unana-
lyzed terms adapted from everyday language, such as behaviour, condition, cause, inﬂuence
and situation in such a way as to analyze (completely or partially)4 the terms proposed for
[use in the science of behavioristic] semiotics. He claimed that this method was scientif-
ically correct in the sense that he was indicating clearly the discourse ﬁeld from which
he was drawing his undeﬁned terms; his intention was to establish the conditions for their
veriﬁcation or confutation (2005: 177).
4 “On the basis of the unanalyzed terms,” Petrilli explains, “the analyzed terms of the science in
question can be either completely analyzed (or ‘deﬁned’), as when we state the necessary and suf-
ﬁcient conditions for their application; or they can be only partially analyzed (or [‘characterized’]),
as when the sufﬁcient but not necessary conditions for their application are asserted” (2005: 180).
Morris felt that it is prudent to proceed only from the latter kind of analysis with regards to the key
term “sign” at this early stage of the science’s development.

4
Excerpts from Signs, Language and Behavior
155
Accordingly, Morris is assiduously careful to deﬁne all his terms. Thus, for
example, when he presents his preliminary formulation of a “sign” as: “Anything,
A, that is a preparatory-stimulus which, in the absence of stimulus-objects ini-
tiating response-sequences of a certain behavior-family, causes a disposition in
some organism to respond, under certain conditions, by response-sequences of this
behavior-family” (1946: 57), this formulation is immediately accompanied by clar-
iﬁcations of what constitutes a “preparatory-stimulus”, a “response sequence”, a
“disposition to respond” and a “behavior-family” in his proposed science of signs
(1946: 194). Not surprisingly, Morris’ deﬁnitions change and his terminology gets
updated as he works through his self-described “prolegomenon to a science of signs”
(1948: 434) throughout the course of his forty-year career. Thus, by 1964, the term
“signiﬁcatum” will be replaced with “signiﬁcation”, and the original 1938 formula-
tion for what characterizes, but does not exhaustively deﬁne, a sign (i.e., its sufﬁcient
but not necessary conditions) is reﬁned from merely:
“S [a sign vehicle] is a sign of D [its designatum] to the degree that I [its interpre-
tant] takes mediated account of D in virtue of the presence of S” (Morris 1938: 4)
to the more precise formulation:
Semiosis is a ﬁve-term relation – v, w, x, y, z – [wherein] v [ a sign-vehicle] sets up in w [an
interpreter system] the disposition to react in a certain kind of way, x [an interpretant], to a
certain kind of object (not then acting as a stimulus), y [a signiﬁcatum/signifcation], under
certain conditions [sign contexts], z (Morris 1964: 2).
Thus, almost thirty years later, the underlying foundations of his sign the-
ory remain unchanged: “In semiosis,” writes Morris, “something takes account of
something else mediately, i.e., by means of a third something. Semiosis is thus a
mediated-taking-account of ” (1938: 4).
Finally, as regards the endlessly disputed term “meaning”, it may be interesting
for contemporary biosemioticians to note that Morris “does not include that term
here at all among the basic terms of semiotic”, believing that
This term, though useful enough at the level of everyday analysis, does not have the pre-
cision necessary for scientiﬁc analysis. Accounts of ‘meaning’ usually throw a handful of
putty at the target of sign phenomena, while a technical semiotic must provide us with words
which are sharpened arrows. ‘Meaning’ signiﬁes any and all phases of the sign-process (the
status of being a sign, the interpretant, the fact of denoting, the signiﬁcatum, etc), and fre-
quently suggests mental and valuational processes as well; hence it is desirable for semiotic
to dispense with the term, and to introduce separate special terms for the various factors
which ‘meaning’ fails to discriminate. (1946: 19)
Charles Morris’ attempts at establishing a science of biosemiotics in the 1940s
and 1950s were, as has often been the case, both premature as well as very much
against the prevailing disciplinary enthusiasms of his time. “Hostility towards prag-
matism from University of Chicago philosopher Mortimer Adler and President
Robert Hutchins further ensured the marginalization of Morris and semiotics,”
writes Morris biographer John Shook (2009: 319). This claim, too, was echoed by
Morris’ star student at the University of Chicago, Thomas A. Sebeok, who believed
that the persevering hostility to Morris’ work there “set back the nascent rise of
semiotics in the United States by easily a quarter of a century” (Deely 2004: o.l.)

156
Charles Morris (1901–1979)
Like Peirce, however, Morris was sanguine about the likelihood that the devel-
opment of a science of signs that would “render the insights of both the theorists
and the practitioners of human action from all over the world compatible with one
another within a comprehensive frame of reference” (Posner 1998: 565) would be
the work of “many investigators working in many ﬁelds and for many generations”
(Morris 1948: 434). The current generation has produced its cohort of such investi-
gators, as the rest of this volume will well attest. Yet here at the prolegomenon stage
of this latest iteration, biosemioticians would do well to remember that one need
not adopt Charles Morris’ particular theoretical framework for the analysis of sign
relations in living systems, in order to draw inspiration from his tenacious efforts at
clarity and precision in laying the foundational stages of a scientiﬁc biosemiotics,
and to strive to follow in his example.

4
Excerpts from Signs, Language and Behavior
157
Excerpts from Signs, Language and Behavior
(1946)
The Scope of Semiotic
Semiotic has for its goal a general theory of signs in all their forms and manifesta-
tions, whether in animals or men, whether normal or pathological, whether linguistic
or non-linguistic, whether personal or social.5 Semiotic is thus an interdisciplinary
enterprise.
Part of the widespread interest in this area is motivated by the belief that
higher-level sign processes (often called symbols) are of central importance in
understanding man and his works. Ernst Cassirer called man “the symbolic ani-
mal” (“animal symbolicum”), instead of the “rational animal” (“animal rationale”),
and much contemporary work has shown the aptness of this conception.
The Problem of Approach
The understanding and the effective use of language and other signs has become
today an insistent task. Popular and technical literature is ﬁlled with discussions of
the nature of language, the differences between signs in men and in animals, the
differentiation of scientiﬁc discourse and such other types of discourse as occur in
literature, religion, and philosophy, the consequences of an adequate or inadequate
use of signs for personal and social adjustments.
These discussions are carried on from many points of view and for various
purposes. There are linguists, psychologists, and social scientists interested in the
study of those special kinds of signs which occur in their own speciﬁc subject mat-
ters; philosophers eager to defend the superiority of one system of philosophy over
another; logicians and mathematicians working on the elaboration of a symbolism
adequate to their own special disciplines; artists and religionists anxious to justify
in an age of science their own special symbols; educators desirous of improving the
use of language in the educational process for which they are responsible; psychi-
atrists aiming to uncover the place which signs play in the personality disturbances
of their patients; statesmen seeking to uphold or improve the basic symbols which
sustain the social structure; propagandists attempting to discern the ways in which
language may be used to direct social change.
All of these approaches and purposes are legitimate. Their multiplicity bears wit-
ness to the enormous place which signs play in human life, while the ferment of
contemporary discussion about signs is one evidence of the tensions which beset
5 Editor’s note: These ﬁrst two paragraphs constitute the opening passage of Morris’s 1964 volume
Signiﬁcation and Signiﬁcance. I have included them here as an introductory aperçu of Morris’
biosemiotic project. [DF]

158
Charles Morris (1901–1979)
our culture. Language is of such central importance that it becomes an object of
central concern in times of extensive social readjustment. It is not surprising that
in these days, as in the later Greek and Medieval periods, attempts should be made
to develop a comprehensive doctrine of signs. Today this discipline is frequently
known as semantics; we shall call it semiotic.6
And yet it must be admitted that from a scientiﬁc, and therefore from a practical,
point of view the present status of this discipline is far from satisfactory. We do not
often have reliable knowledge to direct fruitfully the applications we would like to
make and endeavor to make. The situation is similar to that which the physician fre-
quently encounters: he must do what he can for a particular illness even if adequate
scientiﬁc knowledge is lacking. It is obvious that we do not possess a developed
science of signs, though there are beginnings of such a science in such special ﬁelds
as linguistics. There are few general principles now available in terms of which
existing knowledge can be integrated and from which empirically veriﬁable predic-
tions can be made. Yet the pressing problems for which such a science would be
the proper instrument cannot be disregarded until a developed science of signs is
obtained.
In this situation it has seemed wise to adopt a compromise attitude. The need of
furthering a genuine science of signs is so basic that we must move in this direc-
tion as speedily as possible. The present study is based on the conviction that a
science of signs can be most proﬁtably developed on a biological basis and specif-
ically within the framework of the science of behavior (a ﬁeld which, following a
suggestion of Otto Neurath, may be called behavioristics). Hence I shall constantly
suggest connections between signs and the behavior of animals and men in which
they occur. On the other hand, behavioristics is not at present sufﬁciently developed
to account adequately for the more complex human actions, nor for the signs which
they utilize. Since our present day problems demand, however, insight into just such
complexities, I shall not hesitate to introduce considerations drawn from very gross
observations. And everywhere I shall seek for a wide perspective which will help to
co-ordinate the great variety of interests, scientiﬁc and cultural, in sign phenomena.
I share the view that insight into the nature of signs provides us with an instrument
which improves our understanding of, and effective participation in, the whole of
our contemporary intellectual, cultural, personal, and social problems. In support of
this conviction I advise the reader to turn to Chapter 7, which deals with the impor-
tance of signs in the life of individuals and societies; a preliminary reading of that
material at this time will serve to “fortify” the reader for the analysis which lies
ahead.
6 “Semantics” is perhaps the most widely accepted name for the discipline which studies signs.
“Semiotic,” the term here chosen, was used by the Stoics, John Locke, and Charles Peirce. In the
medieval period the term “scientia sermocinalis” was frequently employed. Linguists and logicians
restrict “semantics” to a part of the whole ﬁeld, namely the part which deals with the signiﬁcata
of signs. Hence we use “semiotic” as the general term; “semantics” will be employed for that part
of semiotic which deals with signiﬁcata. Later we show how semantics, syntactics, and pragmatics
are the main subdivisions of semiotic.

4
Excerpts from Signs, Language and Behavior
159
The following study is directed both to scientists and to those concerned with the
basic issues of contemporary individual and social life. There is a need today for
such a study, inadequate and incomplete though it is bound to be. It may serve as a
guide to the genuinely scientiﬁc and culturally fertile semiotic which the future will
bring.
There is wide disagreement as to when something is a sign. Some persons would
unhesitatingly say that blushing is a sign, others would not. There are mechanical
dogs which will come out of their kennels if one claps one’s hands loudly in their
presence. Is such clapping a sign? Are clothes signs of the personality of those
who wear them? Is music a sign of anything? Is a word such as “Go!” a sign in
the same sense as is a green light on a street intersection? Are punctuation marks
signs? Are dreams signs? Is the Parthenon a sign of Greek culture? Disagreements
are widespread; they show that the term “sign” is both vague and ambiguous.7
This disagreement extends to many other terms which are commonly used in
describing sign-processes. The terms “express,” “understand,” “refer,” “meaning”
would provide many instances. So would “communication” and “language”: Do
animals communicate? If so, do they have a language? Or do only men have lan-
guage? Yes, run some answers; no, run others. We ﬁnd the same diversity of replies
if we ask whether thought or mind or consciousness is involved in a sign-process;
whether a poem “refers” to what it “expresses”; whether men can signify what can-
not be experienced; whether mathematical terms signify anything; whether language
signs are preceded genetically by non-language signs; whether the elements in an
undeciphered “dead” language are signs.
In the face of such disagreements, it is not easy to ﬁnd a starting point. If we are
to seek for a formulation of the word “sign” in biological terms, the task is to isolate
some distinctive kind of behavior which agrees fairly well with frequent usages of
the term “sign”: Since usage of the term is, however, not consistent, it cannot be
demanded that the chosen behavioral formulation agree with all the various usages
which are actually current. At some point the semiotician must say: “Henceforth
we will recognize that anything which fulﬁlls certain conditions is a sign. These
conditions are selected in the light of current usages of the term “sign,” but they
may not ﬁt in with all such usages. They do not therefore claim to be a statement
of the way the term “sign” is always used, but a statement of the conditions under
which we will henceforth admit within semiotic that something is a “sign.”
Then from such a starting point a behavioral theory of signs will build up step
by step a set of terms to talk about signs (taking account of current distinctions
but attempting to reduce for scientiﬁc purposes their vagueness and ambiguity),
and will endeavor to explain and predict sign phenomena on the basis of the general
7 Because of this vagueness and ambiguity a number of scientists have proposed to discontinue
the use of the term “sign.” Of course behavioristics can be developed without the use of the term;
no sign is indispensable. But since the term is in such frequent usage in ordinary language and in
writings of semioticians and behavioristicians it has seemed advisable to continue the term but to
use it in a more precise manner than is customary. Whether this usage is to be incorporated into
behavioristics itself must be left to specialists in the ﬁeld.

160
Charles Morris (1901–1979)
principles of behavior which underlie all behavior, and hence sign-behavior. The aim
is to take account of the distinctions and analyses which former investigators have
made, but to ground these results whenever possible upon general behavior theory.
In the nature of the case such a scientiﬁc semiotic will often deviate from current
terminology, and can only be developed slowly and laboriously. It will often seem
pedantic and less illuminating for many purposes than less scientiﬁc approaches –
which therefore are to be encouraged in the light of the many problems and purposes
which a treatment of signs aims to fulﬁll. It is not to be expected that all discussions
of literary, religious, and logical signs can be translated at once with proﬁt into a
behavioral formulation. The present approach does not therefore wish to exclude
other approaches to semiotic. But it does proceed upon the belief that basic progress
in this complex ﬁeld rests ﬁnally upon the development of a genuine science of
signs, and that this development can be most proﬁtably carried on by a biological
orientation which places signs within the context of behavior.
Preliminary Isolation of Sign-Behavior
We shall begin by taking two examples of behavior to which the term “sign” is often
applied both in common usage and in the writings of semioticians. Then a superﬁ-
cial analysis of these examples will disclose the features which a more technical
formulation of the nature of a sign must embody. If both situations reveal certain
common elements, then both may be called sign-behavior; the differences in the
two situations would then suggest differences between kinds of signs. If analysis
shows too great differences, then the alternative would be to choose different terms
to describe the two situations, and to adopt a narrower deﬁnition of “sign”: in either
case we would then be in a position to consider whether any additional phenomena
are to be called signs, that is, whether the characterization of signs based upon the
two examples in question is to be held as a basis for determining when something is
a sign or whether it is to be expanded to include situations of a widely different sort.
The ﬁrst example is drawn from experiments on dogs.8 If a hungry dog that goes
to a certain place to obtain food when the food is seen or smelled, is trained in a
certain way, it will learn to go to this place for food when a buzzer is sounded even
though the food is not observed. In this case the dog is attentive to the buzzer but
does not normally go to the buzzer itself; and if the food is not made available until
some time after the buzzer has sounded, the dog may not go to the place in question
until the time interval has elapsed. Many persons would say in such a situation that
the buzzer sound is to the dog a sign of food at the given place, and in particular,
a non-language sign. 1f we abstract from the experimenter and his purposes in this
8 See Karl Zener, “The Signiﬁcance of Behavior Accompanying Conditioned Salivary Secretion
for Theories of the Conditioned Response,” American Journal of Psychology, 50, 1937, 384–403.
These experiments make clear the differences in the response of the dog to situations in which the
sign is present and those in which it is not present.

4
Excerpts from Signs, Language and Behavior
161
example, and consider only the dog, the example approximates what have often been
called “natural signs,” as when a dark cloud is a sign of rain. It is in this way that
we wish the experiment to be considered.
The second example is drawn from human behavior. A person on the way to a
certain town is driving along a road; he is stopped by another person who says that
the road is blocked some distance away by a landslide. The person who hears the
sounds which are uttered does not continue to the point in question, but turns off on
a side-road and takes another route to his destination. It would be commonly said
that the sounds made by the one person and heard by the other (and indeed by the
utterer also) were signs to both of them of the obstacle on the road, and in particular
were language signs, even though the actual responses of the two persons are very
different.
Common to these two situations is the fact that both the dog and the person
addressed behave in a way which satisﬁes a need – hunger in the one case, arrival
at a certain town in the other. In each case the organisms have various ways of
attaining their goals: when food is smelled the dog reacts differently than when the
buzzer is sounded; when the obstacle is encountered the man reacts differently than
when spoken to at a distance from the obstacle. Further, the buzzer is not responded
to as food nor the spoken words as an obstacle; the dog may wait awhile before
going for food and the man may continue to drive for a time down the blocked road
before turning off to another road. And yet in some sense both the buzzer and the
words control or direct the course of behavior toward a goal in a way similar to
(though not identical with) the control which would be exercised by the food or the
obstacle if these were present as stimuli: the buzzer determines the dog’s behavior
to be that of seeking food in a certain place at a certain time; the words determine
the man’s behavior to be that of getting to a certain town by avoiding a certain
obstacle at a given place on a given road. The buzzer and the words are in some
sense “substitutes” in the control of behavior for the control over behavior which
would be exercised by what they signify if this was itself observed. The differences
between non-language and language signs remain for subsequent discussion.
It is clear at once that the formulation of “sign” frequent in early behavior theory
is too simple: namely, it cannot be simply said that a sign is a substitute stimulus
which calls out to itself the same response which would have been called out by
something else had it been present. For the response to food is to food itself, while
the response to the buzzer is not to it as if it were food; and the actual response to the
situation in which the sign appears may be greatly different from the response to a
situation where what is signiﬁed, and not the sign, is present. The dog, for instance,
may salivate when the buzzer is sounded but it cannot actually eat unless food is
present; the man may feel anxiety when he is addressed, but his turning off the road
before reaching the obstacle is a very different response from that which he would
make if he had gone directly to the place of blockage itself (and even more different
from the behavior of the person who told him of the obstacle.)
Nor can the difﬁculties in the earlier attempts to identify signs with any and
all substitute stimuli be avoided by attempting to say that whatever inﬂuences a
response with respect to what is not at the moment a stimulus is a sign. For example,

162
Charles Morris (1901–1979)
a drug will inﬂuence the way an organism will respond to stimuli which later affect
it, and yet it would be too great a departure from common usage to call such a drug
a sign.
The difﬁculties in these formulations may perhaps be avoided if, as our exam-
ples suggest, signs are identiﬁed within goal-seeking behavior. So in the light of our
analysis of what the two examples chosen as a point of reference have in common
(and neglecting for the time being their differences) we arrive at the following pre-
liminary formulation of at least one set of conditions under which something may
be called a sign: If something, A, controls behavior towards a goal in a way simi-
lar to (but not necessarily identical with) the way something else, B, would control
behavior with respect to that goal in a situation in which it were observed, then A is
a sign.
The buzzer and the spoken sounds are then signs of food and obstacle because
they control the course of behavior with respect to the goals of getting food and
getting to a certain place in a way similar to the control which food and obstacle
would exercise if they were observed. Whatever exercises this type of control in
goal-seeking behavior is a sign. And goal-seeking behavior in which signs exercise
control may be called sign-behavior.
Toward Precision in the Identiﬁcation of Sign-Behavior
For many purposes the preceding account of a sign is adequate; it at least suggests
a behavioral way of formulating what is commonly meant in saying that a sign
“stands for” or “represents” something other than itself. But for more strictly sci-
entiﬁc purposes a more exact formulation is required in order to clarify the notions
of similarity of behavior and goal-seeking behavior. We might at this point simply
leave it to the scientists in their ﬁeld to state further reﬁnements, and indeed any-
thing we add is in the nature of the case tentative. But since our concern is to push
semiotic as rapidly as possible in the direction of a natural science, the following
suggestions are made.
Implicit in the preceding account are four concepts which need further clar-
iﬁcation: preparatory-stimulus, disposition to respond, response sequence, and
behavior-family. When these notions are elucidated a more precise statement of a
set of conditions sufﬁcient for something to be called a sign can be given.
A preparatory-stimulus is any stimulus which inﬂuences a response to some
other stimulus. Thus it has been found by O. H. Mowrer that the magnitude of
the jump of a rat to a shock stimulus is increased if a tone sounds before the shock
stimulus is encountered.9 Such a stimulus differs from other stimuli, say the shock,
9 The notion of preparatory-stimulus seems to be in harmony with Mowrer’s conception of the
“warning” stimuli involved in “implicit conditioning.” Speaking of the augmentation of the rat’s
jumping to a shock when it is preceded by a sound he writes: “This augmentation of the reaction to
the unconditioned stimulus, by virtue of its being preceded by a warning, or conditioned, stimulus
(which does not, however, produce a gross, overt response in its own right), is here termed “implicit

4
Excerpts from Signs, Language and Behavior
163
in that as a preparatory stimulus it inﬂuences a response to something other than
itself rather than causing a response to itself (it may of course also cause a response
to itself, that is, not be merely or solely a preparatory-stimulus). By a stimulus is
meant, following Clark L. Hull, any physical energy which acts upon a receptor of
a living organism; the source of this energy will be called the stimulus-object. By
a response is meant any action of a muscle or gland; hence there are reactions of
an organism which are not necessarily responses. A preparatory-stimulus affects or
causes a reaction in an organism, but, as Mowrer makes clear, it need not call out
a response to itself, but only to some other stimulus. In the account toward which
we are moving it is not held that all preparatory-stimuli are signs, but only that
preparatory-stimuli which meet certain additional requirements are signs. That a
preparatory-stimulus need not when presented call out a response makes intelligible
the fact that a command to turn right at a certain place may produce at the time of
utterance no overt, or as far as we know, “implicit” response of turning right, and yet
may determine that the person, commanded turns right when he reaches the place in
question. A preparatory-stimulus does however cause some reaction in an organism,
affects it in some way, and: this leads to the introduction of the term “disposition to
respond.”
A disposition to respond to something in a certain way is a state of an organism
at a given time which is such that under certain additional conditions the response in
question takes place. These additional conditions may be very complex. An animal
disposed to go to a certain place to obtain food may not go there even if food is
observed – he may not be willing or able to swim across an intervening water barrier
or to move if certain other animals are present as stimulus-objects. The complex of
conditions also includes other states of the organism. The person commanded to
turn at a certain corner may not turn even when the corner is reached: as he walked
to the corner he may have come to believe that his informant was deliberately trying
to misdirect him, so that conﬁdence in one’s informant may be at times a necessary
condition for making a response to which one is disposed because of signs.
There may be dispositions to respond which are not caused by preparatory-
stimuli, but every preparatory-stimulus causes a disposition to respond in a certain
way to something else. Logically, therefore, “disposition to respond” is the more
basic notion, and a preparatory-stimulus is a stimulus which causes a disposition to
respond in a certain way to something else. And since not all preparatory-stimuli
conditioning” (“Preparatory Set (Expectancy) – Some Methods of Measurement,” Psychological
Monographs, 52, 1940, 27). It is further related to what K. S. Lashley calls a “conditional
reaction” – i.e., a reaction to something which is determined by the stimulus character of some-
thing else (see “Conditional Reactions in the Rat,” Journal of Psychology, 6, 1938, 311–324); to
K. A. William’s conception of signs as stimuli to preparatory responses ( “The Conditioned Reﬂex
and the Sign Function in Learning,” Psychological Review, 36, 1929, 481–497); and to what B.
F. Skinner calls a “pseudo-reﬂex (The Behavior of Organisms, 1938). In the usage of the present
account it is not necessarily implied that a preparatory-stimulus is always learned (though it may
always be), nor that all preparatory-stimuli are signs. The explanation of the functioning of such
stimuli is a problem for behavioristicians. C. L. Hull has suggested that they may be explained in
terms of his conception of temporal patterning.

164
Charles Morris (1901–1979)
would normally be called signs, and not all dispositions to response which are
caused by preparatory-stimuli are relevant to the delimitation of sign processes,
additional criteria are involved; and to be in accord with our own preliminary formu-
lation of sign-behavior, these criteria must introduce the notion of behavior toward
a goal.
A response-sequence is any sequence of consecutive responses whose ﬁrst mem-
ber is initiated by a stimulus-object and whose last member is a response to this
stimulus-object as a goal-object, that is, to an object which partially or completely
removes the state of the organism (the “need”) which motivates the sequence of
responses. Thus the series “of responses of a hungry dog which sees a rabbit, runs
after it, kills it, and so obtains food is a response-sequence.” For the sight of the
rabbit starts a series of responses to the rabbit in terms of which the rabbit is ﬁnally
obtained as food. The intervening responses in the sequence can occur only if the
environment provides the necessary stimulus for their release and such sources of
stimuli may be called supporting stimulus-objects. The terrain over which the dog
runs in this case provides the support necessary for the responses of following the
rabbit and tracking it down, while the rabbit provides the stimuli initiating and
terminating the series of responses.
A behavior-family is any set of response-sequences which are initiated by sim-
ilar stimulus-objects and which terminate in these objects as similar goal-objects
for similar needs.10 Hence all the response-sequences which start from rabbits and
eventuate in securing rabbits as food would constitute the rabbit-food behavior-
family. A behavior-family may in an extreme case have only one member; no limit
is set to the number of possible members. Behavior-families have various degrees
of inclusiveness. All the objects which a dog eats would, for instance determine
an extensive “object-food” behavior-family which would include the rabbit-food
behavior-family as a subordinate behavior-family.
In these terms it is possible to formulate more precisely a set of conditions sufﬁ-
cient for something to be a sign: If anything, A, is a preparatory-stimulus which in
10 This notion of behavior-family is similar to, and indeed a part of, C. L. Hull’s conception of the
habit-family hierarchy (see Psychological Review, 41, 1934, 33 ff.). I have not attempted to probe
the problems connected with the terms “need” or “behavior.” “Need” is taken as roughly synony-
mous with “motivating organic state” and not with “what is necessary for survival”; so used an
organism may have needs which in fact are fatal to its survival. These two common uses of “need”
must be distinguished. On the problem of deﬁning “need” in behavioristics see the monograph by
Else Frenkel-Brunswik, “Motivation and Behavior,” Genetic Psychology Monographs, 26, 1942,
121–265; S. Koch, “The Logical Character of the Motivation Concept,” Psychological Review,
48, 1941, 15–38, 127–154. As for the term “behavior,” it might be possible to identify it with
“response-sequence” or “behavior-family.” We use “behavior” as a narrower term than “response”
and as a wider term than “sign-behavior.” Other uses of the term are, however common. For a
discussion of the situation see the paper by Egon Brunswik in the forthcoming monograph, Theory
of Behavior (International Encyclopedia of Uniﬁed Science, 1(10)). See also the “Symposium
on Psychology and Scientiﬁc Method,” Brunswik, Hull, Lewin, Psychological Review, 50, 1943,
255–310.

4
Excerpts from Signs, Language and Behavior
165
the absence of stimulus-objects initiating response-sequences of a certain behavior-
family causes a disposition in some organism to respond under certain conditions
by response-sequences of this behavior-family, then A is a sign.11
According to these conditions, the buzzer is a sign to the dog since it disposes the
animal to seek food in a certain place in the absence of direct stimulation from food
objects at this place, and similarly, the spoken words are signs to the driver since
they dispose him to response-sequences of avoiding an obstacle at a certain point on
a certain road although the obstacle is not itself at the time of hearing the sounds a
stimulus-object.
The merit of this formulation is that it does not require that the dog or the driver
respond to the sign itself, the sign serving merely as a preparatory-stimulus for
response to something else. Nor does it require that the dog or the driver ﬁnally
respond overtly as they would if food or an obstacle had been stimulus-objects;
it merely requires that if the animal makes the response-sequences which it is dis-
posed to make when certain additional conditions are met (conditions of need and of
supporting stimulus-objects) these response-sequences will be of the same behavior-
family as those which the food or obstacle would have initiated. In this way the
difﬁculties which earlier behavioral formulations of signs encountered are avoided.
And yet objective behavioral criteria are furnished for determining whether some-
thing is or is not a sign. It is further believed that these criteria do not deviate from
those which underlie certain common usages of the term “sign.”
Some Objections Considered
By this time a mixed feeling of dismay, fear, anger, and resentment may well have
overcome readers of contemporary literature on “semantics.” Semiotic is not merely
losing its entertaining character, they may say, but is slipping into the abyss of tech-
nicalities and hard work. And so it is! And so it must if the purpose be scientiﬁc.
For science has always in its advance forced us away from the presented surface of
familiar things to the laborious discovery of those properties of things which give
insight, predictions, and control of this surface. And there is no reason why the sci-
entiﬁc advance of semiotic should shun this road. No reason why sign-processes,
for all their immediate sense of familiarity, should not be as complex as any chemi-
cal structure or biological functioning. And we have already admitted that for other
immediate purposes, other less technical analyses may be more useful.
There is, however, a genuine question as to whether the present approach loses
its relevance for the wide range of problems which draw the attention of the con-
temporary world to signs. And there is a real danger here because of the fact that
we are certainly not at present able to analyze in precise behavioral terms the more
complex phenomena of esthetic, religious, political, or mathematical signs, or even
11 For an analysis of the term “disposition” as applied to signs, see C. L. Stevenson, Ethics and
Language, pp. 46–59.

166
Charles Morris (1901–1979)
the common language of our daily existence. But later chapters will attempt to show
that the present approach has, even now, many suggestions to offer in these ﬁelds,
and that because of a consideration soon to be mentioned, the detailed analysis of
signs and their signiﬁcations in terms of behavior is not always necessary since we
can, within limits, accept the results of analyses which have already been obtained
in these ﬁelds and even verbal reports by a person on his own signs.
An objection frequently raised to the preceding type of behavioral formulation
may be expressed as follows: “The observation of response-sequences is at best
one test for the existence of signs, and one in fact seldom employed. Take a person
reading a book alone in his room, say a book about Alaska; certainly the marks
on the pages of this book are signs to the reader at the moment he reads them.
And he knows this, and knows what they signify, quite independently of how he
would actually respond to Alaska if he were there, and independently in fact of any
response which he makes to his environment. This suggests that there is something
essentially wrong with a behavioral formulation. Behavior is at times evidence of
signs, but there may be other and better and more available evidence – such as that
given by self-observation.”
Now much of this contention may be admitted: there certainly may be other
evidence for sign-processes than the actual observance of response-sequences, and
self-observation may supply this evidence. But to admit these points does not show
an inadequacy in the behavioral formulation.
The situation may be clariﬁed in this way. The preceding formulation of “sign”
is not a deﬁnition in the sense that it gives the necessary and sufﬁcient conditions
for something to be a sign. It does not say that something is a sign if and only
if the conditions laid down are met, but merely that if these conditions are met,
then whatever meets them is a sign.12 There may be various kinds and degrees
of evidence that these conditions are in fact met. And it is perfectly possible for
there to be other sets of conditions proposed for calling something a sign, and these
are acceptable to the present behavioral formulation if they are such that there is a
constant connection between the two sets of sufﬁcient conditions.
The central methodological issues may be analyzed as follows. The set of con-
ditions which has been proposed as sufﬁcient for calling something a sign did
not stipulate that the organism for which it is a sign actually performs response-
sequences of a given behavior-family, but merely that it be disposed to perform
them, that is, would perform them under certain conditions. The question then is,
what kind of evidence permits us to say that an organism is disposed so to act.
The most complete evidence is of course to make available the conditions in
question and then see whether response-sequences of the given behavior-family
12 I owe the suggestion of giving only sufﬁcient conditions for saying that something is a sign,
instead of giving a deﬁnition (that is, sufﬁcient and necessary conditions), to Alfred Tarski. This
procedure seems advisable at the present state of the argument, since premature deﬁnitions may
rule out other phenomena which we may later wish to include. The consequence of the present
procedure is that for the moment our statements about signs are limited to signs as identiﬁed by
the criteria here proposed or by any other criteria which imply these criteria.

4
Excerpts from Signs, Language and Behavior
167
actually occur. If one wants to know whether the buzzer is a sign to the dog of
food in a certain place, one takes a hungry dog and investigates whether the buzzer
is the cause of response-sequences of seeking food in that place when the food itself
is not at the time a stimulus-object. If the dog under these conditions goes to the
place in question and eats the food there available, then one has shown that the dog
was disposed by the buzzer to responses of the same behavior-family that are called
out by the presence of food as a stimulus-object at that place.
But there are other possibilities for showing the existence of such a disposition. If
we deﬁne a segment of a response-sequence as any series of consecutive responses
within a response-sequence which starts from an initial member but does not con-
tain the ﬁnal member, then we may often observe that an animal performs such a
segment of a response-sequence though it does not perform the whole sequence. If
food is not made available to the animal it cannot of course eat food, but it may
be observed to go toward the place in question and to salivate or otherwise react in
ways characteristic of seeking and eating food. Such data may then be taken as evi-
dence that the dog is disposed to behavior of the kind required by the formulation
of a sign, and such evidence is reliable in proportion to the degree to which it is
distinctive of the behavior-family in question.
The evidence required may not even be a segment of a response-sequence, may
not in fact be a response at all. If, for instance, any state of the organism could be
found – say its brain waves – which is such that when this state is present the animal
later responds in the way required by the formulation of a sign, then this state of
the organism would itself be a sufﬁcient condition for saying that the preparatory-
stimulus which occasioned this state was a sign. In other words, there may be other
ways of determining the existence of a disposition to respond in a certain fashion
than by directly observing the response itself.
Finally, among such ways is the possibility of using in some cases the verbal
responses of an organism as evidence of whether something is or is not a sign to
this organism. By correlating such verbal responses with the rest of the behavior of
the organism it is possible to ﬁnd out the extent to which they are reliable evidence
as to the existence of sign-processes. That they are reliable to some extent is not
in doubt, and so semiotic can make use of them as evidence for the existence of
signs, and indeed must in its present state make as much use of them as it can. But
since signs can occur without verbal responses, and since such responses are not
always reliable evidence, they are at best evidence for the existence of signs and not
either necessary or sufﬁcient conditions for the occurrence of signs. The science of
signs must deal with animals and children and insane persons that cannot report on
their behavior, as well as with persons whose reports are often unreliable, so it must
start with criteria for the existence of sign-processes which are applicable in these
cases. Hence the contention that the behavioral formulation is the primary one with
which other sets of conditions are to be correlated as alternative sets of sufﬁcient
conditions or merely as evidence that a speciﬁc set of conditions is fulﬁlled.
The book on Alaska read alone may then be said to be to the reader a complex
of signs prior to the observation of his overt behavior. But to know this is merely
to say that there is some evidence – neural, physiological, verbal – that the man is

168
Charles Morris (1901–1979)
in a state which has been found empirically to be correlated with observable sign-
behavior. That he is now ready to respond in a certain way at a later time can in
the last analysis only be determined by correlating his present state with how he
actually responds at a later time to a given environment.
It may help to point out that a similar situation is frequent in science and in daily
life. A scientist may begin a study of magnetic phenomena by starting with cases
in which bodies of a certain kind are found to approach a given body, and in virtue
of this fact he calls the latter body a magnet. If now he ﬁnds that all magnets have
certain other properties, he may accept these properties as sufﬁcient conditions for
saying that a given body is a magnet, or at least as evidence that it is a magnet.
The situation is akin to saying that a person is angry with someone even before he
behaves angrily to that person, or that a person has typhoid fever even before the
grosser symptoms which originally identiﬁed the disease appear. In all such cases a
disposition to a certain later kind of action is attributed to an object or person before
the action itself appears because of an empirically found correlation between some
earlier state of the object or person and its later action. To say that something is a
sign before responses actually take place is a precisely parallel case.
Further Remarks on Sign-Processes
The behavioral formulation of sign-behavior which has been proposed has certain
consequences which are worth noting.13 It avoids, in the ﬁrst place, the frequent
misinterpretation that a sign must itself be a response. Responses may, of course,
under certain circumstances be signs but they need not be, and signs need not be
responses. For while every sign-process involves a disposition to respond, the sign
itself may he any feature of any stimulus-object which acts in the above manner as
a preparatory-stimulus; such stimuli are not limited to responses, and only when a
response is itself a stimulus of this sort is it a sign.
This approach also avoids the error of those accounts of signs which neglect their
relation to the situation in which behavior occurs. Such accounts often imply that the
organism responds to the sign alone. But the fact that behavior takes place within
a supporting environment implies that the sign alone does not cause the response
evoked, since the sign is merely one condition for a response-sequence in the given
situation in which it is a sign. The dog upon hearing the buzzer does not seek food
wherever it happens to be (though certain components of a food-response – such as
salivation – may appear when the buzzer is heard); only if a supporting environment
is present will it seek food. If the situation does not support certain responses, then
no complete response-sequence of a food behavior-family can take place.
For something to be a sign to an organism requires that the organism be inﬂu-
enced, in the way described, by the presence of that something; it does not require
13 Many of the points mentioned in this section are dealt with more fully in the Appendix, “Some
Contemporary Analyses of Sign-Processes.”

4
Excerpts from Signs, Language and Behavior
169
that the organism signify that the something in question is a sign, for a sign can exist
without there being a sign that it is a sign. There can, of course, be signs that some-
thing is a sign, and it is possible to signify by some signs what another sign signiﬁes.
But this need not take place, and the temptation to attribute such complications to
animal, or even to all human, sign phenomena must be constantly avoided.
The proposed formulation also avoids the ambiguity of the frequent attempts to
deﬁne signs in terms of “appropriate behavior.” It is true that the response-sequences
prepared by the buzzer are “appropriate” to the goal of securing food in the sense
that they are response-sequences of a food behavior-family. It is further true that the
buzzer normally will not remain a sign of food if the responses to situations in which
buzzers sound do not continue to meet a need, that is, do not obtain food. And yet the
question of whether a response-sequence initiated in a situation does in fact reach a
certain goal does not enter into the formulation of “sign” itself. The buzzer is a sign
if it meets the criteria proposed even if the situation immediately confronting the
animal is such that going to the box is inappropriate to the goal of obtaining food, as
it would be if such action did not secure food. Since it is obvious that sign-behavior
does not in all cases eventuate in appropriate (that is, goal-attaining) responses,
it is proper that the general account of signs should not involve the question of
the appropriateness of the responses which occur in the situation in which the sign
operates.
The proposed formulation also helps to resolve the ambiguities in the various
“context” theories of signs. It is true that a sign can be described only by reference
to the speciﬁc way it functions in speciﬁc situations. But since the situation in which
the sign appears is generally a very different situation from that in which it does not
appear, it is somewhat misleading to suggest that a sign signiﬁes the missing part
of a context in which it formerly appeared. The fact that a sign functions as a sub-
stitute for an absent something in the control of behavior keeps the “substitutional”
emphasis of the context formulations without suggesting that the situations in which
the sign does and does not appear are otherwise identical.
Finally, the present account does not depend upon a decision as to how such terms
as “habit,” “substitute stimulus,” and “conditioned response” are to be used. It tries
to isolate a certain kind of behavior, sign-behavior (that is, behavior in which signs
occur); the relations of sign-behavior to unlearned behavior, habits, substitute stim-
uli, conditioned responses, implicit responses, antedating responses, pure-stimulus
acts, and the like are then further questions to be dealt with by students of the general
theory of behavior.
The Basic Terms of Semiotic
It is now possible to isolate the basic terms of semiotic, for such terms will simply
refer to various discernible aspects of sign-behavior. The term sign has already been
introduced, or to speak more exactly, a criterion has been given under which certain
things are admitted to be signs – whether in the course of our inquiry other criteria
will have to be given to isolate other classes of signs remains for the time being an

170
Charles Morris (1901–1979)
open question. But we at least are able to say that if something is a preparatory-
stimulus of the kind speciﬁed in our previous formulation it is a sign. And this is
the necessary ﬁrst step for building a science of signs. For it identiﬁes a subject
matter for such a science and permits the introduction of a number of other terms
for talking about this subject matter. Such terms can be introduced in a number
of ways; we propose the following method of building a language to talk about
signs.
Any organism for which something is a sign will be called an interpreter. The
disposition in an interpreter to respond, because of the sign, by response-sequences
of some behavior-family will be called an interpretant. Anything which would per-
mit the completion of the response-sequences to which the interpreter is disposed
because of a sign will be called a denotatum of the sign. A sign will be said to
denote a denotatum. Those conditions which are such that whatever fulﬁlls them is
a denotatum will be called a signiﬁcatum of the sign. A sign will be said to signify
a signiﬁcatum; the phrase “to have signiﬁcation” may be taken as synonymous with
“to signify.”
So in the example of the dog, the buzzer is the sign; the dog is the interpreter;
the disposition to seek food at a certain place, when caused by the buzzer, is the
interpretant; food in the place sought which permits the completion of the response-
sequences to which the dog is disposed is a denotatum and is denoted by the buzzer;
the condition of being an edible object (perhaps of a certain sort) in a given place is
the signiﬁcatum of the buzzer and is what the buzzer signiﬁes.
In the case of the driver the words spoken to him are signs; the driver is the
interpreter; his disposition to respond by avoiding a landslide at a certain place in the
road is the interpretant; the landslide at that place is the denotatum; the conditions
of being a landslide at that place is the signiﬁcatum of the spoken words.
According to this usage of terms, while a sign must signify, it may or may not
denote. The buzzer can signify to the dog food at a given place without there being
food at the place in question, and the landslide signiﬁed by the spoken words may
not in fact exist. Usually we start with signs which denote and then attempt to for-
mulate the signiﬁcatum of a sign by observing the properties of denotata. But it
is possible at the higher levels of human sign-behavior to determine by decision
the signiﬁcatum of a sign (to “lay down” the conditions under which the sign will
denote), and in this case the problem is not what the sign signiﬁes but whether or
not it denotes anything. We encounter cases of this nature frequently in the more
complex sign-processes.
The relation between interpretant and signiﬁcatum is worth noting. The interpre-
tant, as a disposition to respond caused by a sign, answers to the behavioral side
of the behavior-environment complex; the signiﬁcatum, as the set of terminal con-
ditions under which the response-sequences to which the organism is disposed can
be completed, connects with the environmental side of the complex. Each there-
fore involves the other. A complete description of the interpretant would include a
description of what the organism is disposed to act toward, and a formulation of
the signiﬁcatum is simply a formulation of what would permit the completion of
the response to which the organism is disposed because of a sign. The distinction

4
Excerpts from Signs, Language and Behavior
171
between behavior and environment need not of course coincide with the distinction
between the organism and the non-organic world, since an organism can respond to
other organisms and to itself. It is because of this that parts of the organism, dreams,
feelings, and even interpretants can be signiﬁed.
Under the present usage, a sign cannot signify or denote its own interpretant,
though it may signify and denote the interpretants of other signs (as in the case of
“interpretant” itself). The buzzer does not signify the dog’s disposition to respond
but signiﬁes food at a given place and time. This usage is not the only possible one,
and at no point is the language of semioticians more at variance. A merit of the
present usage of “signify” is that it does not make the signiﬁcatum of every term –
such as “spiral nebula” or “atom” – include biological events, though it recognizes
that there are no signs which signify without dispositions to respond (that is, without
interpretants). And since with this usage a sign does not denote its signiﬁcatum,
the temptation is avoided to make the signiﬁcatum into a special kind of thing –
a temptation which seems to underlie the Platonic doctrine of Ideas and various
philosophic doctrines of “subsistence.”
The term “meaning” is not here included among the basic terms of semiotic.
This term, useful enough at the level of everyday analysis, does not have the
precision necessary for scientiﬁc analysis. Accounts of meaning usually throw
a handful of putty at the target of sign phenomena, while a technical semiotic
must provide us with words which are sharpened arrows. “Meaning” signiﬁes any
and all phases of sign-processes (the status of being a sign, the interpretant, the
fact of denoting, the signiﬁcatum), and frequently suggests mental and valuational
processes as well; hence it is desirable for semiotic to dispense with the term
and to introduce special terms for the various factors which “meaning” fails to
discriminate.
Since something is a sign, signiﬁcatum, denotatum, interpreter, or interpretant
only with respect to its occurrence in sign-behavior, and since such constituents of
sign-processes are studied by other sciences in other connections, the basic terms of
semiotic are statable in terms drawn from the biological and physical sciences – a
point which will prove to be of central signiﬁcance for understanding the relation of
socio-humanistic studies to the natural sciences. Since the factors operative in sign-
processes are all either stimulus-objects or organic dispositions or actual responses,
the basic terms of semiotic are all formulable in terms applicable to behavior as it
occurs in an environment. Semiotic thus becomes a part of the empirical science of
behavior, and can utilize whatever principles and predictions the general theory of
behavior has attained or can attain.
The formulation in terms of other signs of what a sign signiﬁes (the description
of the conditions which something must fulﬁll to be a denotatum of the sign) will
be called a formulated signiﬁcatum. A formulated signiﬁcatum is designative if it
formulates the signiﬁcatum of an existing sign, and is prescriptive if it formulates the
signiﬁcatum which a sign is henceforth to have – a distinction which the commonly
employed term “semantic rule” fails to make. A sign may, of course, signify without
there being a formulation of what it signiﬁes. A recognition of this simple fact cuts
the ground out from under the frequent insinuations that a sign is “without meaning”

172
Charles Morris (1901–1979)
to a person or animal who cannot “tell what the sign means.” For something to
signify is a different thing from the often very difﬁcult task of formulating what it
signiﬁes.
Semiosis and Semiotic
The Nature of a Sign
The process in which something functions as a sign may be called semiosis. This
process, in a tradition which goes back to the Greeks, has commonly been regarded
as involving three (or four) factors: that which acts as a sign, that which the
sign refers to, and that effect on some interpreter in virtue of which the thing
in question is a sign to that interpreter. These three components in semiosis may
be called, respectively, the sign vehicle, the designatum, and the interpretant; the
interpreter may be included as a fourth factor. These terms make explicit the fac-
tors left undesignated in the common statement that a sign refers to something for
someone.
A dog responds by the type of behavior (I) involved in the hunting of
chipmunks (D) to a certain sound (S); a traveler prepares himself to deal appro-
priately (I) with the geographical region (D) in virtue of the letter (S) received from
a friend. In such cases S is the sign vehicle (and a sign in virtue of its function-
ing), D the designatum, and I the interpretant of the interpreter. The most effective
characterization of a sign is the following: S is a sign of D for I to the degree that I
takes account of D in virtue of the presence of S. Thus in semiosis something takes
account of something else mediately, i.e., by means of a third something. Semiosis
is accordingly a mediated-taking-account-of. The mediators are sign vehicles; the
takings-account-of are interpretants; the agents of the process are interpreters; what
is taken account of are designata. There are several comments to be made about this
formulation.
It should be clear that the terms “sign,” “designatum,” “interpretant,” and “inter-
preter” involve one another, since they are simply ways of referring to aspects of
the process of semiosis. Objects need not be referred to by signs, but there are no
designata unless there is such reference; something is a sign only because it is inter-
preted as a sign of something by some interpreter; a taking-account-of-something is
an interpretant only in so far as it is evoked by something functioning as a sign; an
object is an interpreter only as it mediately takes account of something. The prop-
erties of being a sign, a designatum, an interpreter, or an interpretant are relational
properties which things take on by participating in the functional process of semio-
sis. Semiotic, then, is not concerned with the study of a particular kind of object, but
with ordinary objects in so far (and only in so far) as they participate in semiosis.
The importance of this point will become progressively clearer.
Signs which refer to the same object need not have the same designata, since
that which is taken account of in the object may differ for various interpreters. A
sign of an object may, at one theoretical extreme, simply turn the interpreter of the

4
Excerpts from Signs, Language and Behavior
173
sign upon the object, while at the other extreme it would allow the interpreter to
take account of all the characteristics of the object in question in the absence of the
object itself. There is thus a potential sign continuum in which with respect to every
object or situation all degrees of semiosis may be expressed, and the question as
to what the designatum of a sign is in any given situation is the question of what
characteristics of the object or situation are actually taken account of in virtue of the
presence of the sign vehicle alone.
A sign must have a designatum; yet obviously every sign does not, in fact, refer
to an actual existent object. The difﬁculties which these statements may occasion
are only apparent difﬁculties and need no introduction of a metaphysical realm of
“subsistence” for their solution. Since “designatum” is a semiotical term, there can-
not be designata without semiosis – but there can be objects without there being
semiosis. The designatum of a sign is the kind of object which the sign applies to,
i.e., the objects with the properties which the interpreter takes account of through
the presence of the sign vehicle. And the taking-account-of may occur without there
actually being objects or situations with the characteristics taken account of. This is
true even in the case of pointing: one can for certain purposes point without pointing
to anything. No contradiction arises in saying that every sign has a designatum but
not every sign refers to an actual existent. Where what is referred to actually exists
as referred to the object of reference is a denotatum. It thus becomes clear that, while
every sign has a designatum, not every sign has a denotatum. A designatum is not a
thing, but a kind of object or class of objects – and a class may have many members,
or one member, or no members. The denotata are the members of the class. This
distinction makes explicable the fact that one may reach in the icebox for an apple
that is not there and make preparations for living on an island that may never have
existed or has long since disappeared beneath the sea.
As a last comment on the deﬁnition of sign, it should be noted that the general
theory of signs need not commit itself to any speciﬁc theory of what is involved in
taking account of something through the use of a sign. Indeed, it may be possible to
take “mediated-taking-account-of” as the single primitive term for the axiomatic
development of semiotic. Nevertheless, the account which has been given lends
itself to treatment from the point of view of behavioristics, and this point of view will
be adopted in what follows. This interpretation of the deﬁnition of sign is not, how-
ever, necessary. It is adopted here because such a point of view has in some form or
other (though not in the form of Watsonian behaviorism) become widespread among
psychologists, and because many of the difﬁculties which the history of semiotic
reveals seem to be due to the fact that through most of its history semiotic linked
itself with the faculty and introspective psychologies. From the point of view of
behavioristics, to take account of D by the presence of S involves responding to
D in virtue of a response to S. As will be made clear later; it is not necessary to
deny “private experiences” of the process of semiosis or of other processes, but it
is necessary from the standpoint of behavioristics to deny that such experiences are
of central importance or that the fact of their existence makes the objective study
of semiosis (and hence of sign, designatum, and interpretant) impossible or even
incomplete.

174
Charles Morris (1901–1979)
Dimensions and Levels of Semiosis
In terms of the three correlates (sign vehicle, designatum, interpreter) of the triadic
relation of semiosis, a number of other dyadic relations may be abstracted for study.
One may study the relations of signs to the objects to which the signs are applicable.
This relation will be called the semantical dimension of semiosis, symbolized by the
sign “Dsem”; the study of this dimension will be called semantics. Or the subject
of study may be the relation of signs to interpreters. This relation will be called
the pragmatical dimension of semiosis, symbolized by “Dp,” and the study of this
dimension will be named pragmatics.
One important relation of signs has not yet been introduced: the formal relation
of signs to one another. This relationship was not, in the preceding account, explic-
itly incorporated in the deﬁnition of “sign,” since current usage would not seem to
eliminate the possibility of applying the term “sign” to something which was not a
member of a system of signs – such possibilities are suggested by the sign aspects
of perception and by various apparently isolated mnemonic and signaling devices.
Nevertheless, the interpretation of these cases is not perfectly clear, and it is very
difﬁcult to be sure that there is such a thing as an isolated sign. Certainly, potentially,
if not actually, every sign has relations to other signs, for what it is that the sign
prepares the interpreter to take account of can only be stated in terms of other signs.
It is true that this statement need not be made, but it is always in principle capable of
being made, and when made relates the sign in question to other signs. Since most
signs are clearly related to other signs, since many apparent cases of isolated signs
prove on analysis not to be such, and since all signs are potentially if not actually
related to other signs, it is well to make a third dimension of semiosis co-ordinate
with the other two which have been mentioned. This third dimension will be called
the syntactical dimension of semiosis, symbolized by “Dsym” and the study of this
dimension will be named syntactics.
It will be convenient to have special terms to designate certain of the relations
of signs to signs, to objects, and to interpreters. “Implicates” will be restricted to
Dsym, “designates” and “denotes” to Dsem, and “expresses” to Dp. The word “table”
implicates (but does not designate) “furniture with a horizontal top on which things
may be placed,” designates a certain kind of object (furniture with a horizontal
top on which things may be placed), denotes the objects to which it is applica-
ble, and expresses its interpreter. In any given case certain of the dimensions may
actually or practically vanish: a sign may not have syntactical relations to other
signs and so its actual implication becomes null; or it may have implication and yet
denote no object; or it may have implication and yet no actual interpreter and so no
expression – as in the case of a word in a dead language. Even in such possible
cases the terms chosen are convenient to refer to the fact that certain of the possible
relations remain unrealized.
It is very important to distinguish between the relations which a given sign
sustains and the signs used in talking about such relations-the full recognition of
this is perhaps the most important general practical application of semiotic. The
functioning of signs is, in general, a way in which certain existences take account of
other existences through an intermediate class of existences.

4
Excerpts from Signs, Language and Behavior
175
A sign is reliable to the degree that the members of the sign-family to which it
belongs denote; otherwise unreliable. The degree of reliability (and so the degree
of unreliability) of a sign is capable of quantitative formulation. If the dog obtained
food 90 per cent of the times the buzzer sounded, the buzzer sign is 90 per cent
reliable; such a statement would not of course insure that the degree of reliability
of the sign would continue unchanged in the future. A sign is iconic to the extent
to which it itself has the properties of its denotata; otherwise it is non-iconic. A
portrait of a person is to a considerable extent iconic, but is not completely so since
the painted canvas does not have the texture of the skin, or the capacities for speech
and motion, which the person portrayed has. The motion picture is more iconic, but
again not completely so. A completely iconic sign would always denote, since it
would itself be a denotatum. A sign which is to some extent iconic may itself have
properties which are not iconic and which are not relevant to its signiﬁcation. One of
the dangers of the use of models in science, for instance, arises out of the temptation
to ascribe to the subject matter of a theory properties of the model illustrating the
theory which are not involved in the theory itself.14
The terms which have been introduced in this section constitute only a portion of
the terms which students of signs must employ. While a more precise formulation
of these terms can no doubt be given, and would be desirable, the present analysis
may serve to show that a behavioral formulation of the basic terms of semiotic
provides a foundation for the introduction of such other terms as the science of signs
ﬁnds necessary. This suggests that a behavioral semiotic is comprehensive enough
to incorporate the distinctions now current in sign-analysis. The fear that such an
approach might be too simple to deal with the complexities of sign phenomena is in
this way mitigated.
Signal and Symbol
Various other distinctions between signs will appear throughout our discussion, but
there is one basic distinction in the literature of semiotic which warrants consid-
eration now: the difference between signal and symbol. Later we will discuss the
way logicians and philosophers have tried to make the distinction in question; for
the moment we will begin with the distinction as it has presented itself to students
of behavior. A frequent terminology for the difference is “sign” and “symbol,” but
since we regard both the distinguished items as signs, the terminology chosen will
be “signal” and “symbol.”15
14 For a striking illustration see James K. Senior, “On Certain Relations Between Chemistry
and Geometry,” Journal of Chemical Education, 15, 1938, 464–470.
15 Husserl, Gätschenberger, Dewey, Mead, Langer, Kecskemeti, Ogden and Richards, Pavlov,
Hunter, Yerkes, Korzybski, Whetnall and many others operate with some such distinction, some
contrasting “sign” and “symbol,” while some contrast “signal” and “symbol.” The bases for the
distinction differ widely.

176
Charles Morris (1901–1979)
Robert M. Yerkes remarks as follows:16 “Not rarely sign and symbol are used
as synonymous. I wish to propose differing meanings... Whereas the sign is an
experience-act which implies and requires as its justiﬁcation in terms of utility a
succeeding experience-act, the symbol has no such implication and is an experience-
act which represents or may function instead of whatever is represented. The sign
sooner or later loses its meaning apart from its context; the symbol does not. The
sign is not a substitute for the original experience-act, whereas the symbol may be.”
The buzzer in our example of the dog would presumably be regarded by Yerkes and
certain other students of animal behavior as a sign (that is, signal), whereas if the
buzzer stopped sounding before the animal was allowed to seek food (that is, if its
response were delayed) such persons would seem to be saying that something else
must in the interval act as a substitute for the buzzer if food behavior is later to be
called out, and such a substitute would be a symbol. This distinction was made by
W. H. Hunter to explain the results of his experiments on delayed reactions.
While it is highly doubtful that all delayed responses need explanation by the
introduction of a special class of signs (since a delay in response is compatible with
our general description of signs), there is no doubt but that Yerkes is calling attention
to differences in sign-processes which are behaviorally recognizable and deserve a
name. Suppose that the buzzer produced in the dog some response which then func-
tioned as a sign for food at the given place without the buzzer sounding, then such a
“response-sign” would have certain distinctive characteristics – in virtue of the fact
that it is relatively independent of the environment and is a substitute for another
sign with which it is synonymous. At the language level examples are more easily
recognizable. If the driver in the car had been told to turn to the right at the third
intersection, he might have held up three ﬁngers of his right hand until he reached
the intersection in question, or might have continued repeating the instructions to
himself; such action on his part would be a sign to him signifying what the original
spoken words signiﬁed, and such a sign would guide his behavior in the absence of
the spoken signs.
Generalization from such examples suggests the following distinction: Where an
organism provides itself with a sign which is a substitute in the control of its behav-
ior for another sign, signifying what the sign for which it is a substitute signiﬁes,
then this sign is a symbol, and the sign-process is a symbol-process; where this is
not the case the sign is a signal, and the sign-process is a signal-process. More suc-
cinctly, a symbol is a sign produced by its interpreter which acts as a substitute for
some other sign with which it is synonymous; all signs not symbols are signals.
The advantage of such symbols is found in the fact that they may occur in the
absence of signals provided by the environment; an action or state of the interpreter
itself becomes (or produces) a sign guiding behavior with respect to the environ-
ment. So if a symbol operates in the dog’s behavior, the symbol could take the
place in the control of behavior which the buzzer formerly exercised: hunger cramps
for instance might themselves come to be a sign (that is, a symbol) of food at the
16 Chimpanzees, a Laboratory colony, p. 177.

4
Excerpts from Signs, Language and Behavior
177
customary place. The relative independence of such signs from signals provided by
the environment has, however, as its reverse pole certain disadvantages: symbols are
especially unreliable. In the experiment the conditions of the environment were such
that food normally was found at a certain place when the buzzer sounded, but not
otherwise; it is more unlikely that the environment would be such that food would
be in the given place when and only when the animal was hungry. This suggests that
the connection between symbols and signals is more intimate than Yerkes’ words
imply; while it is true that the symbol may perhaps persist as a sign longer than the
signal which is not accompanied or followed by a denotatum, the fact that a symbol
is ultimately a substitute for a signal means that it too is normally subject in its gen-
esis and its continuance upon its capacity to lead to behavior which on the whole
attains goal-objects.
The recognition that a symbol requires an action or state of the organism which
provides a substitute sign synonymous with another sign avoids a number of possi-
ble confusions. Not all states or actions of an organism which are signs or produce
signs are thereby symbols. A person may interpret his pulse as a sign of his heart
condition or certain sensations as a sign that he needs food; such signs are simply
signals; his resulting words – when substitutes for such signals – would however
be symbols. Nor are all sounds uttered by a person or by others symbols even when
they are signs: sounds too may be simply signals. Further, the symbol need not itself
be an action or state of the organism though it is produced by such an action or state:
the written record of a conversation, as a substitute sign for spoken words, is still
a symbol though it exists, as written, in the physical environment of the organism.
Finally, not all signs produced by an organism by its action on the environment are
symbols: the cat which pushes a button which lights a bulb and thus provides itself
with the customary sign of food has produced a signal but not necessarily a symbol
since the light need not itself be a substitute for another sign.17
Doubt may be raised whether the term “symbol” should be used for the kind of
sign-behavior which we have isolated. It may be objected that religious symbols,
such as a cross, or literary symbols, such as a “golden bowl” symbolizing life, or
social symbols, such as representations of a totemic animal, are not symbols in the
sense deﬁned. It must be granted that the proposed use of the term is at variance
with some common usages, but we have seen that a terminology for semiotic can
be expected to show such variance. In the cases in question, however, it is doubtful
if the disagreement is in fact great. The cross and the ﬁgure of the totemic animal
are to be sure iconic, but iconic symbols are admissible on our account as one sub-
class of symbols. And a particular cross or a particular carved animal may well be
substitutes for objects that were themselves signs – the original cross signifying (at
the minimum) the cruciﬁxion of Christ and the living animals signifying something
about the persons for whom they were signs. The words “golden bowl,” as a literary
17 The example is from Jules Masserman, Behavior and Neurosis, p. 59. It might of course be the
case that the light was a substitute for a more primitive sign, such as the sight of the food box used
in the experiment. But since in this case the animal only obtained food when the light was on, the
sight of the box was not itself a sign of food.

178
Charles Morris (1901–1979)
symbol for the fragility of life, are even more clearly substitutes for an actual or
imagined bowl, delicate and beautiful but with a fatal ﬂaw, which to Henry James
had already taken on the status of an iconic sign; the words themselves are in this
case not iconic. So the proposed usage does not in fact seem to violate religious,
anthropological, and literary usages. While a symbol may be iconic it is not always
required to be such even in nontechnical usages, but it is very commonly regarded
as something which is a substitute for other signs and producible by its interpreters.
A more positive argument for allowing “symbol” to mark one pole of the
intended distinction can be given in virtue of the claim often made that symbols are
more “autonomous” and “conventional” than signals. The proposed usage embod-
ies and explicates this claim. The symbol is “autonomous” in the sense already
discussed: since it is produced by its interpreter it may appear under a great variety
of environmental circumstances and is to this extent independent of any particular
external environment. And the symbol is “conventional” in the sense that no limit
is set upon the actions and states and products of the organism that may operate as
synonymous signs substituting for other signs. Symbols may, and indeed do, vary
widely from one individual to another or from one society to another. The possibility
of this variability is explained in our account without the overtones of a “conven-
tion” where it is “decided” what is to be used as a symbol. For the distinction we
have drawn involves no reference to a voluntary decision in the producer of a sym-
bol; such decisions may of course occur in the case of symbols but they are not
necessarily involved in the determination of what is a symbol.
Signs which are substitutes for synonymous signs frequently occur at the more
complex levels of sign phenomena. Such signs seem to be appropriately called sym-
bols. But whatever term be used, the distinction in question is of basic importance
for the development of semiotic and for the understanding of human sign-behavior.
Alternatives to a Behavioral Semiotic
Some readers must feel strongly that we have “left something out,” and perhaps
something central to a theory of signs, namely the “ideas” or “thoughts” which the
sign causes in its interpreter. At a number of places in our account we will return to
this issue; here we must be content to isolate the underlying problem.
It is true that the preceding account has completely and deliberately avoided all
use of “mentalistic” terms in building the terminology of semiotic. And it is also true
that the mentalistic approach has dominated the history of semiotic and still seems
to many thinkers to be a preferable alternative to the approach here developed.
The defense of a behavioral semiotic must not be misunderstood. We have not
contended, and do not believe, that such terms as “idea,” “thought,” “conscious-
ness,” and “mind” are “meaningless.” Nor have we in any sense denied that an
individual can observe his feelings, or his thoughts, or his dreams, or his signs
in a way not possible to other individuals. Our purpose is simply to advance
semiotic as a science, and it is this purpose alone which determines what basic
terms are to be accepted for building the terminology of semiotic. The issue is not

4
Excerpts from Signs, Language and Behavior
179
between “mentalism” and “behaviorism,” but is solely a methodological problem:
are such terms as “idea,” “thought,” “mind” more or less precise, interpersonal, and
unambiguous than such terms as “organism,” “stimulus,” “response-sequence” and
“disposition to response”? In choosing the latter terms, we but express the belief
that they are the more suitable for scientiﬁc advance.
Suppose, for instance, the mentalist should argue – as he often does that for
something to be a sign to some interpreter it must give rise to an “idea” in his
mind, must cause him to “think” of something else. On this frequent manner of
speaking, the buzzer is a sign to the dog only if it causes an idea or thought of food
at a certain place. A person who approaches signs behaviorally (biologically) does
not have to reply that the dog does not have ideas or thoughts, but merely to ask
for the conditions under which we will afﬁrm that the buzzer occasions an idea or
thought in the dog. Unless the mentalist furnishes a criterion such that other persons
may employ it to test whether the dog has or has not an idea there is no way to
determine the precision, interpersonality, or unambiguity of the term. Hence there
is no way to control by observation statements made about the signs of the dog;
and this means that no science of signs is possible. If the mentalist does propose
a criterion meeting these requirements, it will always be found, I believe, that the
criterion is couched in terms of biological states or actions of the dog – though it
may be claimed that these are only “evidence” that the dog has an idea. But if this
is so, the only scientiﬁcally relevant part of the claim that the buzzer is a sign to
the dog is the part couched in biological terms. Hence semiotic as a science gains
nothing by the introduction of mentalistic terms in its primitive terms, for insofar as
these terms are not synonymous with behavioral terms they prove to be scientiﬁcally
irrelevant.
This outcome would not be avoided by proposing to limit semiotic to beings
capable of self-observation and capable of reporting on such observations. For the
problem of determining whether another person has an idea is not methodologically
different from determining whether a dog has an idea. True, the other person may
utter the words, “The buzzer makes me think of food at a certain place.” But these
words are themselves physical sounds uttered by a biological organism, and while
they may rightly be used even on our approach as evidence that the buzzer is a sign,
the reliability of this evidence can only be checked if we are in possession of some
criterion to determine whether the buzzer is or is not a sign of food at a given place.
Since the behavioral approach gives this criterion and the mentalistic approach does
not, a mentalistic semiotic is not an alternative to a behavioral semiotic even at the
level of human beings.
It must be repeated that this does not mean that dogs and persons do not have
ideas. A reader can, if he wishes, say to himself that in all sign-behavior which we
discuss there occur ideas which we do not and cannot mention. The only point is that
if he does this he cannot also say that our account is scientiﬁcally inadequate, for
terms whose reliability cannot be checked by observation cannot appear in any sci-
ence, behavioral or otherwise. Whether they occur somewhere else is not a problem
relevant to the scientiﬁc enterprise. Therefore we conclude that mentalism provides
no alternative to a behavioral semiotic if the goal of semiotic is to become a science.

180
Charles Morris (1901–1979)
It is however possible that the behavioral approach does not in fact “leave out”
anything. It may well be that the main function served by the introduction of “idea”
into the criterion for a sign was to permit us to say that something may be a sign to
someone even when no overt behavior occurs. This function is served in our account
by the term “interpretant,” conceived as a disposition to respond in certain ways
under certain circumstances. To the extent that this is so, “idea” and “interpretant”
may in fact be synonymous signs. And this opens the possibility that all “mentalist”
terms may turn out to be incorporable within a behavioral semiotic. Since it is hard
to see how the reverse situation is possible, the behavioral approach to signs shows
itself once more to be strategically strong.
Does the “phenomenological description” of sign-processes furnish another
alternative to a behavioral semiotic? I think not. For in a wide sense of “phenomeno-
logical” a behavioral semiotic is phenomenological since it includes a description
of observed behavior; and a narrower use of the term (the description by an indi-
vidual of his own sign-processes) is covered by our admission of self-observation,
an admission which is compatible with either a behavioral or a mentalistic psy-
chology, and so does not decide between them. A human being may for instance
describe his “experience” in connection with a sign – his feelings, his ideas, his
expectations – and may compare in these terms the different signs which we have
distinguished and will distinguish.? The resulting reports are reports by an inter-
preter on his own sign-processes, and give us certain data about these processes
which we do not possess in the case of animals unable to report the results of their
self-observation. But reports of self-observation in which, say, the term “idea” is
used do not themselves determine whether “idea” is synonymous with “observa-
tion by an interpreter of his interpretant,” that is, observation of his disposition
to respond in such and such a way. Some “phenomenologists” might very well
report that this is the case. So a phenomenological description of sign-processes,
whether in the wider or narrow sense of “phenomenological,” does not in itself
negate or provide an alternative to a behavioral semiotic. Such a semiotic is able
to include reports by interpreters on their sign-behavior and yet can deal with sign-
behavior in animals, children, and adults where such reports are not available or not
reliable.
While we admit the right of various persons to approach signs in any way they see
ﬁt, we see no evidence that mentalism or phenomenology provide alternatives to a
behavioral semiotic concerned solely with the development of an empirical science
of signs.
The Mentalistic Controversy Resumed
The distinction which has been made between signal and symbol has remained
within the context of behavioristics. Signals and symbols are alike signs in that
they are preparatory-stimuli controlling behavior with respect to other stimuli; the
symbol is a sign producible by the organism itself and a substitute for some other

4
Excerpts from Signs, Language and Behavior
181
sign, but this difference, while distinguishing signal and symbol, is not regarded as a
fundamental difference in their nature as signs. Such a view has, however, frequently
been denied, and often mentalistic terms (“concept,” “idea,” “meaning”) have been
invoked to account for the difference in question, The discussion is often connected
with the view that the distinction between signal and symbol answers to the dif-
ference between animals and humans, men having “symbols” in addition to signals
because of their “minds.” To discuss this issue is a convenient way of raising again
the mentalist-behavioral controversy and at the same time of elucidating somewhat
more fully the relation of signals and symbols, whether they be pre-language, lan-
guage, or post-language signs. Susanne Langer’s formulation provides a point of
departure:
A sign [that is, a signal] indicates the existence – past, present, or future-of a thing, event,
or condition. Wet streets are a sign that it has rained. A patter on the roof is a sign that it is
raining. A fall of the barometer or a ring around the moon is a sign that it is going to rain.
. . .A whistle means that the train is about to start. . . . A crepe on the door means someone
has just died.18 . . . A term which is used symbolically and not signally does not evoke
action appropriate to the presence of its object. If I say: “Napoleon,” you do not bow to the
conqueror of Europe as though I had introduced him, but merely think of him. If I mention
a Mr. Smith of our common acquaintance, you may be led to tell me something about him
“behind his back,” which is just what you would not do in his presence... Symbols are not
proxy for their objects, but are vehicles for the conception of objects. To conceive a thing or
a situation is not the same thing as to “react toward it” overtly, or to be aware of its presence.
In talking about things we have conceptions of them, not the things themselves; and it is
the conceptions, not the things, that symbols directly “mean.” 19
Signals, on this view, “announce their objects,” while symbols lead their inter-
preters to “conceive their objects.”20 How is this difference to be explained on the
behavioral approach?21 One relevant point lies in the fact that a symbol is on the
whole a less reliable sign than is a signal, since it is producible by the organism and
hence may appear, when the organism has a certain need, in situations in which what
is signiﬁed is not present. The signal being more closely connected with external
relations in the environment is more quickly subject to corrections by the environ-
ment and hence tends to be more reliable, that is, to lose its sign status when the
unreliability becomes rather great. Hence signals do on the whole “indicate exis-
tence” more certainly than do symbols. But since signals too have varying degrees
of reliability, the difference remains one of degree.
A second difference is connected with the fact – later to be dealt with more
fully – that signs become specialized in the extent to which they indicate an envi-
ronment and to the extent to which they characterize the environment. Certain
18 [Philosophy in a New Key, pp. 57–58.]
19 [Ibid., pp. 60–61]
20 [Ibid., p. 61]
21 John Dewey makes a similar distinction, though his explanation of the difference is not put in
terms of concepts but in terms of language: signs are “evidence of the existence of something else”
while a symbol is “a meaning carried by language in a system” (Logic: The Theory of Inquiry, pp.
51–52).

182
Charles Morris (1901–1979)
signs, and especially certain kinds of language symbols, attain high generality in
their characterizing component and lose the speciﬁcity of indication which signals
frequently have. If a person merely hears someone say “rain,” the indication of
whether it is raining now or has rained or will rain, or whether the person speak-
ing is referring to all instances of rain, is absent in a way it is not if one hears
the patter of rain – and hence the “evidential” value of the term “rain” is relatively
slight.
Connected with these two points is a third: when a sign is not reliable and not
speciﬁc in indication, behavior is naturally hesitant. If the interpreter has other signs
at his disposal, as in the case of beings with a language, he may under these con-
ditions pay attention to the sign in question, attempt to formulate its signiﬁcation,
raise questions as to its reliability, assess the bearings of this reliability upon what-
ever goals he may have, and even make observations upon his own disposition to
respond which is produced by the appearance of the sign. And since signs are used
for many purposes other than description and prediction, signs low in reliability
may still be attended to, produced, and cherished – as in the case of a work of ﬁc-
tion. There results in these ways the great difference between signals at one extreme
and symbols at another, but again there is no reason to regard the difference as
transcending a behavioral formulation.
And ﬁnally, and of greatest importance, is the fact which we have tried consis-
tently to stress: whether a sign does or does not lead to overt behavior depends upon
whether or not certain conditions of motivation and environment are fulﬁlled. The
person who hears a patter on the roof need no more act as he would if he were out
in the rain than a person who hears the word “Napoleon” need act as he would if
he were in the presence of Napoleon. Both signals and symbols involve dispositions
to response and both alike may or may not occur in situations in which one acts
as he is disposed to act. The difference is not between “announcing” an object in
the case of signals and of “conceiving” an object in the case of symbols, but in the
degree of absence or presence of the supporting conditions under which dispositions
to behavior issue in overt behavior.
Such are at least some of the directions in which a behaviorally oriented semiotic
may seek to explain in its terms the phenomena which have led others to claim that
symbols (especially language symbols) and signals are so different that they should
not both be called signs. It is hard to see what is added by invoking “concepts” as
a principle of differentiation. Unless the term “concept” (or “idea” or “meaning”) is
itself so deﬁned that one can tell when concepts are or are not present, the term offers
no help to semiotic. It is more promising to start with an objective approach and then
to correlate if possible results so obtained with the reports of self-observation con-
cerning the presence of concepts. It may turn out that concepts are claimed to be
present when signs of a certain kind are operative (perhaps general symbols); then
the question would arise whether concepts might not be identiﬁed with the interpre-
tants of such signs (and so become a special class of “ideas” if ideas were equated
with interpretants). The self-observation of concepts (and ideas) would then be the
observation by an organism of certain features of its sign-behavior. But these again
are matters for the psychologist to decide, and not obstacles for the semiotician, nor

4
Excerpts from Signs, Language and Behavior
183
arguments against a terminology which embraces signals and symbols as subclasses
of signs, nor principles for the explanation of the differences between signals and
symbols.
Signs in Animals and Men
Once there is an agreement upon the signiﬁcation of such terms as “signal,” “sym-
bol,” and “language,” the comparison of non-human and human sign-behavior is an
empirical problem falling within descriptive semiotic. As such it is a speciﬁc sci-
entiﬁc problem, and its answer is to be given by the scientiﬁc student of behavior.
Without attempting such an answer here, we may notice how the problem looks
in terms of the general framework which has been developed. If it is evident that
sign-processes at the level of human behavior presuppose and grow out of such
sign-processes as occur in animals, it is also evident that human behavior shows an
amazingly complex reﬁnement and proliferation of signs beyond that of any other
known organism. If there is continuity in some respects, there are also impressive
differences in other respects. The difﬁculty is in doing justice to both sets of facts.
The problem is how to distinguish animal sign-behavior from that of man. Here
there are two possibilities: one is to insist that the difference is solely a matter of
degree; the other is to insist that there is some unique characteristic of human signs
not found elsewhere in the animal world. The ﬁrst tendency is most prominent in the
students of animal behavior since they are aware of the complexity of such behav-
ior; the second is most prominent in the students of the social sciences and the
humanities, since they are impressed with the unique place of signs in the subject
matters with which they deal. Hence the frequent result that some student of man
proposes a unique differentiation of human signs which the student of animal behav-
ior then seeks to show is manifested in at least an embryonic form in the animal
world.
There have been many proposals for a unique differentiation of human signs:
men have symbols while animals have only signals; men alone have signs of signs;
human beings are unique in the transmission of signs by social heredity; human
beings use signs voluntarily while animals do not; animal signs occur only in per-
ception while human beings are capable of inferences based on signs; men alone
become interested in signs as goal-objects; men alone have language. The critic
of such proposals denies that a sharp differentiation has been found and seeks to
supply evidence for attributing the claimed characteristic to non-human animals.
He need not, and usually does not, deny that these characteristics are found in an
extreme degree in the signs in human behavior. That social heredity, for instance,
plays a vastly more important role in the transmission of human signs than it does
in animals, or that men operate at higher levels of signs than animals do, is in fact
not in doubt. The question in each case is merely whether one can say: Here is a
unique characteristic of human signs not shared by the signs of any other animal.
And certainly most proponents of such characteristics have not convincingly made
their case.

184
Charles Morris (1901–1979)
All such discussions usually culminate in the question as to whether language is
unique to man. Here the issue is in part terminological, since if “language” is made
synonymous with “communication” there is no doubt that animals have language; or
if only some of the criteria which are incorporated in the preceding deﬁnition of lan-
guage are insisted upon (or different criteria), then too there may be no doubt about
the existence of animal language. But if the full proposed deﬁnition is accepted, I
know of no convincing evidence that any animals other than men have either a signal
or a symbol language, though it is to be insisted that the problem is an empirical one
and not to be dogmatically resolved. That animal signs at times occur in social acts,
that animal signs are often interpersonal and plurisituational, that an animal may
itself occasionally produce the sign which it interprets, that some symbols occur in
animal behavior does not seem to be in doubt. And yet these facts are not themselves
sufﬁcient conditions for attributing language to animals.
The fact that a sign is plurisituational and interpersonal does not make it a lan-
guage sign, nor does the mere addition of the fact that the sign is produced by
an organism. It is further essential that the sign have the same signiﬁcation to the
producers of the sign when produced by them that it has when produced by other
organisms, that is, that it be a comsign; and it is by no means clear that this condi-
tion is fulﬁlled in sub-human sign-behavior. Hence even if only the ﬁrst four of our
criteria for a language sign were accepted as a deﬁnition, it still remains to be shown
that these conditions are all jointly met in living beings other than men. But even
if these conditions were met, the ﬁfth requirement is a harder hurdle. For though
animal signs may be interconnected, and interconnected in such a way that animals
may be said to infer, there is no evidence that these signs are combined by animals
which produce them according to limitations of combination necessary for the signs
to form a language system. Such considerations strongly favor the hypothesis that
language – as here deﬁned – is unique to man.22
Even if empirical evidence, possibly gained by novel experimentation, should
modify this hypothesis, it is not likely to refute the view that man is characteristi-
cally the linguistic animal. And certainly no other animal transmits to such degree its
signs by social heredity, attains signs so highly independent of particular situations,
22 This is the commonly held view. See A. L. Kroeber, “Sub-Human Culture Beginnings”
(Quarterly Review of Biology, 3, 1928, 325–342); J. A. Bierens de Haan, “Langue humaine; lan-
gage animal” (Scientia, 55, 1934, 40–49); Robert M. Yerkes, Chimpanzees: a Laboratory Colony.
Yerkes differs from Kroeber in believing that there is some evidence of slight cultural heredity in
chimpanzees, but agrees that “there is no single system of signs-vocal, gestural, or postural-which
may properly be called a chimpanzee language” (op. cit., p. 51). Alfred E. Emerson links lan-
guage and social heredity as giving the unique features of man: “Instead of the usual mechanism of
heredity through genic patterns in the chromosomes which determines relatively stereotyped devel-
opment by means of enzyme chains, the human species is the only organism which has developed
a substitute mechanism for such biological heredity... The development of human social heredity
through learned language symbols is of such importance that this human attribute would seem to
indicate the valid division line between the social and the biological sciences. It is what the sociolo-
gist means when he says that man is unique in the possession of a culture” (“Biological Sociology,”
Denison University Bulletin, Journal of the Scientiﬁc Laboratories, 36, 1941, 148–149).

4
Excerpts from Signs, Language and Behavior
185
employs symbols to such an overwhelming extent, uses signs (voluntarily and invol-
untarily) for so many purposes, is so attentive to its signs as signs, passes to such
high levels of sign-behavior, performs such complex inferences via signs, or so often
makes of signs themselves goal-objects. In all these ways, human language (and the
post-language symbols it makes possible) goes vastly beyond the sign-behavior of
animals. But language-behavior is still sign-behavior, and language signs rest upon,
and never completely take the place of, the simpler signs which they presuppose.
The continuity is as real as the discontinuity, and the similarity of human and animal
signs-behavior as genuine as the difference.
The present approach thus sharpens, though it does not itself solve, the empiri-
cal problem as to the relation of sub-human and human sign-behavior. By reﬁning
the terminological apparatus of semiotic and formulating such terms behaviorally,
it leads to a more precise statement of the general problem, namely: which kind of
signs (signals, symbols, comsignals, comsymbols, language signals, language sym-
bols, and post-language symbols) appear in which organisms’ behavior, and what
are the evolutionary and genetic relations between the signs which do appear?23
It is easy (and perhaps correct) to say that signals rather than symbols predomi-
nate in animal behavior and that language signs (and post-language symbols) are
mainly, and perhaps exclusively, human attainments. But there are a vast number of
sign-processes which bridge the gap between these extremes and which presumably
serve to connect in evolutionary terms sub-human and human sign-behavior. It is
these intermediary sign-processes (symbols, comsigns, etc.) to which attention is
here called and about which further knowledge is needed. Some of this knowledge
can be gained from existing literature; much of it must be the product of specially
designed experimentation. As it is obtained the account of biological evolution will
be greatly and signiﬁcantly enriched.
The Scope and Import of Semiotic: Pragmatics, Semantics,
and Syntactics
We have now surveyed the range of material with which a science of signs must
deal. There remains only the task of bringing to a sharper focus the scope of this
science and of indicating its theoretical and practical importance.
Those readers who are familiar with the literatur e of semiotic may have been
surprised that the terms “pragmatics,” “semantics,” and “syntactics” – so widely
23 One central problem here is whether sub-human animals have symbols (as distinguished from
signals). References to symbols are common in the literature about sub-human animals, especially
in discussions of delayed reactions (see the summary of the work of Nissen, Riesen, Crawford
and others in R. M. Yerkes, Chimpanzee: a Laboratory Colony, Chapter 10 (“Language and
Symbolism”)). But J. F. Markey (The Symbolic Process, p. 112) is skeptical about there being
any symbolic behavior which is not social-vocal in origin; and Hull and the gestaltists give other
and divergent interpretations of the delayed reaction experiments from those in terms of symbolic
processes. Part of the differences lies in different uses of the term “symbol”. All accounts agree
that symbolic processes (if they occur at all) are very infrequent in animals as compared with men.

186
Charles Morris (1901–1979)
current in this literature – have not ﬁgured in our account. Their absence up to this
point has, however, been deliberate. These terms have already taken on an ambigu-
ity which threatens to cloud rather than illumine the problems of this ﬁeld, being
used by some writers to designate subdivisions of semiotic itself and by others to
designate kinds of signs in the object languages with which semiotic deals. Otto
Neurath warned years ago that these terms would engender pseudo-problems and
distract attention from genuine problems; the course of events has proved in part the
legitimacy of his fears. Yet these terms, if carefully introduced, serve to mark the
scope and subdivisions of semiotic, and may now be added to our terminology.
In Foundations of the Theory of Signs (p. 6), the three terms in question were
deﬁned as follows: pragmatics as the study of “the relation of signs to interpreters,”
semantics as the study of “the relations of signs to the objects to which the signs are
applicable,” syntactics as the study of “the formal relations of signs to one another.”
Later analysis has shown that these deﬁnitions need reﬁnement. Even as they stand,
however, they give no warrant for their utilization as a classiﬁcation of kinds of
signs (“pragmatical signs,” “semantical signs,” “syntactical signs”); such extension
of their signiﬁcation is questionable, since it may blur the distinction between signs
in various modes of signifying and the signs which make up pragmatics, seman-
tics, and syntactics conceived as the three divisions of semiotic. Hence we shall not
employ such an expression as “syntactical sign,” since doubt can then arise whether
it designates a kind of sign (say, formators) or a sign within the part of semiotic dis-
tinguished as syntactics.24 The terms “pragmatics,” “semantics,” and “syntactics”
need clariﬁcation, however, even when restricted to differentiations of the ﬁeld of
semiotic.
Carnap formulates these distinctions in the following way:
If we are analyzing a language, then we are concerned, of course, with expressions. But
we need not necessarily also deal with speakers and designata. Although these factors are
present whenever language is used, we may abstract from one or both of them in what we
intend to say about the language in question. Accordingly, we distinguish three ﬁelds of
investigation of languages. If in an investigation explicit reference is made to the speaker,
or, to put it in more general terms, to the user of a language, then we assign it to the ﬁeld of
pragmatics. (Whether in this case reference to designata is made or not makes no difference
for this classiﬁcation.) If we abstract from the user of the language and analyze only the
expressions and their designata, we are in the, ﬁeld of semantics. And if, ﬁnally, we abstract
from the designata also and analyze only the relations between the expressions, we are in
(logical) syntax. The whole science of language, consisting of the three parts mentioned, is
called semiotic. (Introduction to Semantics, p. 9.)
In terms of the approach of the present study, the indicated division of the ﬁelds
of semiotic needs certain further alterations: the restriction of semiotic to a study of
24 A. Kaplan and H. Reichenbach have, among others, used such terms as “pragmatical sign.”
This extension, which I regard as unwise, is perhaps in part due to my Foundations of the Theory
of Signs. For in this work a distinction was made between the pragmatical, semantical, and syn-
tactical “dimensions” of sign-processes themselves; this, coupled with the fact that that work did
not sufﬁciently distinguish the modes of signifying nor the difference between the signiﬁcation
and use of signs, might suggest such expressions as “pragmatical sign” and “syntactical sign” –
expressions which the present analysis avoids.

4
Excerpts from Signs, Language and Behavior
187
language must be removed, the study of the structure of languages other than the
scientiﬁc must be made possible, other modes of signiﬁcation than the designative
must be dealt with in semantics, and this in turn requires some modiﬁcation of the
formulation of pragmatics.
The following. deﬁnitions retain the essential features of the prevailing classiﬁ-
cation, while freeing it from certain restrictions and ambiguities: pragmatics is that
portion of semiotic which deals with the origin, uses, and effects of signs within the
behavior in which they occur; semantics deals with the signiﬁcation of signs in all
modes of signifying; syntactics deals with combinations of signs without regard for
their speciﬁc signiﬁcations or their relation to the behavior in which they occur.
When so conceived, pragmatics, semantics, and syntactics are all interpretable
within a behaviorally oriented semiotic, syntactics studying the ways in which signs
are combined, semantics studying the signiﬁcation of signs, and so the interpretant
behavior without which there is no signiﬁcation, pragmatics studying the origin,
uses, and effects of signs within the total behavior of the interpreters of signs.
The difference lies not in the presence or absence of behavior but in the sector of
behavior under consideration. The full account of signs will involve all three con-
siderations. It is legitimate and often convenient to speak of a particular semiotical
investigation as falling within pragmatics, semantics, or syntactics. Nevertheless, in
general it is more important to keep in mind the ﬁeld of semiotic as a whole, and to
bring to bear upon speciﬁc problems all that is relevant to their solution. The present
study has deliberately preferred to emphasize the unity of semiotic rather than break
each problem into its pragmatical, semantical, and syntactical components.
There is another current distinction which offers no difﬁculty in terms of this
analysis: the distinction between pure and descriptive semiotic.
This distinction simply marks the difference between the formative discourse of
semiotic and its designative discourse, that is, the difference between semiotic as
logic and semiotic as scientiﬁc discourse. Semiotic, as a language to talk scientiﬁ-
cally about signs, will have its own formative ascriptors (such as “Every sign has an
interpretant”) and such ascriptors belong to logic; it will also consist of designative
ascriptors (such as statements as to what signs signify to certain persons, how signs
are combined in a speciﬁc language, the origin uses and effects of speciﬁc signs),
and such ascriptors constitute semiotics a natural science. This distinction applies to
each of the subdivisions of semiotic: hence we can distinguish pure and descriptive
pragmatics, pure and descriptive semantics, pure and descriptive syntactics.25 The
application of semiotic as an instrument may be called applied semiotic.
25 R. Carnap makes the distinctions in the case of syntactics and semantics but not with respect
to pragmatics; thus on p. 6 of his Foundations of Logic and Mathematics he writes that “pragmat-
ics is an empirical discipline.” But in pragmatics too we can distinguish between formative and
lexicative ascriptors, and so generalize the distinction between pure and descriptive semiotic. The
present volume neglects in the main the important work which has been done in syntactics; see
Carnap’s Logical Syntax of Language, and The Formalization of Logic. On our position, any kind
of discourse can be studied syntactically. Hence syntactics includes Carnap’s “logical syntax” as
the pure syntactics of the language of science. By the same token any type of discourse (such as
mathematical discourse) can be studied semantically.

188
Charles Morris (1901–1979)
Bibliography
Carnap, R. (1942). Introduction to Semantics. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Hull, C. L. (1920). Quantitative aspects of the evolution of concepts. Psychological Review
Monograph Supplements 28, 1–86.
Hull, C. L. (1930). Knowledge and purpose as habit mechanisms. Psychological Review 37,
511–525.
Hull, C. L. (1931). Goal attraction and directing ideas conceived as habit phenomena.
Psychological Review 38, 487–506.
Hull, C. L. (1933). Hypnosis and Suggestibility. New York: D. Appleton-Century Company, Inc.
Hull, C. L. (1934). The concept of the habit-family hierarchy and maze learning. Psychological
Review, 41, 33–54; 134–152.
Hull, C. L. (1935). The mechanism of the assembly of behavior segments in novel combinations
suitable for problem solution. Psychological Review 42, 219–245.
Hull, C. L. (1937). Mind, mechanism, and adaptive behavior. Psychological Review 44, 1–32.
Hunter, W. S. (1924). The problem of consciousness. Psychological Review 31, 1–31.
Hunter, W. S. (1924). The symbolic process. Psychological Review 31, 478–497.
Hunter, W. S. (1925). The subject’s report. Psychological Review 32, 153–170.
Hunter, W. S. (1932). The psychological study of behavior. Psychological Review 39, 1–24.
Langer, S. K. (1942). Philosophy in a New Key. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Mead, G. H. (1904). The relations of psychology and philology. The Psychological Bulletin 1,
375–391.
Mead, G. H. (1907). Concerning animal perception. Psychological Review 14, 383–390.
Mead, G. H. (1910). Social consciousness and the consciousness of meaning. The Psychological
Bulletin 7, 397–405.
Mead, G. H. (1912). The mechanism of social consciousness. Journal of Philosophy 9, 401–406.
Mead, G. H. (1922). A behavioristic account of the signiﬁcant symbol. Journal of Philosophy 19,
157–163.
Mead, G. H. (1925). The genesis of the self and social control. International Journal of Ethics 35,
pp. 251–277.
Mead, G. H. (1930). Cooley’s contribution to American social thought. The American Journal of
Sociology 35, 693–706.
Mead, G. H. (1934). Mind, Self and Society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mead, G. H. (1938). The Philosophy of the Act. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mowrer, O. H. (1939). A stimulus-response analysis of anxiety and its role as a reinforcing agent.
Psychological Review 46, 55365.
Mowrer, O. H. (1940). Preparatory set (expectancy) – some methods of measurement.
Psychological Review. Monograph Supplements 52, 43.
Neurath, O. (1933). Einheitswissenschaft und Psychologie. Wien: Gerold & Co.
Neurath, O. (1936). International Picture Language, the First Rules of Isotype. London: K. Paul,
Trench, Trubner & Co., Ltd.
Neurath, O. (1936). Basic by Isotype. London: K. Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co., Ltd.
Neurath, O. (1939). Modern Man in the Making. New York: A. A. Knopf.
Neurath, O. (1940–41). Universal jargon and terminology. Aristotelian Society Proceedings 44,
127–148.
Neurath, O. (1944). Foundations of the social sciences. International Encyclopedia of Uniﬁed
Science 2(1). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1931–1935). Collected Papers. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1, 1931; 2,
1932; 4, 1933; 5, 1934; 6, 1935.
Watson, J. B. (1914). Behavior; an Introduction to Comparative Psychology. New York: H. Holt
and Company.
Watson, J. B. (1916). Behavior and the concept of mental disease. Journal of Philosophy 13,
589–597.

4
Excerpts from Signs, Language and Behavior
189
Watson, J. B. (1916). The place of the conditioned-reﬂex in psychology. Psychological Review 23,
89–116.
Watson, J. B. (1919). Psychology from the Standpoint of a Behaviorist. Philadelphia: J. B.
Lippincott Company.
Watson, J. B. (1924). Behaviorism. New York: The People’s Institute Publishing Company, Inc.
Yerkes, R. M. (1943). Chimpanzees, a Laboratory Colony. New Haven: Yale University Press.

Chapter 5
Excerpts from Universe of the Mind: A Semiotic
Theory of Culture
Juri Mikhajloviˇc Lotman (1922–1993)
Introduction and Commentary: Juri Mikhajloviˇc Lotman
Modern science from nuclear physics to linguistics sees the scientist as inside the world
being described and as a part of that world. But the object and the observer are, as a rule,
described in different languages, and consequently, the problem of translation is a universal
scientiﬁc task.
J. Lotman (1990: 269)
By the time that Thomas A. Sebeok ventured into the Soviet-held city of Tartu,
Estonia to meet with the émigré Russian semiotician Juri Lotman in 1970, a rich
half-century’s worth of semiotic scholarship had been steadily accruing ‘behind the
Iron Curtain’ under conditions that would have been barely imaginable to Lotman’s
academic counterparts in the West. Born ﬁve years after the Bolshevik revolu-
tion in Petrograd (St Petersburg), Russia, on February 28, 1922, Lotman entered
Leningrad State University in 1939 to study “philology” under the renowned lit-
erary analysts Boris Eichenbaum (1886–1959) and Vladimir Propp (1895–1970).
Eichenbaum and Propp had come from a long tradition of Russian “formalist” lit-
erary analysts, whose interest in pre-Revolutionary texts and folklore, and whose
belief that literary structure was not strictly the product of Marxist historical dialec-
tic, was ofﬁcially outlawed under Stalin’s reign. Indeed, to the extent that the tenets
of Literary Formalism were incompatible with those of Soviet Realism, avocation
of the former “was a heresy that could lead to deportation to Siberia” (Liukkonen
2008: o.l.).
Less than one year into his studies, however, Lotman was conscripted into the
Soviet military. He was not released until 1946, at which time he resumed his stud-
ies, graduating from university with excellent grades four years later. As a Jew,
however, Lotman was effectively ineligible for consideration for doctoral study,
as during this time the Soviet press was engaged in a vigorous campaign against
“cosmopolitanism”; and this was widely understood to be a thinly-veiled gov-
ernment endorsement of anti-Semitism. Unable to obtain employment in Russia
proper, Lotman ﬁnally found a position as a teacher of Russian language and lit-
erature at the Teacher Training College in Tartu, Estonia in 1950. In 1954, Lotman
joined the Department of Russian Language and Literature at Tartu University, and
later became its head. Two years later, the Twentieth Party Congress of the USSR
191
D. Favareau, Essential Readings in Biosemiotics, Biosemiotics 3,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9650-1_5, C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010

192
Juri Mikhajloviˇc Lotman (1922–1993)
inaugurated its ofﬁcial policy of “de-Stalinization” of academia, at which time a
gradual and cautious revival of literary and linguistic study began.
“Formalism, was, of course, in complete disgrace,” recalls Boris Egorov
(1926– ), a colleague of Lotman who would often smuggle outlawed work by
Russian scholars to Lotman for publication in Tartu. And with Formalism having
been “ofﬁcially banned by Stalin in the 1930s,” recounts Egorov, “by the 1960s, the
Party-minded orthodox were still very dubious about [the then ascendant Western
analytical movement of] Structuralism. So we had very good reasons to be afraid
that this new term, Semiotics, would provoke even more fears. We began to reason,
thus, by the Aesopian principle: “How might all this be expressed more obscurely?”
Then Uspenskji, a mathematician among us, invented the splendid term: secondary
modeling systems. Clever, and incomprehensible. Just what we needed to get on
with our work!” (Toomela 2003: 115).
In 1955, Lotman’s colleagues V.V. Ivanov (1929– ), I.I. Revzin (1923–1974),
and B.A. Uspenskji (1937– ) founded the Association for Machine Translation in
Moscow. A seminar on mathematical linguistics and structuralism was held at the
Moscow State University the following year, bringing together linguists, mathe-
maticians, literary analysts, and cyberneticians. The success of this conference led
to the formation of a number of interdisciplinary institutes and projects devoted to
the problems of signs, codes, signiﬁcation, and translation between sign systems.
“Invoked initially as an aid in tasks of machine translation, semiotics gradually
approached the status of an autonomous discipline,” writes historian of Soviet semi-
otics Daniel Peri Lucid. Lucid cites as a pivotal event in this evolution, Vjaˇceslav
Ivanov’s talk at the 1961 Conference on the Elaboration of Information, Machine
Translation and Automatic Reading of the Text, wherein Ivanov calls for “a unique
semiotic viewpoint to deal with diverse phenomena, including natural and artiﬁcial
languages, languages of signalization, languages of art, “languages” of animals, and
the sign systems of infants and the mentally ill” (1977: 3).
The Symposium on the Structural Study of Sign Systems that was held in
Moscow in 1962 is generally considered to be the watershed event by which
semiotics – or the interdisciplinary study of sign systems per se – became ofﬁ-
cially established as “an independent ﬁeld of research and a recognized fact of
Soviet intellectual life” (ibid: 4). An organizational centre for this interdisciplinary
movement was provided by Juri Lotman, who inaugurated the Tartu University
Summer School in Semiotics, along with the world’s ﬁrst scholarly journal devoted
entirely to semiotics, Trudy po znakovym sisteman (Sign System Studies), in 1964.
The Tartu summer conferences attracted the attention of semioticians from around
the world, and would eventually include such attendees as Roman Jakobson
(1869–1982), Claude Lévi-Strauss (1908– ), Julia Kristeva (1941– ) and Thomas
A. Sebeok (1920–2001), all of whom would go on to promote the work of Lotman
and his colleagues in the West. Similarly, the more than 2000 publications that
Lotman was responsible for getting into print – including works by Lev Vygotsky
(1896–1934) and Mikhail Baktin (1895–1975) – helped to solidify the theoretical
approach to semiotic study known as the Moscow-Tartu school, which is char-
acterized by an emphasis on the examination of multiple sign systems as they

5
Excerpts from Universe of the Mind: A Semiotic Theory of Culture
193
dynamically shape each other at an interface (usually cultural, but also evolutionary
and biological, as Lotman himself will be the most prominent to argue).
Sign system study under the Moscow-Tartu school shifted the emphasis from
an examination of natural language – christened the “primary modeling system”
of human communication and cognition – to the examination of such “secondary
modeling systems” as literature, cartography, etiquette, gesture, scientiﬁc represen-
tation, poetry, myth, games, personality, visual art and mathematics.1 As Egorov
noted above, such inquiry into the construction and maintenance of human “world-
models” treaded dangerously close to advocating understandings alternative to
ofﬁcial Soviet ideology, and Lotman himself would ultimately have to have his most
famous manuscript, O Semiosfere (On the Semiosphere) smuggled out of Estonia by
Thomas A. Sebeok for publication in the West (Sebeok 2001: 167).
“The evolution in semiotic theory” under Lotman’s leadership in the East dur-
ing this time, notes a contemporary theorist, “might be compared to the shift from
Newtonian to relativistic physics,” as the semiotics of the Moscow-Tartu school
evolved from a theory rooted in Saussurean linguistics and in mathematical proce-
dures to a biological, organismic approach (Mandelker 1994: 385). “In a series of
largely untranslated articles from the time, Juri Lotman, the leading ﬁgure of the
Moscow-Tartu school, proposed the model of the semiosphere, a metaphor based on
the principles of cell biology, organic chemistry, and brain science, to map cultural
dynamics” writes Mandelker (Ibid).
Lotman’s 1968 Lektsii po struktural’noj poetike (Analysis of the Poetic Text)
introduced his extended deﬁnition of ‘structuralism’ as the scientiﬁc approach most
appropriate to the examination of any kind of a system or “complete, self-regulating
entity that adapts to new conditions by transforming its features while retaining
its systematic structure” (Granville 2004: o.l.). Accordingly, any given modeling
system – whether natural or artiﬁcial – must be investigated as “an interrelated,
interdependant system composed of units and the rules for their possible combina-
tions” (Ibid). In a Summer School talk that set the direction of the Moscow-Tartu
school for the next two decades, Lotman, in 1970, deﬁned “culture” as the totality of
“all human activity [engendering] the elaboration, exchange and retention of infor-
mation by means of signs” and the goal of a uniﬁed semiotics as an examination
of the “functional correlation of different sign systems” as they are brought into a
unity by culture (and, again, by evolution and biology).
1 “Secondary refers to the idea that while all [such systems] are founded on the primary system of
natural language, they also acquires supplementary structures” of their own, writes Janet Paterson,
“Modeling suggests that the secondary system represents a structure of elements and the rules for
combining them that is analogous to [that present in] the entire sphere of the object of knowledge”
so modelled (1993: 209). In 2000, Thomas A. Sebeok and Marcel Danesi will articulate a com-
prehensive Modeling Systems Theory (MST) for the investigation of all varieties of sign systems
discoverable in the natural world; one that replaces human “language” with Uexkullian “umwelt”
as the Primary Modelling System upon which all subsequent semiotic systems are constructed
(Sebeok and Danesi 2000, Deely 2007).

194
Juri Mikhajloviˇc Lotman (1922–1993)
In 1969, the International Association for Semiotic Studies was founded in Paris
by Algirdas Julien Greimas, Emile Benveniste, Roman Jakobson, Julia Kristeva and
Thomas A. Sebok. Juri Lotman was elected, in absentia, as its ﬁrst Vice-President,
and as member of the Editorial Committee for the association’s peer-reviewed
academic journal, Semiotica – a position that Lotman held through ninety-eight
volumes, until his death in 1993. Moreover, in addition to his four decades worth
of organizational and editorial work for the advancement of interdisciplinary sign
study, Lotman’s own theoretical contributions to the science of semiotics are pro-
found. As author or co-author of over 800 works of sign study, Lotman is most
widely recognized today for his development of the analytical framework of the
“semiosphere.”
By self-consciously coining a cognate of Edward Suess’ (1831–1914) and
Vladimir Verdansky’s (1863–1945) concept of the biosphere – the organizational
space wherein living beings occur and interact – Lotman, in designating the space
wherein agents interact by using sign relations as the semiosphere, was attempting to
re-orient the locus of semiotic study from the traditionally “atomistic” examination
of “individual acts of semiosis” (whether Peircean or Saussurean) to an examination
of the larger system, or matrix, of sign relations within which alone such individual
acts have their “meaning.”2
A “self-contained, single-channel system” such as those presented in Shannonian
coding-and-decoding models “is a mechanism for transmitting extremely simple
signals and for the realization of a single function, but for the task of generat-
ing information, it certainly will not do”, writes Lotman in the selection regarding
the semiosphere that follows (1990: 22). Instead, notes Lotman, among semiosis’
most important functions (in addition to the mere transmission and reception of
pre-encoded information) are: its ability to combine creatively otherwise discrete
messages and bits of information; its ability to generate genuinely new informa-
tion; its ability to condense, order and in many other ways act upon an ever-growing
accretion of information; and its ability to function as a dynamically interactive
memory store.
Such multi-modal semiosis characterizes that found among living beings, as both
in cultural and in biological evolution, writes Lotman, “when the sum of the contexts
in which a given text acquires interpretation becomes incorporated in it [in such a
way] that we may term it the text’s memory... this meaning-space created by the text
around itself” becomes a relevant factor in each new act of interpretation upon that
2 Twelve years later, in 1996, molecular biologist Jesper Hoffmeyer, at that time unacquainted with
Lotman’s work, would open his seminal work on biosemiotics, Signs of Meaning in the Universe,
with these words: “This book deals with something for which there is, as yet, no standard word
in layperson’s language, though there most deﬁnitely ought to be. Please forgive me, therefore,
introducing at the outset the term we lack: semiosphere. The semiosphere is a sphere just like
the atmosphere, the hydrosphere, and the biosphere. It penetrates to every corner of these other
spheres, incorporating all forms of communication: sounds, smells, movements, colors, shapes,
electrical ﬁelds, thermal radiation, waves of all kinds, chemical signals, touching, and so on. In
short, signs of life” (1996: vii). For a comparison between Hoffmeyer’s and Lotman’s notions of
“semiosphere,” see Kull (1998).

5
Excerpts from Universe of the Mind: A Semiotic Theory of Culture
195
text (1990: 57). Each of these embodied acts of interpretation, in turn, brings into
being yet new meaning-spaces of its own. Such “meaning-spaces” are both context-
dependent, as well as context-creating, opportunities for meaning-making action in
response to, and upon, a given text – and the meaning-bearing matrix created by
a society of participants all interacting within such a possibility space is precisely
what Lotman calls the semiosphere.3
Having its origins in the multiply recursive acts of non-linguistic meaning-
making – and in the structures of experience arising therefrom – this semiosphere
pre-exists language and gives rise to it, both evolutionarily and in real-time.
Accordingly, argues Lotman, it makes no sense to conceive of a single “sign rela-
tion” that functions (and could thus be understood) in isolation from all the other
sign-relations of the semiosphere – just as, in ecology, it would make no sense to
conceive of a single organism or species functioning in isolation from the biology
existing in its surroundings.
Rather, “signs” are found in the real world only in the presence of, and as the
result of, other signs. Thus, just as the notion of an ecosystem comprising only
one species is impossible, so too is the notion of a “meaning system” composed of
unconnected and individually subsisting signs. A “sign science” that mistakes the
derivative “atomic facts” of a single sign-act as foundational, and that then attempts
to construct an agglutinative theory of language or semiosis from that starting point,
argues Lotman, is both “inverting evolutionary cause-and-effect” (to use a phrase
of Terrence Deacon’s) and “searching in the destination for what should have been
sought in the source” (to use a phrase popularized by Thomas Sebeok).
The proper unit of investigation for a sign-science is the totality of the semio-
sphere itself, claims Lotman, and it is within this context that any individual act of
semiosis is to be understood and explained:
The unit of semiosis, the smallest functioning mechanism, is not the separate language but
the whole semiotic space of the [sign activity] in question. This is the space we term the
semiosphere. The semiosphere is the result and the condition for the development of culture;
we justify our term by analogy with the biosphere, as Vernadsky deﬁned it, namely: both the
totality and the organic whole of living matter, and also the condition for the continuation
of its life (1990: 125).
Lotman’s dictum may seem impossibly ambitious at ﬁrst glance, yet we should
remember that Darwin, in a similar fashion, took as the proper unit of his investi-
gations “the biological order” as a whole – and from a careful examination of the
patterns exhibited by the whole, deduced a unifying explanatory framework for the
analysis of individual organisms and species that are its constituent parts.
3 Proceeding from a Peircean, as opposed to a Lotmanian, perspective, neurobiologist and bioan-
thropologist Terrence Deacon arrives at a strikingly similar conclusion in the excerpt from The
Symbolic Species that is included in this volume. The reader may wish to take a look at Deacon’s
diagram of a similarly recursive and meaning-bearing matrix of enacted interpretations (Fig. 18.3,
this volume) to obtain a diagrammatic depiction of a Lotmanian “semiosphere” seen from a
Peircean perspective.

196
Juri Mikhajloviˇc Lotman (1922–1993)
Juri Lotman died in his adopted home of Tartu, Estonia on October 28, 1993, at
age seventy-one, of an embolism. His wife, the literary historian Zara Mints (1927–
1990), had died several years earlier, but he was survived by his two sons Mihhail
Lotman (1952b), a semiotician, and Aleksei Lotman (1960b), a biologist and envi-
ronmental activist. Tartu University Professor of Biosemiotics Kalevi Kull reports
that “a regular lecture course on biosemiotics was introduced at Tartu University in
1993, in the year of Yuri Lotman’s death, and opening with Lotman’s introductory
words, as he dictated them from his hospital bed. This course is now read every
year and is included in the University’s standard semiotics curriculum” (Kull 1999:
404–405).

5
Excerpts from Universe of the Mind: A Semiotic Theory of Culture
197
Excerpts from Universe of the Mind: A Semiotic
Theory of Culture (1990)
Preface
The project of creating a thinking brain adumbrated by Goethe is still relevant today:
indeed, with each new advance in science, it has been raised anew, though in dif-
ferent terms. But a very real barrier stands in our way: namely, that we cannot
satisfactorily explain what is the thinking brain we are trying to create artiﬁcially.
Evidently, the reason is that intellectual activity us usually regarded as aquality
unique to man. But something that is taken in isolation and not compared with
anything else cannot be the object of science.
Our task is thus to ﬁnd a series of “thinking objects”, to compare then, and to
deduce the invariant features of intelligence. The concept “intelligence” has many
aspects and I do not feel competent to make an exhaustive deﬁnition of it. However,
the task becomes manageable if we restrict ourselves to its semiotic aspect. Thus,
if we deﬁne intelligence from this point of view, we can reduce it to the following
functions:
1. The transmission of available information (that is, of texts)
2. The creation of new information – that is, of texts which are not simply deducible
according to set algorithms from already existing information, but which are to
some degree inpredictable
3. Memory; that is, the capacity to preserve and reproduce information (texts)
The study of the semiotic systems created by humanity over the course of its
cultural history has led to the unexpected ﬁnding that these functions are also char-
acteristic of semiotic objects. Thinking along these lines has led us to the concept
of the semiosphere and convinced us of the importance of studying the semiotics of
culture.
The Text as a Meaning-Generating Mechanism
In the Saussurean system of thought, which has long determined the course of semi-
otic thinking, there is a clear preference for the study of language rather than speech,
and of the code rather than the text. Speech and its delimited articulated hyposta-
sis, the text, is of interest to the linguist merely as raw material, as a manifestation
of the linguistic structure. Everything that is relevant in speech (or text) is given
in language (or code). Elements occurring in a text without any correspondence in
the code cannot be bearers of meaning. This is what Saussure means when he says:
“The linguist must take the study of linguistic structure as his primary concern, and
relate all other manifestations of language to it” (Ferdinand de Saussure 1983). To
take linguistic structure as the norm means making it the scientiﬁc reference-point

198
Juri Mikhajloviˇc Lotman (1922–1993)
for the deﬁnition of what is essential and what is inessential in language activity.
Naturally, whatever has no correspondence in the language (code) when the message
is decoded is “removed”. After which just as the metal of the language structure is
sifted out from the ore of speech there remains only the dross. This is what Saussure
had in mind when he said, “the science of language can do without the analysis of
speech”.
Behind this scientiﬁc position, however, stands a whole complex of assumed,
almost non-scientiﬁc ideas about the function of language. While the theoretical
linguist is interested in the linguistic structure extracted from the text, the everyday
receiver of information is concerned with the content of the message. In both cases
the text is treated as something that is valuable, not in itself, but merely as a kind of
packaging from which the topic of interest is extracted.
For the receiver of a message the following sequence seems logical:
thought (content of the message)
thought (content of the message)  
the encoding mechanism of language
 the decoding mechanism of language  
the text
From this point of view it is assumed that in the ideal case the informational con-
tent does not change either qualitatively or quantitatively: the receiver decodes the
text and receives the initial message. Once again the text is regarded as a “technical
packaging” for the message which is what the receiver is interested in.
Should we then think that this artiﬁcial model is a model of what language should
be, an ideal, from which it is distinguished only by imperfections which are the nat-
ural result of the “irrational” workings of Nature? Artiﬁcial languages model not
language as such but one of its functions – the ability to transmit a message ade-
quately; because semiotic structures when they achieve this function to perfection
lose the capacity of serving other functions which are inherent to them in the natural
state.
So what are these functions?
First of all, the creative function. Every system which fulﬁls the entire range of
semiotic possibilities not only transmits ready made messages but also serves as a
generator of new ones.
But what is it we are terming “new messages”? Let us agree ﬁrst of all on what
we are so terming. We are not terming “new messages” those messages received
from inputs as a result of simple transformations, i.e. messages which are the fruit
of symmetrical transformations of the input (an input text obtained by a reverse
transformation). If the translation of text T1 from language L1 to language L2 leads
to the appearance of text T2 in such a way that the operation of a reverse translation
results in the input text T1, then we do not consider text T2 to be new in relation to
text T1. So from this point of view the correct solution of mathematical problems

5
Excerpts from Universe of the Mind: A Semiotic Theory of Culture
199
does not create new texts. We might recall Wittgenstein’s remark that within logic
you cannot say anything new.
The polar opposite of artiﬁcial languages are those semiotic systems in which
the creative function is strongest: it is obvious that if the most hackneyed of poems
is translated into another language (i.e. into the language of another poetic system)
then the operation of reverse translation will not produce the input text. The very fact
that one and the same poem can be translated by different translators in many ways
testiﬁes to the fact that in place of a precise correspondence to text T1 in this case
there is a certain space. Anyone of the texts t1, t2, t3 . . . tn which ﬁll this space may
be a possible interpretation of the input text. Instead of a precise correspondence
there is one of the possible interpretations, instead of a symmetrical transformation
there is an asymmetrical one, instead of identity between the elements which com-
pose T1 and T2 there is a conventional equivalence between them. In the translation
of French poetry into Russian the rendering of the French twelve-syllable syllabic
line by the Russian six-foot syllabo-tonic iambics is a convention, the result of an
accepted tradition. Yet in principle it is possible to translate French syllabic verse
into Russian syllabic verse. The translator is forced to make a choice. There is even
greater indeterminacy when, for instance, a novel is transformed into a ﬁlm.
The text that is produced in these instances we shall term a new one and the act
of translation that creates it a creative act.
We can represent the adequate transmission of a text using artiﬁcial language by
the following diagram:
T1
C
T2
In this case the transmitter and the receiver share the same code, C.
The diagram representing artistic translation shows that transmitter and receiver
use different codes C1 and C2 which overlap but are not identical. A reverse trans-
lation will result not in the input text but in a third text, T3. Even closer to the actual
process of the circulation of messages is the case when the transmitter is faced with
not one code but a plural space of codes c1, c2, c3 . . . cn and each of them is a com-
plex hierarchical construction capable of generating a set of texts in equal degree
corresponding to it. The asymmetrical relationship, the constant need for choice,
makes translation in this case an act of generating new information and exempliﬁes
the creative function both of language and of the text.
Particularly indicative is the situation where it is not simply difference which
exists between codes, but mutual untranslatability (for instance, in the translation of
a verbal text into an iconic one). The translation is done with the help of the conven-
tional system of equivalences accepted in that particular culture. So, for example,
when transmitting a verbal text by a pictorial one (for instance, a picture on a Gospel
theme), the space of the theme will overlap in the codes, while the space of the

200
Juri Mikhajloviˇc Lotman (1922–1993)
language and style will be merely conventionally correlated within the bounds of
the particular tradition. The combination of translatability–untranslatability (each to
different degrees) is what determines the creative function.
’
’’’
Cn
C2
C1
T2
T1
T2
n
T2
Since in this case the meaning is not only an invariant remnant which is preserved
under all manner of transformational operations, but is also what is altered, we can
claim that there is an accretion of meaning in the process of such transformations.
[. . .Another] function of language is the function of memory. The text is not only
the generator of new meanings, but also a condenser of cultural memory. A text has
the capacity to preserve the memory of its previous contexts. Without this function,
there could be no science of history, since the culture of preceding ages (and more
broadly speaking, its picture of life) inevitably comes down to us in fragments. If a
text stayed in the consciousness of the perceiver only as itself, then the past would
be represented to us as a mosaic of disconnected fragments. But for the perceiver
a text is always a metonymy of a reconstructed integral meaning, a discrete sign
of a non-discrete essence. The sum of the contexts in which a given text acquires
interpretation and which are in a way incorporated in it may be termed the text’s
memory. This meaning-space created by the text around itself enters into relation-
ship with the cultural memory (tradition) already formed in the consciousness of the
audience. As a result the text acquires semiotic life.
Any culture is constantly bombarded by chance isolated texts which fall on it like
a shower of meteorites. What we have in mind are not the texts which are included
in a continuing tradition which has an inﬂuence on the culture, but isolated and
disruptive invasions. These may be the remnants of other civilizations unearthed by
chance from the ground, texts brought in by chance from cultures far off in time or
space. Unless texts had their own memory and were capable of creating a particular
semantic aura around themselves, these invasions would all remain museum pieces
set apart from the main cultural process. But in fact they are important factors in
the stimulus of cultural dynamics. For a text, like a grain of wheat which contains
within itself the programme of its future development, is not something given once
and for all and never changing. The inner and as yet unﬁnalized determinacy of its
structure provides a reservoir of dynamism when inﬂuenced by contacts with new
contexts.

5
Excerpts from Universe of the Mind: A Semiotic Theory of Culture
201
There is another side to this question. One might expect a text as it lives through
the centuries to become faded and to lose the information contained in it. Yet texts
that preserve their cultural activity reveal a capacity to accumulate information, i.e.
a capacity for memory. Nowadays Hamlet is not just a play by Shakespeare, but
it is also the memory of all its interpretations, and what is more, it is also the
memory of all those historical events which occurred outside the text but with
which Shakespeare’s text can evoke associations. We may have forgotten what
Shakespeare and his spectators knew, but we cannot forget what we have learnt
since their time. And this is what gives the text new meanings.
The Semiosphere
Semiotic Space
Up to this point our argument has followed a generally accepted pattern: we have
started by taking the single act of communication by itself, and we have examined
the relationships which arise between addresser and addressee. This approach pre-
supposes that the study of this one fact will throw light on all the chief features of
semiosis and that these features can then be extrapolated on to the larger semiotic
processes. This approach accords with Descartes’ third rule in Discourse on Method.
Descartes wrote:
The third [rule] was to carry on my reﬂections in due order, commencing with objects that
were the most simple and easy to understand, in order to rise little by little, or by degrees,
to knowledge of the most complex (Descartes 1969).
This approach also accords with the scientiﬁc practice which dates from the
time of the Enlightenment, namely to work on the “Robinson Crusoe” principle
of isolating an object and then making it into a general model.
However, for this procedure to be a correct one, the isolated fact must be able
to model all the qualities of the phenomenon on to which the conclusions are being
extrapolated. This is not so in our case. A schema consisting of addresser, addressee
and the channel linking them together is not yet a working system. For it to work
it has to be “immersed” in semiotic space. All participants in the communicative
act must have some experience of communication, be familiar with semiosis. So,
paradoxically, semiotic experience precedes the semiotic act. By analogy with the
biosphere (Vernadsky’s concept) we could talk of a semiosphere, which we shall
deﬁne as the semiotic space necessary for the existence and functioning of lan-
guages, not the sum total of different languages; in a sense the semiosphere has
a prior existence and is in constant interaction with languages. In this respect a
language is a function, a cluster of semiotic spaces and their boundaries, which,
however clearly deﬁned these are in the language’s grammatical self-description,
in the reality of semiosis are eroded and full of transitional forms. Outside the
semiosphere there can be neither communication, nor language. Of course, the
single-channel structure is a reality. A self-contained, single-channel system is a

202
Juri Mikhajloviˇc Lotman (1922–1993)
mechanism for transmitting extremely simple signals and for the realization of a
single function, but for the task of generating information it certainly will not do.
This is why we can imagine that a system like this is an artiﬁcially-made construc-
tion, but in natural circumstances systems of quite another type are at work. Just
the fact that it is a universal of human culture, that there exist both conventional
and pictorial signs (or rather that all signs are to some degree both conventional and
representational), is enough to show that semiotic dualism is the minimal form of
organization of a working semiotic system.
Binarism and asymmetry are the laws binding on any real semiotic system.
Binarism, however, must be understood as a principle which is realized in plurality
since every newly-formed language is in its turn subdivided on a binary principle.
Every living culture has a “built-in” mechanism for multiplying its languages (as we
shall see below, the Paralel and opposite mechanism for unifying languages is also at
work). For instance, we are constantly witnessing a quantitative increase in the lan-
guages of art. This is especially so in 20th century culture and in other past cultures
typologically resembling it. At periods when most creative activity comes from the
readership, the slogan that “art is everything we perceive as art” rings true. In the
early years of this century cinema ceased being a fairground amusement and became
a serious art-form. It made its appearance not alone but along with a whole proces-
sion of traditional and newly invented peep-shows. Back in the nineteenth century
no one would have seriously regarded the circus, fairground peep-shows, traditional
toys, advertisements or the cries of street traders as art-forms. Once it became an art,
cinematography at once split into documentary ﬁlms and entertainment ﬁlms, cam-
era ﬁlms and cartoon ones, each with its own poetics. And nowadays there is another
opposition to be added, that between cinema and television. True, art becomes more
narrow at the same time as the assortment of art-languages increases: some arts in
practice drop out of the picture. So we should not be surprised if, when we look
closer, the diversity of semiotic systems within a particular culture is relatively con-
stant. But something else is important: the set of languages in an active cultural ﬁeld
is constantly changing, and the axiological value and hierarchical position of the
elements in it are subject to even greater changes.
At the same time, throughout the whole space of semiosis, from social jargon
and age-group slang to fashion, there is also a constant renewal of codes. So any
one language turns out to be immersed in a semiotic space and it can only func-
tion by interaction with that space. The unit of semiosis, the smallest functioning
mechanism, is not the separate language but the whole semiotic space of the cul-
ture in question. This is the space we term the semiosphere. The semiosphere is the
result and the condition for the development of culture; we justify our term by anal-
ogy with the biosphere, as Vernadsky deﬁned it, namely the totality and the organic
whole of living matter and also the condition for the continuation of life.
Vernadsky wrote that
all life-clusters are intimately bound to each other. One cannot exist without the other. This
connection between different living ﬁlms and clusters, and their invariancy, is an age-old
feature of the mechanism of the earth’s crust, which has existed all through geological time
(Vemadsky 1960).

5
Excerpts from Universe of the Mind: A Semiotic Theory of Culture
203
The same idea is expressed more clearly again:
The biosphere has a quite deﬁnite structure which determines everything without exception
that happens in it. . . . A human being observed in nature and all living organisms and every
living being is a function of the biosphere in its particular space-time (Vemadsky 1977).
In his notes dating from 1892 Vernadsky pointed to human intellectual activity
as a continuation of the cosmic conﬂict between life and inert matter:
the seeming laws of mental activity in people’s lives has led many to deny the inﬂuence of
the personality on history, although, throughout history, we can in fact see a constant strug-
gle of conscious (i.e. not natural) life, formations with the unconscious order of the dead
laws of nature, and in this effort of consciousness lies all the beauty of historical manifesta-
tions, the originality of their position among the other natural processes. A historical epoch
can be judged by this effort of consciousness (Vemadsky 1988).
The semiosphere is marked by its heterogeneity. The languages which ﬁll up the
semiotic space are various, and they relate to each other along the spectrum which
runs from complete mutual translatability to just as complete mutual untranslatabil-
ity. Heterogeneity is deﬁned both by the diversity of elements and by their different
functions. So if we make the mental experiment of imagining a model of a semiotic
space where all the languages came into being at one and the same moment and
under the inﬂuence of the same impulses, we still would not have a single coding
structure but a set of connected but different systems. For instance, we construct a
model of the semiotic structure of European Romanticism and mark out its chrono-
logical framework. Even within such a completely artiﬁcial space there would be
no homogeneity since inevitably where there are different degrees of iconism there
can be no mutually complete semantic translatability, but only conventional cor-
respondence. Of course the poet and partisan hero of 1812, Denis Davydov, did
compare the tactics of partisan warfare with Romantic poetry, declaring that the
leader of a partisan band should not be a “theorist” with “a calculating mind and
a cold heart”: “This poetic profession needs a romantic imagination, a passion for
adventure and it is never content with dry prosaic displays of valour. It is a verse of
Byron’s!” (Davydov 1822). But we have only to look at his study of tactics, Attempt
at a Theory of Partisan Warfare, with its plans and maps to realize that this ﬁne
metaphor was just a pretext for the contrast-loving mind of a Romantic to juxtapose
the incompatible. The fact that the uniﬁcation of two different languages is achieved
by a metaphor is proof of the essential differences between them.
But then we have also to take account of the fact that different languages circulate
for different periods: fashion in clothes changes at a speed which cannot be com-
pared with the rate of change of the literary language, and Romanticism in dance
is not synchronized with Romanticism in architecture. So, while some parts of the
semiosphere are still enjoying the poetics of Romanticism, others may have moved
far on into post-Romanticism. So even our artiﬁcial model will not give us a homol-
ogous picture across a strictly synchronic section. This is why when we try to give a
synthetic picture of Romanticism to include all forms of art (and perhaps also other
areas of culture), chronology has to be sacriﬁced. What we have said is true also of
the Baroque, of Classicism, and of many other “isms”.

204
Juri Mikhajloviˇc Lotman (1922–1993)
Yet if we talk not of artiﬁcial models but of modeling the actual literary pro-
cess (or more broadly, the cultural process) then we must admit that – to continue
with our example – Romanticism occupies only a part of the semiosphere in which
all sorts of other traditional structures continue to exist, some of them going way
back into antiquity. Besides, at all stages of development there are contacts with
texts coming in from cultures which formerly lay beyond the boundaries of the
given semiosphere. These invasions, sometimes by separate texts, and sometimes by
whole cultural layers, variously effect the internal structure of the “world picture”
of the culture we are talking about. So across any synchronic section of the semio-
sphere different languages at different stage of development are in conﬂict, and some
texts are immersed in languages not their own, while the codes to decipher them with
may be entirely absent. As an example of a single world looked at synchronically,
imagine a museum hall where exhibits from different periods are on display, along
with inscriptions in known and unknown languages, and instructions for decoding
them; besides there are the explanations composed by the museum staff, plans for
tours and rules for the behavior of the visitors. Imagine also in this hall tour-leaders
and the visitors and imagine all this as a single mechanism (which in a certain sense
it is). This is an image of the semiosphere. Then we have to remember that all ele-
ments of the semiosphere are in dynamic, not static, correlations whose terms are
constantly changing. We notice this especially at traditional moments which have
come down to us from the past. The evolution of culture is quite different from
biological evolution, the word “evolution” can be quite misleading.
Biological evolution involves species dying out and natural selection. The
researcher ﬁnds only living creatures contemporary with him. Something similar
happens in the history of technology: when an instrument is made obsolete by tech-
nical progress it ﬁnds a resting place in a museum, as a dead exhibit. In the history of
art, however, works which come down to us from remote cultural periods continue
to play a part in cultural development as living factors. A work of art may “die”
and come alive again; once thought to be out of date, it may become modern and
even prophetic for what it tells of the future. What “works” is not the most recent
temporal section, but the whole packed history of cultural texts. The standard evo-
lutionary point of view in literary history comes from the inﬂuence of evolutionary
ideas in the natural sciences. With this approach the state of literature at anyone time
is judged by the list of works written in that year, instead of by the works being read
in that year – which would produce a very different picture. And it is hard to say
which of the lists is more typical for the state of culture at anyone time. Pushkin, for
instance, in 1824–1825, took Shakespeare as his most topical writer, Bulgakov read
Gogol and Cervantes as contemporaries, Dostoevsky is just as relevant at the end of
the twentieth century as he was at the end of the nineteenth. In fact, everything con-
tained in the actual memory of culture is directly or indirectly part of that culture’s
synchrony.
The structure of the semiosphere is asymmetrical. Asymmetry ﬁnds expression
in the currents of internal translations with which the whole density of the semio-
sphere is permeated. Translation is a primary mechanism of consciousness. To
express something in another language is a way of understanding it. And since in the

5
Excerpts from Universe of the Mind: A Semiotic Theory of Culture
205
majority of cases the different languages of the semiosphere are semiotically asym-
metrical, i.e. they do not have mutual semantic correspondences, then the whole
semiosphere can be regarded as a generator of information.
Asymmetry is apparent in the relationship between the centre of the semiosphere
and its periphery. At the centre of the semiosphere are formed the most devel-
oped and structurally organized languages, and in ﬁrst place the natural language
of that culture. If no language (including natural language) can function unless it
is immersed in the semiosphere, then no semiosphere, as Emile Benveniste pointed
out, can exist without natural language as its organizing core. The fact is that the
semiosphere, besides the structurally organized language, is crowded with partial
languages, languages which can serve only certain cultural functions, as well as
language-like, half-formed systems which can be bearers of semiosis if they are
included in the semiotic context. Compare the latter with a stone or a strangely
twisted tree-stump which can function as work of art if it is treated as one. An
object will take on the function ascribed to it.
In order that all this mass of constructions are perceived as bearers of semiotic
meaning we must make a “presumption of semioticity”: the semiotic intuition of the
collective and its consciousness have to accept the possibility that structures may be
signiﬁcant. These qualities are learnt through natural language. For instance, the
structure of the “families of the gods” and of other basic elements of the world-
picture are often clearly dependent on the grammatical structure of the language.
The highest form and ﬁnal act of a semiotic system’s structural organization
is when it describes itself. This is the stage when grammars are written, customs
and laws codiﬁed. When this happens, however, the system gains the advantage of
greater structural organization, but loses its inner reserves of indeterminacy which
provide it with ﬂexibility, heightened capacity for information and the potential for
dynamic development.
The stage of self-description is a necessary response to the threat of too much
diversity within the semiosphere: the system might lose its unity and deﬁnition,
and disintegrate. Whether we have in mind language, politics or culture, the mech-
anism is the same: one part of the semiosphere (as a rule one which is part of its
nuclear structure) in the process of self-description creates its own grammar; this
self-description may be real or ideal depending on whether its inner orientation is
towards the present or towards the future. Then it strives to extend these norms over
the whole semiosphere. A partial grammar of one cultural dialect becomes the met-
alanguage of description for culture as such. The dialect of Florence, for instance,
became during the Renaissance the literary language of Italy, the legal norms of
Rome became the laws of the whole Roman Empire, and the etiquette of the Parisian
court of Louis XIV became the etiquette of all the courts of Europe. A literature of
norms and prescriptions comes into being in which the later historian will tend to
see an actual picture of real life of that epoch, its semiotic practice. This illusion
is supported by the evidence of contemporaries who are in fact convinced that they
indeed do live and behave in the prescribed way. A contemporary will reason some-
thing like this: “I am a person of culture (i.e. a Hellene, a Roman, a Christian, a
knight, an esprit fort, a philosopher of the age of the Enlightenment, or a genius of

206
Juri Mikhajloviˇc Lotman (1922–1993)
the age of Romanticism). As a person of culture I embody the behavior prescribed
by certain norms. Only what in my behavior corresponds to these norms is counted
as a deed. If, through weakness, sickness, inconsistency, etc., I deviate from these
norms, then such behavior has no meaning, is not relevant, simply does not exist”.
A list of what “does not exist”, according to that cultural system, although such
things in fact occur, is always essential for making a typological description of that
system. For instance, Andreas Capellanus, author of De Amore (c. 1184–1185), a
well-known treatise on the norms of courtly love, carefully codiﬁed courtly love
and set the standards of faithfulness, silence, devoted service, chastity, courtesy,
and so on for the lover; yet he had no compunction in violating a village-girl since
according to his world-picture she “as it were did not exist”, and actions involving
her as it were did not exist either, since they lay outside the domain of semiotics.
The world-picture created in this way will be perceived by its contemporaries as
reality. Indeed, it will be their reality to the extent that they have accepted the laws
of that semiotics. And later generations (including scholars), who reconstruct life
in those days from texts, will imbibe the idea that everyday reality was indeed like
that. But the relationship of this metalevel of the semiosphere to the real picture of
its semiotic “map” on the one hand, and to the everyday reality of life on the other,
will be complex. First of all, if in that nuclear structure where the self-description
originated, the self-description in fact represents an idealization of a real language,
then on the periphery of the semiosphere, this ideal norm will be a contradiction
of the semiotic reality lying “underneath”, and not a derivation from it. If in the
centre of the semiosphere the description of texts generates the norms, then on the
periphery the norms, actively invading “incorrect” practice, will generate “correct”
texts in accord with them. Secondly, whole layers of cultural phenomena, which
from the point of view of the given metalanguage are marginal, will have no relation
to the idealized portrait of that culture. They will be declared to be “non-existent”.
From the time of the cultural history school, the favorite genre of many scholars
has been articles of the type, “An Unknown Poet of the Twelfth Century”, “Further
Remarks about a Forgotten Writer of the Enlightenment Period”, and so on. Where
does this inexhaustible supply of “unknown” and “forgotten” ﬁgures come from?
They are the writers who in their time were classed as “nonexistent” and who were
ignored by scholarship as long as its point of view coincided with a normative view
of the period. But points of view change and “unknowns” suddenly occur. Then
people remember that in the year Voltaire died, the “unknown philosopher”, Louis-
Claude Saint Martin was already thirty-ﬁve, that Restif de la Bretonne had already
written over 200 novels which historians of literature still cannot properly place,
calling him either “little Rousseau” or an “eighteenth-century Balzac”; and that in
the Romantic period in Russia there lived a certain Vasily Narezhny who wrote some
25 volumes of novels which were “unnoticed” by his contemporaries until traces of
realism were found in them.
So while on the metalevel the picture is one of semiotic unity, on the
level of the semiotic reality which is described by the metalevel, all kinds of
other tendencies ﬂourish. While the picture of the upper level is painted in a
smooth uniform color, the lower level is bright with colors and many intersecting

5
Excerpts from Universe of the Mind: A Semiotic Theory of Culture
207
boundaries. When Charlemagne at the end of the eighth century brought sword
and cross to the Saxons, and St Vladimir a hundred years later baptized Kievan
Russia, the great barbarian empires of East and West became Christian states. But
their Christianity was a self-characterization and as such extended to the politi-
cal and religious metalevel beneath which ﬂourished pagan traditions and all sorts
of real-life compromises with them. It could not have been otherwise consider-
ing that the conversions to Christianity were forced on the masses. The terrible
bloodshed wrought by Charlemagne on the pagan Saxons at Verdun was hardly
likely to foster acceptance of the principles of the Sermon on the Mount among the
barbarians.
And yet it would be wrong to suggest that this simple change of nomenclature
had no effect on the “underlying” levels: for Christianization did turn into evange-
lization, and, even on the level of “real semiotics”, it contributed to the uniﬁcation
of the cultural space of these states. Semantic currents ﬂow not only across the hor-
izontal levels of the semiosphere, but also have their effect in a vertical direction,
and promote complex dialogues between the levels.
But the unity of the semiotic space of the semiosphere is brought about not only
by metastructural formations: even more crucial is the unifying factor of the bound-
ary, which divides the internal space of the semiosphere from the external, its inside
from its outside.
The Notion of Boundary
The space which in one system of coding is a single person, may in another system
be the place where several semiotic subjects are in conﬂict.
Because the semiotic space is transected by numerous boundaries, each message
that moves across it must be many times translated and transformed, and the process
of generating new information thereby snowballs.
The function of any boundary or ﬁlter (from the membrane of the living cell, to
the biosphere which according to Vernadsky is like a membrane covering our planet,
and to the boundary of the semiosphere) is to control, ﬁlter and adapt the external
into the internal. This invariant function is realized in different ways on different
levels. On the level of the semiosphere it implies a separation of “one’s own” from
“someone else’s”, the ﬁltering of what comes from outside and is treated as a text
in another language, and the translation of this text into one’s own language. In this
way external space becomes structured.
When the semiosphere involves real territorial features as well, the boundary
is spatial in the literal sense. The isomorphism between different kinds of human
settlement – from archaic ones to Renaissance and Enlightenment plans for ideal
cities – and ideas about the structure of the cosmos has often been remarked on.
Hence the appeal of the centre for the most important cultic and administrative
buildings. Less valued social groups are settled on the periphery. Those who are
below any social value are settled on the frontier of the outskirts (the etymology
of the Russian word for outskirts [predmest’e] means “before the place” [pered

208
Juri Mikhajloviˇc Lotman (1922–1993)
mestom] i.e. before the city, on its boundaries), by the city gate, in the suburbs.
If we think of this on a vertical scale then these “outskirts” will be lofts and cel-
lars, and in the modern city the metro. If the centre for “normal” life is the ﬂat,
then the boundary space between home and non-home is the staircase and entrance.
And these are the spaces which marginalized social groups make “their own”: the
homeless, the drug addicts, young people. Other boundary places are public places
such as stadia and cemeteries. There is a signiﬁcant change in the accepted norms
of behavior when moving from boundary to centre.
However some elements are always set outside. If the inner world reproduces the
cosmos, then what is on the other side represents chaos, the anti-world, unstructured
chthonic space, inhabited by monsters, infernal powers or people associated with
them. In the countryside the sorcerer, the miller and (sometimes) the smith had to
live outside the village, as did the executioner in a medieval town. “Normal” space
has not only geographical but also temporal boundaries. Nocturnal time lies beyond
the boundary. People visit the sorcerer if he demands it by night. The robber lives
in this anti-space: his home is the forest (the anti-home), his sun is the moon (the
“thieves’ sun” in the Russian proverb), he speaks an anti-language, his behavior is
anti-behavior (he whistles loudly, swears indecently), he sleeps when other people
work, and robs when other people are sleeping, and so on.
The “night-time world” of the city also lies on the boundary of the space of
culture or beyond it. This travesty world presupposes anti-behavior.
We have already discussed the process whereby the periphery of culture moves
into the centre, and the centre is pushed out to the periphery. The force of these
opposing currents is even stronger between the centre and “the periphery of the
periphery”, the frontier zone of culture. After the 1917 October Revolution in Russia
this process took place literally in many shapes and forms: poor folk from the out-
skirts moved in their masses into the “apartments of the bourgeoisie” who were
either turned out or had to squeeze up to accommodate them. There was a sym-
bolic sense too in the moving of the beautiful wrought iron railings which before
the Revolution surrounded the royal gardens round the Winter Palace in Petrograd
to a working-class area where they were put up round a square, while the tsar’s gar-
den was left without a railing, “open”. In the utopian plans for a socialist city of the
future, of which any number were drawn up in the early 1920, a recurrent idea was
that the centre of the town should be a giant factory “in place of the palaces and
churches”.
In this sense, Peter the Great’s transfer of the capital to Petersburg was a typi-
cal move to the frontier. The transfer of the politico-administrative centre on to the
geographical frontier was at the same time the transfer of the frontier to the ideo-
logical and political centre of the state. Later pan-Slavist plans to move the capital
to Constantinople involved moving the capital even beyond the actual frontiers.
A similar shift can be observed in the norms of behavior, of language, of style in
dress, and so on, from the frontier area into the centre. Take jeans for example: what
were once working clothes intended for people doing physical labor became young
people’s clothes, since young people rejected the central culture of the twentieth
century and saw their ideal in the peripheral culture; subsequently jeans spread over

5
Excerpts from Universe of the Mind: A Semiotic Theory of Culture
209
the whole domain of culture, became neutral, that is, “common to all”, which is the
most important feature of semiotic systems of the centre. The periphery is brightly
colored and marked, whereas the nucleus is “normal”, i.e. lacking in color or scent,
it “simply exists”. So the victory of a semiotic system involves it shifting to the
centre and an inevitable “toning down”. We can compare this with the “usual” cycle
of ageing: the rebellious youth with the passage of the years becomes the “normal”
respectable gentleman, passing from provocative “colorfulness” to sobriety.
In the frontier areas semiotic processes are intensiﬁed because here there are
constant invasions from outside. The boundary as we have already pointed out is
ambivalent and one of its sides is always turned to the outside. Moreover the bound-
ary is the domain of bilingualism, which as a rule ﬁnds literal expression in the
language practice of the inhabitants of borderlands between two cultural areas. Since
the boundary is a necessary part of the semiosphere and there can be no “us” if there
is no “them”, culture creates not only its own type of internal organization but also
its own type of external “disorganization”. In this sense we can say that the “bar-
barian” is created by civilization and needs it as much as it needs him. The extreme
edge of the semiosphere is a place of incessant dialogue. No matter whether the
given culture sees the “barbarian” as savior or enemy, as a healthy moral inﬂuence
or a perverted cannibal, it is dealing with a construct made in its own inverted image.
It is entirely to be expected, for instance, that the rational positivistic society of 19th
century Europe should create images of the “pre-logical savage”, or of the irrational
subconscious as anti-spheres lying beyond the rational space of culture.
Since in reality no semiosphere is immersed in an amorphous, “wild” space, but
is in contact with other semiospheres which have their own organization (though
from the point of view of the former they may seem unorganized) there is a con-
stant exchange, a search for a common language, a koine, and of creolized semiotic
systems come into being. Even in order to wage war there has to be a common
language. It is a well-known fact that in the last period of Roman history barbarian
soldiers ascended the throne of the Roman emperors, while many military leaders of
the “barbarians” served their apprenticeship in the Roman legions (Latimore 1962).
On the frontiers of China, of the Roman Empire, of Byzantium, we see the same
thing: the technical achievements of the settled civilization pass into the hands of
the nomads who turn them against their inventors. But these conﬂicts inevitably lead
to cultural equalization and to the creation of a new semiosphere of more elevated
order in which both parties can be included as equals.
Dialogue Mechanisms
What the Renaissance did to Italian culture, the Enlightenment did with French.
France had absorbed cultural currents from the whole of Europe: the ideas of the
Reformation from Holland – Germany and Switzerland, the empiricism of Bacon
and Locke and Newtonian mechanics, the Latinism of the Italian Humanists, and the
Mannerism of the Spanish and Italian Baroque; but in the age of the Enlightenment

210
Juri Mikhajloviˇc Lotman (1922–1993)
she made all Europe speak her language. At the time of the Renaissance each cul-
tural tendency had had to face a hard choice: either to be a supporter or an opponent
of Humanism and the cult of Antiquity, which amounted to supporting or oppos-
ing the spirit of Italian culture; similarly in the eighteenth century there was a
choice: either to be a follower or an opponent of the ideas of the Enlightenment,
namely, religious toleration, the cult of Nature and Reason, and the eradication
of age-old superstitions in the name of the freedom of Man. Paris became the
capital of European thought, and innumerable texts poured out of France to all the
corners of Europe. Compare this period with the pause which followed and which
was marked by the publication of Madame de Staël’s De l’Allemagne (1810): France
“became a receiver” again and opened itself to English culture from Shakespeare
to Byron, to German culture – Schiller, Goethe – and to the Romantic writers of
northern Europe from Kant to Walter Scott.
From the point of view of the “receiving” side the process of reception falls into
the following stages:
1. The texts coming in from the outside keep their “strangeness”. They are read in
the foreign language (both in the sense of natural language and 10 the semiotic
sense). They hold a high position in the scale of values, and are considered to be
true, beautiful, of divine origin, etc. Knowledge of the foreign language is a sign
of belonging to “culture”, to the elite, to the best. Already existing texts in “one’s
own” language, and that language itself, are correspondingly valued lowly, being
classed as untrue, “coarse”, “uncultured”.
2. Both principles – the “imported” texts and the “home” culture – restructure each
other. Translations, imitations and adaptations multiply. At the same time the
codes imported along with the texts become part of the metalingual structure.
During the ﬁrst stage the dominant psychological impulse is to break with the
past, to idealize the “new”, i.e. the imported world-view, and to break with tradi-
tion, while the “new” is experienced as something salviﬁc. In this second stage,
however, there is a predominant tendency to restore the links with the past, to
look for “roots”; the “new” is now interpreted as an organic continuation of the
old, which is thus rehabilitated. Ideas of organic development come to the fore.
3. During this stage a tendency develops to ﬁnd within the imported world-view
a higher content which can be separated from the actual national culture of the
imported texts. The idea takes hold that “over there” these ideas were realized
in an “untrue”, confused or distorted, form and that “here”, in the heart of the
receiving culture they will ﬁnd their true, “natural” heartland. The culture which
ﬁrst relayed these texts falls out of favor and the national characteristics of the
texts will be stressed.
4. During this stage the imported texts are entirely dissolved in the receiving cul-
ture; the culture itself changes to a state of activity and begins rapidly to produce
new texts; these new texts are based on cultural codes which in the distant past
were stimulated by invasions from outside, but which now have been wholly
transformed through the many asymmetrical transformations into a new and
original structural model.

5
Excerpts from Universe of the Mind: A Semiotic Theory of Culture
211
5. The receiving culture, which now becomes the general centre of the semiosphere,
changes into a transmitting culture and issues forth a ﬂood of texts directed to
other, peripheral areas of the semiosphere.
Of course our picture is highly schematic. In reality the circulation of texts moves
ceaselessly in all directions, large and small currents intersect and leave their traces.
At the same time texts are relayed not by one but by many centres of the semio-
sphere, and the actual semiosphere is mobile within its boundaries. Finally, these
same processes occur at different levels: periods when poetry invades prose alternate
with periods when prose invade poetry; there are times of mutual tension between
drama and the novel, between written and oral culture, and between elite culture and
oral culture. One and the same centre of the semiosphere can be at one and the same
time both active and “receiving”, one and the same space of the semiosphere can
be both in one sense a centre and in another sense a periphery; attractions provoke
rejections, and borrowings provoke originality. The semiosphere, the space of cul-
ture, is not something that acts according to mapped out and pre-calculated plans. It
seethes like the sun, centres of activity boil up in different places, in the depths and
on the surface, irradiating relatively peaceful areas with its immense energy. But
unlike that of the sun, the energy of the semiosphere is the energy of information,
the energy of thought.
Semiotic systems are in a state of constant ﬂux. Such is the law too of the semio-
sphere which is subject to change both in its inner structure and as a whole. In what
follows we shall be discussing a particular kind of internal change. Within the frame-
work of each of the substructures which make up the semiosphere there are elements
which are ﬁxtures in its space, and elements with relative freedom of movement. The
former belong to social, cultural, religious and other structures, while the latter have
a higher degree of freedom of choice in their behavior. A hero of the second type
can act, that is, can cross the boundaries of prohibitions in a way that others cannot.
Like Orpheus or Soslan from the epic of the Narts, he can cross the boundary sep-
arating the living from the dead, or like the Benandanti he can wage nocturnal war
with witches, or like one berserk he can ﬂing himself into battle, defying all rules –
naked or clad in a bearskin, howling like a beast and killing his own people as well
as the enemy. He may be a noble robber or a picaro, a sorcerer, spy, detective, ter-
rorist or superman – the point is that he is able to do what others cannot, namely to
cross the structural boundaries of cultural space. Each such infringement is a deed,
and the chain of deeds forms what we call plot.
Symbolic Spaces
Humanity, immersed in its cultural space, always creates around itself an organized
spatial sphere. This sphere includes both ideas and semiotic models and people’s
recreative activity, since the world which people artiﬁcially create (agricultural,
architectural and technological) correlates with their semiotic models. There is a
two-way connection: on the one hand, architectural buildings copy the spatial image

212
Juri Mikhajloviˇc Lotman (1922–1993)
of the universe and, on the other hand, this image of the universe is constructed on
an analogy with the world of cultural constructs which mankind creates.
The importance of spatial models created by culture lies in the fact that, unlike
other basic forms of semiotic modeling, spatial models are constructed not on a ver-
bal, discrete basis but on an iconic continuum. Their foundation are visually visible
iconic texts and verbalization of them is secondary. This image of the universe can
better be danced than told, better drawn, sculpted or built than logically explicated.
The work of the right hemisphere of the brain here is primary. But the ﬁrst attempts
at self-description of this structure inevitably involve the verbal level with the atten-
dant semantic tension between the continual and the discrete semiotic pictures of
the world.
The spatial picture of the world is many-layered: it includes both the mythologi-
cal universum and scientiﬁc modeling and everyday “common sense”. Every normal
person has these (and many other) layers which form a heterogeneous mixture
which functions as a whole. In the mind of modern man there mingles Newtonian,
Einsteinian (and even post-Einsteinian) ideas with deeply mythological images as
well as persistent habits of seeing the world in its everyday sense. Against this sub-
stratum can be seen images created by art or deeper scientiﬁc ideas and also the
constant transcoding of spatial images into the language of other models. The result
is the complex semiotic mechanism which is in constant motion.
The spatial image of the world created by culture is situated as it were between
humanity and the outer reality of Nature and is constantly drawn to these two poles.
It turns to humanity in the name of the outside world whose image it is, while the
historical experience of man subjects this image to constant reworking, striving for
accuracy in its representation of the world. But this image is always universal while
the world is given to human beings through experience only partially. The contradic-
tion between these two mutually associated aspects is inevitable and ineradicable;
together they form the universal plan of content and expression, and the reﬂection
of content in expression is inevitably not wholly accurate.
No less complex are the relationships between human beings and the spatial
image of the world. On the one hand, the image is created by man, and on the other,
it actively forms the person immersed in it. Here it is possible to draw a Paralel
with natural language. We could say that the activity generated by human beings
towards the spatial model has its origin in the collective, whereas the reverse ten-
dency affects the individual. But there is also a Paralel in poetic language, which
creates a personality which then has a reverse effect on the collective. As in the
process of language-formation so in the process of spatial modeling both tendencies
are active.
Can There Be a Science of History?
If the function of history is still the same aim of “thinking of the past as it really was”
(the formulation is an old one but it is surely true of every historian), then memory
is an instrument for thinking in the present although the content of the thought is

5
Excerpts from Universe of the Mind: A Semiotic Theory of Culture
213
the past. Or in other words, the content of memory is the past, but without memory
we cannot think “here” and “now”: memory is the deep-seated ground of the actual
process of consciousness. And if history is culture’s memory then this means that it
is not only a relic of the past, but also an active mechanism of the present.
If we have to use a metaphor in order to imagine the capacity for memory, then,
the least appropriate one is the image of the library with books on its shelves, or a
computer with data of whatever quantity stored in its memory. Memory is more like
a generator, reproducing the past again; it is the ability, given certain impulses, to
switch on the process of generating a conceptualized reality which the mind trans-
fers into the past. This capacity is part of the general process of thinking and is
inseparable from it.
The interrelationship between cultural memory and its self-reﬂection is like a
constant dialogue: texts from chronologically earlier periods are brought into cul-
ture, and, interacting with contemporary mechanisms, generate an image of the
historical past, which culture transfers into the past and which like an equal part-
ner in a dialogue, affects the present. But as it transforms the present, the past too
changes its shape. This process does not take place in a vacuum: both partners in the
dialogue are partners too in other confrontations, both are open to the intrusion of
new texts from outside, and the texts, as we have already had cause to stress, always
contain in themselves the potentiality for new interpretations.
Conclusion
The individual human intellect does not have a monopoly in the work of think-
ing. Semiotic systems, both separately and together as the integrated unity of the
semiosphere, both synchronically and in all the depths of historical memory, carry
out intellectual operations, preserve, rework and increase the store of information.
Thought is within us, but we are within thought, just as language is something
engendered by our minds and directly dependent on the mechanisms of the brain,
and we are with language. And unless we were immersed in language, our brain
could not engender it (and vice versa: if our brain were not capable of generating
language, we would not be immersed in it). The same with thought: it is both some-
thing engendered by the human brain and something surrounding us without which
intellectual generation would be impossible. And ﬁnally the spatial image of the
world is both within us and without us.
We are both a part and a likeness of a vast intellectual mechanism. Hence the
difﬁculties but also the importance of the kind of research we are doing. The emer-
gent synthesis becomes ever clearer: whether we are studying the structure of the
literary text, the functional asymmetry of the hemispheres of the brain, the problems
of oral speech or of deaf and dumb language, the advertisements of our modern age
or the religious ideas of archaic cultures – we ﬁnd the different mechanisms of the
single intellectual life of humanity. We are within it, but it – all of it – is within us.
We are at the same time like matryoshkas, and participants in an endless number of

214
Juri Mikhajloviˇc Lotman (1922–1993)
dialogues, and the likeness of everything, and “the other” both for other people and
for ourselves; we are both a planet in the intellectual galaxy, and the image of its
universum.
References
Davydov, D. (1822). Opyt teorii partizanskogo deistviya [An Outline Theory of Partisan Action],
second edition, Moscow, p. 83.
Descartes, R. (1969). Discourse on method. In: Wilson, M. D. (Ed.) The Essential Descartes. New
York, p. 118.
Ferdinand de Saussure (1983). Cours de Linguisique Generale, London, p. 9.
Latimore, O. (1962). Studies in Frontier History, London; Piekarczyk, S. (1968). Barbaryncy i
chrzescijanstwo, Warsaw; Cardini, op.cit., “Rome and the Barbarians” and “The Barbarians
and Christianity”.
Vemadsky, V. I. (1960). Izbrannye sochineniya [Selected Works], vol. 5, Moscow, p. 102.
Vemadsky, V. I. (1977). Razmyshleniya naturalista. Nauchnaya mysl’ kak planetarnoe yavlenie
[Thoughts of a Naturalist. Scientiﬁc Thinking as a Planetary Phenomenon], book 2, Moscow,
p. 32.
Vemadsky, V. I. (1988). Filosofskie zametki raznykh let [Philosophical Notes from Various Years],
Prometei, 15, Moscow, p. 292.

Part II
The Biosemiotic Project
of Thomas A. Sebeok

Chapter 6
Biosemiotics: Its Roots, Proliferation
and Prospects
Thomas A. Sebeok (1920–2001)
Introduction and Commentary: Thomas A. Sebeok
Scarce is the polymath of the magisterial stature of, say, Charles Peirce, capable of reaching
athwart more than a couple of disciplines, especially across the humanities and the sciences,
which are perhaps uniquely bridged by semiotics.
T. Sebeok (2002: xxii)
Because the ﬁgure of Thomas A. Sebeok looms so large throughout this volume,
cited far more here than any other thinker (except, perhaps, Charles Darwin), and
because the story of his founding of the contemporary interdiscipline of biosemi-
otics is recounted in some detail in the introductory overview of biosemiotics that
is Chapter One of this volume, we will limit the comments that appear in this read-
ing selection preface to just the barest biographical sketch, so as to allow the reader
the pleasure of reading Sebeok’s own account of the founding of the “biosemiotics”
project in his own words in the following selection.
Thomas Albert Sebeok was born on November 9, 1920 in Budapest, Hungary.
At age sixteen, he began his university studies at Magdalene College in Cambridge,
where he studied under philosopher and rhetorician Ivor Armstrong Richards
(1893–1979), whose monograph The Meaning of Meaning (co-authored with
Charles Kay Ogden (1889–1957) in 1923), was an early and lasting inﬂuence. In
1937, Sebeok enrolled at the University of Chicago, where he attended lectures by,
and was brieﬂy under the mentorship of, semiotician and philosopher of science
Charles Morris (1901–1979), whose wide-ranging areas of interest were similar to
Sebeok’s own. At the time of his enrollment, Sebeok was hoping to pursue a career
in biology, but the outbreak of World War II in 1939 convinced him that he could be
more useful to the world as a linguist, and during the war, Sebeok did much work
in developing training materials in Hungarian and Finnish for the United States
government.
Sebeok earned his bachelor’s degree in linguistics at the University of Chicago
in 1941, and from there went on to Princeton, where he earned his Master’s
Degree in anthropological linguistics and his Ph.D. from the Department of Oriental
Languages and Civilizations in 1945. It was during this time, too, that Sebeok made
the acquaintance of émigré Russian linguist and literary critic Roman Jakobson
(1896–1982), who was teaching both at Columbia University and at the New
217
D. Favareau, Essential Readings in Biosemiotics, Biosemiotics 3,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9650-1_6, C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010

218
Thomas A. Sebeok (1920–2001)
York City New School for Social Research, and who became Sebeok’s doc-
toral dissertation advisor. Sebeok was naturalized as a United States citizen in
1944, and following his graduation from Princeton in 1945, joined the faculty of
Indiana University at Bloomington, which became his home university for the next
45 years.
Ever a proliﬁc researcher, author, and academic impresario, the resumé of
Sebeok’s ﬁrst decade and a half at Indiana University – long before he got into
his stride as world-renowned semiotician, much less biosemiotician – illuminates
much about the man:
A linguist studying Finno-Ugric languages, Sebeok’s linguistic ﬁeldwork took him to
Central and Eastern Europe, including Lapland and the former Soviet Union. He also car-
ried out studies in the former Mongolian People’s Republic, Mexico and in the U.S. (among
the Winnebago Indians of Wisconsin and the Laguna Indians of New Mexico). In addition
to these studies in grammar and phonology, his interest in anthropology, folklore and liter-
ary studies led to early publications dealing with folksongs, charms, games, poems and the
supernatural. He carried out some of the ﬁrst computer analyses of verbal texts and pub-
lished a path-breaking volume on Myth in 1955, and one on Style in Language, in 1960.
At the same time, he contributed to the creation of the new ﬁeld of psycholinguistics,
publishing, with Charles Osgood, the famous classic text, Psycholinguistics, in 1954. By
1960, he had established himself as a scholar known for overcoming academic boundaries
between subjects in his own research, in collaborations with scholars in adjacent ﬁelds, and
in organizational roles as an book and journal editor, founder and ofﬁcer of several academic
organizations, conference organizer, and mentor (Vlahakis 2002: o.l.).
Characteristically enough, however, Thomas A. Sebeok was best known, and
is remembered today, for his accomplishments in the forty-one-year period begin-
ning after these ﬁrst ﬁfteen years’ worth of preliminary academic accomplishment
prior to his development of a multidisciplinary research agenda that he would name
“Semiotics.” Moreover, Sebeok remained intellectually and indefatigably active in
intellectual circles right up until the day of his death on December 21, 2001, when
he died at his home in Bloomington, Indiana, at the age of eighty-one.
Yet even in the above thumbnail sketch of his “freshman years” as a public intel-
lectual, one can detect Sebeok’s trademark “uncontainable interest in everything”
and his commitment to what he described as the two fundamental academic virtues
of “publishing and teaching as much as possible; and, equally importantly, doing
one’s best to facilitate the success of one’s colleagues” (1995: 125). An inveterate
chronicler of not only the traditions that he saw himself as inheriting, but also of
the development of those traditions as it was taking place in his own time, Sebeok
records that it was at a conference devoted to the study of “the kinesics and par-
alinguistics of non-verbal communication” that he had organized in 1962, where
anthropologist Margaret Mead (1901–1978) suggested using the term semiotics as
a “cover noun” to denote the study of “patterned communication in all modalities”
(Sebeok 2002: xiii, Sebeok et al. 1964: 5).
This term – which at once captured historical resonance with the work of Peirce
and Morris, but was yet sufﬁciently general to include all the possible manifesta-
tions of sign use that Sebeok was interested in actively investigating – became the

6
Biosemiotics: Its Roots, Proliferation and Prospects
219
aegis under which he worked and thought from that point on.1 The conference pro-
ceedings themselves were published by Sebeok in 1964 under the title Approaches
to Semiotics, spawning a book series of the same name that he personally oversaw,
and that eventually ran to 112 volumes over the course of its almost 30 year run.
Philosopher and historian of sign study John Deely proclaims that Sebeok’s “pub-
lication of Approaches to Semiotics volume from the 1962 Indiana conference of
surely marks the beginning in North America of semiotics as an intellectual move-
ment” (Deely 2004: o.l.), and within ﬁve years of its publication, Sebeok would
found the International Association for Semiotic Studies (Association Internationale
de Sémiotique) with colleagues Umberto Eco (b. 1932), Roman Jakobson (1896–
1982), Roland Barthes (1915–1980), Emile Benveniste (1902–1976), Algirdas
Julien Greimas (1917–1992) and Juri Lotman (1922–1993). At this time, Sebeok
was also elected as Editor-in-Chief of the association’s journal, Semiotica, a position
that he held from the journal’s inception in 1969 until his death in 2001.
Two major bibliographical surveys (Deely 1995, Umiker-Sebeok 2003) of books
and journal articles authored by Sebeok at the time of his death lists ﬁve-hundred-
seventy-nine single-authored or co-authored entries. “Reviews and miscellanea
(forewords, encyclopedia articles, etc.),” notes John Deely, “raise the writings to
eight-hundred-thirty-three. Editorial work promoting other scholars adds another
three-hundred-ninety-ﬁve volumes” for a total of 1,228 published scholarly works.
Yet, notes Deely
for all of Thomas A. Sebeok’s prodigious range of intellectual involvements, positions,
acquaintances, presentations and writings – his visiting appointments in thirty-ﬁve uni-
versities of twenty different countries; his honorary doctorates in the U.S.A., Hungary,
Argentina, Bulgaria, Finland; as president of organizations in anthropology, linguistics,
semiotics; his Fulbright grants to Germany, Italy, Argentina, Uruguay, Mexico; as Fellow
of the Stanford Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences, the East-West
Center, the Netherlands Institute for Advanced Study, the National Humanities Center, the
Smithsonian, the Woodrow Wilson International Center; etc., etc. – it was into his shap-
ing of the doctrine of signs that everything else was gathered and found its place (Deely
2004: o.l.).
Indeed, Sebeok’s obituary states that of all his eighty-one years’ worth of accom-
plishments, “he was most proud of having brought into being a group of theoretical
biologists and semioticians to pursue this ﬁeld of investigation” (Vlahakis 2002:
o.l.).
Such “bringing together” consisted not just in Sebeok’s indefatigable efforts
at creating publication venues for these authors, encouraging them in their often
neglected efforts, and bringing their ideas to a larger audience by citing them insis-
tently in his own widely-read work – all of which he did unceasingly – but, much
1 Recalls Sebeok: “By 1962, I had edged my way into animal communication studies. Two
years after that, I ﬁrst whifﬂed through what Gavin Ewart evocatively called ‘the tulgey wood
of semiotics’” (Sebeok 1986a: ix).

220
Thomas A. Sebeok (1920–2001)
more importantly, in his tireless efforts to realize an active and ongoing, cross-
disciplinary community of scholars who would work together on the puzzles of
organismic sign-processing long after he was gone.
It is for such reasons that we think of Thomas A. Sebeok today not so much as
the ‘founder’ of an institutionalized approach to the study of biosemiotics, but as
the intellectual and inspirational ‘father’ of an ever-branching lineage of individual
inquirers, all of whom are motivated by the same kinds of questions that motivated
Sebeok – but who, were it not for Sebeok’s lifelong efforts at illuminating the “fam-
ily resemblances” uniting all their inquiry, may never have realized the power of
that collective unity.
The story of how Thomas A. Sebeok founded the contemporary project of
biosemiotics appears in the selection that begins this anthology, and has been
recounted in several other highly illuminating texts as well (many of which are
listed in the Further Readings bibliography appearing later in this volume). But in
the following selection, the reader will have the signal pleasure of being taken on a
brief but grand tour of the history of biosemiotics by the master of the sign himself.
In the selection that follows, Sebeok situates the biosemiotic project at the inter-
section of its twinned larger contexts of biology and semiotics, and recounts the
involvement of himself, Giorgio Prodi (1928–1987), Heini Hediger (1908–1992),
and Thure von Uexküll (1908–2004), in attempting to establish the “latest iteration”
of the millennia-long project of examining the role of sign relations in life processes.

6
Biosemiotics: Its Roots, Proliferation and Prospects
221
Biosemiotics: Its Roots, Proliferation
and Prospects (2001)
Cognition is simply a development of the selective attitude of an organism toward its
environment and the readjustment that follows upon such a selection. This selection we
ordinarily call ‘discrimination’, the pointing-out of things and the analysis in this pointing.
This is a process of labeling the elements so that you can refer to each under its proper tag,
whether that tag is a pointing of the ﬁnger, a vocal gesture, or a written word.
(Mead 1936: 350)
Throughout Western intellectual history, most semiotic theories and their appli-
cations have focused on messages – whether verbal or otherwise – in circulation
among human beings, generally within their cultural setting. This kind of semi-
otic inquiry, characterizable as anthropocentric or, even more circumscribed, as
logocentric, has been the rule since ancient times.
A partial if conspicuous, yet until recently by and large undeclared, excep-
tion to this tradition has been iatric semiotics, concerned with the arts of healing
(symptomatology, diagnostics, prognostics, and the like), practiced and written
about by physicians such as Hippocrates of Cos (B.C. 460–377) – called by many
the Father of Medicine but by some also “der Vater und Meister aller Semiotik”
(Kleinpaul 1972: 103; on medical theory and sign theory in Pre-Alexandrian times,
see Langholf 1990: 57–68, 82–93, 150–164); or the great Neoplatonist Galen
of Pergamon (A.D. 129–c200) (Sebeok 1996). As Baer observed of the Greeks:
“Signs [s¯emeia] are here construed as bodily clues that allow inferences based on
observation” (1988: 47).
Iatric semiotics persevered with numberless modern successors of these ven-
erable ﬁgures, to name only a few, through Thomas Sydenham (often called the
“English Hippocrates”) in the 17th century; F. G. Crookshank, also of London,
emphatic about “the necessity to Medicine of a Theory of Signs” (1938: 354);
Harley C. Shands, a distinguished New York cardiologist turned bountiful semioti-
cian; F. Eugene Yates, a Los Angeles specialist in medical engineering who contends
that science in general “has been permeated with semiotic issues all along” (1985:
359); and a host of other contemporaries.
But no pillar of the medical establishment would more crisply and trenchantly
discern and signal a crucial paradigm shift in, or a consistently comprehensive semi-
otic overview of, the intellectual landscape than Thure von Uexküll [hereafter in this
text: Thure]. To be sure, his familial as well as medical credentials are unique. So it
is apposite and was presumably perhaps foreordained that he would most explicitly
pinpoint biosemiotics as the underlying exemplar for medicine, especially so in its
aspect as a natural science concerned with “illness as a disturbance of a complicated
physio-biochemical machine” (1982: 206, 1991).
A few years later, he spelled this out further: “The overwhelming majority of
objective evidence of a disease belongs to those types of processes taking place
within the body, which, in turn, are divided into subsystems (organ systems, organs,
tissue, cells, cellular organelles)” (Thure 1986: 204). Just as, on the macroscopic

222
Thomas A. Sebeok (1920–2001)
level, “evolution depends on setting up new systems of communication” (Jacob
1974: 308), so also within the organism, no less than between the organism and
its Umwelt. The components listed are among the major participators in the inter-
change of signs that ceaselessly ebbs and ﬂows on the interior plane; accordingly,
the living things are indeed aptly regarded as a web of semioses. In 1976, I tagged
such schemes “cybernetic systems within the body” and then termed their operations
“endosemiosic” (1985 [1976]: 3).
By 1993, the conceptual framework for internal somatic sign transactions was
comprehensively expanded by Thure and two of his medical associates. Since, as
these authors point out, all sign processes within “are indirectly linked to phenom-
ena in the organism’s environment . . . these endosemiotic signs which belong to
an ‘inner world’ have to be translated into the codes of other . . . sign systems”
(1993: 5–7). Such other codes belong to those exosemiosic transactions which were
described by means of what Jakob von Uexküll [hereafter in this text: Jakob] named
a functional cycle (cf., e.g., 1973 [1920, 1928]: 151–156; see also T. von Uexküll
1987: 166–169).
“Medicine”, as Thure highlighted, was ever “a semiotic discipline” (1992: 455).
And, as the historian Carlo Ginzburg pointed out, this “model of medical semiotics
or symptomatology”, and “the ‘semiotic’ approach, a paradigm or model based on
the interpretation of clues, had become increasingly inﬂuential [in the 19th century]
in the ﬁeld of human sciences”. But in fact its “roots . . . were far more ancient”.
They can be traced to Mesopotamian forms of knowledge and beyond (1983:
87–91). The medical crafts should thus be seen as the ultimate cradle of – and a
lengthy if tacit prologue as well as a vivid backdrop to – not merely endosemiotics
but its comprehensively encompassing domain that has become increasingly known
in the last quarter of our century as biosemiotics. This embraces, according to one
recent exposition, “all processes that take place in animate nature at whatever level,
from the single cell to the ecosystem”, as “concerned with the sign aspects of the
processes of life itself, not with the sign character of the theoretical structure of
life sciences” (Hoffmeyer 1998: 82). In a different but equally valid formulation,
“the socio-semiological limits of intentional communication . . . are largely over-
come [by means of biosemiotics] as we are introduced to the global logic of the
great ecosystem named Gaia where conceptual boundaries ﬁnally open up to the
encounter between semiosis and life” (Petrilli 1999: 316). Furthermore, as Thure
afﬁrms, biosemiotics remains “of central interest for the biosciences and medicine”
(1992: 456; for his most extended relation to-date, cf. 1997; for an early map of
this then still ill-deﬁned territory, see the collection by Sebeok and Umiker-Sebeok
1992). In short, the province of biosemiotics coincides in its entirety with that of the
biosphere, which, in this context, is tantamount to the “semiosphere” (but in a sense
far vaster than in Lotman’s usage).2
2 For the contrast between Y. M. Lotman’s anthropological usage and V. I. Vernadsky’s global
usage, see Sebeok (2000).

6
Biosemiotics: Its Roots, Proliferation and Prospects
223
Terminological issues abound, but this is hardly the place to rehearse the atten-
dant philological niceties beyond acknowledging that the very label of this emerging
domain of knowledge seems to have been claimed independently – at least twice in
the US and once in the former Soviet Union – over the past few decades. What
remains important is to corroborate that the domain of biosemiotics and the ﬁeld of
biosemiotics3 surfaced a long time avant la lettre; and that, furthermore, its ripeness
did not just happen in a simple linear progression but surged by ﬁts and starts as a
convoluted affair, winding its long but episodic way through at least three succes-
sive 20th century iterations: I register these, respectively, with the names of J. von
Uexküll [1864–1944], Heini Hediger [1908–1992], and Giorgio Prodi [1928–1987].
In the telling, I must make it clear that I intend to proceed not as a professional
historian but rather as an implicated deponent, a predisposed witness, variously
involved in the unfolding chronicle. The following account will therefore have an
autobiographical tinge; but I have never before set the better part of it forth in print.
Jakob spent his student days at the University of Dorpat, in Estonia (1884–1888).
But all pilgrims’ paths eventually lead to Germany – according to the canonical ver-
sion of his triumphant trajectory – where he became a citizen in 1918, joining (when
already in his sixtieth year) the University of Hamburg in 1924. He founded and
led the Institute for Umwelt-Research there from 1925 to 1940. Although he pro-
duced the ﬁrst edition of his Theoretische Biologie in 1920, he prepared a thoroughly
revised second edition in Hamburg, to appear 8 years later then to be posthumously
reprinted in 1973. The only English translation, published in 1926, was thus calami-
tously based on the ﬁrst edition. This circumstance, aggravated by the poor quality
of this rendering, alas retarded the appreciation (especially so, deplorably enough,
in the Anglo world) of his Umwelt-science – and, correspondingly, the ﬂowering of
biosemiotics – by about half a century. Thomson, in his review of the English ver-
sion, chose, ambivalently, to “congratulate Dr. D. L. Mackinnon on her remarkably
successful translation of what we know to have been very difﬁcult German. No one
but an organically philosophical biologist could have achieved such a conspicuous
success. Not that the book can ever be easy-reading, in the most lucid translation”.
Yet, on the other hand, he grouses that “an unnecessary difﬁculty seems to be raised
by the use of difﬁcult terms, which perplex the reader gratuitously” (1927: 419,
415).
I myself ﬁrst read the book in English in 1936, ﬁnding it bafﬂingly murky; but
then I read the second German edition in 1976, and found that, if not pellucid,
nonetheless electrifying (Sebeok 1998a: 32–34). Some time later still, this expe-
rience led me to instigate and arrange for the publication of two of Uexküll’s shorter
monographs in English (1982 and 1992).4
3 For this important distinction – which is particularly pertinent to biosemiotics – between
“domain” and “ﬁeld”, see Csikszentmihalyi (1996).
4 Ironically, Klopfer and Hailman wrote of his earliest classic work, the Umwelt und Innenwelt der
Tiere (1921 [1909]), that this has “had relatively little effect on animal behavior studies compared
with the great originality of its content” (1967: 126). One reason for this seems to have been that
it was far ahead of its time; or, in Csikszentmihalyi’s parlance, that there was no ﬁeld competent

224
Thomas A. Sebeok (1920–2001)
But long before then, in the mid-1970s, I resolved to investigate Jakob’s writings
for my own ediﬁcation, and to look at what others had written about them.5 These
exploratory readings resulted in a paper titled “Neglected ﬁgures in the history of
semiotic inquiry: Jakob von Uexküll”, which I ﬁrst presented in an abridged version
in August 1977 at the III Wiener Symposium über Semiotik (Borbé 1978); the ﬁnal,
much longer version appeared in a book of mine, The Sign & Its Masters (1989
[1979]: 187–207, 290–291). This chapter, my personal appreciation of Jakob and
his principal works, was widely noticed, despite the fact that it was in the main
researched and, foremost, composed to educate myself. So one needs to ask: just
what did this piece accomplish for my readership? The answer is: it redeﬁned and
relocated a nonpareil pioneer investigator of a domain (Umweltlehre) and sanctioned
his having done so in a ﬁeld (biosemiotics) appropriate to and by that time at last
receptive of his creative achievement.6
Thure was among my audience in Vienna. He reacted to my paper about his
father with no cavils, indeed, with enthusiasm. We had an extended talk over an
ensuing dinner, in consequence of which, as a next step a few months afterwards,
Thure came to call on me at my Bloomington home for a further lengthy evening’s
discussion. These two talks gave early impetus to, then came to decisively shape,
the subsequent unfolding of biosemiotics. Among other things, it was during these
initial dinner meetings that the two of us hammered out concrete publication plans in
English of several works by both Jakob and Thure himself. Most of these eventually
appeared in Semiotica, or in other series under the auspices of Walter or Mouton de
Gruyter, or were issued by other houses in Germany and the US. (Representative
items are listed among the references below.)
There were some other far-reaching consequences that ﬂowed from our talks,
two among them being especially worth some comments here.
First, the idea of launching a series of annual international conferences devoted
to biosemiotics was broached and soon realized by Thure. Repeated about ﬁve or six
times in the late eighties and early nineties, these were held on the premises of the
Glotterbad Clinic for Rehabilitative Medicine in Glottertal, Baden-Württemberg,
Germany, under his leadership, with the signal cooperation of Jörg M. Herrmann,
M.D., the Clinic’s Director. Thure, in his Introduction to one of the sessions, on
“Models and methods in biosemiotics”, succinctly stated the aims: “to support the
experiment of bringing together Humanities, represented by semioticians; Natural
in the domain to take control over it: “There are several ways that domains and ﬁelds can affect
each other. Sometimes domains determine to a large extent what the ﬁeld can or cannot do . . . No
matter how much a group of scientists would like their pet theory accepted, it won’t be if it runs
against the previously accumulated consensus” (1996: 44).
5 That research was in large part conducted at the Netherlands Institute for Advanced Study, where
I was a Fellow during 1973–1974.
6 See again Csikszentmihalyi (1996). Note my continued emphasis on the availability of a respon-
sive ﬁeld, which was by no means at hand in 1934, when Bühler ﬁrst recognized the semiotic
character of the Umweltlehre, “welcher von vornherein in seiner Grundbegriffen Merkzeichen und
Wirkzeichen sematologisch orientiert ist” (1965 [1934]: 27).

6
Biosemiotics: Its Roots, Proliferation and Prospects
225
Sciences, represented by experts in molecular biology; and Medicine, a science with
an uncertain position between both of them, represented by internists, psychiatrists,
and clinical psychologists”. He depicted the topic of the conference as “the proposi-
tion of an order in nature which has nothing to do with causality, but which canalizes
causal processes between living systems and their environment as well as in and
between these systems. We maintain”, he concluded, “that this order is a semiotic
one or at least can be described in semiotic terms” (1990: 1).7
Secondly, Thure made arrangements for me to spend a week or so visiting him
in Freiburg (in part intended to coincide with Rowohlt’s publication of my German
paperback, Theorie und Geschichte der Semiotik, where I characterized Jakob as
“einer der grössten Kryptosemiotiker seiner Zeit” [1979: 10]). Our Freiburg dis-
cussions about multifarious biosemiotic topics were carried out, with rare intensity,
from morning late into every night, and were happily augmented by the continuous
participation of Giorgio Prodi, Director of the Institute for Cancer Research of the
University of Bologna. Prodi, an astounding polymath (Eco 1988) who had become
my friend several years earlier, encountered Thure for the ﬁrst time on that occasion;
the two of them met only twice more, ﬁrst in Palermo in the summer of 1984, then
the last time in Lucca in the early fall of 1986 (Sercarz et al. 1988). Prodi sparked the
third biosemiotic iteration, to which I shall return below after sketching the second.
One of the sundry riddles that mar the gradual coming into view of modern
biosemiotics – the second iteration, if you will – is the neglect of Heini Hediger,
whose lifelong attempt to understand animals surely marked a milestone in the elu-
cidation of this domain, providing it with a particularly beneﬁcial empirical footing.
This seeming indifference – or is it blindness? – to his capital achievements is
the more puzzling in the light of Hediger’s manifest admiration for Jakob, whose
Umweltlehre clearly had a decisive inﬂuence on his own highly original analyses of
the psychology and biology of animal ﬂight response (or negative territoriality). For
instance, touching on his 1932 dissertation and work resulting there from, he wrote:
“This work was surprisingly successful; it was especially well received by J. von
Uexküll at the Institute for Environmental Studies in Hamburg, where I met both
him and his successor, F. Brock. For my part, I was extremely impressed by von
Uexküll’s Umwelt-Lehre . . .. Consequently, I dedicated another paper following
that on my ﬂight work, a study of tameness, to von Uexküll . . . these two subjects
7 Those attending the Glottertal conferences one or more times included, besides many Germans,
Swiss, Danes (e.g., Hoffmeyer), Estonians (e.g., Kull), and myself from overseas. A prominent
German semiotician whom I remember being there on each occasion was Martin Krampen, who
substantiated phytosemiotics, i.e., the semiotics of plants, putting this then novel domain on an
equal footing with other recognized branches of biosemiotics (1981: 187; see discussion above).
A large wind-up gathering in this series was organized in the nineties by Hoffmeyer; this took
place in Denmark, with an expanded attendance on the part of Scandinavian semioticians as well
as natural scientists. More recent locations for biosemiotics get-togethers (enumerating here only
those which I myself was asked to participate in, several repeatedly) were scheduled in Berkeley,
Denver, Dresden, Gaithersburg, Imatra, Guadalajara, Kassel, Las Cruces, São Paulo, Tartu, and
Toronto.

226
Thomas A. Sebeok (1920–2001)
formed the basis for my later investigation concerning the relationship between ani-
mals and man, especially in the zoo. In addition, they led to the founding of zoo
biology . . .” (1985: 149). Hediger’s seminal discoveries of the concepts of indi-
vidual and social space in application to animals of many kinds were later applied
to humans and further fruitfully elaborated under such labels as “proxemics” in
anthropology (Hall 1968).
Some years afterwards, I myself discussed nine speciﬁc circumstances (among
no doubt several others) in which man may have “semiotic encounters” with ani-
mals (Sebeok 1988: 68–71). These juxtapositions include taming, training in several
interdependent variations (apprentissage, dressage, domestication, and the like). My
understanding of such procedures was immensely enriched by Hediger’s wealth of
experiences in shaping behavior, especially in zoos and circuses. Hediger totally
accepted the principles of zoosemiotics – which of course constitutes a substan-
tial segment of biosemiotics – “[the two of us] have been working together for
some time” (Hediger 1985: 151; see further his 1980 book, with numerous exam-
ples and references under this heading).8 As he noted, we “often met in Zurich or
Amsterdam”, and, in 1980, he was my guest in New York City. In all these venues,
we frequented zoos and watched the training and performances of animals in cir-
cuses, some large enterprises (like Barnum & Bailey) and others small (such as
the Swiss Circus Knie). His powers of observation and their subtlety far exceeded
mine, so he taught me many things about applied biosemiotics which I could never
have learned on my own (see, for example, his stunning 1974 article, with striking
illustrations, on reciprocal semiosis between man and wild animals, viz., panthers,
elephants, etc., in the circus). Hediger’s appreciation of the quintessentially biosemi-
otic constitution of the Clever Hans phenomenon was also uncommonly insightful
(Sebeok and Rosenthal 1981: 1–17). He foretold “that eventually an explanation
for the extremely complex and, so far, underresearched problem of the relation-
ships between man and animals will be obtained by means of signal study or
semiotics, speciﬁcally zoo-semiotics” (1985: 177). Over-all, his legacy is a many-
sided, profuse research program for biosemiotics that can easily extend for several
8 At the risk of being overcome by terminological surfeit ( or vertigo), I can offer the following non-
exhaustive rundown – with a basic reference or two – of the currently labeled component branches
of biosemiotics that I am aware of: protosemiotics (“the basic feature of the whole biological orga-
nization [protein synthesis, metabolism, hormone activity, transmission of nervous impulses, and
so on]”, cf. Prodi in Sercarz et al. 1988: 55); microsemiotics (in prokaryotes, cf. Sonea 1988,
1990, 1995); cytosemiotics (in cells, renamed microsemiotics by Yates 1997); endosemiotics (in
the milieu intérieur, T. von Uexküll et al. 1993); phytosemiotics (plants, cf. Krampen 1981, 1997);
zoosemiotics (speechless animals, cf. Sebeok 1972, 1990); mycosemiosis (fungi, Kraepelin 1997);
and cybersemiotics (cf. Sebeok 1997: 116; androids, robotics, cyborgs, sensor and muscle augmen-
tation, prostheses [eye-glasses, hearing aids, dentures, artiﬁcial limbs, mirrors, etc., cf. Eco 1986:
220–222]). Anthroposemiotics (speechifying animals) is usually excluded. Exosemiotics has been
used in two different senses: as the opposite of endosemiotics, or in passing reference to the sign
behavior of putative extraterrestrial creatures.

6
Biosemiotics: Its Roots, Proliferation and Prospects
227
generations ahead; (his 1980 book is a veritable treasure house for a research
agenda).9
Hediger was a visionary innovator who reached from the inside outwards. He
felt entirely comfortable within Jakob’s Umwelt paradigm, but, implicitly, with
(zoo)semiotics too, which he came increasingly and quite explicitly to embrace
and proﬁtably apply in his later years. Giorgio Prodi, to the contrary, was a mav-
erick: a proliﬁc physician and experimental oncologist by profession, a novelist by
avocation, but also an intermittent if resolute contributor to biosemiotics. However
radically idiosyncratic, Prodi’s recreation of a domain for biosemiotics was with
little hesitation matched up with an existing ﬁeld, or academic niche, a luxury
not enjoyed by Jakob and only indirectly so, and only after his mid-sixties, by
Hediger.10 His ﬁrst major book on the subject – which claimed to deal with “la
preistoria nelle sue pesanti conseguenze sulla storia e sulla teoria della semiosi”
(1977: 5) – was promptly accepted for publication by Umberto Eco; he was asked to
deliver a paper on the topic at the Third International Congress of the IASS in 1984
(1988b); and invited to prepare a long English version of the former to appear in
Semiotica (1988a). He was also chosen to be a key participant in the 1986 workshop
on immunosemiotics, organized by Sercarz and others, where he spoke on “Signs
and codes in immunology” (1988: 53–64).11 Here he took a decided position against
“semiotics as a pure human domain”, in contrast to his own perspective of “a gen-
eral semiotic domain”, and introduced the notion of a “protosign”, which belongs to
“proto-semiotics . . . the basic feature of the whole biological organization” – pro-
tein synthesis, metabolism, hormone activity, transmission of nervous impulses, and
so on (1988: 63, 55).
More extensively, he labeled the domain, over-all, “natural semiotics” (1988c:
149–170), which seems to be roughly equivalent to mathematician Kergosien’s
“nature semiotics” (1992: 145), as well as to the phrase “semiotics of nature”,
occasionally used by Hoffmeyer and Emmeche (1991: 117–118) (but who currently
seem to favor “biosemiotics”).
9 A lengthy, illustrated memorial essay of mine, “The Swiss pioneer in nonverbal communication
studies: Heini Hediger [1908–1992]” (Sebeok 2001), was prepared for delivery at a conference on
“Semiotics and the Communication Sciences”, University of Lugano, Switzerland, May 2–4, 2001.
The written version is to appear in a volume of transactions being edited by Peter Schulz.
10 A reminder: one of the central components of creativity is the ﬁeld, “which includes all the indi-
viduals who act as gatekeepers to the domain. It is their job to decide whether a new idea or product
should be included in the domain”. Publishers and journal editors ﬁgure prominently among the
“ﬁeld of experts” who recognize and validate innovation, as are academic administrators, ofﬁcers
of public and private sources of ﬁnancial support, or, to put it brieﬂy, persons with control over
access to critical resources (cf. Csikszentmihalyi 1996: 28, 6).
11 Tomio Tada’s deﬁnition of immunosemiotics is: “the study of the general principles underlying
the structure of sign systems perceived by different cells of the immune machinery”, according
to which “restrictions in partner cell interactions must exist as part of an intercellular semiotic
system” (Sercarz et al. 1988: vii).

228
Thomas A. Sebeok (1920–2001)
In my judgment, these quasi-synonymous terms are poor substitutes for
“biosemiotics”, There are several reasons for this, some narrow, others broader. The
narrow reason is that the word “nature” is used with quite different technical con-
notations by Jakob, as explicated in Thure’s Glossary: “Systematically ordered and
complete structure of all Umwelts whose meaning is sought in overlapping compo-
sition” (1987: 236). Yet, at other times, Jakob equated “nature” with “true reality”:
“Da die Tätigkeit unseres Gemüts das einzige uns unmittelbar bekannte Stück Natur
ist, sind seine Gesetze die enizigen, die mit Recht den Namen Naturgesetze führen
dürfen” (J. von Uexküll 1973 [1920, 1928]: 40).
The over-arching context for biosemiotics is our biosphere in the sense of the
organic whole of living matter (cf. footnote 2); and this is the only geosphere which
contains living matter. Because there can be no semiosis without interpretability –
surely life’s cardinal propensity – semiosis presupposes the axiomatic identity of the
semiosphere with the biosphere. As Short persuasively argued, “there is no basis for
the assertion that semiosis occurs outside of living things” (1998: 49) (except, one
may add, man’s inert extensions, such as automata, computers, or robots). Local
nature (Gaia), however, additionally comprehends the inorganic matrix for the place
wherein organisms dwell – the enveloping gaseous mass, waters, and rocks; while
cosmic nature further includes the totality of extraterrestrial objects (Sebeok 2000).
Another eccentricity of Prodi’s is his avoidance of references to the works
of others. For example, in his English article, although dealing with intrinsically
biosemiotic issues, viz., of “natural semiology” (1988a: 206), he cites only Frege
and the 1923 edition of Ogden and Richards. While this composition style perhaps
adumbrates Prodi’s striking originality, it fails to align him with any predecessors
or successors in semiotics, so his untutored readers may ﬂounder for lack of famil-
iar signposts. But having said this, it was also the case that, during the week we
spent together in our open-ended 1979 “intensive seminar” in Thure’s company on
the practical and conceivable ins and outs of biosemiotics, the three of us got along
extremely well; as I commented afterwards, “this uniquely stimulating experience
enabled me to enhance my writing and teachings . . . in biosemiotics in its various
topical subdivisions” (Sebeok 1998b: 34–35).
In 1988, some months after Prodi’s untimely death at the age of 59, I received an
invitation from the ofﬁcers of a medical association in his country to attend a sizable
memorial gathering at an isolated resort in Southern Italy, where I was to delineate
Prodi’s contributions to biosemiotics. As it turned out, my fellow participants were
all physicians or biologists. His colleagues seemed genuinely respectful of, indeed,
fascinated by, the semiotic side of Prodi’s scholarly endeavors, yet none publicly
declared a commitment to his line of research.
Such appear to me to have been the three principal biosemiotic iterations of
the past century. But these evidently do not exhaust the prehistory of this domain.
Other creative ﬁgures could be named (although, arguably, in a minor key): for one,
Kenneth Craik [1914–1945], the reclusive don of St. John’s College, Cambridge,
who independently invented “another kind of Umwelt theory” (Craik 1943; see
Sebeok 1991: 104); and for another (if perhaps tangentially) René Thom [b. 1923],
the mathematician whose catastrophe-theoretical excursions into areas of biological

6
Biosemiotics: Its Roots, Proliferation and Prospects
229
morphogenesis were powerfully impacted by Jakob’s theorems of the dynamic of
life (Thom 1975, passim).
Biosemiotics tends sometimes to be promoted, though I think mistakenly, to con-
trast with cultural semiotics. But “culture” is not much more than that realm of
nature where the logosphere – Bakhtin’s dialogic universe – impinges in infant lives
then comes to predominate in normal adult lives. Yet in fact even mainstream semi-
oticians range over a wide spectrum of attitudes toward biology. Ernst Cassirer’s
writings are, for instance, saturated not just by biological intimations – Jakob’s
impress is palpable throughout (e.g., 1944: 23–26; cf. Thure in J. von Uexküll 1992:
311, footnotes 2 and 3). For A. J. Greimas, zoosemiotics looms somewhere in a hazy
if rosy future: “it is destined to become a genuine semiotic realm, both autonomous
and promising”, he once declared (Greimas and Courtès 1979: 376). Umberto Eco,
who once banished zoosemiotics to “il limite inferiore della semiotica” (1975: 21),
now concedes that “in the depth of biological processes lie the elementary mecha-
nisms from which semiosis springs” (in Sercarz et al. 1988: 15). Louis Hjelmslev
remains silent on the matter. And so on . . .
In an attempt to ascertain dispositions in some depth rather than by a mere
impressionistic sampling, I was able to persuade an array of colleagues to scrutinize
the oeuvre of ﬁve pre-eminent semioticians of yore – Peirce, Lady Welby, Charles
Morris, Roman Jakobson, and Yuri Lotman – “for harbingers of biosemiotic dis-
cernments, judgments, prognostications, or at the very least congeniality” (from my
Foreword to Hoffmeyer and Emmeche 1999). Readers interested in pursuing the
fascinating results of these searches are referred to Biosemiotica, constituting Part I
of Vol. 127 (1999) of this journal.12
In some crudely simple quantitative terms, biosemiotics can certainly be said
to have proliferated over the past decade: for example, as compared to the Sebeok
and Umiker–Sebeok volume on Biosemiotics (1992), which ran to less than 500
pages, the Hoffmeyer–Emmeche volume Biosemiotica (1999), ran to 660 pages;
but that was, as well, shortly preceded by another over 250-page double issue of
the same journal devoted to a closely kindred topic, “Semiotics in the Biosphere”
(Vol. 120 [1998]); plus it was closely followed by the present volume, dedicated
to the memory, appreciation, and inﬂuence of the domain’s chief architect, Jakob.
Single-author booklength publications in biosemiotics, like Merrell’s (1996) or
Hoffmeyer’s (1993) or Kull’s (in preparation), are multiplying, as are collections
such as the one by van der Vijver et al., with yet others in sight. Signiﬁcantly,
new reference books are now routinely graced by separate entries, as in Walter de
Gruyter’s Handbook of Semiotics (Posner et al. 1997–1998: 1: 436–591), the Oxford
University Press’s Encyclopedia (Hoffmeyer 1998: 82–85), Routledge Companion
to Semiotics and Linguistics (Paul Cobley, ed., 2001), and the expanded second edi-
tion of Handbook of Semiotics (Winfried Nöth, 1990). Too, I have already listed
12 Two among these subjects were my former teachers. To gain a still more rounded historical
perspective of this cardinal domain of learning, we hope to arrange for similar probes of writings
by other such respected ﬁgures, for instance, Susanne Langer.

230
Thomas A. Sebeok (1920–2001)
(in footnote 6) scores of recent conventions on biosemiotics, of diverse sizes and
varying composition, assembled at venues over four continents.
It is on the other hand also true that biosemiotics – as general semiotics itself
– has not typically become a conventional university-based discipline, nor, in my
view, should it have.13 This is not the place to document, or argue again for, my
preference, but it is clear that such formal units of knowledge production are by
no means the only possible, let alone the most desirable, type of reputational sys-
tem of work organization and control. Semiotics, and, a fortiori, biosemiotics, is,
or should be, a ﬁeld committed to producing novelty and innovations, not much
else. Whitley rightly emphasized (1984: 13) that there exists an “‘essential tension’
between novelty and tradition, or co-operation and competition”, a notable feature
of certain kinds of modern scientiﬁc works, surely inclusive of biosemiotics. He
observed that a “broader and more general social unit of knowledge production and
co-ordination is the intellectual ﬁeld”. Such ﬁelds, conceived as “relatively well-
bounded and distinct social organizations which control and direct the conduct of
research on particular topics in different ways”, possess identities that are by no
means always identical with employment or education unit boundaries. They “vary
in the degree of cohesion and autonomy from other [academic] structures, but con-
stitute the major social entities which co-ordinate and orient research across a wide
variety of situations. . .. They reconstruct knowledge around distinct ‘subjects’ and
their organization and change are crucial aspects of intellectual work and knowledge
production in the modern, differentiated sciences” (Whitley 1984: 7). By “science”,
Whitley has of course in mind all forms of modern scholarship, not just the natu-
ral sciences; and each intellectual ﬁeld, or craftwork, he stresses, “has a distinctive
language for describing cognitive objects and communicating task outcomes which
reduces lay participation in the assessment of contributions and enables results from
different production sites to be compared and co-ordinated” (Whitley 1984: 34). In a
useful tabular form, he differentiates between scientiﬁc ﬁelds, in which biosemiotics
obviously belongs under his type (e) (Whitley 1984: 158, Table 5.2).
Note that each of our three biosemiotics trailblazers was an intrinsically uncon-
ventional academic. Jakob, in support of his consecutive faculty engagements in
Germany, was, in addition to his afﬁliation with the Zoological Center in Naples,
particularly active in his own Institute for Umwelt-Research at the University of
Hamburg. Hediger was, to be sure, a Professor of Psychology at the University of
Zurich, but his concentrated intellectual efforts radiated out of a succession of zoo-
logical gardens, ﬁrst at Dählhölzli (Bern), then Basel, ﬁnally, effective 1954, his
beloved Zurich Zoo. Prodi, who held the Chair in Experimental Oncology at the
University of Bologna’s School of Medicine, worked out of his own Instituto di
Cancerologia. The functions of these distinctions, which may seem to academic
outsiders mere subtle reﬁnements, or frosting atop of a cake, are perfectly under-
stood by professors like me, for I too was the chairman of a Research Center at my
13 For glimpses of the relation of semiotics and biosemiotics, see T. von Uexküll (1998: 2189–
2190).

6
Biosemiotics: Its Roots, Proliferation and Prospects
231
institution for 37 years. This is also why the University of Tartu’s Jakob von Uexküll
Center – a modernized reincarnation (under Kalevi Kull’s direction) of the Hamburg
prototype – is fraught with such promise of new research departures, supplement-
ing his university’s time-honored departmental structures necessarily dedicated to
upholding traditional paths of teaching and learning propagation.
An interesting condition speciﬁed for the establishment of scientiﬁc ﬁelds as
distinct systems of work organization is that “each ﬁeld has to control a sepa-
rate communication system”, that is, a benchmark set of shared vocabulary items
of its own that differentiates this ﬁeld from all others as a sort of monopolistic
exclusion device (Whitley 1984: 29, 31–32). This is why Jakob’s seemingly arcane
terminology, often remarked on by biologist commentators and other readers, is so
advantageous, even when – or especially because – it provokes an often felt need
to have recourse to an accompanying formal Glossary (e.g., in 1982: 83–87). This
was pointed out by Thure himself when he insisted that the differences in Jakob’s
“terminology are not to be regarded simply as a source of difﬁculty; they may also
prove helpful where the various semiotic theories diverge”. Here he surely refers to
the unavoidable disparities between his father’s idiom and Peirce’s and Saussure’s
(1987: 148; see also Krampen 1997: 512).14
Although Jakob’s research interests in principle encompassed the comportment
of all organisms, he in fact spun his theory of models and of the attendant func-
tional cycle almost entirely out of his observations of “the worlds of animals
and men”, particularly marine animals (jellyﬁsh, sea-urchin, octopus, trout) and
insects (annelids, ticks, dragonﬂies). He is therefore justly to be counted among the
founders of ethology (Bleibtreu 1968: 13), for this “certainly owes more to his teach-
ing than to any other school of behaviour study” (Lorenz 1971: 277); and many of
the phenomena and operational concepts that “gave focus to classical ethology were
ﬁrst described, or at least anticipated” by him (Dyer and Brockman 1996: 529). His
design was also commonly used by early investigators of synchronic animal com-
munication processes, as well as for the testing of the hypothesis of “ritualization”
– or what I have elsewhere called “the semiosis of gene-dependency” – an intrigu-
ing special case of diachronic sign science (Sebeok 1989 [1979]: 29–30, Fig. 2.1).
Inasmuch as any animal’s communication system must be a natural extension of
its sensorium, which invokes an understanding of its Umwelt, it is easy to appre-
ciate how indispensable Jakob’s insights were to the origins and development of
14 There is no evidence that these three masters of the sign were aware of one another. The mean-
dering, diffuse arguments at last June’s (1999) twin Uexküll-related meetings (Tartu, Imatra) over
matters of basic terminology underline these points. There were sharp debates about the meaning
even of such a pivotal term as Umwelt and its correct rendering into English, ranging from such
approximations as “perceptual universe”, “selfworld”, or “phenomenal world”, to such absurdities
as “environment” (but see Immelman and Beer 1989: 88) or “niche”. Despite the fact that the clos-
est English equivalent is manifestly “model”, the only palpable group consensus reached was the
unhelpful surrender, that the German word should be retained in English. Nevertheless, seemingly
recondite concerns about technical vocabulary, leading toward a standardized symbol system, tend
to reinforce the unity of a ﬁeld like biosemiotics.

232
Thomas A. Sebeok (1920–2001)
zoosemiotics (Sebeok 1972: 61). Doubtless, the most cited example of the zoosemi-
otic aspects of Jakob’s explorations is his fabled scrutiny of Ixodes rhitinus, the
cattle tick (whose story Bleibtreu opens his 1968 book with), often revisited, and
reinterpreted in a Dresden lecture by Udo Figge as recently as February 1999 in
strictly semiotic terms (See now Figge 2001).
Hediger had a sweeping yet intimate knowledge of the behavior of an exception-
ally wide range of animals – especially terrestrial vertebrates – based on extensive
ﬁeld work as well as acute observations both in and far beyond the zoo. At the
very outset of his remarkable book he speciﬁes: “Insbesondere werden wir uns
mit der Zoosemiotik zu befassen haben, also mit den Signalen, die zwischen
Tieren und besonders zwischen Tier und Mensch in beiden Richtungen wirksam
sind, gewissermassen hin und her schwingen”, Later he adds: “Der Zoosemiotik
bleibt noch ein weites Feld zu bearbeiten” (1980: 10, 144), but already Hediger
himself impressively contributed to this ﬁeld. Following in Jakob’s footsteps, he
consistently applied both biological and semiotic criteria to the study of animal
communication. Jakob did so implicitly, Hediger eventually in quite categorical
terms.
Some have suggested that “Biosemiotics has evolved from the study of ani-
mal communication to more general considerations of biological codes” (e.g.,
Peter Cariani in van de Vijver et al. 1998: 360). This, however, simpliﬁes,
even skews, an, in truth, far more labyrinthian sequence of events culminating
in biosemiotics to which zoosemiotics is but one contributing factor (Sebeok
1998a: 10). This notwithstanding, zoosemiotics is doubtless “a particularly rich
branch of biosemiotics because animals are in some sense semiosic mediators
between creation and decay. On a macroscopic scale, they can be viewed as
transforming agents ﬁxed midway between the ‘composer’ plants, organisms that
set interpret ants in motion, and ‘decomposer’ fungi, which break them down”,
viz., between phytosemiosic and mycosemiosic operations. Too, in their role
as gobetweens, animals process signs through media embracing the entire sen-
sory spectrum, each – in conformity with Jakob’s teachings – according to, but
only commensurate with, its speciﬁc array of sense organs (Sebeok 1988: 65;
1997: 116).
Others chose to pursue different pathways to stoke the biosemiotic superstruc-
ture, an enticing case in point deriving from some casual remarks of Jakob’s to the
effect that plants lack a function cycle. Krampen has shown the predominance of
indexicality in plant semioses, that plants nonetheless do have feedback cycles con-
necting sensors and regulators, and how “meaning factors” function in the vegetal
(vs. animal) realm – or, in a nutshell, how phytosemiosis differs from zoosemiosis
(1981, 1997).
Not surprisingly, the guiding preoccupation of medical practitioners from
Hippocrates to our day, notably including both Thure and Prodi, has focused on
endosemiosis or “protosemiosis” from the cell to the highest integration level, up to
the sphere where the non-conscious inner world may in humans and certain other
animals become transmutable, by means of sign connections via neurotransmitters,

6
Biosemiotics: Its Roots, Proliferation and Prospects
233
neurohormones, and other neurobiological processes still far from understood, into
consciously experienced reality.15
Research at the ephemerally woven frontiers of biosemiotics – evolutionarily the
highest and the lowest planetary limits of which are circumscribed by two sugges-
tive metaphors (both, as it happens, of Canadian vintage) – are of quotidian concern.
The upper periphery, a virtual community, was dubbed a global village by Toronto’s
Marshall McLuhan (1962: 31). This electronically mediated global forum, located
nowhere on the superhighway called the Internet, is a very real, if volatile, network
of networks. It is populated by biomimetic creatures with unconventional communi-
cation schemes and emotive manifestations actualized by media embodiments, such
as animation, robot languages and robot speech, and text. Regular and occasional
users are subject to the vagaries of cybersemiotics (cf. footnote 7). (According to a
report just issued by the Department of Commerce in 2000, 67% of Americans still
do not use the Internet.)
The scalar opposite metaphor was coined by Montreal’s Sorin Sonea: the global
organism. Nor did the similitude with the Internet escape him, as he notes: “Like
an electronic communications network the bacterial world possesses an enormous
data base, in this case in the form of bacterial genes. . .. This biological commu-
nications network, which possesses more basic information than the brain of any
mammal, functions in a manner that sometimes resembles human intelligence”
(Sonea and Panisset 1983: 85). Furthermore, the ensemble of bacteria resemble
“a vast computerized communications network – a superorganism whose myriad
parts shift and share genetic information to accommodate any and all circumstances”
(Sonea 1988: 45). The smallest known autopoietic entity is a single self-maintaining
bacterial cell: the “biosemiotic atom.”
The analogy is powerful, yet not absolute. While being wired is optional – we,
who are nonusers, think we have rational grounds for our skepticism – the global
prokaryotic community inescapably perfuses the Earth. In a way that is literally
mind-boggling, all of us eukaryotes are fashioned of bacteria; we are both their
habitats and vehicles for further dispersal. In particular, our central nervous system
may be characterized as a colony of interactive bacteria. For this reason alone, any
biosemiotic theory failing to take into account the multiform data of bacterial semio-
sis is as ﬂawed as would be one that ignored the complexities of the verbal code in
its social ramiﬁcations (Sebeok 1997: 114).
References
Baer, E. (1988). Medical Semiotics. London: University Press of America.
Bleibtreu, J. N. (1968). The Parable of the Beast: An Exploration of the Frontiers of Biological
Knowledge. London: Gollancz.
Borbé, T. (1978). Semiotik IlL Zeichentypologie. München: Wilhelm Fink.
15 On nitric oxide, that “pantheon of messenger molecules”, and so-called “hedgehog genes”, cf.
Sebeok (1997: 120, footnote 13).

234
Thomas A. Sebeok (1920–2001)
Cassirer, E. (1944). An Essay on Man: An Introduction to a Philosophy of Human Culture. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Cobley, P. (Ed.) (2001). Routledge Companion to Semiotics and Linguistics. London: Routledge.
Craik, K. J. W. (1943). The Nature of Explanation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Crookshank, F. G. (1938). The importance of a theory of signs and a critique of language in the
study of medicine. In: Ogden, C. K., Richards, I. A. (Eds.) The Meaning of Meaning. New
York: Harcourt, Brace and Co., pp. 337–355.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1996). Creativity: The Flow and Psychology of Discovery and Invention.
New York: HarperCollins.
Dyer, F. C., Brockman, H. J. (1996). Sensory processes, orientation, and communication: Biology
of the Umwelt. In: Houck, L. D., Drickamer, L. C. (Eds.) Foundations of Animal Behavior.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 529–538.
Eco, U. (1975). Trattato di semiotica generale. Milano: Bompiani.
Eco, U. (1986). Mirrors. In: Bouissac, P., Herzfeld, M., Posner, R. (Eds.) Iconicity: Essays on
the Nature of Culture: Festschrift for Thomas A. Sebeok on His 65th Birthday. Tübingen:
Stauffenburg, pp. 215–237.
Eco, U. (1988). Una sﬁda al mito delle due culture. Saecularia Nona 2 (January-February)
Bologna.
Figge, U. L. (2001). Jakob von Uexküll: ‘Merkmale’ und ‘Wirkmale’ (in this issue).
Ginzburg, C. (1983). Clues: Morelli, Freud, and Sherlock Holmes. In: Eco, U., Sebeok, T. A. (Eds.)
The Sign of Three. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, pp. 81–118.
Greimas, A. J., Courtes, J. (1979). Semiotics and Language: An Analytical Dictionary.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Hall, E. T. (1968). Proxemics. Current Anthropology 9, 83–108.
Hediger, H. (1974). Communication between man and animal. Image Roche 62, 27–40.
Hediger, H. (1980). Tiere verstehen: Erkenntnisse eines Tierpsychologen. München: Kindler.
Hediger, H. (1985). A lifelong attempt to understand animals. In: Dewsbury, D. A. (Ed.) Leaders in
the Study of Animal Behavior: Autobiographical Perspectives. Lewisburg: Bucknell University
Press.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1993). Signs of Meaning. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1998). Biosemiotics. In: Bouissac, P. (Ed.) Encyclopedia of Semiotics. New York:
Oxford University Press, pp. 82–85.
Hoffmeyer, J., Emmeche, C. (1991). Code-duality and the semiotics of nature. In: Anderson, M.,
Merrell, F. (Eds.) On Semiotic Modeling. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 117–166.
Hoffmeyer, J., Emmeche, C. (Eds.) (1999). Biosemiotica Semiotica 127. [Special issue.]
Immelman, K., Beer, C. (1989). A Dictionary of Ethology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Jacob, F. (1974). The Logic of Living Systems: A History of Heredity. London: Allen Lane.
Kergosien, Y. L. (1992). Nature semiotics: The icons of nature. In: Sebeok, T. A., Umiker-Sebeok,
J. (Eds.) Biosemiotics, pp. 145–170.
Kleinpaul, R. (1972). Sprache ohne Worte, second edition. The Hague: Mouton.
Kraepelin, G. (1997). Mycosemiosis. In: Posner, R., Robering, K., Sebeok, T. A. (Eds.) Semiotics:
A Handbook on the Sign-Theoretic Foundations of Nature and Culture, vol. 1. Berlin: Walter
de Gruyter, pp. 488–507.
Krampen, M. (1981). Phytosemiotics. Semiotica 36 (3/4), 187–209.
Krampen, M. (1997). Phytosemiosis. In Posner, R., Robering, K., Sebeok, T. A. (Eds.) Semiotics:
A Handbook on the Sign-Theoretic Foundations of Nature and Culture, vol. 1. Berlin: Walter
de Gruyter, pp. 507–522.
Langholf, V. (1990). Medical Theories in Hippocrates. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Lorenz, K. (1971). Studies in Animal and Human Behaviour, vol. 2. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
McLuhan, M. (1962). The Gutenberg Galaxy. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

6
Biosemiotics: Its Roots, Proliferation and Prospects
235
Mead, G. H. (1936). Movements of Thought in the Nineteenth Century. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Merrell, F. (1996). Signs Grow: Semiosis and Life Processes. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Nöth, W. (1990). Handbook of Semiotics. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Ogden, C. K., Richards, I. A. (1938). The Meaning of Meaning: A Study of the Inﬂuence of
Language Upon Thought and of the Science of Symbolism, ﬁfth edition. New York: Harcourt,
Brace.
Petrilli, S. (1999). About and Beyond Peirce. Semiotica 124 (3/4), 299–376.
Posner, R., Robering, K., Sebeok, T. A. (Eds.) (1997–2002). Semiotics: A Handbook on the Sign-
Theoretic Foundations of Nature and Culture, vols. 1 and 2. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Prodi, G. (1977). Le basi materiali della signijicazione. Milano: Bompiani.
Prodi, G. (1988a). Material bases of signiﬁcation. Semiotica 69 (3/4), 191–241.
Prodi, G. (1988b). La biologia come semiotica naturale. In: Herzfeld, M., Melazzo, L. (Eds.)
Semiotic Theory and Practice, vol. 2, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 929–951.
Prodi, G. (1988c). Teoria e metodo in biologia e medicina. Bologna: CLUEB.
Sebeok, T. A. (1972). Perspectives in Zoosemiotics. The Hague: Mouton.
Sebeok, T. A. (1979). Theorie und Geschichte der Semiotik. Hamburg: Rowohlt Taschenbuch.
Sebeok, T. A. (1985 [1976]). Contributions to the Doctrine of Signs. London: University Press of
America.
Sebeok, T. A. (1988). ‘Animal’ in biological and semiotic perspective. In: Ingold, T. (ed.) What Is
An Animal? London: Unwin Hyman, pp. 63–76.
Sebeok, T. A. (1989 [1979]). The Sign & Its Masters. London: University Press of America.
Sebeok, T. A. (1990). Essays in Zoosemiotics. Toronto: Toronto Semiotic Circle.
Sebeok, T. A. (1991). Semiotics in the United States. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Sebeok, T. A. (1996). Galen in medical semiotics. Interdisciplinary Journal for Germanic
Linguistics and Semiotic Analysis I, 89–111.
Sebeok, T. A. (1997). Global semiotics. In: Rauch, I., Carr, G. F. (Eds.) Semiotics Around the
World: Synthesis in Diversity. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 105–130.
Sebeok, T. A. (1998a). Come comunicano gli animali che non parlano. Bari: Edizioni del Sud.
Sebeok, T. A. (1998b). The Estonian connection. Sign Systems Studies 26, 20–38.
Sebeok, T. A. (2000). The music of the spheres. Semiotica 128 (3/4), 527–535.
Sebeok, T. A. (2001). The Swiss Pioneer in Nonverbal Communication Stuides: Heini Hediger
[1908–1992]. Ottawa: Legas.
Sebeok, T. A., Rosenthal, R. (Eds.) (1981). The Clever Hans Phenomenon: Communication with
Horses, Whales, Apes, and People (=Annals 364). New York: The New York Academy of
Sciences.
Sebeok, T. A., Umiker-Sebeok, J. (Eds.) (1992). Biosemiotics. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Sercarz, E. L. et al. (Eds.) (1988). The Semiotics of Cellular Communication in the Immune System.
Heidelberg: Springer Verlag.
Short, T. L. (1998). What’s the use? Semiotica 122 (1/2), 1–68.
Sonea, S. (1988). The global organism: A new view of bacteria. The Sciences 28 (4), 38–45.
Sonea, S. (1990). Bacterial (prokaryotic) communication. In: Sebeok, T. A., Umiker-Sebeok, J.
(Eds.) The Semiotic Web 1989, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 639–662.
Sonea, S. (1995). Oui, les bactérie communiquent! Débats Sémiotiques 1 (1), 24–37.
Sonea, S., Panisset, M. (1983). A New Bacteriology. Boston: Jones and Bartlett.
Thom, R. (1975). Structural Stability and Morphogenesis. Reading: W. A. Benjamin.
Thomson, T. A. (1927). Review of J. von Uexküll, Theoretical Biology. Journal of Philosophical
Studies 2 (7), 413–419.
Uexküll, J. von (1973 [1920, 1928]). Theoretische Biologie. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp. [English trans.
by D. L. Mackinnon, Theoretical Biology. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner, 1926].
Uexküll, J. von (1982). The Theory of Meaning. In: von Uexküll, T. (Ed.) Semiotica 42 (1),
1–87.

236
Thomas A. Sebeok (1920–2001)
Uexküll, J. von (1992). A Stroll Through the Worlds of Animal and Men. In: von Uexküll, T. (Ed.)
Semiotica 89 (4), 273–391.
Uexküll, T. von (1982). Semiotics and medicine. Semiotica 38 (3/4), 205–215.
Uexküll, T. von (1986). Medicine and semiotics. Semiotica 61 (3/4), 201–217.
Uexküll, T. von (1987). The sign theory of Jakob von Uexküll. In: Krampen, M. et al. (eds.)
Classics of Semiotics, 147–179. London: Plenum Press.
Uexküll, T. von (1990). Introduction to Models and Methods in Biosemiotics. Unpublished
Manuscript.
Uexküll, T. von (1991). Die Bedeutung der Biosemotik für die Medizin. Münchener medizinische
Wochenschrift 133 (41), 601–602.
Uexküll, T. von (1992). Varieties of semiosis. In: Sebeok, T. A., Umiker-Sebeok, J. (Eds.)
Biosemiotics: The Semiotic Web 1991, 455–470.
Uexküll, T. von (1997). Biosemiose. In: Posner, R., Robering, K., Sebeok, T. A. (Eds.) Semiotics:
A Handbook on the Sign-Theoretic Foundations of Nature and Culture, vol. 1. Berlin: Walter
de Gruyter, pp. 447–457.
Uexküll, T. von (1998). Jakob von Uexküll’s Umweltlehre. In: Posner, R., Robering, K., Sebeok,
T. A. (Eds.) vol. 2, 2183–2191.
Uexküll, T. von, Geigges, W., Herrman, J. M. (1993). Endosemiotics. Semiotica 96 (1/2), 5–51.
van der Vijver, G. et al. (Eds.) (1998). Evolutionary Systems: Biological and Epistemological
Perspectives on Selection and Self-Organization. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic.
Whitley, R. (1984). The Intellectual and Social Organization of the Sciences. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
Yates, F. E. (1985). Semiotics as bridge between information (biology) and dynamics (physics).
Recherches Sémiotiques/Semiotic Inquiry 5, 347–360.
Yates, F. E. (1997). Microsemiosis. In: Posner, R., Robering, K., Sebeok, T. A. (Eds.) Semiotics: A
Handbook on the Sign-Theoretic Foundations of Nature and Culture, vol. 1. Berlin: Walter de
Gruyter, pp. 457–464.

Chapter 7
The Clever Hans Phenomenon from an Animal
Psychologist’s Point of View
Heini K.P. Hediger (1908–1992)
Introduction and Commentary: Heini K.P. Hediger
My childhood dream, my lifelong wish, would have been fulﬁlled if it had really been
possible to converse with animals.
H. Hediger (1985: 177)
Swiss zoologist Heini K.P. Hediger (1908–1992), is the second historical ﬁgure
named in Thomas A. Sebeok’s review of the “three successive twentieth-century
iterations of biosemiotics” prior to the one that Sebeok himself initiated. “One of
the sundry riddles that mar the gradual coming into view of modern biosemiotics,”
writes Sebeok, “is the neglect of Heini Hediger, whose lifelong attempt to under-
stand animals surely marked a milestone in the elucidation of this domain, providing
it with a particularly beneﬁcial empirical footing” (2001: 66).
Born in Basel, Switzerland on November 30, 1908, Hediger would later recount
that his early fascination with animals included, by age six, a self-collected
menagerie of “sea anemones, ﬁsh, snakes, owls, a fox, an opposum, and a slow
loris” (1969: 145). His obsessive attention to the behavior of these animals, and
the incessant growth of this menagerie, writes Hediger “was negatively correlated
with my success at school” (ibid). Still, it was clear to him that the study of zoology
was his life’s passion, and Hediger went on to excel at his studies of zoology, botany,
psychology and ethnology at the University of Basel’s Zoological Institute under the
tutelage of zoologist and interdisciplinan Adolf Portman (1897–1982) from 1927 to
1932. During this time, Hediger also undertook zoological ﬁeld work in Morocco,
Papau New Guinea, and the Solomon Islands, where he discovered several new
species – and even a new genus – of reptiles, this latter being the Melanesian coral
snake Parapistocalamus hedigeri.
What intrigued him most on these expeditions, however, were the related phe-
nomena of territorial marking and the ﬂight distances involved in the escape
behavior in ﬁddler crabs. Hediger’s 1934 paper on these phenomena, “Zur
Biologie und Psychologie der Flucht bei Tieren”, helped pioneer the then newly
emerging ﬁeld of animal ethology (along with his then-unknown colleagues
Konrad Lorenz and Nikolass Tinbergen, with whom Hediger maintained an active
scientiﬁc correspondence for many years, as well as with Jakob von Uexküll, whose
237
D. Favareau, Essential Readings in Biosemiotics, Biosemiotics 3,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9650-1_7, C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010

238
Heini K.P. Hediger (1908–1992)
Umweltforschung was an early inﬂuence upon, and inspiration to, him). Indeed,
Hediger generally credited as the starting-point of the scientiﬁc investigation into
animal and human proxemics.
Notes Estonian zoologist and biosemiotican Aleksei Turovski: “It is hard to
believe in our time, but it seems that Heini Hediger really was the ﬁrst zoologist
who realized that there is no such thing as an animal that is ‘free’ in the anthro-
pomorphic sense: ‘The wild animal does not live in freedom: neither in space, nor
as regards its behaviour towards other animals’ wrote Hediger ([1950] 1964: 13).
Rather, animals in the wild are ‘bound by space and time, by sex and social status’”
(1985: 158). Accordingly, neuropsychologists Graziano and Cooke (2006) note that
“Hediger’s work on the ﬂight zone led directly to the concept of personal space
in humans” – citing anthopologist Edward T. Hall’s work on interactional propin-
quity (1963) as well as cognitive scientist J.J. Gibson’s ecological approach to visual
perception (1979) and, by extension, to the neurobiological research on the spatial-
coding areas of the pre-motor cortex that led to the eventual discovery of “mirror
neurons” in primates (Fogassi et al. 1992, 1996).
Yet while Hediger found zoological ﬁeld work much to his liking – it allowed
him to ﬁnance and to add to his ever-growing private menagerie, for one thing (1984:
150) – he was equally, if not more, passionate about studying the behavior of wild
animals in captivity – most notably, in circuses and zoos. Thus, after receiving his
doctorate and working as a lecturer at the University of Basel Zoological Institute
under his mentor Adolf Portman from 1932 to 1937, Hediger was ﬁnally awarded
the directorship of a small zoo in Dählhözli, Bern, where he would work for the next
seven years (1937–1944), before going on to serve as the director of the Basel Zoo,
and then the Zürich Zoo, for the following 30 years (1944–1954, and 1954–1974,
respectively).
At Bern, Hediger’s work overseeing every aspect of zoo management, while
simultaneously collecting detailed observations of the day-to-day behavior of
its wide variety of animals, resulted in the publication of his most famous
book, Wildtiere in Gefangenscaft: Ein Grundriss der Tiergartenbiologie, in 1942.
Translated into English in 1950 as Wild Animals in Captivity: An Outline of Zoo
Biology, this book established the ﬁeld of zoobiology as a scientiﬁc discipline, and
became known as “the zoo Bible” for zookeepers around the world (Hediger 1985:
151). Subsequently, Hediger traveled around the world as a consultant for the design
and management of zoos and aquariums, and accepting commissions from the gov-
ernments of Brazil, India, Switzerland and Australia for overseeing the planning
and management of ever more naturalistic, humane and animal-friendly aquariums
and zoos.
It was during the course of these travels that Hediger, while touring the
zoos of the United States in 1951, visited the Yerkes Laboratories of Primate
Biology, where psychologists Keith and Catherine Hayes were attempting to
teach a chimpanzee, Viki, how to use human language. Over the course of the
next three decades, Hediger would go on to meet and to observe the experi-
ments of virtually all of the major researchers involved in such projects to teach
apes to use human language – i.e., Roger Fouts, Robert Allen and Beatrice
Gardner, Francine Patterson, Duane and Sue-Savage Rumbaugh – yet, in every

7
The Clever Hans Phenomenon from an Animal Psychologist’s Point of View
239
instance, it was clear to him that the researcher’s animal subjects were not
actually “learning language” so much as they were learning how to detect and
respond appropriately to the wealth of facial, postural, and other non-verbal signals
that their trainers were communicating to them, unaware of their own doing so.
Himself exquisitely attuned to the micro-communicative nature of nonverbal
body movements and meaningful display behavior that animals rely on in their inter-
actions with one another – and with the humans who interact with them in circuses
and zoos – Hediger, like the chimpanzees, could see that it was the inadvertant sig-
naling behavior of the researchers, and not “human language” that was successfully
being learned in these experiments. Hediger’s professional expertise regarding the
“micro-semiotics” of human-animal interaction placed him in the orbit of Thomas
A. Sebeok, whose own inquiry into the more general phenomena of “zoosemiotics”
amongst all living organisms was just taking shape in 1964.
Sebeok and Hediger maintained a decades-long friendship, and Sebeok’s last
single-authored monograph was an homage to Hediger and his work (Sebeok
2001a). Recounting their time together visiting zoos and circuses around the world,
Sebeok observes that Hediger’s “powers of observation and their subtlety far
exceeded mine, and he taught me many things about applied biosemiotics which
I could never have learned on my own”, and concludes of Hediger that “overall, his
legacy is a many-sided, profuse research program for biosemiotics that can easily
extend for several generations ahead” (2001a: 36).
Hediger died at his home in Basel, Switzerland in 1992. His name remains
famous among zoo managers and zoo designers, and each year the International
World Association of Zoos and Aquariums awards its highest award in the ﬁeld
of zoo conservation – the Heini Hediger Award to individuals who have rendered
outstanding service to the zoo and aquarium community.
The selection with which Hediger is represented here is from a conference con-
vened at the New York Academy of Sciences in 1981 by Thomas A. Sebeok and the
psychologist Robert Rosenthal, arising out of their mutual interest in the processes
of non-verbal communication and the effects that such inadvertent signaling by
experimenters upon their subjects may play in the skewing of experimental results.
Entitled The Clever Hans Phenomenon: Communication with Horses, Whales, Apes
and People, the conference was inspired by the increasing number of laboratory
studies claiming to have successfully taught chimpanzees to communicate using
human language, if only in a primitive form.
Present at this conference were some of the major “ape language trainers” of the
time, including Herbert S. Terrace and Duane and Sue-Savage Rumbaugh. However,
as the title of the conference indicates, most of the scientists attending were scepti-
cal of these “animal language-training” claims, and the majority of the conference
was instead dedicated to the investigation of the very genuine semiotic (and not
linguistic) phenomena underlying the “Clever Hans effect” in animal training and
experiment.
The “Clever Hans” of the conference title was, of course, der Kluge Hans, the
celebrated “thinking horse” of retired schoolteacher and horse trainer Wilhelm von
Osten, who toured around Germany at the turn of the twentieth century, exhibiting

240
Heini K.P. Hediger (1908–1992)
the horse’s apparent ability to understand German, tell the time, read the calen-
dar, and do mathematical operations such as multiplication and division. Von Osten
did not charge for these performances, and genuinely believed that he had trained
the horse to reason like a human being (a claim that an independent commission
of scientists in 1904 likewise concluded to be the case). Thus, if Hans was asked
to calculate the division of 132 by 12, he would tap out the answer “11” with his
foot; if Hans was shown a watch and asked what time it was, he would correctly
tap out ﬁrst the hour, then the minute. In 1907, however, comparative biologist and
psychologist Oskar Pfungst demonstrated conclusively that Hans’s “reasoning abil-
ities” consisted, in every case, in the horse’s attunement to the non-verbal and often
unconscious facial, postural and muscular signals that von Osten was exhibiting
at the moment that the tap corresponding to the correct answer appeared – at which
point the horse would immediately stop tapping, as doing so was followed invariably
by his reward (Pfungst, 1911 [1965]).
As Sebeok notes of this affair, the 1904 Hans Commission made the initial mis-
take of “looking for, in the horse, what they should have looked for in the man” –
or, more precisely from the biosemiotic point of view, “looking for in the destina-
tion what they should have looked for in the source” of the sign exchange that was
occurring between von Osten and Hans (Sebeok 1980: 417).
As an animal enthusiast since childhood, and a professional zoologist his entire
adult life, Heini Hediger was well aware of the fact that “concerning sensory organi-
zation, we humans are very often strongly underprivileged as compared with many
animals, who also enjoy a much shorter reaction time” (1981: 8). Accordingly, ani-
mals are often far better able to detect and correctly act upon the signs that we
are unwittingly sending them, than we are able to detect and correctly act upon
the signs that they are sending us. Animal training – in circuses, in zoos, and, per-
haps, unknowingly, in experiments such as those conducted by the ape “language
teachers” – consists almost entirely in setting up such a reliable system of human-to-
animal signs, argues Hediger here. Untangling the mystery of animal intelligence,
Hediger insisted, demands a rigorous examination into the animal’s organization of
signs (1985: 177).
At the time of the following selection’s writing, Hediger, at 74 years of age,
had personally visited countless zoos and circuses, and had visited almost all of the
major “ape language” trainers and their primate “language learners” (i.e., Washoe,
Lana, Sherman and Austin, Koko, and Viki) to date. Yet while admitting that his
“childhood dream, [his] lifelong wish, would have been fulﬁlled if it had really been
possible to converse with animals” (1985: 177), Hediger concluded from these visits
that, for these researchers, the central lesson of the Clever Hans affair, regarding the
relationship between selective seeing and self-delusion, has still not been learned. In
this sense, “compared with all his critics,” writes Hediger, quoting Pfungst, “Clever
Hans was the superior observer” (1981: 19).

7
The Clever Hans Phenomenon from an Animal Psychologist’s Point of View
241
The Clever Hans Phenomenon from an Animal
Psychologist’s Point of View (1981)
It is certainly a unique and highly unusual event for The New York Academy of
Sciences to dedicate a conference to a horse named Clever Hans, which lived in
Germany, in Berlin, about 75 years ago.
If Clever Hans were still alive, according to his admirers’ conviction, he would
undoubtedly feel very honored, for they believed ﬁrmly “that an animal can think
in human way and can express human ideas in human language.” This is literally
the declaration made in 1914 by one of the authoritative experts, the psychia-
trist Gustav Wolff from Basel (Wolff 1914). The amazing fact is that today again
there are numerous people who, based on other observations, would sign this same
declaration.
Not only did uninformed people have this opinion on Clever Hans, but also
prominent scholars, scientists, psychologists, psychiatrists, medical doctors, and
many others (Hediger 1967, 1974, Sebeok 1979a).
What had happened? In the year 1904 it was reported that in Berlin the
retired schoolteacher Wilhelm von Osten had succeeded in producing evidence that
animals – for the time being, horses – could think, talk, and calculate if instructed
by the right method. The method invented by Herr von Osten consisted of giving a
number to each letter of the alphabet. This association between letter and number
the horse had to learn by means of a blackboard.
By tapping the right number with a front hoof on a board mounted in front of him
the horse could combine letters into words, words into sentences and so express his
thoughts. Through this tapping method the front leg of the horse became a kind of
a speaking organ. For each correct answer the horse was awarded with a delicacy.
Thomas A. Sebeok, on whose initiative this conference was organized, has described
this method and its history very extensively (Sebeok 1979a); so I do not need to enter
into this in detail.
Clever Hans, who at the time drew worldwide attention, was the ﬁrst and most
famous of the thinking animals. Soon he was to be followed by others, not only
horses, but also dogs and cats. By 1937 there were already over 70 of these so-
called thinking animals (Koehler 1937). Since then their number has continued to
rise, and allegedly dialogues have been set up with many more representatives of
the animal world, in America with dolphins and apes especially.
I would like to conﬁne myself to try to present the Clever Hans phenomenon in
a larger sense from the standpoint of an animal psychologist. Above all there are
three basic biological phenomena which in this connection I feel are important to
consider. They are:
(1) The age-old burning desire of mankind to take up language contact with
animals, that is, to understand the language of animals.
(2) The assimilation tendency, that is, the deep-rooted tendency present in all higher
living beings – man included – to see in creatures of a different species, with

242
Heini K.P. Hediger (1908–1992)
whom there exists a certain familiarity, creatures of their own kind and to treat
them accordingly.
(3) The catalytic effect from human being to animal, which can often be extremely
strong.
The history of man–animal relationships has been almost completely neglected
by modern behavioral research, but I think it might be useful to consider some
experiences of practical men who live in direct contact with a variety of animals
not only in scientiﬁc laboratories but also in zoos and circuses.
If we want to understand higher animals we remain widely dependent on their
speciﬁc ways of communication and on the interpretation of their expression. To my
knowledge up to this day an actual conversation on the basis of a real language has
not yet been established.
To begin with, it is important that we recognize objectively the before-mentioned
general, intensive, and ancient desire, for it represents a very essential source of
mistakes not only in the matter of animal language, but also in animal experi-
ments generally. In behavior research the well-known proverb, “He who searches
will ﬁnd,” plays an important and often crucial role.
I see a certain relationship between the placebo effect in Medicine and what
Robert Rosenthal (1966) in such an impressive way described as the Experimenter’s
Expectancy in behavior studies. Just as a patient feels a strong effect from nothing,
an experimenter may read a positive result or induce such in the behavior of an ani-
mal. Experiments certainly do not always take an objective course in the sense that
one stimulus of a known quality and quantity releases a corresponding objectively
measurable reaction.
In other words, it depends on what sender and receiver make of a stimulus or a
sign; sometimes as much is made of it as the satisfaction of the wishes requires. In
this respect, greatest signiﬁcance should be given to semiotics, especially zoosemi-
otics, for it endeavors to examine all possible channels of communication as they
have been enumerated by Sebeok in 1976 (Sebeok 1976).
Communication, as it preoccupies us here in connection with the Clever Hans
phenomenon, is not only a series of ﬂow-processes between a chemical substance
and a subject; it is a much more complex connection between the experimenter and
the animal.
In many animal experiments, whether psychological or physiological, the effect
of the design of the apparatus, of the laboratory, the atmosphere, in short, the whole
envelope in which the signs (stimuli) work, is often neglected. One believes in deal-
ing with only one relationship, one channel of communication between the animal
and the experimenter, that is to say, the ofﬁcial one. In reality there are complex bun-
dles of relationships, of channels. An animal experiment does not begin only when
the animal starts in the training apparatus. In a certain sense it starts by planning,
with the invention of the design of the experiment. It will be cut out for the animal
in a speciﬁcally human way of thinking, based on the posing of the question; and,
in addition, the animals are selected in this sense.
As often with the study of man–animal relationships, the conditions of the cir-
cus can be helpful since we have to do with big animals, with wide swinging

7
The Clever Hans Phenomenon from an Animal Psychologist’s Point of View
243
movements, and acoustic effects, which means with conspicuous signs in a typi-
cal surrounding. Despite their importance, the micro-signs manifesting themselves
there too will be ignored for the time.
When a group of lions on pedestals are to “sit up,” the trainer in front of them, in
a bent or kneeling position, will give the command and get up with corresponding
stimulating calls and, with stretched out arms, will raise stick and whip way up.
If the same animal tamer with the same movements and calls puts himself in
front of a group of free-living lions, which, for example, he might encounter in a
national park in East Africa, his behavior will induce a general ﬂight reaction. Why?
The drastic difference is illuminating: The circus lions are trained and understand
the signs given by their master. Free-living lions, however, have no such intimate
relationship with man. Like practically all wild animals in nature, they see in him
just an enemy, their main enemy from whom they have to run away.
On one and the same stimulus, on identical signs, the two lion groups react
in a basically different way according to their individual experience, depending
on what man has invested or not invested in them. A free-living untamed and
untrained animal reacts completely differently from one well-adapted to the exper-
imental situation, regardless of whether the animal is lion, ape, horse, parrot, rat,
or even planaria. This is due not only to the training invested, but also even more
to the increased comprehension possibilities and better developed communication
channels reached during the close contact with man.
Clever Hans represents an excellent example of these facts: A wild horse or
even an ordinary domestic horse does not pay attention to human movements that
barely consist of one millimeter, as Oskar Pfungst has shown (Pfungst 1907). It is
only on the basis of extraordinary familiarity between Clever Hans and his master,
gained during the course of teaching, that the horse became able to interpret as deci-
sive signs movements of the head of his master of even one-ﬁfth of a millimeter
deﬂection.
I would like to emphasize again the importance of familiarity between man and
animal. It may ﬂuctuate between 0 and 100%. The free-living animal knows only
the ﬂight reaction to an approaching man. The other extreme is absolute tameness,
the lack of any ﬂight-tendency that results from a generation-long domestication
or what has lately been labeled “laboratorization,” or from individual taming and
training.
We humans are still much biased by the idea that all animals of a given species
are equal, in a way, stereotype ﬁgures right out of a textbook of Zoology, ﬁxed
genetically to the last detail. In my opinion this is a naive and simpliﬁed concept
to which we should no longer adhere. Through the catalytic effect of man, surpris-
ing changes and an increase in behavior may be caused which surpass by far the
genetically given ethogram of a species.
I would like to remind us of the famous wolf “Poldi,” which as a young animal
was trapped in the wilds and trained by an Austrian police ofﬁcer, Rudolf Knapp, to
become a police dog (Knapp 1936).
The Swiss National Circus shows a white rhino (Ceratotherium simum) that was
caught in the South African bush as a young animal and which after a few months
showed its astonishing acts in front of thousands of people and this in the glare of

244
Heini K.P. Hediger (1908–1992)
spotlights and to the sound of blaring music. It also may be freely guided through
dense city trafﬁc.
In its original African homeland this rhino, “Ceyla,” knew only one reaction
towards man and this was the ﬂight reaction. Other relations to man were nonexis-
tent, but these relations changed to the maximum degree, that is, to perfect tameness
and trainedness. Today man is its intimate friend, its socially superior companion to
whose tiny signs the rhino reacts with great attention and reliability. In a certain
sense Ceyla is no longer simply a zoological rhino. Enormous human inﬂuence has
been invested in it.
The famous chimpanzee, “Washoe,” was also born in the African jungle and
within a short time reached the highest level of animal–man relationship, a level
at which it is believed that even a certain conversation becomes possible. Through
the catalytic effects of man extraordinary latencies have been activated in Washoe
similar as in “Sarah,” “Lana,” “Koko,” and others. All these surprising activities
would never have manifested themselves in the wild.
By visualizing how tremendous the difference of habitat is in which Washoe was
born in Africa and of the one in which she later received her language training
in America, it will become obvious how very much the animal, its surroundings,
the stimuli to which it is exposed have been changed. The whole communication
system has been altered. The answers we receive from such an animal must be quite
different from those of a free-living chimpanzee.
The biologist and biophilosopher Bernard Rensch in 1973 states:
While the imporant experiments of the Gardeners and the Premacks show that Chimpanzees
to a certain degree may replace words by the use of ASL or plastic ﬁgures as symbols these
are in fact results which could only be reached through man capable of speaking. In nature
nothing similar of human language has ever evolved in Chimpanzees, Gorillas and Orang
Utans (Rensch 1973).
In other words, with all animals with which we try to enter into conversation
we do not deal with primary animals but with anthropogenous animals, so-to-speak
with artifacts, and we do not know how much of their behavior may still be labeled
as animal behavior and how much, through the catalytic effect of man, has been
manipulated into the animal. This is just what we would like to know. Within this
lie the alpha and omega of practically all such animal experiments since Clever
Hans.
I have the impression that we biologists ﬁnd ourselves in a situation correspond-
ing to the atomic physicists from whom we have to learn so much lately. It has been
discovered that as soon as single atoms are observed their reactions are inﬂuenced.
Of course it is a long way from the atom to a living being, a horse or a chimpanzee.
However, if the simplest thing, the atom, is inﬂuenced in its behavior through the
human observer, how much more must we suppose then that two living subjects
inﬂuence each other through observation.
Maybe it is a general law that through observation the observed will be altered.
However, we do not want to indulge in speculations, but it may be certain that every
animal experiment – not only the ones concerning language – represents a relation

7
The Clever Hans Phenomenon from an Animal Psychologist’s Point of View
245
between two living subjects and not simply a relation between a subject and an
object whose behavior could be registered objectively. This means that in an animal
experiment we have to work not with pure unaltered animal behavior, but always
with the behavior of the animal plus the inﬂuence of the human observer.
Now, does that mean that we should resign because it is not possible to ﬁnd
out pure animal behavior anyway? Certainly not. We are given the urgent duty to
understand the nature of the manifold signs and their mutual alteration ﬂowing
between the sender and the receiver. We can do this best by using the methods
of zoo semiotics established by Sebeok in 1963 (Sebeok 1976: 57). To this complex
belong, for example, the problems of intensive wishing, the mechanism of looking,
and so forth.
The closer – in the spatial and psychological sense – the experimenter and the
animal ﬁnd themselves the greater is the danger of mutual inﬂuence. Oskar Pfungst
(1907: 49) has found a close relationship between the performances of Clever
Hans and the distance of his master. Therefore, Otto Koehler, in 1937 already the
senior of most prominent of European animal psychologists has demanded with
emphasis:
During the experiment every contact between experimenter and animal has to be strictly
avoided. The animal has to decide absolutely free. Experimenters who are not willing or
who are not able to fulﬁll these conditions have to be eliminated harshly. (Koehler 1937: 24)
In his classical investigations on the counting ability of different birds – which
reaches the number seven – Koehler himself had set a good example. During
the critical experiments the animals were observed from an insulated side-room
through the view-ﬁnder of a hidden camera. During the experiments with his
famous raven, “Jakob”, Koehler disappeared from the grounds altogether and read
a book or held his lecture in order to exclude even a telepathic inﬂuence (Koehler
1943).
Further – repulsed by the nonsense with Clever Hans – Koehler demanded that
the experimenter should not wish a deﬁnite result. Literally he explained: “Who
believes in advance what in reality he could only read out of experimental results,
he who does not criticize himself and can not take criticism of others does not do
research but he deceives himself” (Koehler 1937: 21). This was exactly the case
with Clever Hans.
I do not want to enter into the other precautions demanded by Koehler. But I
doubt whether the active scientists who do research on animal language do adhere
to the two above-mentioned basic demands of Koehler.
I would like to quote here the Oxford zoologist, Sir Alister Hardy: “Again and
again faulty conclusions have been reached because the worker has been unwittingly
inﬂuenced by an ardent desire for particular results” (Hardy 1965).
It is not easy to explain such an effect. However, with regard to big animals an
approach may be found. To this I would like to mention a kind of reverse situation
of the zoo where the lack of an intense desire led to failure. By chance I became
a witness of an interesting dialogue between an experienced elephant-keeper and
a beginner who complained very seriously that the elephants would not obey his

246
Heini K.P. Hediger (1908–1992)
orders although he gave them exactly as he was instructed. The old keeper’s typical
explanation was:
You should not – simply stand there, give orders and move accordingly, but you
must participate with your whole inner strength. With all your energy you must want
what the elephants should do. You must have the strong will that they do what you
order them to do.
For every circus animal tamer this is a clear fact.
From this simple zoo or circus experience I believe we can draw two con-
clusions: First, through the strong inner effort the human expression and accom-
panying movements, which have been presented and analyzed so brilliantly by
Paul Ekman (Ekman et al. 1972), Erving Goffman (Goffman 1971), and oth-
ers, are enormously intensiﬁed. Second, we have to take into consideration that
many animals – elephants also – are excellent observers, often extremely skillful
interpreters of the human expression.
To this observation with elephants I would like to add a short remark on a series of
preliminary experiments which I made many years ago at the Zoo in Basel. It deals
with the chimpanzee, “Max,” and his keeper Carl Stemmler who at the time were
very popular personalities in Basel. Stemmler had taught his adolescent chimpanzee
a few simple tricks, so-called obedience exercises, which mainly served to establish
and to secure for the future as long as possible the social superiority of man. One
goal of these rather primitive experiments was to test whether any evidence of verbal
understanding could be established by giving Max the orders through a loudspeaker
while his master was invisible.
The chimp showed that he understood the orders but he would not execute them
when his master was not to be seen. When he was present, mute, and made the
normal accompanying movements while the orders came from the loudspeaker, Max
would obey as if Mr. Stemmler would give the orders personally.
Certainly we do not want to attach an exaggerated signiﬁcance to these old and
crude pilot experiments. However, this much we may conclude from them: They
demonstrate the overall signiﬁcance of the gesture, the expression, that is, of the
nonverbal communication during close contact between animal and man. They also
show that it is a “multichannel” communication, that each channel has its own
speciﬁc properties, and that their interaction creates possibilities, the number of
which is greater than the sum of the possibilities of each channel taken separately
as Sebeok puts it (Sebeok 1976: 78) in connection with the work of Bar-Hillel.
In view of the Clever Hans phenomenon, this evidence may not be emphasized
enough.
Last year in a Swiss circus I talked with a Polish animal tamer, Mrs. Krystina
Terlikowska, who worked with four female tigers and three female lions. Mrs.
Terlikowska, an analphabetist who has practiced this profession since she was 8
years old, says that the most important part of her present activity was to talk with
the animals. This indeed is a very old and proven recipe for all who have to work
with big animals.
By speaking, our expression is activated and enriched. It is of course not the
speciﬁc language nor the single words that matter but the facial expression, the

7
The Clever Hans Phenomenon from an Animal Psychologist’s Point of View
247
intonation, the sound intensity, the posture, the movements, and maybe the color
of our face, the thermal pattern of our skin, even the smell which changes from
moment to moment, and many other factors that we do not know yet, channels not
yet investigated.
As is well known, we humans lack, for example, the ability to perceive ultra-
sonic sound and ultraviolet light. We lack the sense of magnetism, a very ﬁne sense
of vibration and temperature, a sense for polarized light, and so on, and so forth.
Concerning the sensory organization, we humans are very often strongly underpriv-
ileged as compared with many animals, which also enjoy a much shorter reaction
time. We have nothing by far to compare with the whiskers and the ear-pouches of
cats and so on.
In order to emphasize the signiﬁcance of our nonverbal communication with
animals I would like to mention an observation which in 1979 was made in a
well-known private zoo in the Netherlands, in Burger’s Animal Park in Arnheim.
Dr. Frans de Waal has given a detailed report (de Waal 1980) of which the author
has conﬁrmed every word personally.
According to this observation it was possible to teach a chimpanzee mother,
“Kuif,” who never was able to raise her own young, to give a milk bottle to a
foreign young chimpanzee called “Roosie” and to raise it successfully. The whole
instruction of the mother was given through the bars of her cage by showing her
the necessary actions and by continuous repetition of six words or orders like: raise
the bottle, give it to Roosje, hold the bottle tight, hold it a bit higher, stop (take the
bottle out of the mouth), and return the bottle. After only three weeks of instruction
through the bars of the cage one dared to trust the stepmother with the baby who, up
to now, had been raised artiﬁcally by human caretakers. The raising by the chimp
succeeded perfectly. Later on, the stepmother was able to provide her adopted child
partly with her own milk.
This is the ﬁrst time that such an astonishing experience with bottle feeding
through an animal was realized. It shows how effective communication between
man and animal can be. This marvelous performance of the stepmother was reached
within the short period of 3 weeks and without an artiﬁcial language – only through
the demonstration and through the spontaneous manifestations of her attendants.
This amazing act of training causes one to ponder the manifold efforts of several
researchers to enter into language contact, into a dialogue with apes. The chim-
panzee Kuif did not answer with any language signs but by correctly tending the
bottle to Roosje. With this doubtlessly she conﬁrms that she understood the human
instructions in every detail.
In principle, I recognize here performances similar to those in some language
experiments. In each case the chimpanzees were demonstrated the desired actions
with the hope that they would react in a certain way. With Kuif it was the correct
handling of the bottle; with Washoe, Sarah, Lana, and so forth, it is the production of
certain signs in which we would like to see a language. But how can we prove that
such answers are to be understood as elements of a language, and that they are not
only reactions to certain orders and expression, in other words simply performances
of training?

248
Heini K.P. Hediger (1908–1992)
When an outside observer follows and tries to understand the signaling of a
chimpanzee trained in American Sign Language (ASL), he has great difﬁculty
in distinguishing preparative from conclusive movements, especially since these
movements succeed each other very rapidly. The noninitiated person has a hard time
deciding where the preparing movement stops and where the real signal starts and
ends, for each signal is embedded seamlessly into another movement (e.g., ﬂower,
bug, dirty).
I do not doubt that Washoe and other chimps have learned a number of signs in
the sense of ASL. But it seems to me that a better clariﬁcation could be reached
mainly through the introduction of the orders “repeat” and “hold it.” By this the
chimpanzee could show that he really understands the single elements and does
not execute fast, sweeping movements into which one possibly could read such
elements.
With trained animals and animals in the process of being trained – which is
quite a different matter – there exists a general tendency not to react in single,
self-contained elements but in sequences. In the circus many animal tamers have
gotten into embarrassment or even danger of life through this. I am referring to
the phenomenon of anticipation. This fact is also known in connection with dog
training. Within a tiger group, for example, it may happen that a certain tiger
starts the next trick (e.g., jumping through a hoop) before the animal tamer has
been able to put into safety the other tigers, that is, to bring them back to their
seats. Because of this, dangerous contacts and aggressive conﬂicts may occur in
the manege, which not infrequently lead to catastrophes. With dogs this undesired
anticipation of orders is mostly more harmless. It is caused by an extremely ﬁne
interpretation of the expression of the clog’s master. The dog then executes an
order before it has been given ofﬁcially to him. Are we sure that the possibility
of anticipation can be absolutely excluded in language experiments with trained
apes? In this situation it may easily make the impression of a spontaneous utter-
ance. There are so many and different pitfalls when you try to interpret animal
behavior.
Thomas A. Sebeok (1979b) recently has reminded us of the memorable story of
the famous Russian physiologist Ivan Pavlov and his assistant Studentsov. By posing
the same problem to ﬁve consecutive generations of mice, the two believed they had
proved correct the Lamarckian theory of inheritance of learned behavior. As they
expected, each generation needed fewer sessions for the mice to master their task.
The original number decreased from 300 to 100, 30, 10, and 5.
It was discovered later, however, that the improvement of performance was
apparent only and was by no means based on inheritance. What had improved
was the treatment of the mice by the experimenter. This is by no means the only
experiment by which Lamarck’s theory was to be evidenced.
Let me brieﬂy mention the well-known experiment of William McDougall who,
similar to Pavlov, also tried to prove the inheritance of effects of training. This time
no less than 23 generations of rats were used. Interestingly enough, McDougall was
absolutely aware of his possible wishful thinking as Sir Alister Hardy (1965) points
out by literally quoting McDougall’s apprehension in the following way:

7
The Clever Hans Phenomenon from an Animal Psychologist’s Point of View
249
In this connection it is necessary to avow that, during the course of the experi-
ment, there grew up in all of us a keen interest in, I think I must in fairness say, a
strong desire for, positive results. From the ﬁrst it was obvious that a positive result
would be more striking, would excite more interest in the biological world, than
a negative one. And when indications of a positive result began to appear, it was
but human nature to desire that this result should appear as clearly cut and positive
as possible. Further, on my own part, there was a feeling that a clear-cut positive
result would go far to render tenable a theory of organic evolution, while a negative
result would leave us in the Cimmerian darkness in which Neo-Darwinism ﬁnds
itself.
I was conscious, therefore, of a strong bias in favor of a positive result, and
throughout I was consciously struggling against the temptation to condone or pass
over any detail of procedure that might unduly favour a positive result. Such details
are encountered at every point, more especially in the breeding of the animals. To
have disguised from on self this bias, to have pretended that we were superior to
such human weakness, would have been dangerous in the extreme. The only safe-
guards against its inﬂuence were the frank avowal of it and unremitting watchfulness
against it. I can conceive of no task that could make greater demands upon the scien-
tiﬁc honesty of the worker, and it is in part this demand for unremitting watchfulness
that renders the work peculiarly exhausting. I can only say that I believe we have
succeeded in standing upright, and in fact, for myself, I am disposed to believe that
I have leaned over backwards, as we say in America. Whether we have really suc-
ceeded in this, the most difﬁcult part of our task, can only be proved when other
workers shall have undertaken similar experiments. If our results are not valid the
ﬂaw, which has escaped our penetration hitherto, must, I think, be due to some subtle
inﬂuence of this bias (Hardy 1965).
In fact: is there a more conscientious and a more sincere attitude of an exper-
imenter? It is almost identical with the severe commands of Otto Koehler. And
despite all of that McDougall stumbled. Nobody could repeat his important exper-
iment with the same results. Very grave errors had occurred as David Katz
demonstrated in a very interesting chapter with the title “The Clever Hans Error
and Similar Mistakes of Modern Animal Psychology” (Katz 1937).
The essence of McDougall’s experiment consisted-to be brief-in setting the rats
at the starting point of the apparatus in a water channel. From there they had the
possibility to swim towards the left or the right into a dim or glaringly illuminated
channel in order to reach dry grounds. If they chose the glaringly illuminated chan-
nel they received a strong electric shock. If they chose the dimly lit channel they
could reach dry grounds without punishment (Munn 1933).
The rats’ performances improved – with some irregularities – fairly continuously.
The total time of the rats spent in the water dropped from 2320 seconds to less than
half, that is, 1020 seconds in some of the last generations. Astonishingly, the very
last generation was not the best. Its total time in the water had risen again to 1620
seconds. This “anomalous” record for the last generation is according to McDougall,
as quoted by Munn (1933) probably due to the death of an assistant who had been
handling the rats. So there was a change of experimenter.

250
Heini K.P. Hediger (1908–1992)
Of course in such an experiment it depends greatly upon how the rats have been
handled and put into the water. The pretreatment and the starting phase may be
decisive. Today we ﬁnd it normal that the experimenter who puts the animals in
the water at least does not know if he is working with trained rats of the gen-
eration to be tested or with naive control animals. However, David Katz (1937)
to his great astonishment discovered that the experimenter always knew about the
origin of the rats. This is just as big a methodological mistake as is direct con-
tact with the experimental animal. But there were even more and quite different
sources of mistake involved, as Munn (1933) points out, e.g., in the selection of the
animals.
Today by means of numerous experiments it has been proved by Rosenthal
(1966), Timaeus (1974), and others that the way and means how an animal is
brought into the apparatus may greatly inﬂuence the result of the experiment, even
the animal’s past, the intrauterine as well as the postnatal one. Morton in his fas-
cinating paper (Morton 1968) on handling and gentling laboratory animals has,
for example, found that subjects shocked in infancy took longer to respond in an
avoidance learning situation.
In other words: What also matters in evaluating the performances of experimental
behavior is the animal’s past, even in the case of rats. The human inﬂuence on the
behavior of experimental animals may even start before its birth.
More and more I come to the conviction that the results of animal experiments do
not so much depend on the exact sequence and make-up of the experiment itself, but
to a great deal also on the past of the individual animal and on the personal attitude
of the experimenter. These two important facts are very often what conventionally
is neglected most.
Clever Hans is only one example of this but one that should cause us to rethink
the whole experimental situation.
With this I come to Factor 2 of my introduction, to the assimilation tendency,
that is, the anthropomorphizing of the animal through man and the zoomorphizing
of man through the animal. This is not at all a theoretical speculation but a proved
practical experience gained through a huge pile of facts (Hediger 1967, 1974, 1940,
1951, 1965).
If, for example, we ask the gorilla Koko: “Are you an animal or a person?” as it
happened according to Francine Patterson’s report (Patterson 1978), Koko’s answer
could never be authentic if it is, “Fine animal gorilla.” Koko has studied neither
zoology nor anthropology. She cannot distinguish between man and animal as two
different categories of the zoological system. As with each animal she lacks the
notion of species. Therefore she could not know that she belongs to the species
Gorilla gorilla and the human beings surrounding her to Homo sapiens.
According to all we know today about big animals living in close contact with
man we have to assume that Koko, based on her assimilation tendency, sees in her
mistress (for the time being) a superior specimen of her own species, that is another
gorilla. The same stands for the attendants of chimpanzees who at present apply
themselves with language studies. There is no reason to believe that, in this regard,
they behave differently than apes in a zoo where they are in close contact with their
keepers.

7
The Clever Hans Phenomenon from an Animal Psychologist’s Point of View
251
As long as we deal with very young animals everybody probably agrees that, to
the bottle baby, the caring human being is nothing else but its mother, a mother of
the same species. The assimilation tendency to one’s own species here is apparent
and uncontested.
At the zoo the caretaker of adolescent apes as a rule goes through a signiﬁ-
cant change of meaning (Bedeutungswandel in the sense of Uexhill) leading to a
dangerous situation: he becomes to be a social rival. This may lead to dangerous
conﬂicts and to direct attacks on the keeper. Many – probably most – of the zoo acci-
dents have this motivation not only with apes but also with deer, big cats, antelopes,
elephants, and so forth.
In scientiﬁc research institutions, the decades-long experiences of zoological gar-
dens should not be ignored completely. Not all zoos are mere show businesses.
There have always existed a number of zoos – and the Bronx Zoo is one of the lead-
ing – in which scientiﬁc research has been done, in spite of the often chronic lack of
money and personnel, which in all departments necessitates very strict economical
operation.
This gives rise to the following purely practical consideration. If apes really dis-
pose of the great intelligence and the highly developed communication ability that
one has attributed to them lately – why in no case in the zoos of the world, where
thousands of apes live and reproduce, has it been possible to get one to clean his
own cage and to prepare his own food?
As far as I know in all zoological gardens of the world as well as in all Primate
stations people still have to be employed to do these simple jobs of daily life.
Paradoxically in zoos as well as in laboratories Homo sapiens still is the servant
of the ape.
One may argue that apes have no interest in such work, that they have no per-
severance and that they simply do not want to. By all means I do agree with these
arguments for I have always emphasized that one may never conclude incapability
when an animal does not obey an order. There is always the possibility that it has
understood the order but does not want to carry it out. Apes have no notion of work.
We might perhaps teach an ape a sign for work but he will never grasp the human
conception of work.
The world-wide evidence of unwillingness of apes to carry out the simplest
household activities, that obvious disinterest, almost necessarily leads to the ques-
tion as to what interests apes at all. With this we are confronted with the problem as
to how a research program of future efforts should be designed in order to possibly
enter into a dialogue with animals, to lead a conversation with them.
So we try to arrive at a program that makes sense. On what subject may we best
converse with an animal? Unfortunately it is not much: Apes, dolphins, or horses
have no interest at all in things that are of general interest to humans. By this I mean
all that is written in books and the media:
Culture in the broadest sense
Politics, Sports
Business, Finance, Trafﬁc, Technique
Work, Research, and so forth.

252
Heini K.P. Hediger (1908–1992)
What else then remains? Very little it seems to me. Especially when we think that
the animal has no access to the future. It lives entirely in the present time (Hediger
1973). Also the past is mostly out of its reach, except for very recent experiences.
Therefore there remain the essential daily needs, above all metabolism, food and
drink, social and sexual contact, rest and activity, play and comfort, conditions of
environment in connection with the sensations of pleasure and dislike, some objects,
and possibly a few more things. This is indeed rather modest.
Experimenters who try to enter into a conversation with animals should keep this
in mind. Clever Hans has taught us clearly what happens when we force this simple
repertoire with an exaggerated program. It again would lead us to believe that “the
animal can think in a human way and express human thoughts in human language,”
as I have quoted in the beginning.
The work of Oskar Pfungst (1907) on Clever Hans, going back to the year 1907,
has not really given us a satisfactory solution of involuntary signaling. According to
my opinion this problem is far from being solved. Concerning the work of Pfungst
I would like to say the following:
(1) It has remained widely unknown.
(2) It has been almost forgotten.
(3) It is not complete.
(4) It gives rise to important criticism.
(5) It has never been repeated and conﬁrmed.
To the Clever Hans critics, Oskar Pfungst’s work was so welcome and appeared
to be so perfect that they believed it to be 100% right and that they could accept it
forever as such. Here again we have to deal with the basic phenomenon, with the
idea of wishful thinking, with the experimenter’s expectancy, which is central to
every animal experiment and which is so difﬁcult to eliminate.
Pfungst also was an experimenter. He too was obsessed by the wish to reach
positive results, to prove that a horse or any other animal could not think in a human
way and not express human ideas in human language.
He apparently thought he had found evidence that Clever Hans was doing noth-
ing more than watching that famous relaxation jerk of his master when the correct
number of knocks was reached, that involuntary almost microscopic head move-
ment, which could measure 1/5 mm or even less (Pfungst 1907: 120). I do not doubt
this result but I would be much more convinced had it been conﬁrmed at least once.
The work of Pfungst does in fact contain all kinds of curiosities. The greatest
one for me is what he mentions in connection with the so-called laboratory exper-
iments. These are the basis of most of his work and have been carried out in the
Psychological Institute of the University of Berlin. By contrast the other experi-
ments and observations took place in the open, in the courtyard where Clever Hans
normally would perform, or in a tent which occasionally was set up in that courtyard
or in the stable.
In laboratory experiments one generally expects greater precision and more exact
experimental conditions than in a stable or courtyard. In reality, during the so-called

7
The Clever Hans Phenomenon from an Animal Psychologist’s Point of View
253
laboratory experiments a horse was not even present. The role of the horse to be
tested was taken over by Oskar Pfungst himself (Pfungst 1907: 77). You will under-
stand now why I permit myself to speak of curiosities of the Pfungst expertise. This,
however, is not the only one.
On page 123 of his work Pfungst clearly mentions:
With the standing of our knowledge of today all attempted explanations have a more or
less hypothetical character (Bedeutung). Should as a result of further research the herewith
attempted explanation prove to be untenable one would have to take under consideration
abilities yet unknown in the horse’s eye or search for the reason in the brain. Experiments
with other specimens of this genus will have to teach us if all other horses have the same
ability or if some individuals are privileged.
This shows that Pfungst felt insecure and that he demanded a repetition of
his investigations. However, up to now – more than 70 years later – this has
never happened. One did not wish to recognize as questionable or even wrong the
apparently so clear and convincing explanation given by Pfungst, which he him-
self considered to be hypothetical. Again and again desire proves to be the most
powerful factor in an animal experiment. This fact seems to be unchanged even
today.
It is not possible now to consider critically every point of Pfungst’s work.
To me personally the following statement matters most of all. On page 125,
Pfungst conﬁrms that Clever Hans, compared with all his critics, was a superior
observer.
Basically this fact puts the human observer into a very difﬁcult position. As I
have mentioned before, we have to resign ourselves to the fact that many animals,
are far superior to man in terms of their sensory organization. This is true not only
for horses but also for primates, rats, and even many invertebrates, maybe even for
planaria and protozoa like paramecium.
This is of primary importance for assumedly physiological experiments and also,
for example, for the experiments started by James V. McConnell (1968) on the trans-
fer of learned information. From this general situation I can only draw one logical
and biological conclusion: training is always part of all the aforementioned experi-
ments. Training is a most intense relation between animal and man, between animal
and experimenter, and this within an artiﬁcial surrounding which has been imposed
upon the animal.
In an experiment we mostly observe results, which we may regard as proof
of a hypothesis. However, we still know much too little about how these results
have been arrived at, about what has taken place between man and animal during
preparations, and during the critical experiments, in other words, all the different
communication channels.
Since Clever Hans – more than 70 years ago – I fear we have not made much
progress in this regard. Otto Koehler has shown us in an exemplary way how we
may practically exclude man as a source of mistake, but he has never demonstrated
precisely what we want to eliminate thereby, what human inﬂuences.
It is my ﬁrm conviction that there is only one way to clear up this complex
of problems. We have to grasp the phenomenon at its roots; that is, we have to

254
Heini K.P. Hediger (1908–1992)
repeat the Clever Hans experiment from the very beginning under exact laboratory
conditions with the tools of zoosemiotics.
Since here we are primarily interested in direct communication with the ani-
mal, in animal language, I would like to conclude by quoting the British biologist
J.B.S. Haldane (1954). In Paris, 1954, during a lecture at the Sorbonne University
he made the following statement1:
When a child says to his mother, “I am hungry” or “I want to sleep,” he is still
animal. When he says, “This I have done this morning,” he begins to be man.
To my knowledge, up to now, no animal, not even an ape, has ever been able to
talk about a past or a future event.
References
Ekman, P., Friesen, W. V., Ellsworth, P. (1972). Emotion in the Human Face. New York: Pergamon
Press.
Goffman, E. (1971). Relations in Public. New York: Allen Lane, The Penguin Press.
Haldane, J. B. S. (1954). La signalisation animale. L’ Année Biologique 30, 89–98.
Hardy, A. (1965). The Living Stream. A Restatement of Evolution Theory and its Relation to the
Spirit of Man. London: Collins, pp. 156–158.
Hediger, H. (1940). Ueber die Angleichungstendenz bei Tier und Mensch. Die Naturwis-
senschaften 28, 313–315.
Hediger, H. (1951). Grundsätzliches zum tierpsychologischen Test. Ciba-Zeitschrift 11, 4630–
4636.
Hediger, H. (1965). Man as a Social Partner of Animals and vice-versa. Symposium of the
Zoological Society of London 14, 291–300.
Hediger, H. (1967). Verstehens- und Verständigungsmöglichkeiten zwischen Mensch und Tier.
Schweiz. Zs. Psychol. und ihre Answendungen 26, 234–255.
Hediger, H. (1973). Tiere sorgen vor. Manesse Verlag, Conzett & Huber, Zürich, Switzerland.
Hediger, H. (1974). Communication Between Man and Animal. Image Roche 62, 27–40.
Katz, D. (1937). Animals and Men. Studies in Comparative Psychology. New York: Longmans,
Green, p. 7.
Knapp, R. (1936). Poldi, die bosnische Wölﬁn, Pirngruber Linz a. Donau.
Koehler, O. (1937). Die “zählenden” Tauben und die “zahlsprechenden” Hunde. Der Biologe 6,
13–24.
Koehler, O. (1943). Zähl-Versuche an einem Kolkraben und Vergleichsversuche an Menschen.
Z. Tierpsychol. 5, 575–712.
McConnell, J. V. (1968). Biochemie des Gedächtnisses, Med. Prisma 3, 3–21.
Morton, J. R. C. (1968). Effects of Early Experience. “Handling” and “Gentling” in Laboratory
Animals. In: Fox, M. W. (Ed.) Abnormal Behavior in Animals. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders
Company, p. 269.
Munn, N. L. (1933). An Introduction to Animal Psychology. The Behavior of the Rat. Cambridge:
Houghton Mifﬂin Company, Riverside Press, pp. 39, 40.
Patterson, F. (1978). Conversations with a Gorilla. Natl. Geogr. 154, 438–465.
Pfungst, O. (1907). Das Pferd des Herrn von Osten (Der kluge Hans). Joh. Ambrosius Barth,
Leipzig.
1 Quand un enfant dit à sa mère: “J’ai faim”, ou “Je voeux dormir”, i1 est encore animal. Quand
il dit: “Voici ce que j’ai fait ce matin”, il commence à être homme.

7
The Clever Hans Phenomenon from an Animal Psychologist’s Point of View
255
Rensch, B. (1973). Gedächtnis, Begriffsbildung und Planhandlungen bei Tieren. Berlin: Paul Paray,
p. 241.
Rosenthal, R. (1966). Experimenter Effects in Behavioral Research. New York: Appleton.
Sebeok, T. A. (1976). Contributions to the Doctrine of Signs. Bloomington: Indiana University
Press, Lisse: Peter de Ridder Press.
Sebeok, T. A. (1979a). The Sign & Its Masters. Austin, Texas: University of Texas Press.
Sebeok, T. A. (1979b). Looking in the destination for what should have been sought in the Source.
In: Sebeok, T. A. (Ed.) The Sign & Its Masters. Austin, Texas: University of Texas Press,
pp. 85–106.
Timaeus, E. (1974). Experiment und Psychologie. Verlag Hochgrefe Göttingen.
Waal, F. B. M. de (1980). Schimpansin zieht Stiefkind mit der Flasche auf. Tier 20, 28–31.
Wolff, G. (1914). Die denkenden Tiere von Elberfeld und Mannheim. Süddeutsche Monatshefte,
pp. 456–467.

Chapter 8
Phytosemiotics
Martin Krampen (1928– )
Introduction and Commentary: Martin Krampen
There are three levels of meaningful cycles corresponding to the predominance of indexi-
cality, iconicity, and symbolicity, each higher process including also the lower. Indexicality,
on the vegetative level, corresponds to the sensing and regulating, in a feedback cycle, of
meaningful stimulation directly contiguous to the form of the plant. Iconicity, on the animal
level, is produced by the function cycle, with receptor and effector activity representing, in
a nervous system, the ‘image’ of objects. Symbolicity, on the human level, is produced by
perception and action in human society.
M. Krampen (1981: 194)
Although neither a biologist nor a biologist manqué, visual artist and design ana-
lyst Martin Krampen is the author of one of the most seminal “turning-point” texts
in biosemiotics. Phytosemiotics – the selection that is presented here – is invoked
in almost every published overview or introduction to the ﬁeld (e.g., Barbieri 2001,
Deely 1990, Favareau 2007, Kull 2003, Sebeok 2001), and is widely-acknowledged
as the text that expanded the purview of Sebeok’s zoösemiotic project into the
full-blown examination of sign relations pertinent to any living system.
Born on March 9, 1928 in Siegen, Germany, Krampen began his university career
studying psychology, philosophy, and theology at the Universities of Tübingen and
Heidelberg, as well as studying painting and design at the Accademia delle Belle
Arti in Florence, Italy. Having received his diploma in Visual Communication at
the Hochschule für Gestaltung in Ulm, Germany in 1957, Krampen earned his doc-
torate in Communication Arts at Michigan State University in 1962. By 1965, his
professional biography had already read, in part, that:
Professor Krampen has done extensive research and writing for professional journals on
subjects including: world road sign systems, the classiﬁcation of graphic symbols (as part
of a survey commissioned by the Ford Foundation), the perception of apparent movement,
industrial design and industrial organization, and the forgetting and retention of pictorial
material. As a graphic designer, he has worked in book design, magazines, and advertise-
ments. His design projects have ranged from restyling the format of a newspaper (La Sera
di Roma) to planning exhibitions and displays for the United States Information Service,
Westinghouse, and the 1967 Montreal World’s Exhibition. He has won several awards for
typography and his graphic design is represented in the permanent collection of the Museum
of Modern Art, New York (1965: 31).
257
D. Favareau, Essential Readings in Biosemiotics, Biosemiotics 3,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9650-1_8, C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010

258
Martin Krampen (1928– )
Following this period, Krampen taught social psychology, semiotics, and psy-
chology of design at a number of universities in Europe and North America,
and from 1977 until his retirement as a full professor in 1993, taught Visual
Communication at the Hochschule der Künste (formerly: the University of
Gottingen). Since his retirement from teaching, Krampen remained active as an
artist, graphic designer, and researcher (his current research examines the use of
color as a Gestalt element on the Internet). Yet his place in the history of biosemi-
otics became secured with the publication of his 1981 article on phytosemiotics – the
investigation into the use of sign-processes taking place within and between plants.
In the mid-1970s, Krampen’s work on the semiotics of road signs came to the
attention of Thomas A. Sebeok, whose own decade-long investigations into the
semiotics of animal communication by that time had already opened up the ﬁeld of
sign research to include within its purview not only those signs made by humans in
their cultural endeavors (collectively: the species-speciﬁc project of anthroposemio-
sis), but also, thanks to Sebeok’s recent rediscovery of the Umweltlehre of Jakob
von Uexküll, a principled and non-anthropomorphic framework for the inquiry into
animals’ manifold ways of receiving and emitting signs in order to successfully
negotiate the world.
Sebeok christened this latter project zoosemiotics1 in 1963, as by that time he
had come to the conclusion that the practice of “restricting semiotic inquiry to our
species” alone – as if humans were the ﬁrst and only animals to use sign relations to
communicate and to know about the world – “was absurd, and that [the discipline
of semiotics’] ﬁeld of reference had to be extended to comprehend the entire ani-
mal kingdom in its maximum diversity” (2001: xxi). It was not until 1977, however,
reports Sebeok, that he ﬁnally discovered in Uexküll’s Umweltlehre the “sound the-
oretical basis” needed to ground this inquiry scientiﬁcally (ibid). Not long after, he
recounts,
There came several dramatic proposals from diverse, unexpected, as well as more or less
independent, sources. Beginning in 1981, Martin Krampen followed up on the abduction
that plants, too, undergo semiosis, and thus another discipline, phytosemiotics, came into
being. In 1991, I postulated semiosis in the fungi. And thereby added mycosemiotics to the
taxonomy. The recognition of far-reaching semiosis in the kingdom Prokaryote, compris-
ing all bacteria (microsemiosis), was triggered by a 1983 book by Sorin Sonea and . . . a
conceptual framework for identifying the pertinent integration levels [of sign processes in
the human body] was presented in a 1993 monograph2 by the physician son of Jakob von
Uexküll, Thure, with two of his medical associates. This domain is now termed endosemi-
otics . . . These newly identiﬁed and labelled topics, among others, together now constitute
the overall domain of biosemiotics (2001: xxi-xxii).
1 The word also appears throughout the biosemiotic literature as zoösemiotics, an orthographical
convention initiated by John Deely in 1990, “to prevent a misunderstanding that I have actually
encountered,” he explains, “whereby this rich realm of investigation has been unwittingly reduced
in hearer’s minds to the study of sign systems among captive animals” (1990: 29).
2 Included in this volume as Chapter Nine.

8
Phytosemiotics
259
An empirically-grounded researcher into the measurable effects of visual design,
Krampen’s ‘abduction’ about the legitimacy of studying plant semiosis was not the
armchair postulate that one might assume from the casual wording of Sebeok’s rec-
ollection above. Rather, Krampen’s interior design based research on the semiotic
effects that plants have on the habitats of humans led him to investigate the viability
of thinking about the semiotic interactions taking place within plants themselves.
Lacking central nervous systems through which afferent sensory input and efferent
motor output could be organized into the functional cycles necessary for meaning-
making, plants were pronounced to be creatures incapable of manifesting Umwelt by
Jakob von Uexküll (1940 [1982]: 33). Nor would Krampen – or any other biosemi-
otician – attribute to plant life the ability to form mental images, to plan, to have
personalities and emotions, to cognize, or to empathize with human beings in the
sense that such capacities have been attributed to them by certain plant enthusiasts
and “New Age” religionists.3
Yet the scientiﬁc investigation into the biological organisms that are plants reveal
that they rely on a complex and interdependent set of highly evolved direction-
dependent (i.e., tropic) and rate-dependent (i.e., nastic) responses to environmental
stimuli; are both ontogenetically adaptive as well as interactively territorial; and
employ sign-based systems of information transfer both within and across indi-
viduals. Such functional real-time responses to environmental stimuli include the
exploratory, exploitative and self-preservational reactions to the impingements of
moisture, light, gravity, sun direction, barometric pressure, magnetic ﬁelds, nutrient
gradients, temperature, color (wavelength), physical contact, ﬂuid ﬂow, electrical
current, darkness, and the volatile airborne and soluble waterborne chemical signals
exchanged within the ecosystems of plants.4
Surely, then, argues Krampen in this historically important text, the interactions
and organization of these naturally evolved, complex-adaptive living systems must
be “structured according to a base semiotics which cuts across all living beings –
plants, animals, and humans alike” (1981: 203). Thus, as Anderson et al. will later
argue (see Chapter Twelve, this volume): “the fact that sedentary plants have a
diffuse and poorly-understood internal communication system – rather than a cen-
tralized nervous system – may not disqualify them from possessing an [interior
relational web of sign processes called] Umwelt any more than it excludes them
3 Indeed, perhaps nowhere is anthropomorphism more fully understood for the fallacy in reasoning
that it is – and is therefore studiously avoided and admonished – than in biosemiotics, which insists
upon acknowledging both the commonality and the differences in naturally evolved sign systems.
The discipline’s foundational insistence on such vigilant non-conﬂation, then, makes it particularly
ironic – and unfortunate – that upon ﬁrst encountering the word “biosemiotics”, the mistaken idea
that comes to mind for many people is that the project must be advocating that all non-human
organisms “think like humans.” Yet this is the one notion that is universally considered to be
anathema throughout biosemiotics, which is why I often recommend Terrence Deacon’s masterful
debunking of this “exactly backwards” idea – his 1997 The Symbolic Species, excerpts of which are
included in this volume as Chapter Eighteen – to those encountering the often easily misinterpreted
texts of biosemiotics for the ﬁrst time.
4 For reference to this literature, please see footnote 5.

260
Martin Krampen (1928– )
from existing in [an external] relational web called ‘niche’” (1984: 57) – because
Umwelt, as Krampen points out in the following selection, refers merely to the total-
ity of “what is meaningful impingement for the living being, in terms of its own
information processing equipment, sign systems, and codes” (1981: 22).
The publication of Krampen’s Phytosemiotics article in 1981, writes semiotics
scholar John Deely, “swiftly became part of the twentieth-century mainstream
development of semiotics, opening the way to a postmodern and global intellec-
tual culture . . . [by] showing how the whole of the biosphere is subtended and
uniﬁed in its interdependencies by the action of signs” (2006: 586). Indeed, and
as Sebeok implies above, the realization that the sign-processing abilities in humans
did not emerge de novo, but both evolved from and are built upon the more primitive
sign-processing abilities of our animal ancestors, leads inexorably to the realization
that (functional, non-mentalistic) sign processes enabling the organism to adaptively
negotiate its external environment must be a necessary component of all living sys-
tems – and it is by virtue of this understanding that the contemporary integrative
interdiscipline of biosemiotics was born.
Krampen’s call in this article for the establishment of a dedicated investigation
and analysis proper to the level of sign processing observable within and among
plants – as opposed to the levels appropriate to the study of sign-processing found
in animals, much less the one appropriate to humans – recalls, as Kull (2000: 346)
points out, Aristotle’s scala naturae distinction between the vegetative, animal,
and rational modes of organization and interaction in living systems, with each
ascending level augmenting, while still depending upon, the earlier way of being
for its support. Accordingly, Kull argues that we can intelligibly speak of a het-
erarchy of vegetative, animal, and rational modes of semiosis in delineating the
various iconic, indexical and symbolic acts of sign-processing that, in the aggregate,
constitute human experience (and mutadis mutandis, the non-human experience
of other organisms).
Deely (1982, 1990, 2001), however, sees Krampen’s extension of Sebeok’s
zoosemiotics project to one dedicated to the examination of all biological being,
and to the examination of their relations with the signa naturalia of every kind
(e.g., day/night cycles, barometric pressure gradients, mineral density, etc.) as one
that leads us, not so much back to a more scientiﬁcally informed reconsideration of
the insights of antiquity, but instead to a genuinely “post”-modern transcendence of
the mind-matter duality that has characterized modernity since its codiﬁcation by
Descartes. Krampen’s proposal, writes Deely, “was key to completing the notion of
‘biosemiotics’ – the architectonic idea proposed by Thomas A. Sebeok that semiosis
is criterial of life” (2006: 586).
Deely further notes, however, that since all the phenomena that are criterial
of biological life – such as metabolism, growth, reproduction and self-repair –
must themselves be congruent with, emerge from, and build upon the possibili-
ties, constraints and regularities of the existing physical substratum, the search for
the non-biological regularities of the universe that alone make semiosis veridical
becomes a ﬁeld of (at least theoretical) investigation in its own right. Deely des-
ignates this ﬁeld – which examines the pre-existing “patterns of knowability” or

8
Phytosemiotics
261
“virtual thirdness” inherent in the regularities of the non-living surround that can
potentially function as signs for some agent – as physiosemiotics, to distinguish it
from what he considers as the “dangerously misguided” notion of pan-semiotics,
which would designate the polar opposite belief that the semiosis of living being
is inherent in all non-living things (1990: 83–105). Krampen’s discipline-changing
inauguration of phytosemiotics, writes Deely, thus “marks not the ﬁnal step, but only
a penultimate one, in reaching the outlines of the full extent possible of the doctrine
of signs” (1990: 103).
Aristotelian or postmodern (or both), Krampen’s article occupies a signal place
in the history of biosemiotics – and its prescient insistence on the development of a
non-anthropomorphic understanding of sign-processing in plants has been amply
justiﬁed by botanical studies undertaken in the almost three decades since the
following selection was written.5
5 Baluska et al. (2006) provides an excellent overview of the current state of the art in plant
behavior and plant signaling studies; the scientiﬁc peer-review journals Plant Physiology, Trends in
Plant Science, and Plant Signaling and Behavior report the latest ﬁndings in the ﬁeld; and Simons
(1992) and Attenborough (1995) provide readable and informative introductory texts. See also the
Bibliography and Further Readings section in this volume for a list of similarly relevant texts.

262
Martin Krampen (1928– )
Phytosemiotics (1981)
Introduction: Background of the Problem
The problem of this essay is to establish phytosemiotics, i.e., the semiotics of plants,
as an area of inquiry into sign processes, parallel and on an equal footing with
anthroposemiotics, the study of human communication, and zoosemiotics (Sebeok
1963, 1972), the study of sign processes occurring within and between species of
animals, the three areas forming together the discipline of “biosemiotics”.
Subjective Interest
For 3 years, I have been working, in my capacity as a psychologist and semiotician,
in an interdisciplinary team together with a designer, a gardener, and a physician
in an experiment in living and working among plants. The designer from this team
moved, 4 years ago, into a normal commercial greenhouse that was empty at the
time. After a preliminary failure with “laissez-faire” gardening and tropical vege-
tation, he planted, with the help of the gardener, a selection of subtropical plants
around small platforms used for ofﬁce work, sleeping, cooking, and sitting. These
plants remain green all year round regardless of the presence of snow and frost
outside – if the greenhouse is moderately heated. The designer had his ofﬁce there
and lived there, the doctor monitored his health, and I observed the behavior of
the designer, his employees, and his visitors (including myself). In addition, oxygen
and carbon dioxide measurements were taken longitudinally under different weather
conditions.
A report on this experiment has appeared (Logid 1981). On the basis of the result,
the team is suggesting a combination glass-and-stone house with a 50% surface for
plants as an alternative architectural solution in the face of fading oil resources (the
sunheat caught in the glasshouse can be stored), in the face of air pollution (the
oxygen content in the glasshouse is, due to the plants, above the normal level of
any room with open windows), and in the face of decreasing environmental quality
in our cities. In contrast, the quality of life in this environment is rated very highly
by the participants in this experiment (due to the colors of blossoms and leaves, the
smells, and the constant change of space resulting from plant growth and seasonal
cycles). This advantage must be paid for by way of an average of one hour per day
spent on plant care.
I had, however, one problem with the experiment that I could not resolve at the
beginning – the problem of its semiotic interpretation. For quite some time I thought
that the semiotic content of this enterprise was negative only. This island of green
represented, in my estimation, an escape from daily routine with its signs of human
communication in bureaucracy and mass media. Plants, unlike letters, punched
cards, and tapes, are not malleable. One cannot do with them as one pleases. They
require care and grow according to their own plan.

8
Phytosemiotics
263
Problem Relevance and the Semiotic Approach
There is little doubt that the problem of new alternative forms of working and living
is highly relevant if one considers the crises of energy, environmental pollution, and
the general loss of quality in daily life. This is at least true in western industrialized
countries, where we witness mass tourism, suburban sprawl, and growing so-called
“green” political movements. A project like the one described above seems to give a
direct and practical answer to the problems mentioned. There seems to be little room
for theoretical questions of semiotics. But the lack of a theory to back up a practice
has always made me suspicious. I also ﬁnd the escapist tendencies in mass tourism,
urban sprawl, and “green” politics unsatisfactory. I therefore began to amplify my
semiotic interests by searching for a solution to my “cognitive dissonance”.
Jakob von Uexküll’s Biosemiotics
I had read Jakob von Uexküll’s ([1940] 1970) “Bedeutungslehre” (theory of mean-
ing) a long time ago.6 I had discussed the semiotic importance of the work of this
unorthodox German biologist, forerunner of ethology, many times with his son,
Thure von Uexküll, who is attempting to develop further the semiotic aspects of
his father’s work with “biology as a science of meaning in nature”. These discus-
sions were often very heated and controversial because I could not cope with what
I thought to be a hermeneutic approach to natural science. It took the publication of
Jakob von Uexküll’s selected writings by his son (Thure von Uexküll 1980), and a
careful rereading of the “Bedeutungslehre”, to convince me that a basis for a semi-
otics of plants could be found in Jakob von Uexküll’s work. The basic premises of
Jakob von Uexküll’s theory of meaning in nature may be summarized as follows:
(1) Living beings, from the cell to the most complex organism, are “autonomous”.
They do not react in a causal and mechanical way to impingements of objects
or other living beings as material objects do. Living beings react in a way that is
meaningful in terms of their own needs, i.e., they process information according
to their speciﬁc receptors, nervous systems, and effectors and according to their
own code. Therefore, biology can utilize causal and mechanical explanations
only to a very limited degree. The main task of the biologist is to reconstruct
the meaning of a living being’s behavior. This implies ﬁnding out exactly which
sign processes underlie behavior. In other words, biology is biosemiotics (a term
not used by Jakob von Uexküll).
(2) There is a structural correspondence between each living being as an
autonomous subject and its own “Umwelt”. The term “Umwelt” is difﬁcult
6 An English translation of Jakob von Uexküll’s “Bedeutungslehre” (“The Theory of Meaning”)
will appear, with an Introduction by Thure von Uexküll, in Semiotica in 1982.

264
Martin Krampen (1928– )
to translate into English. It means the subjective world of what is mean-
ingful impingement for the living being in terms of its own information
processing equipment, sign systems, and codes. Since “Umwelt” is not to be
confused with “environment”, the original term will be maintained. The struc-
ture of connection between a living being and its Umwelt is mediated by sign
processes.
(3) There is a meaningful structural correspondence between the Umwelts of differ-
ent living beings within a species and those of living beings of different species,
according to a “general plan of nature”.
(4) The ultimate task of the biologist is to reconstruct piece by piece, in keeping
with, and on the basis of, experimental evidence, the hypothesized general plan
of nature.
Jakob von Uexküll’s Anthroposemiotics and Zoosemiotics
In order to describe in somewhat more detail the biosemiotic theory of Jakob von
Uexküll, one must start with his anthroposemiotics. While this term, again, is not
used by him, the meaning of the relationship between each human subject and his
Umwelt, as well as the meaningful correlation between the Umwelts of different
human beings, is of special importance in Jakob von Uexküll’s biosemiotics. He
gives many examples as evidence of different kinds of Umwelts.
One example is a walk through a town. The tailor’s shop contains the concave
counterforms of human bodies specialized for different activities in their lives. The
clocks in the watchmaker’s shop have replaced (according to abstract human time
measures – the natural one of the sun, which used to regulate human lives by the
presence or absence of its light). The book shop contains messages between card-
board covers that are of great importance for communication from human Umwelt
to human Umwelt. The butcher’s shop contains the carcasses of animals, each of
which was, at one time, an organism with an Umwelt of its own, etc. Everything
witnessed during a walk through town is geared to human needs. The height of
the buildings and of doors and windows is related to the size of the human body.
Stairs accommodate ascending legs, bannisters the arms. Each object is given its
form and its meaning by some function of human life. In every case, some human
affordance is backed up by a counteraffordance of an object. In fact, the mean-
ing of an object to human lives literally consists of its counteraffordance to human
affordance.
But the key role of anthroposemiotics in Jakob von Uexküll’s conception arises
from the fact that the scientist himself, the biologist, is a human subject surrounded
by his Umwelt as if by a transparent bubble, on the surface of which appear his sci-
entiﬁc observations in keeping with his own sign systems and codes. Jakob von
Uexküll likes to quote, in this respect, the British astronomer and physicist Sir
Arthur Stanley Eddington, who said he had two desks, the one he used for writ-
ing on, and the other a physical desk consisting of an immeasurably large number
of particles (Jakob von Uexküll [1940] 1970). For that matter, a biologist would

8
Phytosemiotics
265
investigate a different desk than a physicist (Jakob von Uexküll 1935). Therefore,
the scientiﬁc and especially the biosemiotic investigator must use a special method
in order to arrive at a careful reconstruction of the Umwelt of the observed living
being in his own Umwelt and on his own terms – a method that would now be called
participant observation.
The structural correspondence between each living human organism and its
Umwelt is described by Jakob von Uexküll as a “function cycle”. The subject liter-
ally “grasps” an object, in a double-pronged attack, either directly with his receptors
(e.g., eyes) and effectors (e.g., hands), or indirectly with ampliﬁcations of his recep-
tors (e.g., microscope) and his effectors (e.g., a tool or a machine). There is a
constant feedback of signals from the effectors to the receptors, which is modiﬁed
by the encounter with the object. The nervous system within the organism medi-
ates between receptors and effectors according to the needs of that organism (e.g.,
hunger, defense, sexual drive, and the medium in which it lives).
According to Jakob von Uexküll, the receptors receive afferent signals from the
object and the effectors are steered by efferent signals to carry out an action upon
the object. Both kinds of signals are charged with meaning by the code constituted
by the subject’s needs. An object may thus be sensed differently and acted upon
differently, depending on the actual need. The two faces of the object as a sign
are the afferent signals as the signiﬁer, and the induced efferent signals as the sig-
niﬁed. The semiosis proceeds on the basis that the afferent signals are constantly
cancelled by the efferent signals, either in terms of the consumption of the object,
or in terms of a different “perspective”, or in terms of a code-switching to another
need. The sum of the object signals received and their corresponding action signals
constitutes the Umwelt of the organism, which is mirrored by signs as an “inner”
counterworld.
The task of the biologist is to study the code according to which a living being,
be it human or animal, imparts meaning to its Umwelt, by studying the physical
structure of receptors and effectors and by observing, through experimental vari-
ation, which signals are processed on each side, i.e., which signs are in the code
of the living subject. The study of the Umwelt of human beings is thus, clearly,
anthroposemiotic.
The role played by those particular objects in the Umwelt of human beings that
are called signs has been studied by Thure von Uexküll (1980). The speciﬁc char-
acteristic of the human Umwelt is that it is structured according to the species’
framework of space and time; that, by reafferent feedback processes, the phe-
nomenon of “consciousness” (or self-awareness) exists; and that by transmission of
sign-objects, particularly of linguistic signs, a common social reality is established.
Following the suggestion of Marx ([1857] 1961: 636) that it is scientiﬁcally
more correct to explain apes by using knowledge about men than to explain men
in terms of apes, the zoosemiotics of Jakob von Uexküll can now be sketched “by
subtraction”.
Returning to the example of Eddington’s desk, this object becomes, in the
Umwelt of a ﬂy, a mere horizontal walking surface and is, in that respect, no differ-
ent from the seat of the chair or the top of a cupboard. In fact, all objects in a human

266
Martin Krampen (1928– )
room are reduced, in the Umwelt of a ﬂy, to objects to walk on, objects to feed on,
and objects, a lamp for instance, to ﬂy around in a kind of play activity. As Jakob
von Uexküll cogently observes, the number of objects pertaining to the Umwelt of
an animal corresponds exactly to the number of actions executed by it. But each
animal, be it an amoeba, a ﬂy, or a lion, behaves meaningfully on the basis of sign
processes with a functional cycle forming signs from afferent signals as signiﬁers
and corresponding efferent signals as signiﬁeds.
The Phytosemiotic Hypothesis
It is the hypothesis of this study that, while plants are autonomous living beings
(in the sense of Jakob von Uexküll), their semiosis is different from that of human
and animal subjects in such a way that it merits its own semiotic analysis. This
semiotic analysis may well form the positive scientiﬁc basis lacking so far in the
conservationist activities that have until now, largely been based on negation and
ideology. The method by which the speciﬁcity of plant semiosis can be shown is
that of opposition, well known in semiotic inquiry. It would thus be necessary to
show by which distinctive features phytosemiotic processes differ from anthropo-
and zoosemiotic processes, and at the same time, what their common biosemiotic
basis is.
Distinctive Features of Phytosemiotics
Fixation Versus Mobility
Jakob von Uexküll (1922) characterizes the most obvious difference between
animals and plants as that of movement and quietness:
The confusing aspect offered by the thousands of animal worlds is due to the impossibility
of ﬁnding a moment of rest anywhere. Everything is constantly in the process of breath-
taking movement. . .. Again and again the animal must exercise its organs to respond to the
requirements of the Umwelt. Sometimes the animal is the persecutor and sometimes the
persecuted. But it is always active and thus burns the materials which its digestive cells
have extracted in painstaking labor from the nourishment which it has acquired in such a
hard way.
The aspect of the reign of plants is quite different. Hectic haste is replaced by comfortable
calm. Not that work ceases for a moment, as long as the plant is alive. An uninterrupted
stream of liquids enters by the roots, rising along the stem and branches out in all directions
to the leaves where it evaporates again in a well-controlled fashion. This stream transports
the nourishing salts gained from the earth into all those tissues of the plant which transform
them into material of the plant’s body. In the laboratory of the leafgreen, the important
building block of carbon is produced with the help of the sun. Everything is handled by the
ﬁne detail work of living cells which remain autonomous subjects as do those in the bodies
of animals. They work in union, according to a plan, by transmitting stimuli and material.

8
Phytosemiotics
267
This quotation certainly should not be misunderstood in the sense that plants do
not move. There is, for one thing, the phenomenon of phototropism (e.g., Presti et al.
1977), implying relatively slow movement of plants toward light sources. And there
is, of course, very visible adaptive movement of plants in response to the pressure
of air (wind) or water (stream).
Absence of Effectors and Receptors
The “comfortable calm” of the reign of plants is due to the fact that plants have
no speciﬁc effector organs – no feet to run with, no arms to gesticulate with, etc. –
and, correspondingly, no speciﬁc receptor organs – no eyes to look around with, no
ears to hear with, etc. Consequently, there is no nervous system mediating between
effectors and receptors.
This assertion appears to be in contradiction to an increasing – and quite
“fashionable” – body of literature concerned with “plant receptors”. For instance,
so-called photo receptors have been studied in different strains of Phycomyces, a
species of fungus (Delbrück et al. 1977, 1976, Presti et al. 1977). It was found,
in one study, that “the Phycomyces sporangiophore is a single cell and responds
phototropically, adapting to various light levels. . .. The authors have analyzed the
kinetics of this adaptation, using a tracking machine for greater precision. Dark
adaptation is exponential . . . i.e. the threshold falls exponentially in the dark, in
contrast to scotopic vision where the logarithm of threshold falls exponentially in
the dark.” In the other studies, the chemical functioning of these photoreceptors was
analyzed, with the result that the “bluelight receptor” of Phycomyces is not carotene
(as in animals), but riboﬂavin.
A similar topic in the literature is the search for a functional “plant hormone
receptor” (e.g., Dodds and Hall 1980, a review on the problem with a bibliography
of 65 titles). Animal hormone receptors are deﬁned as follows:
Animal hormones are synthesized in clearly deﬁned organs and are then translocated to
equally clearly deﬁned ‘target’ tissues organs . . . where they control speciﬁc biochemical
processes . . . the sites with which they interact must have a very high afﬁnity for the hor-
mone. Equally, the sites must show very high speciﬁcity for the hormone. These sites, or
rather the whole molecule of which they are part, are termed ‘hormone receptors’. All such
receptors which have been isolated so far have proved to be proteins.
In contrast to a large number of hormones found in animals (more than 40 have
by now been identiﬁed), only ﬁve groups of plant hormones are known so far. These
plant hormones have a much simpler structure than animal hormones. According to
Dodds and Hall (1980), “The very term hormone is called into question in plants
since the site of synthesis is not usually restricted to a specialized organ or tissue
. . . most if not all plant cells have had the capacity for hormone synthesis at some
time in their development and many retain this capacity, even if to a limited extent.”
In addition, “there is usually no one distinct target for a given hormone since at any
one time many different tissues and organs in the plant are capable of responding

268
Martin Krampen (1928– )
to it – often in a different way”. Obviously, it is this “totipotency of plant cells”,
a principle formulated already by Haberland (1902), that differentiates so-called
photo- and hormone-receptors of plants from those in animals. This does not mean
that there is no “differentiation”, e.g., “division of labor”, between plant cells during
the development of plants.
It is typical for the modern conception of “plant receptors” in botany to refer
to chemical “binding” processes that are treated, according to information theory,
as processes between chemical “messengers” and “target substances”, rather than
referring to specialized cell compounds or receptor organs as these are present in
animals. Moreover, the useful distinction between “exteroceptors” (e.g., photore-
ceptors) and “interoceptors” (e.g., hormone receptors) is neglected by botanical
terminology. I would, therefore, like to maintain Jakob von Uexküll’s conception
denying plants the capacity of specialized receptor organs, and rather apply to what
are called receptors in the above cited literature the term “sensors”, according to the
parlance of cybernetics with respect to feedback cycles.
Absence of the Functional Cycle
For the same terminological reason, I would agree with Jakob von Uexküll in main-
taining that plants do not have a “functional cycle” connecting receptor organs via
a nervous system to effector organs. What plants have is a feedback cycle between
sensors and regulators. In the absence of a functional cycle in plants, there is no
way by which afferent signals can be ﬁtted together with efferent signals to form the
signiﬁers and signiﬁeds of “objects”.
Casing Versus Umwelt
Given the absence of a functional cycle, plants cannot have an Umwelt. As Jakob
von Uexküll ([1940] 1970) points out: “The plant does not possess Umwelt-organs,
it is directly immersed into its habitat. The relationships of the plant to its habitat are
quite different from those of the animal to its Umwelt.” While humans and animals
each have their own Umwelt, plants are conﬁned to their casing.
Meaning Factor Versus Meaning Carrier
Due to the absence of effectors, nervous system, and receptors and the consequent
lack of the functional cycle and the resulting Umwelt, plants have no objects that
may become the sources or “carriers” of meaning for them. Meaning is mediated
for plants by what Jakob von Uexküll calls “meaning factors”. Meaning factors are
those stimuli among the stream of impingements pressing upon the plants from all
sides that are relevant to their life. The plant does not counter external impinge-
ments with the double-pronged operation of receptors and effectors, but uses the

8
Phytosemiotics
269
living sheet of cells of its casing to ﬁlter out relevant impingements. These relevant
impingements are the meaning factors, i.e., the semiotic factors, for the living plant.
Using the example of the leaves of an oak tree, Jakob von Uexküll shows how
phytosemiosis functions. One of the meaning factors, as far as oak leaves are con-
cerned, is the rain. Falling raindrops follow precise physical laws governing the
behavior of liquids upon striking a leaf. In this case, according to Jakob von Uexküll,
the leaf is the “receiver of meaning”, coupled with the meaning factor “rain” by a
“meaning rule”. The form of the leaves is such that it accommodates the physical
laws governing the behavior of liquids. The leaves work together by forming cas-
cades in all directions in order to distribute the rain water on the ground for optimal
use by the roots. To put it in more common semiotic terminology, the leaf’s form is
the signiﬁer and the physical behavior of a raindrop is the signiﬁed. The code cou-
pling leaf and raindrop is the oak tree’s need of liquid for the transport of nourishing
salts into its cells.
Utilization or Meaning by Form Versus Utilization of Meaning
by Function Cycle
The difference between plant and animal is that the plant utilizes meaning by means
of its form built up according to a “plan of nature”, enabling the leaf to ﬁt into the
physical behavior of liquids, while humans and animals utilize meaning through
their function cycle. The code of a plant’s need is a superordinate rule coupling two
subordinate rules, the physical laws governing the forming and ﬂowing of drops
and the biological formation rules according to which the leaves of a particular
species of plants grow in its typical habitat. The code of an animal’s need couples
relevant objects or animals to the receptors and effectors of the receiving animal.
The superordinate rule of the living being’s needs may be considered a code to
which subordinate rules relate as subcodes.
Predominance of Indexicality Versus Iconicity and Symbolicity
The classical trichotomy of possible relationships between the material aspect of the
sign and the object it stands for is, in Peirce, reﬂected by degrees of iconicity, index-
icality, and symbolicity (and in the Saussurean tradition by degrees of motivation,
indexicality, and arbitrariness). If one wants to extend this trichotomy to plants on
the one hand, versus animals and humans on the other, the absence of the function
cycle would suggest that, in plants, indexicality certainly predominates over iconic-
ity. In animals, however, iconicity seems to predominate over symbolicity, since
the double-pronged action of receptors and effectors models the object almost as a
concave negative image of the two actions. Finally, symbolicity predominates over
iconicity in humans because of their widespread social use of language and other
arbitrary sign systems.

270
Martin Krampen (1928– )
There are three levels of meaningful cycles corresponding to predominance of
indexicality, iconicity, and symbolicity, each higher process including also the lower.
Indexicality, on the vegetative level, corresponds to the sensing and regulating, in a
feedback cycle, of meaningful stimulation directly contiguous to the form of the
plant. Iconicity, on the animal level, is produced by the function cycle, with recep-
tor and effector activity representing, in a nervous system, the “image” of objects.
Symbolicity, on the human level, is produced by perception and action in human
society.
Communalities Between Phytosemiosis and Zoosemiosi
Selection of Impingements
While there are distinct differences between the sign processes in plants and animals
or humans, there are also important communalities among them. One is that they all
ﬁlter out a speciﬁc selection of all those impingements surrounding them. As living
beings, they are all capable of drawing a borderline between “self” and “nonself”,
utilizing only those impingements that are meaningful to their needs.
Suffering the Imposition of Meaning
Plants, animals, and humans not only utilize impingements meaningfully, but also
suffer the imposition of meaning. Jakob von Uexküll ([1940] 1970) shows this with
the example of the different roles a wild ﬂower in a meadow may play as a meaning-
ful object in different function cycles: It may be picked by a human for a bouquet
of ﬂowers, it is utilized as a walkway and plant-louse farm by ants, the larva of
the cicada may bore its nest into its stem, and the cow may eat it together with a
bunch of grass. Suffering the imposition of meaning is analogously applicable to
animals and humans, as is proved by the roles of prey and predator between animals
and between animals and humans, and by the suppression of humans by humans.
In the “plan of nature”, the meaning of suffering the imposition of meaning may
range from the reduction of excess individuals in the interest of their own species
to reduction in the interest of a whole ecological system, whereas social oppression
among humans seems to be dictated by historical and dialectical laws.
Rules of Correspondence Between the Umwelts of Humans,
Animals, and Plants – The Method of “Counterpoint”
With the example of oak leaf and raindrop, it was shown that meaning in nature is
based on rules of correspondence bracketing subordinate formation rules and phys-
ical rules. The favorite example of Jakob von Uexküll for explaining the lawfulness

8
Phytosemiotics
271
of these meaningful correspondences or – as one would say in semiotics – codes
is that of a musical composition of which “nature” is the composer. This whole
composition, of which the biologist tries to write the score, i.e., to study the syn-
tagrnatic.rules, is based on the technique of counterpoint. The method is to ﬁnd
the counterpoint to each note of the composition by following the motto: Wherever
there is a point, its corresponding counterpoint can be found. The physical behavior
of raindrops is the counterpoint corresponding to the point of the leafs form, the
soft skin of mammals corresponds to the tick’s bite, the path corresponds to man’s
feet, nourishment to his mouth, an enemy to his weapon, as Jakob von Uexküll has
pointed out.
There is one fundamental rule of correspondence between humans and animals
on the one hand and plants on the other, this being of critical importance for life:
Plants produce the oxygen all humans and animals breathe. In other words, the
life of plants corresponds as a counterpoint to the breathing lungs of humans and
animals as a point. As Jakob von Uexküll ([1940] 1970) paraphrased Goethe’s verse
Wär’ nicht das Auge sonnenhaft
die Sonne könnt’ es nie erblicken.
by postulating
Wär’ nicht die Sonne augenhaft
an keinem Himmel könnte sie erstrahlen.
we might say:
Wär’ nicht die Lunge pﬂanzenhaft
das Atmen könnte nicht gelingen.
and
Wär’ nicht die Pﬁanze lungenhaft
gäb’s keinen Atemzug auf Erden.
[Editor’s note: a small study showing a correlated increase in oxygen levels with
plant life in the greenhouse has been omitted from this reprint. Its conclusion is as
follows:] The consequences of these oxygen and carbon dioxide measurements for
healthy working and living conditions are obvious. According to medical experts,
there seems to be a clear correlation between the increase of cancer and diminishing
oxygen concentration in industrial areas. The data are presented here to demon-
strate the meaning of plants to human life and to point out the necessity for further
investigation in phytosemiotics.
Three Forms of Life and Their Common Semiotic Aspect
It has been shown above that the semiotics of the vegetative world is different from
that of animals and humans, in that the absence of effectors and receptors does not
allow for the constitution of a functional cycle, of object signs and sign objects, or

272
Martin Krampen (1928– )
of an Umweit. The vegetative world is nevertheless structured according to a base
semiotics which cuts across all living beings, plants, animals, and humans alike.
As Thomas A. Sebeok and Thure vori Uexküll have pointed out, many life pro-
cesses within the animal and human organisms function according to the principle
of the vegetative world, i.e., according to the principle of phytosemiotics. This ﬁeld
of semiotic inquiry has been labeled endosemiotics bv them (Sebeok 1976, Thure
von Uexküll 1980). As soon as a functional cycle is constituted by the presence
of effectors and receptors, through the mediation of a “vegetative” nervous sys-
tem, the phenomenon of Umwelt arises in animals and humans alike. The semiotic
aspects of the Umwelt have been called “exosemiotics” (Thure von Uexküll 1980).
Whereas endosemiotics is pertinent to all three forms of life, plants, animals, and
humans, and thus pertinent to phytosemiotics, zoosemiotics, and anthroposemiotics,
exosemiotics is pertinent to zoo semiotics and anthroposemiotics only. As Thure
von Uexküll (1980) suggests, the age-old problem of the dualism of body and soul
might thus ﬁnd a biosemiotic answer. Plants would therefore exhibit predominantly
indexical sign systems; in animals, both indexical and iconic signs would appear;
whereas human sign processes would display the whole range of the trichotomy,
from indexicality via iconicity to symbolicity.
Meaningful Interactions Between Plants and Animals
Thus far, only differences and communalities between the sign processes in
plants, animals, and humans have been accounted for. Some examples of semiotic
interactions between these living beings will now be presented.
It is well known that plants have chemical defenses against the attacks of her-
bivore animals such as insects. There are two classes of such defenses. Either
chemical deterrents are already present before the attack occurs or such a deter-
rent is mobilized in response to such an attack. The latter defense is known as
“induced resistance”. It is practiced frequently in higher plants against infections
by microorganisms. Induced resistance sometimes occurs, however, as a counter-
attack by the plant against the attack of an herbivore insect enemy. As far as this
insect-induced resistance in plants is concerned, it is interesting to study the time
plants need for mobilization. Most of the observed cases of this type of resistance
have long response times, ranging from 12h to as much as several years. But there
are examples of relatively rapidly induced resistance.
I am grateful to Thomas A. Sebeok for drawing my attention to such an example
published recently (Carroll and Hoffman 1980). It shows a complex sequence of
animal attack on the plant, rapid counterattack by the plant, and adaptive counter-
measures against this defense of the plant on the part of the animal. The crookneck
squash is attacked by a beetle species labeled Epilachna tredicimnotata (Coleoptera:
Coccinelidae). This bug ﬁrst uses its specially formed apical teeth to cut a circular
trench in the crookneck squash leaf and then feeds only on the cut-out disk. The
trenching takes about ten minutes, obviously time enough to isolate a part of the leaf
from the chemical deterrent that the plant mobilizes against the attack. The response

8
Phytosemiotics
273
time of the plant and some further circumstances connected with this interaction
between “prey” and “predator” have been investigated experimentally by Carroll
and Hoffman.
They used the circumstance that the deterrent mobilized by the crook neck squash
against Epilachna is a feeding stimulant for another beetle (Acalymma). The latter
refuses, for instance, to feed on crookneck squash leaves that have been recently
removed from the plant and, therefore, cannot yet have been reached by the deterrent
(unless it has been locally synthesized). The response time of Epilachna attacks on
the crookneck squash can now be experimentally “chronometrized” by damaging
crookneck squash leaves and varying the time between damaging and cutting a part
of the leaf as food for the two kinds of beetles.
The ﬁrst kind should refuse, the second kind start feeding from the moment at
which the deterrent has arrived at the damaged area of the leaf. Carroll and Hoffman
found that it takes the crookneck squash about 40 min to mobilize the deterrent and
to send it to the attacked area. Epilachna is faster, however, and takes only ten min-
utes to cut out an area from the leaf before the deterrent can reach it! (Or is it content
to eat only what it can cut out in 10 min, the plant, in turn, tolerating this minor dam-
age?) After reviewing some similar cases of plant-animal interaction reported in the
literature, Carroll and Hoffman suggest that the fact that herbivores often move from
one plant to another before having ﬁnished feeding might be an adaptive response
geared to avoiding the arrival of defensive deterrents at the feeding point.
Meaningful Interactions Between Plants and Men
The “Green Thumb” Theory
As far as the interaction between humans and plants is concerned, there is a
widespread popular conviction that some people have “green thumbs”: Whatever
seed they put into the earth will grow and mature nicely. Others, not gifted with
this magic capacity, can do whatever they like – the plants will die for them. I have
heard people explain this phenomenon by the alleged radiation of an aura that is par-
ticularly “congenial” to plants. But even admitting that living beings possess their
own “aura” of radiation (for instance, warm-blooded animals radiate heat), I would
suggest that “green thumbs” is a phenomenon analogous to that of “clever Hans”
of which Sebeok (1977, 1978) has repeatedly warned us. The “magic”, in this case,
lies in the fact that some people have a different attitude towards plants, know more
about them and, consequently, take better care of them. It is no wonder if plants
react positively to this treatment.
Caring for Plants
Another concept of meaningful interaction beetween plants and humans could be
based on the differentiation of “meaning” into two classes: There are objects that

274
Martin Krampen (1928– )
are “indirectly” meaningful to us, such as words or other communicative signs.
But there are also objects that may acquire “direct” meaning. This is, for instance,
the case with “cherished” possessions, which may become receptacles of personal
memories, e.g., a gift from a friend, or tokens of attitudinal justiﬁcation, e.g., a “sta-
tus symbol” or a trophy. Plants, for instance, are generally present in the “object
ecology” of a typical middle class home and tend to carry a special meaning for one
or more members of the family.
Csikszentmihalyi and Rochberg-Halton (1978) and Rochberg-Halton (1979)
have shown in their studies on the meaning of “cherished household possessions”
that, for children, parents, and grandparents, quite different objects acquire mean-
ing for quite different purposes. The younger generation names, as its preferred
possessions, objects that require active manipulation – e.g., stereo units, musical
instruments, pets, etc. The grandparents, on the contrary, prefer objects of passive
contemplation, such as family photographs, books, paintings, crockery, etc. The
middle generation, the parents, take an intermediate position between their children
and their own parents as far as the “motivation” of cherished objects is concerned.
Their preference ranges from paintings and books to musical instruments, plants,
and stereos (in that order).
The middle rank of objects for the three generations shows a decrease in life
characteristics: children prefer pets, parents plants, grandparents crockery. Also, the
same objects may obtain different ranks, depending on whether they are ranked
according to one or another of three different meaning dimensions: ﬁrst, reference
to self versus reference to other; second, current experience versus memory of the
past, and third, personal values. The latter dimension of meaning reﬂects objects
as models of the self or templates of self-development. It is in this dimension that
plants, together with books, rank ﬁrst, i.e., above all other objects. By analyzing
the rank order of parents separately, i.e., women versus men, one ﬁnds plants only
in the rank order of the former, whereas the latter have tools and trophies in their
preference list as objects meaningful only to men.
Obviously, in these choices, differences in the conception of self are involved that
are due to stereotypes of sexual roles. As Csikszentmihalyi and Rochberg-Halton
(1978: 12) put it: “The meaning system built by men is different from that of women
partly because they learn to use different things to objectify experience. The feelings
and thoughts one has in caring for a plant are bound to be different from the ones
a person has when using a camera . . . We are assuming that a plant produces, in
its (characteristic) caretaker, feelings of nurturance while a trophy is more likely to
invoke a feeling of pride in one’s past accomplishment.”
This phenomenon of plants evoking the nurturance instinct in humans is nicely
demonstrated in a report by Newman (1979) on a particular type of interaction with
plants, exhibited by a woman who served as a subject in a study on a person’s rela-
tion to objects. By eliciting accounts of this woman’s most highly valued activities,
Newman found that she focused her main interests on collecting, repairing, and
nurturing. Her main collector items were valuable Indian prints, as well as stones
she picked up. She repaired her own car and other objects around the house, being
directly prompted to do so by her feminist orientation, prescribing that one has to

8
Phytosemiotics
275
learn to take care of oneself. The nurturing aspect of her activities was clearly visible
by the mass of plants in her house. But this aspect was brought out even more by the
fact that she used to go to supermarkets and plant stores every so often to buy plants
that were dying. “Then she would nurse them back to health, propagate them and
give them to friends who would be good to them. Thus, she said, she ‘worries a lot’
about them” (Newman 1979: 4a). Apparently, her interaction with plants excluded
aesthetic contemplation. Caring for plants was a very active form of “rescuing” in
the woman’s life.
This example shows, in a psychological way, how important plants may become
for humans. The study of the psychological relationships between men and plants
is still in its very early stages. One of the tasks ahead lies in the development of an
attitude-toward-plants-test, which could complement other “environmental inven-
tories”, e.g., the Environmental Response Inventory (ERI) of McKechnie (1977),
already used in environmental decision making, planning, and aptitude testing.
Learning from Plants
Plants not only evoke nurturance behavior but often become something like “teach-
ers” when we interact with them. The “comfortable calm” they radiate has already
been mentioned (Jakob von Uexküll 1922). But they may also become “living exam-
ples” of “passive resistance”. As Jakob von Uexküll ([1940] 1970) says: “A plant
solves its main task by passive surrender to the effects of the Umwelt into which
it is slotted. Since the plant is not mobile, it has to face all those external effects
which are present in its surroundings. The most efﬁcient means of an animal’s self-
preservation – escape – is not available to the plant.” In addition, the example of
the plant’s life rhythm can be very instructive to humans. Some plants certainly
possess, in their genotype, the capacity to predict, independently from weather con-
ditions, the change of seasons. And Jakob von Uexküll ([1940] 1970) observes, in
this respect:
Since plants are not dead cases, but are constantly forced to defend their lives, we recog-
nize in them a life rhythm paralleling the change of the seasons. Our deciduous trees lose
their leaves in autumn and change into plants, independent of water, in order to survive the
effects of dehydration imposed on them by frost and frozen ground. The inner rhythm of
plants, however, is adapted even more intimately to the changes of the year because it has
been shown that our fruits grow best in hot houses, if one exposes the trees to the drop in
temperature normal during their blossoming period.
Finally, plants impress us not only with the biotechnical solutions they ﬁnd to
their problems but also with their “wisdom” in architecture: “The houses of men are
immobile and immediately betray their locality in their external habitus: Roofs and
windows must be built differently, depending on whether snow, rain, storm or heat
from the sun menaces the house. Plants, likewise, demonstrate through their form
whether they must defend themselves against drought or water, against an excess or
a lack of light” (Jakob von Uexküll [1940] 1970).

276
Martin Krampen (1928– )
Generally, human aesthetic experience is heightened in symbiosis with plants,
since the plant’s foremost “receiver of meaning” is its form, linked with physical
“meaning factors” that generally follow physical laws. Thus, plants not only adapt
indexically to their environment but also iconically portray the forces of their envi-
ronment through their meaningful form. A study of literature and poetry, of painting,
religion, and other human endeavors should convince us that plants have served as
meaningful signs, indexical, iconic, and symbolic, in many cultures because they
are living beings possessing features that evoke the attribution of meaning to a very
considerable degree.
Discussion and Some Conclusions
Jakob von Uexküll’s approach to biology as a science of life is a holistic one: The
whole is not explained by the functioning of its parts, but the meaning of the parts is
explained according to the plan of the whole, a principle that is not unlike the fun-
damental proposition of Gestalt theory. Admittedly, with his postulate of a “general
plan of nature”, one reaches the borderline of the operational. But if the “general
plan of nature” is taken as a hypothesis, guiding, step by step, the experimental
veriﬁcation of “rules of correspondence”, it loses its pseudoexplanatory character.
It may also become a guideline for ecological research and, indirectly, for the
political conclusions based upon it. The ideological veneration of greenery and its
attendant blind search for alternatives can be replaced by the detailed study of the
symbiosis between humans, animals, and plants, and ecologically sound solutions to
contemporary problems can be deduced from it. Despite the impression of progress
raised by the constant introduction of new and sophisticated tools between human
effectors or receptors and the human Umwelt, the human organism cannot escape
the basic vegetative rules of endosemiotics and remains locked together with plants
by a mutual rule of correspondence: If men cease to care for plants, i.e., cease to
understand their meaning factors and the meaning rules at the basis of their forma-
tion rules, they will asphyxiate themselves. As Thure von Uexküll (1980) has put it:
“Man is led, from his extravagant position as the observer positioned outside nature
and as its unscrupulous exploiter, back into nature, in which he must arrange himself
for better or worse.” Phytosemiotics can help to improve this arrangement.
References
Carroll, R. C., Hoffman, C. A. (1980). Chemical feeding deterrent mobilized in response to insect
herbivory and counteradaptation by Epilachna tredecimnotata. Science 209 (July 18), 414–416.
Csikszentmihalyi, M., Rochberg-Halton, E. (1978). Reﬂections on materialism: People and things.
University of Chicago Magazine 70(3), 7–15.
Delbrück, M., Degenkolbe, J., Leser, K.-H. (1977). Discussion to IV, light and dark adaptation of
the photoreceptor cell. Biophysics of Structure and Mechanism 3, 181–182.
Delbrück, M., Katzir, A., Presti, D. (1976). Responses of Phycomyces indicating optical excita-
tion of the lowest triplet state of riboﬂavin. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science
(Washington), 78 (1969–1973).

8
Phytosemiotics
277
Dodds, J. H., Hall, M. A. (1980). Plant hormone receptors. Scientiﬁc Progress, Oxford 66, 513–535.
Haberland, G. (1902). Culturversuche mit isolierten Pﬂanzenzellen, Sitzungsberichte der
Akademie der Wissenschaften. Wien: Math. Nat. Classe 111, 69–92.
Logid (1981). Grüne Archen. Frankfurt am Main: Fricke Verlag.
Marx, K. ([1857] 1961). Einleitung zur Kritik der politischen Ökonomte. In Marx/Engels, Werke,
vol. 13. Berlin (East): Dietz Verlag.
McKechnie, G. E. (1977). The Environmental Response Inventory in application. Environment and
Behaviour 9(2), 255–276.
Newman, M. (1979). Working paper. (Mimeographed), SUNY, Buffalo, Center for Study of
Cultural Transmission.
Presti, D., Hsu, W.-J., Delbrück, M. (1977). Phototropism in Phycomyces mutands lacking
β-Carotene. Photochemistry and Photobiology 26, 403–405.
Rochberg-Halton, E. (1979). Cultural signs and urban adaptation: The meaning of cherished house-
hold possessions. Dissertation Summary (mimeographed), Behavioral Sciences, University of
Chicago.
Sebeok, T. A. (1963). Communication among social bees; porpoises and sonar; man and dolphin.
Language 39, 448–466.
Sebeok, T. A. (1972). Perspectives in Zoosemiotics. The Hague: Mouton.
Sebeok, T. A. (1976). Contributions to the Doctrine of Signs. Bloomington and Lisse: Indiana
University, Research Center for Language and Semiotic Studies and the Peter de Ridder Press.
Sebeok, T. A. (1977). Ecumenicalism in semiotics. In: Sebeok, T. A. (Ed.) A Perfusion of Signs.
Bloomington and London: Indiana University Press.
Sebeok, T. A. (1978). ‘Clever Hans’ in a semiotic frame. Diogenes 28.
Uexküll, J. von (1922). Wie sehen wir die Natur und wie sieht sie sich seiber? Die
Naturwissenschaften 14, 316–322.
Uexküll, J. von (1935). Die Bedeutung der Umweltforschung für die Erkenntnis des Lebens.
Zeitschrift für die gesamte Naturwissenschaft 7, 257–272.
Uexküll, J. von ([1940] 1970). Bedeutungslehre. In: Uexküll, J. von, Kriszat, G. (Eds.) Streifzüge
durch die Umwelten von Tieren und Menschen. Bedeutungslehre, Frankfurt am Main: S. Fischer
Verlag. Originally in Bios, Vol. 10, Leipzig.
Uexküll, T. von (Ed.) (1980). Jakob von Uexküll, Kompositionslehre der Natur. Frankfurt am Main,
Berlin, Wien: Verlag Ullstein (Propylaen).

Chapter 9
Endosemiosis
Thure von Uexküll (1908–2004), Werner Geigges (1953– ),
and Jörg Herrmann (1944– )
Introduction and Commentary: Thure von Uexküll (1908–2004)
Observation can show us living systems only ‘from the outside,’ that is, as they present
themselves ‘to us.’ In order to inquire into their ‘inside’ . . . we must ﬁnd out how the living
system construes its conditions. It should be emphasized here that “outside” and “inside”
are semiotic concepts in that they mark a viewpoint outside or inside the system.
T. von Uexküll et al. (1993: 194)
“Almost every German university hospital has a chair of psychosomatic
medicine,” noted the obituary for pioneering clinical biosemiotician Thure von
Uexküll upon the occasion of his death at age 96 in 2004. “German medical
students are obliged to attend courses in medical psychology, sociology, and psy-
chosomatic medicine, and more than 7,000 beds in German rehabilitation hospitals
are devoted to the treatment of patients with psychosomatic disorders,” the obit-
uary continued, concluding that “the unique position of psychosomatic medicine
in Germany – in comparison with other European countries – is largely due to
the continuous engagement of Thure von Uexküll” (British Medical Journal 2004:
1047).
The eldest son of biologist and philosopher Jakob von Uexküll (1864–1944),
whose view of the human being as “a system embedded in the environment of
other systems” profoundly inﬂuenced his own later, highly original contributions
to both medicine and to biosemiotics, Thure von Uexküll was born in Heidelberg,
Germany, on March 15, 1908, one year prior to the publication of his father’s sem-
inal monograph Umwelt und Innenwelt der Tiere. During the years 1928 to 1936,
Thure studied medicine in Hamburg, Munich, Innsbruck and Rostock, performing
his internship as a medical doctor at the Charité Hospital in Berlin from 1936 to
1943. From 1943 to 1945, he was conscripted as a doctor in the German military,
despite his refusal to join the Nazi party. In 1945, he became an assistant professor at
the University of Munich Medical Hospital, travelling to the United States in 1952
under a fellowship from the Rockefeller Institution to work as a medical doctor and
a researcher into what he would later develop as the ﬁeld of “integrative medicine.”
Uexküll returned to Germany in 1955 to serve as Director of the Medical
Outpatient Department at the University of Giessen from 1955 to 1965, and as
the Director of the Department of Internal Medicine and Psychosomatics at the
279
D. Favareau, Essential Readings in Biosemiotics, Biosemiotics 3,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9650-1_9, C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010

280
Thure von Uexküll (1908–2004) et al.
University of Ulm from 1966 until his retirement in 1977, at age 69. Post-retirement,
Uexküll continued researching and working as a professor emeritus of internal
medicine at the University of Ulm, editing and authoring substantial contributions
to the deﬁnitive (1564-page) volume on psychosomatic medicine in 1979, now
in its sixth edition and required reading for the majority of medical students in
Germany. It was also during this time that Uexküll made the acquaintance of poly-
math Thomas A. Sebeok (1920–2001), with whom, according to many accounts by
Sebeok (1979, 1986, 1990, 2001), Thure and Giorgi Prodi (1928–1987) co-founded
the contemporary interdiscipline of biosemiotics.
Thure was present at the Third Weiner Symposium über Semiotik in Vienna in
August 1977, when Sebeok delivered his seminal paper entitled “Neglected Figures
in the History of Semiotic Inquiry: Jakob von Uexküll.” The two men later had an
extended discussion over dinner that, Sebeok recounts, “gave early impetus to, and
decisively shaped, the subsequent unfolding of biosemiotics” (2001: 34).
“First, the idea of launching a series of annual international conferences devoted
to biosemiotics was broached and soon realized by Thure,” reports Sebeok,
Repeated about ﬁve or six times in the late eighties and early nineties, these were held
on the premises of the Glotterbad Clinic for Rehabilitative Medicine in Glottertal, Baden-
Württemberg, Germany, under his leadership, with the signal cooperation of Jörg M.
Herrmann, M.D., the clinic’s director. Thure, in his introduction to one of the sessions,
on ‘Models and methods in Biosemiotics’ succinctly stated the project’s aims: “to sup-
port the experiment of bringing together the Humanities, represented by semioticians; the
Natural Sciences, represented by experts in molecular biology; and Medicine, a science
with an uncertain position between both [the Natural Sciences and the Humanities], and
represented by internists, psychiatrists, and clinical psychologists.” He depicted the topic of
the conference as “the proposition of an order in nature which has nothing to do with [brute
efﬁcient] causality, but one which canalizes causal processes between living systems and
their environment, as well as in, and between, these systems. We maintain”, he concluded,
“that this order is a semiotic one, or at least can be described in semiotic terms” (2001: 35).
These Glottertal conferences, Sebeok notes, are where Danish biosemioticians
such as Jesper Hoffmeyer and his colleagues made the acquaintance of American
semioticians such as Sebeok and his colleagues, as well as with biologists and
semioticians of the Moscow-Tartu circle such as Kalevi Kull – and were the direct
forerunners of today’s annual International Gatherings in Biosemiotics conferences,
which were originally convened as a follow-up to the Glottertal conferences by
Hoffmeyer, Emmeche and Kull.
Thure von Uexküll’s role in the development of contemporary biosemiotics,
however, extends far beyond the organizational role that he performed in bring-
ing together researchers in medicine, science, and the humanities. For as noted by
Kull and Hoffmeyer, Uexküll was an active colleague and collaborator with both
the Copenhagen and the Tartu groups of semioticians, authoring a number of sem-
inal biosemiotic papers addressing the fundamental issues of biosemiotics. These
included a series of papers examining the bio-semiotic emergence of a sense of
“self ” (Uexküll 1984, 1986b, 1992a, 1995), in which is posited a theory of “natu-
ral semiotic levels ranging from the cell constituting the lowest level (the ‘semiotic

9
Endosemiosis
281
atom’) and progressing through the ascending semiotic levels of vegetative semio-
sis (e.g., phytosemiotics) to animal semiosis (zoosemiotics) to human sign systems
[anthroposemiotics] which allow for the capacity to represent absent objects and
possible worlds” (2005: 489).
Moreover, and although his extensive research into human psychosomatic phe-
nomena and its treatment by medical professionals diverged in some important ways
from the ideas put forth by his father, Thure von Uexküll throughout his life helped
to preserve his father’s legacy and to advance and extend the concepts central to
Jakob von Uexküll’s Umweltlehre. Indeed, Thure collaborated with Jakob through-
out the last few years of his father’s life, co-authoring “a biological variation on a
Platonic dialogue” called Die ewige Frage in 1943, and contributing a chapter to Der
Sinn des Lebens (published posthumously in 1947). He also, along with his mother,
Gudrun von Uexküll, completed the last nine chapters of Jakob von Uexkull’s unﬁn-
ished ﬁnal book Das allmächtige Leben (1950) by working from the notes left
behind by his late father. Thure also edited a collection of his father’s works (1980)
and authored extensive commentaries upon them after the “re-discovery” of Jakob’s
Umweltlehre by semioticians in the 1980s (1982a, 1987, 1992b, 1993b, 2004).
Throughout his life, however, Thure von Uexkull’s primary focus was on “de-
mechanising” the approach to medicine that views the patient’s body as a broken
machine to be put back into working order by the physician; and upon the devel-
opment of a genuinely “integrative medicine” that would recognize the active
role that the body itself plays in the establishment and disestablishment of both
health and disease, based upon its interpretation of the signs that impinge upon it
not only from the external environment, but from the brain and from the rest of
the massively intercommunicating systems constituting the internal environment,
as well.
Thus, though he was well aware of (and stressed to his colleagues the importance
of considering) the fact that “mental states” are, in fact, physical (i.e., chemical and
neuronal) states, and therefore are important contributors to both a patient’s health
and disease, he resisted the over-simple and somewhat “mystical” ideas proposed
by some of his colleagues that psychosomatic phenomena such as hypertension
and stomach ulcers were entirely the product of the patient’s cognitive states and
could be thus treated solely by psychotherapy, arguing instead that a truly integra-
tive medicine must acknowledge the non-mentalistic biosemiosis that characterizes
multicellular body processes themselves.
“The overwhelming majority of the objective evidence of a disease,” he noted,
belongs to those types of processes taking place within the body, which, in turn, are sub-
divided into subsystems (organ systems, organs, tissue, cells, cellular organelles). . .. The
participants in the exchange of signs that takes place on the biological level are thus given
. . .[and] the sign processes use chemical, thermal, mechanical and electrical processes as
sign carriers. They make up an incredible number. If one reﬂects upon the fact that the
human body consists of 25 trillion cells which is more than 2,000 times the number of
people living on earth, and that these cells have direct or indirect contact with each other
through sign processes, one gets an impression of the amount. Only a fraction are known to
us. Yet this fraction alone is hardly comprehensible. . .. The messages that are transmitted
include information about the meaning of processes in one system of the body (cells, tissues,

282
Thure von Uexküll (1908–2004) et al.
organs, or organ systems) for other systems as well as for the integrative regulation systems
(especially the brain) and the control systems (such as the immune system) (1986: 204).
Endosemiotics is the term that Thure von Uexküll and his medical colleagues
Werner Geigges (1953– ) and Jörg Herrmann (1944– ) coin in the following selec-
tion to describe the vast – and still yet to be fully undertaken – research program
into the investigation of the body’s multiply interacting systems of non-linguistic,
non-mentalistic signs.
In short, just as Jakob von Uexküll’s notion of the Umwelt of the organism-
in-its-surround has been described as “the crucible of the animal’s informational
relationships, perforce the ‘meaningful’ ones, with the environment” (Anderson
et al. 1984), Thure von Uexküll’s even more ambitious project of endosemiotics
is the attempt to describe and understand the crucible of informational relation-
ships taking place within the organism itself. Biology, as Thure mentions, knows
this internal interaction space to be vast, with trillions of endlessly interacting cells,
exchanging informational “messages” on the ever-changing contours of a moment-
to-moment epigenetic landscape. Moreover, the necessarily interacting systems
within the body each appear to operate using their own unique sign system, and
so one of the most pressing question for a science of the body becomes: How do all
these differently operative sign systems translate each other’s very different kinds
of incoming and outgoing chemical, electrical, gradient, frequency-dependent and
conformational signals and “messages” so as to be able to causally inﬂuence each
other into and out of the various transient optimal states needed to result in the coor-
dinated accomplishments of hunting, feeding, ﬂeeing, metabolising, respirating,
wound-healing, growth, digestion, excretion and reproduction?
With the initiation of this project – and by his tireless crusade to make inte-
grated, psychosomatic medicine an obligatory part of every medical practioner’s
education – Thure von Uexküll, as semiotican Marcel Danesi once said of Uexküll’s
colleague Thomas A. Sebeok, helped “transform semiotics back into a ‘life
science’ – having taken it back, in effect, to its roots in medical biology [and specif-
ically, the uninterrupted tradition of symptomology found in all cultures]. In other
words, he uprooted semiotics from the philosophical, linguistic, and hermeneutic
terrain in which it has been cultivated for centuries and replanted it into the larger
biological domain from where it sprang originally” (2002: o.l.).

9
Endosemiosis
283
Endosemiotics (1993)
Preliminary Remarks
The term endosemiosis refers to processes of sign transmission inside the organ-
ism. So this article presupposes and starts from a speciﬁc systematics which has
been derived from systems theory (von Bertalanffy 1968). The relations between
systems theory and sign theory have been discussed elsewhere. Here it is sufﬁcient
to emphasize the following.
The framework of systems theory describes a graduated order in which, begin-
ning with and “rising” from the phenomena of inorganic nature, the phenomena of
all living beings up to human social systems are allocated to different “integration
levels”. In this article on endosemiosis, we address the second of these integration
levels, postulating the cell to be its most elementary integrating unit; in contrast,
sign processes occurring within the cell, between its organelles, are regarded as
“microsemioses”.
Thus, all sign processes occurring in multicellular organisms are “endosemi-
otic”, no matter whether we look at fungi, plants, animals, or humans. Since these
organisms differ considerably in their structure and in the differentiation of their
parts, it is useful to start out from the highly differentiated higher animals and
humans. There we ﬁnd organs – especially the immune system, the nervous sys-
tem, and the locomotor apparatus – which do not exist in fungi and plants. All
endosemiotic sign processes are indirectly linked to phenomena in the organism’s
environment. For example, the immune system contains an almost complete list
of potential antigens – that is, of substances in the environment which can harm
the organism. Moreover, programs for the construction of subjective “phenomenal
worlds” are stored in the central nervous systems of higher living beings, contain-
ing all details essential to the orientation of motor activity. In this way the nervous
system is closely linked to the locomotor apparatus.
Jakob von Uexküll coined the term Umwelt1 (“subjective universe”, “signiﬁcant
surround”, “phenomenal world”, or “self-world”, as opposed to Umgebung – “envi-
ronment”; for a glossary of Jakob von Uexküll’s terminology, see Thure von Uexküll
1982). From a semiotic perspective, its implications are the following:
(1) Animals and humans are wrapped in a network of sign processes which connect
them with their environment and, at the same time, protect them by trans-
posing this environment, according to its subjective meaning, into Umwelt or
“individual reality”.
(2) These networks are composed of signs which, because of their “private” charac-
ter, are accessible only to the encoding subject, whereas they are mere “noise”
to all others.
1 According to Krampen (1986: 84), J. von Uexküll’s term Umwelt “means the subjective world
of what is meaningful impingement for the living being in terms of its own information processing
equipment, sign systems, and codes”.

284
Thure von Uexküll (1908–2004) et al.
J. von Uexküll termed these Umwelt-programs stored in the organism “counter-
world” or “inner world” (Gegenwelt and Innenwelt). We would like to reserve the
term “counterworld” for organic systems like the nervous system and the immune
system which, independent of other organic systems, store “world programs” of
their own. When these “counterworlds”, by means of circular sign relations between
nervous system and Immune system, intertwine and form a unity on the higher
integration level of the organism, we speak of “inner worlds”.
Such an “inner world” contains templates, as it were, of the sectors of the envi-
ronment that are signiﬁcant to the living being. These templates are recorded in
signs exchanged between cells and between organs. Therefore, although they are
closely related to the organism’s environment we have to call them endosemiotic.
Before signs can be exchanged between individuals – animal or human – and their
environment, these endosemiotic signs which belong to an “inner world” have to be
translated into the codes of other – zoo semiotic or anthroposemiotic – sign systems
(in humans, this implies translation into psychological and social sign systems).
The Need for an “Endosemiotic Anatomy”
When we speak of “endosemiotic anatomy”, we are using the term “anatomy” as
a metaphor. In contrast with its traditional use, here it is meant to denote a science
which describes not static, but dynamic structures being constantly constructed and
transformed. We hope that this metaphoric use will help to redeﬁne the term itself.
Concepts like “functiona1 anatomy” or “anatomy of functions” represent similar
attempts within anatomy to overcome the traditionally static connotation of the
term. We assume that the vital relations between the organism’s cells and organs
are established and maintained by information transmission through signs and not
by rigid tissue structures. Since sign processes do not ﬁgure in the traditional med-
ical model of the body, not only the doctrine of signs, but also the organizing
principle introduced by systems theory will have far-reaching effects on our con-
ceptions of the structure of the body. The traditional model has been developed by
anatomists studying corpses. (“Ana-tomy” is derived from the Greek word for “cut-
ting open”, and originally meant dissection.) In this model’s spatial order, bones,
joints, muscles, and internal organs are enclosed by the skin as an outer integument.
This image neglects that organisms are “autopoietic” – that is, self-constructing and
self-maintaining systems (Maturana 1980) in which bones, joints, muscles, internal
organs, and the skin enclosing them also participate in the process of autopoiesis.
Therefore, as Victor von Weizsacker (1930) has put it, health is not a capi-
tal resource which one may exhaust, but exists only so long as it is continually
generated. If it ceases to be generated, one is already ill.
Antonowsky (1987) has countered “pathogenesis”, a term common in medicine
which presupposes health to be the given natural state of the anatomical organism,
with his new coinage “salutogenesis”. The difference in perspective is radical: the
pathogenetic perspective concentrates on processes which change or destroy given
structures of the body, whereas the salutogenetic model emphasizes processes which

9
Endosemiosis
285
build up and maintain those structures. And since salutogenetic processes have to
be described by looking at sign processes, medicine needs a “semiotic anatomy” for
the concept of salutogenesis to come into its own.
Such a model proceeds from the assumption that animals and humans transform,
through zoosemiotic and anthroposemiotic sign processes, their “objective” envi-
ronment (as it presents itself to the neutral observer) into “subjective universes” or
“individual realities” enclosing their bodies like “solid shells which, however, are
invisible to the outside observer” (Uexküll 1920). These exosemiotic sign processes
may be described by means of the functional cycle (Funktionskreis – Uexküll 1957)
or of the situation cycle (Situationskreis – Uexküll 1977).
In establishing a semiotic anatomy, we must take into consideration that
the exosemiotic sign processes which transform the objective environment into
subjective universes or individual realities require endosemiotic sign processes
which build up the immunologic and neural “counterworlds” or “inner worlds” in
the animal or human body. There are two conclusions to be drawn from this:
(1) Organism and subjective universe (or individual reality) together form a uniﬁed
system. Bateson speaks of “units of survival” (1972: 483) and points to the fact
that an organism which destroys its Umwelt (and perhaps, together with this
subjective universe, the sector of its objective environment necessary for the
organism’s survival – that is, its “niche”) destroys itself.
(2) This uniﬁed system has to be described by a semiotic anatomy as being hier-
archically structured in integration levels. On each of these levels, systems
(and the sign processes connecting them with each other) appear which then,
on a higher integration level, function as subsystems and elements of more
complex systems, with more complex signs being exchanged between them.
Semiotically speaking, each integration level may be regarded as a suprasystem
of sign systems (Nöth 1985), or as context in the sense of a meta-level on which
information about information is transmitted (Emmeche and Hoffmeyer 1987,
The Semiotics of Nature: The Linguistic-Genetic Analogy, unpublished).
For the time being (that is, as long as our knowledge of the details of the incred-
ibly complex informational processes in the body remains sketchy), the project of
establishing a semiotic anatomy may be carried out only fragmentarily and provi-
sionally. It will have to be continually elaborated and corrected. Nonetheless, it is
possible and imperative to make a start by giving a ﬁrst outline.
Wieser (1990) indicates the importance of a semiotic clariﬁcation of those sign
systems which make possible the interaction of cells, organs, organisms, and their
environment. He states that
present evolution research is not so much interested any more in the relationship of genes
and environment, mutation and selection or in the problem of how ever-improving individ-
ual adaptation comes about, but rather tries to understand how integrated biological systems
(organisms, societies, ecosystems) develop from reproducible parts (genes, cells, individ-
uals, populations) – and what the struggle with a kaleidoscopically changing environment
contributes to this process. Thus, evolution research should concern itself primarily with the
dynamics of the negotiations between the respective parts and their superordinate system as

286
Thure von Uexküll (1908–2004) et al.
well as between this system and the environment (while it should be remembered that the
‘system’ also belongs to the environment of the ‘parts’ and therefore helps to shape their
fate in the same manner in which its own fate is shaped by the physico-chemical conditions
of the environment).
The following may be read as a “list of contents” on which this ﬁrst sketch
of our semiotic project will be based: rising from the ﬁrst level of the aforemen-
tioned microsemiotic sign processes occurring inside individual cells, we arrive at
the second level, cytosemiotic information networks. Cytosemioses shape cells, as
subsystems or elements, into tissues and integrate them into the alliance of an organ,
thus giving rise to a third integration level on which the cytosemioses of cells are
translated or integrated into organ semioses.
The plane of organs includes the immune system and the nervous system, whose
sign processes build up two different “counterworlds”. The counterworld of the ner-
vous system is joined together, through circular sensorimotor sign connections (see
Piaget’s “sensorimotor circular reactions” [1955]), with the organ of the “locomotor
apparatus” to form a unity. Furthermore, the counterworld of the nervous system
is linked, through circular neuroendocrine sign processes, with the internal organs.
Finally, on the next, fourth integration level, we ﬁnd “program texts” which are
retrievable at any time for semioses: the counterworlds of the immune system and
of the nervous system – which is bound up with the locomotor apparatus – are
associated by sign connections and merge to form a common “inner world”of the
organism (Fig. 9.1).
Figure 9.1 shows some of the potential links between the endocrinium, the ner-
vous system, and the immune system. The bright lines stand for neural connections,
the black lines for hormonal, and the broken lines for postulated connections whose
sign-transferring molecules have not yet been detected. This ﬁgure gives an idea of
the complexity of the network of endosemiotic sign relations.
We have outlined a program for reﬂecting on the endosemiotic part of a semi-
otic anatomy. The psychological and social sign systems which likewise belong to
a semiotic anatomy are “exosemiotic” and will only be touched upon here. We have
to take into consideration that our body-sense (that is, the “body we experience”)
requires sign processes which already belong – as an example will illustrate – to
a psychological integration level. Moreover, in animals and humans (with upward
and downward effects between the social, psychological, and biotic-endosemiotic
levels continually taking place within these bio-psychosocial systems), sign pro-
cesses of the psychological and the social integration level inﬂuence the order of
endosemiotic sign processes, and vice versa.
This illustrates that it is difﬁcult to keep to the ordering principle of hierar-
chical organization. This ordering principle takes up the old notion of the “scala
rerum”. A one-dimensional graduated order, however, cannot account for the com-
plex relationships we are faced with. Therefore, a semiotic anatomy has to lead to
multidimensional and ramiﬁed models as well as to circular models joining together
different integration levels (Uexküll and Wesiack 1988). Moreover, a terminology
that is as graphic as possible must be designed.

9
Endosemiosis
287
Fig. 9.1 The circularity of endosemiosis in the immune and nervous systems

288
Thure von Uexküll (1908–2004) et al.
The Body as a Web of Semioses: Introductory Considerations
Weiner (1989) thinks that a semiotic anatomy is already emerging: “We witness
a silent revolution in our thinking on the body in health and disease. . . This rev-
olution results from the insight that the body is not a mechanical system. . . but a
self-regulating communication system which is integrated into larger systems (con-
sisting of other organisms, institutions and ecologies) of information exchange.”
So Weiner places great emphasis upon the investigation of the semiotic structure
which results from the interlocking of the various integration levels of cells, organs,
organisms, and psychological and social systems.
He emphasizes that inside the body, electrical and chemical signals are the most
important vehicles for information exchange; by interacting with specialized cell
structures (the receptors), these vehicles enable cells to communicate with each
other.
He does not, however, address any of the problems of sign theory which arise in
this context. He leaves aside, for example, that the electrical and chemical vehicles
are only carriers of messages; that they are not only generated by those cells which
emit signs but also are encoded by them; and that for any information to be trans-
ferred, the receptors of other cells have to decode them and encode them into new
signs.
Yet Weiner depicts the ease with which the “conversions” from one vehicle sys-
tem into another occur inside the body: the transformation of physical vehicles
like pressure, heat, or cold into electrical vehicles, of electrical into chemical, and
vice versa, of chemical into electrical vehicles. Here syntactical interrelations and
maybe even syntactical hierarchies of signs become apparent. Yet Weiner does not
go beyond the signetic perspective, from which signemic2 problems concerning
the coding of vehicles into signs and their “translation” from one sign system into
another are not apparent.
Chemically determinable ink lines on a sheet of paper may turn into letters (that
is, into semiotically meaningful letters). In analogy, the question of how physi-
cal, chemical, or electrical vehicles become signs carrying messages can only be
asked (and answered) if it is taken into consideration that, just as an alphabet is
not a random collection of meaningless line patterns, endosemiotic codes are not
accumulations of meaningless physical, chemical, and electrical processes.
2 Ethnologists have coined, by analogy with the linguistic concepts of “phonetics” and “phone-
mics”, the terms “etic” and “ernic” to indicate two different approaches to a foreign culture. An
approach from “outside” in which the observer applies the criteria of his or her own culture to
foreign phenomena is called “etic”. The “emic” method implies the observer′s attempt to use the
criteria of the culture under observation. Adopting these ethnological concepts for semiotic pur-
poses, we may characterize the attitude of an observer of signs who is interested only in the physical
and chemical properties of the sign vehicles as “sign-etic”, In contrast, the observer’s attitude is
called “sign-emic” if his or her interest is centered on the meanings of sign vehicles (see Uexküll
1990).

9
Endosemiosis
289
The “biosemiotic crunch question” is: how can a human observer decipher signs
emitted by living beings of other species? Here we will not discuss this in detail.
Sufﬁce it to say that this question concerns the problem of the attribution of meaning
(Bedeutungserteilung) and that we have to distinguish between the signiﬁcance of
an event as it appears to us as human observers and the signiﬁcance which the same
event assumes for the observed living system. Two points must be taken into account
in this context:
(1) The physical and chemical properties by which we identify vehicles inform
us of the possibilities for manipulation offered us by the vehicles. So their
properties are meaningful to us.
(2) We have to infer the meaning which vehicles assume as signs for living systems
(or cells and organs) from the way in which these systems behave toward their
environment after the vehicles have acted on their receptors. Thus, we have to
interpret their behavior as semioses of symptomatization3 – that is, as symptoms
of their biological state; we may then understand this state as the interpretant
which attributes to a vehicle the meaning it has for the observed system. In other
words, we have to conceive of the behavior as an (indexical) sign pointing to
the interpretant. Sebeok (1976) puts this as follows: “Let it be recalled that all
objects on the one hand, and the memory, being a reservoir of interpretants, on
the other, are also kinds of signs or systems of signs”.
Both observations stress the fact that observation can show us living systems
only “from the outside” – that is, as they present themselves “to us”. In order to
inquire into their “inside”, into their sign relationships (with themselves, with their
environment and other systems), we must ﬁnd out how the living system construes
its conditions. It should be kept in mind here that “outside” and “inside” originally
are semiotic concepts in that they mark a viewpoint outside or inside a sign system.
The Conceptual Framework for Identifying Endosemioses
In many respects, endosemioses resemble sign processes in plants (phytosemioses).
The greater complexity of endosemiotic sign processes in animal and human organ-
isms, however, calls for a more precise conceptual system which provides a tool for
identifying endosemioses.
3 We may distinguish three forms of semiosis by considering differences in the contributions of
emitter and receiver: (a) Semioses of information, in which the inanimate environment acts as a
“quasi-emitter”, but assumes no semiotic functions - they must be performed by the receiver alone
(Bottner 1980); (b) Semioses of symptomatization, in which the emitter is a living being which
sends signals through its behavior – although these signals are not directed toward any receiver,
they inform the expert of the situation and/or the state of the living being; and (c) Semioses of
communication, the only sign processes in which emitter and receiver share the semiotic tasks (see
Uexküll 1990).

290
Thure von Uexküll (1908–2004) et al.
In contrast with common causal-mechanistic research, semiotic research does
not proceed analytically, but synthetically. Semioses are uniﬁed (i.e., systemic)
interrelations. To discover such interrelations in nature, semiotic research needs a
conceptual repertory which includes synthetical terms and a methodology allow-
ing empirical application and veriﬁcation of these terms. Moreover, the synthetical
terms must be suitable for describing units as emerging phenomena; that is, they
have to be dynamic concepts as well.
To arrive at such a conceptual repertory, it is best to start from the principle of
correspondences as deﬁned by Plessner (1976):
According to the principle which Uexküll once phrased “Where there is a foot,
there is a path, where there is a mouth, there is food, where there is a weapon,
there is an enemy”, it should be possible to point out correspondences easily and
unambiguously.
Plessner discusses the difﬁculties which arise if the biological principle of cor-
respondences is unreﬂectingly applied to humans. However, here we are concerned
only with the principle itself. It says that in the sphere of living things each affor-
dance presupposes a counteraffordance – that is, it can be realized only through an
interaction. In analogy to Hegel’s famous example of master and servant, the affor-
dance of the foot presupposes the counteraffordance of the ground, the affordance
of the mouth is founded on the counteraffordance of food, etc.
We may express this in the formula “affordance (+) counteraffordance = action”.
Here action is deﬁned as a synthetical concept. This implies that an action is to be
combined from the contributions of two (or more) participants, but also that it is
only in the framework provided by an action that phenomena like participants and
their affordances can come to the fore. Therefore, “(+)” here is not meant to denote
a mathematical concept, but to indicate that “action” refers to the higher integration
level (the context) on which two (or more) affordances complement one another to
form something new. Accordingly, affordances in their turn may be seen as actions
(or subsystems) built from even simpler affordances. Like the concepts of “system”
and “subsystem”, the concepts of “action” and “affordance” are relative with respect
to the level of description.
It is crucial that synthesis here means that a living system and its environment
are ﬁtted into an association of affordance and counteraffordance (foot and ground,
mouth and food, etc.), and that cooperation and conﬂict do not give rise to pur-
poseless chaos but to a (biologically) useful process, to a “utilization of meaning”
(Bedeutungsverwertung – Uexküll 1982: 36, 1940: 13).
Mouth and foot belong to the body of a living being, and food and ground are
parts of the environment which are chosen (as parts of its subjective universe) by
the living being and provided by the environment (in its function as a niche). This
relationship between living being and environment constitutes an ecological equi-
librium in which the environment must not dictate to the living beings the laws of
their survival, and the living beings must not prescribe to the environment its forms
of manifestation. This synthetical rule of ecological balance is neglected in the neo-
darwinist notion of an environment entirely controlling the development of living
beings by selection, as well as in the belief that the environment is an inexhaustible

9
Endosemiosis
291
supply to be exploited by living beings, and above all humans. Whatever survives
and develops is always the unity of organism plus environment (Bateson 1972).
Semiotically speaking, living systems neither ﬁnd a signiﬁed – an “object” – in
their environment nor do they arbitrarily create it; rather, they generate it together
with the environment (through affordance and counteraffordance) within the frame-
work of their actions. In the course of this process, the “object” is temporarily
absorbed into the whole of the system – that is, “assimilated” (Piaget 1952).
Therefore, our synthetical conceptual system has to be modelled on the whole of
an action which consists of four parts:
(1) a living system (with a receptor for taking in environmental inﬂuences as sign
vehicles and an effector for answering with a behavior or affordance);
(2) the sign (into which the received sign vehicles are encoded);
(3) the interpretant (which is responsible for the encoding process or the “attribu-
tion of meaning” [Bedeutungserteilung]); and
(4) the denoted object (which is actualized in the course of an attribution of
meaning – i.e., through the interaction of the effector’s affordance with the
environment’s counteraffordance).
If the receiver is left out of account, the sign would be characterized by a triadic
relation (according to Peirce 1988). A tetradic formula, however, would match
with the “general sign relation” proposed by Emmeche and Hoffmeyer (1987, The
Semiotics of Nature: The Linguistic-Genetic Analogy, unpublished):
Rather than the triadic system of Peirce we would prefer, however, the tetradic system. . ..
From a formal point of view the sign would be deﬁned through a triadic relation. By intro-
ducing the fourth link in the “sign relation” (the effector), we want to stress, however, that
in actual life not only reﬂection but also action is always involved in the use of signs. The
interpretation of the sign is part of active life and thus directly or indirectly leads to some
kind of behaviour involving the object referred to by the sign.
The simplest model for this conceptual system is the feedback cycle. It implies
(1) a system (with a detector for receptor and a correcting element for effector).
The feedback cycle “ﬁxes” (2) a “reference value” – that is, an interpretant which
assigns a certain meaning (“too high”, “too hot”, etc.) to the “sign vehicles” of
the detector’s responses and thus encodes them into (3) signs which trigger off the
response of the correcting unit (the effector) – i.e., the system’s affordance. The
system’s affordance and the counteraffordance of the “controlled member” together
generate (4) the signiﬁed or object (the reset of the actual value to the reference
value – that is, the “utilization of meaning”).
As the expression “utilization of meaning” makes evident, the terms “value”
and “meaning” in this conceptual framework are “self-referential”: affordances are
directed toward the reference value of the system; that is, they are meaningful only
with respect to this value. The reference value is either fed into the system from
outside – this applies to cybernetic machines – or established by the system “itself ”
(cf. Krampen 1981).
In other words: the “self ” of a living being follows the meaning which those parts
of its environment it relates to assume for its construction (autopoiesis – Maturana

292
Thure von Uexküll (1908–2004) et al.
and Varela 1980) and its survival, and thus encodes this meaning into signs govern-
ing its behavior. So in biology, too, it is the code which is the unifying or synthetical
principle.
J. von Uexküll phrased this as follows:
Each component of an organic or inorganic object, on appearing in the role of a meaning-
carrier on the life-stage of an animal subject, has been brought into contact with a
‘complement’, so to speak, in the body of the subject that becomes the meaning-utilizer.
(1940: 7; 1982: 30)
We cannot directly observe the interpretant according to which a living system
codes effects of the environment on its receptors into signs. We have to infer it from
the system’s behavior; we have to interpret endosemioses “against the grain”, as
it were, by reconstructing their “history”: we take the last act or behavior of the
living system as an indexical sign pointing to the interpretant which, as the coding
instance, has assigned to the sign the meaning it has with regard to the system.
Who Is “Some-body”? Inquiring into the Endosemiotic Self
The problem of dynamics. Endosemioses have their own dynamics and are, as we
have already emphasized, “self-referential” (that is, circular): they refer to them-
selves (Maturana and Varela 1988). But who or what is this “self ” which in living
systems establishes its reference value, and how is it involved in the dynamics of
endosemioses? In Peirce’s deﬁnition of “sign”, this “self ” is “somebody”: “A sign
is something which stands to somebody for something in some respect or capac-
ity” (CP 2.228–303). Here “somebody” is a receiver of signs and lacks “something”
which is shown to him or her by means of “something” (i.e., something else serving
as a sign). The receiver’s (interpreter’s) relationship with the other elements of the
sign process is determined by a need. Is it possible to deduce the dynamics inherent
to endosemioses from this need?
A need is usually conceived as a force which reaches out for us from somewhere.
Piaget (1952) explains that we misunderstand the concept as long as we imagine a
force intervening from outside in life processes. It is just the other way round – the
need is only an aspect of the dynamics of those life processes.
The basic needs do not exist, in effect, prior to the motivating cycles which permit them to
be gratiﬁed. They appear during functioning. One could not say, therefore, that they precede
repetition: they result from it as well, in an endless circle. [...] From the psychological point
of view, need must not be conceived as being independent of global functioning of which
it is only an indication. From the physiological point of view, moreover, need presupposes
an organization in ‘mobile balance’ of which it simply indicates a transitory imbalance. In
both kinds of terminology, need is thus the expression of a totality momentarily incomplete
and tending toward reconstituting itself. . . (Piaget 1952: 44 f.; italics added)
The circular process is deﬁned as “endless circle”, as a self-contained unity or
“totality”. If we regard such “totalities tending toward reconstituting themselves” as

9
Endosemiosis
293
sign processes, we may say that a “totality” is completed only when the utilization
of meaning has been achieved.
When we deﬁne the interpretant as the present state of a living system which is a
“totality momentarily incomplete and tending toward reconstituting itself ”, this pro-
vides us with a synthetical formula by which circular processes can be described as
self-generating totalities. Yet the question remains: who or what is the “somebody”
or “self ” that establishes the reference values representing the state or interpretant
of the living system at a given time?
“Body self ” and the Body as a “Tool” of Life: Code Duality
The endosemiotic processes generating the unity of the organism may be described
in analogy to the words or sentences generating the unity of a context. Antonovsky
(1987) has termed those processes “salutogenesis”. A text determines the words and
sentences it consists of, and at the same time it is realized by them. To transfer this
formula onto biological relationships, we need to form an idea of how the whole
and its parts generate and determine each other.
We may start from the observation that all cells of our body stem from a single
cell, the fertilized egg cell or so-called zygote. It has given the same genetic code
as a dowry to all daughter cells. The code provides for them all to carryon their sur-
face an individual “monogram” speciﬁc of their biological self – the so-called MH
complex (major histocompatibility complex) – which distinguishes them from the
cells of all other organisms. The cells of the immune system, which watch over the
individuality of the organism, “read” this sign combination and direct their activity
against all cells with a foreign monogram (we will discuss this in more detail later).
So here “the whole” controls, through the kinship of the body cells, the activity of
its parts, and at the same time is generated by this activity.
Moreover, the DNA of an individual’s genetic code, which all its cells have
received as a dowry from the fertilized egg cell, is only one variant on the DNA
which all individuals of the same generation have inherited from the generations
preceding them. The individual owes “the whole” of its manifestation (its pheno-
type) to the genotype laid down in the gene pool of its generation. This genotype is
the totality which, from a semiotic perspective, is represented by each individual of
this generation as pars pro toto, and at the same time is realized by these individuals
as a group.
This relatively abstract notion is put in concrete terms in a model developed by
Emmeche and Hoffmeyer (1987, The Semiotics of Nature: The Linguistic-Genetic
Analogy, unpublished). They assume a “code duality”: In the construction of body
cells and organism, the digital genetic code of the DNA is translated into an
analogue code (Fig. 9.2).
In Fig. 9.2, the DNA is understood as a part of the evolutionary stream of signs.
The receiver system – the fertilized egg, the actual “person” of biology – uses the
information transmitted by the DNA for the epigenetic process (that is, for construct-
ing the individual or the phenotype). Metaphorically speaking, the zygote reads the

294
Thure von Uexküll (1908–2004) et al.
DNA
ZYGOTE
NICHE
PHENOTYPE
Fig. 9.2 Emmeche and Hoffmeyer’s evolutionary stream of signs. From Emmeche and Hoffmeyer
(1987: 28, The Semiotics of Nature: The Linguistic-Genetic Analogy, unpublished)
book of its DNA and interprets its content as a kind of instruction for building a
tool for survival. Only with the help of this tool can the egg cell hope to continue its
cell lineage. The tool is required to be sufﬁciently suitable to survive in its ecologi-
cal niche and to reproduce itself. The ecological niche is the only real object in the
world of living systems (see Emmeche and Hoffmeyer 1987: 28, The Semiotics of
Nature: The Linguistic-Genetic Analogy, unpublished).
Emmeche and Hoffmeyer think that regarding the individual being as a “tool for
testing the suitability of the DNA of the fertilized egg cell” offers an alternative to
exaggerated individualistic notions as well as to the topical theory of the individual
being a “survival machine for selﬁsh genes” (Dawkins 1976). They stress that their
theory does not fall back upon old feudal ideas of the paramount value of the fam-
ily. (Nor does it resurrect fascist ideas of a single people’s pre-eminence, since it
emphasizes the common heritage of all living creatures.) They note that their view
ﬁts well with a recently renewed deep-felt kinship with all living forms which makes
us feel responsible to them. Their image of the fertilized egg cell as a re-staging of
the ﬁrst act of creation on earth is aimed at foregrounding two processes and their
interaction: the digital and the analog information processes and their translation
into one another.
This view has to be supplemented, however, by systemic aspects so that it
becomes evident how far Dawkins, in overemphasizing polar and linear concepts,
misses the reality of biological evolution (cf. also Wieser 1990).
At the stage of anthroposemiotic sign systems, the individual gains a new sig-
niﬁcance: human language has opened up a sphere in which it is clearly up to the
individual to develop new ideas and concepts; her or his achievements have become
more crucial to the survival of the species than biological adaptation to a given
environment. Although in this article we are mainly concerned with endosemio-
sis, we mention these exosemiotic aspects in passing. For the linguistic deﬁnition
of “self ” is valid in the endosemiotic sphere as well: “Somebody” translates the

9
Endosemiosis
295
digital message which has been handed down in an immensely long ancestral
line into the analog code of present sign processes in order to prompt the con-
struction of an individual which is to serve as a tool for testing and maintaining
a “niche”.
“Self ” and “Non-self ”
In the course of embryonic development, the daughter cells of the zygote differenti-
ate toward separate tasks. This differentiation may be pictured in a model similar to
the one Jakobson (1968) uses to describe the differentiation leading from the baby’s
babbling sounds to adult language: inarticulate vocalizations which are accompa-
nied by a childlike sense of omnipotence develop into consonants and vowels which
give rise to the differently articulated phonemes of adult language. Each of these
phonemes betrays that it belongs to a certain language. Quite similarly, the differ-
entiated cells of the body show that they belong to the species-speciﬁc construction
of an adult organism. Furthermore, they point to the individuality of a speciﬁc self.
In order to illustrate these considerations, we single out, from the almost indivis-
ible net of innumerable endosemioses, a speciﬁc interaction of different body cells:
an immune process. (Further below we will depict such processes in a larger con-
text and in more detail.) When we assume that the construction and maintenance of
living systems occurs, on all integration levels, in the form of totalities “momentar-
ily incomplete and tending toward reconstituting” themselves by assimilating parts
of their environment as “non-self ”, we notice that those processes are governed
by signs. It is signs which attribute to “non-self ”, according to its relevance to the
autopoiesis and the survival of the living system, a positive meaning (= beneﬁcial)
or negative meaning (= harmful). Only selective “recognition” of these differing
sign qualities allows the living system to maintain and defend its totality.
Endosemiotics addresses itself to conﬂicts of the body cells with an “inner
environment” or “milieu interne”; the task of the immune system is to secure the
integrity of the body and to recognize and eliminate “harmful non-self ”. “Milieu
externe” and “milieu interne” are connected by an iconic sign relation.
The cells of the immune system are derived from cells which in the course of
embryonic development turned into haemopoietic tissue and travelled into the bone
marrow. There they took on the function of precursor cells or stem cells from which,
through several intermediate stages, the various sorts of immune cells develop,
with the so-called lymphocytes constituting their largest group. When the immune
system responds to an encounter with “harmful non-self ”, the lymphocytes take
on speciﬁc tasks in cooperation with other cells: they produce antibodies, destroy
virus-infected cells, or control the activity of other cells. All these functions are
triggered by speciﬁc recognition mechanisms and are aimed at warding off harm-
ful “non-self factors”. In an immune response, lymphocytes perform some or all
of these functions and interact with other cells in a complex web of positive and
negative inﬂuences.
Recognition of the different sorts of antigens (“harmful non-self ”) as well as
precise regulation of the cooperation of the various cells result from sign processes

296
Thure von Uexküll (1908–2004) et al.
whose vehicles have been identiﬁed in increasing numbers in recent decades. It
has turned out that, apart from two global groups of “beneﬁcial non-self ” (e.g.,
nutrients) and “harmful non-self ” (e.g., foreign antigens), there is a group of “non-
self in the narrow sense”. While the ﬁrst two groups of “non-self ” are more or
less the same for all living systems or merely differ between species, the last group
consists of “non-self ” as opposed to the single individual – that is, of “individual
non-self ”.
“Self ” and “Individual Non-self ”
Each body cell of humans or higher animals bears on its surface, as a kind of mono-
gram, the aforementioned MHC (major histocompatibility complex), marking it as
a cell which belongs to that speciﬁc individual and is distinguished from the cells of
any other individual.
All cells of the mammal organism, and probably of all vertebrates, possesses in their cell
membrane a set of proteins which are the gene products of a speciﬁc genetic complex, the
so-called ‘major histocompatibility complex’ (MHC), which controls the ﬁtting of sugar
molecules into the protein molecules. These membrane proteins control the activity of T
lymphocytes in that the latter will recognize an antigen as ‘foreign’ only if it is associated
with MHC molecules. The MHC, which is known as HLA system in humans, is character-
ized by a high degree of polymorphism: It is extremely unlikely that two individuals who
are not related to each other possess identical sets of MHC products. (Staines et al. 1985)
The MHC controls the activity of T-lymphocytes against cells of their own body
which have been infected by a virus and bear on their surface, besides the MHC
monogram characterizing their type of cell, a virus antigen (that is, a second sign).
Destroying these cells prevents the virus from multiplying inside them. They are
sacriﬁced because viruses need a cell’s hereditary substance to multiply.
Moreover, T-lymphocytes also direct their activity against all intact cells carrying
a foreign MHC. Our immune system thus will treat all cells of a foreign organism as
dangerous non-self. This is a disruptive factor in transplant medicine: to the lympho-
cytes of the recipient of the transplant tissue, the tissue’s MHC molecules appear to
be antigens, so that it may be rejected. This is why MHC molecules have also been
called “transplantation antigens”.
This very function of the immune system, however, which is such an obstacle for
transplant medicine, is indispensable in protecting us from cancer. Protection from
cancer is based on the capacity to recognize and eliminate body cells whose MHC
monograms changed as they were transformed into cancer cells.
”Monograms” consisting of “readable” protein sequences on the cell surface
also playa critical part as identiﬁcation marks in the immune defense against
viruses, bacteria, and unicellular or multicellular parasites. Yet viruses are able to
change their monograms by mutating; thus in a new infection, they are no longer
recognized, and the previously acquired immunity fails. Some parasites can deceive
their host by mimicry (Staines et al. 1985), donning a wrap made from proteins of
the host’s red blood cells (and becoming, as it were, a wolf in sheep’s clothing).

9
Endosemiosis
297
“Self ” and “General Biological Non-self ”
A further MHC protein molecule appears only on the surface of speciﬁc immune
cells – the B lymphocytes and macrophages – and functions as a signal to other
cells participating in the immune response. This signal is recognized by a group of
T-lymphocytes, the so-called helper cells; they answer by stimulating the antibody-
producing B lymphocytes and thus enable them to “recognize” their speciﬁc
antigenes. All these cells are joined together in a circular interaction controlled
by speciﬁc signs, an interaction which we may call the “simplest basic melody”
or “basic text” of the immune system. We will now look at this cooperation more
closely, since the coherency of the involved elements gives an example of a semiotic
“totality tending toward reconstituting itself ”.
This coherency becomes apparent in that lymphocytes cannot proceed against
non-self on their own. They can decode the signs which control their behavior only
with the aid of other cells. Moreover, the lymphocytes’ contribution to the immune
response has to be supplemented by the contributions of other cells, above all the
macrophages, large cells which can, to a limited extent, operate independent of
immune defense processes and eliminate pathogenes (viruses and bacteria) by eat-
ing them – that is, by phagocytosis. This capacity is considerably heightened if the
pathogenes are marked by speciﬁc antibodies provided by B lymphocytes.
The circular process starts with a pathogene (bacterium or virus) encounter-
ing a macrophage which “identiﬁes”, by a speciﬁc sign, the pathogene as harmful
non-self. The vehicle of this sign is a relatively small component of the pathogene-
speciﬁc antigen; it is called “antigenic determinant” or “epitope”. Signetically
speaking, it consists of a certain sequence of amino acid molecules on the surface
of a sometimes quite large protein molecule. The signemic attribution of mean-
ing (Bedeutungserteilung) – that is, the encoding into a sign denoting an object of
phagocytosis – depends on the state of activity of the macrophage (its “appetite”,
which is to say its interpretant or reference value); as has been mentioned, the
macrophage’s activity substantially increases through combination with an antibody
supplied by B lymphocytes.
The macrophage’s response is, as we have said, phagocytosis: the pathogene
is eaten; but as long as antibodies are missing, it cannot be digested, or can be
only with difﬁculties. So simultaneously, antigen particles are secreted on the
macrophage’s surface and “presented”, as indexical signs, to other cells. The par-
ticles serve as signs to B lymphocytes (aided by T helper cells) and lead them
to produce the required antibodies. Thus, the macrophage’s reaction is, under a
semiotic perspective, a combination of “using behavior” (Gebrauchsverhalten – i.e.,
phagocytosis) and “signaling behavior” (Signalverhalten – i.e., presentation of sig-
nals) (Tembrock 1975), or of “utilization of meaning” (Bedeutungsverwertung) and
“attribution of meaning” (Bedeutungserteilung) (Uexküll 1982).
Immunoglobulins which are capable of binding and neutralizing antigens serve
as vehicles of the antibodies. Above all, however, they attach themselves, like a
“wanted” poster, onto the surface of the antigen-bearing bacteria and viruses, thus
“denoting” them as prey to the macrophages, whose appetite, as we have said,
multiplies if pathogenes are marked in this way.

298
Thure von Uexküll (1908–2004) et al.
Antibody-producing B lymphocytes bear on their surface membrane speciﬁc
receptors exclusively “recognizing” one particular antigen. When a B cell encoun-
ters the antigen which ﬁts its receptor it begins to divide, thus giving rise to two cell
types. One type develops into mature plasma cells which produce large quantities
of antibodies and give them off into the blood. The other type stays back in reserve;
these are the so-called memory cells. In a new infection with the same pathogene,
they develop very quickly into antibody-producing plasma cells; they are the basis
of an acquired immunity against a renewed illness from the pathogene.
However, since a B lymphocyte cannot “recognize” its speciﬁc antigen on
its own, the circle spanning the macrophage, the pathogene, and the antibody-
producing B cell only closes if another cell joins in, the so-called helper cell. Just
as an antigen becomes a sign which macrophages can read without difﬁculty only
after it has been combined with its antibody, produced by B lymphocytes, a sign
combination which B cells can read is only achieved if substances produced by the
helper cells during their contact with the antigen are added to the antigen.
In summary, we may say that the “totality” of the immune system’s “semiotic
basic melody” which “tends toward reconstituting itself ” consists of three stan-
zas. The ﬁrst stanza, in which the pathogene interacts with the macrophage and
the macrophage exhibits a signal response, is followed by the second stanza, in
which the helper cell encodes the signals presented by the macrophage into signs
for the antibody-producing B lymphocyte. The last stanza is introduced by B lym-
phocytes (which in the meantime have multiplied) producing antibodies which the
macrophages again encode into signs denoting the pathogene. Thus the process has
come full circle.
From a semiotic point of view, this “basic melody” may be understood as a
“text” (in the sense of a network of interrelations of meaning; we already spoke
of a “basic text” of the immune system). A text can be analyzed as a “semiotic
system” which, according to Klaus (1969), “consists of a set of elements and a set
of relations among them”, and in which there may be distinguished a paradigmatic
and a syntagmatic dimension (Nöth 1985: 175). In our example, the paradigmatic
dimension is represented by the pathogenes or antigens and the cells participat-
ing in the immune process. The syntagmatic dimension concerns the combination
(or composition) – that is, the course of the interaction between the respective patho-
gene and the immune cells. We think that here we are not merely using a metaphor
but applying an elementary epistemological structuring operation which allows us
to perceive a dynamic course of events as an integrated unity.
When we describe endosemiotic processes as “complex texts” or semiotic sys-
tems, a syntagmatic analysis becomes possible “which is concluded when a unit
cannot be reduced any more to subordinate units. This unit then is an element of a
paradigm” (Krampen et al. 1981). We become aware of “integration levels” if we
understand syntagma as the compositional form of a semiotic system which, in its
paradigmatic dimension, consists of subsystems as its elements, and if we recall that
subsystems may again be reduced to their elements and the relations between these
elements. For example, syntagmatic analysis of the cooperation between immune
system and hormone system (as of a “complex text” or semiotic system at a higher

9
Endosemiosis
299
integration level) would show that immune processes (as one category of subsys-
tems) and hormone processes (as another category of subsystems) represent its
paradigmatic dimension, while their cooperation represents its syntagmatic dimen-
sion. One integration level lower, syntagmatic analysis of the immune process (as
of a “text” or semiotic system) would yield the elements of pathogene and immune
cells as its paradigmatic dimension; and so forth.
Outline of a Semiotic Anatomy: The Integration Levels
When a distinction is drawn between phyto-, zoo-, and anthroposemiotics (Krampen
1981; Sebeok 1976), it refers to the pragmatic aspect of signs according to which
signs are “for somebody”; that is, the criterion for this taxonomy refers to the respec-
tive addressee. The systematics of micro and endosemiotics is based on similar
principles.
Such a method of classiﬁcation does not raise any problems as long as the
addressees (such as plants, animals, humans, cells, or cell organelles) can be phe-
nomenologically identiﬁed without complications. Difﬁculties arise, however, if
it has to be decided whether a cell aggregation, a tissue, or an organ should be
regarded, in an endosemiotic sense, as the addressee “for whom” certain sign
processes may possess a pragmatic meaning.
Here we are again confronted with the issue of the scala rerum; we have to
ﬁnd criteria for establishing a graduated order of endosemiotic integration levels.
Ethology has developed such criteria for the domain of zoosemiotics. By means of
these criteria, “temporary” and “permanent communication systems” in animals can
be deﬁned as sign receivers; “permanent communication systems” can be divided up
into “open associations” (for example, swarms of insects or birds), “colonies”, etc.
“Speciﬁc systems” which consist of individuals of the same species may be distin-
guished from “non-speciﬁc systems” composed of individuals of various species.
Also, criteria have been developed to assign “non-speciﬁc systems” to different
categories (e.g., the categories of symbioses and of parasitism – Tembrock 1975).
It has not yet been investigated whether and to what extent such taxonomic cri-
teria are suitable for identifying different forms of the coexistence of cells in the
body – that is, whether they are appropriate in the domain of endosemiotics. We will
touch upon “speciﬁc” or “relatively speciﬁc” systems when we discuss endosemi-
otic processes in the nervous system and the immune system. For two reasons,
however, we get into difﬁculties if we follow the criterion of speciﬁcity and consider
organs, which do consist of cells of different origin and function (supporting cells,
vascular cells, parenchymal cells, etc.), as “non-speciﬁc systems”: ﬁrst, because all
these cells are body cells, descended from one cell (the fertilized egg cell); second,
because “speciﬁcity” is deﬁned differently in physiology and semiotics. Apart from
medical ﬁndings on symbioses (e.g., symbiosis with certain bacteria on the skin, in
the mouth, and in the intestine) and on parasitism (of viruses, bacteria, malaria plas-
modia, etc.), we know little about true “non-speciﬁc systems” in the body; both phe-
nomena are essential to the immune system’s activities, yet strictly speaking, they

300
Thure von Uexküll (1908–2004) et al.
are beyond the scope of endosemiotics. Therefore, when we speak of “integration
levels” in the following, we move on relatively uncertain ground. It can be taken for
granted, however, that inside the body we do not ﬁnd a one-dimensional hierarchical
order, but several ramiﬁed orders and numerous feedback loops between them.
Four Endosemiotic Integration Levels – A Sketch
With the above reservations in mind, we now give a rough overview of the most
important integration levels in an endosemiotic anatomy. The ﬁrst integration level
is found in the aforementioned “microsemiotic” dialogue which takes place between
the genes and the activities of the enzymes in the cell body. The genes do not simply
dictate the construction of the cell structures; rather, they are interlinked, through
their interplay with the enzymes of the cell body, with the processes of cell division
during the growth and development of the organism which constructs and organizes
itself as autopoietic system.
Moreover, the genes are related to each other in another dialogue: in normal body
cells, proliferation and differentiation are subject to a complex genetic control which
is brought about, among other inﬂuences, by two different kinds of regulatory genes
acting in combination: the growth promoting “proto-oncogenes” and their antago-
nists, the “suppressor genes”. The proto-oncogenes are crucial, for example, to the
formation of growth factors and of receptors for growth factors; or they inﬂuence,
as DNA-binding proteins, the “switching on and off” of genes, or are involved in
controlling the cell cycle (Welter 1989).
The signiﬁcance of the interplay of different regulating factors becomes apparent
in tumor genesis; it illustrates how microsemiotic and endosemiotic sign processes
interlock. If in normal cells proto-oncogenes are changed or unphysiologically acti-
vated, they turn into oncogenes which not only transform normal cells into cancer
cells, but also may inﬂuence a tumor cell’s behavior toward other cells.
Tumor genesis, however, always occurs in a “multistage sign process” in which
the interpretants of cells are affected so that the cells’ responsiveness is activated or
deactivated. It has been demonstrated that disturbances of deactivation or the loss of
suppressor genes may lead to tumor formation.
That these regulatory genes play a critical part in tumor genesis has been proved
ﬁrst for the retinoblastoma, a malignant degeneration of the retina (Knudson 1973:
325–328).
When we go from the ﬁrst to the second integration level, we enter the endosemi-
otic sphere where ﬁrst we come upon cell-to-cell communication by cytosemiotic
processes. This transition to the second integration level draws our attention to a
semiotic network whose sign processes occur through speciﬁc structures, the so-
called “gap junctions”; these are ﬁne channels in the cell walls through which
neighboring cells communicate directly and which facilitate direct metabolic and
electrical contact. Presumably they allow groups of cells to coordinate their steps
of development and differentiation and to unify their responses to regulation
signals.

9
Endosemiosis
301
When we summarize the great number of new ﬁndings on ‘gap junctions’, an entirely
new picture of cell-to-cell communication emerges. The hormone systems with their long-
distance effects and the transmitter substances with their shortdistance [synaptic] effects
are now joined by the ‘gap junction’ which is the most important component since it makes
possible a combined intracellular transmission of signals and metabolites. (Maelike 1985)
The importance of these gap-junction connections for cell communication may
be illustrated by looking at certain processes triggering an immune response; they
constitute a link in the chain of signs which activates the cooperation of cer-
tain immune cells. By means of autoradiography it could be demonstrated that
macrophages participate in this cooperation not only by using a net of ﬁne cords of
cytoplasm to capture “enemy substances” or antigens; through “gap junctions” they
also establish direct contact with helper-cell-activated large B cells (plasmablasts),
which then multiply to form memory cells and antibody-producing B lymphocytes.
Presumably it is sufﬁcient for the macrophages, on whose surface the antigen is
represented by a signal, to merely touch the plasmablasts so as to bring about their
division (clonal selection – Nossal 1988).
Antibodies, which are carried over great distances by the bloodstream, already
belong to a higher integration level of endosemiotic networks, since they can con-
nect immune cells far removed from each other. As they are similar to antigens –
which we will examine more closely later – they may be regarded as iconic signs.
On these higher integration levels (beyond the level of gap junctions), where
endosemiotic networks link the most diverse cells to form functional units, we may
distinguish systems which employ short-distance sign vehicles from those which
employ long-distance sign vehicles. Among those of short-distance effect, transmit-
ter substances are a crucial and particularly interesting group; among those with
long-distance effects, the various hormone systems are the most important. Their
functions interlink and overlap to such an extent that to distinguish different lev-
els of a semiotic anatomy here is of didactic rather than practical signiﬁcance. For
example, catecholamines can be classed with transmitter substances as well as with
long-range hormones.
Keeping these reservations in mind, we may describe the connections between
cells which do not immediately border on each other as the second integration
level of a semiotic model of the body. We would like to describe in more detail
the connections established by polypeptides and transmitters.
Polypeptides (= growth factors) are substances which in recent years have been
identiﬁed as vehicles in a network of sign processes which interlock in subtle ways
and thus regulate the multiplying of cells in the tissue aggregation of an organ
(e.g., of the liver or the skin) with great precision. Here an important semiotic prin-
ciple becomes apparent: division processes are not set off by a single growth factor,
but by a combination of two (or more) such factors. It is as if not single “letters”, but
only certain “words” will assume meaning as signs which can be “read” and then
answered by cell division.
That tumor cells lack the semiotic competence to “read” combined signs is
evidence of the biological signiﬁcance of this principle. Tumor cells start to divide

302
Thure von Uexküll (1908–2004) et al.
even when contacting single growth factors – responding, as it were, to isolated
letters of their alphabet (Kiefer and Havemann 1988).
In transmitter substances we ﬁnd a second mode of associating adjoining cells.
They are the vehicles for the sign processes which connect adjoining nerve cells.
Nerve cells consist of a small cell body and one or many dendrites – long, thin
branches which often possess far-reaching ramiﬁcations. Each dendrite is linked
to dendrites of many adjoining nerve cells. The gap between the contact points of
dendrites is called the synapse.
This synaptic cleft serves to establish and interrupt the exchange of information
between nerve cells: to initiate communication, transmitter substances are secreted
into the cleft, where they produce chemical vehicles for the signs which connect
adjoining cells. When the transmission of information is completed, the substances
are reabsorbed; they are stored by the nerve endings which generated these vehicles
and which in the next transmission of information will again secrete them into the
synaptic cleft. The nerve cell responds to the transmitter substance by changing its
membrane potential so that, from a signetic perspective, the chemical vehicle (the
transmitter substance) is transformed into an electrical vehicle. From a signemic
aspect, the nerve cell appears to respond by a signaling behavior (Tembrock 1975):
the nerve cell encodes the chemical effect of the transmitter substance on its receptor
into a sign and responds to this sign by a signaling behavior – i.e., by changing its
membrane potential.
The next coding step in the semiotic sequence of nervous sign processes is car-
ried out by the receptors of certain cell areas to which the electrical signals are
addressed. Here we already are on a third integration level where cells are com-
bined into organs. In these nerve cell areas, a new code arises which integrates the
separate signs to form the complex signs of a uniformly responding organ: now not
a single discharge, but the rate of such discharges is coded into a sign. Again the
principle is that single signals (“letters”) are combined to form sequences of signs
(“words”). The cytosemiotic alphabet of the single nerve cell consists of only one
letter, the electrical discharge. The alphabets of the neurological areas of the ner-
vous system are comparable to the alphabet of the Morse code in that they consist
of different sequences of single cytosemiotic signs. In other words, we are dealing
with two alphabets: the ﬁrst encodes transmitter substances into signs for adjoining
nerve cells, which then respond with an electrical signal; the second assembles these
responses and codes the electrical discharge frequency into signs for more complex
areas of the nervous system. In this way, the network of nerve cells becomes a
transport system for high-speed long-distance communication in the body.
As a transport system for sign vehicles, the bloodstream is considerably slower.
It carries antibodies and, above all, hormones which allow communication between
areas far removed from each other. The chemical vehicles of the various hormone
substances are encoded into signs transmitting meaning or information in the fol-
lowing manner: when coming into contact with a hormone, the receptors of the
addressee cell activate enzymes on the inner cell wall which, if conditions are suit-
able, set off one or more “second messenger systems” so as to regulate intracellular
activities. Here we see again how closely the different semiotic integration levels
are intertwined.

9
Endosemiosis
303
The transport systems of the bloodstream and the nerve network are interlinked
by dendrites of nerve cells which are situated in the blood vessels, where they
facilitate quick transmission of information. Blood cells (e.g., lymphocytes) attach
their receptors to the dendrites in the vascular wall and thus transmit and receive
information to and from the brain.
The Principle of Self-organization: Overcoming
Reductionist Notions
The principle of self-organization, which makes possible the formation of com-
plex sign systems within the organism, is central to a semiotic anatomy. Here the
“silent revolution” of our ideas about the construction of the organism (Weiner
1989) becomes most obvious as we recognize that our long-held reductionist views
on neural control are wrong.
Lüscher (1983) states that
in the last decades the reductionist path in neurobiological research has led to spectacular
successes. In spite of these successes one has recently come to the conclusion that the well-
ordered functioning of the brain can only be insufﬁciently understood by mere analysis. . ..
If one tries to understand the functioning of the brain or its subsystems and thus traces back
the way of analytical dismemberment, one is surprised by the observation that merely join-
ing together the parts does not sufﬁce to explain even the most elementary behavior of the
central nervous system. This experience has led to the insight that the brain’s functioning
cannot be understood from sole analysis – however diligent and complete – of its compo-
nents and their interconnections, since the central nervous system as a totality gives rise to
a new order.
According to reductionist ideas, neural control processes are supposed to run,
just like orders from a telephone exchange, along given anatomical paths which are
thus assumed to constitute the neural structures. As we have just seen, however, it is
just the other way round: neural structures come into being through the intervention
of integrating codes in conjunction with neural processes. So the self-organization
of the nervous system can be illuminated by looking at the principle according to
which integrating codes emerge.
Lüscher (1983) characterizes this principle by drawing a parallel to the rationale
of democracy:
Democracy is an example of self-organization. The organizing forces are constituted by
the rules of the game of democracy. In contrast, organization is understood as the coherent
behavior of a system on the basis of superordinate forces or orders. Here dictatorship could
serve as an example.
The coherent behavior not only of the nervous system, but of all living sys-
tems results from a continual reciprocal tuning-in of the system’s elements. In
order to attune themselves to one another (sich aufeinander abstimmen), the ele-
ments need sign processes by means of which they can inform each other of their
biological states and thereby can inﬂuence these conditions so that their behav-
ior may express the rule of a majority. Put simply, “pitch signals” (or “mood
signals” – Stimmungs-Signale) may change pitches (Uexküll 1952), and pitches are

304
Thure von Uexküll (1908–2004) et al.
contagious. To illustrate how integrating codes come into being on the basis of such
an “attuning” or “voting principle” (Abstimmungs-Prinzip), we would like to discuss
the functioning, ﬁrst, of a center of the nervous system and, second, of the immune
system.
The Respiratory Center as an Example of the Formation
of an “Integrating Code”
As Lüscher (1983) stresses, the central nervous system was long understood as a
superordinate command center which, like a dictator, imposes on dependent organs
and organ systems an order designed to regulate their functioning. This notion
of a “heteronomous organization” is based on the model of an assembly of sim-
ple machines which will respond to a certain input from the command center by
producing ever the same output.
This model, however, did not explain why the organs of those living beings
which do not possess a central nervous system also show coordinated responses to
environmental stimuli. J. von Uexküll termed these living beings “reﬂex republics”
(Reﬂexrepubliken – 1905: 69; 1957: 34). He describes how in the sea urchin, whose
every spine possesses a nerve center of its own, the different nerve centers inform
each other of their state and thus, in a process comparable to a vote (Abstimmung) in
a republic, succeed in coordinating and organizing their functions. He illustrates his
model as follows: “When a dog runs, the animal [that is, its brain] moves its legs;
when a sea urchin runs, the legs move the animal” (1957: 32).
Konrad Lorenz (1927) demonstrated this principle of coordination by describing
how a group of free-living animals attune themselves to each other.
The members of the jackdaw swarm, which by day ﬂies to the ﬁeld to look for food and
in the evening ﬂies into the woods to sleep, again and again attune themselves to each
other through the calls of the single birds so that the swarm as a whole arrives at a uniﬁed
tendency. When in the morning or evening hours the tendencies of the single birds diverge,
one can observe that for a while the swarm ﬂies to and fro: If the ‘djak’ calls outweigh
the ‘djok’ calls, the swarm ﬂies towards the woods, and vice versa. These to-ings and fro-
ings continue until suddenly all birds give the same one cry and the swarm as a whole ﬂies
towards the woods or the ﬁeld. Then the swarm has been primed by the attuning process
[Abstimmung] either for the behavior ‘retiring to their places to sleep’ or for the behavior
‘searching for food’. Thus it is dominated by a common pitch [Stimmung] or something like
a common emotionality. (Uexküll 1963: 174)
In this example, the birds’ calls, as pitch signals, affect the pitches of the sin-
gle birds and lead to a self-organization of the whole of the swarm. The same
kind of coordination has been observed in insects. In his essay “Bienentanz und
Menschensprache” (bee dance and human language 1986), U. L. Figge analyzes,
from a linguistic perspective, Karl von Frisch’s observations on Tanzsprache und
Orientierung der Bienen (dance language and orientation of bees – 1965). He
describes an episode from the life of a bee colony which impressively illustrates

9
Endosemiosis
305
that the self-organization principle of reciprocal attuning also holds for a species
entirely different from jackdaws with regard to genetics, anatomy, and functioning.
In spring . . . part of the colony leaves the hive, together with a queen, and forms a cluster
in the hive’s immediate vicinity, mostly on a bough. Experienced bees, which hatched out
in the year before and as collectors have acquainted themselves with the surroundings of
the hive, leave the cluster and ﬂy off as scouts to look for a habitation. On its return from
viewing a potential habitation (e.g., the cavity of a tree), a scout bee performs a dance which,
depending on its properties, may lead other scouts to inspect the potential habitation. Thus,
more and more viewings are carried out which are followed by dances to the swarm and by
viewings triggered by these dances, until all scouts perform dances of the same shape. Then
a new habitation has been found to which the scouts immediately lead the swarm. (Figge
1986: 46)
In a note Figge adds:
Up to hundred bees may be involved in the search for a habitation. Accordingly, it takes a
long time until they all have fallen into the same dance – sometimes it takes days. Only in
rare exceptional cases this agreement is not accomplished. (1986: 67)
Lüscher (1983) demonstrates by the example of the respiratory rhythm that the
functional structure of the central nervous system obeys the same principle of
self-organization. Deﬁned groups of nerve cells, which do not depend on a
superordinate timing unit, attune themselves to each other by semiotic processes.
Reduced to its essence, this conception implies that [in the respiratory center] two different
neuron populations participate in the formation of the respiratory rhythm, one cell popula-
tion having an inspiratory, the other an expiratory effect [pitch]. Only the population with
inspiratory effect is capable of independent activity [it corresponds to the jackdaws wanting
to ﬂy to the ﬁeld]. In contrast to the inspiratory neuron population, the expiratory popu-
lation tends to inactivate itself [it corresponds to the birds pushing towards their places to
sleep]. Left to itself, a given state of activity in the expiratory population will tend, on the
basis of a certain time constant, towards zero. To understand rhythmogenesis, it is essen-
tial to look at the synaptic linking of the two neuron populations. In summary, one can say
that autonomous inspiratory activation increasingly excites the expiratory cell population
which in its turn responds by exerting an increasing inhibitory inﬂuence on the inspiratory
population. Under this inhibitory inﬂuence, the excitation in the inspiratory system goes
down, followed by a decrease of the excitation in the inhibitory neuron population. Thus,
a renewed autonomous development of excitation takes place in the inspiratory neuron
population, and the process we have outlined recurs in rhythmic succession.
In this interplay, the carbonic acid content of the blood affects the excitation
of the inspiratory cell population, just as hunger has affected the excitation of a
jackdaw which wants to ﬂy to the ﬁeld. Conversely, the blood’s oxygen content,
which affects the inhibitory neuron population, may be compared to the repletion of
the jackdaws setting out for their places to sleep.
From a semiotic viewpoint, the biological state of the single nerve cell (its need
for O2 or surplus of CO2) equals the deviation from its reference value (i.e., its inter-
pretant); similarly, the degree of repletion or hunger of the single bird corresponds
to the deviation from the bird’s reference value or interpretant. The respective inter-
pretant encodes the inﬂuences of the environment on the receptors of either bird or

306
Thure von Uexküll (1908–2004) et al.
nerve cell into iconic signs denoting the resources offered by the environment (in
jackdaws, the iconic signs are also indexical signs).
We would like to emphasize three points here:
(1) The interaction of the cytosemioses of numerous single nerve cells and the
attuning (Abstimmung) of their individual interpretants (codes) to each other
gives rise to the complex code of an organ (here, the respiratory center), just as
the code of the jackdaw swarm originates from the exchange of information on
each bird’s individual pitch. As emergent phenomena, organ and swarm belong
to an integration level of a new complexity where these entireties respond to
signs received and encoded by their individuals. That is to say, the individual
functions as a receptor within a complex whole.
(2) The
next
integration
level
arises
from
a
further
“attuning
process”
(Abstimmungs-Prozeβ) between the complex code of the respiratory center and
the code of nerve cells controlling the heart rate. In this way the respiratory
rhythm is included in circulatory regulation.
The preganglionic heart vagus neurons are situated in immediate vicinity to
the inspiratory brainstem neurons. Their discharge pattern is joined to the res-
piratory rhythm and characterized by expiratory activation. At the same time,
in many branches of the sympathetic nerve, including the sympathetic heart
nerve, the inspiratory part of the respiratory center is one of the central driving
forces. So here we are dealing not with a simple superimposition of excitation
or with “irradiation”, but with a complex attuning process between sympa-
thic and vagal heart innervation on the one hand and respiratory rhythm on
the other. This connection is most prominent in a resting person and can be
recognized most clearly by “respiratory sinus arrhythmia”. But even after den-
ervating the pressoreceptor reﬂexes and eliminating the mechanical factors of
breathing, inspiratory inhibition and expiratory activation of the heart vagus
can be observed; the opposite is true for the sympathetic nerve. This con-
nection of heart rate and breathing can be used to condition the heart rate
since breathing offers a voluntary access to autonomic innervation. In the
complex system of neural heart rate control, the effect of each inspiration
may be interpreted as a shift of heart rate control toward a “defense reac-
tion” (Köpchen et al. 1981); this reaction is accompanied by activation of the
sympathetic heart nerve and immediate inactivation of vagal innervation, and
may be understood along the lines of Cannon’s (1953) emotional “emergency
pattern”.
(3) From the aspect of endosemiosis, the “pitch” of the respiratory center is the
“integral” of countless cellular semioses; on the even more complex level of the
integration of the organism with its environment, this resultant is translated into
the psychological sign of a vital body sense. For example, this sense determines
our behavior toward the environment when we have “difﬁculty in breathing”.
This again illustrates that endosemiosis and exosemiosis are closely intertwined
and that, as we emphasized in the beginning, a “body being experienced”
requires sign processes which belong a psychological integration level.

9
Endosemiosis
307
The “Inner World of the Nervous System” and the Unity
of Perception and Movement
In order to understand the nervous system as an organ in a semiotic anatomy of the
body we have to realize its function for an “inner world”. Its sign processes as a
whole are an endosemiotic mirror, so to speak, of the exosemiotic Umwelt or sub-
jective universe (but not of the environment – i.e., the outside world). The nervous
system is connected to the outside world only through the sense organs, which may
be seen as specialized receptors. Like all receptors of the nervous system, they are
designed to ﬁlter arriving stimuli and to transform them into electrical excitation.
J. von Uexküll (1909) described this as follows:
So in the nervous system the stimulus itself does not really appear but its place is taken
by an entirely different process which has nothing at all to do with events in the outside
world. This process can only serve as a sign which indicates that in the environment there
is a stimulus which has hit the receptor, but it does not give any evidence of the quality of
the stimulus. The stimuli of the outside world are altogether translated into a nervous sign
language. (1909: 192)
To keep stimuli distinguishable, different nerve tracts (acoustic, visual, tactile,
etc.) connect the various kinds of stimuli with the respective brain areas. These areas
of the nervous system thus constitute an “inner mirror of the world” which in the
course of evolution has been inserted between the sense organs taking in the outside
world and the motor parts of the nervous system (i.e., the locomotory apparatus).
As a result of this development,
no more outside stimuli transformed into excitation signs directly reach the motor networks.
These networks receive all excitations second hand from a new excitation universe which
has emerged in the central nervous system and rises between environment and motor ner-
vous system. All actions of the muscle apparatuses must only be looked at in relation to
and understood from this excitation universe. The animal does not ﬂee any more [as prim-
itive organisms do] from the stimuli sent by the enemy but from a reﬂection of the enemy
springing from a mirror world. (Uexküll 1909: 194 f.)
Instead of “mirror world” (Spiegelwelt), J. von Uexküll sometimes uses the term
“counterworld” (Gegenwelt), because in this phenomenal universe, the objects of
the environment are represented by schemata which are not, as in a mirror, products
of the environment, but rather “tools of the brain” ready to come into operation
if the appropriate stimuli are present in the outside world. In these schemata,
sensory and motor processes are combined – as in Piaget’s (1955) sensorimotor
circular reactions – to form complex programs controlling the meaning-utilizing
(bedeutungsverwertend) behavioral responses. They are retrieved when the sense
organs have to attribute semiotic meanings to stimuli.
Mountcastle (1975), a contemporary brain researcher, gives an impressive
description of how the nervous system, far from passively reﬂecting the environment
like a mirror, generates a “counterworld” with sign processes of its own:
Each of us believes himself to live directly within the world that surrounds him, to sense its
objects and events precisely, to live in real and current time. I assert that these are perceptual
illusions, for each of us confronts the world from a brain linked to what is ‘out there’

308
Thure von Uexküll (1908–2004) et al.
by a few million fragile sensory nerve ﬁbres. These are our only information channels,
our lifelines to reality . . . . The central neuron is a story-teller with regard to the afferent
nerve ﬁbres; and he is never completely trustworthy . . . . Sensation is an abstraction, not a
replication, of the real world.
The Immune System: Recognition, Memory,
“Self ” and “Non-self ”
The “few million fragile sensory nerve ﬁbres” are not the only connection between
the organism and the outside world surrounding it. In the beginning we already indi-
cated that the body constructs the immune system as a “second counterworld” which
can change our conscious perception only indirectly, but, if circumstances permit,
profoundly. Moreover, there is a resemblance between nervous system and immune
system which is not only of semiotic but also of epistemological signiﬁcance.
Reconstruction of foreign semioses which we observe may inform us of the
meaning which the signs have for the interpreter who or which is different from
us, but it cannot convey the content of the “experience” which the interpreter “has”
when receiving the signs. We may empathize with foreign interpreters, but we
cannot turn into them.
This points to a fundamental mystery: each sign contains the “self ” of its receiver
as a distinctive code. To put it more precisely, each sign leads to a change of
the individual, subjective “self ” of the receiver who or which in this manner is
informed about the signiﬁed “non-self ” and its properties. “Green”, “hard”, “blue”,
or “warm” are modes of experience in which the self ﬁnds itself changed in com-
parison with a previous or different state, and which, by the same token, signify
properties of something which is “not the self ” – for example, a meadow, a stone,
the sky, or the bath water. These modes of experience are preverbal. Translating
them into everyday language conceals their mystery.
Rainer Maria Rilke has given artistic form to this mystery, particularly in his
Sonnets to Orpheus. One of them begins:
Banana, full round apple, orange, pear,
gooseberry. There’s something here that speaks
death and life into the mouth . . . I swear . . .
Read it on a child’s face, when its cheeks
pop with relish. What inﬁnity!
Can’t you feel inside your mouth a growing
anonymousness, and, where words were, a ﬂowing
of suddenly released discovery? 4 (First part, Sonnet XIII; 1936: 61)
4 In the original German version:
Voller Apfel, Birne und Banane,
Stachelbeere . . . Alles dieses spricht
Tod und Leben in den Mund . . . Ich ahne . . .
Lest es einem Kind vom Angesicht,

9
Endosemiosis
309
Such self-experiences seem to depend on the nervous system. From the discov-
eries of immunology, however, it appears that they have a biological counterpart
which in all probability provides the earliest biological basis for our conscious self-
experience. It has been a known fact for quite a long time that organisms are able to
distinguish self from non-self, and that this capacity is vital to their “integration”.
For example, the nervous system reliably informs our conscious body experi-
ence, by means of sensations of pain, about the dividing lines between self and
non-self. When, as a result of a nerve injury, the sensation of pain fails, the organ-
ism is exposed to injury which it will not fend off, or will even inﬂict on itself. Yet
even single cells are capable of distinguishing self and non-self. The cells of the
immune system have developed this capacity into a speciﬁc function: as we have
said, they are able to “recognize” foreign proteins (e.g., in the surface membrane of
viruses, bacteria, and parasites). This is required for the intruders to be eliminated
in time. The foundations of this capacity have to be investigated by semiotic means.
Another semiotic problem area is the organism’s memory for diseases from
which it has recovered. We say that the organism has aquired “immunity” against
these diseases. But it has been known only for a few decades that immunity means
that the organism is able to distinguish, on the endosemiotic level of its cells, self
from non-self.
When N. K. Jerne was awarded the Nobel Prize for his discoveries in immunol-
ogy, he gave a short outline of the history of his discipline (1985). Among other
things, he described how in 1890 von Bering and Kitasato discovered the ﬁrst anti-
bodies in the blood of animals which had been treated with diphtheria and tetanus
toxins, and how they proved that the antibodies were capable of neutralizing the
toxins. For a long time it was thought that all cells of the animal and human organ-
ism could produce such antibodies. Only in 1960 was it established that only certain
blood cells, the so-called lymphocytes, possess this capacity. In humans their num-
ber is approximately 1012, exceeding the number of nerve cells by one order of
magnitude. After all, the lymphocytes altogether come to one percent of our weight.
They circulate through our body in blood and lymph, coming into contact with
almost all body cells and closely cooperating with some of them in immune defense.
In describing processes in the immune system, scientists had to borrow, as
had happened in molecular genetics, linguistic concepts. Emmeche and Hoffmeyer
(1987, The Semiotics of Nature: The Linguistic-Genetic Analogy, unpublished)
stress how unusual this procedure is in biology and medicine, disciplines which
for a hundred years have persistently struggled to bring their terminologies into line
with the terminology of physics.
Indeed, concepts like “program”, “genetic code”, “information”, “memory”, or
“recognition”, which suddenly became well-acknowledged and even indispensable
concepts in biology and medicine, do not make any sense in physics. Here again, the
wenn es sie erschmeckt. Dies kommt von weit.
Wird euch langsam namenlos im Munde?
Wo sonst Worte waren, ﬂießen Funde,
aus dem Fruchtﬂeisch überrascht befreit. [1936: 60]

310
Thure von Uexküll (1908–2004) et al.
“silent revolution” has won through. It has forced researchers to use a vocabulary
which runs counter to their conception of the world, and to describe the behavior of
cells not in causal-mechanical but in semiotic terms.
Jerne began his speech as follows:
Grammar is a science that is more than 2000 years old, whereas immunology has become
a respectable part of biology only during the past hundred years. Though both sciences
still face exasperating problems, this lecture attempts to establish an analogy between lin-
guistics and immunology, between the descriptions of language and of the immune system.
(1985: 1057)
The Semiotics of the Immune System
The analogy between language and immune system reaches even further than the
one between language and the genetic code. To understand this we have to recall
some facts about the structure of amino acids.
The nucleotide sequences of the genetic code may be compared to the signs
of Morse code. Just as the sign sequences of Morse code are decoded and trans-
lated into the letter sequences of a language composed of words, the nucleotide
sequences of the genetic code are decoded and translated into the 20 sign sequences
constituting the “alphabet” of the amino acid code.
The innumerable and remarkably different protein bodies of which the body sub-
stances of all living beings, from viruses to mammals, consist are assembled from
these 20 amino acids. Lymphocytes can “read” these protein bodies. Therefore, they
must have a code at their command by means of which they can compare immensely
complicated alphabets.
Protein bodies are long chain molecules whose links are formed by varying
sequences of amino acids. If each amino acid is understood as a letter in an alpha-
bet, protein bodies can be compared to texts composed of very long strings of letters.
The number of amino acids in a large protein molecule roughly corresponds to the
number of letters in one column of a newspaper article. In such a column, the letter
sequences of words and sentences are arranged in one row underneath another. In
contrast, the sequences of the amino acid alphabet are folded into each other, since
in organisms the protein molecules are rolled up into complex tangles, even where
they form the surface of cells. Therefore, only the few amino acid sequences on the
surface – which are comparable to single words or short sentences – can be “read”.
To the immune system they are a dictionary consisting, as it were, of the “proper
names” of the countless protein molecules from which the organisms of all living
beings are constructed.
These “proper names”, which sometimes contain only ten amino acids, have
been termed “epitopes” (from the Greek epi “upon”, and topos “place”). Since the
human immune system can recognize the epitopes or “proper names” of all the
many millions of protein bodies which occur in the body substance of millions
of different organisms, from viruses to mammals, its range comes up to the total
of the telephone books for all major cities on all continents of the world. As the

9
Endosemiosis
311
immune system can “read” all the “proper names”, it is capable of producing anti-
bodies speciﬁc to these markings. Antibodies are attached as a kind of label to the
invading viruses or bacteria so that other cells participating in the immune defense
can decipher these “wanted posters” and recognize the intruders as candidates for
destruction.
Jacquemart and Coutinho (1988) oppose mechanistic notions by pointing out the
explicitly semiotic character of these molecular reactions:
antigen and antibody, in so far. as immunological qualities based on molecules [sic], are
mutually constituted . . .. [A] molecule does not have epitopes. This quality is brought to
the molecule by a paratope (the ‘proper name’ of the antibody), which determines the
place, the size, the molecular components Implicated in the linkage etc. A paratope, to
some extent . . . concretises a possibility that can be expressed by a given molecule (the
‘epitope’). (1988: 178)
From a semiotic point of view, the immune system “recognizes” foreign signs
which it has never before encountered. Yet the way in which .this problem is solved
supports the view that non-self can only be recognize as a variety of self, and that,
as Plato stated, only the known IS recognizable.
The lymphocytes (producers of the antibodies which attach themselves to
invaders as a label or “mark of Cain”) wear on their surface receptors which are
built exactly like the antibodies they have sent out. So they wear the very same
amino acid sequences by which the “proper name” of a speciﬁc protein molecule
can be identiﬁed. When the lymphocyte comes into contact with such a protein
body, it starts to divide into many daughter cells. Some of these cells mature into
large lymphocytes which give off great numbers of antibodies into the blood. The
remaining daughter cells do not develop up to this stage, but stay back in reserve so
that when an invasion of the same kind recurs, protein molecules can immediately
respond by massive antibody production. These cells preserve the secret, as it were,
of the invaders’ proper name. As the “memory” of the immune system, they are the
basis of immune recognition.
By comparing the code of the immune system to the telephone books of all cities
on earth, we have already indicated that to recognize “unknown” substances which
have never before come into contact with the organism and for which “memory
cells” have not yet been formed requires enormous resources. Each of the many
mil1ions of lymphocytes wears on the receptors of its surface membrane an ammo
acid sequence which can “read” the “proper name” of another protein molecule.
Thus, the immune system keeps ready millions of lymphocytes with their different
receptors for millions of protein bodies which the organism might possibly have to
confront in its lifetime.
In order to illustrate this immense abundance, we have to contrive a simile: imag-
ine that the Federal Bureau of Investigation has possession of a collection which
contains the ﬁngerprints of all people on earth; for each set of ﬁngerprints it employs
a separate ofﬁcer who sets out and searches for a person in the population whose ﬁn-
gers match the document. Well over 90 percent of the ofﬁcers will search in vain for
their candidate their whole lives long, and very few will ever make a strike. But then,
these few will not have identiﬁed something unknown; they will have ascertained

312
Thure von Uexküll (1908–2004) et al.
the ﬁngerprints they already knew. In other words, to identify the unknown means
to recognize something familiar; non-self is a potential variety of self.
To the semiotician, this conclusion is rather banal. It implies that the unknown
is recognized by iconic signs. The group of lymphocytes wear on their receptors
millions of iconic representations of antigen epitopes. However, only the contact
with – or the contiguity to – the counterpart of the epitope, which is constituted by
the amino acid sequence upon the foreign protein molecule, supplements the iconic
quality with the indexical quality required for the sign “non-self ”. Figuratively
speaking, our body carries with it a gigantic collection of photographic plates wait-
ing to be developed into pictures of all possible enemies it may ever encounter;
only when the immune system is faced with an enemy will a plate from this
“counterworld” constructed by the immune system be developed.
On the other hand, there are pathogenes which are no longer detected once they
have forced their way into a body cell. Among these, viruses also can use their
DNA to impose their building plan on the cell so that it starts to replicate the virus
in large numbers and neglects its original functions. Only the so-called killer cells
(T-Iymphocytes) are capable of identifying the infected cells and destroying them
along with the viruses inside them. If this process gets under way, the killer cells
begin to multiply very quickly and to master the infection. The AIDS virus can
“hide” not only in body cells but also in macrophages and lymphocytes (helper
cells); in this way it remains “unrecognized” and is not attacked by the immune
defense, which regards it as “self ”. It is as if a conﬂagration starts at the ﬁre station,
or as if terrorists disguised as police ofﬁcers occupy the FBI and alter its functioning
to serve their purpose.
The Immune System as a “Voting Republic”
(Abstimmungsrepublik): Self as “Primordial Sign” (Urzeichen)
In identifying the unknown as non-self, the immune system makes use of the mys-
terious kinship between self and non-self. Yet paradoxically, this procedure makes
it difﬁcult, if not impossible, to recognize what is known.
Antibodies mean “self ” only to the lymphocyte – which produces them and
wears antibodies of the same kind on its surface that serve as receptors. To other
lymphocytes, they are “non-self ” – wearing the ﬁngerprints, as it were, of a potential
enemy – and appear as antigens against which they produce further antibodies.
It has indeed been demonstrated that when the immune system of an animal
produces speciﬁc antibodies in response to an antigen, it also develops antibodies
directed against those ﬁrst antibodies. The “self ” of one lymphocyte is “non-self ”
to another. This astonishing chain reaction goes on and on: the “anti-antibodies”
formed by the second lymphocyte induce a third lymphocyte to produce antibodies
against them, and so forth. Thus the immune system is a gigantic network of antigen-
antibody interactions (Jerne 1985, Kohler et al. 1984).

9
Endosemiosis
313
This stream of signs, which at the contact of a lymphocyte with an antigen sweeps
like a gust of wind through the entire immune system, leads the different cells to
attune (abstimmen) their interpretants to one another. So the immune system is a
“semiotic republic” similar to the respiratory center or the jackdaw swarm. On a
higher integration level, the various antigen-antibody interactions form the unity of
an organ which can, in spite of its immense complexity, respond as a whole to signs
received by a single cell.
Actually, the complexity of the whole process becomes even more amazing,
because other cells such as T-lymphocytes and monocytes join the interactions of
the antibody-producing B lymphocytes. The image of a multinational state comes
to mind, whose nations speak the most diverse languages. Yet instead of a Babel of
languages we have an “exemplary democratic order” structured through a “voting
(Abstimmung) by signs”.
This order also includes a semiotic peculiarity: in their great majority,
the antibodies which are emitted by B lymphocytes into the blood where
they can be detected in the form of speciﬁcally constructed protein bodies
(gammaglobulins) – are “signs to absent addressees”. They can only convey their
message when a suitable antigen (e.g., a bacterium or virus with the correct epitope)
enters the bloodstream.
So in the incredibly complex Babel of voices within the immune system we
detect the recurrence of a particularly fascinating message: life is always and every-
where a dialogue between self and self – in endless variations self ﬁnds its own
image in the shape of non-self.
The “Inner World” as a Unity Composed of the “Counterworlds”
of the Nervous System and the Immune System
We have shown that the semioses of the nervous system and the immune system
set up two different “counterworlds”. Before we discuss evidence that these two
“counterworlds” are integrated to form a common “inner world”, we would like to
distinguish some of their typical features.
The most striking difference can be seen in how directly each of the two sys-
tems participates in the formation of consciousness. In the counterworld of the
nervous system, programs are stored for constructing a world which we consciously
perceive and experience. This world includes our body, which is, as “experi-
enced body”, its center; as we have already indicated, this point is crucial to a
semiotic anatomy. In contrast, the counterworld of the immune system contains
programs for confronting the environment in ways which elude our conscious
experience.
Nevertheless, there exist connections between the two systems by which they are
integrated to form a common “inner world”. A new discipline called psycho-neuro-
immunology (see Ader 1981) addresses itself to the interactions between psyche
and immune system.

314
Thure von Uexküll (1908–2004) et al.
Psyche as Translator of “Counterworld” into World
How are we to imagine the psyche? The answer is: our psyche is a translator. The
“neural counterworld”, which our brain composes of the signs streaming into it on
different nerve tracts from all parts of the organism and, via the sense organs, from
the outside world, is translated by the psyche into what we experience as our body
and our world.
When talking of a psyche, we also have to take a closer look at the concept of
consciousness. What does it mean that, in contrast to immune processes, brain pro-
cesses participate directly in the formation of consciousness? For, paradoxically, we
are “outsiders” to all “inner” (i.e., endosemiotic) sign processes, whether they occur
in the nervous system or in the immune system (we can illuminate them only by
complicated methods, and “understand” their messages only through biosemiotic
interpretation), whereas we are “insiders” of all sign processes by which the outside
world and our body are presented to us as conscious realities. The “inner” sign pro-
cesses of the brain are, like all “inner” or endosemiotic events, inaccessible to our
conscious experience; but, unlike all other endosemioses, they participate directly
in its formation. That is, all consciously experienced “outside” realities are transla-
tions of “inner” sign processes which occur in our brain and are inaccessible to our
experience and understanding.
Here it should be recalled that originally, “inside” and “outside” are semiotic
concepts which take on spatial connotations only when we look at our motoricity.
Moreover, “participation in the formation of consciousness” and “consciousness”
are “emergent phenomena” which cannot be anticipated and derived from the obser-
vation of elementary states, and manifest themselves “out of the void”, as it were, in
a leap from the endosemiotic to the psychosemiotic integration level. The following
remarks are aimed at illustrating the dynamics of this transition.
The “Experienced Body” as a Translation of the “Counterworld”
of the Nervous System: Phantom and Scotoma Limbs
We have shown that in the “counterworld” of the nervous system, the “unity
of perceiving and moving” (see the subtitle of Weizsacker 1940) is prepared by
the construction of programs for “sensorimotor circular reactions” (Piaget 1955).
The “counterworld” has to be “translated” into the world which we perceive and
consciously experience as our “reality”. This conscious world has an important bio-
logical function: it enables us to deal with our environment by active movements. As
has been emphasized above, simpler systems (e.g., plants) are not capable of such
motor activity. Our conscious “I” or ego is an instance of the psyche which princi-
pally translates sensory informations arriving at the brain into orientation signs (or
advance organizers) for our motor behavior (Freud 1911).
Among these sensory data, those belonging to the “muscle sense” or kinaesthetic
sense are of particular interest. At each moment they convey to the “I” not only the

9
Endosemiosis
315
exact position of all limbs, but also that it actually does possess a body. In a fascinat-
ing account, the neurologist Oliver Sacks (1986), who once became a neurological
patient himself, relates his personal experience of what happens when those data are
missing or are no longer being translated into a body experience. He writes:
And indeed it is this ‘muscle sense’, as it was once called, before Sherrington investigated it
and renamed it ‘proprioception’ – it is this sense . . . by which the body knows itself, judges
with perfect, automatic, instantaneous precision and motion .of all its moveable parts, their
relation to one another, their alignment in space. . .. One may be said to ‘own’ or ‘possess’
one’s body – at least its limbs and moveable parts – by virtue of a constant ﬂow of incoming
information, arising ceaselessly, throughout life, from the muscles, joints and tendons. One
has oneself, one is oneself, because the body knows itself, conﬁrms itself, at all times, by
this sixth sense. (1986: 46 f.)
The continually changing pattern which results from a sea of proprioceptive sign
processes in the brain corresponds to the autopoiesis of a “neural counterbody”
forming the center of a “neural counterworld” which also is in a state of con-
stant ﬂux. The cerebral process in which this “neural counterbody” is translated into
the “experience of our body” constitutes the basis for a “subjectively experienced
anatomy” as it is exercised in the body-centered psychotherapeutic methods (auto-
genic training, functional muscle relaxation, etc.) so as to help patients to become
better acquainted with their own body and to treat it more carefully.
Sacks calls for a new neuropsychology which investigates these connections and
their disturbances.
Classical neurology was essentially static: its model was a model of ﬁxed centres and func-
tions. Neuropsychology on the other hand, is essentially dynamic: it sees countless systems
in continual interaction and interplay. (1986: 162)
To explore the streams of signs and their interactions, neuropsychology requires
a neurosemiotic framework by which the salutogenetic programs and the codes of
“gnostic systems” can be deciphered according to which the body reads itself as a
text permanently writing and reformulating itself.
These codes correspond to what neurologists call “body schema” without yet
knowing how to actually put this concept to use. There are illnesses which begin to
betray their secret if they are seen as disturbances of the body schema or as transla-
tion error. The best known of these disturbances is the syndrome of phantom limb
pain – pain in an amputated (i.e., absent) limb – which has been frequently and
thoroughly described, but scarcely understood. The phantom limb has its counter-
part in the phenomenon of the “scotoma limb” which Sacks describes from his own
experience: the limb is anatomically intact, yet to the patient it is a foreign object
which does not belong to his or her body. After an accident, Sacks had to undergo
an operation. When he looked at the operated leg from which the plaster cast had
been removed, he was amazed as well as utterly disconcerted:
Yes, it was there! Indisputably there! . . . A leg – and yet, not a leg: there was something
all wrong. . .. It was indeed ‘there’ in a sort of formal, factual sense: visually there, but not
livingly, substantially, or ‘really’ there. It wasn’t a real leg, not a real thing at all, but a mere

316
Thure von Uexküll (1908–2004) et al.
semblance which lay there before me. . .. It was clear that I had a leg which looked anatom-
ically perfect, and which had been expertly repaired, and healed without complication, but
it looked and felt uncannily alien – a lifeless replica attached to my body. (1986: 91)
At that moment he remembered how as a young doctor he was called to a patient
whose complaints he did not comprehend then: “I thought . . . of . . . his pale, scared
face, and the consternation as he whispered: ‘It’s just a counterfeit. It’s not real. It’s
not mine.’” (1986: 91).
What had happened? In both cases proprioceptive data were missing or did not
reach the respective areas of the brain. This impressively illustrates that our living
body, which we experience as the center of our reality, is the product of a “neural
counterbody” which is continually shaped and reshaped by the ceaseless ﬂow of
proprioceptive signs from the muscles, joints, and tendons of our limbs to the brain.
This “neural counterbody” is the center of a “neural counterworld” which our brain
constructs and reconstructs from the likewise permanent ﬂow of signs from the sense
organs. Counterbody and counterworld are amalgamated to form an indissoluble
unity because all the events we perceive in the environment are counteraffordances
– that is, they are related to actual or potential affordances of our motor system and
combine with these to form the spatial grid by which we orient ourselves.
When a nurse attended to Sacks’s unreal leg, her actions became equally unreal:
Her activity had seemed meaningless and unreal, presumably, because the leg felt mean-
ingless and unreal. And because the leg felt senseless, in all senses of senseless, absolutely
senseless and unrelated to me, so had her motions which had been related to it. As the leg
was merely a semblance, so her motions . . . seemed merely a semblance. Both had been
reduced to meaningless semblance. (1986: 92 f.)
As soon as the salutogenetic formation of the “neural counterbody” in the brain
is disturbed – either because the stream of proprioceptive signs from the limbs is
cut off or because for some reason the interaction of the respective cerebral sys-
tems is blocked – the translation into the experience of a “real body” in a “real
world” collapses. This shows again that endosemioses and exosemioses are closely
interlinked.
Psycho-Neuro-Immunology: The Interweaving
of “Counterworlds” into an “Inner World”
When we described the translation of a non-conscious neural counterworld into a
consciously experienced physical reality, we did not mention that this translation
process may be inﬂuenced by the immune system – that is, by the counterworld it
constructs to ﬁght harmful substances which our sense organs are unable to detect.
Usually we do not notice such inﬂuences. However, if we are, for example, run-
ning a fever in the course of an infection, our sense of reality may be considerably
changed by pyrogenous substances produced by the immune system. Conversely,

9
Endosemiosis
317
there is evidence that processes occurring inside our psychological reality may
affect – via the nervous system the immune system.
That the neural and immunological counterworlds are interwoven by sign con-
nections to form a uniﬁed inner world has been most impressively demonstrated in
the experimental conditioning of immune processes. Semiotically speaking, condi-
tioning means a “semantic link-up of meanings” between psychological experiences
and endosemiotically controlled processes in the organism. The classic example is
Pavlov’s work with dogs whose gastric secretion could be set off by the sound of a
bell if the sound had previously been often enough coupled with innate stimuli for
secretion (e.g., the smell of food).
Ader (1981) demonstrated in animal experiments that sweetener can suppress
immune processes if it has previously been administered together with a substance
which inhibits the immune system. Yet conversely, the subjective reality of the ani-
mals was changed as well: they avoided the sweetener which they had liked before.
This shows that the neural and immunologic counterworlds are integrated to form
a conjoint inner world which corresponds to a fourth endosemiotic integration level;
this inner world then is translated into an experienced reality.
A number of substances have been identiﬁed which serve as vehicles in the sign
processes between nervous system and immune system. The ﬁrst group consists
of the neurotransmitters; among them, noradrenalin and adrenalin play an essential
part in the regulation of the immune system. The details of immunoregulation, how-
ever, are still unknown (for a bibliography on this subject, see Klosterhalfen and
Klosterhalfen 1990).
A second kind of sign connection is established by the neurohormones, which are
associated with psychological processes. They are known to inﬂuence the course
of illnesses in which the immune defense is activated usually they are discussed
in the context of “stress hormones and immunity”. Glucocorticosteroids are the
best-known hormones of this group. In small quantities they can stimulate the
immune defense, whereas in large quantities they have an immunosuppressive,
anti-inﬂammatory effect and reduce resistance to infections (for references see
Klosterhalfen and Klosterhalfen 1990). These and other substances of similar effect
seem to modify the responsiveness of immune cells to signs by changing their
interpretant.
Furthermore, the nervous system responds to processes in the immune system:
during an immune response the activity of neurons in the ventromedial hypothala-
mus increases. Lymphocytes can produce a “glucocorticoid releasing factor” which
raises, via the hypophysis, the corticoid level in the blood, and in this way pre-
vents immune responses from escalating. Besides, interleukin 1, which is generated
by lymphocytes, can also stimulate the secretion of ACTH (adrenocorticotropic
hormone) and corticoids (Besedovsky et al. 1986).
Immune responses have been investigated in persons exposed to different kinds
of strain: in astronauts, in widows and widowers, and in students taking exams. In
all of these studies, stress situations were found to have signiﬁcant effects on the
immune system.

318
Thure von Uexküll (1908–2004) et al.
In astronauts, “mitogenic stimulation” was inhibited – that is, their lymphocytes
no longer responded to substances which usually serve as sign-vehicles for trigger-
ing cell division. Interestingly enough, this was not due to stress hormones but to
weightlessness, which seemed to have a direct effect on the interpretants of the cells.
Signiﬁcant connections between psychological processes and the behavior of
immune cells were found in widows and widowers as well as in men whose wives
were suffering from breast cancer. Apart from the fact that the division rate of lym-
phocytes was reduced, the activity of socalled killer cells – lymphocytes specializing
in direct elimination of invading viruses and bacteria – was also inhibited. This again
indicates that interpretants of cells can be altered as a result of psychological events.
In the context of AIDS, such considerations have gained particular relevance: to
what extent do psychological factors inﬂuence the outbreak and the course of AIDS
in persons infected with the HIV virus?
The syndrome of AIDS, especially the underlying immunodeﬁciency, impres-
sively conﬁrms the signiﬁcance of the semiotic function of sign recognition: an
important peculiarity of the AIDS virus, its preference for a certain cell type (the T4
cells), can be explained by the fact that the virus uses an area on their surface as a
receptor. This area is associated with the T4 marker, a protein by which T4 cells are
distinguished from other lymphocytes. When the virus attacks the cell, its ﬁrst step
is to attach itself to this spot.
There has also been discussion as to whether psychological factors affect the
onset and the course of cancer. To date no conclusive evidence is available (Hiirny
1990). In the long term, however, this research may well lead to the development of
new preventive and therapeutic options (Klosterhalfen and Klosterhalfen 1990).
The Observer as Meta-Interpreter
How can we answer now the principal question of biosemiotics: whether a human
observer is actually capable of deciphering the signs of foreign living beings?
We have seen that in biosemiotics we are dealing with problems of inter-
pretation – that is, of translation. Translations may be understood as “linkages of
meaning”; translations of endosemiotic sign processes will have to link, for exam-
ple, cytosemiotic signs to word signs. This leads to “meta-interpretations” in which
an observer has to interpret a cell’s behavior toward its environment as a clue indi-
cating its responses to its own interpretations. Thus, the observer has to assume that
the cell encodes the effects of the environment on its receptors into signs, and that
these signs control its behavior toward its environment.
To transform such assumptions into empirically testable statements, the observer
ﬁrst has to interpret – in a semiosis of information – the physico-chemical proper-
ties of the environment (in our example of immune processes, the physico-chemical
properties of the antigen) and their effects on the receptor of the observed cell
(the physico-chemical interaction with the respective sections of the receptor, the
so-called “idiotopes”) as quasi-mechanical events – that is, “signetically”. From the
cell’s state or behavior the observer then has to infer its interpretant, which attributes

9
Endosemiosis
319
to the changes in the receptor a meaning as a sign that will dictate the response of
the cell.
However, having thus interpreted our behavior as observers, we are faced with
an epistemological problem: how are we to justify our interpretations, derived from
our human experience, of living systems which are so remote from us biologically?
How can we use anthropomorphic terms like “sign” and “semiosis”, and postulate
endosemiotic signs whose meanings are linked to the meanings of human linguistic
signs and may thus be translated into them?
We have found that all processes of life happen between varieties of “self ” which
encounters itself as “non-self ”. One form of variation is the combination of simple
signs to form more complex signs. It will have to be investigated in detail to what
extent the signs of more complex integration levels may actually be understood as
“integration products” in which signs of more elementary levels are joined together
to form more complex units.
We have mentioned evidence supporting the view that more elementary signs
as they are exchanged between cells on an endosemiotic level are gradually
“computed” and integrated so as to construct more complex signs.
“Semiotic voting republics”, in which cells of the immune system or of the ner-
vous system and even birds are integrated to form more complex units, provide
additional examples of such organizing principles of life.
Thus, objections that we are applying anthropomorphic concepts may be coun-
tered by a genetic argument referring to the hierarchic order of life: a systemic and
semiotic order of nature is becoming apparent in which simple signs are integrated
to form more and more complex signs, and this systemically structured universe of
signs comprises humans, too, as senders and receivers of signs.
References
Ader, R. (1981). Psychoneuroimmunology. New York: Academic Press.
Antonowsky, A. (1987). The salutogenetic perspective: Toward a new view of health and illness.
Advances 4(1), 47–55.
Bateson, G. (1972). Steps to an Ecology of Mind. New York: Ballantine.
Besedovsky, H., Del Rey, A., Sorkin, E., Dinarello, C. A. (1986). Immunoregulatory feedback
between interleukin-I and glucocorticoid hormones. Science 233, 652–654.
Böttner, M. (1980). Zeichensystem der Tiere. Ein Versuch angewandter Semiotik. Unpublished
dissertation, University of Stuttgart.
Cannon, W. B. (1953). Bodily Changes in Pain, Hunger, Fear and Rage. Boston: Charles T.
Branford.
Dawkins, R. (1976). The Selﬁsh Gene. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Figge, U. L. (1986). Bienentanz und Menschensprache. In: Eschbach, A. (Ed.) Perspektiven des
Verstehens. Bochum: Brockmeyer.
Freud, S. (1945). Formulierungen iiber die zwei Prinzipien des psychischen Geschehens [1911].
In Gesammelte Werke [Collected Works], vol. 8, 229–238. Frankfurt am Main: S. Fischer.
Hoffmeyer, J., Emmeche, C. (1991). Code-duality and the semiotics of nature. In: Anderson, M.,
Merrell, F. (Eds.) On Semiotic Modeling. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 117–166.
Hürny, Ch. (1990). Psychische und soziale Faktoren in der Entstehung und im Verlauf maligner
Erkrankungen. In: Uexküll, T. von (Ed.) Psychosomatische Medizin. Munich: Urban and
Schwarzenberg.

320
Thure von Uexküll (1908–2004) et al.
Jakobson, R. (1968). Child Language, Aphasia, and Phonological Universals. The Hague:
Mouton. [Trans. by Allan R. Keiler from Kindersprache, Aphasie und allgemeine Lautgesetze,
Uppsala, 1944.]
Jaquemart, F., Coutinho, A. (1988). Observer, immune system and their respective objects
(about self-non-self discrimination). In: Sercarz, E. E. et al. (Eds.) The Semiotics of Cellular
Communication in the Immune System. Berlin and Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 173–181.
Jerne, N. K. (1985). The generative grammar of the immune system. Science 229, 1057–1059.
Kiefer, P., Havemann, K. (1988). Wachstumsfaktoren, Rezeptoren und Krebs. Der Internist 29,
430–437.
Klaus, G. (1969). Semiotik und Erkenntnistheorie. Berlin: VEB Deutscher Verlag der
Wissenschaften.
Klosterhalfen, W., Klosterhalfen, S. (1990). Psychoimmunologie. In: Uexküll, T. von (Ed.)
Psychosomatische Medizin. Munich: Urban and Schwarzenberg.
Knudson, A. G. (1973). Mutation and human cancer. Advances in Cancer Research 17, 317–352.
Köhler, H., Urbain, J., Cazenave, P. A. (Eds.) (1984). Idiotypy in Biology and Medicine. New York:
Academic Press.
Köpchen, H. P., KliiBendorf, D., Sommer, D. (1981). Neurophysiological background of cen-
tral neural cardiovascular-respiratory coordination: Basic remarks and experimental approach.
J. Auton. Nerv. Syst. 3, 335–368.
Krampen, M. (1981). Phytosemiotics. Semiotica 36 (3/4), 187–209. [Reprinted in Frontiers in
Semiotics, John Deely et al. (eds.), 83–95. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1986.]
Krampen, M. et al. (1981). Die Welt als Zeichen: Klassiker der modernen Semiotik. Berlin: Severin
und Siedler.
Lorenz, K. (1927). Beobachtungen mit Dohlen. Journal für Ornithologie 75, 511–519.
Lüscher, H. R. (1983). Selbstorganisation als Ordnungsprinzip im Zentralnervensystem.
Vierteljahresschrift der Naturforschenden Gesellschaft in Zurich 128 (3), 167.
Lüscher, H. R. (1984–1985). Komplexitat und Stabilitat im Zentralnervensystem. Bulletin der
Schweizerischen Akademie der Medizinischen Wissenschaften 85, 59–74.
Maelike, A. (1985). Zell-zu-Zellkommunikation durch “gap-junctions”. Nachr. Chem. Techn. Lab.
33(2), 976–977.
Maturana, H. R., Varela, F. J. (1980). Autopoiesis and Cognition: The Realization of the Living.
Dordrecht, Boston, and London: D. Reidel.
Maturana, H. R., Varela, F. J. (1988). Der Baum der Erkenntnis. Munich: Scherz.
Mountcastle, V. B. (1975). The view from within: Pathways to the study of perception. Johns
Hopkins Medical Journal 136, 109–131. [Quoted in: K. R. Popper and J. C. Eccles (1977), The
Self and Its Brain, 253. Berlin and New York: Springer.
Nossal, G. J. V. (1988). Wie Zellen Antikorper bilden. In: Kohler, G. (Ed.) Immunsystem. Abwehr
und Selbsterkennung auf molekularem Niveau. Heidelberg: Spektrum der Wissenschaft,
pp. 24–33.
Nöth, W. (1985). Handbuch der Semiotik. Stuttgart: Metzler.
Peirce,
C.
S.
(1988).
Naturordnung
und
Zeichenprozeﬁ.
Schriften
iiber
Semiotik
und
Naturphilosophie, (= Aachener Studien zur Semiotik und Kommunikationsforschung 18),
H. Pape (Ed.). Aachen: Alano.
Piaget, J. (1952). The Origins of Intelligence in Children. New York: International Universities
Press.
Piaget, J. (1955). The Construction of Reality in the Child. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Plessner, H. (1976). Die Frage nach der Conditio humana. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
Rilke, R. M. (1936). Sonnets to Orpeus, trans. by J. B. Leishman. London: Hogarth Press.
Roitt, I. M., Brostoff, J., Male, D. K. (1988). Immunology. London: Gower Medical Publishing.
Sacks, O. (1986). A Leg to Stand On. London: Pan.
Sebeok, T. A. (1976). Contributions to the Doctrine of Signs. Bloomington and Lisse: Indiana
University and The Peter de Ridder Press.

9
Endosemiosis
321
Staines, N., Brostoff, J., James, K. (1985). Introducing Immunology. London and New York: Gower
Medical Publishing.
Tembrock, G. (1975). Biokommunikation. Reinbek: Rowohlt.
von Bertalanffy, J. (1968). General System Theory. New York: Braziller.
von Frisch, K. (1965). Tanzsprache und Orientierung der Bienen. Berlin: Springer.
von Uexküll, J. (1905). Leitfaden in das Studium der experimentellen Biologie der Wassertiere.
Wiesbaden: J.F. Bergmann.
von Uexküll, J. (1909). Umwelt und Innenwelt der Tiere. Berlin: Springer.
von Uexküll, J. (1920). Theoretische Biologie. Berlin: Paetel.
von Uexküll, J. (1957). A stroll through the worlds of animals and men. In Instinctive Behavior,
trans. by Claire H. Schiller (Ed.), 5–80. London: Methuen.
von Uexküll, J. (1982). The theory of meaning. Semiotica 42(1), 25–82. [Special issue of Semiotica
on J. von Uexküll’s Bedeutungslehre (Leipzig: Barth, 1940); Guest editor: T. von Uexküll.
Trans. by Barry Stone and Herbert Weiner.]
von Uexküll, T. (1952). Untersuchungen iiber das Phanomen der “Stimmung” mit einer Analyse
der Nausea. Zeitschrift ﬁir klinische Medizin 149, 132–210.
von Uexküll, T. (1963). Grundfragen der Psychosomatischen Medizin. Reinbek: Rowohlt.
von Uexküll, T. (1977). Psychosomatische Probleme im Bereich der Kardiologie. Zeitschrift für
Allgemeinmedizin 53, 73–82.
von Uexküll, T. (1982). Glossary. Semiotica 42(1), 83–87. [Special issue of Semiotica on J. von
Uexküll’s Bedeutungslehre (Leipzig: Barth, 1940); Guest editor: T. von Uexkiill. Trans. by
Barry Stone and Herbert Weiner.]
von Uexküll, T. (1986). Soziale Krankheit und soziale Gesundung. In Gesammelte Werke
[Collected Works], vol. 8, 31–91. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
von Uexküll, T. (1990). Biosemiosis. Handbook of Semiotics, Chapter III, Article 16b.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
von Uexküll, T., Wesiack, W. (1988). Theorie der Humanmedizin: Grundlagen drztlichen Denkens
und Handelns. Munich: Urban and Schwarzenberg.
von Weizsäcker, V. (1940). Der Gestaltkreis. Theorie der Einheit von Wahrnehmen und Bewegen.
Leipzig: Thieme.
Weiner, H. (1989). The revolution in stress theory and research. In: Lieberman, R., Yager, J. (Eds.)
Stress in Psychiatry and Medicine. New York: Plenum Press.
Welter, C., Zang, K. D., Blin, N. (1989). Tumor-Suppressorgene. Deutsche medizinische
Wochenschrift 114, 1496–1502.
Wieser, W. (1990). Die Herausforderung der Evolutionsbiologie: an wen? Merkur 44(I), 58–63.

Chapter 10
Signs and Codes in Immunology
Giorgio Prodi (1928–1987)
Introduction and Commentary: Giorgio Prodi (1928–1987)
Reality is interpreted by a priori systems provided with their own codes that are themselves
the a posteriori products of their system’s natural history (and therefore: of the reality that
the system can read).
G. Prodi (1998: 63)
Giorgio Prodi was a accomplished oncologist, poet, novelist and philosopher
whose lifelong interest in examining the connection between biology and epis-
temology Thomas A. Sebeok would repeatedly invoke as constituting one of the
three main precursor attempts at founding biosemiotics as a research agenda in the
twentieth century. Indeed, Sebeok reports that long before he ﬁrst met Prodi in the
mid-1970s, “Prodi had forged, without explicit reference to any other previous or
contemporary thinker, still another variant of this sprouting, or re-emerging domain”
of sign study, to which he had given the title “natural semiotics” (1998: 34).1 Yet
Prodi’s role in the history of biosemiotics is not merely that of a precursor to Sebeok.
Rather, Sebeok also credits Prodi as being one of the three main founders of contem-
porary biosemiotics, recalling the seminal planning sessions of 1977 when he met
with Prodi and Thure von Uexküll in Freiburg to conduct “an intensive week-long
open-ended seminar, so to speak, on the practical and conceivable ins and outs”
of what they would jointly develop later as the contemporary research agenda of
biosemiotics (1998: 194).
Born in Scandiano (Reggio Emilia), Italy, on August 2, 1928, Giogio Prodi
graduated from the University of Bologna with a doctorate in medicine in 1952.
Prodi would spend the entirety of his academic career at this very university,
holding the chairs of General Pathology (1966–1968), Experimental Oncology
(1969–1978), and Oncology (1979–1987). In 1973, he founded and directed the
University of Bologna’s Cancer Research Institute, and a few years later founded
1 One of Prodi’s early manuscripts on this topic, entitled La preistoria nelle sue pesanti con-
seguenze sulla storia e sulla teoria della semiosis, came to the attention of fellow semiotician and
novelist Umberto Eco (1932–), who saw to its publication in 1977, introducing Prodi’s work on
“natural semiotics” to the community of general semioticians, most of whose work was still rooted
in anthroposemiotic analysis (Sebeok 2001: 67).
323
D. Favareau, Essential Readings in Biosemiotics, Biosemiotics 3,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9650-1_10, C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010

324
Giorgio Prodi (1928–1987)
the interdisciplinary Interdepartmental Cancer Research Center that now bears his
name. “As a member of numerous scientiﬁc societies and associations,” writes
Guido Paolucci, Prodi’s successor to the directorship of the Cancer Research Center,
Giorgio Prodi “came to represent an undisputed cultural point of reference for the
University, both nationally and internationally. Continues Paolucci:”
[Prodi’s] zest for learning and life led him into the ﬁeld of epistemology, in which he became
an international authority. In the ﬁeld of literature, he was to publish prize winning novels,
short stories and poems [in addition to a vast scientiﬁc bibliography of over 300 publications
on oncology] . . .He pursued his three main ﬁelds of research: medical oncology, philoso-
phy, and literature, separately, secure as he was in his knowledge of being a specialist in
all three...His life and work formed a mosaic of interconnections between philosophy and
science [and] a reading of his encyclopaedic scientiﬁc, philosophical and epistemological
publications provides a map by which to retrace his steps in pursuit of a better understand-
ing of biological phenomena and that which pertains to the signiﬁcance and structure of
thought (Paolucci 1996: ii).
One year after Prodi’s death in 1987, Sebeok published in Semiotica an English
language précis that Prodi had made of his own 1977 masterwork in ‘natural
semiotics,’ Le bai materiali della signiﬁcazione. Condensing into ﬁfty pages the
arguments and ﬁndings of his 259-page 1977 monograph, Prodi’s précis, entitled,
‘Material Bases of Signiﬁcation’ (1988) remains an extraordinarily dense read that
is nonetheless extraordinarily rewarding. This précis being a highly concentrated
distillation of an already exceedingly dense work itself, to condense it even further
in order to accommodate the space limitations of this volume would have rendered
it dense to the point of incomprehensibility. Instead, I will attempt to convey to the
reader a sense of some of the large-scale concerns and theses appearing in Prodi’s
1977 manifesto of “natural semiotics” in this introduction, in the hopes that this
overview will be conceptually sufﬁcient to allow a contextualized reading of the fol-
lowing selection. This selection, entitled ‘Signs and Codes in Immunology’, reﬂects
many of Prodi’s larger concerns and ideas, and is a transcript of the conference paper
that Prodi presented at the NATO Advanced Science Institute Conference on ‘The
Semiotics of Cellular Communication in the Immune System,’ just one year before
his death.
Even in this short conference paper, one can witness the broad scope of Prodi’s
semiotic systematic – a systematic that is ﬁrmly grounded in the purely efﬁcient
material and energy exchanges of the material world as those changes come to shape
the biological systems that adapt to them. As a thoroughgoing but non-naïve mate-
rialist, Prodi insisted that “biological systems” themselves are no more than densely
interacting sets of purely efﬁcient material and energy exchanges whose being never
transcends that of the material and energy exchanges that bears them, and in which
they live their lives. In the following few pages, I will try to lay out the essence of
Prodi’s ‘natural semiotics’.
“A frame of existing facts is the territory upon which one moves and in which,
contemporarily, one searches for the explanation of moving”, writes Prodi, “yet if
there is an existing network of facts, and if we are part of it, our nature (structure,

10
Signs and Codes in Immunology
325
functions) stems from it – and as a speciﬁcation of this, it can be neither contradic-
tory nor external. We need not raise the issue of justifying the network, but rather,
of being justiﬁed by it . . .through the [material] network facts that are our make-up,
and the [material] facts that connect us with the outer existence, we are submerged
without any possible interruption in the most general web of facts” (Prodi 1982: 15).
Because of the material ubiquity of reality, notes Prodi, “dualism is not overcome
by synthesis, but rather by the ascertainment that at the very base of it all, there is no
duality” (1987b: 119). In this sense, Prodi may be seen as something of a reverse-
pansemiotician, for his conviction is not that mind is in matter, but that mind – just
like everything else in our universe – is nothing but matter and energy exchange,
a complex chain of ramifying (though at each point always still purely physical)
interactions, regardless of how far from the holistic material bedrock of reality that
we may subjectively experience our “minds” to be. Thus, he argues:
If we were able to undo a sign in its various steps, we would discover that every step is
formed by a reader-thing that interprets another thing which, in turn, is seen as a sign,
that is, subsequently read by yet another thing. All the molecular processes that we are
beginning to be aware of rather well, in the present day, (from the proteinic synthesis to
the employment of energy, from the duplication of the DNA to the transmission of nervous
drives) belong to this typology. Man’s cerebral functioning is surely terribly complicated
[ . . . ] but it is hard to believe that it may operate differently from a continuous molecular
recognition of signiﬁcance. (Prodi 1987b: 147).
Yet Prodi’s semiotic materialism, as evidenced in the following selection, is
generative, and not eliminative: here, the purely material systems that are “organ-
isms” are literally shaped and reshaped, both in phylogeny and ontogeny, by their
interactions with the world. “Meaning in nature is thus the relations of correspon-
dence between material states which appear as triggers for change,” writes Prodi
(1988: 195). Prodi characterizes such pre-biotic, but naturally occurring and reg-
ularized, relations of correspondence in the material world as the proto-semiotic
relations grounding the ability of organisms with biosemiotic capacities to reliably
“know” the world. “Life begins when onto such a uniform world, conditions of
selectivity are superimposed,” writes Prodi, “or, better, when conditions of selectiv-
ity are generated from the conditions of uniformity” (1988: 55). Grounded in these
two simple principles, Prodi’s materialist biosemiotics yields molecular (and later
cellular and multi-cellular) “reading machines” that are in all cases “constructed on
the referent” of that part of external reality which is their complementary substrate.
Prodi discusses the examples of enzymes and their substrates to illustrate the under-
lying physical complementarity driving not just primitive semiosis, but, ultimately,
all semiosis:
The transformation of indifferent things into signs is linked to the stabilizing of the
[molecular] reader and confers advantages on the latter (taking the word advantage in a
nonanthropomorphic sense as signifying stability, and subsequently competitive advantage
as well). In this kind of dynamic, a sign establishes itself as such because it is useful; in
other words, it creates new thermodynamic and energy conditions for its user. Thus the sig-
naling phenomenon has a concrete natural basis and retains this even when the [composite
that is the] signaling machine attains the level of cultural complication . . .

326
Giorgio Prodi (1928–1987)
Bacteria offer us a concrete example of the function. Let us suppose there exists a large
population of bacteria in contact with n sign-things, such that each member is capable of
reading-metabolizing the n referents. If, thanks to the mutation produced by the accidental
disorder, one of the individuals is enabled to exploit an n + 1 metabolite, then an evolu-
tionary step has taken place in the bacterium in question and in all the clones that descend
from it. This is manifested in an expansion of the reading area. What has happened to the
n+ 1 thing is that it has acquired a natural possibility of being read, and can be deciphered
as a sign. The microorganism’s environmental range has thus increased. What chance has
the new clone of being stabilized? Neither more nor less than the advantages deriving from
reading . . .
A condition of this kind might seem to be very mechanistic, but this is by no means the
case; [for] the new circumstances and reading possibilities are not only external aspects
(in relation with the referent) but also internal ones (consisting of a rearrangement of the
sign relationship that makes up the individual). There is no doubt that n + 1’s capacity
to be read arises only if the new reading system appears, but the new reading system is
inconceivable without n + 1. The possibility of reading is thus constructed on the referent.
All a structure can do during evolution is expand into the forest of things surrounding it
and learn to decipher more and more of them, modifying both itself and the things in the
process. Little by little, the forest is converted into a place of family, connatural presences
utilized by the structure; it becomes an interpretable sign complex. In the last analysis, it
is things that have themselves read, building suitable structures to this end (1988a: 209,
211–212).
Increase in biological complexity thus results from – and not merely in – an
increase in the number of real-world referents being read, “fostering the develop-
ment of [ever-more] adapted, progressive reading machines” (1988a: 226), argues
Prodi. For since “the general principle is that reading systems construct themselves
upon signs, and these signs are solicited by referents” (1988a: 208), at a certain
level of complexity, the “signs of referents” themselves begin to function as “ref-
erents” (in the manner, Prodi acknowledges, of Peircean interpretants), resulting in
the evolution of the appropriate reading mechanisms, accordingly.
Moreover: “Since stored signs are ‘meaningful for [x]’ . . . there are connec-
tions between the internal signs. No matter how segmented they are, they do not
form a sequence of ‘accidental’ units; if this were so, we would be quite incapable
of explaining that connective function which we call knowledge . . .Thus, [given
that these connections, too, are physical realities, and thus can also function as
referents], they carry meaning for a speciﬁc connecting apparatus that can review
them, see which are meaningful in relation to a given situation or adjustment to the
environment, and link them together” (1988a: 230).
Thus, by invoking the exact same processes described taking place in the
immune system in ‘Signs and Codes in Immunology,’ and by proceeding from the
simplest and most direct “physically complementary relation” of the epitope to
the most mediated and non-linear (but still ultimately physically complementary)
chain reactions running through the central nervous system, Prodi goes onto to
detail how his materialist biosemiosis is operative in the organization of: animal
collectivity (1988a: 223), human social life (1988: 225), communal intersubjectiv-
ity (1988a: 224), hypothesis generation (1988a: 232), memory (1988a: 226), the
objectiﬁcation of extra-mental reality as such (1988a: 237), and the ultimate human

10
Signs and Codes in Immunology
327
accomplishment that is the full recognition of signs as signs (1988a: 235). “In this
model, there are no halts,” writes Prodi scholar Felice Cimatti, but only
ongoing transformations, living forms turning yet into other more or less complex forms of
life. Moreover, we are not the ones, as presumptuous subjects, to ‘know’ the object; rather,
things alone [transform us in our interactions with them, such that they become “known”]
to us. We are thus nothing but the ultimate transformation of other things, linked, in turn, to
many others, and so on, all the way up to those very things we are presently knowing ...Thus,
the world does not account for an a priori distinction between subjects and objects which are
separated and differ from each other, but only on more or less complex systems, all tied to
an articulated web of relations that coincides with life...subject and object cannot therefore
constitute the starting point of knowledge’s developing process. Still they represent the ﬁnal
point, though never wholly attainable, for if such a full separation would ever occur, the
biological continuity that links them, would break down. That would mean not just the end
of semiosis or knowledge, but of life itself (2000: 352–353).
In this sense, Prodi’s material bases of signiﬁcation, monadic at its core (1988a:
191), dyadic in its action (1988a: 201), and triadically informative as to the real
nature of being as the complexity of a “reading machine’s” own reading opera-
tions come to recognize their own recursive effect upon the reading (1988a: 241),
presents us with perhaps the most fully worked out biological account of the oft-
misunderstood doctrine underlying Peircean biosemiotics’ naturalistic realism – i.e.,
the idea that it is the nature of objects that ultimately give rise to (or bestimmit) the
nature of their sign vehicles (which, in turn, ultimately give rise to the nature of
their interpretants – and which, in turn, ultimately give rise to the nature of their
interpreters).
Accordingly, “life, semiosis and material logic are biologically coextensive terms
in Prodi’s model,” writes Prodi scholar Felice Cimatti, and thus
the separation between sign and referent as seen in the classical semiotic triangle will never
occur. [Rather, such ‘separation’ can be experienced] only to the extent that we have lost all
recollection of their original spatial contiguity when the translating chains that link the ﬁrst
to the second are extremely prolonged. Their separation is, as said before, only apparent:
the sign is always contiguous to its object, what varies, instead, is the extension of the
translating chains (2000: 376, 365).
It is perhaps as an extension of this very logic of contiguity, and of ‘translating
chains’, that the dedication page of Thomas A. Sebeok’s ﬁrst book bearing the title
Biosemiotics bears the inscription: “In memoriam: Giorgio Prodi (1928–1987): Bold
trailblazer of contemporary biosemiotics” (Sebeok and Sebeok 1992).

328
Giorgio Prodi (1928–1987)
Signs and Codes in Immunology (1988)
Introduction: Semiotics and Immunology
Immunological reaction consists in deciphering molecular structures (e.g., antigens,
antigenic epitopes), and this deciphering is demonstrated by the [life-sustaining
appropriateness] of the response itself (i.e., the production of antibodies or antibody-
equivalents). These responses are speciﬁc, and each one is directed only towards the
single antigenic structure by which it has been provoked. Therefore, the immune
system performs an “interpretation” of the material objects that it can explore; it is
triggered by some of them, and toward these only it builds its speciﬁc response. In a
very general perspective, antigens are [information-bearing, or] “meaningful things”
for an immune system, because of their capacity to trigger the system in a speciﬁc
way. They are therefore “signs” which the immune system is able to interpret.
Immunocompetence is a thus a “system of interpretation”, which works on the
basis of a particular physiology and with particular rules, as its “code” of interpre-
tation. Importantly, the property “to be a sign” only exists in relation to a system
of interpretation: a molecule is an antigen only in relation to an immune system.
An “absolute sign” does not exist, precisely to the extent that an “absolute anti-
gen” does not exist. It is accordingly justiﬁed to attempt to verify if the concepts of
semiotics (as they emerge from the study of linguistics and other human sciences)
can be applied to immunology. Caution and care must be used, however, because
very distant cultural domains are involved, and empty metaphors can easily be pro-
duced: but in both cases, it is a matter of [the scientiﬁc examination of] “things” that
are identiﬁable as “signs” by a deciphering system – in relation to which, they are
properly “signs”.
Systems of Deciphering
Molecular structures are identiﬁed by the immune system as provided with a deﬁnite
special shape resulting from the sequence of their constituents. This brings about
a sharp discrimination between the “self” – against which the reaction does not
occur – and the “not self”. The laws that regulate such reaction must therefore also
explain its absence.
Among not-self molecules, deﬁnite structural traits allow the distinction between
one antigen and the others. The single epitope is confronted with (introduced in)
a system of interpretation by which it is manipulated and explored. The single
immune system is confronted with (being internal to) the epitopic universe which
it is capable of interpreting. This interpretation can be in some extent ambiguous
(cross-reactions among different antigens, as they were synonyms; autoimmune
reactions; tolerance against not-self molecules), and this fact causes pathologi-
cal conditions, or can be used in prevention or therapy, Namely, it is possible to
manipulate the system, if its rules are known.
The attitude of the immune system to read the world is comparable to that of
the nervous system, though in a very different way and on very different objects.

10
Signs and Codes in Immunology
329
The nervous system is devoted to the discrimination of inputs from the environment
(inside and outside) in term of localization and characterization of the emitters, and
is based on cooperating elements working in a ﬁxed and invariant position (neurons,
synapses). The immune system works by discriminating molecules present inside
the body, through elements which cooperate, move, and collide in a free medium.
As far as the nervous system is concerned, during the evolution of man such a com-
plexity was attained, that allowed the formation of language and the interpretation of
reality through a symbolic medium (semiotics as usually considered). It is matter of
higher order: in a linguistic system a sign (e.g. a word) is “triadic” and its connection
with reality is mediated by the body of the language itself. What is the relation-
ship between these two signs (a word and an antigen), so distant in the domain of
reality?
The problem is that of the semiotic threshold. When, during evolution, can we
attribute the character of sign to a matter of fact (thing or event)? When does it
raise in nature the occurrence of a thing which is “meaningful” for another thing?
The semiotician usually ﬁxes the threshold at the level of man, saying that sign is
something which stands for something else in the frame of a language.
We are searching for the natural ancestors of this very recent (human) situation.
In our opinion the threshold has to be placed much behind.
Biology as Natural Semiotics
We think that the threshold for “sign” is situated at the very beginning of the bio-
logical domain, characterizing its origin and its basic structure. The pre-biological
universe is constituted by standard and uniform situations, both of chaotic-statistic
type (plasma, gases and liquids) and of repetitive type (crystals). Any condition of
selectivity or speciﬁcity is absent. Life begins when to such a uniform world, con-
ditions of selectivity are superimposed or, better, when conditions of selectivity are
generated from the conditions of uniformity. This status is possible because of the
production of molecular structures endowed with sufﬁcient complexity, proper to
the chemistry of carbon. An enzyme, which can be considered the simplest example
of this status, selects its substrate among a number of meaningless molecules with
which it can collide: it reacts and forms a complex with only its molecules partner.
This substrate is a sign for the enzyme (for its enzyme). The enzyme explores reality
and ﬁnds what corresponds to its own shape: it is a lock which searches and ﬁnds its
proper key. In philosophical terms, an enzyme is a reader that “categorizes” reality
determining the ensemble of all the molecules which can factually react with it. The
term category is used here both in a Kantian sense (a “point of view” of a reader who
gives order to the world) and an Aristotelian sense (the objective ensemble of things
presenting a given character). This semiotics (or proto-semiotics) is the basic fea-
ture of the whole biological organization (protein synthesis, metabolism, hormone
activity, transmission of nervous impulse, and so on). In all these cases a speciﬁc
relationship between a reader and its sign is clearly established.
Often a molecule is at the same time sign and reader. An organism is constituted
by (results from) a high number of these correspondences. Biology is, in itself and

330
Giorgio Prodi (1928–1987)
in all its aspects, a natural semiotics. (This topic is treated in much more detail in the
works quoted in bibliography). This “protosemiotics” constitutes also the ground of
the immune reactions.
If a matter of fact is a sign, the reader for whom such a matter of fact is a sign has
a proper code of interpretation, and only on the base of this code the matter of fact
is a sign. If a molecular structure is interpreted by the immune system as an epitope
(and is therefore a sign for the system) the question is: how is the code constituted,
how does it work to interpret its reality. The mechanism must be based on the general
well established reactions of deciphering (DNA coding, protein syntheses and so
on). Then the question can become the following: how these reactions are combined
to produce an “immunological interpretation”. A novelty, in term of natural history,
always is obtained as a more complex relation among ancient and well working
mechanisms. Also the great novelty represented by the immune system follows this
rule (the language too, in our opinion).
Semiotic Repertoire
The proof that a matter of fact is a sign for a code is the response of the system
itself. The proof that a molecule is an antigen for the immune system is the pro-
duction of a complementary speciﬁc molecule (an antimolecule, as a free antibody
or as a membrane-associated protein), or can be also a speciﬁc interference on this
production. The main point is the mechanisms which link the two terms: how the
antigen is connected with the synthesis of its anti-structure.
The instructive theory maintains that the antigenic epitope has primary func-
tion in the process, because, in some way, that anti-structure built on it: the antigen
constitutes the mold for the production of its antibody. This does not exist before
the antigen, both as molecule and information, and is constructed after and on the
antigen.
The system has an endless capability to face all the possible epitopic structures.
Such a theory is impossible. Antibodies are proteins, and as all other proteins,
are produced from an existing codiﬁcation represented by DNA sequences. An
instructive theory should be based on a totally unknown mechanism of protein
synthesis.
The second possibility is that the genetic code contains a certain ﬁnite numbers
of sequences, capable to rule the synthesis of the anti-structures for all the epitopes.
In this case the function of the antigen is less important (through ever necessary),
because it simply triggers the work of a preexisting machinery: it selects the single
response from the repertoire of all the possible responses. This is the ground of the
selective theories. The system of interpretation (repertoire and rules) is an a priori of
the interpretation of the single epitope: it is properly a code (in the general sense of
a systematic modality of interpretation, in the same way that a language is a code).
This mechanism, only supposed till few years ago, is nowadays well known. In
each cell of the body all the DNA sequences are present for the anti-epitopic struc-
tures, obviously in a ﬁnite number, but covering all the possible shapes of antigens.

10
Signs and Codes in Immunology
331
They are placed in some deﬁnite positions in chromosomes (for instance in chro-
mosomes 14, 2, and 22 as far as heavy and light chains of man are concerned). In
a deﬁnite set of lymphocytes these DNA sequences can be arranged by translation
and joining with a random mechanism, so that diversity is generated starting from
the same repertoire: in each cell a given combination of DNA pieces is reached,
different in principle from any other. So from a repertoire of different sequences a
repertoire of different cells is obtained: the semantic dictionary of the immunologi-
cal code is distributed among a high number of cells, which are in this way different
from each other and genetically speciﬁc. The core of the system is therefore an het-
erogeneous population of cells which as a whole can read all the epitopes, but only
one of them (in principle) can read a single epitope (of course it is not completely
true, because the same combination has a certain probability to be reached in dif-
ferent cells). The mechanism of VDJ and C joining is one of the most interesting
results in molecular biology.
Therefore the system contains an internal repertoire (as codiﬁcation of
complementary structures) of the epitopic universe: it is an a priori mechanism
in relation to the events it can decipher, into which it can fall. In this sense it is
not an exception, because all the biological entities are a priori in relation to their
environment, through a posteriori products of natural history.
In this sense we can say (using with caution these expression) that antigens
are the “totally alien” which is introduced into the domain of the language (of
the known), being analyzed by a categorical system (made part of a process of
interpretation, and, in this sense, “razionalized” by the system).
From the Repertoire to the Syntax
The repertoire of the anti-epitopic DNA sequences constitutes the semantic compo-
nent of the system. As in all the languages, also a syntactic component is necessary,
which establishes the rules for the use of the repertoire: how a deﬁnite proposition
can be obtained using the words of the dictionary.
The immunological repertoire is, per se, a pure potentiality, that must be trans-
formed in an actual process to obtain the product of the reaction. Syntax means rules,
and rules means essentially a restriction of possibilities. In fact a syntactic scheme
in a language forbids most of the combinations among the words of a dictionary, and
allows only few of them: it restricts drastically the high number of random combina-
tions of the words resulting from a kind of thermodynamic collision, and establishes
the permitted structures.
The “meaning” resides precisely in this process: from an indeﬁnite causality to
an ordered situation, interpretable also in terms of the theory of information and of
the theory of communication. It is matter of a “channeling” of the semantic entities
into the deﬁnite pathway of the syntactic rules.
To use the repertoire, the ﬁrst step for an antigen is to be handled in a proper
manner by macrophages, to be exposed on the surface of a proper cell, and then
some ﬁxed processes among specialized cells can take place.

332
Giorgio Prodi (1928–1987)
This is the channeling we are speaking about: each step of this represents a
structure-antistructure selection trough speciﬁc receptors, both between two cells
and between a lymphokine and a cell. Only at the end of the chain is the anti-
body forming cell triggered to clonal ampliﬁcation and anti-epitope production.
Also after this process, some other chains of molecular events must take place,
to modulate the amount of the products formed. Many aspects of this picture
(many rules of this grammar) are nowadays known, appearing as particular cases
of the general “protosemiotics” we are speaking about. Cooperation between T
and macrophages, between T and B, between T and T, the action of the differ-
ent interleukins and so on are all chapters of this glottology. We underline that all
the steps are performed, and exist before the “historical” (here and now) event of
antigenicity (e.g. the entry of a toxin): the matter of fact simply selects one of the
possible channels, individuating the way: a kind of a generative process to form
a phrase through a grammar. So the production of an anti-epitopic structure taken
from the repertoire can be seen as the formation of a phrase using simpler units of
sense.
Also the complex individuation of an input from the external world performed
by the nervous system is a deﬁnite channeling, each step of which consists in a
relationship between molecular partners (the action of ionic pumps that allows the
formation of the electric potential, the synaptic relation between neurotransmitters
and their receptors, and so on): the only relevant difference is that in the case of the
nervous system the channeling is preﬁxed also in spatial terms as an anatomically
deﬁned network, while in the immune response the channeling must be determined
each time through statistical encounters of cells.
Semiotics and Syntax: The Syngenetic Restriction
The repertoire contains also the anti-self sequences, and the organism is potentially
capable to destroy itself through its immune system.
This event does not take place, because syntax includes rules that forbid that
channeling in the direction of what is self, and excludes the self as target. Interpreted
either as deletion of clones or as a product of cooperative reactions, tolerance is
obtained and maintained through a chain of molecular speciﬁcities: also the absence
of reaction is a reaction.
Usually the speciﬁc trait of the immune system is considered the response against
not-self. But two quite different aspects must be considered together: the response
is both against not-self (therefore is a general exclusion of self: it is not a choice but
a giving up of a large set of choices) and speciﬁc (against a given epitope).
In the case of antibody production, at the end of the channel we obtain a free
anti-epitopic molecule, which can react with the correspondent epitope.
In the case of a cell-cell reaction (cytotoxicity) and in all the cell-cell reaction,
an identiﬁcation of “selfness” is necessary.
Each cell of the system, to cooperate with another cell, must be sure that it is
matter of a cell of the same system (of the same organism or of an organism of the

10
Signs and Codes in Immunology
333
same individual characteristics) and deciphers on it some signs of “selfness” that
mean “compatibility”. This deciphering opens the gate, and the chain can begin.
The same happens for the destruction of the cell-target: “foreing” is always inter-
preted in the frame of the “familiar”, as if it were necessary to preliminary ascertain
the use of the same grammar. In fact a language presupposes that the speakers agree
to use that language, adopting its syntax and its semantic repertoire: the unknown
which a language must always face (forming continually new phrases) is liable to
interpretation because it is introduced in the frame of the known (which is old and
well established, and is precisely the system, the mechanism of interpretation). The
signals of selfness are genetically determined: in fact they must be invariant, not
dependant on the “personal history” of the individual, or on environmental inﬂu-
ences. They are constituted by MHC-coded antigens. The problem of presentation
of an antigen together with MHC products (as two separate points, or as one point)
is well known.
On the contrary, tolerance is an “historical” event, and depends on what the
system ﬁnds during its development: it is not genetic but ontogenetic. Important
to remark, also tolerance is restricted. This “view of differences in the frame of
equality” is compatible with a concept of the immune system as phylogenetically
developed mainly to maintain the integrity of the self against the tendency to
disorder represented by mutations: the function of the system is to preserve the
neatness of the genetic message from the ground noise, and the reaction against
exogenous materials (bacteria, toxins, virus) would be only a side effect. Cells
presenting “deviation” from the permitted scheme (self cells which become
non-self), are eliminated, and for this is necessary that the exploring immune cell
can before recognize selfness: it explores continually normal cells and individuates
the altered ones confronting these with its (normal) scheme. So an immune cell is
the touchstone of the self.
Idiotypic Networks
The amino acid sequence of the antibody combining site is necessarily “new”,
therefore antigenic, and produces an immune response. The variable region of the
correspondent antibody is the equivalent (in immunological terms) of the antigenic
epitope: both (epitope and anti-antibody) can bind to the same amino acid sequence,
which constitutes the variable region of the antibody. In its turn, the variable region
of an anti-antibody is an epitope, and so on. In the whole immune system an
“internal image” of the epitopic universe is present not only in the sense that the
anti-epitopic sequences of DNA are present in the repertoire, but also that the sys-
tem is provided with a universe of internal epitope-equivalents: the outside world
has, so speaking, its representatives in the inside domain of the body. The produc-
tion of anti-images is a continuous function of the system, which is always in a state
of internal activity, a kind of at rest work. Therefore the input of an antigen can be
seen also as a perturbation induced in a condition of equilibrium, forcing the system
to reach another condition of equilibrium.

334
Giorgio Prodi (1928–1987)
The character of an a priori mechanism is even more clear. But this does not
mean that the immune system (or, generally speaking, an organism) is a kind of
“autopoietic” monad, and that the external world is only a shadow: the system is
derived from the outside and reacts towards the outside interpreting it. On the other
hand, always we see that, in the course of phylogeny, a more precise and efﬁcient
interpretation of reality parallels a higher (and not a lower) degree of autonomy of
the reader versus the reality to be read.
What is Semiotics for Immunology (and Vice Versa)?
Immunologists can probably be stimulated by the concepts of semiotics (as by those
of theories of information and of communication).
They are particularly sensitive to all the phenomena of signaling. Nevertheless
the danger is high that they are tempted by a metaphoric use of the terms, that can
confuse the argument. In fact semiotics is normally intended as a theory of human
and cultural signs and codes. It involves symbolic activity, hypothetical structures,
a formal logical frame and a certain degree of consciousness. Then questions of
the following kind (perfectly meaningless) can be posed, and in fact are: if the
immune system can make choices, or can build hypotheses, or has an intentionality
in synthesizing its antistructures, and so on.
The different modalities in deciphering objective referents develop during natural
history in absolute continuity, one from another, but they are distinct, and must be
considered distinct. The continuity does not exclude sharp qualitative differences,
and the existence of real “crises” in this pathway. A point of crisis is certainly repre-
sented by human knowledge, which is in continuity with, but cannot be reduced to,
previous systems of meaning. A domain of modalities is also a domain of terms that
we use about them, so it is necessary to deﬁne the meaning of the words and the con-
text in which they are placed. In this perspective we have speciﬁed the term “sign”
as a diadic entity which becomes triadic when a sufﬁcient complexity is reached.
A symbolic conventional sign cannot represent the situation of the immune sign,
or, even more so, of the “categorical” biological sign (which we have exempliﬁed in
the function of an enzyme molecule).
In any case, whether the concepts of semiotics can help the immunologist in his
experimental work is, in my opinion, doubtful.
On the contrary, I think that immunology can give fruitfully its concepts to semi-
otics, to build a general theory of signs and codes, whose scheme we have traced
starting from the origin up to the stage of human knowledge.
In our view, it is not symbolic language which “explains” the machinery of the
cell, but it is this machinery that must explain (through a situable complexity) the
nature of a symbolic language.
There is disagreement between those that consider semiotics as a pure human
domain, and the present view of a general semiotic domain: the only question is
where to place the threshold for sign. To avoid confusion, the term “protosign” could
be used instead, up until the human sign, but this seems to me rather artefactual.

10
Signs and Codes in Immunology
335
In any case, the common points are that reality is interpreted by a priori systems
provided by their own codes, and that all are the a posteriori products of their natural
history (and therefore of the reality that they can read).
References
Prodi, G. (1983). La storia naturale della logica. Milano: Bompiani.
Prodi, G. (1985). Biology as natural semiotics. IIId International Congress of Semiotics, Palermo.
Prodi, G. (1986). “Phylogeny of codes” and “Ontogeny of codes”. In: Sebeok (ed.) Encyclopedic
Dictionary of Semiotics. Berlin: Mouton.
Prodi, G. (1987). Le basi materiali della signiﬁcazione. Milano: Bompiani.

Chapter 11
From Animal to Man: Thought and Language
René Thom (1923–2002)
Introduction and Commentary: René Thom
In a few years’ time we shall look back in amusement at those writings in which biologists
are astonished that the human gene contains hardly more than a thousand times more infor-
mation than that of the humble coliform bacillus and that it contains much less than those of
a triton or a grain of corn. As if the distribution of nucleotides in a DNA chain were equally
probable! As if the maintenance and duplication of nucleic material did not require the
presence of a cytoplasmic milieu to which it is strictly and speciﬁcally adapted! In this con-
nection, only one hypothesis seems plausible: On account of the constraints that the global
viability of the system imposes, the DNA chain must organise itself in relatively autonomous
and stable segments, the ‘signiﬁcant’ segments. Furthermore, these can present a hierarchy
of functional subordinates, just as a language splits up into sentences, words and letters.
The ‘genetic code’ barely corresponds to the most elementary level, that of the letters in a
word: the ‘level of ﬁrst articulation’ of the linguists. . .Is not such a discipline which tries to
specify the connection between a global dynamic situation, (the ‘signiﬁed’), and the local
morphology in which it appears (the ‘signiﬁer’), precisely a ‘semiology’?
R. Thom (1983: 168–169)
Musing upon the intellectual foundations of his biosemiotic worldview, Thomas
A. Sebeok once remarked, more seriously than not, “I consider myself a Thomist –
a René Thomist, that is” (1991: 157). Given that Sebeok – a self-described biolo-
gist manqué, a professional linguist, and a committed interdisciplinarian in many
ways, but in no sense a mathematician – would claim such intellectual afﬁnity with
a man whose life’s work revolved around differential equations and topological
geometry, may seem to call out for explanation for some readers, as may the inclu-
sion of mathematician René Thom in this book. Those more intimately acquainted
with Thom’s writings, or with the history of biosemiotics, however, will understand
at once Thom’s place in this anthology of biosemiotic writings, and why Sebeok
regarded “the semiotic intimations of the French polymath René Thom as nuggets
of pure gold [and as] pointers towards the elevation of the doctrine of signs to the
status of a theory or a science” (1979: viii).
René Frédéric Thom was born on September 2, 1923 in Montbéliard, France.
The son of shopkeeper parents, Thom early displayed a genius for mathematics,
graduating with honors from Collège Cuvier in Montbéliard in 1938. He received
his baccalauréat degree in elementary mathematics from Besançon in 1940, and a
baccalauréat degree in philosophy the following year in Lyon. He attended the Lycée
337
D. Favareau, Essential Readings in Biosemiotics, Biosemiotics 3,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9650-1_11, C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010

338
René Thom (1923–2002)
Saint-Louis in Paris in 1942, and was accepted into the prestigious École Normale
Supérieure in Paris in 1943, where he studied under the algebraic topologist Henri
Cartan (1904–2008), co-founder of the mathematical collective that published under
the pseudonym of “Nicolas Bourbaki.”
After graduation, Thom followed Cartan to the University of Strasbourg in 1946,
taking a research post with the Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque which
allowed him to complete his doctorate in 1951. His doctoral thesis, entitled Fibre
Spaces in Spheres and Steenrod Squares, contained the foundations of his later the-
ory of co-bordism – a hybrid of topological and algebraic approaches to the study
of jointly bound manifolds that would play a decisive role in his thinking about
both animal morphology and semiotic intelligibility several decades later, and for
which he was awarded mathematics’ highest honor, the Fields Medal, seven years
later.
While on a fellowship to do mathematical research in the United States after
the completion of his doctorate, Thom attended seminars by the mathematicians
Eugenio Calabi (1923– ) and Kunihiko Kodaira (1915–1997) and held personal
discussions with Albert Einstein (1879–1955), Norman Steenrod (1910–1971) and
Hermann Weyl (1885–1955). Two years later, he returned to France, where he taught
topology and mathematics at the University of Grenoble from 1953 to 1954, at the
University of Strasbourg from 1954 to 1963, and, from 1964, at the Institut des
Hautes Études Scientiﬁque at Bures-sur-Yvette, France, where he would spend the
rest of his academic career. Thom was awarded the Grand Prix Scientiﬁque de la
Ville de Paris in 1974, and died in his home at Bures-sur-Yvette on October 25,
2002, at the age of 79.
According to his obituary, Thom recounted late in his life that the awarding of
the Fields Medal in 1958 had “brought him the freedom to choose what research
he wanted to do, and for him that was essential. He began to take the whole of sci-
ence as his canvas. He was not a theoretical or experimental scientist, in the sense
of designing experiments and predicting results, but rather a philosopher of sci-
ence, writing about the long-term future developments in the sciences that needed
to occur” (London Times 2002). Accordingly, after 1963, Thom’s work moved away
from its previous emphasis on working out the mathematical equations of differen-
tial topology (the ﬁeld which he had already contributed such lasting innovations
as the notions of characteristic classes, co-bordism, the Thom transversality theo-
rem, the Thom conjecture of genus minimization in class homology, and what are
now called by differential topologists, ‘Thom spaces’) and towards the exploration
of what would later be called singularity theory – i.e., the study of how geometric
“stability” emerges from, and is maintained within, the ever-shifting manifold of a
multi-dimensional dynamic.
An interdisciplinary thinker by temperament,1 Thom realized that the principles
of structural organization and form-creation revealed by the study of singularity
1 “Thom was forced to invent catastrophe theory in order to provide himself with a can-
vas large enough to accommodate the diversity of his interests,” writes colleague Christopher
Zeeman (1977: 373).

11
From Animal to Man: Thought and Language
339
mapping may prove fruitful to the application of any ﬁeld of inquiry where the
anomalous “emergence of order out of chaos”(cf. Prigogine 1984, Holland 1992,
Kauffman 1995) – or to use Norbert Wiener’s famous phrase, wherein the puzzle of
“islands of negentropy . . . resist[ing] the general stream of corruption and decay”
(1973: 27) – is an issue. Today we are used to thinking about naturally occurring
processes in such terms, but it should be remembered that when René Thom was pio-
neering such thinking in 1964, the sciences of “chaos theory”, “self-organization”,
“dissipative structures” and “dynamical, far-from-equilibrium, complex-adaptive
systems theory” were, in effect, awaiting their seeding in the work of Thom’s own
soon to be developed catastrophe theory.
Conceived in 1964 and presented to the world for the ﬁrst time in a series of two
articles in 1968, Thom’s “outline for a general theory of models” sought to use the
equations of singularity theory to characterize the dynamic topology of multidimen-
sional possibility space wherein structural “stability” of any kind (e.g. organismic,
social, ecosystemic, or linguistic) not only emerges and maintains itself, but also
wherein such stability-inducing form changes in response to perturbation in ways
that either preserve, modify or destroy its original formal integrity. Thom calls the
points whereat a continuous process “jumps” into discontinuity, and in so doing
is reconﬁgured into a newly continuous state, catastrophe points, after the Greek
word καταστρoϕ ´η – a term used to designate that point in the ongoing develop-
ment of events (e.g., a drama), whereat a “sudden turn” initiates a consequential new
trajectory.
Such continuity-breaking and trajectory-changing events are critical to the devel-
opment of any kind of form – biological and socio-historical, as well as mathematic
and topological, according to Thom. Not surprisingly, then, Thom considers the
proper object of his investigation to be morphogenesis – i.e., “form” creation per
se. Thus, he cites as formative inﬂuences upon his thinking the works of structuralist
biologist D’Arcy Thompson (1860–1948), organicist neurologist and Gestalt psy-
chologist Kurt Goldstein (1878–1965) and developmental embryologist Conrad Hal
Waddington (1905–1975).2
In trying to understand the differentiating yet non-random processes of embry-
onic development, Waddington, like Thom, understood himself to be grappling
with foundational questions that go back to the beginning of systemic biological
inquiry in the West; and with the attempt to provide modern-day scientiﬁc answers
to Aristotle’s still largely unanswered questions about forms and ends. “How does
development produce entities which have Form, in the sense of integration or
wholeness,” asked Waddington, “and how does evolution bring into being organisms
which have Ends, in the sense of goal-seeking or directiveness?” (1957: 9).
2 Thom cites only one more thinker as a conceptual precursor in this passage introducing his
magnum opus, Structural Stability and Morphogenesis; it is animal ethologist and Umwelt the-
orist Jakob von Uexküll (1864–1944). The relationship between Uexküll’s Bedeutungslehre and
Thom’s semiophysics still awaits an extended scholarly analysis (but see Baer 1987: 196–201
and Sebeok 1979: Chapter 3). For more recent biosemiotic analyses of the relationships between
Uexküll’s Bedeutungslehre and Thom’s semiophysics, see Augustyn (2005) and Bundgaard and
Stjernfelt (2010).

340
René Thom (1923–2002)
Accordingly, in the preface to the English translation of Thom’s 1972 work in
catastrophe theory, Structural Stability and Morphogenesis, Waddington notes that
in this work, René Thom is turning his attention to “one of the major problems in
epistemology” – the problem of discontinuity in a world that appears to be con-
structed upon four dimensions of continuity; in short, the problem of the emergence
of new form. “It is easy to accept,” writes Waddington, “that the chemical compo-
sition of differentiating cells needs for its description a multidimensional function
space, and that the sudden boundaries created between one tissue and another are
examples of Thomian catastrophes” (1975: xvi). Thom, in turn, drew considerable
inspiration in his work from Waddington’s (1940, 1957) concept of the epigenetic
landscape as the dynamic substrate of conditions making possible the multiple
realizations of probabilistic form.
For Waddington, the puzzle to be solved in developmental biology is to under-
stand exactly what happens at each point along the ever-complexifying develop-
mental pathways of embryogenesis, such that a single undifferentiated cell can
divide and interact with its progeny so as to eventually result in the massively
differentiated and biologically speciﬁc cells, tissues, limbs, bones, organs, and inter-
connected functional systems of the organism (see Fig. 11.1). Part of this puzzle, felt
Waddington, entails discovering the underlying principles and mechanisms whereby
slight (but statistically inevitable) deviations and perturbations along such pathways
either do, or do not, result in massive change or developmental failure.
Fig. 11.1 Waddington’s Epigenetic Landscape: Waddington’s heuristic depiction of the devel-
opmental history of the fertilized egg during embryogenesis. Multiple alternative pathways of
possibility appear at every point, but certain pathways (chreods) have become more evolutionarily
“en-trenched” and can only be avoided by the crossing of “thresholds” that then make available
alternative pathways, and so on, serially, throughout (Illustration from Waddington 1957: 29)

11
From Animal to Man: Thought and Language
341
In Waddington’s work, Thom saw deep parallels with his own. “A process (P),
is structurally stable if a small variation in initial conditions leads to a process
(P1) isomorphic to (P) in the sense that a small transformation in space-time
(an ε-homomorphism in geometry) will bring the process (P1) back to the process
(P). This leads us quite naturally to Waddington’s notion of ‘chreod’ and of the
‘morphogenetic ﬁeld’ in general,” wrote Thom, noting, too, that “this idea of
interpreting cellular differentiation in terms of a ‘stable metabolic regime’ – i.e. an
attractor of biochemical kinetics – is often attributed to [physicists Max] Delbrück
(1906–1981) and [Leó] Szilárd (1898–1964). When in fact, it was stated in its
local form, which is the only correct one, in C. H. Waddington’s Introduction to
Modern Genetics in 1940” (Thom 1983: 16, 17fn). Catastrophe Theory, explained
Thom, consists in “the mathematical study of the ‘bifurcations’ presented by these
multi-dimensional attractors, and the topological nature of the catastrophes that
result” (Thom 1983: 20).
For Thom, however, the transient and ever-consequential coming-into-being and
destruction of chreodic pathways of possibility and actuality in the organism con-
stitute not only the dynamic of embryological development, but are the key to
explaining the persistence of the organism itself. Thom thus felt that the phe-
nomenon of “life” itself is best thought of as a processural and “lifelong epigenesis”
whereby the organism’s structural stability is maintained only by the incessant inter-
action “between [morphogenetic sub-]‘ﬁelds’ of a more elementary character, from
which emerges the structurally stable conﬁgurations that assure control, homeostasis
of the metabolism, and the stability of reproduction” (1983: 26).
Addressing areas of concern similar those of Howard Pattee (1926– ) and Giorgio
Prodi (1928–1987) – whose independently undertaken investigations are also rep-
resented in this volume as Chapters Ten and Seventeen, respectively – Thom
is interested in the emergence (and the often counter-intuitive consequences) of
both systemically-generated constraints and affordances within the dynamics of a
generatively active-space.
With Prodi (1988: 22), Thom believes that the ongoing dynamics of the living
organism constitute an interacting “ﬁeld of vectors” wherein local dynamics that
have become structurally stable a posteriori (through the attainment of their “limit
state”) “rule over an open set of neighboring points” a priori, in the manner of
Waddingtonian “attractors,” thereby effectively, partitioning the system whole into
various domains of semi-autonomous attractor states.3 In turn, such various domains
of locally consequential attractor states are separated from one another by points of
discontinuity “which form what we call the set of catastrophe points of the process”
(Thom 1983: 194).
“There is therefore no mystery in the notion of the morphogenetic ﬁeld ”, writes
Thom. Rather
3 In 2000, neurobiologists Gerald Edelman and Guilio Tononi would propose a similarly rich
concept of the transient but consequential “dynamical functional clusters” that arise and dissipate
in brain activity – a concept is very Thomian in spirit, if not in origin.

342
René Thom (1923–2002)
this notion simply expresses the fact that a process happens in conformity with a [topology]
given a priori, and in a structurally stable manner. In every natural process, one ﬁrst tries
to isolate those areas where the process is structurally stable: [These are] the ‘chreods’ of
the process – islets of determinism separated by zones where the process is indeterminate
or structurally unstable. By introducing dynamic models, one then tries to break down each
chreod into elementary catastrophes, and then to bring the organisation of these elementary
chreods back to a stable global form by the action of an implicit singularity of the dynamics
[which constitutes its] ‘organising centre’ (1983: 16).
At the heart of Catastrophe Theory, notes Thom, is the realization that “the prop-
erties of this set constitute the morphology [i.e., the topology of continuity and
discontinuity] of the process” under observation (1975: 38). As such, Thom under-
stood Waddingtonian chreods as “coherent systems of catastrophe” that could be
taxonimized into characteristic classes, or archetypes, of “form”creating processes.
Thom’s taxonomy of “elementary catastrophes” – i.e., the morphologies of for-
mal possibility – include folds (the destruction of an attractor, and its capture by
an attractor of lesser potential), cusps (the bifurcation of an attractor into two dis-
connected attractors), hyperbolic umbilics (the singularity – or “organising centre” –
presented by the crest of a wave as it breaks), and many more (1975: 110; 1983: 19).
Such elementary catastrophes, Thom notes, are found both in inanimate as well as
animate structures – crystals and hurricanes, as well as in tree branching, bronchial
tubing and neuronal dendrition.
“But it is clear,” writes Thom, “that [elementary catastrophes] would not be
sufﬁcient to account for all the development of a living being” (1983: 20). For
this, claims Thom, requires that “the appearance of a new ‘phase’ in an initially
homogenous milieu leads to an appearance of the kind which we call a ‘gener-
alized catastrophe.’” Thom uses the term “global control form” to capture this
ontogenetically emergent self-stabilizing dynamic characteristic of a living being.
“An animal, for example, is distinguished by its global stability: submitted to a
shock, to a stimulus (s), it will reply by a reﬂex (r) which will have the effect, in
principle, of annulling the perturbations caused by the stimulus (s)” (1983: 23).4
With Pattee (1961, 1966), then, Thom is interested in examining the ways in which
the increase in complexiﬁcation of a systems’ internal interactions can result in
system-preserving “simpliﬁcation” by the eventual canalization of “conformation-
dependant propagation rules” that then to function as “nonholonomic constraints”
upon the system’s self-maintaining yet adaptive dynamics.
With Pattee, too, Thom, understands that the capture and control of possibility
trajectories by a system’s constituent-level “constraints” may, especially in inter-
action with one another and with a responsive environment, allow such systems
4 In this regard, it is interesting to compare Thom’s 1966 criterion of “life” as a ﬁnality-manifesting
and self-stabilizing “global control form” with the similarly motivated notions of life as a proces-
sural and self-maintaining ‘autopoesis’ as articulated by Maturana and Varela in 1973, and with
Robert Rosen’s 1971 notion of life as characterized by replicative systems of metabolism and repair
(“M,R systems”) that are “open to material causation, but closed to efﬁcient causation” (1971:
57). Of the three approaches, only Thom’s attempts to account for all four forms of Aristotelian
causation in the biology of living systems.

11
From Animal to Man: Thought and Language
343
Fig. 11.2 Evolution of the Grip Morphology: (a) depicts a standard “bifurcation” catastrophe in
the development of a system: Each of the two “branches” is being directed towards a different
attractor state. (b) depicts the capture of a third attractor state between the original two – the grip
archetype. (c) depicts the grip archetype as it manifests in the biological morphology of ball-and-
socket, bone-and-joint, ligand-and-receptor (and perhaps even Uexküll’s sensorimotor “forceps”)
to enter into higher-dimensional possibility spaces.5 Thom see this phenomenon,
too, as a generator of both biological and phenomenological form. The emer-
gence of Thom’s “grip archetype” (Fig. 11.2) neatly illustrates how this shaping of
immediate-next possibility by topological constraints canalized previously in time
can result in the emergence of biological function, embryogenetic development, and
the embodied Gestalt of organismic “knowing.”6
Having introduced Catastrophe Theory in 1968 simultaneously in two forms:
one, with a paper on semiotics, and the other, with a paper on biological morphol-
ogy that he understood as being complementary to the ﬁrst, René Thom qualiﬁed for
the title of “bio-semiotician” a good ﬁve years before Thomas A. Sebeok ﬁrst intro-
duced the term. “Clearly,” wrote Thom in this foundational paper, “it is in Biology,
the science nearest to man, that one would expect to see the reappearance of the
notion of meaning” ([1968] 1983: 168).
Accordingly, analyses of the emergence of form-born and form-bearing struc-
tures and “meaning topologies” appear side-by-side with the investigation into
biological development and its possibility morphologies in Thom’s writings.7
Thom’s theories of meaning, like those of all biosemioticians, cannot be properly
understood if disengaged from his understandings about biology – which is why
we have taken the time to present at least an orienting grounding to the basics
5 Jesper Hoffmeyer articulates a similar argument about the generative dialectic between bio-
logical “fatedness” and “freedom” in 1996: Chapter Three of Signs of Meaning in the Universe
(1996).
6 In this last conceptualization, Thom clearly reveals his indebtedness to Jakob von Uexküll’s
theory of meaning, wherin the organism “grasps the world [experientially] with the two forceps of
its receptor organs and its effector organs” (1940: 22.). Similarly: “How, then,” asks Thom, “shall
we characterize perception if not as: The modiﬁcation of a competent dynamic under the sensory
aspect of external reality?” (1983: 263).
7 In English, see, especially: Chapters 10 through 15 of Mathematical Models of Morphogenesis
(1983), Chapters 2 and 8 of Semiophysics (1990); and Chapter 13 of Structural Stability and
Morphogenesis (1975), which appears in a slightly abbreviated version as the selection which
follows.

344
René Thom (1923–2002)
of Thom’s Catastrophe Theory to the reader in this introduction. Hopefully, that
grounding will prove sufﬁcient to allow the reader to follow Thom’s thinking in the
following selection, where – after having considered the topological morphologies
characteristic of genetic mutation (1975: 281), death (1975: 285), and the origins
of metabolism (1975: 286) and evolution (1975: 291) in the chapter prior, Thom
now turns his considerable mathematical and philosophical skills to an examination
of the problems of reproduction tool use, language society and memory in living
systems.
The selection that follows was written by Thom between 1964 and 1968, for
publication in his ﬁrst book-length treatment of catastrophe theory, which was pub-
lished in 1972. It was released in an English version in 1975, and by 1976 had
come under the careful attention of Thomas A. Sebeok, who publically praised
Thom’s work and who consistently stressed its potential for the development of
a biology-based science of signs (1976: 156). Sebeok later cultivated a profes-
sional relationship with Thom, who found in Sebeok a kindred interdisciplinary
spirit (Thom 1977: 44), and in 1990 – due in no small part to his then decade long
acquaintance with Tom Sebeok – René Thom published a book-length manuscript
detailing his semiophysics, or embodied topological theory of meaning.
“Concerned in the ﬁrst place with the seeking out of [the morphology of] signif-
icant forms in order to build up a general theory of intelligibility,” writes Thom
(1990:vii), Semio-Physics: A Sketch, is as difﬁcult and sui generis a conceptual
framework as is catastrophe theory, from which it derives. By turns Peircean,
Uexküllian, and Lotmanian, it is nonetheless ultimately a structuralist theory of
meaning, proceeding from the foundational assumption that “the problem of a struc-
turally stable mapping lies at the heart of every theory of representation and of
semantics” (Wildgen 2005: 3).8
Developed almost twenty years after the following selection was written, an in-
depth discussion of Thom’s semiophysics here will not help the reader coming to
this volume for an introduction to biosemiotics and its seminal texts (nor would
have the reprinting a selection from Semio-Physics in place of the chosen selection,
given the prerequisite acquaintance with catastrophe theory that it assumes). But
a small discussion here of its twinned pair of foundational concepts will give the
reader a general sense of the theory’s fundamental approach.
At the basis of Thom’s semiophysics are the complementary morphogenetic
topologies that Thom calls salient forms and pregnances. Salient forms are deﬁned
as “any experienced form clearly separate from the continuous background against
which it stands out” (1990: 162).9 Physically discontinuous by deﬁnition, such
8
As the aggregate effect of reading this anthology as a whole should make clear, however,
the currently perceived “conceptual antagonism” that might seem to make impossible a coher-
ent reconciliation between the structuralist and Peircean approaches to meaning – as between the
organicist and mechanist, Baerian and Darwinian, and Hoffmeyerian and Barbierian ones, to take
just some contemporary examples – appears more and more untenable the more one reads, and will
almost certainly not withstand the continued growth and development of the ﬁeld.
9 Cf C. S. Peirce’s notion of ﬁrstness and iconicity, as well as Gregory Bateson’s notion of a
“difference which makes a difference” as the fundamental unit of information.

11
From Animal to Man: Thought and Language
345
salient forms are “translated into [analogous] discontinuities in the subjective sen-
sorial state, sometimes with enormous ampliﬁcation” and cascading propagating
effects, writes Thom (ibid). They differ from morphogenetic pregnances in that
Although salient forms can have a certain impact on a subject’s sensory apparatus (a ﬂash
of lightning can dazzle), this effect remains transient and short-lived. Salient forms are
likewise registered in the short-term memory, but have no long-term effect on the behavior
of the subject (human or animal) or on its physiological state. The situation is different
where forms that carry a biological signiﬁcance for the animal are concerned. Among these
are the forms of prey for the (hungry) predator, of the predator for its prey, of a sexual
partner at the appropriate time. The recognition of these forms gives rise to a very ample
reaction in the subject: the freeing of hormones, emotive excitement, and behavior designed
to attract or repulse the inductive form. I will call such forms pregnant, and this speciﬁc
character of theirs, pregnance (1990: 167).
“Pregnances,” writes Thom, “are non-localized entities emitted and received
by salient forms” (1990: 16). “Of course,” he notes, “all pregnant forms are ipso
facto salient” (just as the Peircean “index” is ipso facto “iconic” on a more prim-
itive level). To illustrate this, Thom uses the well-known example of Pavlov’s
dog, wherein “the salient form that is the sound of the bell is invested by the alimen-
tary pregnance of the meat” (in a manner recalling Uexküll’s “meaning-stamping”).
For Thom, a morphogenetic analysis of the Pavlovian example aptly illustrates the
general phenomenon of semiosis, whereby such pregnance can be seen as akin to
“an invasive ﬂuid spreading through the ﬁeld of perceived salient forms, the salient
form acting as a ‘ﬁssure’ in reality through which seeps the inﬁltrating ﬂuid of
pregnance” (1990: 194).
Accordingly, Thom uses the phrase par réversion de la causalité génératrice
to denote that property of pregnance that Sebeok, when discussing the Peircean
index, calls “the inverse of physical [efﬁcient] causality [whereby] the index [or
pregnance] always performs as a sign the vector of which is towards the past”
(Sebeok 1986: 50). When such morphologies of pregnance emanating out of salient
forms – in other words, when the meanings invested in entities by the triadic agent-
object-action sign relation – become incorporated into biological systems (either
evolutionarily or in the lifetime of the organism) for use in dealing with future sim-
ilar relations, the resulting process of in-form-ation reveals that “semiotic” activity
“in its origin, is linked in an essential manner to biological control systems,” writes
Thom, “or more exactly, as said by older thinkers who were not afraid of words, to
biological ﬁnality (ﬁnalité: ultimate purpose)” (1983: 286).
Language, Thom will next go on to argue, is not only what frees the human
being from their “enthrallment by objects” [i.e., those physically present salient
forms and their pregances, both those immediately present and those that have
become biologically canalized] – the “tyranny of the here and now”– but is also
a collectively-realized social control structure for Thom (1983: 274–275). “In man,
as in animals, symbolic activity originates in the need for regulation: homeostasis in
the living organism and, similarly, stability in the social body” writes Thom (1983:
269). Consequently, the signals used in a collectivity are vectors of pregnance: “the
transfer a pregnance from one member of the community to another, or to several

346
René Thom (1923–2002)
others, so promoting collective behavior” (1990: 22). These vectors, the “substrate
space” of Thom’s “intelligible ontology” (1990: 57) correspond to Lotman’s semio-
sphere – a point made in some depth by Lotman scholar Edna Andrews (2003: 54),
though Thom himself seems never to have read Lotman’s work.
In short: Thom’s salient forms are topically disjoint objects (including biological
agents) that function as sign vehicles, and his pregnances are the meanings that
these sign vehicles become invested with as a result of their interaction in the world
(including their interaction with other pregnances and other sign vehicles).
And as Thom notes, “the ideal of contemporary science – and of positivism – is to
reduce everything to salient forms, with no interaction allowed other than collision
between salient forms, and to do away entirely with pregnance” (1990: 162). With
this last observation, Thom proves himself a biosemiotician in spirit, if not in name.
His legacy in the history mathematics solidly established and recognized by the
time of his receipt of the Fields Medal at age thirty-ﬁve, Thom was free to spend the
next four decades developing his thought in whatever ways he found most worth-
while. He was to come into contact with the nascent biosemiotics community in
Denmark in 1986, when was invited by semiotician Frederik Stjernfelt to give a talk
on catastrophe theory to Jesper Hoffmeyer and Claus Emmeche’s “Helmuth Hansen
Study Circle” (later to become the Danish Semiotics of Nature Association) at the
University of Copenhagen.
Even more consequentially, in 1985, Thom arranged for the publication and
personally wrote the preface for a book by a young biologist who, completely
independently of Sebeok’s or Hoffmeyer’s biosemiotics, had been painstakingly
developing a “semantic biology” of his own. That book was entitled The Semantic
Theory of Evolution (1985) and its author, Marcello Barbieri, would go on to
become one of the world’s leading biosemioticians, and the founder of the theory of
“the organic codes” (2003).
Thus, while the explanatory shortcomings of catastrophe theory in the 1970s
would give way to the more expansive dynamics of chaos theory in the 1980s (which
would, in turn, give way to complexity theory in the 1990s and – some might argue –
to biosemiotics in ﬁrst decade of the 21st century), it should be now clear why
Thomas A. Sebeok so enthusiastically embraced René Thom as a kindred spirit
and a fellow pioneer in the attempt to create a scientiﬁcally defensible, and wholly
naturalistic, theory of signs.

11
From Animal to Man: Thought and Language
347
From Animal to Man: Thought
and Language (1975)
The Animal Mind
Genetic Forms
It is striking to observe how efﬁciently the capture of prey is realized, even at the
lowest levels of the phylogenetic tree. This forces us to postulate that each animal
has an organic chart of its mobility that enables it to control its own actual move-
ments with remarkable precision so as to capture its prey or ﬂee from its predators.10
However, there is no reason to believe that this chart is permanent; it is more often
associated with an object of fundamental biological importance (e.g., a prey or
predator) and is focused on that object. We shall designate the innate forms, handed
down in the endowment of the species and determining a well-deﬁned motor action;
by the name of genetic forms. Then, as soon as an external form is recognized as a
genetic form, a perception catastrophe takes place, and the “ego” is recreated in an
action, in the motor chreod (of capture or ﬂight) that the genetic form projects onto
the external form.
This poses an important theoretical problem: how can these genetic forms be
represented, and on what space are they deﬁned? Although it is not easy to reply to
these questions, one thing is certain: it would be wrong to represent these forms as
permanently ﬁxed engrams, like prints on a photographic plate. In reality, they are
deﬁned dynamically, by a kind of never-ending embryology which extends into the
motor chreod focused on the form. From this comes the fact that the metrical con-
trol of genetic forms is in general not very rigorous and often supranormal releasers
trigger off the reﬂex more effectively than the normal biological form. Besides, the
space on which these forms are deﬁned can only exceptionally be identiﬁed with
the outside space, and when the identiﬁcation happens without external cause we
say that there is a hallucination. Very probably this biologically disastrous phe-
nomenon of hallucination is as rare in animals as in man, and it can be realized only
in pathological states like those of sensory deprivation. In states of normal vigilance
the permanent input of the senses into the mind represses the intrusion of genetic
forms in the cycle of sense and motor activities.
Thus the ego of the animal is not, in principle, a permanent entity, any more than
his vision of space is global. The territory of an animal is, in reality, an aggregate
of local charts, each associated with a well-deﬁned motor or psychological activ-
ity (areas for hunting, congregating, sleeping, etc.), and. passage from one chart to
another takes place through well-deﬁned visual or olfactory markers. For certain
animals some of these charts can extend over enormous distances, as with migrating
10 The idea that mental activity must realize some model of the environmental space of the ani-
mal – so ineluctable to my profane mind – seems very uncommon among physiologists. It does
occur, however, in J. Z. Young (1964).

348
René Thom (1923–2002)
birds, but here again the charts are centered on a territory and have a well-deﬁned
physiological vocation.
These, then, are the characteristic signs of the animal mind: impermanence of
the ego, alienation by genetic forms, and decomposition of space into local charts,
each associated with a partial ego. However, in the higher animals at least, there are
mechanisms acting to remedy this fragmentation.
Animal in Quest of Its Ego
One of the most evident manifestations of this impermanence of ego, still clearly
apparent in man, is the circadian alternation of sleep and wakefulness. It is not
unreasonable to see this cycle as a realization of the predation loop, synchronized
to the alternation of day and night. In animals the wakeful period is appropriate
for hunting-night time for nocturnal predators, and day time for diurnal; and sleep
is then the ill-deﬁned period covering the transition between the satisﬁed predator
and the hungry predator identiﬁed with the prey, as we have seen. Then, beginning
with reptiles, we see the appearance of a mechanism smoothing to some extent the
transition from sleep to wakefulness: dreaming.
Dreaming
It is well known that the relative length of dream or paradoxical sleep increases as
one climbs the phylogenic tree. It is natural to see this paradoxical sleep as a kind
of virtual spatialization of the genetic forms; dreaming gives rise to a partial ego,
without come-back to the dreamer, without substance or liberty – a veritable prey of
its preys or its predators. Thus we could deﬁne dreaming as a constrained activity,
dealing ﬁctitiously with ﬁctitious objects. As such, sleep permits a considerable
temporal extension of the ego during this period of unconsciousness.
Play
Another factor having an important role in stabilization of the animal ego is play.
Observe, for example, a young cat in the process of playing; it will behave as if
attacking genuine prey in front of an object like a ball of wool or string, having only
a distant morphological analogy with its prey. The animal is certainly not deceived;
it has created a playful ego that is not at all disturbed by the lack of ﬁnal reward when
the pseudoprey is found to be inedible. Thus play is a dual activity to dreaming;
whereas the latter is a constrained activity dealing ﬁctitiously with ﬁctitious objects,
the former is a spontaneous activity practiced in reality on real objects. Of course
play may follow rules: in fact, it is often a highly structured combination of rules.
But the absence of effective reward makes it into a free activity that the animal may
abandon or take up at any moment.
Also this predatory playful activity gives valuable experience in distinguishing
between edible and inedible objects; this exploration goes on almost continuously in

11
From Animal to Man: Thought and Language
349
human babies between 8 and 11 months of age. In this sense wakefulness in animal
and man is a state of continuous virtual predation. Every perceived object is treated
as a virtual prey, but only objects of sufﬁciently promising form can initiate the
capture process, while the others are weighed by perception, which in man behaves
in this respect like a virtual hand. The etymology of percipere is “to seize the object
continually in its entirety.”
A Fundamental Contradiction in Biological Regulation:
The Persistence of the Subject and Periodicity of Actions
The Predation Loop
The essential regulation constraint on an animal is feeding, which alone allows it to
replace its loss of chemical energy and to restock its reserves. Now feeding implies
predation, the presence of another living being (animal or plant), the prey, which
is to be captured and ingested. The corresponding morphology is thus the cap-
ture morphology (Fig. 11.3), whose simplest algebraic realization is given by the
Riemann-Hugoniot catastrophe. As we want speciﬁcally to express the asymme-
try between subject and object, between predator and prey, we associate to each
living being (or, in linguistic terminology, each actant) a minimum of a poten-
tial on the space of internal variables. Then the spatial capture of one actant by
another is to be interpreted as the capture of the basin representing the prey by
the basin of the predator. This leads to representing the capture morphology as a
typical section of the cusp by an oriented line L of the universal unfolding of the
catastrophe (Fig. 11.4). For example, on a line parallel to the Ou-axis, the point K
Fig. 11.3 The capture
morphology
Fig. 11.4 Capture
morphology as section of a
cusp catastrophe unfolding

350
René Thom (1923–2002)
Fig. 11.5 The predation loop
where this parallel meets the discriminant curve 4u3 + 27v2 = 0 denotes the catas-
trophe point where the prey is ingested by the predator. Now such an interaction
is fundamentally irreversible. If we want to arrange things so that the animal can
again be in a state of capture of a new prey, we must replace the oriented line L
by a closed cycle C which restores the organism to its original state, a require-
ment of the periodicity of actions. Such a closed cycle must necessarily be centered
on the origin, the organizing center of the catastrophe (Fig. 11.5). However, if we
lift this closed cycle to the space of internal variables, we ﬁnd that, often hav-
ing traversed arc 123 of C, the predator becomes its prey. Thus the periodicity
of the action implies an identiﬁcation between predator and prey, a confusion of
actants.
Faced with so paradoxical a conclusion, one might be tempted to reject the
model; however I think to the contrary, that this difﬁculty of principle must occur
in all models. Even more, I think that the progressive elimination of this difﬁculty
sheds unexpected light on many aspects of biological morphogenesis and on the
origins of magical ritual in man (on participation11 in the sense of Lévy-Bruhl). We
can suppose that the spatiotemporal continuity of the organism, of the domain of
space-time occupied by it, is the very basis of the unity of the organism. However,
if we extend this requirement to the “semantic spaces” describing the internal prop-
erties of an organism, we might easily encounter situations that contradict this
11 The belief that man can transform himself into an animal is very widespread even today, and
the animals into which he believes that he can change himself are universally those that are in
the relationship of predator on man (wolf, tiger, shark, etc.) or his prey. In particular, in many
primitive tribes the hunt begins with a ceremony of a virtual dance in which the hunter, dressed
in a skin of the prey, imitates its movements and behavior. In biological morphology, on the other
hand, the presence in many predators of bait organs, like the end of the tongue of a lamprey with
its wormlike form, can scarcely be explained other than by the existence in the genetic endowment
of a simulating structure of the mind of the prey (or sometimes of the predator; for example, the
ocellate designs on the wings of some butterﬂies, which have the effect of keeping birds off).

11
From Animal to Man: Thought and Language
351
requirement of spatiotemporal connectivity. It could be that the essential function
of the mind and cerebral organization is to overcome this contradiction. What does
this mean?
The hungry predator having traversed arc 123, is its prey until it reaches point
J, where the cycle C meets the upper branch of the bifurcation cusp. There is a
catastrophe at J, the perception catastrophe. If the predator is its prey before J, this
means that the mind of the predator is dominated, alienated by the image of its
prey. In some sense, the nervous system is an organ that allows an animal to be
something other than itself, an organ of alienation. As soon as the external prey p
is perceived and recognized by the predator, it becomes itself again, and it jumps
from the surface corresponding to the prey to its own surface in an instantaneous
cogito. At this moment, the chreod of capturing the prey is triggered, this chreod
having several modalities according to the behavior of the prey (ﬁght, ﬂight, etc.);
thus this is a motor chart focalized, at least at the beginning, not on the organism but
on the prey. The ingestion catastrophe occurs at K; and a spatial smoothing of this
catastrophe gives rise to the digestive tube, a tubular neighborhood of the trajectory
of the prey in the interior of the organism of the predator (Fig. 11.6).
How should we interpret this catastrophe which, at J, ensures the organic conti-
nuity of the predator despite the mental discontinuity? Consider the hysteresis loop
associated with the folding deﬁned by the predator-prey conﬂict (Fig. 11.7); it has
a simple interpretation in terms of energies. The Ov-axis denotes the amount of
reserve chemical energy, and in the capture chreod the predator must reach into his
energy reserves (on the lower sheet, decreasing v) in order to convey the prey p
to the point K of ingestion. We might regard the vertical arc Jb as the central ner-
vous system in vertebrates; or, considering the stable sheets as rivers, the arc Jb
Fig. 11.6 The digestive tube
Fig. 11.7 The hysteresis
loop

352
René Thom (1923–2002)
Fig. 11.8 The dissociation of neural crests
might be interpreted as a capture process of the upper river by a particularly active
afﬂuent of the lower river. This capture catastrophe is none other than the neurulation
producing the invagination of the nervous tube in the epidermis. After capture, the
arc bd (Fig. 11.8) will be a dead valley where the hydraulic circulation will become
ramiﬁed, leading eventually to a generalized catastrophe; this corresponds to the
dissociation of neural crests which will mainly contribute to the organogenesis of
sensory organs. On the other side of this threshold d, there will be another gener-
alized catastrophep describing the spatial indeterminism of the position of the prey.
Recognition of the analogy between the perceived form p and the typical form, the
“genetic” form, initiates the perception catastrophe by a phenomenon of resonance,
for how can we ever recognize any other thing than ourselves?
The Reproduction Loop
Biological reproduction is a process in which a parent organism A creates a descen-
dant A’, which breaks off spatially from the parent (Fig. 11.9). Therefore the
morphology realizing this is the emission morphology obtained by reversing the ori-
entation of line L of Fig. 11.4 in the universal unfolding of the Riemann-Hugoniot
catastrophe.
If again we form a cycle C, as in the previous case, we ﬁnd this time that we
arrive at a less paradoxical conclusion; the parent organism A perishes at point K
(Fig. 11.10), captured by its descendant A’, and after traversing arc 123, the descen-
dant becomes a parent, as is normal after a lapse of a generation. Here the confusion
Fig. 11.9 The emission
morphology

11
From Animal to Man: Thought and Language
353
Fig. 11.10 The reproduction
loop
Fig. 11.11 Continuity via
capture
of actants is natural, with daughter becoming mother after puberty. But if we want
the parent to have several descendants in order to ensure the permanence of the
subject, it is necessary to proceed as with the predation loop: we must guarantee
continuity with the upper sheet by a process of capture (Fig. 11.11).
Hence the descendant sheet A’ must perish at the threshold d in a generalized
catastrophe, expressing the reduction of the corresponding tissue into a set of disso-
ciated cells in the process of multiplication, and then the elimination of these cells
from the organism by rejection toward the outside.
Sexuality
It is possible to give an interpretation of sexuality in this plan, if we suppose that
one step in reproduction must necessarily comprise a capture process. The profound
motivation of sexuality is probably not the exchange of genetic material, as is usu-
ally supposed, but rather the smoothing of the reproduction catastrophe. The spatial
separation of a descendant from a parent organism is never easy when these organ-
isms have a complex constitution. In males, the emission of gametes is relatively
easy, since they are very small cells with respect to the organism, and also this
emission is often helped by the presence of a female acting as attractor, conforming
to the gift morphology: In females, the fertilitization of an ovum by sperm coming
from: the exterior creates an organism that is genetically and therefore metabolically

354
René Thom (1923–2002)
Fig. 11.12 The excision
morphology
different from the mother, thus allowing her to reject this organism by the
formation of a shock wave (or an antigene reaction, biologically speaking). In this
way the capture morphology manifests itself in the female gamete in relation to
the sperm; it is also often apparent in oogeneses in many species where the future
ovum engulfs adjacent cells for nourishment by a process of phagocytosis. Another
probable symptom is the blockage of meiosis in the ovum (the formation of polar
globules).
At any rate, it is important to keep in mind all the morphologies present in sexual
interactions: those of emission, capture, gift, and excision (the male gamete excises
the descendant of the female organism; see Fig. 11.12). All these morphologies
occur in the universal unfolding of the double cusp.
Homo Faber
Organs and Tools
The capture chreod typically includes two phases: a somatofugal phase of throwing
out an organ to seize the prey, and a somatotrophic phase of carrying the prey, once
seized, toward the mouth.
Roughly speaking, the use of tools corresponds to a smoothing, a threshold
stabilization, between these phases. For example, when we want to gather fruit from
a tree, it is often useful to grasp ﬁrst the branch carrying the fruit, so that the char-
acteristic of being prey extends from the fruit to the branch on which it is growing.
Playful activity adds further to this extension. This stabilization at the extreme point
of the somatofugal extension has brought about an organogenesis based on oppo-
sition: the opposition of thumb and index ﬁnger, the opposition between the two
hands, and so forth. The grip archetype is probably only an organic realization of
the hysteresis cycle that we met in the study of a bone joint (Section 9.6B); the ver-
tical segments correspond to the ﬁngers, the upper sheet IS an arbitrary object, and
the lower sheet is the wrist (Fig. 11.13). The hand appears as a universal rotula with
an exogenous tibia of arbitrary form.
Man, the omnivore, must kill and tear up his animal prey; therefore outside
objects are to be considered, in play, not only as prey but also as tools. This has
implied a global transfer of organogetic ﬁelds into ﬁelds of tool manufacture. In
addition to the ﬁelds associated with the elementary catastrophes (such as splitting,
pricking, and piercing, etc.; see the table in Fig. 11.14), there are ﬁelds, such as

11
From Animal to Man: Thought and Language
355
Fig. 11.13 The grip
Fig. 11.14 The table of archetypal morphologies

356
René Thom (1923–2002)
polishing and planning, associated with the conﬂict between two solid objects that
we met in the epigenesis of a bone. Each tool has it own space T, in which it is cre-
ated by a kind of embryology; this space. has its own epigenetic gradients unfolding
the functional catastrophe that the tool provokes. Thus almost all everyday objects
(tools, furniture, etc.) have a bilateral symmetry, just like animals, and a proximal-
distal gradient. In use, the characteristic space T of the tool is canonically identiﬁed
with the local motor chart of the organism and often realizes an important extension
of it.
An Example: The Construction of a Club as a Chreod
The projectile chreod is known throughout the animal kingdom; it consists of throw-
ing an object in order to hurt an enemy. To begin with, the projectile is often
produced by an appropriate organ of the animal that throws it (in a hydra, its
nematocyst; in a cuttleﬁsh, its ink; some monkeys bombard their attackers with
their conveniently produced excrement). This chreod has been highly specialized
in man by the use of a club; he tries to split open his enemy’s head and provoke a
swallow-tail catastrophe, and this requires the projectile to have a typical beveled
form. The mental picture of this catastrophe to be wrought on the adversary cre-
ates a secondary ﬁeld, that of the manufacture of the club. This process can be
described as follows. Unlike those of many ﬁelds found in animals, the initial data,
namely, the form of the block to be fashioned, are very varied; from the variety
of different forms of the basic material, the worker must produce a unique form.
Thus the construction of the club is a highly attracting chreod and demands the
continual presence in the worker’s mind of the required form. In this sense it is
the earliest example of a rigorously ﬁnalist process in which instantaneous direc-
tion at each moment is the result of a conﬂict between the end required and the
present condition of the material being worked. Such a process can be described as
follows.
When the worker takes up the block of rock B that he has chosen to work, he
compares it in his mind with the required result O. This comparison produces a
mental shock wave which stimulates a work process, for example, to ﬁle from B
along a face f. When this face is sufﬁciently ﬂat, a new comparison with O induces
the ﬁling of another face f ’; later the worker may rework face f. Let me give a
geometrical interpretation of this process (Fig. 11.15). The Oxy-plane parameterizes
the forms of the block being worked, where O is the ideal form; two half-lines of
functional catastrophes, D and D’, radiate from O for example x = ±y; the process
ﬁelds X and X’ are represented by parallel vector ﬁelds with slopes – 2 and + 2
directed toward negative x; at D the ﬁeld changes from X’ to X, and at D’ from X
to X’. Under these conditions, starting from any point in DOD’ with the regime X
or X’ will lead to the required form O. When O is achieved (or considered to be
achieved), the process reﬂex will disappear, and the chreod of making the tool will
give way to that of using it, which will normally come next in the global function
ﬁeld.

11
From Animal to Man: Thought and Language
357
Fig. 11.15 Construction as a
ﬁnalist attraction chreod
In this way, the secondary morphology with support DOD’ is a funneled breaking
ﬁeld of the type encountered in mean coupling ﬁelds (see Section 6.2B); in fact, in
the formalism of organogenesis described in Section 10.4, this secondary ﬁeld is in
some sense the analytic extension by smoothing of the shock waves of the primary
chreod, and generally the internal variables of the secondary ﬁeld are the external
variables of the primary ﬁeld. But here there is a new feature: the secondary static
ﬁeld enters into competition with an opposing ﬁeld, the initial form of the block B
chosen by the worker. Consequently, he must also take an auxiliary block A (tertiary
morphology) to smooth B, and the conﬂict between these two ﬁelds produces the
funneled conﬁguration of the secondary static ﬁeld (and observe that the bounding
shock waves D and D’ give, by analytic continuation, the edges of the wound to
be inﬂicted on the adversary). This gives a secondary catastrophe whose external
variables characterize the relative position of B with respect to A and whose non
punctual organizing center has for support the shock waves D and D’. The tertiary
ﬁeld formed by the smoothing of these shock waves is a static ﬁeld, indicating the
attraction by B of an auxiliary block A. To sum up, the set of the motor ﬁelds of
the hands forms a semantic model of at least twelve dimensions, the dimension of a
product of two copies of the group of Euclidean displacements.
It is the same hand that fashions and brands the club, and this functional subordi-
nation between chreods is evidence of a syntax already almost as reﬁned as that of
language. In particular, the formal process of organogenesis (Section 10.4), trans-
forming a mean coupling ﬁeld on all external space U into a static ﬁeld with internal
space U, is already realized in mental activity.
These considerations raise the question of how it is that the human mind can
achieve this complicated architecture, this hierarchy of ﬁelds, of which animals
appear incapable, even though the brains of the higher vertebrates are so little dif-
ferent, anatomically and physiologically. Personally, I believe that this capability
depends on a topological discontinuity in the kinetics of nervous activity, that in the

358
René Thom (1923–2002)
human brain there is a device simulating self-reproducing singularities of epigene-
sis allowing, in the presence a catastrophe with internal space Y and unfolding U,
the unfolding space to be mapped back into the internal space, causing the confu-
sion of internal and external variables. Such a device would not require any great
modiﬁcation of the anatomical or physiological structures.
Homo Loquax
The Double Origin of Language
The appearance of language in man is a response to a double need:
1. For a personal evolutive constraint, aiming to realize the permanence of the ego
in a state of wakefulness.
2. For a social constraint, expressing the main regulating mechanisms of the social
group.
The ﬁrst constraint fulﬁlls the need to virtualize predation. Man in a state of
wakefulness cannot pass his time like an infant of 9 months seizing every object and
putting it in his mouth. He has greater things to do; he must “think,” that is, seize
the things lying between exterior objects and genetic forms, namely, concepts.
The second constraint expresses the need for the social body to disseminate the
information necessary for its survival, like the presence of nearby enemies or prey.
Language then works as a sense relay, allowing one individual X to describe to
another Y what he, X, is in a position to see but Y, less well placed, cannot see.
The social constraint will create structures in the most unstable zone of the indi-
vidual by an effect of interaction between hierarchical levels of organization; these
structures will be on the shock waves separating sleep and wakefulness, or genetic
and spatial forms, and these shock waves will exfoliate. A baby is equipped at birth
with a stock of sensory-motor schemas, genetic forms that manifest themselves in
the so-called archaic reﬂexes. Later, toward 6 months, these schemas undergo a
kind of melting, a generalized catastrophe, coinciding with the onset of infantile
babbling. This babbling seems like the need to expel by the process of articulation
some of these alienating genetic forms, clearly a playful emission of forms, not a
capture of forms. Recall that a genetic form is not ﬁxed, but rather is equipped with
mechanisms of self-regulation analogous to those of a living being; a concept occurs
by superposition, by projecting the regulation schemes of the subject onto a spatial
form, an exterior image. By a geometrical analogy, we might say that the concept
forms by exfoliation from the spatial image, where the normal coordinate along
which the exfoliation takes place is associated with the direction of an articulated
emission whose phonetic structure has little to do with the genetic form that gave its
regulation to the concept. (This is the Saussurian idea of the arbitrariness of sign.)
This association forms by habituation, with the emission of the sound occurring

11
From Animal to Man: Thought and Language
359
with the (playful or biological) use of the corresponding object. On the other hand,
the laws of combination, the syntax, of these words are not arbitrary since they are
imposed by the semantic interactions between the concepts, themselves deﬁned by
the regulation schemes of the subject and thus of the concepts.
If a child spends the time between 1 and 3 years of age without other human ver-
bal contact, the articulatory emission catastrophe (the babble) rapidly degenerates
into the production of a few crude sounds (the verbalization of “wolf children”). The
exfoliation of the semantic support space of the concept is inhibited by the incoher-
ence or absence of the sounds associated with the object; this results in the mental
retardation or idiocy to which these children are condemned. Those who have stud-
ied these wolf children have observed their extreme reactions to some noises like
the cracking of a nut. There is little doubt that their minds are still dominated by a
small number of alienating forms of genetic origin. Man gets rid of these alienat-
ing forms by giving them a name and so neutralizing their hallucinatory powers by
ﬁxing them on a semantic space distinct from space-time.
If man has escaped from the fascination of things through the use of language, he
remains under the fascination of action incorporated as the grammar of the language
(a verb conjugates, etc.). Only the Oriental philosophers have tried to withdraw the
subject of this fascination by reducing virtual action to pure contemplation.
Syntax and Archetypal Morphologies
It is well known that all speech can be decomposed into elementary phrases, each
phrase being characterized by the fact that it contains precisely one verb, ignoring
here the difﬁculties (about which specialists are still debating) of the deﬁnition of
the traditional grammatical categones: noun (substantive), adjective, verb, preposi-
tion, and so forth. The fact that any text can be translated from one language to
another conﬁrms the belief that these categories are almost universal. Now, given a
spatio-temporal process which we are to describe linguistically, are there any formal
criteria relating to the intrinsic morphology of the process that enable us to predict
the decomposition into phrases?
To this end, we must start by “objectively” describing a spatiotemporal morphol-
ogy. In fact every linguistically described process contains privileged domains of
space-time bounded by catastrophe hypersurfaces; these domains are the actants of
the process, the beings or objects whose interactions are described by the text. As
a general rule, each actant is a topological, ball and hence contractible; this is the
case, for example, for animate beings. At each moment t we contract each actant
to a point and when two actants interact this implies that their domains come into
contact in a region of catastrophe points which we also contract to a point of inter-
section of the lines of the two contiguous actants. In this way we associate a graph
with every spatiotemporal process.
In then propose that the total graph of interactions describing the process can be
covered by Sets Ui such that the following conditions are met:

360
René Thom (1923–2002)
1. The partial process with support Ui is described by one phrase of the text.
2. The interaction subgraph contained in Ui belongs to one of the sixteen archetypal
morphologies of the table of Fig. 11.14.
In principle each of the morphologies is generated by a construction of the fol-
lowing type. In the universal unfolding of each elementary singularity, take a ray
emanating from the organizing center and having contact of maximum order with
the discriminant variety, and then displace this ray parallel to itself to avoid the con-
fusion of actants at O. Then lift this ray to the space of internal variables, with each
actant being represented by the basin of a minimum, to give the corresponding inter-
action. It may be necessary to cheat a bit by bending the rays in order to ensure the
permanence of the actants to times t = ± ∞. Furthermore, certain verbs called iter-
atives require repetitions of an action, and in this case the basic cell is described by
the archetypal morphology. The occurrence of excision morphologies, characteristic
of sexual reproduction, is noteworthy.
This theory of the spatial origin of syntactical structures accounts for many facts,
for example, the restriction to four actants in an elementary phrase and the origin
of most of the cases in a language with declension: the nominative, for the subject;
the accusative, for the object; the dative, with verbs having the morphology I the
instrumental, with verbs having the excision morphology of cutting, or ablative. The
only classical case that cannot be interpreted by this tableau is the genitive, which
is an operation of semantic destruction, dislocating a concept into its regulating
subconcepts in a kind of inverse embryology (see Thom 1973).
The Automatisms of Language
It remains to account for the palpably automatic character of the formation of syn-
tactical structures. To this end we suppose that each main verb type (each archetypal
morphology) is represented mentally by an oscillator, which vanishes at the organiz-
ing center at a certain critical energy level Ec. When E < Ec, it typically describes a
cycle in the universal unfolding with almost a stationary point on a sheet or a branch
of the discriminant variety; the corresponding arc describes one of the typical sec-
tions generating the associated archetypal morphology. For example, in a verb of
the capture morphology there will be a cycle C in the universal unfolding of the
Riemann-Hugoniot catastrophe with the stationary point k on the capture branch.
When E = Ec, the radius of C tends to zero and the cycle vanishes at the organizing
center O. This gives the unstable potential V = x4 in the internal space, and then
the situation evolves toward a generic situation with the representative point in the
uv-plane following a curve close to the capture branch K inside the cusp. This results
in the formation of two dummy actants corresponding to the minima of potential,
and then these dummy actants will play an instrumental role in the capture of the
concepts of the meaning. Each dummy actant excites the concept and reduces it to
its splitting into image + word; ﬁnally the dummy actant unites with the word and
is emitted as a word.

11
From Animal to Man: Thought and Language
361
Fig. 11.16 The take morphology
Such a process then describes the emission of a phrase of type SVO, subject-verb-
object. First the vanishing of the cycle C leads to the emission of the verb V, and then
the packet of two dummy actants liberates the subject-object; each of these actants
interacts with the corresponding concept, which it maps on the subject image axis
while the dummy actant is re-emitted as a word (substantive). The total morphology
is that of the verb “to take” (see Figs. 11.14 and 11.16). Thought is then a veritable
conception, putting form on the dummy actant arising from the death of the verb,
just as the egg puts ﬂesh on the spermatizoid; thus thought is a kind of permanent
orgasm. There is a duality between thought and language reminiscent of that which I
have described between dreaming and play: thought is a virtual capture of concepts
with a virtual inhibited emission of words, a process analogous to dreaming, while
in language this emission actually takes place, as in play.
More details of the problem of grammatical categories and the question of the
order of words in a sentence are given in Appendix 2.
The Origin of Geometry
In the state of wakefulness, of continuous virtual predation, man can reach out to
any point sufﬁcient1y close to his body; and these voluntary movements give rise to
proprioceptive sensations which permit a rigorous metrical control of the displace-
ment of limbs far more precise than the control of induced movements. Thus we can
assert that, very early in human development, there are local charts associated with
the organism that describe all the metrical structure of Euclidean space.
The use of tools allows us to extend this chart by adjoining to it the chart associ-
ated with the tool. Even better, the disappearance of alienating forms, which center
the chart on an external prey, enables these charts to be adjoined indeﬁnitely to each
other. For example, the operation of measuring, by adjoining a yardstick to the end
point of a previously measured length, is typically an extension of a chart by the
chart associated with the yardstick. This is how geometric space is made up: a space
of pure unmotivated movement, the space of all the play-movements of which we
feel we are capable.

362
René Thom (1923–2002)
Fig. 11.17 Cartesian axes
It is striking to observe how most spaces, even in pure mathematics, are not
homogeneous but are well and truly endowed with a base-point, an origin, the
mathematical equivalent to a subject in a state of continual predation in the space.
Even the typical picture of Cartesian axes Oxy (Fig. 11.17) conjures up irresistibly a
mouth about to close on the typical point p, the prey. It is surely not by chance that
the most of the catastrophes of organic physiology are idempotents (T2 = T) like
projection onto an axis, measurement in quantum mechanics, or the capture by the
mind of a meaning (just as we say “I’ve got it” to mean that we have understood).
Although the acquisition of a global appreciation of metrical space appears early
in man, the same is not true of its representation by pictures. Although the psychol-
ogist J. Piaget has been led to believe, through an examination of drawings, that
children acquire topological structures before metrical ones (Piaget and Inhelder
1956), I think that this conclusion is based on a misunderstanding of the process
of the formation of semantic spaces by exfoliation of the spatial image. Thus a
3-year-old child knows how to recognize whether his piece of cake is smaller than
his neighbour’s; but when he tries to draw, he clearly wants above all to draw objects
and not the ambient space in which they lie, which is very difﬁcult from him. Now
each object is generally seen from a privileged direction,. giving it a simple appar-
ent contour and revealing best the three-dimensional form of the object. Generally
this direction is perpendicular to the plane of bilateral symmetry for an object, like
an animal or a tool, having such a symmetry; only man is represented ﬁrst face-on,
rather than in proﬁle. For a complicated object, like a car, there are subobjects that
may be necessary for recognition, like wheels. In a global chart of the object, the
subobjects may be correctly located but drawn with their own privileged perspec-
tive, thus explaining the phenomenon of ﬂattening that Luquet (1927) has described
in many designs by children (e.g., see Fig. 11.18). In such cases there is a conﬂict
between the global perspective and the requirement of semantic dominance of an
object over its sub-objects. The relationships of surrounding, touching, and so on,
which are considered by Piaget as “topological,” are in fact semantic relationships
of dominance between concepts, relationships expressed precisely by the genitive
case (the wheels of the car, the eyes of the head, etc.).

11
From Animal to Man: Thought and Language
363
Fig. 11.18 “Flattening” as
example of semantic
dominance
Three Important Kinds of Human Activity
Art
Can artistic activity appear in our semantic models? Of course this is so with poetry,
which uses ordinary language, and music, which requires the use of a discrete nota-
tion. For visual arts, however, the case is less clear even though the recurrence of
typical motifs and forms suggests that the idea of the chreod and, with it, semantic
models may be valid; but what characterizes these activities with respect to ordinary
language is the use of concepts, that is, systematically excited chreods. This has the
effect of harming the global intelligibility of the model and obscuring or removing
the sense. From where, then, does our feeling of beauty come? From the idea that the
work of art is not arbitrary, and from the fact that, although unpredictable, it appears
to us to have been directed by some organizing center of large co dimension, far
from the normal structures of ordinary thought, but still in resonance with the main
emotional or genetic structures underlying our conscious thought. In this way the
work of art acts like the germ of a virtual catastrophe in the mind of the beholder.
By means of the disorder, the excitation, produced in the sensory ﬁeld by looking
at the work, some very complicated chreods (of too great a complexity to resist the
perturbations of the normal thought metabolism) can be realized and persist for a
moment. But we are generally unable to formalize, or even formulate, what these
chreods are whose structure cannot be bent into words without being destroyed.
Delirium
One of the basic postulates of my model is that there are coherent systems of catas-
trophes (chreods) organized in archetypes and that these structures exist as abstract
algebraic entities independent of any substrate, but it must not be forgotten that the
substrate does have a part fundamental in the dynamic of these forms. In particular,
if the substrates A and B are independent or only weakly coupled, the morphol-
ogy of support A is practically independent of that of support B. During normal

364
René Thom (1923–2002)
mental activity, there are a large number of relatively independent substrates, each
undergoing its own determinism or evolution. In this respect mental activity is only
simulating the dynamic of the external world, which admits many independent or
weakly coupled domains, made possible in particular by spatial separation. But such
a separation of substrates inside a unique functional system as highly interconnected
as the nervous system is very difﬁcult to maintain; it is unstable and can break down
under crude physiological inﬂuences (fever, drugs, etc.). Then the coupling interac-
tions between two substrates A and B can increase to the extent that an archetype
deﬁned on A can evolve on B and upset the normal evolution of B’s own dynamics;
furthermore, this mixture of substrates destroys the more reﬁned chreods, whose
organizing centers have high codimension, in favor of more primitive ﬁelds that
are more stable and more contagious. This will give rise to a syncretistic mental
dynamic with oversimple structures – what is usually called delirious thinking.
In this connection, a good doctrine in the use of analogies in science remains to be
established. Local isomorphisms of dynamical situations over independent substrata
are, I think, very frequent, and many of them have yet to be recognized; because
they are so frequent, however, these analogies have neither the weight nor the sig-
niﬁcance that the incautious might be tempted to attribute to them. It is an enormous
step from noticing the presence of isomorphic morphological accidents on different
substrates, to establishing some fundamental coupling between these substrates to
explain these analogies, and it is precisely this step that delirious thinking takes. If
some of my arguments, particularly in biology, have seemed to the reader to lie on
the boundaries of delirium he might, by rereading, convince himself that I have, I
hope, at no point made this step.
Human Play
In play the mind is given over to an eminently combinatorial activity; it constructs
and uses a semantic model according to rules that it knows and respects. In the sim-
plest case the rules are such that the strategy is determined; there are only a ﬁnite
number of possible evolutions, which can be considered in turn. Frequently, how-
ever, the rules are not powerful enough to determine the system completely, and
play appears as a kind of artistic activity in which the player, motivated by some
esthetic sense, tries to form the most attractive and effective moves. But playing
games is fundamentally different from artistic activity in that the set of rules must
be consciously kept in mind. It is completely incompatible with delirium because
it requires a mental domain kept completely free and independent of any external
coupling, in which the mind may realize high-codimensional chreods; thus formal-
ized, or axiomatic, thought can be considered as a game whose rules, forming the
organizing center, are codiﬁed as a system of axioms. In this way, formal thought
can be regarded as magic that has been psychoanalyzed and made conscious of its
organizing structures.
Playful activity, left to itself, is not slow in creating gratuitous, worthless
examples of semantic models with no other semantic realization than their own

11
From Animal to Man: Thought and Language
365
combination, nor is it slow to decline into trivia. Although some of modern mathe-
matics is perhaps guilty of this charge, it is no less true that mathematical activity
among mankind has essentially been inspired by reality and ﬁnds there its constantly
renewed fecundity. The axioms of arithmetic form an incomplete system, as is well
known. This is a happy fact, for it allows hope that many structurally indetermi-
nate, unformalizable, phenomena may nevertheless admit a mathematical model.
By allowing the construction of mental structures simulating more and more closely
the structures and forces of the outside world, as well as the structure of the mind
itself, mathematical activity has its place in the warp of evolution. This is signiﬁcant
play par excellence by which man can deliver himself from the biological bondage
that weighs down his thought and language, and can assure the best chance for the
survival of mankind.
The Structure of Societies
We are now going to outline roughly the structures of animal and human societies
as metabolic forms. A society is a metabolic form ﬁrst and foremost because it
survives the individuals that constitute it; there is a permanent ﬂux of constantly
renewed individuals assuring the continuation of the social form. Moreover, there
is an interaction between the individuals maintaining the stability of this form. This
interaction often materializes as a circulation of complexity, of information, through
the social body.
Basic Types of Society
There are two basic types of society.
1. The military society. Here each individual occupies a speciﬁed position and
regulates his own movement so that the global form of the society is preserved,
as well as his position within the society. It is clear that global invariance of the
spatial body requires a permanent interaction of each individual with the individuals
surrounding him. As the circulation of information, considered as a ﬂuid, must be
structurally stable, the simplest process to give this effect is a gradient circulation:
here a positive function u is deﬁned on the social body, called authority, zero at the
boundary, and each individual is constrained to control his movement toward the
closest individual on the trajectory of grad u in the direction of increasing u. This
function u must have at least one maximum, and the individual at this point is the
chief, because he takes orders from no one. Because delays in the transmission of
orders may have a disastrous effect on global stability, particularly in troubled times
when very rapid changes of behavior are necessary, u can have no other critical point
apart from the single maximum personiﬁed by the chief. Thus the social body is a
ball under monarchical rule.
As an application of this proposition, we see that most animal groups with invari-
ant structures are topologically balls, generally governed by a chief, for example,

366
René Thom (1923–2002)
ﬂocks of birds, shoals of ﬁsh, or herds. However, the existence of a chief is
not always obvious: the queen is not the director12 in a hive of bees, but more
complicated morphogenetical ﬁelds are in operation. Another example is slime
molds.
Although this is the simplest structurally stable structure, it is not the only one.
Military societies with many, or even with no chiefs are possible, but then the social
body must be at least a three-dimensional manifold in order to admit a structurally
stable ergodic ﬁeld without singularity.
2. The ﬂuid society. Here the typical example is a cloud of mosquitoes: each indi-
vidual moves randomly unless he sees the rest of the swarm in the same half-space;
then he hurries to re-enter the group. Thus stability is assured in catastrophe by a
barrier causing a discontinuity in behavior. In our societies this barrier is ﬁxed and
doubly realized by the conscience of the individual and by the laws and repressive
organisms of the society, and so our societies are of an intermediary type: they are
not rigorously ﬂuid, for they are stratiﬁed into social classes separated by shock
waves that are difﬁcult for an individual to cross. The classical analogy between
the society and the individual organism is well known: the distinction between pri-
mary (production), secondary (distribution), and tertiary (direction) is echoed by
the three fundamental layers of an embryo, but societies, unlike individuals, rarely
reproduce themselves by budding (swarming). Marxism, which would explain the
structure and evolution of societies solely in economic terms, is equivalent to Child’s
metabolic theory of embryology and suffers from the same simpliﬁcations. A typical
character of social morphogenetical ﬁelds is that they modify the behavior of indi-
viduals, often in a lasting and irreversible way, as in the case of those who are per-
suaded to give all, including their own lives, for the preservation of the global social
form, considered as supreme. This is an effect, without parallel in inanimate nature,
that has disastrous consequences as far as the continuance of social injustice is
concerned.
Other Aspects of Societies
1. Money. As a token for bargaining, money circulates in the opposite direction to
goods and services and therefore tends to move away from consumers and accu-
mulate at the producers. But as it must follow a closed path in the social body, it
is necessary for an artiﬁcial mechanism to carry it in the opposite direction. Such
a mechanism can depend only on the structure of society, on authority; in this way
money is imbued with the gradient of authority (grad u) by the process of taxes.
When it arrives at the summit, it is divided up by the chief, who can, in a per-
manent (or at least annual) catastrophe, share out the portions where necessary; in
12 Note that in a beehive the place (i.e., the function) of an individual in the society varies with
his age. As the worker bee grows older, her activities move away from the germinal center (care of
recently enclosed larvae) toward somatic roles (wax-worker, then honey-gatherer).

11
From Animal to Man: Thought and Language
367
fact, this power is one of the essential means of government. Thus, in all societies,
the gradient of production and the gradient of authority have a tendency to orga-
nize themselves in an antagonistic manner and so bring about a sufﬁciently stable
circulation of money.13
2. The mind of a society. In this respect we might ask whether a social
group acquires a “mind” that could have an autonomous existence. It seems
that the social mind has a fragmentary character very similar to that of the ani-
mal mind: society ﬁnds its identity only in the face of an urgent threat, like
war, where its existence and stability are threatened; similarly, the spatial con-
science of the society has a local character, focalized on certain threatened zones.
On the other hand, one may see in large collective displays such as fetes and
celebrations an activity homologous to dreaming in the individual, a virtual
manifestation of genetic “social” forms. Individual semantics is perhaps another
example.
The view outlined above is basically pessimistic, for it shows that social injus-
tice is inextricably bound up with the stability of the social body. Personally I
believe that the only way of reducing oppression is to stop giving an ethical
value to social forms, in particular, to nations. The celebrated dictum of Goethe,
“Better injustice than disorder,” can be justiﬁed only inasmuch as disorder may
generate even worse injustices; but this danger is not likely if the members of a
society have achieved sufﬁcient moral values for them not to exploit a temporary
lapse of authority to their own proﬁt. In this case, a very labile situation, with a
ﬂuctuating authority, has the best chance of providing a regime optimal for each
member.
It is tempting to see the history of nations as a sequence of catastrophes between
metabolic forms; what better example is there of a generalized catastrophe than the
disintegration of a great empire, like Alexander’s! But in a subject like mankind
itself, one can see only the surface of things. Heraclitus said, “You could not dis-
cover the limits of soul, even if you traveled every road to do so; such is the depth
of its form.”14
Conclusion
Here, before the ﬁnal discussion, is a summary of the main points that have been
made.
13 In this model of society, the intellectuals (artists and thinkers) ﬁgure as the axis of the money
circulation; in their central position, freed from the need to produce, deprived of the advantages
and responsibilities of power, they are the eye of this continual hurricane. In terms of the model of
Section 1 l.1C we might regard them as the chromosome of the social body.
14 I have twice allowed myself to translate the Heraclitean λoγos as “form.” Allowing that to
Heraclitus the logos is the formal structure that assures for any object its unity and its stability, I am
convinced that this particular use of the word “form”(meaning the equivalence class of structurally
stable forms) in this book is a reasonably good approximation.

368
René Thom (1923–2002)
Summary
1. Every object, or physical form, can be represented as an attractor C of a
dynamical system on a space M of internal variables.
2. Such an object is stable, and so can be recognized, only when the corresponding
attractor is structurally stable.
3. All creation or destruction of forms, or morphogenesis, can be described by the
disappearance of the attractors representing the initial forms, and their replace-
ment by capture by the attractors representing the ﬁnal forms. This process,
called catastrophe, can be described on a space P of external variables.
4. Every structurally stable morphological process is described by a structurally
stable catastrophe, or a system of structurally stable catastrophes, on P.
5. Every natural process decomposes into structurally stable islands, the chreods.
The set of chreods and the multidimensional syntax controlling their positions
constitute the semantic model.
6. When the chreod C is considered as a word of this multidimensional language,
the meaning (signiﬁcation) of this word is precisely that of the global topol-
ogy of the associated attractor (or attractors) and of the catastrophes that it (or
they) undergo. In particular, the signiﬁcation of a given attractor is deﬁned by
the geometry of its domain of existence on P and the topology of the regulation
catastrophes bounding that domain.
One result of this is that the signiﬁcation of a form C manifests itself only by
the catastrophes that create or destroy it. This gives the axiom dear to the formal
linguists: that the meaning of a word is nothing more than the use of the word;
this is also the axiom of the “bootstrap” physicists, according to whom a particle is
completely deﬁned by the set of interactions in which It participates.
Let us now consider the prejudicial question of experimental control.
Experimental Control
Are these models subject to experimental control? Can they give experimentally
veriﬁable predictions? At the risk of disappointing the reader, I must answer in the
negative. This is an inherent defect of all qualitative models, as compared with clas-
sical quantitative models. When the processing studied is entirely within a chreod C,
all that the experiment can do is to conﬁrm the stability of the chreod; when the pro-
cess has several chreods C1, C2, . . . separated by indeterminate zones, the process
is by deﬁnition structurally unstable, and no individual prediction is possible. The
only beneﬁt to be drawn from the model is a statistical study of the morphologies
presented by a set of processes of the type under consideration; this is the method
used in quantum mechanics and often in quantitative biology. In the case of a single
chreod, it might be possible to construct, by internal analysis of the chreod, a quan-
titative model; but for this the dynamical properties of the substrate must be well
understood – something that is rarely possible, except in the study of shock waves in

11
From Animal to Man: Thought and Language
369
hydrodynamics, where some partial progress has been made. In general, the way is
blocked by the nonexistence of a quantitative theory of catastrophes of a dynamical
system; to deal with this it would be necessary to have a good theory of integration
on function spaces and we saw in Section 7.3 the difﬁculties of such a theory.
The strict empiricist, faced with this deﬁciency, will tend to reject these models as
speculative constructions, devoid of interest; and, as far as present scientiﬁc progress
is concerned, he is probably right. On a larger scale, however, there are two reasons
that might commend them to the scientist.
The ﬁrst reason is that every quantitative model ﬁrst requires a qualitative
isolation from reality in setting up an experimentally reproducible stable situation.
We take the main divisions of science, the taxonomy of experience, into physics,
biology, chemistry, and so forth as given a priori, a decomposition bequeathed on us
almost unconsciously by our perception and used by every scientist, no matter who
he is, rather like Monsieur Jourdain speaking prose. Should it not be of interest in
this situation to reconsider this decomposition and integrate it into the framework
of an abstract general theory, rather than to accept it blindly as an irreducible fact
of reality?
The second reason is our ignorance of the limits of quantitative models. The
enormous successes of 19th century physics, based on the use and exploitation of
physical laws, created the belief that all phenomena could be justiﬁed in a sim-
ilar way, that life and thought themselves might be expressed in equations. But,
on reﬂection, very few phenomena depend on mathematically simply expressed
(“fundamental”) laws: scarcely three, namely, gravitation (Newton’s law), light, and
electricity (Maxwell’s law). Their simplicity is only apparent, and only expresses
how gravitation and electromagnetism are intimately connected with the geometry
of space, the result of a statistical effect of a large number of isolated, independent,
small phenomena. The situation is different at the level of quanta; the fundamental
reasons for the stability of matter are still unknown, and the stability of the proton
remains unexplained. Quantum mechanics, with its leap into statistics, has been a
mere palliative for our ignorance.
Furthermore, even when a system is controlled by explicit laws of evolution, it
often happens that its qualitative behavior is still not computable and predictable; as
soon as the number of parameters of the system increases, the possibility of a close
calculation decreases-what Bellman (1961) has called the curse of dimensionality.
Those who sell electronic gadgetry would have us believe that the computer age will
be a new era for scientiﬁc thought and humanity; they might also point out the basic
problem, which lies in the construction of models.
Since Newton’s proud cry, “Hypotheses non ﬁngo,” it has been hoped that
a happy intuition, a lucky guess, would be sufﬁcient to reveal the fundamental
laws underlying everything; but this method of blind groping without any intu-
itive support seems now to have produced as much as it is able. After all, it is
not impossible that science is now approaching the ultimate possibility of ﬁnite
description; then the indescribable and unformalizable will be on hand, and we shall
have to face this challenge. We shall have to ﬁnd the best means to approach the
action of chance, to describe the symmetry breaking generalized catastrophes, to

370
René Thom (1923–2002)
formalize the unformalizable. For this task, the human brain, with its ancient bio-
logical heritage, its clever approximations, its subtle esthetic sensibility, remains and
will remain irreplaceable for ages to come.
So what I am offering here is not a scientiﬁc theory, but rather a method; the ﬁrst
step in the construction of a model is to describe the dynamical models compatible
with an empirically given morphology, and this is also the ﬁrst step in understanding
the phenomena under consideration. It is from this point of view that these meth-
ods, too indeterminate in themselves, lead not to a once-and-for-all explicit standard
technique, but rather to an art of models. We may hope that theoreticians will
develop a quantitative model in the framework of a given substrate, just as quantum
mechanics has been developed for elementary interactions. But this is only a hope.
Philosophical Considerations
There is no doubt it is on the philosophical plane that these models have the most
immediate interest. They give the ﬁrst rigorously monistic model of the living being,
and they reduce the paradox of the soul and the body to a single geometrical object.
Likewise on the plane of the biological dynamic, they combine causality and ﬁnal-
ity into one pure topological continuum, viewed from different angles. Of course
this requires the abandonment of a universal mechanism and Laplacian absolute
determinism, but have these ever been anything but wishful thinking?
Our models attribute all morphogenesis to conﬂict, a struggle between two or
more attractors. This is the 2,500 year old idea of the ﬁrst pre-Socratic philosophers,
Anaximander and Heraclitus. They have been accused of primitive confusionism,
because they used a vocabulary with human and social origins (conﬂict, injus-
tice, etc.) to explain the appearance of the physical world, but I think that they
were far from wrong because they had the following fundamentally valid intu-
ition: the dynamical situations governing the evolution of natural phenomena are
basically the same as those governing the evolution of man and societies, profoundly
justifying the use of anthropomorphic words in physics.15 Inasmuch as we use the
word “conﬂict” to express a well-deﬁned geometrical situation in a dynamical sys-
tem, there is no objection to using the word to describe quickly and qualitatively
a given dynamical situation. When we geometrize also the words “information,”
“message,” and “plan,” as our models are trying to do, any objection to the use of
these terms is removed. And this will represent not a little progress for present-day
molecular biology.
15 It is striking how all past and present techniques of foretelling the future depend on the follow-
ing principle: a generalized catastrophe (tea leaves in a cup, lines on the palm of a hand, drawing
of cards, the shape of a chicken’s liver, etc.) is studied and its morphology is then associated, by
a suitable isomorphism, with the preoccupations and difﬁculties of the client. This method is not
absurd insofar as the dynamic of morphogenesis may contain local accidental isomorphisms with
the dynamic of human situations, and often a gifted soothsayer may well elicit some valuable con-
clusions from this examination. To classify these isomorphisms in some deﬁnitive manner would
be to embark on the characteristic form of delirious thought.

11
From Animal to Man: Thought and Language
371
Epilogue
I should like to have convinced my readers that geometrical models are of some
value in almost every domain of human thought. Mathematicians will probably
deplore abandoning familiar precise quantitative models in favor of the neces-
sarily more vage qualitative models of functional topology; but they should be
reassured that quantitative models still have a good future, even though they are
satisfactory only for systems depending on a few parameters. The qualitative meth-
ods considered here, which appeal to the ideas of the morphogenetic ﬁeld and
chreod associated with singularities of the bifurcation set of an inﬁnite-dimensional
function space, avoid this difﬁculty. In theory, they still provide only a local clas-
siﬁcation, and so only a local investigation of the singularities of morphogenesis;
the problem of integrating these local models into a stable global structure (dynam-
ical topology), although sketched out in the case of living beings, remains wide
open.
An essential tool is still missing: a more precise description of the catas-
trophic process of the disappearance of an attractor of a differential system and its
replacement by new attractors. This problem is not only of theoretical importance.
Physicists, if they want one day to obtain information about very small processes
at subquantic level, will need the intermediary of the interaction of a highly con-
trolled process with an enormous degree of ampliﬁcation. Such processes, in which
an inﬁnitesimal perturbation may cause very large variations in the outcome, are
typically catastrophes.
Biologists will perhaps reproach me for not having spoken of biochemistry in
precise terms. This is true, and I do not deny the importance of chemical constraints
on the dynamic of life. But I believe that any such constraint, and any chemical
bond, can be considered as a geometrical factor in an appropriate space. Writing the
equation, in atoms, that connects two constituents of a chemical reaction is one, the
coarsest, of these constraints; the topology of biochemical kinetics and its relation
with the spatial conﬁguration of macromolecules are others that are certainly more
decisive. On the other hand, what is it that assures us that the formal structures
governing life as a stable process of self-reproduction are necessarily connected
with the biochemical substrate that we know today?
As far as life and social sciences are concerned, it is difﬁcult for me to judge
whether my present ideas may be of interest, but in writing these pages I have
reached the conviction that there are simulating structures of all natural external
forces at the very heart of the genetic endowment of our species, at the unassailable
depth of the Heraclitean logos of our soul, and that these structures are ready to
go into action whenever necessary. The old idea of Man, the microcosm, mirroring
World, the macrocosm, retains all its force: who knows Man, knows the Universe.
In this Outline of a General Theory of Models I have done nothing but separate
out and present the premises of a method that life seems to have practiced since its
origin.
A mathematician cannot enter on subjects that seem so far removed from
his usual preoccupations without some bad conscience. Many of my assertions

372
René Thom (1923–2002)
depend on pure speculation and may be treated as day-dreams, and I accept this
qualiﬁcation-is not day-dream the virtual catastrophe in which knowledge is initi-
ated? At a time when so many scholars in the world are calculating, is it not desirable
that some, who can, dream?
Appendix 1
A Model for Memory
Structure of memory.
We propose the following structure for memory:
1. A relatively slow dynamic (P,ψ) representing consciousness and mental activity.
2. A rapid auxiliary dynamic (M, X).
3. A weak coupling between these two dynamics by a third system (Q, X), of type
a product of N linear oscillators, each with the same period.
The conﬁguration space of Q is then an N-dimensional torus T N. The parallel
constant ﬁeld in Q is structurally unstable and evolves through resonance toward a
structurally stable situation characterized by the presence of attracting cycles. There
may be competition between several possible resonances corresponding to slightly
different biochemical states of neurons. To ﬁx the idea, suppose that the possible res-
onances are parameterized by the points of a set J of phase differences in the torus
TN, varying, in principle, according to the past history of the individual. Suppose,
for example, that J is a tree with successive bifurcations; then the terminal points
of the tree will correspond to speciﬁcally catalogued memories. When Q is in a
stable regime corresponding to such an external point s, the system Q will impose
a certain weak coupling between (P, ψ) and (M, X) with the effect of producing
a mean coupling ﬁeld in P; the unique attractor of this mean ﬁeld will then cap-
ture the dynamic ψ, recalling the memory belonging to s. The internal evolution
of Q is itself governed by a secondary coupling with (P, ψ); when mental activity
requires the recollection of a memory, Q will become unstable and the representa-
tive point in J will return to the origin of the treeJ and then move toward an external
point.
Two factors come into play at each bifurcation of J.
1. The coupling with (P, ψ), which can direct the choice in one direction or another.
2. The local chemical memory affecting the probabilities of each of the branches of
the tree at the corresponding vertex.
Very probably the structure of J is not absolutely determined but depends on the
genetic information and the experience of the lifetime of the individual. On the other
hand, the external points probably cover only a very small part of all the possible
couplings leading to mean ﬁelds with stable attractors. In this sense it can be said
that our brains contain not only our actual memories, but also all virtual memories
that we could have but never shall have.

11
From Animal to Man: Thought and Language
373
The Mechanism of Acquiring a Memory
Each branch point of the tree J can be represented by a partial oscillator D with
three .states: two stable regimes a and b corresponding to the branches of J issu-
ing from the point, and an indifferently excited state. Each stable state synthesizes
substances (RNA?) ma and mb, respectively, in the affected neurons, and these sub-
stances catalyze the return to the corresponding state. However, active synthesis of
these substances, and their deposit in the neurons, cannot start until the excitation of
D has died down. The recollection of the memory s will usually lead to the excita-
tion of a reﬂex r(s) by the organism. This reﬂex r(s) may have agreeable or painful
effects on the organism. When the effect is painful, there will be a generalized exci-
tation of the local oscillators D in Q and the substances giving rise to this choice
will be suppressed; this will leave almost no trace of the chemical of the choice just
made. On the other hand, if the effect is agreeable, the excitation of the local oscil-
lators D will be reduced and material ma or mb, according to the choice just made,
will be synthesized. It could also be that the pain wave in Q generates the synthesis
of substances unfavorable to the return to the corresponding regime.
Temporary loss of memory is a well-known and curious phenomenon. There are
two possible explanations: either the dynamic Q cannot reach the required terminal
point s because the local chemical memory at one of the bifurcations of J prevents
it (this is the Freudian interpretation, which we forget memories connected with
disagreeable sensations): or Q does reach s, but this was actually not a point, so that
Q ends up a little to one side and gives a coupling that recalls the general structure
of the bifurcations of the mean ﬁeld, but, because of an auxiliary perturbation, the
horizontal component Y does not give rise to any attracting cycle. The memory is
there, virtual, in the consciousness, and needs only the ﬁeld that excited it. In this
case the best way of recalling the memory is to start again from the beginning, if
possible some time later.
Whatever else are the virtues of this model, it shows that there is little hope
of localizing memories either spatially, in speciﬁc neurons, or chemically, in
well-determined substances.
Appendix 2
Grammar, Languages, and Writing
Grammatical categories and the typology of languages.
We have seen that concepts have a regulation ﬁgure, a logos, analogous to that
of living beings, We might regard a grammatical category (in the traditional sense)
as a kind of abstract logos, puriﬁed to the point that only the rules of combination
and interaction between such categories can be formalized. From this point of view,
we say that a grammatical category C is semantically closer than a category C’ if
the regulation of a concept of C involves mechanism intervening in the regulation
of C’. For example, take a name of animate being, say a cat: this cat must make use

374
René Thom (1923–2002)
of a spectrum of physiological activities for survival – eating, sleeping, breathing,
and so forth; once these are satisﬁed, he can then indulge in less necessary but
quite normal activities – playing, purring, and the like. Similarly each substantive
has a spectrum of verbs describing the activities necessary for the stability and the
manifestation of the meaning of the concept. Since the verb is indispensable for the
stability of the substantive, it is less dense than the noun. The adjective shares in
the stable character of the noun, but it is deﬁned on a space of qualities, deeper than
space-time, the support of the verb.
When a category C is denser than C’, there is, in general, a canonical transforma-
tion from C to C’. The inverse transformation, however, is generally not possible.
These rules lead to the following order, in decreasing semantic density, for the
traditional grammatical categories: noun-adjective-verb-adverb afﬁxes and various
grammatical auxiliaries. In the emission of a sentence the meaning is analyzed and
the elements are emitted in the order of increasing density. In the model of Section
13.4C the density of the concept is, in practice, the time required by the dummy
actant to reduce the concept to the representative sign. It is much longer for a
complex being like man than for an inanimate object, whose regulation is much
simpler. As an example, the normal order of emission of a transitive phrase, subject-
verb-object, would be verb-object-subject; the object is less stable than the subject,
since in such a transitive process the subject survives the whole interaction whereas
the object may perish. (The cat eats the mouse, the morphology.) The reception
order, the one most favorable to the best reconstitution of the global meaning, is
generally the opposite order: subject-object-verb. Now researches on the univer-
sals of language have shown that the pure emissive typology V-O-S is practically
nonexistent (see Greenberg 1966), whereas the receptive typology S-O-V is well
represented (e.g., Japanese, Turkish, and Basque). This reﬂects a fundamental fact
in the dynamic of communication: the act of speaking is initiated by the speaker,
and in general he has a greater interest in being understood than the listener has in
understanding. Consequently the transposition of the emissive order into the recep-
tive order is generally carried out by the speaker, and this gives predominance to
the reception typology. However, the mixed emissive typology S-V-O is the most
common.
An elementary sentence generally contains other ancillary elements that go to
make up a nuclear phrase; these are the adjuncts. The principal kinds of adjuncts are
the epithet adjectives (A-N or N-A) and genitives (G-N or N-G). The adjective is
semantically less dense than the noun; therefore the receptive typology of the epithet
is N-A, the emissive A-N; and similarly for the genitive: receptive N-G, emissive
G-N. Since a preposition is less dense, an adjunct of type Pre-N is an emissive
type, in harmony with the order V-O, while a postposition N-Post is in harmony
with O-V.
The second principle governing the typology of languages is this: the free
adjuncts (those not tied to the central verb, e.g., A and G) have an inverse typology
to the verb-object nucleus. This leads to the two main types of languages:

11
From Animal to Man: Thought and Language
375
Emissive
Receptive
V-O
O-V
Pre
Post
N-A
A-N
N-G
G-N
English is not typical, since it has preserved from an older receptive stage the
typology A-N for the epithet adjective and the partial type G-N in the Saxon genitive
(John’s house). For further details see my 1973 article on the subject.
The Origin of Writing
The mental reconstruction of the organizing centers of elementary ﬁelds spreads, by
a very natural contagion, to the functional ﬁelds of the hand. The external variables
of the elementary catastrophes will be realized as spatial variables. The stylization
of an action is nothing more than a return to the organizing center of this action. To
the extent that the Riemann-Hugoniot cusp is conceptually stabilized by the concept
of division or separation, the catastrophe can be realized by writing in clay with a
stick the symbol <. Similarly the sign ∧is, like the previous one, an old Chinese
ideogram meaning to enter or penetrate, and this could well be a stylization of the
elliptic umbilic. In this way we cannot but admire the suitability of the Chinese sys-
tem of writing; the dominant inﬂuence of the spoken word in the West has resulted
in an alphabeticalor syllabic system of writing, and the expression (signiﬁant) has
violently subjugated the meaning (signiﬁé).
In conclusion, we have seen that an analysis of the grammatical structures of
language requires a subtle mixture of algebra, dynamics, and biology. Without pre-
tending to have a deﬁnitive answer to a problem whose difﬁculty can scarcely be
measured, I venture to suggest that these ideas may contain something of interest
for many specialists. 16,17
16 Suppose now that the number of these categories organizing the meaning was reduced and that
a typology of the events so instituted was possible; then such a typology, based on an exhaustive
description of the structures of the message, would form the objective framework within which the
representation of the contents, identiﬁed with the semantic micro-universe, would be the only vari-
able. The linguistic conditions of the understanding of world would then be formulated (Greimas
1966).
17 It thus appears that the future of syntactical research lies in intranuclear investigation, which
alone will allow an investigation of the interior of the nucleus and the phenomena based there, and
which will produce, in the intellectual order, structures at least as complicated as those of the cell,
the molecule, and the atom of the material order (Tesnière 1966).

376
René Thom (1923–2002)
References
Bellman, R. (1961). Adaptive Control Processes, a Guided Tour. Princeton: Princeton University
Press, p. 94.
Greenberg, J. H. (1966). Universals of Language. London: MLT Press, p. 104.
Greimas, A. J. (1966). Sémantique structurale. Paris: Larousse, p. 133.
Luquet, G. H. (1927). Les dessins d’un enfant, Alcan, 1913; and Le dessin enfantin, Alcan, 1927.
Piaget, J., Inhelder, B. (1956). The Child’s Conception of Space. London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul.
Tesnière, L. (1966). Eléments de syntaxe structurale. Paris: Klincksieck, p. 157.
Thom, R. (1973). Sur la typologie des langues naturelles: essai d’interprétation psycholinguis-
tique. In: Gross, M., Halle, M., Schutzenberger, M.-P. (Eds.) The Formal Analysis of Natural
Languages, Proceedings of the First International Conference, Mouton.
Young, J. Z. (1964). A Model of the Brain. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Chapter 12
A Semiotic Perspective on the Sciences: Steps
Toward a New Paradigm
Myrdene Anderson (1934– ), John Deely (1942– ),
Martin Krampen (1928– ), Joseph Ransdell (1931– ),
Thomas A. Sebeok (1920–2001), and Thure von Uexküll
(1908–2004)
Introduction and Commentary: A Semiotic Perspective
on the Sciences
Semiotics has itself thrived in a generative atmosphere of specialization and synthesis. Now,
in an expanding intellectual universe, we converge with several other strains of scholar-
ship. In this brief paper, we not only acknowledge this convergence and complementarity,
but actively welcome the emerging rapprochement, which we interpret as representing a
radical shift in scientiﬁc paradigm. This conceptual revolution transcends a dichotomous
Cartesian, analytic view of the world, in the direction of a view embracing the whole,
respecting complexity, and fostering synthesis.
(Anderson et al. 1984: 7)
“In the spring of 1983, Thomas A. Sebeok proposed the writing of a kind of
‘position paper’ or ‘manifesto,’ jointly with John Deely, Martin Krampen, [Myrdene
Anderson, Joseph Ransdell] and Thure von Uexküll, to explore the possibility of
semiotics providing a new paradigm or framework in terms of which it will be pos-
sible to overcome the divide between the so-called two cultures, and pointing out
a direction for the overdue reintegration of the human and natural sciences at a
level of synthesis beyond the false dichotomy which has bred the multifarious, stale
oppositions of realism and idealism” (Anderson et al. 1984: 35).
Almost a quarter of a century after Thomas A. Sebeok and colleagues issued
the above call for what would eventually become the contemporary interdiscipline
of ‘biosemiotics,’ the synthesis of sign science and life science envisioned at that
time seems to be ﬁnally coming into its own. Today, the spirit of Sebeok’s Glottertal
conferences of the early 1990s, which brought together researchers from the life
sciences with researchers from the sign sciences to help each other explore the role
of signs in nature, has now taken institutional form as the Annual International
Gatherings in Biosemiotics – while his 1991 proposal for the founding of an
International Society for Biosemiotic Studies ﬁnally became a reality in 2005.
Already over 300 members strong, that Society maintains an active web presence
at www.biosemiotics.org. There, scholars from around the world collaboratively
engage in the project that declares its goals to be:
the study of the myriad forms of communication and signiﬁcation observable both within
and between living systems, Biosemiotics is thus the study of representation, meaning,
377
D. Favareau, Essential Readings in Biosemiotics, Biosemiotics 3,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9650-1_12, C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010

378
Myrdene Anderson (1934– ) et al.
sense, and the biological signiﬁcance of sign processes in nature – from intercellular signal-
ing processes to animal display behavior to such human semiotic artifacts as language and
abstract symbolic thought. As such, the interdisciplinary research project of biosemiotics is
attempting to re-open the dialogue across the life sciences – as well as between the life sci-
ences and the humanities – regarding what, precisely, such ineliminable terms as sign and
meaning ultimately refer to in the context of living, interactive, complex-adaptive systems
(www.biosemiotics.org).
Today, as a result of the intense cross-disciplinary exchange of ideas made pos-
sible by the annual international conferences, the dedicated peer review journal
Biosemiotics, and the outreach efforts of the International Society for Biosemiotic
Studies, Sebeok and colleagues’ long-envisioned research agenda investigating
the relationships between sign processes and life processes is becoming expo-
nentially more interdisciplinary and internationally recognized every year. Indeed,
the number of university courses now exclusively devoted to Biosemiotics is
steadily increasing, with the ﬁrst PhDs in Biosemiotics having recently been
awarded at the University of Tartu, Estonia – this university having been selected
as the permanent new home of the late Thomas A. Sebeok’s vast personal
library of biology and semiotics literature. One can only imagine how gratiﬁed
Sebeok would have been, had he lived to see the recent explosion of interest in
the ﬁeld.
For as recently as 1995, reﬂecting upon the impact-to-date of the 1984 manifesto,
Sebeok had written that
unfortunately, although the ‘two cultures’ [of science and the humanities] as ideal assem-
blages, still by and large “can’t talk to each other”, that is only the lesser part of our –
that is, the semiotics community’s – predicament. Much more enfeebling is the prevail-
ing estrangement within the riven world-wide semiotics commonwealth itself, between the
many who would style themselves humanists and a scientiﬁcally cultivated minority. In a
paper, A semiotic perspective on the sciences: Steps toward a new paradigm (Anderson
et al. 1984), six of us tried to address this dilemma, but in the short run, to little avail. The
number of scholars who nimbly scud back and forth between the ‘two cultures’ remains
heartbreakingly minuscule (1995: 3).
Yet today, less than ﬁfteen years later, scholars from both the natural sciences and
the social sciences are taking up the challenge to learn enough about semiotics to be
able to produce semiotically-informed analyses of the phenomena they study – just
as semioticians have begun to educate themselves on the basic biology of life’s man-
ifold communicative and representative sign-processes, so as to be able to contribute
to one of the most exciting intellectual dialogues of our time: the investigation of
the role of signs for life itself.
Certainly this dialogue would never have come into being in its present form,
were it not for Thomas Sebeok and a host of interdisciplinary thinkers, to whose
work the current ﬁeld of biosemiotics owes considerable debt, but who, for rea-
sons of space, are not represented by reprinted selections in this volume. Such
widely read and deeply inﬂuential pioneers include Floyd Merrell, Stanley Salthe,
Paul Bains, Eugene Yates, Edwina Taborsky, Frederik Stjernfelt, Nathan Houser,
Vincent Colapietro, Mads Bergmann, Menno Hulswit, Eugene Baer, Roland Posner,

12
A Semiotic Perspective on the Sciences
379
Paul Boussiac, Marcel Danesi, David Savan, Augusto Ponzio, Susan Petrilli, Brook
Williams, Paul Cobley, Winifred Nöth, Ferrucio Ross-Landi, and Lucia Santaella
Braga, just to name a few.
Of particular importance are the three of the six authors of the following selection
whose other work is not represented by reprinted articles in this volume, but who
nonetheless have left and continue to leave an indelible mark upon the contemporary
research agenda of biosemiotics.
Myrdene Anderson (1934– ) is an American-born anthropologist, linguist, and
semiotician who received her PhD in Anthropology from Yale University in 1978
and is now Associate Professor of Anthropology, Linguistics, and Semiotics in the
Department of Sociology and Anthropology at Purdue University. A past pres-
ident of both the Central States Anthropological Society and of the Semiotic
Society of America, her principal research interests are systems, scientiﬁc, and
semiotic approaches to the understanding of human socio-culture; the ethnography
of marginality; and the longitudinal ethnographic study of pastoral and nomadic
peoples, especially the Saami people of Lapland. Anderson’s research on Saami
ethno-semantics commenced in 1971 and continues today, augmented by other
projects involving both ﬁeldwork and archival investigations. These other projects
include the study of real and metaphoric trash; an ongoing ethnography of the
Artiﬁcial Life movement; research on alternative gardening practices; reﬂections
on play and folklore; and the unpacking of anthropological praxis. This is in addi-
tion to her continued deep involvement with the biosemiotic community, at whose
annual international conferences she is a regular speaker, as well as being a founding
member of the International Society for Biosemiotics Studies.
John Deely (1942– ) has been writing on the interface of science and semi-
otics since his ﬁrst publication on the philosophical implications of the theory of
evolution in 1965. A Professor of Philosophy and Semiotics at the University of
St. Thomas, Houston, and past President (2003) and past Executive Director (2006)
of the Semiotic Society of America (SSA), Deely was chosen by the SSA to be
its ﬁrst living Thomas A. Sebeok Fellow in 1993. In 1985, Deely translated and
edited the critical bilingual edition of John Poinsot’s (St. John of the Cross’) 1632
Tractatus de Signis – “the earliest known treatise to demonstrate the unity of semi-
otics as a systematic inquiry into the action of signs as consequent upon their unique
being as triadic relations” (Deely 2005: 212).
Deely was awarded the ﬁrst Mouton d’Or Award for the best essay published
in the ﬁeld of semiotics by the journal Semiotica for the calendar year 1981, and
he was awarded that prize a second time in 2004. His 1990 Basics of Semiotics
has been translated into ten languages, and his other major works include his mas-
sively inﬂuential Four Ages of Understanding: The First Postmodern Survey of
Philosophy from Ancient Times to the Turn of the Twenty-First Century (2001),
What Distinguishes Human Understanding? (2002), The Semiotic Animal (with
Susan Petrilli and Augusto Ponzio (2005), Intentionality and Semiotics (2007),
Purely Objective Reality (forthcoming) and the trilogy Augustine & Poinsot: The
Protosemiotic Development (2007), Descartes & Poinsot: The Crossroad of Signs
and Ideas (2008), and Peirce & Poinsot: The Action of Signs from Nature to Ethics

380
Myrdene Anderson (1934– ) et al.
(2009). In 2010, a collection of thirty of Deely’s most seminal articles, all of which
have profound relevance to the project of biosemiotics, were collated by semi-
otician Paul Cobley and released, with illuminating commentary by Cobley, as
Realism for the 21st Century: A John Deely Reader. Married to Maritain scholar
Brooke Williams Deely (née Smith), Deely is also chief editor of the University of
Scranton’s Approaches to Postmodernity book series, of which Jesper Hoffmeyer’s
(2008) Biosemiotics, excerpted in this anthology, is the second volume.
Joseph Ransdell (1931– ) is a Fellow and past President of the Charles S. Peirce
Society, whose principal research interests are the history of philosophy, and the
theory of meaning. Ransdell was an Associate Professor of Philosophy at Texas
Tech University at the time that the article reprinted here was Written. He retired
from teaching in 2000 and has remained active as a scholar and webmaster of aca-
demic materials ever since. In 1993, Ransdell established the PEIRCE-L Internet
Forum and shortly thereafter created the website Arisbe: The Peirce Gateway at
http://www.cspeirce.com/arisbe.htm which Ransdell has successfully designed to
function as the gateway to all the resources on the World Wide Web related to the life
and work of Charles S. Peirce. The Arisbe website – in conjunction with the invalu-
able archival and exegetical work that continues to be produced by Ransdell and his
colleagues at the Peirce Edition Project, and which for the last two decades has been
painstakingly reviewing the over 80,000 pages of manuscript left behind by Peirce
in order to prepare the deﬁnitive scholarly edition of his works – deeply informs
the biosemiotic analyses of those scholars working in the Sebeokian tradition of
biosemiotics.
In sum, Sebeok’s 1995 worries about the success of the research project outlined
in the 1984 ‘manifesto’ that is reprinted as the following selection appear, in ret-
rospect, to have been premature. Rather, we can now see how the conceptual and
programmatic seeds that Sebeok and his colleagues had been planting diligently
throughout the 1970s and 1980s were quietly taking root throughout the 1990s,
only to begin sending out their ﬁrst, still very tentative, shoots aboveground now.
It seems appropriate, then, to conclude the ﬁrst half of this anthology with this
groundbreaking article that not only sets out the mission statement, as it were, of
the biosemiotics that lies in wait – “a semiotics which provides the human sciences
with a context for reconceptualizing foundations and for moving along a path which,
demonstrably, avoids crashing into the philosophical roadblock thrown up by forced
choices between realism and idealism, as though this exclusive dichotomy were also
exhaustive of the possibilities for interpreting experience” (1984: 8) – but also, by its
very collaborative and interdisciplinary nature, remains a paragon of biosemiotics
scholarship itself.

12
A Semiotic Perspective on the Sciences
381
A Semiotic Perspective on the Sciences: Steps
Toward a New Paradigm (1984)
Changing Paradigms
In the expanding intellectual universe of contemporary science, semiotics provides
an environment in which specialists from many ﬁelds converge toward an interdisci-
plinary union. This poses the question of the exact role semiotics plays in bringing
about such a union. Is it a discipline, a method, or an approach and perspective
contributing to the integration of the sciences and of knowledge in general?
An Expanding Intellectual Universe
A paradox worthy of attention: both specialization and synthesis percolate on the
edges of human knowledge. Boundaries of systems generate patterns of catastrophe,
ﬁelds of inclusion and exclusion, ﬁgures and grounds of Gestalten, and relations of
energy information and spacetime, all of which ﬂipﬂop and fascinate us the more.
Semiotics has itself thrived in such a generative atmosphere of specialization
and synthesis. Now, in an expanding intellectual universe, we converge with sev-
eral other strains of scholarship. In this brief paper, we not only acknowledge this
convergence and complementarity, but actively welcome the emerging rapproche-
ment, which we interpret as representing a radical shift in scientiﬁc paradigm (see
Kuhn 1970). This conceptual revolution transcends a dichotomous Cartesian, ana-
lytic view of the world, in the direction of a view embracing the whole, respecting
complexity, and fostering synthesis (cf. Percy 1983, Singer 1980).
In his “Pretext” to Space structures, mathematician Arthur Loeb (1976: xv)
addresses a dilemma which must face the majority of academic semioticians –
whether one’s targeted audience will be a union or an intersection of specialists.
There may be different solutions for various contexts of communication, but in this
paper we opt for the fuzzy generality of a union as preferable to the potentially triv-
ial token intersection. Much phatic communion by interdisciplinary semioticians,
unfortunately, tends to the latter pole, with prominence given to the recitation of
genealogies (cf. Bouissac 1976, 1979, 1981). The former pole, on the other hand,
might fall under the rubric of “ecumenical” semiotics (Sebeok 1977b), a semiotics
which provides the human sciences with a context for reconceptualizing founda-
tions and for moving along a path which, demonstrably (e.g., Williams 1984), avoids
crashing into the philosophical roadblock thrown up by forced choices between real-
ism and idealism, as though this exclusive dichotomy were also exhaustive of the
possibilities for interpreting experience.
Avoiding this particular roadblock is no mere empty claim, still less a maneuver
or tactic. It is rather the rationale enabling semiotics to reintegrate the natural and
human sciences in the higher synthesis proper to a doctrine of signs. Before striding

382
Myrdene Anderson (1934– ) et al.
into ecumenical territory, however, the next sections touch ever so ﬂeetingly several
of the more recently polished ﬁgures and less polished concepts in semiotics.
Semiotics as Perspective
A quote from Peirce (1934: 302) – “this universe is perfused with signs” –
anticipated the leaky boundary between semiotic scholarship and the traditionally
specialized research parallel to it in the humanities, social sciences, life sciences,
and conceptual sciences. In all of these ﬁelds, signiﬁcant work tends to be accom-
plished by individual scholar-scientists in touch with themselves and with their
sibling disciplines, and hence aware of the value in exchange. Any boundaries which
become the justiﬁcation for their contents demand incessant maintenance, at the cost
of internal investments in metabolism and fantasy.
Much venom has been expended, in accusation as well as in defensive jest,
declaiming semiotics as a colonizer of well-established academic disciplines. At the
same time, confusion reigns both among and beyond the cognoscenti as to whether
semiotics is an approach, a ﬁeld, a discipline, a method, a theory, a science, or a
disease (Deely 1976, 1982a, Eco 1976, 1980, Ransdell 1979, Rey 1973, Scruton
1981, Sebeok 1977b). Above all, semiotics must be a perspective. But the currency
of both these topics suggests a fundamental uncertainty in the sanctum of signs. This
uncertainty in itself might be either provocative or sapping in its effects. The state-
of-the-art conference, “Semiotics: Field or Discipline?”, sponsored by the Research
Center for Language and Semiotic Studies at the Bloomington campus ofIndiana
University in October of 1984 may prove to be a watershed between ambivalent
specialization and conﬁdent synthesis in semiotics.
Hyphenated Semiotics
As happens in the ontogeny of any enterprise, semiotics has generated a terminol-
ogy, some of enduring utility, some of it outgrown, and some of the tokens never
intended to be other than expressive. Some speciality ﬁelds have been labeled by
juxtaposing the subject matter with the approach, as in the case of “medical semi-
otics” “legal semiotics” and “semiotics of architecture”. There have been adjectives
further delineating aspects of the semiotic approach, such as “experimental semi-
otics”, “empirical semiotics” (Shank 1984, Deely and Lenhart 1981: 317–343), and
experiential semiotics’ (discussed in Ransdell 1979, 1982).
Finally there are several sets of preﬁxes and compounds suggesting dis-
tinct genera of sign phenomena as the focus of inquiry, and here one recalls
“endosemiotics”, “exosemiotics”, “anthroposemiotics”, “zoosemiotics”, and “phy-
tosemiotics”. Humans, the students of semiotic science, may perforce cast the
enterprise anthropocentrically. Inexcusable, however is the glottocentric, or any
unqualiﬁed logocentric, bias.

12
A Semiotic Perspective on the Sciences
383
Until the recent decade, it was biologically acceptable to refer to two king-
doms of living things and to underline the unique properties of humans within the
socalled animal kingdom. In this spirit, Sebeok in 1963 and later (1965: 1006, 1979:
3560, Sebeok et al. 1972: 61) contributed “zoosemiotics”, distinguished “anthro-
posemiotics”, and anticipated “phytosemiotics”. The last subject has been explicitly
broached by Krampen (1981), and defended as a domain of study by Deely (1982b).
Although zoosemiotics and anthroposemiotics suggest some discontinuity between
ethologically-grounded communication and species-speciﬁc genres of humans, this
oversimpliﬁes the more interesting realities, as has often been noted (Sebeok 1965,
1975a, 1977a, Umiker-Sebeok and Sebeok 1980, Deely 1978b, 1980).
As will be discussed, plants communicate complex messages, including tree-
to-tree pheromonal warnings about caterpillar predators (reported by Orians and
Rhoades 1983, Baldwin and Schultz 1983), and cell-to-cell memory within cotton
seedlings providing increased resistance to mite predation (Karban and Carey 1984).
This is but to indicate that study and documentation of plant-plant and plant-animal-
plant communication has grown vastly over the past decade (Montalverne 1984).
At still other levels, it is now recognized within biology that, rather than two,
there are at least three (Woese 1981), if not ﬁve (Whittaker 1969, Margulis 1970,
1981), kingdoms of living things. Beyond the conﬁnes of traditional biology, more-
over, our planet, Gaia, has evolved as a system profoundly shaped in many stages
by its living constitutents (Lovelock 1972, 1979, Bargatzky 1978).
In this position paper, we reinspect some prevailing continuities and disconti-
nuities in semiotic phenomena and within the leagues of thinkers coming to grips
with these. Whether old labels beﬁt new concepts, or new labels old concepts, is
only part of our problem. There exists no convenient catastrophe between emerged
and emerging. Consequently we emphasize the evolution both of the universe and
of our knowledge systems in a semiotic perspective. We suggest that the insulation
between the conceptual sciences and the natural sciences is as counterproductive as
that within the various branches of the humanities, social sciences, and natural sci-
ences. Moreover, these diverse ﬁelds can be broached and integrated with semiotics
and other systems sciences. The paramount and, we posit, essential contribution
of semiotics to this emerging synthesis lies in Peircean semiotic (Ransdell 1977,
1985a, b, Krampen 1979) and its acknowledgement of the panoply of sign rela-
tions and the participation of the interpretant – a doctrine rather than a science of
signifying.
The Concept of “Umwelt”
Semiotics will always be discovering and rediscovering thoughtful wrestlers of the
sign. A valuable review of some of these semiotic thinkers, along with other issues,
including ecumenicalism, already exists in Sebeok’s seminal sketches of Jakob von
Uexküll (Sebeok 1979: 187–207) and Karl Bühler (Sebeok 1981: 91–108), which
gave rise to similar sketches of Francis Lieber (Kevelson 1981), R. G. Collingwood

384
Myrdene Anderson (1934– ) et al.
(Russell 1981), John Poinsot (Deely 1982c), and eventually to the ongoing series
of Special Sessions in “Neglected Figures in the History of Semiotic Inquiry” at
the Annual Meetings of the Semiotic Society of America. Here we draw particu-
lar attention to recent translations of two works. The earlier of these works was
unknown to Peirce, and the later one was written without reference to Peirce. Yet
there is striking anticipation of Peirce’s semiotic in the earlier work and a resonance
of it in the later one.
The ﬁrst is the Tractatus de signis: The Semiotic of John Poinsot (1632), pre-
sented in integral bilingual format (forthcoming 1985). This work adumbrated in a
foundational way the contemporary Peircean enterprise of assimilating the study of
natural and cultural phenomena alike to the perspective of semiotic (Winance 1983).
Developed entirely around the idea of relative being and tracing that idea across the
ages to its origins in ancient Greek philosophy, this work effectively demonstrates
at once the unifying power of semiotic vis-à-vis the fractured intellectual traditions
of mode
philosophy and the foundational thrust of the doctrine of signs toward
an establishment for the ﬁrst time of an experimental anthropology equally able
to account for what is and what is not present in human experience in physically
isolable ways.
The other is Jakob von Uexküll’s Bedeutungslehre (1940), edited by Thure von
Uexküll as “Jakob von Uexküll’s ‘Theory of Meaning’” and presented as a special
issue of Semiotica 42.1 (1982). Jakob von Uexküll was signiﬁcant in the founding
of behavioral physiology, or ethology, though he seems to have been unacquainted
with either Saussure or Peirce, and never heard of Poinsot, but, like his younger
acquaintance Cassirer, did draw on Kant.
Von Uexküll’s understanding of the sign in biological systems allocated quite
different roles to animal and to plant “behavior”. While this continues to be a con-
ventional division of labor, with ethologists restraining themselves to the study
of macroscopic animal behavior and plant physiologists concentrating on micro-
scopic plant behavior, Jakob von Uexküll’s particular rationale for this dichotomy
was unique. He suggested that animals, being mobile, possess receptor and effector
organs integrated by a nervous system. With these, the animal is able to model its
Umwelt, or signiﬁcant surroundings. Plants, according to Jakob von Uexküll, lack
these organs and consequently have no Umwelt, no cognitive map, a view conso-
nant with biological assumptions held up to the current decade. He visualized plants
as being passively immersed in a habitat, which directly communicates with the
plant by “meaningful” stimuli. These ideas are discussed, of course, by Jakob von
Uexküll (1940, 1957), and by Thure von Uexküll (1982a, b), Earl W. Count (1973:
4–8, 221–223), Donald R. Grifﬁn (1981), Martin Krampen (1981: 187–209), John
Deely (1981, 1982a: 93–106) and Thomas A. Sebeok (1979: 187–207).
Exposure to these ideas enriches us, provided only that we appreciate them in the
context of their own times as well as in relation to our own both of which in turn
are colored by the past in different and seldom unimportant, if elusive, ways. It is
the concept of Umwelt which intrigues us most with respect to Jakob von Uexküll.
The species-speciﬁc Umwelt complements an individual but necessarily species-
constrained Innenwelt. These correlatives mediate all constellations of sign trafﬁc
having relevance to the animal.
rn

12
A Semiotic Perspective on the Sciences
385
The Umwelt is then the crucible of the animal’s informational relationships, per-
force the “meaningful” ones, with the environment. In fact, for the animal, the
environment consists of these sign relationships, with conspeciﬁcs, with predators
and prey, with shelter, weather and terrain, and with odors, sounds and silence. In
many respects, this anticipates and complements the notion of the niche as high-
dimensional hyperspace (Elton 1927, Hutchinson 1957). G. Evelyn Hutchinson’s
An Introduction to Population Ecology (1978) includes a generous chapter on the
history of the concept of niche, which developed from a rudimentary and ancillary
notion in 1857 (Hansmann 1857) to a sophisticated concept with Grinnell in 1924
(Hutchinson 1978: 152–212, 1979: 243–247).
Unfortunately, many contemporary researchers assess niche only through mea-
sures of energy relations, and, hence, reduce a whole and dynamic system to
a skimpily-looped teleology, albeit one elegantly-clad quantitatively. Efforts to
address this reductionism are sprinkled throughout the literature (e.g., Allen and
Starr 1982, Patten and Auble 1980, Pimm 1982, Smith and Morowitz 1982, and
both special issues of Synthese 43.1 and 43.2), but have had little effect on techni-
cians exercising methodologies, that is, on persons working in the ﬁeld who are not
scholar-scientists.
That sedentary plants have a diffuse and poorly-understood internal communi-
cation system rather than a centralized nervous system may not disqualify them
from possessing an Umwelt any more than it excludes them from existing in a rela-
tional web called “niche”. Niche is the scientist’s best approximation of an inferred
Umwelt; as such, it may be operationalized to incorporate relatively few of the
countless and themselves interacting orbits of sign relations. Simulations in such
working models serve a purpose if they humble us as to the actual complexity of
organism in its surroundings, or of species in niche, but delude those who are satis-
ﬁed by empirical constructs. The use of the less familiar Umwelt as a semiotic term
is partly to remind us that the web of sign relations is at all times informational and
energetic, spatial and temporal, objective and subjective.
Here we confront the former, linear paradigm head-on, because none of these
pairs is a dichotomy. Each is a unitary relationship, with aspects implicating other
aspects. The Cartesian analytic and reductionistic “either-or” must succumb to a
synthetic, holistic, and provoking “both-and”. Much of the confusion surrounding
studies of miscalled “animal language” can be traced directly to this theoretical
point (Deely 1975, 1978b, 1982a, Sebeok 1977a, Sebeok and Umiker-Sebeok 1980,
Sebeok and Rosenthal 1981; and so on).
Challenges for Semiotics
Imputed discontinuities in knowledge systems have led too often to unnecessary and
deleterious divisions of labor. Of particular consequence is the cleavage between
ethology and ecology and between scholar and scientist. A semiotic perspective
bridges these enterprises, particularly when semiotics can encompass the study of
dynamical systems as a whole.

386
Myrdene Anderson (1934– ) et al.
Focus in the Division of Labor
It is clear that Jakob von Uexküll’s Umwelt, a qualitative and meaningful model
of a species’ signiﬁcant surround, and his Innenwelt, the individual’s actualized ver-
sion of that surround orchestrated by its nervous system, both integrate consummate
environments, exterior and interior. This is one more dichotomy which is collaps-
ing in the emerging paradigm. Practitioners utilizing the niche concept increasingly
acknowledge the complexity inherent in a species’ Umwelt. In so doing, they may
not always have beneﬁt of von Uexküll’s label (e.g., Patten and Auble 1980), but
accomplish this by default when confronted with anomalies such as the ubiquity of
“maladaptive” or “dysfunctional” behavior which refuses to reduce to “adaptive” or
“functional” rationales.
More fundamentally it is clear that ethology and ecology have wandered along
unnecessarily divergent paths. This division of labor, like those between the study of
“animals” and “plants” (fortunately still united in ecology), of the macroscopic and
the microscopic, and of “individual” and “system”, is a costly one. Recent attempts
to reintegrate the “three E”s’ of ethology, ecology, and evolution (e.g., in Stonehouse
and Perrins 1977, Krebs and Davies 1978, 1984), while exciting, show no inclination
to transcend the old paradigm. Table 12.1 illustrates some of the tensions and gaps
in our knowledge exacerbated by prevailing patterns of specialization in academia,
which reﬂect in turn dualistic tendencies in our world view. Of course, dichotomies
may come naturally to organisms which happen to be bilaterally symmetric, but
any cross-cultural inspection of cosmologies will demonstrate that this biological
Table 12.1 Fractures in knowledge arising from the division of scientiﬁc labor
Imputed discontinuities
Some disciplines affected
Living – nonliving
Natural sciences – physical sciences
Animal – plant
Zoology – botany
Human – alloanimal
Social sciences – natural sciences
Verbal – nonverbal
Linguistics – ethology
Disregarded continuities
Some disciplines affected
Space – time
Ecology – evolution
Matter/energy – information
Ecology – ethology
Social sciences – humanities
Economics – psychology
Macroscopic – quantum
Ethology – biochemistry/astronomy
Regularly-negotiated boundaries
Some disciplines affected
Inside – outside
all
Self – other
Digital – analogue
Episodic level/storage – continuous ﬂow
Quantiﬁcation – qualiﬁcation
Analysis – synthesis
Abduction – deduction – induction
all

12
A Semiotic Perspective on the Sciences
387
arrangement hardly determines a dualistic species-mindset for us, any more than our
experience with time predicts a linear, causal universe shared by all Homo sapiens
(see Lee 1959, Snyder 1978, Curtis 1978, Hall 1984).
The macrosemiotic and the quantumsemiotic (the megasemiotic and the
microsemiotic) present twin challenges to the human investigator: ﬁrst, how to
understand phenomena of such grain and at such exotic levels in terms of semiosis
respecting that system; and second, how best to communicate this understanding to
others. These parallel the problems inherent in human-scale phenomena which must
be translated between cultural codes in space-time or between species. A number
of scholars (including Bateson 1972, Curtis 1978, Dawkins 1976, Delbrück 1978,
Florkin 1974, Haraway 1976, Jones 1982, Laudan 1981, Merchant 1980, Wechsler
1978) emphasize the role of metaphor/metonymy in the processes of elucidation and
explication.
In all cases the need is to avoid specious and redundant divisions of academic
labor grounded in methodology without further explicit theoretical rationale. Those
aspects of scientiﬁc endeavor which appear overdetermined are likely to be those
which will prove maladaptive in the longer term (see Dobert 1981: 116–119,
Ransdell 1979: 286–288).
Fuzz in the Unity of Science
All attractive paradigms, such as evolution, ecology, and Gaia, which will be dis-
cussed below, deal with relationships of complex phenomena which in themselves
are laden with complexity. Systems thinking, whether self – consciously scientiﬁc or
folk wisdom, is responsible for any number of general-purpose aphorisms, such as:
“All things change so that all things can remain the same”; “The present contains the
past”; “A whole is greater than the sum of its parts”; “Life is change”; “The whole
is simpler than its parts”; and the like.
Semiotics concerns itself with systems as well – systems of signs, of communi-
cation, of clues, and of meaning. Thus far, however, semiotics has seldom dealt with
dynamical systems as a whole: those nonlinear, irreversible realities where energy
explicitly fuses with information, such as experience, ontogeny, and phylogeny.
Because of the specialization of semiotics in systems seemingly unconstrained by
energy relations, the shape of change, whether directional or nondirectional, has
too often been neglected. Thompson, in introducing catastrophe theory in his book,
Rubbish Theory, protested that “semiology cannot distinguish change from noise”
(1979: 61). This need not be the case, and Thompson’s choice of terms here already
signals a great deal to the sophisticated readership (Sebeok 1971: 53). Hence one
reason for the present paper.
Catastrophe theoretical concepts have been introduced into mainstream semi-
otics by Sebeok (1976, 1977a, b, 1979) and by Thom himself, in print (1968,
1970, 1973, 1974, 1975a, b, 1978, 1980), and in person at the 1979 interna-
tional meetings in Vienna and at ISISSS “80” in Toronto. In brief, catastrophe
theory models topologically discontinuous phenomena, those having boundaries in

388
Myrdene Anderson (1934– ) et al.
space-time, including those which change with time. However, “time” in these mod-
els is usually two-point physical time or products of the same, and the number
of independent parameters is likewise pragmatically limited to four. A semiotic
perspective can potentially deal with space-time sensitive to the grid and rhythm
of the phenomenon-observer relationship and in the degree of resolution desired.
Behavior of matter/energy-information in space-time may be both described and
explained, either quantitatively or qualitatively, but should not be reduced to any
of these parameters. Table 12.2 lists the provocative elements of systems and some
of their dynamical properties. In sampling scholarly work across the centuries, we
discover that most of the acknowledged minds, and many others, resonated to these
basic properties of systems. This in itself is properly exciting, but need evidence no
more than a human propensity for integrating complexity.
There is currently a pervasive distrust of comprehensive paradigms. Much work
passing as science meanwhile amounts to mere data accumulation, with or without
some perfunctory and transiently stylish methodology. Whenever the ties bind-
ing methodology, theory, and epistemology are severed, the exercise of the ﬁrst
becomes, at best, highly ritualized play, and, at worst, imitation of the antecedent,
grounded science or scientist. For our purposes here, we reject the two-cultures
view of scientist and scholar (Snow 1959, 1964). Only when “scientist” is con-
strained to be “inductive”, “empirical”, or “experimental” (see Ransdell 1982), can
this antinomy even be imagined. The basic relationships in the necessary triadic
abduction/deduction/induction preclude the pedestaling of anyone process.
Table 12.2 Generic systems elements and processes
Systems elements:
Space-time, disjoint given cognition
Matter/energy conﬂated to energy
Information implicated by energy
Process variables:
Continuous ﬂow
Episodic level/storage
Trends in the maturation of systems:
Complexiﬁcation:
Intensiﬁcation of ﬂow of information and energy
Intensiﬁcation of storage of information and energy
Compartmentalization and miniaturization:
Vertical stratiﬁcation – hierarchies
Horizontal differentiation – specialization
Negentropy, self-organization, and directionality:
Integration and extensive feedback circuitry
Interchangeable units and equiﬁnality
Irreversibility
Dissipative structures

12
A Semiotic Perspective on the Sciences
389
Rather more insightful than any tension between scientist and scholar are the
overlapping modalities of art, craft, and science. The semiotician functions as an
artist during that portion of the enterprise which is largely means-oriented expres-
sion and shaped by enabling constraints, as a craftsperson while instrumentally
ends-oriented and shaped by limiting constraints, and as a scientist when addi-
tional rules are superimposed to instruct the synthesis and discard of information
and to evaluate “signiﬁcance”. This systems substructure of art, craft, and science
is sensitive to cultural and individual styles, neither precluding other modalities
nor imposing an unequivocal trichotomy (see Spencer-Brown 1972, Stokes 1973).
“Science” appears to be the more dynamic and emergent dialectic of all constraints,
temporal and spatial, informational and energetic, and may be more apt to transcend
culture, although it rarely if ever does; Outside semiotics, as well, scholarship and
science are necessarily, even inevitably, fused in matured minds. “Maturation” as
a systems concept relates to such features as degree of integration, rather than to
temporal ones (see Table 12.2).
Evolution and Biogenesis
The concept of evolution taken generically designates the processes of continu-
ity and change in any dynamical system, including but not limited to biological
systems. Reappraisal of this concept incorporates such elements as coevolution,
symbiosis, and biogenesis, and transcends the linear traditions with their post-
Renaissance emphasis on efﬁcient cause-effect and “progress”.
On the Evolution of the Concept of Evolution
In the beginning was the word – at least one for each language-culture group – which
dealt with the origins of the cosmos and which imputed relations between the signif-
icant characters of the drama. Each people has thus acknowledged its involvement
in the systems of evolution and ecology in its spatiotemporal surround. The sci-
ence of predominantly temporal relations of living things reached another plateau
of maturity with Darwin’s theory of evolution. The science of predominantly spatial
relations of living things in their environment was similarly stimulated, on the one
hand, focusing on energy relations, by Haeckel’s concept of ecology and Elton’s
notion of niche, and, on the other hand, focusing on information relations, by Saint-
Hilaire’s concept of ethology with von Uexküll’s formulation of Umwelt. These
individuals’ names serve as both touchstones and watersheds in biology, much as
the name of Peirce serves within semiotics proper. Within the panoply of biological
sciences up to this point, semiotics has had the most extensive overlap with ethology,
which has even been called “natural semiotics” by Sebeok (1977a).
Originally, of course, evolutionary science developed out of the postRenaissance
Western linear traditions, with their emphasis on time, “efﬁcient” or “productive”

390
Myrdene Anderson (1934– ) et al.
causality and its effects (“progress” and “perfection”), all rooted in assumptions
of the “great chain of being” chronicled by Lovejoy (1936). To this day one
reads of “higher” and “lower” organisms, of “complex” and “simple” languages,
of “advanced” and “primitive” societies, with the latter perhaps “preliterate” or
“underdeveloped”. Ludel’s critique (1982) of studies on interspecies communication
makes this point very well. Given coevolution (discussed in the following section),
there has always been interspecies communication; the laboratory variety is artiﬁce.
We are inevitably steeped in anthropocentrism and ethnocentrism. Neither species,
group, nor individual can truly transcend its phylogeny, history, and ontogeny. This
is how “the present contains the past”. But the present is not determined by the past.
While anthropocentrism and ethnocentrism cannot be, strictly speaking, controlled,
they can be controlled for, in part, through our very awareness of them.
In the narrow sense, evolution designates the process and the study of continu-
ity and change in living systems organized in holons of species. Species are unique
semiotic systems in that they are for the most part reproductively closed, but open
within the framework of Umwelt to information and energy relations of far greater
magnitude and complexity than can be explained by reference to narrow notions
of differential reproduction, ﬁtness, adaptation, or competitive exclusion (Conrad
1972, Crook 1970, Peters 1983, Johnston 1976, Waal and Van Hooff 1981). Hence,
they can best be understood with reference to teleonomy and open systems rather
than by the teleology of ﬁnal cause (Pittendrigh 1958, Mayr 1974, brief discussion
in Deely 1966: 91–92 n. 96). Whether evolutionary change is gradual or through
pulses of semiosis and equilibria (Gould 1977), or both, patterns in the persistence,
diversiﬁcation and extinction of forms exhibit the trends characterizing matura-
tion in systems generally (see Table 12.2). These trends of intensiﬁcation in the
circulation and storage of information and energy, tendencies to stratiﬁcation and
specialization, and consolidation of functional guilds and dissipative structures will
be discussed as semiotic phenomena in the sections to follow.
Meanwhile, of habit and necessity, we use the terms “evolution”, “ecology”, and
“ethology” in many less technical contexts, in both more focused and more general
ones. For example, systems of ideas, such as those of semiotics or of evolution itself,
evolve and have ecologies transacting appreciable resources, speciﬁcally, energy-
information.
The overwhelming pattern in the development of such conceptual systems is their
increasing encompassment of knowledge (Haken 1977, Marney and Schmidt 1976,
Sahal 1982, Scharfe 1982, Simon 1969, Thom 1974), or holism (see Smuts 1926 for
an early use of this term), at the same time as they generate and systematize more
and more particularistic data. We witness, at every scale, “human” and quantum,
similar behavior in dynamical systems, whether we limit our purview to material
systems (focusing on energy relations – e.g., Gerard 1957, 1960, Miller 1978, Miller
and Miller 1982), or to nonmaterial systems (focusing on information relations –
e.g., Ackoff and Emery 1972, Bateson 1972, 1979, Thom 1975a, Tomkins 1975),
or to both concrete and abstract (presumably whole) systems (e.g., Adams 1975,
1981, Bertalanffy 1973, 1981, Boulding 1978, 1981, Buckley 1968, Hirsch 1984,
Jantsch 1980, 1981, Koestler 1967, 1978, Laszlo 1972, 1983, Maruyama 1963,

12
A Semiotic Perspective on the Sciences
391
Table 12.3 Levels of evolutionary transformation
Factors in
biological
transformation
Fundamental unit
affected
Elemental medium
of message
Nature of message
Teleonomic
epigenesis
Taxon (at any
level of
inclusion) and
organism
All media, with
push of ENERGY-
INFORMATION
Trajectory of actualized
enabling and limiting in
phylogeny and ontogeny
Natural
selection
Organism (as
situated in all
encompassing
and
overlapping
systems)
All media, with pull
of ENERGY-
INFORMATION
Drag of differential
replication of certain
alleles at expense of others,
as consequence of
“differential reproduction”
evidencing “ﬁtness” in an
encompassing system and
resulting in “adaptation”,
or precipitating from
scholastic factors extrinsic
to system
Mutation
DNA,
chromosome
INFORMATION
Change of information
(substitution, loss, or
addition, at level of “gene”
allele or nucleotide)
generating variation of both
genotype and phenotype
Recombination
Sex cell
INFORMATION
Unique recombinations of
information contributing to
variation of both genotype
and phenotype
Gene ﬂow
Population
SPACE-TIME
Information transfer
(between populations
linked to mobility of
individual allele-carriers)
Gene drift
Population
SPACE-TIME
Information skewing (within
a population isolate of
individual allele-carriers
1976, Wilden 1972, Zeleny 1980). Table 12.3 further maps out these basic systems
domains and their associated processes.
Abstract-concrete and conceptual-material are commonly treated as synonymous
pairs, which clouds their utility as semiotic parameters in any systems analysis. Not
every systems approach through the ages has been consciously holistic or semiotic,
let alone has each made explicit the dialectic of information, energy, and dissipative
structures (Prigogine and Stengers 1979, 1984). Nor has each acknowledged the
dynamic and open properties of the object/subject of study and of the very semiosis
of study. It follows that, for reasons of period or preference, there have been various
ways to engage systems. One enduring approach is through semiotic events, even

392
Myrdene Anderson (1934– ) et al.
though this has thus far been unduly focused upon information relations. The over-
emphasis on the study of energetics, and the reduction of phenomena to quantitative
measures in terms of energy, as in the vulgar forms of ecology and cultural ecology,
while dominant in the literature, show signs of an exiting paradigm. We believe
the emerging paradigm respects the dynamic relation of energy-information and
nonequilibrium trajectories, as can be seen in our ﬁnal section.
It has often been noted that evolution in physical systems is associated with
entropy – the decrease of order with movement toward equilibrium; this is in accor-
dance with the second law of thermodynamics. Yet, in living systems, evolution is
associated with an increase in order; this complementary process has been called
the second law of systems (Makridakis 1977), and is often referred to as negentropy
(Allen 1981). At the same time, nonequilibrium dynamics have become understood
in physical systems largely through the contributions of Prigogine (1962, 1980) and
coworkers, who also recognize ubiquity of nonequilibrium in living and cultural
systems (Prigogine and Stengers 1979, 1984).
Because of its recent evolutionary spurt – from cybernetics to dissipative struc-
tures – there is no monolithic “systems theory”. This makes for an eclectic approach.
It is less savory as a technique, for some persons equate knowledge with control
(e.g., Batty and Hutchinson 1983, Laszlo 1983, Pattee et al. 1966), not realizing that,
where semiotic components playa major role, the more we understand the complex-
ities of a system, the less we should be conﬁdent of our power to manage it. (Cf.
Berlinski 1976).
On Coevolution
Given this dynamic in the evolution of all systems – energetic, informational, and
whole – we follow without surprise the substance of reﬁnements in the theory
of evolution itself. First, still dealing with the living world, came the aware-
ness of coevolutionary processes which network biota in webs of relationships
(Bateson 1972, 1979, Ehrlich and Raven 1964, Holling 1976, Hutchinson 1957,
1978, Margalef 1968, Odum 1969, 1981, Smith 1975, Varela et al. 1974). Applying
to this insight the speciﬁc realization of the role of signs as mediating the whole
of experience and providing its structure, this situation has aptly been character-
ized the semiotic web (Deely 1978a, 1982a, applying the metaphor from the title
of Sebeok 1975b). Survival is signiﬁcant therefore not primarily at the individual
nor even at the species level, but at that of a larger community circulating energy-
information. That expanding open system is not amenable to deﬁnitive study under
the microscope or beyond telescopic glass. It can be modeled, however, and this
artifact compared with other orders of reality.
The entire biotic world must consist of coevolutionary products, yet their rela-
tionships are so complex that biologists seldom chart more than a pair of species at a
time, to show their interdependence, their complementarity, and/or their synchrony

12
A Semiotic Perspective on the Sciences
393
(Futuyma and Slatkin 1983, Nitecki 1983, Thompson 1982). What Teilhard de
Chardin (1959) called the “biosphere” would, following the Gaia hypothesis,
include the lithosphere, hydrosphere and atmosphere as well. Coevolutionary mod-
els stress the importance of cooperative forces over competitive ones, but must also
account for speciation of biological forms within some scale of ecosystem, as well
as transformations at the level of the latter.
Somewhat at odds with these assumptions of coevolution, Dawkins (1976, 1982)
argues for the gene as the competitive unit participating in natural selection – hence
the “selﬁsh gene”. Klopf (1982) has carried this metaphor to another level in his
“hedonistic neuron”. Our knowledge of the behavior of systems suggests that per-
severance is apt to be a feature of the more inclusive holon, even at the expense of
or in spite of certain of the included ones. A corollary of this observation is the fact
that subsystems need not “serve” overarching systems, and may even be organized
in tight guilds of interaction which bear only slightly on other aspects of the system.
This reasoning leads one to agree with Dawkins’ particular conclusion that genes
need not be “adaptive”, without it at all compelling agreement with the overall tenor
and theses of his arguments.
In an essay critical of but inspired by Dawkins, Hull (1981: 33) points out
that one must not conﬂate the two-step evolutionary processes of replication and
interaction. Replication concerns coded information: interaction (with numerous
internal and external environments) concerns the transaction of meaningful energy-
information. The latter process entails interactions, with conspeciﬁcs and with
others, which appear to be more complex than cooperation (including others in
energy-information) or competitive (excluding others from energy-information),
and which must be reassessed at each order of semiosis (see Count 1973: 4–8, Gatlin
1972, Swanson 1983).
We may note here in passing that sociobiology (Wilson 1975, 1978), predicated
on a competitive model of behavior, appears to be a direct descendant of Darwin’s
linear evolution, and in some “ways the converse of coevolution”. It is certainly
conceived in a presemiotic perspective, and its extensions seeking to explain the evo-
lution of culture (Lumsden and Wilson 1981, 1982) suffer, as Huntingford (1982)
and others (cf. commentaries following Lumsden and Wilson 1982) well show,
from emphasis on competition within a framework of energetic payoffs, and from
inattention to interesting complexities. In these discussions which often fail to inte-
grate competition and cooperation, energy and information, and still other dynamics
within or beyond the nucleotide or species, we recognize tinges of “survival of the
ﬁttest” notions of “selection-in”. A semiotically-informed view of natural selec-
tion’s role in evolutionary processes would ﬁrst prefer the paraphrase “survival of
the not unﬁt” to approximate the “selection-out” actually occurring, where those
elements, individuals, or populations left out of the game (cf. Slobodkin 1968) may
simply be victims of stochastic events. Second, natural selection itself is but one
of a number of semiotic processes involved in biological transformation; these pro-
cesses will come up for further discussion later in this paper, and in Tables 12.3
and 12.4.

394
Myrdene Anderson (1934– ) et al.
Table 12.4 Extended parameters in grid of natural selection
Systems
element
Pattern of operationa
Mode of manipulation
SPACE
Through extension
In occupying space
(studied in ecology with emphasis on energy)
TIME
Through extension
In accessing past
In monitoring present
In projecting future
(studied in ethology and linguistics with emphasis on information)
In replicating into
future
(studied in ecology with measures of “differential reproduction” or “ﬁtness”)
INFORMATION
Through circulation
By creating
information
(studied in evolutionary biology and the social sciences, periodically biased
synchronically or diachronically)
ENERGY
Through circulation
By harnessing
By using
By “wasting” energy
(studied in ecology and economics, variously biased by species, ecosystem,
and geography)
a Traditional division of scientiﬁc labor indicated in parentheses
On the Metacoevolution of Gaia
Even more recently, and long anticipated, follows a proposition of metacoevolu-
tion. We refer to the Gaia hypothesis, advanced ﬁrst by Lovelock (1972), and since
elaborated by himself and others (Lovelock and Margulis 1974a, b, Watson et al.
1978, Lovelock 1979, 1983, Margulis 1981). A quite parallel speculation has also
been advanced in Germany by Bargatzky (1978), but we shall limit our discus-
sion to the more fully documented Lovelock version of the hypothesis. At last,
we are presented with evidence that Gaia – planet earth and its atmosphere – has
coevolved with its living constituents. Living things have not unilaterally adapted
to conditions of the planet. Rather, the relationship has been reciprocal, with liv-
ing forms contributing to the very qualities of the nonliving environment which
make Gaia habitable – particularly atmospheric qualities, but also those of its litho-
sphere, oceans and seas. Gaia is a subsystem in a larger cosmos, but a subsystem
having tighter relations of matter/energy-information within its guild of networks
than to the balance of the universe. Moreover, with equally enormous consequences
for semiotics, Whittaker (1969) and Margulis (1970, 1971, 1981, Margulis and
Schwartz 1982) have advanced evidence for ﬁve, not two, kingdoms of biota, and
have implicated amutational symbiosis as a criterial force in evolution, as will be
taken up in the next section.

12
A Semiotic Perspective on the Sciences
395
According to Lovelock and coworkers, the earth’s unlikely, unstable, and dise-
quilibrious atmosphere advertises the presence of control systems into which more
conventionally living systems feed. Without its living components, Gaia’s carbon
dioxide concentrations in the soil and in the atmosphere would each adjust to
new levels, water vapor distribution would be altered, temperatures would increase
by some 20 ◦C, and cycling in solids, as weathering, for example, would be
profoundly affected. All these factors would reﬂect the decreased throughput of
energy-information which is the forte of living systems (Lovelock 1983).
Microevolution: Endosymbiosis in Cell Evolution
While one cannot go so far as to equate the sense in which the genetic code
and human language are each “languages” (Shanon 1978), the genetic code has
been acknowledged as a digital language of life forms, with mutations or per-
mutations of nucleotides along the DNA or RNA strands being the equivalent of
changes of meaning when revisions in replication have consequences (Conrad 1972,
Eigen et al. 1981, Hartman 1975, 1982, Tomkins 1975). This code can also incor-
porate promiscuous DNA (e.g., Lewin 1984), nomadic genes (e.g., Ferris et al.
1983), freeloading viruses (e.g., Bremermann 1983), and subviral viroids and pri-
ons (Diener 1983), which then replicate as an integral part of the host genome.
Particularly in plants, repetitive sequences of DNA contribute to variability with
Lamarckian-like consequences (e.g., Marx 1984).
Natural selection operates at this level, and on any number of levels over and
above the genetic. According to Lovelock and Margulis (1974b), natural selection
is also operative on the level of the inclusive holon of Gaia. Margulis, alone (1970,
1971, 1981) and with others (Whittaker and Margulis 1978, Margulis and Schwartz
1982), has also pursued the possibility of amutational evolution, and the contem-
porary hypothesis of ﬁve kingdoms is strongly associated with her name, although
it should be noted that her work builds upon the pioneering thought of Whittaker
(1969). As she points out (Margulis 1981: 15–36), there has been an undercur-
rent of suspicion about the dual-kingdom classiﬁcation for over a century, but other
solutions to the problem have not anticipated Margulis’ comprehensive rationale
for the ﬁve kingdoms. (Still other modifying schemes have been proposed, notably
that of Woese (1981), which envisions rather three main kingdoms of phylogenetic
descent, archaebacteria, true bacteria, and eukaryotes, this ﬁnal kingdom inclusive
of slime molds, protozoa, fungi, animals, and plants, all having mitochondria deriv-
ing from photosynthetic bacteria introduced into some remote common ancestral
linkage.)
Margulis’ formulation, popular in part because of the several textbooks she has
contributed (Margulis 1970, 1981, Margulis and Schwartz 1982), also involves king-
doms which have not diverged in an orderly manner involving only descent through
replication, showing rather evidence of ancestral encapsulation of elements from
one kingdom by an emergent one in a process involving cell endosymbiosis. The

396
Myrdene Anderson (1934– ) et al.
ﬁve kingdoms so developing are the monera (bacteria), protoctista (microbes and
descendents, mostly water-dwellers, such as seaweed), fungi, plants, and animals.
According to the earlier two-kingdom thesis, transformations occurred in descent
due to such factors as mutation, gene ﬂow, genetic drift, and natural selection. These
factors have been difﬁcult to map, let alone measure. Table 12.3 shows a systems
translation of these still important evolutionary mechanisms, together with that of
epigenesis. This last notion, in fact quite ancient in biology (Nogar 1963: 292–294),
has been underappreciated in the recent past for ideological reasons (speciﬁcally,
anti-“vitalist” phobias), but it continues to be an indispensable notion, as has been
shown both scientiﬁcally (Waddington 1960) and philosophically (Deely 1969, see
also Nogar 1973: 374 n.l), so it is hardly surprising to ﬁnd revisionist evolutionists
working to reintegrate this factor (e.g., Gould 1977).
Margulis in particular (Margulis 1970, Whittaker and Margulis 1978) has demon-
strated that specialized organelles such as chloroplasts, cilia, and mitochondria in
eukaryote plants and animals (those having cells with nuclei), are encapsulated,
endosymbiotic prokaryotes (simpler organisms traceable back to the monera). This
contrasts with the long held assumption that organelles were the result of internal
differentiation arising mainly through mutation and selection. The process as demar-
cated by Margulis is called the endosymbiotic theory of cell evolution (Margulis
1981: 1–14). Speciﬁcally, monera forms are implicated directly in certain organelles
found in plants and in protoctista, while the latter have contributed organelle mate-
rial to all three of the plant, animal, and fungal kingdoms. This indicates that even
phylogenetic lines are open systems in a web of actual and possible semiosis, with
the incorporated organelles negotiating a niche in descendent cells and these cells
in encompassing organelles.
Biogenesis on Gaia
Even though we have not paused to distinguish “life” from “nonlife”, the former, it
would appear, possesses some facility for replication and for adeptly processing free
energy-information as so-called “throughput” (see Gerard 1960: 263, for an early
use of this concept under the spelling “thruput”). Energy-information circulated
as an end, within or without the hoi on, can be called throughput. This compul-
sive consumption is favored by modeling systems in organisms, modeling systems
such as memory or language, which render space-time a manipulatable element in
an Umwelt. In throughput, a system intensiﬁes its momentum and directionality,
and may thereby increase its relative autonomy as well, becoming less affected by
coordinate and superordinate holons. “Introspective” holons, or guilds, character-
istically circulate energy-information within their bounds, much of it self-serving
throughput.
As we have seen, ecosystems composed of living and non-living elements,
at whatever holon of inclusion, behave in a manner analogous to organisms

12
A Semiotic Perspective on the Sciences
397
themselves. The Gaia system, composed of active and inert elements, behaves sim-
ilarly. Perhaps any system interacting with a living one takes on the properties of
“life”, and/or becomes as well a mirror for projections of living observers.
There continue to be speculations as to origins: origins of the universe, of
the earth, of the genetic code, of life on earth and possibly elsewhere, even –
despite strictures in the Constitution of the oldest society for the study of language
(Statuts de la Société de Linguistique de Paris, “deuxième article”, adopted in 1866:
comment in Deely 1982a: 108–109) of speciﬁcally human language. The cosmo-
logical components of such speculation have helm fanned especially by advances
in the quantum sciences, focusing on the ultra-micro and ultra-mega in space-time.
Nascent journals such as Origins of Life and BioSystems devote most of their space
to the conundrum of beginnings as well as of becomings. Beyond anthropocentric
notions of space and time which are relevant to us in our scale of participa-
tion in the universe, “beginning” necessarily has other meanings (see Davies
1981).
The received wisdom about the origin of life revolves around some “primordial
soup”. These biogenesis models concentrate on the inorganic-organic boundary –
that is to say, on chemical constituents, a body of theorizing summarized by
Dickerson (1978: 70–73).
Another approach to biogenesis, ﬁrst broached in 1966 by Cairns-Smith and sub-
sequently developed (Cairns-Smith 1966, 1982, Cairns-Smith and Walker 1974),
sets the stage with minerals rather than chemicals. Minerals have more explicit
structure to start with, from crystals to ﬁbers, and habits of growth, of becoming.
They have “insides” and “outsides”, and consequently boundaries to actualize and
sustain through “negotiation”.
In the Cairns-Smith scenario, minerals such as colloidal clays resulting from
the weathering of common rocks, evolved systems not only of growth but of self-
replication, shaped in the familiar crucible of natural selection. It was in the dynamic
of natural selection that carbon took over from, say, the silicon in these clays, to pro-
duce the carbon-based systems we now dub “living”. It is ironic that we experience
a reverse revolution now, at another level, but a silicon takeover nonetheless, as
computer chips direct us to serve their ends. (See Jastrow 1981: 162, Wesley 1974:
233–241).
Nonequilibrium Dynamics
The evolution of a paradigm, such as that of evolution itself, exhibits the momen-
tum of nonequilibrium trajectories now recognized in the study of biology, culture,
and dynamical systems generally throughout the cosmos. Dynamical systems far
from equilibrium evolve with punctuational spurts constantly precipitating evident
discontinuities. As semiotics evolves to attend to both energetic and informational
phenomena in space and time, the ﬁeld can provide the very mortar to the new
synthesis in human knowledge systems.

398
Myrdene Anderson (1934– ) et al.
Dissipative Structures
Thus far we have sketched the pattern of generalization and specialization, expan-
sion and contraction, in the history of semiotic and systems sciences. However, the
conservative paradigms of. evolution generally, even reﬁnements such as coevolu-
tion, metacoevolution of Gaia, endosymbiosis in cell evolution, and speculations as
to biogenesis, all tempt us to think, misleadingly, in terms of equilibrium models.
In point of fact, dynamical systems, those irreversible processes in time exempli-
ﬁed in Fig. 12.1, do not always behave homoeostatically. Equilibrium sustained by
homeostatic feedbacks is a cybernetic null hypothesis, Real phenomena are more
interesting and less domesticated, predictable, or static.
All these systems are actually directional, self-generating, and indeterminately
open. The importance of such temporal processes involving ﬂuctuation, equiﬁnality
(convergence) and multiple solutions (divergence) has been most elegantly demon-
strated in physics by Prigogine (1962) and coworkers (Prigogine et al. 1972, Nicolis
and Prigogine 1977) and extended to the larger scientiﬁc landscape by Prigogine
and Stengers (1979, updated and translated 1984). Our views of the complexity of
human beings, human language and culture, and living systems generally, prompt
us to look more closely at this latest approach in systems theory. (See excellent
Fig. 12.1 Dynamics associated with prototype systems

12
A Semiotic Perspective on the Sciences
399
treatments in Adams, 1975, 1981, Corning 1983, Eigen and Winkler 1981, Jantsch,
1980, 1981, Jantsch and Waddington 1976, Zeleny 1980).
Anything sufﬁciently interesting to study, whether concrete or abstract, will fall
into the category of dynamical systems. Those systems farther from equilibrium
Prigogine refers to as dissipative structures, for they feed on free matter/energy to
create new orders of information, new relations of coordination and hierarchy (Allen
and Starr 1982: 8–66, Bookchin 1982: 348–366, Pattee 1973: 131–156, Prigogine
1980: 104–128, Simon 1973: 4–11).
Current discourse in the biological sciences about the existence or prevalence of
saltational evolution, or punctuated equilibrium (associated with Stephen Jay Gould
1977, Eldredge and Cracraft 1980, Wiley and Brooks 1982, 1983), ﬁts rather well
with the features of dissipative structures. The more conventional view of evolution-
ary change is one of gradualism, not of spurts of catastrophic reorganization. These
spurts, or catastrophes in Thom’s formulation, occur when dissipative structures
near bifurcation points respond to what would earlier have been below-threshold
information.
Returning to Fig. 12.1, the quadrants of living systems and quantum systems
share the property of being quintessential nonequilibrium phenomena, character-
ized as dissipative structures. In living systems, the free matter/energy-information
is throughput in this original “consumer-oriented” system, and in the process it is
the quantum phenomena which are “put through”, The frenetic activity of “life” –
growth, replication, metabolism, play, language, culture, even waste and war, to
name the more familiar of semiotic events – arrests the centripetal and centrifugal
forces within Gaia, and permits more rounds on the treadmill.
Very little headway has been made by any body of scholar-scientists in com-
prehending life and biogenesis, partly because (as with messages, which exist
in decodings) we are looking at the wrong side of the equation for the answer.
(Other kinds of prismatic myopia have been nicely uncovered under the rubric of
“Looking in the Destination for What Should Have Been Sought in the Source” –
Sebeok 1979: 84–106.) Communication begins with a decoder, not with the encoder,
whether “intentional” or not: This insight is particularly crucial to the understanding
of evolution as a part of semiosis. Similarly, life is a result of one of the most inter-
esting innovations with Gaia, namely, death. It is death which permits the throughput
to condense into regions of order in an unstable, dissipative structure. These regions
are the domain life.
Charges of an “organismal heresy” (e.g., Moore 1983) still sting in the life sci-
ences and in the physical sciences, whenever a system larger, smaller, or more
abstract than an “organism” “behaves”. First, biology must cope with an elas-
tic notion of “organism”, or else explain away the slime mold and other eclectic
congregations of cells. Curiously, exercising this same growing knowledge of sys-
tem behavior in the social sciences brings accusations of “neo-mechanicism” (e.g.,
Thullier 1983)!
That systems behave, or transact energy-information, is the case even in the
absence of any living constituents. These nonliving systems endure rather than
replicate, unless they evolve as in Cairns-Smith’s model within some selective grid
similar to natural selection. But the archetype it is less characterized by throughput,

400
Myrdene Anderson (1934– ) et al.
than the living system. In short, systems under this archetype are without the beneﬁt
of death. But, with living processes in the picture, even the inert “dies”, as it were,
and, given culture can also be “born again” (see Thompson 1979). This cycling of
matter/energy-information speeds up the stuff of messages and magniﬁes the assort-
ment of synapses. It is one explanation for the organismic behavior of some systems
inclusive of inert matter.
Out of this process of maturation in systems (see Table 12.2), information
can decouple from energy, crystallize as meaning in space-time, and condense as
knowledge even less tied to space-time. In this semiotic scenario, natural selection
becomes a more dynamic concept. As routinely interpreted in Table 12.3, selec-
tion is the only evolutionary transformational factor which implicates energy. Any
overemphasis on energy-management in ecological explanation is due to a focus
on natural selection among these factors, and on some measure of natural selec-
tion which reduces to gross “reproductive success” or “ﬁtness”, post hoc judged as
“adaptation”. Vast amounts of literature juggle the inferences deriving from various
operational deﬁnitions of these two terms alone (e.g., Conrad 1972, 1983, Peters
1983), and the circularity involved in notions of adaptation, wherein survival indi-
cates adaptation and adaptation favors survival, have received more and more critical
attention (e.g., Eldredge and Tattersall 1982).
Here it may be useful to look more closely at an expanded systems view of natural
selection, dealing, in Table 12.4, with just this one evolutionary factor.
A replicating organism may be in a situation to minimize, optimize, or maxi-
mize, proximately or ultimately, some means or ends, either through hard-wiring,
soft-wiring, or some combination thereof, by virtue of intention, evolutionary tra-
jectory, or stochastic factors, all of which reﬂect and were shaped by its past
phylogenetic and ontogenetic history. Organisms seldom just metabolize and repli-
cate. Some even opt to behave “altruistically”. Understanding living organisms
calls for an appreciation of the non-energetic activities transpiring – not just the
information-management implicated by energy-shaped habits of food and space,
but information-circulating systems monitoring time, minimizing tedium, or gen-
erating chaos as well as order. It is due to the powerful negentropic properties of
life that disorder can be not just tolerated, but even accentuated and intensiﬁed in
such diverse cultural forms as art and war, for example (see Sebeok 1981: 210–259,
Maruyama 1976, Rappaport 1979, Peckham 1965). Intensiﬁcation of circulation
of energy-information, or throughput, has as a by-product the increased hierarchic
organization and ﬂexibility we associate with systems, particularly those containing
living members.
Information, Communication, Meaning
The foregoing viewpoints distance themselves from narrowly functional and causal
explanations of complex phenomena. It is tempting in the same vein to ven-
ture out onto one more rink. This concerns the origins of signs. Indeed, however

12
A Semiotic Perspective on the Sciences
401
the universe originated, energy-information, a sign of the ﬁrst degree, was either a
product or a by-product. If the sign is a viable key for the understanding of complex
systems, then it must have these twin properties of energy-information. To tran-
scend conventional semiotics, explorers in general semiotics have had to deal with
dynamic processes involving both information and energy. There are numerous com-
plementary and overlapping semiotic disciplines, such as ecology and economics,
where the neglected element in the system as conventionally investigated is instead
information, communication, or meaning.
Through exaptation (to extend the term for incidental preadaptation in evolu-
tion from Gould and Vrba 1982), semiotics can ﬁnd familiar handholds in much
of the spectacular work in the inert quantum ﬁelds and biochemistry. Sometimes
semiotics is itself mined for insights, rendering some of the most technical work
accessible when the metaphors are recalqued. In this genre would be Tomkins’
suggestion of a metabolic code (1975), Florkin’s ambitious serial publications
in biochemistry, only represented here by his 1974 chapter on biosemiotics,
and Bochner and Ames’ (1982) elucidation of biochemical message units called
“alarmones”, and “Yates” (1982) detailed work on physiological systems and
homeokinesis.
We suggest, nodding to Peirce, that the universe originated with the sign. This
thirdness would have to presuppose secondness, and it in turn ﬁrstness. The evo-
lution from free energy-information, interaction, communication, meaning, and
condensed meaning stored in knowledge systems can all be understood as further
by-products in the ontogeny of the universe-system. In the maturation of systems,
sketched in Tables 12.2 and 12.4, energy-information systems intensify and com-
plexify, precipitating horizontal and vertical holons of organization. Consequently,
there were subsystem boundaries transacting resources from an early stage. Life
introduces even more discontinuities into play.
As suggested at the outset, boundaries are deﬁned by sign activity: transaction,
manipulation, maintenance, and catastrophe (Anderson 1985) – all implicate semio-
sis. In the evolution of edges, we can trace the ricochet of digital systems building
on analogue ones, and subsequent bootstrapping. Edges ﬁrst fence out, making for
an inside vis-à-vis an outside, and then transact with and through that boundary. If
not tied solely to biological systems, “exosemiotics” may still have utility as a label
for the study of exoholon behavior, which presently is dominated by an energet-
ics perspective in ecology and by an informational one in ethology. Subsequently,
edges fence in, permitting internal functions of metabolism, circulation, replication,
and waste, or “endosemiotic” behavior, The two faces of this boundary integrate, of
course, in natural selection, when still other hierarchies and coordinate holons come
into play.
The ﬁrst “living” forms would have circulated “natural” energy-information in
increasingly redundant, overdetermined analogue systems. The ﬁrst instance of
superposed digitality would be some kind of differentiation, a guild, streamlining
that redundancy. This applies in either the primordial soup model or the cell
endosymbiosis model. However, the ﬁrst “living” forms need not be visualized as

402
Myrdene Anderson (1934– ) et al.
grains of replicating matter, later to differentiate internally and diversify, when those
grains could themselves have been differentiations within an encompassing cosmos.
A recurrent pattern in emergent systems is the interplay between “upward evolu-
tion” and “downward evolution”. The outgoing paradigm emphasized the former, a
narrow view of the new paradigm emphasizes the latter, while a synthetic semiotic
respects and integrates both.
The genetic code may have been the earliest innovation of a double articula-
tion “language” (Martinet 1965, Hockett’s “dual patterning” 1960, Hartman 1975,
1982, Eigen et al. 1981, Jakobson 1970, Weigin 1981). As in human verbal lan-
guage, a ﬁnite number of primitive signs (with earlier signiﬁcance on another level),
lose that signiﬁcance or are revalued when operating as raw materials for a new
sign system. This amounts to reshaping an analogue system from a digital one
(Sebeok 1962).
Taking into account all that is now understood about throughput dynamics in
dissipative structures, we can appreciate human language as one more energy-
information processor, along with trophic level, thermoregulation, play, dreaming,
and art; all are self-serving and not explicable through function. The “functions” of
human language fall into two, now interpenetrating classes – internal representation
or modeling (as underlies Umwelt), which we label “language”, and inter-individual
communication or “speech”, both species-speciﬁc faculties (Sebeok 1979: 45–55,
see also Dawkins and Krebs 1978). The narrower and proper sense of “lan-
guage” predominately relates to space and storage in the framework of Table 12.2,
and its correlate of “speech” specializes in the parameters of time and ﬂow.
Allo-organisms – our old-fashioned “plants” and “animals” – have faculties to pro-
cess analogous resources of information and energy. Yet it is increasingly agreed
that human verbal language did not emerge from a nonverbal, vocal antecedent, at
least not from an antecedent communication system narrowly deﬁned (cf. Maritain
1957, Jerison 1975, Kenny et al. 1972, Merrell 1982, Spuhler 1977).
As with human verbal language, other forms of internal modeling and exter-
nal communication are similarly reduced mistakenly to a functional grid. Certainly
human language is a ﬂexible tool in ultimately interacting with the signiﬁcant sur-
round; but it also serves as a toy in the manipulation of that world, as well as of past
worlds, future worlds, and an inﬁnite number of fantasy worlds. Modeling ﬁdelity,
then, is not a measure of the “adaptiveness” of human language, nor of any other
of these modeling and communication systems. As long as such a system is not
too “maladaptive”, it can stay in the “existential poker” (Slobodkin 1968: 190) of
evolution.
In other words, the “function” read into these modeling systems is the tip of an
iceberg. The rest of the iceberg is a stabilizing guild of tight relations, a web of
dissipative structures. Information-driven, these modeling systems essentially prey
upon order, shredding it, circulating the energy-information it entails. Negentropy
ensues for the processor, and order for the organization of the processor. At the same
time, noise, disorder and even chaos are compulsively converted into meaningful
order.

12
A Semiotic Perspective on the Sciences
403
However, order costs. Whether we examine crystals or organisms, we ﬁnd that
perfect symmetry is virtually impossible. Yet deviations from symmetry, from order
of any kind, constitute information of a ﬁner grain, and are apt to be captured by
the larger system for some use, hence converting what is noise at one level into
meaningful pattern at another. In vertebrate bilateral symmetry, for example, this
results in handedness, footedness, brainedness, eyedness, and any number of other
partially charted divergences resulting from the near-symmetrical partners becom-
ing differentially specialized; the ﬂaw is transformed into a necessary complement
in a system undergoing complexiﬁcation. (The deplorable choice of the term “dom-
inance” of one side, to describe the relation of bilateralized functions, rather than
speaking in terms of differential specialization and the total integration of behavior,
has had the unfortunate effect of misleading some readers of, if not writers in, the
ﬁeld.) Brain lateralization, human language, and human speech demonstrate once
more the semiotic power of a boundary.
Symbiosis as Semiosis
Explicit in all the emerging models involving the life sciences has been atten-
tion to complexity of co-occurrence and context. Organisms coexist, coevolve,
by means of semiosis and the relations it entails. Margulis lists some of the
classical types of relationships in the biological world (1981: 162–163), warn-
ing that the lines dividing such relationships are either ﬁne or fuzzy. Symbiosis,
mutualism, commensalism, parasitism, and predator-prey, even autotrophic and het-
erotrophic habits, all are modulated by the immediate environment and by the
phylogenetic and ontogenetic past of the organism. As mentioned earlier, she dis-
cards entirely the two-kingdom classiﬁcation for living organisms, submitting a
scheme (and a nomenclature – 1981: 353–363) justifying ﬁve kingdoms evolv-
ing endosymbiotically. All these relationships involve communication and lend
themselves to, or require, semiotic understanding, even though the terms “phy-
tosemiotics”, “zoosemiotics”, and “anthroposemiotics” are inadequate on several
counts.
First, these terms imply qualitative discontinuity between all the semiotic phe-
nomena under study; this appears less and less to be the case. Then, with the
ﬁve-kingdom classiﬁcation, “plants” and “animals” return through the looking glass
to become strictly folk taxa once more. Nor can one with conﬁdence simply repar-
cel semiosis according to the putative ﬁve kingdoms, not only because these are
provisional, as we noted above, and will doubtless remain so for some time, but
because, more fundamentally, they may not even be interesting or signiﬁcant in
sorting different types of semiosis.
There is a paucity of empirical data to suggest the nature of any unique proper-
ties of semiosis, whether interpreters be classiﬁed by pseudo – kingdom, kingdom,
phylum, or even species. Some dramatic biochemical signs recur with similar and

404
Myrdene Anderson (1934– ) et al.
dissimilar interpretants across kingdoms, and sometimes this can be a clue to coevo-
lution, such as the sex pheromone of the sow exuded by the underground trufﬂe
(presumably the excavating boar is also an agent in dispersion of the trufﬂe). Among
sometimes visually-perceptible signs, neoteny (retention of juvenile characteristics
into a later stage), whether embryological, anatomical, physiological, or behavioral,
such as roundness with eye spots among mammals (Montagu 1981) is overwhelm-
ingly attractive – which is doubtless favorable for the neotenous creature. (Indeed,
in our culture, it has spilled over into our preference for cars and comic strips, and
mascara accentuating the eye spots of women). But it turns out that, in systems
terms, neoteny is a recurring expedient, a way to playa different tune, as it were,
using the same notes. Analogues to the originally-noted embryological neoteny can
be found later in ontogeny, in society, in culture, and even in the evolution of speech
insofar as it shares unique properties with the neonate’s cry.
Once the spiraling dynamics of semiosis are examined, as is being done in
the alloprimate-human communication research (Sebeok and Umiker-Sebeok 1980,
Sebeok and Rosenthal 1981), our assumptions overdetermine everything from
choice of subject (neotenous and intelligent primate relative) to result (semiosis
leaks). This is not an auspicious time to distinguish categorically subtypes of semio-
sis, whether by originator, object, interpretant, or interpreter, as our knowledge of
these pales before our understanding of the sign.
Yet, as it matures, semiotics will surely continue to generate, label, classify,
investigate and discard new and passing concepts. One hears indictments in all ﬁelds
about creeping, hollow jargon having more to do with social relations than with the
subject matter. Semiotics as a perspective has minimized this through its incessant
reference to the masters of the sign (e.g., Sebeok 1979).
In retrospect, the term “semiotics” has worn well. But we regularly relive the
frustration of participants in the Indiana University Conference of Paralinguistics
and Kinesics in 1962 (Sebeok et al. 1964, 1972; see especially the close of the dis-
cussion on pages 275–276). Persons were attuned to the disadvantages of a marked
term, such as “nonverbal”, to characterize the ﬁeld of study, particularly when it
exposes some logocentric tendencies.
Such problems will not be solved here. In fact, with this paper, we propose prob-
lems for our nimble and nebulous science rather than solutions. In an academic
climate suffering from terminal paradigm burnout, optimism for any general or
uniﬁed approach is bound to invite scorn. Nevertheless, a convergence is under-
way, a maturing in numerous guilds of thought – such as evolved formulations of
systems theory, the inviting synthesis between macroevolutionary and microevo-
lutionary theory, Lovelock’s Gaia Hypothesis, Loeb’s Design Science Group at
Harvard, artiﬁcial intelligence projects, and all the other strains of synthetic work
providing grounds for optimism about the possibility of a general uniﬁed perspective
within the framework of what we have called “ecumenical semiotics”. The synergy
of symbiosis is in fact underway.

12
A Semiotic Perspective on the Sciences
405
References
Ackoff, R. L., Emery, F. E. (1972). On Purposeful Systems. Chicago: Aldine-Atherton, Inc.
Adams, R. N. (1975). Energy and Structure: A Theory of Social Power. Austin: University of Texas
Press.
Adams, R. N. (1981). Natural selection, energetics, and ‘cultural materialism’. Current
Anthropology 22(6), 603–624.
Allen, P. M. (1981). The evolutionary paradigm of dissipative structures. In: Jantsch, E. (Ed.) The
Evolutionary Vision: Toward a Unifying Paradigm of Physical, Biological, and Sociocultural
Evolution (AAAS Selected Symposium, 61), Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press, Inc., for
American Association for Advancement of Science, pp. 25–72.
Allen, T. F. H., Starr, T. B. (1982). Hierarchy: Perspectives for Ecological Complexity. Chicago
and London: The University of Chicago Press.
Anderson, M. (1985). Cultural concatenation of deceit and secrecy. In: Mitchell, R. W., Thompson,
N. (Eds.) Deception in Humans and Animals, Albany, New York: State University of New York
Press.
Anderson, M., Deely, J., Krampen, M., Ransdell, J., Sebeok, T. A., Uexküll, T. von (1984).
A Semiotic Perspective on the Sciences: Steps Toward a New Paradigm. Toronto Semiotic
Circle Monographs, Working Papers, and Pre publications 5. Toronto: Toronto Semiotic Circle,
Victoria University.
Baldwin, I. T., Schultz, J. C. (1983). Rapid changes in tree leaf chemistry induced by damage:
evidence for communication between plants. Science 221(4607), 277–279.
Bargatzky, W. (1978). Das Universum Lebt: Die Aufsehenerregende Hypothese vom Organischen
Aufbau des Weltalls. Munich: Wilhelm Heyne Verlag.
Bateson, G. (1972). Steps to an Ecology of Mind: A Revolutionary Approach to Man’s
Understanding of Himself. New York: Ballantine.
Bateson, G. (1979). Mind and Nature: A Necessary Unity. New York: E. P. Dutton.
Bateson, M. C. (1972). Our Own Metaphor: A Personal Account of a Conference on the Effects of
Conscious Purpose on Human Adaptation. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.
Batty, M., Hutchinson, B. (Eds.) (1983). Systems Analysis in Urban Policymaking and Planning
(NATO Conference Series, II, Systems Science, 12). New York and London: Plenum Press.
Berlinski, D. (1976). On Systems Analysis: An Essay Concerning the Limitations of Some
Mathematical Methods in the Social, Political, and Biological Sciences. Cambridge, MA, USA,
and London: The MIT Press.
Bertalanffy, L. von (1973). General Systems Theory: Foundations, Development, Applications,
revised edition. New York: G; Braziller.
Bertalanffy, L. von (1981). A Systems View of Man. LaViolette, P. A. (Ed.). Boulder, Colorado:
Westview Press.
Bochner, B. R., Ames, B. N. (1982). ZTP (5-amino 4-imidazole carboxamide riboside 5′-
triphosphate): a proposed alarmone for lO-formyltetrahydrofolate deﬁciency. Cell 29(3),
929–937.
Bookchin, M. (1982). The Ecology of Freedom: The Emergence and Dissolution of Hierarchy. Palo
Alto, California: Cheshire Books.
Boulding, K. E. (1978). Ecodynamics: A New Theory of Societal Evolution. Beverly Hills,
California, and London: Sage Publications.
Boulding, K. E. (1981). Human knowledge as a special system. Behavioral Science 26(2), 93–102.
Bouissac, P. (1976). The ‘golden legend’ of semiotics. Semiotica 17(4), 371–384.
Bouissac, P. (1979). A compass for semiotics. Ars Semiotica 2(2), 205-221.
Bouissac, P. (1981). Fignrative versus objective semiotics: an epistemological crossroads. In: Deely
J. N., Lenhart M. D. (Eds.) Semiotics 1981 (= Proceedings of the Semiotic Society of America).
New York: Plenum Press, pp. 3–12.

406
Myrdene Anderson (1934– ) et al.
Bremermann, H. J. (1983). Parasites at the origin oﬂife. Journal of Mathematical Biology 16,
165–180.
Buckley, W. (Ed.) (1968). Modern Systems Research for the Behavioral Scientist: A Sourcebook.
Chicago: Aldine Publishing Comapny.
Cairns-Smith, A. G. (1966). The origin of life and the nature of the primitive gene. Journal of
Theoretical Biology 10, 53–88.
Cairns-Smith, A. G. (1982). Genetic Takeover and the Mineral Origins of Life. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Cairns-Smith; A. G., Walker, G. L. (1974). Primitive metabolism. Bio Systems 5, 173–186.
Conrad, M. (1972). Information processing in molecular systems. Currents in Modern Biology 5,
1–14.
Conrad, M. (1983). Adaptability: The Signiﬁcance of Variability from Molecule to Ecosystem. New
York and London: Plenum Press.
Corning, P. A. (1983). The Synergism Hypothesis: A Theory of Progressive Evolution. New York:
McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Count, E. W. (1973). Being and Becoming Human: Essays on the Biogram. New York: D. Van
Nostrand Company.
Crook, J. H. (1970). Social organization and the environment: aspects of contemporary social
ethology. Animal Behaviour 18, 197–209.
Curtis, J. M. (1978). Culture as Polyphony: An Essay on the Nature of Paradigms. Columbia and
London: University of Missouri Press.
Davies, P. (1981). The Edge of Inﬁnity: Where the Universe Comes From and How It Will End.
New York: Simon and Schuster.
Dawkins, R. (1976). The Selﬁsh Gene. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dawkins, R. (1982). The Extended Phenotype: The Gene as the Unit of Selection. Oxford and San
Francisco: W. H. Freeman and Company.
Dawkins, R., Krebs, J. R. (1978). Animal signals: information or manipulation? In Krebs, J. R.,
Davies, N. B. (Eds.) Behavioural Ecology: An Evolutionary Approach, Chapter 10. Sunderland,
MA, USA: Sinauer Associates, Inc., pp. 282–315.
Deely, J. N. (1966). Evolution: concept and content. Listening 1(1), 38–66.
Deely, J. N. (1969). The philosophical dimensions of the origin of species. The Thomist 38(1),
75–149; 38(2), 251–342.
Deely, J. N. (1975). Modern logic, animal psychology, and human discourse. Revue de l’Universite
d’Ottawa 45(1), 80–100.
Deely, J. N. (1976). The doctrine of signs: taking form at last. Semiotica 18(2), 171–193.
Deely, J. N. (1978a). What’s in a name? Semiotica 22(1–2), 151–181.
Deely, J. N. (1978b). Toward the origin of semiotic. In Sebeok, T. A. (Ed.) Sight, Sound, and Sense.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, pp. 1–30.
Deely, J. N. (1980). The nonverbal inlay in linguistic communication. In Rauch, I., Carr, G. F.
(Eds.) The Signifying Animal. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, pp. 201–217.
Deely, J. N. (1981). Cognition from a semiotic point of view. In Deely, J. N., Lenhart, M. D.
(Eds.) Semiotics 1981 (Proceedings of the Semiotic Society of America). New York: Plenum,
pp. 21–28.
Deely, J. N. (1982a). Introducing Semiotic: Its History and Doctrine. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press.
Deely, J. N. (1982b). On the notion of phytosemiotics. In Deely, J. N., Lenhart, M. D (Eds.)
Semiotics 1982 (= Proceedings of the Semiotic Society of America). New York: Plenum Press.
Deely, J. N. (1982c). Neglected ﬁgures in the history of semiotic inquiry: John Poinsot. In
Eschbach, A., Trabant, J. (Eds.) History of Semiotics. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.

12
A Semiotic Perspective on the Sciences
407
Deely, J. N., Lenhart, M. D. (1981). Fourth annual symposium on empirical semiotics. In Deely, J.
N., Lenhart, M. D. (Eds.) Semiotics 1981 (= Proceedings of the Semiotic Society of America).
New York: Plenum Press, pp. 317–343.
Delbriick, M. (1978). Mind from matter? American Scholar 47, 339–353.
Dickerson, R. E. (1978). Chemical evolution and the origin of life. Scientiﬁc American 239(3),
70–86.
Diener, T. O. (1983). The viroid - a subviral pathogen. American Scientist 71(5), 481–489.
Dobert, R. (1981). The role of stage models within a theory of social evolution, illustrated by the
European witch craze. In Jensen, U. J., Harre, R. (Eds.) The Philosophy of Evolution. New
York: St. Martin’s Press, pp. 71–119.
Eco, U. (1976). A Theory of Semiotics. Bloomington and London: Indiana University Press.
Eco, U. (1980). The sign revisited. Philosophy and Social Criticism 7(3–4), 263–290.
Eigen, M., Winkler, R. (1981). Laws of the Game: How the Principles of Nature Govern Chance.
Translated from the German by Kimber, R., Kimber, R. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Eigen, M., Gardiner, W., Schuster, P., Winlder-Oswatitsch, R. (1981). The origin of genetic
information. Scientiﬁc American 244(4), 88–118.
Ehrlich, P. R., Raven, P. H. (1964). Butterﬂies and plants: a study in coevolution. Evolution 18,
586–608.
Eldredge, N., Cracraft, J. (1980). Phylogenetic Patterns and the Evolutionary Process. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Eldredge, N., Tattersall, I. (1982). The Myths of Human Evolution. New York: Columbia University
Press.
Elton, C. S. (1927). Animal Ecology. London: Sidgwick and Jackson.
Ferris, S., et al. (1983). Alien mitochondrial DNA in mice. Reported in note, ‘Jumping genes’,
Science 220(4599), 811.
Florkin, M. (1974). Concepts of molecular biosemiotics and of molecular evolution. In Florkin,
M., Stotz, E. H. (Eds.) Comparative Biochemistry, Molecular Evolution, Comprehensive
Biochemistry 29A, chapter 1. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 1–124.
Futuyma, D. J., Slatkin, M. (Eds.) (1983). Coevolution. Sunderland, MA, USA: Sinauer Associates,
Inc.
Gatlin, L. L. (1972). Information Theory and the Living System. New York: Columbia University
Press.
Gerard, R. W. (1957). Units and concepts of biology. Science 125(3245), 429-433.
Gerard, R. W. (1960). Becoming: the residue of change. In Tax, S. (Ed.) The Evolution of Man:
Man, Culture, and Society, Vol. 2 of Evolution After Darwin, the University of Chicago
Centennial. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 255–267.
Gould, S. J. (1977). Ontogeny and Phylogeny. Cambridge and London: Harvard University Press.
Gould, S. J., Vrba, E. S. (1982). Exaptation - a missing term in the science of form. Paleobiology
8(1), 4–15.
Grifﬁn, D. R. (1981). The Question of Animal Awareness: Evolutionary Continuity of Mental
Experience. 2nd edition (lst edition, 1976). Los Altos, California: William Kaufmann, Inc.
Grinnell, J. (1924). Geography and evolution. Ecology 5, 225–229.
Haken, H. (Ed.) (1977). Synergetic: A Workshop (Proceedings of the International Workshop on
Synergetics at Schloss Elmau, Bavaria, 2–7 May 1977). Berlin, Heidelberg and New York:
Springer-Verlag.
Hall, E. T. (1984). The Dance of Life: The Other Dimension of Time. Garden City, New York:
Anchor Press, Doubleday.
Hansmann, A. (1857). Die Sylvien der Insel Sardinien. Naumannia 7, 404–429.
Haraway, D. J. (1976). Crystals, Fabrics, and Fields: Metaphors of Organicism in Twentieth-
century Developmental Biology. New Haven and London: Yale University Press.
Hartman, H. (1975). Speculations on the evolution of the genetic code. Origins of Life 6(3),
423–427.
Hartman, H. (1982). Life, language, and society. Semiotica 42(2), 89–106.

408
Myrdene Anderson (1934– ) et al.
Hirsch, M. W. (1984). The dynamical systems approach to differential equations. Bulletin of the
American Mathematical Society (new series) 11(1), 1–64.
Hockett, C. E. (1960). The origin of speech. Scientiﬁc American 203, 88–96.
Holling, C. S. (1976). Resilience and stability of ecosystems. In Jantsch, E., Waddington, C. H.
(Eds.) Evolution and Consciousness: Human Systems in Transition, Reading, Massachusetts:
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, pp. 73–92.
Hull, D. (1981). Units of evolution: a metaphysical essay. In Jensen, U. J., Harre, R. (Eds.) The
Philosophy of Evolution. New York: St. Martin’s Press, pp. 23–44.
Huntingford, F. (1982). The evolution of cooperation and altruism. In Colman, A. M. (Ed.)
Cooperation and Competition in Humans and Animals. Berkshire, England: Van Nostrand
Reinhold Company Limited, pp. 3–25.
Hutchinson, G. E. (1957). Concluding remarks. Cold Spring Harbor Symposium, in Quantitative
Biology 22, 415–427.
Hutchinson, G. E. (1978). An Introduction to Population Ecology. New Haven and London: Yale
University Press.
Hutchinson, G. E. (1979). The Kindly Fruits of the Earth: Recollections of an Embryo Ecologist.
New Haven and London: Yale University Press.
Jakobson, R. (1970). Linguistics. Main Trends of Research in the Social and Human Sciences; Part
I: Social Sciences (Studies in the Behavioral Sciences, 8), Chapter 6. Paris and Berlin: Mouton,
for UNESCO, pp. 419–463.
Jantsch, E. (1967). The Ghost in the Machine. New York: MacMillan.
Jantsch, E. (1978). Janus: A Summing Up. London: Hutchinson of London; and, New York:
Vintage Books.
Jantsch, E. (1980). The Self-organizing Universe: Scientiﬁc and Human Implications of the
Emerging Paradigm of Evolution. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Jantsch, E. (Ed.) (1981). The Evolutionary Vision: Toward a Unifying Paradigm of Physical,
Biological, and Sociocultural Evolution (AAAS Selected Symposium, 61). Boulder, Colorado:
Westview Press.
Jantsch, E., Waddington, C. H. (Eds.) (1976). Evolution and Consciousness: Human Systems in
Transition. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company.
Jastrow, R. (1981). The Enchanted Loom: Mind in the Universe. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Jerison, H. J. (1975). Fossil evidence of the evolution of the human brain. in Annual Review of
Anthropology 4, 27–58.
Johnston, T. D. (1976). Theoretical considerations in the adaptation of animal communication
systems. Journal of Theoretical Biology 57, 43–72.
Jones, R. S. (1982). Physics as Metaphor. New York: New American Library.
Karban, R., Carey, J. R. (1984). Induced resistance of cotton seedlings to mites. Science 225(4657),
53–54.
Kenny, A. J. P., Longuet-Higgins, H. C., Lucas, J. R., Waddington, C. H. (1972). The Nature of
Mind. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Kevelson, R. (1981). Francis Lieber and the semiotics oﬂaw and politics. In Deely, J. N., Lenhart,
M. D (Eds.) Semiotics 1981 (Proceedings of the Semiotic Society of America). New York:
Plenum Press, pp. 167–177.
Klopf, A. H. (1982). The Hedonistic Neuron, A Theory of Memory, Learning, and Intelligence.
New York and London: Hemisphere Press.
Krampen, M. (1979). Perfusion of signs without confusion. Ars Semiotica 2(3), 327, 359.
Krampen, M. (1981). Phytosemiotics. Semiotica 36(3–4), 187–209.

12
A Semiotic Perspective on the Sciences
409
Krebs, J. R., Davies, N. B. (Eds.) (1978). Behavioural Ecology: An Evolutionary Approach.
Sunderland, Massachusetts: Sinauer Associates, Inc.
Krebs, J. R., Davies, N. B. (1984). Behavioural Ecology: An Evolutionary Approach. 2nd edition.
Sunderland, Massachusetts: Sinauer Associates, Inc.
Kuhn, T. S. (1970). The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions. 2nd edition (lst edition, 1962). Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Laszlo, E. (ed.) (1972). The Relevance of General Systems Theory. New York: G. Braziller.
Laszlo, E. (1983). Systems Science and World Order: Selected Studies. Oxford and New York:
Pergamon Press.
Laudan, L. (1981). A refutation of convergent realism. In Jensen, U. J., Harre, R. (Eds.) The
Philosophy of Evolution. Chapter 9, New York: St. Martin’s Press, pp. 232–268.
Lee, D. (1959). Codiﬁcations of reality: lineal and nonlineal. In Lee, D. (Ed.) Freedom and Culture.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc. [Reprinted from Psychosomatic Medicine
12, (1950).], pp. 105–120
Lewin, R. (1984). No genome barriers to promiscuous DNA. Science 24(4652), 970–971.
Loeb, A. L. (1976). Space Structures: Their Harmony and Counterpoint. Reading, Massachusetts:
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company.
Lovejoy, A. O. (1936). Great Chain of Being: A Study of the History of an Idea. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Lovelock, J. E. (1972). Gaia as seen through the atmosphere. Atmosphere and Environment 6,
579–580.
Lovelock, J. E. (1979). Gaia: A New Look at Life on Earth. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lovelock, J. E. (1983). Daisy world: a cybernetic proof of the Gaia hypothesis. The CoEvolution
Quarterly 38, 66–72.
Lovelock, J. E. (1974a). Homeostatic tendencies of the earth’s atmosphere. Origins of Life I, 12–22.
Lovelock, J. E., Margulis, L. (1974b). Atmospheric homeostasis by and for the biosphere: the Gaia
hypothesis. Tellus 26(1–2), 2–10.
Ludel, J. (1982). Language acquisition in chimps and dolphins: anthropocentrism – still and again.
The CoEvolution Quarterly 36, 46–53.
Lumsden, C. J., Wilson, E. O. (1981). Genes, Mind, and Culture: The Coevolutionary Process.
Cambridge, Massachusetts and London: Harvard University Press.
Lumsden, C. J., Wilson, E. O. (1982). Precis of Genes, Mind, and Culture; with commentary by
others. The Behavioral and Brain Sciences 5, 1–37.
Makridakis, S. (1977). The second law of systems. International Journal of General Systems 4(1),
1–12.
Margalef, R. (1968). Perspectives in Ecological Theory. Chicago and London: The University of
Chicago Press.
Margulis, L. (1970). Origin of Eukaryotic Cells: Evidence and Research Implications for a Theory
of the Origin and Evolution of Microbial, Plant, and Animal Cells on the Precambrian Earth.
New Haven and London: Yale University Press.
Margulis, L. (1971). Whittaker’s ﬁve kingdoms of organisms: minor revisions suggested by
considerations of the origin of mitosis. Evolution 25(1), 242–245.
Margulis, L. (1981). Symbiosis in Cell Evolution: Life and Its Environment on the Early Earth. San
Francisco: W. H. Freeman and Company.
Margulis, L., Lovelock, J. E. (1974). Biological modulation of the earth’s atmosphere. Icarus 21,
471–489.
Margulis, L., Schwartz, K. V. (1982). Five Kingdoms: An Illustrated Guide to the Phyla of Life on
Earth. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman and Company.
Maritain, J. (1957). Language and the theory of sign. In Anshen, R. N. (Ed.) Language: An Inquiry
into Its Meaning and Function. New York: Harper, pp. 86–101.
Marney, M., Schmidt, P. F. (1976). Evolution of scientiﬁc method. In Jantsch, E., Waddington,
C. H. (Eds.) Evolution and Consciousness: Human Systems in Transition. Reading,
Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, pp. 185–197.

410
Myrdene Anderson (1934– ) et al.
Martinet, A. (1965). The word. Diogenes 51, 38–54. Montreal.
Maruyama, M. (1963). The second cybernetics: deviation-amplifying mutual causal processes.
American Scientist 51(2), 164–179.
Maruyama, M. (1976). Toward cultural symbiosis. In Jantsch, E., Waddington, C. H. (Eds.)
Evolution and Consciousness: Human Systems in Transition. Reading, Massachusetts:
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, pp. 198–213.
Marx, J. L. (1984). Instability in plants and the ghost of Lamarck. Science 224(4656), 1415–1416.
Mayr, E. (1974). Teleological and teleonomic, a new analysis. In Cohen, R. S., Wartofsky, M.
W. (Eds.) Methodological and Historical Essays in the Natural and Social Sciences (Boston
Studies in the Philosophy of Science, 14). Dordrecht and Boston: D. Reidel Publishing
Company, pp. 91–117.
Merchant, C. (1980). The Death of Nature: Women, Ecology, and the Scientiﬁc Revolution. San
Francisco: Harper and Row, Publishers.
Merrell, F. (1982). Semiotic Foundations: Steps Toward an Epistemology of Written Texts (=
Advances in Semiotics). Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Miller, J. G. (1978). Living Systems. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Miller, J. G., Miller, J. L. (1982). The earth as a system. Behavioral Science 27(4), 303–322.
Montagu, A. (1981). Growing Young. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Montalverne, G. (1984). A vida secreta das plantas. Atlantis 4/4,8–13.
Moore, P. D. (1983). Revival of the organismal heresy. Nature 303, 132–133.
Nicolis, G., Prigogine, I. (1977). Self-organization in Nonequilibrium Systems: From Dissipative
Structures to Order Through Fluctuations. New York: John Wiley.
Nitecki, M. H. (Ed.) (1983). Coevolution. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Nogar, R. J. (1963). The Wisdom of Evolution. New York: Doubleday.
Nogar, R. J. (1973). Aquinas, Sartre, and the lemmings. In Deely, J. N., Nogar, R. J. (Eds.) The
Problem of Evolution: A Study of the Philosophical Repercussions of Evolutionary Science.
New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts; Indianapolis: Hackett, pp. 365–375.
Odum, H. T. (1969). Environment, Power and Society. New York: John Wiley.
Odum, H. T. (1981). Energy: Basisfor Man and Nature. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Orians, G., Rhoades, D. (1983). (Trees battle bugs with signals, reported in Time, 20 June 1983.)
Pattee, H. H. (Ed.) (1973). Hierarchy Theory: The Challenge of Complex Systems. New York:
George Braziller.
Pattee, H. H., Edelsack, E. A., Fein, L., Callahan, A. B. (Eds.) (1966). Natural Automata and
Useful Simulations (Proceedings of a Symposium on Fundamental Biological Models, 17 June
1965, Stanford). Washington, D.C.: Spartan Books; and, London: MacMillan.
Patten, B. C., Auble, G. T. (1980). Systems approach to the concept of niche. Synthese 43(1), 155–
181; Conceptual Issues in Ecology, Special issues Synthese 43(1) and 43(2). Dordrecht and
Boston: D. Reidel.
Peckham, M. (1965). Man’s Rage for Chaos: Biology, Behavior, and the Arts. New York: Schocken
Books.
Peirce, C. S. (1934). Collected Papers. Vol. 5. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Percy, W. (1983). A semiotic primer of the self. In Percy, W. (Ed.) Lost in the Cosmos: The Last
Self-help Book. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Peters, D. S. (1983). Evolutionary theory and its consequences for the concept of adaptation. In
Grene, M. (Ed.) Dimensions oj Darwinism: Themes and Counter themes in Twentieth-century
Evolutionary Theory. Chapter 12. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; and, Paris: Editions
de la maison des sciences de l’homme, pp. 315–327.
Pimm, S. L. (1982). Food Webs. London: Chapman and Hall.
Pittendrigh, C. S. (1958). Adaptation, natural selection, and behavior. In Roe, A., Simpson, G. G.
(Eds.) Behavior and Evolution. Chapter 18. New Haven: Yale University Press, pp. 390–416.
Poinsot, J. (1632). Tractatus de Signis, translated and presented by Deely, J. N. in consultation with
Ralph Austin Powell under the subtitle, The Semiotic of John Poinsot. Berkeley: University of
California Press (1985).

12
A Semiotic Perspective on the Sciences
411
Prigogine, I. (1962). Introduction to Nonequilibrium Thermodynamics. New York: Wiley
Interscience.
Prigogine, I. (1980). From Being to Becoming: Time and Complexity in the Physical Sciences. San
Francisco: W. H. Freeman and Company.
Prigogine, I., Stengers, I. (1984). Order Out of Chaos, revised and translated from the French, La
nouvelle alliance: metamorphose de la science (1979). New York: Bantam Press.
Prigogine, I., Nicolis, G., Babloyantz, A. (1972). Thermodynamics of evolution. Physics Today
25(1 I), 23–28; 25(12), 38–44.
Prigogine, I., Stengers, I. (1979). La nouvelle alliance: metamorphose de la science. Paris: NRF,
Gallimard, Biblioteque des sciences humaines.
Ransdell, J. (1977). Some leading ideas of Peirce’s semiotic. Semiotica 19(3–4), 157–198.
Ransdell, J. (1979). Semiotic objectivity. Semiotica 26(3–4), 261–288.
Ransdell, J. (1982). On the paradigm of experience appropriate for semiotics. In Herzfeld, M.,
Lenhart, M. D. (Eds.) Semiotics 1980 (Proceedings of the Semiotic Society of America). New
York: Plenum Press.
Ransdell, J. (1977/1985a). Peircean semiotic. Semiotica 19, 157–178.
Ransdell, J. (1985b). Charles Sanders Peirce. In Encyclopedic Dictionary of Semiotics. Berlin:
Mouton/de Gruyter.
Rappaport, R. A. (1979). Ecology, Meaning, and Religion. Richmond, California: North Atlantic
Books.
Rey, A. (1973). Theories du signe et du sens. Paris: Klincksieck.
Russell, A. (198I). The logic of history as a semiotic process of question and answer in the thought
of R. G. Collingwood. In Deely, J. N., Lenhart, M. D. (Eds.) Semiotics 1981 (Proceedings of
the Semiotic Society of America). New York: Plenum Press, pp. 179–189.
Sahal, D. (1982). Structure and self-organization. Behavioral Science 27(3), 249–258.
Scharfe, H. (1982). Expansions: a study in the unity of science. Behavioral Science 27(3), 214–248.
Schultz, J. C. (1983). Tree tactics. Natural History 92(5), 12–25.
Scruton, R. (1981). The impossibility of semiotics. In Scruton, R. (Ed.) The Politics of Culture and
Other Essays. Chapter 3. (originally published in London Review of Books, 7 February 1980).
Manchester: Carcanet Press.
Sebeok, T. A. (1962). Coding in the evolution of signalling behavior. Behavioral Science 7, 430–
442.
Sebeok, T. A. (1963). Communication in animals and men. Language 39, 448–466.
Sebeok, T. A. (1965). Animal communication. Science 147(3661), 1006–1014.
Sebeok, T. A. (1971). Original draft of “‘Semiotics’ and its congeners”, reprinted in Contributions
to the Doctrine of Signs (1976), pp. 47–58.
Sebeok, T. A. (1972). Perspectives in Zoosemiotics, (Janua Linguarum, Series Minor, 122). Berlin:
Mouton.
Sebeok, T. A. (1975a). Zoosemiotics: at the intersection of nature and culture. In Sebeok, T. A.
(Ed.) The Tell-tale Sign: A Survey of Semiotics. Lisse: Peter de Ridder Press, pp. 85–96.
Sebeok, T. A. (1975b). The semiotic web: a chronicle of prejudices. Bulletin of Literary Semiotics
2 1–63 reprinted in Sebeok 1976, 149–188.
Sebeok, T. A. (1976). Contributions to the Doctrine of Signs. Lisse: Peter de Ridder Press.
Sebeok, T. A. (1977a). Zoosemiotic components of human communication. In Sebeok, T. A. (Ed.)
How Animals Communicate. Chapter 38. Bloomington and London: Indiana University Press,
pp. 1055–1977.
Sebeok, T. A. (1977b). Ecumenicalism in semiotics. In A Perfusion of Signs (Advances in
Semiotics), 180–206. Bloomington and London: Indiana University Press.
Sebeok, T. A. (1979). The Sign & Its Masters. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Sebeok, T. A. (1981). The Play of Musement. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Sebeok, T. A., Hayes, A. S., Bateson, M. C. (Eds.) (1964/1972). Approaches to Semiotics: Cultural
Anthropology, Education, Linguistics, Psychiatry, Psychology (Transactions of the Indiana

412
Myrdene Anderson (1934– ) et al.
University Conference on Paralinguistics and Kinesics), Janua Linguarum, Series Major 15,
2nd edition (original edition, 1964). Berlin: Mouton.
Sebeok, T. A., Rosenthal, R. (Eds.) (1981). The Clever Hans phenomenon: communication with
horses, whales, apes, and people. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, Vol. 364. New
York: The New York Academy of Sciences.
Sebeok, T. A., Umiker-Sebeok, J. (Eds.) (1980). Speaking of Apes: A Critical Anthology of Two-
way Communication with Man. New York and London: Plenum Press.
Shank, G. D. (Ed.) (1984). Paradigms for Empirical Semiotics. Toronto Semiotic Circle
Monograph, number 3.
Shanon, B. (1978). The genetic code and human language. Synthese 39, 401–415.
Singer, M. S. (1980). Signs of the self: an exploration in semiotic anthropology. American
Anthropologist 82(3), 485–507.
Simon, H. A. (1969). The Sciences of the Artiﬁcial (Karl Taylor Compton Lectures, 1968).
Cambridge and London: The MIT Press.
Simon, H. A. (1973). The organization of complex systems In Pattee, H. P. (Ed.) Hierarchy Theory:
The Challenge of Complex Systems. Chapter 1. New York: George Braziller, pp. 1–27.
Slobodkin, L. B. (1968). Toward a predictive theory of evolution. In Lewontin, R. C. (Ed.)
Population Biology and Evolution. Syracuse: Syracuse University Press, pp. 187–205.
Smith, C. J. (1975). Problems with entropy in biology. BioSystems 7, 259–265.
Smith, T. F., Morowitz, H. J. (1982). Between history and physics. Journal of Molecular Evolution
18, 265–282.
Smuts, J. C. (1926). Holism and Evolution. New York: The MacMillan Company.
Snow, S. C. P. (1959). The Two Cultures and the Scientiﬁc Revolution. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Snow, S. C. P. (1964). The Two Cultures: And a Second Look, 2nd edition. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Snyder, P. (1978). Toward One Science: The Convergence of Traditions. New York: St. Martin’s
Press, Inc.
Spencer-Brown, G., Keys, J. (1972). Only Two Can Play This Game. New York: The Julian Press,
Inc.
Spuhler, J. N. (1977). Biology, speech, and language. in Annual Review of Anthropology 6,
509–561.
Stokes, A. (1973). A Game That Must Be Lost; Collected Papers. Cheadle, Cheshire, England:
Carcanet Press Limited.
Stonehouse, B., Perrins, C. (Eds.) (1977). Evolutionary Ecology. Baltimore, London and Tokyo:
University Park Press.
Swanson, C. P. (1983). Ever-expanding Horizons: The Dual Informational Sources of Human
Evolution, 3rd edition (original edition 1954, 2nd edition 1965). Ammherst: The University
of Massachusetts Press.
Teilhard de Chardin, P. (1959). The Phenomenon of Man, translated by Wall, B. New York: Harper
and Row.
Thom, R. (1968). Topologie et signiﬁcation. L’iige de la science 4, 219–242.
Thom, R. (1970). Topologie et linguistique. In Haeﬂiger, A., Narasimhan, R. (Eds.) Essays on
Topology and Related Topics; memoires dedies a Georges de Rham. New York, Heidelberg,
and Berlin: Springer-Verlag, pp. 226–248.
Thom, R. (1973). De l’icone au symbole: esquisse d’une theorie du syrnbolisme. Cahiers
Internationaux de Symbolisme 22–23, 85–106.
Thom, R. (1974). La linguistique, discipline morphologique exemplaire. Critique 30, 235–245.
Thom, R. (1975a). Structural Stability and Morphogenesis: An Outline of a General Theory
of Models, translated from the French by Fowler, D. H. Reading, Massachusetts: The
Benjamin/Cummings Publishing Company, Inc.
Thom, R. (1975b). Les mathematiques et l’intelligible. Dialectica 29(1), 71–80.
Thom, R. (1978). De quoi faut-il s’etonner? Circe 8–9, 7–90.
Thom, R. (1980). L’espace et les signes, Semiotica 29(3–4), 193–208.
Thompson, J. N. (1982). Interaction and Coevolution. New York: Wiley-Interscience.

12
A Semiotic Perspective on the Sciences
413
Thompson, M. (1979). Rubbish Theory: The Creation and Destruction of Value. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Thullier, P. (1983). OU va le ‘neo-mecanicisme’? Review of L’auto-organisation de la physique
au politique (Proceedings of a colloquium at Cerisy, 1981), Dumouchel, P., Dupuy, J.-P. (Eds.).
La Recherche 14(146), 1013–1015.
Tomkins, G. W. (1975). The metabolic code. Science 189, 760–763.
Uexküll, J. von (1940/1982). Bedeutungslehre, Bios 10. Leipzig: Johann Ambrosius Barth.
Translated from the German by Barry Stone and Herbert Weiner as ‘The Theory of Meaning’
(1982) Semiotica 42(1), Thure von Uexküll (issue ed.), 25–82.
Uexküll, J. von (1957). A stroll through the world of animals and men; a picture book of invisible
worlds. In Instinctive Behavior: The Development of a Modern Concept, translated from the
German by Schiller, C. H. New York: International Universities Press, Inc, pp. 5–80.
Uexküll, T. von (1982a). Meaning and science in Jakob von Uexküll’s concept of biology.
Semiotica 42(1), 1–24.
Uexküll, T. von (1982b). Semiotics and the problem of the observer. In Deely, J. N, Lenhart, M.
D. (Eds.) Semiotics 1982 (Proceedings of the Semiotic Society of America). New York: Plenum
Press.
Umiker-Sebeok, J., Sebeok, T. A. (1980). Introduction: Questioning apes. In Speaking of Apes: A
Critical Anthology of Two-way Communication with Man (Topics in Contemporary Semiotics).
New York and London: Plenum Press, pp. 1–59.
Varela, F. G., Maturana, H. R., Uribe, R. (1974). Autopoiesis: the organization of living systems,
its characterization and a model. BioSystems 5, 187–196.
Waal, F. B. M. de., Hooff, J. A. R. A. M. van (1981). Side-directed communication and agnostic
interactions in chimpanzees. Behaviour 77(3), 164–198.
Waddington, C. H. (1960). Evolutionary adaptation. In Tax, S. (Ed.) The Evolution of Life, Vol. I
of Evolution after Darwin. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, pp. 381–402.
Watson, A., Lovelock, J. E., Margulis, L. (1978). Methanogenesis, ﬁres and the regulation of
atmospheric oxygen. BioSystems 10, 293–298.
Wechsler, J. (1978). Introduction. In Wechsler, J. (Ed.) On Aesthetics in Science. Cambridge,
Massachusetts and London: The MIT Press, pp. 1–7.
Weigin, X. (1981). A l’aube de la vie, la naissance du code genetique. La Recherche 12(125),
1000–1008.
Wesley, J. P. (1974). Ecophysics: The Application of Physics to Ecology. Springﬁeld, lllinois:
Charles C. Thomas, Publisher.
Whittaker, R. H. (1969). New concepts of kingdoms of organisms. Science 163(3863), 150–159.
Whittaker, R. H., Margulis, L. (1978). Protist classiﬁcation and the kingdoms of organisms.
BioSystems 10, 3–18.
Wilden, A. (1972). System and Structure: Essays in Communication and Exchange. London:
Tavistock Publications.
Wiley, E. O., Brooks, D. R. (1982). Victims of history – a nonequilibrium approach to evolution.
Systematic Zoology 31(1), 1–24.
Wiley, E. O., Brooks, D. R. (1983). Nonequilibrium thermodynamics and evolution: a response to
Lovtrup. Systematic Zoology 32(2), 209–219.
Williams, B. (1983). History as a semiotic anomaly. In Deely, J. N., Lenhart, M. D. (Eds.) Semiotics
1983 (Proceedings of the Semiotic Society of America). New York: Plenum Press.
Williams, B. (1984). What has history to do with semiotics? Semiotica 52, 1–47.
Wilson, E. O. (1975). Sociobiology: The New Synthesis. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Wilson, E. O. (1978). On Human Nature. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press.
Winance, E. (1983). Review article in Revue Thomiste 83(3), 514–516.
Woese, C. R. (1981). Archaebacteria. Scientiﬁc American 244(6), 98–122.
Yates, F. E. (1982). Outline of a physical theory of physiological systems. Canadian Journal of
Physiology and Pharmacology 60(3), 217–248.
Zeleny, M. (Ed.) (1980). Autopoiesis, Dissipative Structures, and Spontaneous Social Orders
(AAAS Selected Symposium, 53). Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press.

Part III
Independent Approaches to Biosemiotics

Chapter 13
Theoretical Biology on Its Way to Biosemiotics
Kalevi Kull (1952– )
Introduction and Commentary: Kalevi Kull
Semiosic practice—the behavior of organisms, including the everyday behavior of
humans—is the acquisition and application of knowledge. In humans, due to the usage
of propositional and narrative sign systems, semiosic practice develops into a ‘knowing of
knowing’, or semiotics sensu lato. A methodical acquisition and organization of knowledge
leads to science.
K. Kull (2009: 84)
Appropriate as it was to conclude the last section with a forward-looking article
by Sebeok and his collaborators so it is ﬁtting to begin this one with a backwards-
glancing article by biosemiotician Kalevi Kull. Founder of the world’s ﬁrst Ph.D.
granting program in Biosemiotics, Kull bridges both biosemiotics’ Sebeokian past
and its post-Sebeokian future. And like his late good friend and Colleague, Thomas
Sebeok, Kull is as committed to the facilitation of the publication of others’ work –
and to the archival chronicling of biosemiotic’s long and perhaps still largely undis-
covered history – as he is towards the contribution of his own original scholarship to
the ﬁeld. Yet as biosemiotic’s de facto archivist and historian, Kull rarely includes
his own biography among those past and present biosemioticians whose lives and
works he chronicles. This introduction aims to ﬁll in that one blind spot in Kull’s
biosemiotic scholarship.
Botanist, ethologist, theoretical biologist, and historian of science, Kalevi Kull
continues a long tradition of biosemiotically-oriented research in his native Estonia.
“Due to the deep analogies observable between living and linguistic systems,”
reports Kull in describing the founding of the Biosemiotics curriculum at Estonia’s
Tartu University, “the feeling here has been that it may also be possible to discover
the general theoretical explanations which span these ﬁelds. Especially because both
the biological tradition of [Tartu University alumni] Karl Ernst von Baer (1792–
1876), Jakob von Uexküll (1864–1944) and Thure von Uexküll (1908–2004), as
well as the semiotic tradition of [Tartu University faculty] Juri Lotman (1922–1993)
and Mikhail Lotman (1952– ) run strongly through Estonian intellectual life, we feel
that there is a solid basis here in Tartu for work on this subject” (2009:p.c.).
Born in Tartu, Estonia, on August 12, 1952, Kull’s ﬁrst acquaintance with the
works of Jakob von Uexküll came in 1968, when he was working as a young
417
D. Favareau, Essential Readings in Biosemiotics, Biosemiotics 3,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9650-1_13, C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010

418
Kalevi Kull (1952– )
assistant at the Puhtu Ornithological Station with a small group of scientists who
were studying the ontogeny of bird thermoregulation. “These were romantic days
with many hours spent in a tent on an islet, “ recalls Kull, ‘chronometrizing’ the
behavior of nestlings and their parents; other hours spent at night in the lab, exper-
imenting with small birds’ reactions to different temperatures, and still more time
with a heap of books about theory of biology” (ibid). The building in which the
Ornithological Station itself was housed, it turns out, was in the former summer
home of Jakob von Uexküll, and over time, Kull’s own work in biology, and in
biosemiotics, would become deeply inﬂuenced by Uexküll’s Umweltlehre.
Fittingly, Kull received his education in biology at Tartu University, home of the
world’s oldest semiotics program, as well as the world’s oldest semiotics journal
(Sign Systems Studies), both founded by Juri Lotman (1922–1993) in 1964. Lotman
would eventually become a colleague of Kull’s, as would pioneering biosemiotician
Thure von Uexküll, creating a ripe atmosphere for the continuing development of
biosemiotics, and earning Tartu University Thomas A. Sebeok’s praise as “a singular
Mecca-like ﬁeld for us pilgrims laboring in the domain of semiotics” (2001: 164).1
Within this already proto-biosemiotic intellectual milieu, Kull received his
degree as a ﬁeld ecologist in 1975 and began work immediately as an ecophysi-
ologist, studying the various mechanisms of balance in lives of organisms in their
natural conditions, and in particular, the mechanisms of species coexistence within
species-rich communities. Accordingly, after his ethological work studying the
mechanisms of temperature homeostasis (including the ontogenesis of thermoreg-
ulation and the behavioural aspects of temperature regulation in birds at the Puhtu
Ornithological Station), Kull spent several years conducting experimental work at
the Vooremaa Forest Ecology Station in eastern Estonia, studying the ecophysio-
logical mechanisms of growth limitation in plants, and developing mathematical
models of these mechanisms, based on his research ﬁndings.
This early work in theoretical biology – and the realization that many of his stu-
dents were unaware of all but the latest and most thoroughly orthodox developments
in experimental science – inspired Kull to organize the Estonian Spring School in
Theoretical Biology in May 1975. These conferences for students and faculty have
since become annual events, taking place each year in a different part of the Estonian
countryside and each year devoted to a different single topic in theoretical biology.
Thus, past Spring Schools have been devoted to theoretical biological theories of
growth, death, sleep, sex, communication – and even to the concept of theoretical
biology itself.
In 1978, with Tartu University already a nexus of the burgeoning Tartu-Moscow
school of semiotic study, Kull and his colleagues organized a joint Russian-Estonian
conference entitled “Biology and Linguistics” which explored the possible rela-
tions between these two synchronically stable but diachronically novelty-generating
1 Just as ﬁttingly, and thanks to the efforts of Kalevi Kull, Tartu University today is the home of
the Thomas A. Sebeok Memorial Library, housing Sebeok’s personal, and extensive, collection of
literature devoted to biology, semiotics and biosemiotics.

13
Theoretical Biology on Its Way to Biosemiotics
419
systems. The success of this conference led to a series of increasingly biology-
oriented semiotic conferences aimed at augmenting the more “general semiotic”
conferences that Juri Lotman had initiated at Tartu University with the founding of
Estonian Summer School in Semiotics in 1964, and continued throughout the 1980s,
and brought into this slowly coalescing ﬁeld of “bio-semiotics” such future seminal
biosemioticians as Sergey Chebanov and Alexei Sharov.
In 1992, Kull was named a Professor of Ecophysiology at the University of
Tartu, and became head of the Ecophysiology Division in the university’s Institute of
Zoology and Botany. In this position, Kull and his team of researchers discovered a
plant community with the highest small-scale species diversity in Europe, and estab-
lished the Laelatu Biological Station for the permanent study of that site. In 1989,
Kull had drawn upon his earlier work at the Vooremaa Forest Ecology Station to
write, with his brother Olevi Kull (1955–2007) Dinamicheskoe modelirovanie rosta
derev’ev (Dynamical Modelling of Tree Growth). Eight years later, Kull would write
Puisniidud (Wooded Meadows) about the most species-rich botanical communities
of northern Europe, with his colleague Toomas Kukk.
1992 was also the year that Kull made the acquaintance of both Thomas Sebeok
and Jesper Hoffmeyer at the conference for biology and semiotics that Sebeok and
Thure von Uexküll had organized with Jörg Hermann at the Glotterbad Clinic for
Rehabilitative Medicine in Glottertal, Germany. By many accounts, this meeting
“marks the dividing line between the initial period in the establishment of biosemi-
otics, and biosemiotics as it is presently practiced” (Hoffmeyer 2008: 365). No
longer conﬁned to just those general semioticians and small handful of scientists
that Thomas Sebeok had personally recruited to the project, the reach of biosemi-
otics now began to expand exponentially with the growth of “satellite” biosemiotics
communities in Copenhagen and Tartu, led by the biologists Hoffmeyer and Kull,
respectively (and between whose groups there has remained much productive
collaboration and contact).
In 1993, Kull was instrumental in the establishment of the Jakob von Uexküll
Center for biosemiotic study at the Estonian Naturalists’ Society. A regular lecture
course on biosemiotics was also introduced at Tartu University by Kull that year,
“in the year of the death of Juri Lotman,” Kull notes, “but [commencing] with his
introductory words, as dictated in the hospital” (1999: 404). This course is now
offered every year and is included in the University’s standard Semiotics curriculum.
Given the receptivity towards biosemiotics evidenced at his University, Kull traded
his position in the Ecophysiology Division to join the Department of Semiotics in
1997, where he continues to teach biosemiotics, ecosemiotics, general semiotics,
theoretical biology, and the history and philosophy of life science.
Kull assumed editorship of the world’s original semiotics journal, Sign Systems
Studies, in 1998, and in 2001, he edited the special quadruple issue of Semiotica
dedicated to Jakob von Uexküll. “Forty-one distinguished academics from ﬁfteen
different countries have produced a 828-page volume with papers on history, philos-
ophy, theoretical biology, ecology, linguistics, arts, biology, literature and computer
science” in this volume, notes biosemiotician Marcello Barbieri, in reviewing
this Special Issue – and, despite his own theoretical disagreements about the

420
Kalevi Kull (1952– )
“anti-mechanism” found in many of these papers, he concludes that together they
form “a powerful, pulsating new vision about the fundamentals of life: a new theory
of signiﬁcation and biological meaning” (2002: 283).
Not long after, and due in no small part to Kull’s Sebeok-like organizational
efforts, biosemiotics as an international interdisciplinary research agenda began tak-
ing on a life outside of the still largely humanities-based home that Sebeok had been
able to provide it with. In collaboration with Claus Emmeche and Jesper Hoffmeyer,
Kull co-organized the ﬁrst annual international Gatherings in Biosemiotics con-
ference at the University of Copenhagen in 2001. Thirty scientists and scholars
from eighteen countries attended that event, which in many ways marked another
watershed moment and turning-point in the development of biosemiotics. “There,”
I have written elsewhere, having been myself privileged to attend that groundbreak-
ing event, “these second-generation heirs of Sebeok’s Glottertal conferences were
able to bring together a growing group of younger researchers for whom the idea
of fully causal, semiotic dynamism in autopoetic systems was no longer a ‘radi-
cal proposal’ from the humanities – but was, instead, the self-evidently naturalistic
starting point from which to proceed to build a coherent and scientiﬁcally grounded
interdiscipline” (2008: 41).
The ﬁrst annual international Gatherings in Biosemiotics was convened in the
very room at the University of Copenhagen where Wilhelm Johanssen (1857–
1927) ﬁrst introduced the word “gene” in 1909. Appropriately enough, the second
annual international Gatherings in Biosemiotics, hosted by Kull, was convened
at Tartu University and featured sessions in the former houses of both Karl
von Baer and Jakob von Uexküll. Since 2006, Kull has been the Head of the
Tartu University’s Department of Semiotics and, in 2007, became the world’s
ﬁrst full Professor in Biosemiotics, establishing there the world’s ﬁrst doctoral
degree-granting programme in Biosemiotics in 2008.
Having himself been deeply involved in biological ﬁeldwork, experimental biol-
ogy, ecology, ethology, theoretical biology and biosemiotics, Kull is uniquely
positioned to situate the contemporary research agenda of biosemiotics within the
larger history of theoretical biology. Having done so already in two previous publi-
cations (1993 and 2000), Kull expands upon his previous research in the following
selection, providing the reader with a rich historical background within which to
contextualize both the non-Sebeokian readings (i.e., Florkin, Rothschild, Bateson,
Pattee) and the post-Sebeokian (Hoffmeyer, Emmeche, Markoš, Brier, Witzany,
Deacon, and Barbieri) readings that comprise the second half of this anthology.

13
Theoretical Biology on Its Way to Biosemiotics
421
Theoretical Biology on Its Way
to Biosemiotics (2009)
Den Lebens-Prozess . . . halten wir nicht für ein Resultat des organischen Baues,
sondern für den Rhythmus, gleichsam die Melodie, nach welcher der organische Körper sich
aufbaut und umbaut.2
Karl Ernst von Baer (1864: 280)
Symphony or embryo, the principle is the same:
the more complex the pattern, the more important the silences.
Robert Pollack (1994: 76)
“What would a fully adequate theory of biology look like?” is a question that has
been central to the ﬁeld of Theoretical Biology during all of its existence, and that
is still pertinent to us today, as we begin developing what is perhaps the third “great
wave” in theoretical biology, which is biosemiotics. As such, it would do well for
us to review some of the historical trajectory that has brought us to this point.
Biological theories and theoretical concepts in biology are obviously as old as
biology itself, since there cannot be any science without its theoretical aspect.
However, “theoretical biology” as a discipline – with its dedicated monographs,
periodicals, professionals, and nomenclature – arose primarily at the beginning of
the 20th century. The works which launched the ﬁeld were Johannes Reinke’s
“Einleitung in die theoretische Biologie”3 (1901) and Jakob von Uexküll’s
“Theoretische Biologie” (1920a).
The meaning of the term “biology” had already been reserved since the year
1800 when it was deﬁned by Karl Friedrich Burdach (and a year later by Jean-
Baptiste Lamarck and Gottfried Reinhold Treviranus), to denote the integrity of
various aspects and forms of life (including plants, animals and humans, morphol-
ogy, physiology and behaviour, etc.). This is how the term has been interpreted since
the end of the 19th century (e.g., by the leading European journal “Zeitschrift für
Biologie”, edited by Wilhelm Kühne) and is still understood today. In the same way,
Theoretical Biology has set as its aim the development of a theory which can be
applied for understanding the phenomenon of life however and wherever it occurs.
During the 100 years since its birth at the beginning of the 20th century, theo-
retical biology has experienced two remarkable peaks of interest. The ﬁrst was in
the 1930s, and the second was in the 1960s and 1970s. These ﬁrst two peaks will
be brieﬂy characterised below, given that a third peak of interest is just showing the
ﬁrst signs of its possible emergence now (this peak will be brieﬂy discussed at the
conclusion of this article).
In short, this essay will attempt to suggest some contexts and associations of the
semiotic view in biology, by making a short review of the development of theoretical
2 We hold life process not for the result of the organic construction, but for the rhythm, as a melody,
according to which the organic bodies build and rebuild themselves.
3 “Introduction to theoretical biology”.

422
Kalevi Kull (1952– )
biology over a one century period, as viewed from the side of biology. The latter is
an important restriction, since the picture may look considerably different from the
viewpoint of and in the context of semiotics. It is important to emphasize this since
biosemiotics, although now accepted as a distinct branch in semiotics, has still not
established itself widely in biology. For instance, one can ﬁnd chapters devoted
to biosemiotics in contemporary semiotic textbooks, and corresponding sections in
large semiotic conferences, whereas the same is quite rare in biological (or even
ethological) reviews or congresses. However, the situation today is already different
from that of two decades ago, when Dietmar Todt (1987) and Joachim Schult (1989:
261) claimed: “Es ist ohne jeden Zweifel so, daß [..] die Semiotik bisher in die
Biologie kaum Eingang gefunden hat.”4
Delimiting the period to one century also means that according to the approach
used in this review and the meaning given here to the term “biosemiotics”, this
branch of science (or a corresponding approach) may have existed under some other
name before this period and will exist after it. Such a situation is certainly common
for many, if not for almost all sciences. The fact that there are not many comprehen-
sive analyses of the history of theoretical biology, despite its rapid development in
this century, is an additional hurdle to the making of this analysis.
Biology at the Beginning of the 20th Century
To understand the atmosphere in biology during Reinke’s and Uexküll’s time, it is
important to note that the decades around the turn of the century were very pro-
ductive in starting simultaneously a series of new branches in biological research.
Among these, the following can be listed:
(1) the beginning of genetics through the rediscovery of Mendel’s laws;
(2) the beginning of mathematical biology and research into population variability,
under the name of biometry (Karl Pearson); and the establishment of the ﬁrst
journal (“Biometrika”) in this ﬁeld (1901–1902);
(3) the beginning of biophysics (Jacques D’Arsonval et al. 1901);
(4) the ﬁrst book with the title “theoretical biology” (Johannes Reinke 1901);
(5) the boom of neovitalism (Hans Driesch);
(6) intensive work in the ﬁeld of morphogenesis (Wilhelm Roux’s “Entwickel-
ungsmechanik”);
(7) also, ecology as an independent science took its ﬁrst steps at this time (Warming
1895).
All of these events had long-lasting effect on biology, and considerably inﬂu-
enced its theoretical discussions. We may say, I suppose, that at that time theoretical
biology as a branch of biology was born. Before that time, there existed works which
4 “There is no doubt that semiotics has yet hardly found any input to biology”.

13
Theoretical Biology on Its Way to Biosemiotics
423
can be classiﬁed as theoretical biology, but as a branch with its own specialised jour-
nals, books, terminologies and devoted specialists, it did not previously exist. This
period of intensive diversiﬁcation in biology at the turn of the century is somewhat
comparable to the great peak in theoretical biology which took place in the 1960s
and 1970s.
Jakob von Uexküll (1864–1944), who developed one of the ﬁrst comprehen-
sive systems of notions for semiotic biology, was probably the most important
ﬁgure in biosemiotics in the ﬁrst half of the 20th century. His books “Umwelt und
Innenwelt der Tiere” (1909), “Bausteine zu einer biologischen Weltanschauung”
(1913), “Theoretische Biologie” (1920a, 1928), “Bedeutungslehre” (1940), popular
scientiﬁc books “Biologische Briefe an eine Dame” (1920b), “Streifzüge durch die
Umwelten von Tieren und Menschen” (Uexküll and Kriszat 1934),5 and many arti-
cles, introduced an approach and terminology which was for a long time used and
accepted only by a small group of scientists, but that now (and particularly in the
last decade) has found rapidly spreading use in the works of semioticians, as well as
in the works of many psychologists, anthropologists, ecologists, philosophers, and
computer scientists. It should be noted that Uexküll was, primarily, a biologist who
was not content with the commonly used level of scientiﬁc argumentation, and who
thus decided to place biology on a solid philosophical basis.
Uexküll stressed that his approach was a development of the views of German
physiologist Johannes Müller (1801–1858), whose law of speciﬁc sensory energies
states that “the modality of the sensation depends in an immediate manner only upon
what region of the central organ is put into a corresponding excited state, indepen-
dent of the external causes bringing about the excitation” (Schlick 1977: 165). Or,
as formulated by Uexküll (1931a: 209): “Eine lebende Zelle besitzt ihren eigenen
Ichton”.6 As for his philosophical grounding, Uexküll applied the epistemology of
Immanuel Kant to his research of animals’ behavior and their subjective experience.
The term Umwelt in its meaning of the subjective world of an organism had been
used by Uexküll since 1909 (in his article of 1907 he still uses the term “Milieu”, in
distinction from “Außenwelt”).
Uexküll also emphasized that he was a follower of Karl Ernst von Baer’s (1792–
1876) line of thinking in biology. He cited many times Baer’s interpretation of
biological time, and felt drawn also to his other views in general biology. Indeed,
the Baltic German embryologist Baer developed an approach in biology which has
later been considered as an alternative and comparable in its importance to that of
Darwinism (cf. “I insist on the rigid separation of von Baer and Haeckel” [Gould
1977: 4] and “Baer, and not Darwin, should become the central historical ﬁgure in
theoretical biology” [Salthe 1993b: 247]).
5 “Animal’s umwelt and internal world”, “Building blocks of a biological worldview”, “Theoretical
biology”, “Theory of meaning”, “Biological letters to a lady”, “Strolls through the worlds of
animals and men”.
6 A living cell possesses its own self-tone.

424
Kalevi Kull (1952– )
It is well-known that Uexküll was not acquainted with the works of semioticians.
Almost his only conversations with people close to semiotics were those in Hamburg
with Ernst Cassirer (1874–1945) and Heinz Werner (1890–1964, the co-author of
“Symbol Formation”; Werner 1919), however, they were both much younger, and
Uexküll’s views were already established at that time. Later, he also corresponded
with philologist Heinrich F. J. Junker (1889–1970). Far more important were prob-
ably the inﬂuences he took from the late romanticist atmosphere in Estonia, from
the special biological environment in the Biological Station of Naples, and from the
Heidelberg laboratory of Wilhelm Kühne (1837–1900, a pupil of Johannes Müller
and the author of the “enzyme” concept).
Uexküll developed his approach in an extensive way in his book “Theoretische
Biologie”, the second edition (1928) of which became well-known and was later
reprinted. Hermann Keyserling was among the early philosophers who proposed a
whole epistemology to be based on Uexküll’s approach.
In the context of semiotics, it is of interest here to draw attention to one aspect of
Uexküll’s methodology, namely, his very frequent use of musical metaphors. This
practice was actually quite common among romanticist biologists. We also ﬁnd it
in the works of Baer (1864). However, in the writings of Uexküll, metaphors like
Ton, Tastatur, Melodie, Motiv, Kontrapunkt, Komposition and others seem to play a
particularly important role. Uexküll, when building his “subjective biology” – and
at the same time criticizing Darwinians for not being scientiﬁc enough – needed a
new vocabulary, as well as a new methodology. Since he did not know semiotics or
any other applicable terminology from the humanities, he used terms from music for
this purpose. “So sind die organischen Faktoren, die wir bei der Entwicklung bisher
kennen gelernt haben: Gene, Plan und Protoplasma – Noten, Melodie und Klavier.
Gene und Plan scheinen stets ganz tadellos zu sein, nur bei ihrer Einwirkung auf
das Protoplasma können Störungen vorkommen, die wir experimentell ausnutzen; –
wie eine Sonate Beethovens, die auf dem Papier tadellos ist, in ihrer Ausführung
auf dem Klavier aber oft recht viel zu wünschen übrig lässt”7 (Uexküll 1913: 175).
This aspect in Uexküll’s works deserves special analysis.
In areas which later have interested biosemioticians, several other trends can also
be listed from this early period.
Charles Darwin (1872) wrote a book on the evolution of emotions, which was an
early work on ethology; ethology was established as a branch and mainly developed
in the 20th century. In this context, a great impact on research in behavioural sci-
ence in the 20th century was made by George John Romanes (1883) (1848–1894).
“Following Spencer, Romanes traced the objective manifestations of mind back to
the most primitive forms of life, to plants and protozoa; indeed he conceived mind
as an organic development out of the phenomenon of life” (Richards 1989: 349).
7 “The organic factors that we have studied in development so far – genes, plan, and protoplasm –
are thus notes, melody, and piano. Genes and plan always seem to be quite perfect, only at their
inﬂuence on the protoplasm disturbances can occur, which we experimentally exploit – like a
Beethoven’s sonata, which is perfect on paper, but in their execution on piano often leaves much
to be desired.”

13
Theoretical Biology on Its Way to Biosemiotics
425
As a reaction to important achievements in biochemistry and the spread of reduc-
tionism in biology, holistic views started to reappear in the last decades of the
previous century. In an introduction to the textbook of physiological and pathologi-
cal chemistry by Gustav Bunge (1887) (1844–1920, a scientist of Tartu University),
neovitalism was introduced on to the scene (Eduard von Hartmann 1906). It is
noticeable that the ﬁrst monographs on theoretical biology, as well as the wider
usage of the term “theoretical biology” derived from biologists of clearly neovi-
talistic inclination (Reinke 1901). Sergey Meyen (1977) has shown in his article
“The principle of sympathy”, “how Driesch had expressed all the basic dilemmas
of biology” (Karpinskaya 1994: 114). Hans Driesch’s analysis of biological form
is not very far from the interpretation of biological form in contemporary works on
biosemiotics. When speaking about the positive sides of neovitalism, it is important
to emphasize the basic assumption, that holistic concepts can be introduced in a
fashion that does not violate any physical laws (Elsasser 1982: 21). An analogous
assumption should hold when speaking about the positive features of several repre-
sentatives of neo-Lamarkism (an approach which also has some features important
for the history of biosemiotics): it should be assumed that Crick’s central dogma
holds. And indeed, at least several neo-Lamarckians (e.g., German botanist Carl
Nägeli, and British paleontologist David M. S. Watson) have clearly stated that
acquired characters are not inheritable (cf. Bowler 1983, Cannon 1957, Mayr 1972),
which means that the third mechanism of evolutionary perfection (an autogenetic
one, or based on genetic predisposition) was considered possible besides those of
natural selection or acquired adaptation.
The biologists adhering to the soft version of vitalism (or taking a compromise
position between vitalism and mechanicism), according to Ernst Mayr, “might be
best referred to as organicists”, since “vitalism has become so disreputable a belief
in the last 50 years that no biologist alive today would want to be classiﬁed as a vital-
ist” (Mayr 1988: 13). This should be considered in relation to the fact that Uexküll’s
name has been listed as the second one after Driesch in the articles about neovital-
ism in several encyclopedia. To the organicists in this sense, Mayr classiﬁes among
others also the above mentioned Johannes Müller. Here, Max Delbrück’s (1976)
view can be recalled, showing a deep analogy between the Aristotle’s hylomorphic
principle (usually held to be the beginning of vitalism) and the principle implied in
DNA (cf. Mayr 1988: 13).
Among the early anti-Darwinian theories, developed in the end of the 19th cen-
tury, one of the possibly more interesting ones for later biosemiotic views was the
autogenetic theory of evolution (as established, e.g., by Carl Nägeli and Theodor
Eimer). Its main statement is the existence of an immanent (intrinsic) source of
evolutionary change, the intrinsic trend towards the diversiﬁcation of structure and
behaviour (cf. Csanyi and Kampis 1985). Theodor Eimer stressed the predictability
of that trend, using the term orthogenesis (cf. Mayr 1988: 499). Several psychola-
marckists, such as Edward Cope, were also quite close to these views. “It was
their unshakable belief in teleology that induced Karl Ernst von Baer and other
of Darwin’s contemporaries to attack the theory of selection so temperamentally.
Indeed, the belief in a teleological force in nature was so ﬁrmly anchored in the

426
Kalevi Kull (1952– )
thinking of many that even among the evolutionists this belief had more follow-
ers in the ﬁrst 80 years after 1859 than did Darwin’s theory of selection” (Mayr
1988: 59).
After the works of August Weismann, it became generally accepted that acquired
characters cannot be inherited. In modern terms, genetic memory works as read-
only, as a ROM. As a result of this discovery, the autogenetic theories were thrown
into the dustbin of history, together with all they included. The nomogenetic theory
of evolution (Lev Berg, Alexandr Lyubischev, Sergey Meyen) has been one of the
rare (and a quite unknown for the majority of biologists) approaches which still held
and developed in a way the autogenetic view.
Memory is certainly an important component in semiotic processes. In this
aspect, there exists a forgotten investigation from the theoretical biology of the
beginning of the century – Richard Semon’s (1911) (1859–1918) analysis of bio-
logical systems, based on the notions of mneme and engram (which is related in
its approach to the works of Ewald Hering (1912), Eugen Bleuler, Edward Cope,
Eugenio Rignano and Samuel Butler; cf. Blandino 1969). Bertrand Russell’s book
“The Analysis of Mind” was largely based on Semon’s approach, through which the
latter has also indirectly inﬂuenced contemporary philosophy. However, it is inter-
esting to mention that in his later works Russell did not cite Semon’s name almost
at all. The probable reason for this is hidden in Semon’s belief to the inheritance of
acquired characters, i.e. the view due to which its supporters lost their position on
the map of science. But exactly in the way that this part of Darwin’s views (pangen-
esis) were considered indifferent in relation to his main views, so also in the case
of Semon this assumption does not greatly inﬂuence his general ideas on biological
memory.
The First Wave of Theoretical of Biologists: 1920–1940
Between the peaks of theoretical biology of 1900 and the 1960s–1970s, there was
also a remarkable wave in the 1930s. It was characterized by the publication of the
ﬁrst inﬂuential monographs calling themselves “theoretical biology” (Ludwig von
Bertalanffy, Erwin Bauer), Nicolas Rashevsky’s mathematical biophysics, Alfred
Lotka’s and Vladimir A. Kostitzin’s mathematical biology, and the start of several
journals in this ﬁeld. This has been called the golden age of theoretical ecology
(Scudo and Ziegler 1978). As a result of works by Ronald A. Fisher, Sewall Wright
and John B. S. Haldane, the Darwinian theory of natural selection obtained its math-
ematical basis, and the so-called modern synthesis took place, giving rise to the
synthetic theory of evolution. According to Ernst Mayr (1988: 550), “An unexpected
achievement of the synthesis was its effect on the prestige of evolutionary biology.
The 1920s and 1930s experienced an absolute low in the esteem of evolutionary
biology within biology.” Since that time, neo-Darwinism became the dominating
view in biology for a considerably long time, and holism became unpopular. These
developments did not give much to semiotic biology, at least during their ﬁrst
decades.

13
Theoretical Biology on Its Way to Biosemiotics
427
At the same time, holistic views in biology were still quite strong, but this can
be seen as late inertia from the neo-vitalist or organicist period of the beginning
of the century. Of the more mathematically-biased holistic biologists, the works of
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson (1917), Joseph Woodger (1930/1931, 1952), Ludwig
von Bertalanffy (1932) should be mentioned.
Besides Uexküll with his “Bedeutungslehre” (1940), there were also several other
biologists inﬂuenced by neovitalistic approaches, in whose works some insights
into semiotic biology can be found, among them Edgar Dacqué (1878–1945),
Karl Friederichs (1878–1969), Friedrich Brock (1898–1958), Adolf Meyer-Abich
(1893–1971), Richard Woltereck (1877–1944), and others.
Edgar Dacqué’s (1929) title “Leben als Symbol” for his book indicates that he,
may be, had some semiotic ideas in mind. “Das Individuum ist also, wie schon
gezeigt, Symbol, in dem die Entelechie der Art begrenzten Ausdruck ﬁndet”8
(Dacqué 1929: 102). However, the book itself is not directly a semiotic one.
Karl Friederichs (1937) analysed the terms Bedeutung, Sinn, and Wert in his
book on ecology. He also proposed the replacement of Uexküll’s term Umwelt by
Eigenwelt (self-world), which he saw as more appropriate.
Adolf Meyer-Abich (1963, Meyer 1934) has interpreted the work of Uexküll
as the ﬁrst formulation of functional archetypes, in addition to the morphological
archetypes already known in biology for a long time. According to a sectarian view
of Meyer-Abich, physics should be a part of biology, not vice versa. However, this
view can be seen in another light, if interpreted it in the light of the ideas of Walter
Elsasser (1982) or Robert Rosen (1991a) on the need for broadening the basis of
physics in order to include the nature of living processes.
Friedrich Brock, who was a pupil of Uexküll and his follower in the Institut
für Umweltforschung in Hamburg, carried out some experimental research into ani-
mal Umwelts. He has also underlined the closeness of Umweltlehre to Leibniz’s
philosophy (Brock 1939; also Lassen 1939/1941).
Richard Woltereck (1932, 1940), in his “Ontology of living”, has emphasized
the existence of many intermediate forms between the somatic unconscious and the
mental conscious intentional. He has also analyzed the concept of adaptation from
the point of view of subjective biology, and has stressed the role of representation
for intentional phenomena. His approach might be considered as a development of
Uexküll’s views. “Für den lebenden Körper existiert nur, was ihn erregt, wofür er
resonant ist, was für ihn Bedeutung besitzt”9 (Woltereck 1940: 431).
Thus, the inﬂuence of the organicist approach to the growth of semiotic trends in
biology has probably been conspicuous, however, this has obtained a wider accep-
tance only due to the works of Uexküll, the role and results of other scientists
of this trend being left almost unnoticed in the period dominated by genetic pre-
formism. I do not claim with this that the works mentioned above are all valuable
8 “The individual is, as already shown, a symbol, in which the entelechy of the species ﬁnds its
limited expression”.
9 “For the living body exists only what excites it, what he is resonant with, what has a meaning for
it”.

428
Kalevi Kull (1952– )
for contemporary semiotic biology, but I do claim that Uexküll was not alone in his
views.
In parallel, it should also be mentioned that in the works of several semioticians
of that time (Charles Morris, Ernst Cassirer, Roman Jakobson), biology was already
seen as occupying a space close to the science of signs.
The Second Great Wave and Zoosemiotics, 1960–1980
As noted, the 1960s precipitated the rise of a new powerful wave of theoretical biol-
ogy, with the “Journal of Theoretical Biology”, biocybernetics, information theory,
systems theory, Waddington, Rosen, many new journals and book series, etc. This
was a period of applied mathematics in every ﬁeld of biology, together with a diver-
siﬁcation of theoretical approaches. Due to the great inﬂuence of biocybernetics in
this period, communication processes received much attention by biologists.
This was also the start of extensive molecular biological research, with the deci-
phering and understanding of the genetic code and the principal ways of information
transfer in a cell. There were also a rise in the application of information theory
in biology, and the quick development of mathematical biology, biophysics, and
biocybernetics. At the same time, ethology became very popular.
Ecology, for which this period was also a time of large extension, is a branch of
biology in which holistic views have had a strong inﬂuence, together with reduc-
tionist approaches, of course. Eugene P. Odum (1964) “clearly delineated these
two camps and placed himself in the forefront of the holists” (McIntosh 1988:
201). However, as Anna Bramwell (1990) has illustrated, these relationships are
very complex and any superﬁcial division is not correct. According to Bramwell,
the organicist biology of Uexküll’s time was that which gave the initial power to
ecological views, extending far outside a professional biology.
The powerful introduction of cybernetic ideas and the concept of information
into biology was thought to solve the eternal problems of the teleology of liv-
ing together with the relationships of mind and matter. However, these problems,
instead, resolved into many branches. Among them, an interesting book by Miller
et al. (1960) should be mentioned; this applied the notion of plan to the explana-
tion of animal behaviour. Along the lines of this period, Uexküll’s approach could
be intepreted as an early development of some biocybernetic notions. Also, sev-
eral notions of Hans Driesch were taken into use in the theory of self-regulating
systems (for instance, equiﬁnality, by Ludwig von Bertalanffy, Paul Weiss, and
others). There were, however, scientiﬁc branchings emerging from biocybernetics,
represented by Gregory Bateson, and from the collaborations between Humberto
Maturana and Francisco J. Varela – three names often quoted in contemporary
biosemiotic works.
Susan Oyama, referring to Gerd Sommerhoff (1974), has stated that “under-
standing of goal-directedness requires neither mentalistic language nor invocation
of machine models, but conceptual clarity and investigation of actual relation-
ships among variables and their consequences” (Oyama 1985: 133). Thus, despite

13
Theoretical Biology on Its Way to Biosemiotics
429
the explanations given to goal-directedness in cybernetics (bearing in mind here
the analogies between Uexküll’s functional circle and Norbert Wiener’s feedback
loop and its applications in neurobiology, e.g. by Pyotr K. Anokhin), and Kari
Lagerspetz’s (1959) and Ernst Mayr’s analysis of biological teleology (proposing
the term “teleonomy” to make these biological phenomena acceptable to scientists
of other philosophical backgrounds), it seems to be, nevertheless, appropriate to
propose these terms for the next round of analysis – semiotic analysis (cf. Powell
1986).
This situation may have helped create an environment in which the semiotic
approach could be applied in biology. It began as zoosemiotics, primarily through
the works by Thomas Sebeok.
Sebeok’s work has been immense, and it is largely due to him that biosemi-
otics, ﬁrst, appeared in the 1960s, and second, is stepping towards its heyday today.
Instead of listing his works I refer here to his bibliography (Deely 1995).
The belief in the at least potential possibility to conjoin semiotics with biology
was also not alien to several other leading semioticians. In 1967, Roman Jakobson
said (1971: 675): “The complete failure of mechanistic efforts to transplant bio-
logical (e.g., Darwinian or Mendelian) theories into the science of language or to
fuse linguistic and racial criteria led linguists temporarily to distrust joint designs
with biology, but at present, when both the study of language and the study of life
have experienced continuous progress and stand before new, crucial problems and
solutions, this scepticism must be overcome.”
Along with Sebeok, there were several others who started to use semiotic ter-
minology in ethology and biological communication studies. For instance, Günter
Tembrock (1971), inﬂuenced by zoosemiotics, applied the concepts of syntax,
pragmatics, and semantics, as basic aspects in his classiﬁcation and analysis of
communication phenomena in biology.
Another branch in biology, besides ethology, which started to search for ways
of integration with general linguistics, was molecular genetics. Marcel Florkin
(1900–1979), a Belgian biochemist, published a large paper on the biosemiotics of
biochemistry, in which he applied the Saussurean approach to molecular processes
of the cell (Florkin 1974; cf. Emmeche and Hoffmeyer 1991). In addition, George
Beadle and Muriel Beadle wrote: “Science can now translate at least a few mes-
sages written in DNAese into the chemical language of blood and bone and nerves
and muscle. One might also say that the deciphering of the DNA code has revealed
our possession of a language much older than hieroglyphics, a language as old as
life itself, a language that is the most living language of all” (Beadle and Beadle
1966: 207).
However, the majority of these attempts to apply semiotic terminology in biol-
ogy (e.g., Tembrock, Florkin, Beadle) did not go very deep. This means, one still
probably cannot see in them the establishment of semiotic biology as an approach
which considers the living process itself as having a basically semiotic nature. In
this sense, particularly as concerns molecular biology, one may distinguish between
the application of linguistic and semiotic approaches, the former being much more
widely used in that period.

430
Kalevi Kull (1952– )
According to Robert Rosen (1991b, 217), who has for a long time searched for
non-reductionistic ways of building the theory of biology (as has another exact
scientist in the ﬁeld, Walter Elsasser), “biology is the way that we will ﬁnd answers
to most, if not all, of the deep questions which have engaged the human mind
throughout our history. I have always believed that biology is the central science,
in which all others converge, and which in turn illuminates them all with new light.”
Not very far from these thoughts, in a series of conferences “Towards a theoreti-
cal biology” in 1968–1972 with a small circle of foremost scientists, the paradigm
for the theory of general biology was sought. According to the conclusion made by
the organizer of these conferences Conrad Waddington, this paradigm should come
from general linguistics (Waddington 1972). This idea was developed in the papers
of several participants: Howard Pattee, Brian Goodwin, René Thom, Christopher
Zeeman. My idea that this was not so distant from the route to biosemiotics (Kull
1993a), can be illustrated by a quote from Sebeok (1989: 281): “Uexküll’s scheme
could, I think, productively be accommodated within Zeeman’s developing model
of the brain, thus making it amenable to mathematical exploration and generaliza-
tion to cover any information with tolerance properties; in particular, this would
allow for the combination of language structure with tolerance structure along lines
worked out in some detail by Thom.”
However, in the mutual integration of biology and linguistics, some new math-
ematical problems received more attention than did their semiotic counterparts,
for instance, Noam Chomsky’s generative grammars (Lindenmayer and Rozenberg
1976). Also, much research on the biological foundations of language (Lenneberg
1967, Lieberman 1984, Walker 1978) was quite far from semiotics.
The name “biosemiotics” probably ﬁrst appeared also in the 1960s. One can ﬁnd
it used already in 1961 by Friedrich S. Rothschild (1899–1995) in the conference
“The Psychology of the Self” in New York. According to Rothschild (1962: 777):
“This approach presupposes acceptance of our position that the history of subjec-
tivity does not start with man, but that the human spirit was preceded by many
preliminary stages in the evolution of animals. The symbol theory of psychophysical
relation bridges the gulf between these disparate avenues of research and unites their
methods under the name of “biosemiotic”(see also Rothschild 1989, 1994, Bülow
and Schindler 1993, Anderson 2003). It should be acknowledged that a book by
Stepanov (1971) includes a chapter entitled “Biosemiotics”, in which he described
the views of Jakob von Uexküll, and which has sometimes been considered as one
of the earliest known usages of the term.
Despite the ﬁrst introductions to the ﬁeld of biosemiotics being published in this
period, a wide increase in knowledge about zoosemiotics, a corresponding interest
in animal languages, and some seemingly important preliminary work towards the
integration of linguistics and biology, it appears in retrospect that there were still
very few people who really believed that biosemiotics was a deep, true fundament
for future biology at this time. Sebeok (1968, cited in Deely 1990: 85–86), how-
ever, was an exception to this rule, noting that: “A mutual appreciation of genetics,
animal communication studies, and linguistics may lead to a full understanding
of the dynamics of semiosis, and this may, in the last analysis, turn out to be no

13
Theoretical Biology on Its Way to Biosemiotics
431
less than the deﬁnition of life.” Soon, many other scholars from a variety of disci-
plines began to share this view (see Anderson 1990 and Eder and Rembold 1992 for
overviews).
1980s and 1990s: Establishing the Field of Biosemiotics
The decades after the great peak in the 1960s and 1970s marked a clear decline in
general interest in theoretical biology. Biosemiotics, simultaneously, is remarkably
growing. But let me ﬁrst note some trends appearing in neo-Darwinian biology,
emphasizing the communicative aspects.
“In the past two decades the importance of sexual selection has again been
acknowledged [. . .] this topic has become one of the major concerns of sociobiol-
ogy” (Mayr 1988: 505). This means a growing interest in the role of certain aspects
of communication by evolutionary biology. Along with the works by Edward
O. Wilson, William D. Hamilton, Amotz Zahavi and others, the concept of “memes”
(Richard Dawkins) has achieved a wide distribution in biologists’ writings. John
Maynard Smith developed a game theoretic model to describe the evolution of com-
munication. John Maynard Smith and Eörs Szathmary (1997) have written about
the biological background of language origins. Gerald Edelman (1992: 74) pro-
poses to develop “sciences of recognition, sciences that study recognition systems”,
including into them evolutionary biology, immunology, and neurobiology. From
philosophy (but following the same biological tradition), Daniel Dennett has made
strong attempts to explain the intentional aspects of living systems.
On the microscopic level, the linguistics, and step-by-step semiotics, of molec-
ular texts have been more and more analyzed in molecular biology (e.g., Brendel
et al. 1986). “I shall guess, the history of linguistics will be repeated in the devel-
opment of molecular biology” (Berlinski 1978: 180). According to Robert Pollack
(1994: 151), “molecular biology now confronts a new and unpredicted uncertainty,
a boundary on our ability to know the ﬁnal meaning of the genes we study”. “The
trend is clear: we can expect to ﬁnd more and more examples of the richness of a
real language in our cells. DNA and protein have grammar and syntax, and we have
already come upon typographical errors, double meanings, synonyms, and other
subtleties” (Pollack 1994: 153).
The rediscovery of Uexküll’s work by Sebeok was quite sudden. In his “selected
and annotated guide to the literature of zoosemiotics and its background” (Sebeok
1969), Uexküll’s name is still lacking. Despite some occasional references earlier
(cf. Sebeok 1989 [1979]: 193), the breakthrough was made in Sebeok’s talk at
the “III Wiener Symposium über Semiotik” in 1977 (Sebeok 1989: 187). Through
Sebeok, this had a positive feedback effect on ethology and many other areas,
which started to refer to Uexküll again. Shortly after the reclamation of Uexküll by
Sebeok, Thure von Uexküll published a compendium of his father’s works, supplied
with extensive commentaries (Uexküll 1980). This was followed by publication of
translations of “Bedeutungslehre” and “Streifzüge. . .” in “Semiotica” (J. v. Uexküll
1982, 1992), and the inclusion of Uexküll into “Classics of Semiotics” (Krampen
et al. 1987). Uexküll did not write much about plants (other than his well-known

432
Kalevi Kull (1952– )
example of oak and rain, which may not have been a particularly good example of
what he was trying to show from the point of view of a professional plant ecophys-
iologist). To ﬁll this gap, Martin Krampen (1981) wrote an article, from which the
ﬁeld called phytosemiotics is considered to have begun. John Deely (1986, 1990)
responded with a critique that introduced the notion of physiosemiosis to denote the
realm of pre-biotic conditions necessary for biosemiosis to take place.
The evolutionary perspectives of biosemiotics have been developed, e.g., by
Günter Bentele (1984), and by Marcello Barbieri (1981; 1985), who has intro-
duced the term “natural convention” in addition to “natural selection”, and who
wrote about The Semantic Theory of Evolution in 1985. A programmatic paper for
biosemiotics, in which a series of statements on the semiotic aspects of biological
evolution is formulated, is the collective article by Myrdene Anderson et al. (1984),
in which they stress the importance of coevolution and symbiosis, noting that com-
munication begins with a decoder, not with the encoder, whether “intentional” or
not. This insight is particularly crucial to the understanding of evolution as a part of
semiosis.
A major new aspect appeared through the discoveries made in immunology,
which showed that there exists another system capable of learning and informing
the whole animal body, besides the nervous system. After the works of Niels Jerne,
which pointed out some linguistic features of the system, a remarkable book on
immunosemiotics was published (Sercarz et al. 1988). Shortly after that, the semi-
otic interpretations of the processes taking place inside an organism were integrated
in a large paper on endosemiotics (Uexküll et al. 1993). To Thure von Uexküll’s
(1979, 1982, 1986) credit is also the building of a bridge between biosemiotics
and psychosomatic medicine, a project to which he devoted his life. The book
“Biosemiotics” edited by Thomas Sebeok and Jean Umiker-Sebeok (1992) with its
twenty-seven authors was probably the ﬁrst book with “biosemiotics” in the main
title. Innovative and diverse, it remained for a long time the largest volume in this
ﬁeld.
The paper by Jesper Hoffmeyer and Claus Emmeche (1991) on code duality
seems to herald a new quality in the works on biosemiotic ontology, since it intro-
duces a formulation of biological information which is applicable to all levels of
living systems, and which is the guiding thread of all the following writings by
Hoffmeyer in his characterization of “semiosic body-mind”.
Semiotics has been seen as a tool for approaching the epistemologic prob-
lems of biology. This has several dimensions. Firstly, biosemiotics seems to
propose for biology a sort of philosophical basis or background, in a hope to
replace the one which has been applied at least since Ernst Haeckel, namely
“Evolutionstheorie als Weltanschauung” (cf. Uexküll 1907, Weingarten 1993).
Secondly, it enables the introduction of subjectness, i.e. organism as a subject, into
the biological realm (cf. Uexküll 1931b, Woltereck 1932). And thirdly, it helps to
understand the development of mental features through the semiotically interpreted
evolutionary epistemology (Schult 1989, Hoffmeyer 1996b). (Since there is a dif-
ference between genetic and evolutionary epistemology, the proper aspect here
may be genetic epistemology, cf. Kesselring 1994.) Hoffmeyer has emphasized the

13
Theoretical Biology on Its Way to Biosemiotics
433
importance of biosemiotics as an approach which can resolve the dualism: “To
modern science, dualism still holds good as a way of dividing the world into two
kingdoms, those of mind and matter, the cultural and the natural spheres [. . .]. And
it is this boundary that biosemiotics seeks to cross in hopes of establishing a link
between the two alienated sides of our existence – to give humanity its place in
nature” (Hoffmeyer 1996a: 94). According to the biosemiotic view, “system could
be more or less rational; rationality is something that can occur at levels other than
that of the human psyche” (Hoffmeyer 1996a: 93).
Within the last decades, there has also been much particular work done on
developing the semiotic understanding of different biological phenomena.
Eugen Baer (1984: 6) said, “we must look at adaptation as a semiotic phe-
nomenon, that is, as a process of signiﬁcation.” This is an important point, since
the notion of adaptation certainly requires reinterpretation. The existing notion of
adaptation in biology, which is either connected to ﬁtness and thus disconnected
from form, or, when described as a form then loses its testability, needs a new theo-
retical foundation. The drawbacks of the contemporary approach were described by
Stephen Jay Gould and Richard Lewontin (1979).
An interesting case in which semiotic aspects appear, is mate recognition, and
together with this, the mechanism which is responsible for the origin and hold-
ing of biological species as discrete units (Schult 1989, 1992, Kull 1992, 1993b).
This is closely related to the recognition concept of species as developed by Hugh
Paterson (1993). The role of genetic communication between bacteria was investi-
gated by Sorin Sonea (1992) in a similar context. Another semiotically interesting
phenomenon, in which discreteness also arises, is categorical perception (Stjernfelt
1992). These are examples of more general reciprocal mechanisms, which are
responsible for a large set of spatial, temporal and morphological discreteness in
various biological systems, at the same time being a prerequisite of any linguistic
phenomena.
Barend van Heusden, when speaking about biosemiotics, has tried to formulate
the speciﬁcity of human perception. “Humans are aware of the fact that they do
not actually perceive forms . . . but that they perceive with forms, that . . . the world
presents itself to us as different from a remembered past” (Heusden 1994: 68). Thure
von Uexküll has stressed that the difference lies in the temporal aspect, namely that
there appears a time lag between the perception and reaction in the case of humans.
Indeed, the more biology is integrated into semiotics, the more important it will be to
reformulate the sources of the clear difference between bio- and anthroposemiosis.
Yoshimi Kawade (1996) has renewed the semiotic interpretation of biomolecular
processes. Ray Paton (1997) has analyzed in what sense a biological form can be
a text, or an enzyme can be a verb (on the organism as a text, cf. Sebeok 1977,
Löfgren 1981, Kull 1997).
There are also attempts to make the information concept more appropriate for
biology with the help of semiotics (Sharov 1992). “With semiotics the observer
could be brought right into the models. Furthermore, this now allows the meaning of
information to be modeled as well as the information itself, as is done in information
theory. Indeed, as I conceive it now, information theory must become embedded in

434
Kalevi Kull (1952– )
semiotics” (Salthe 1993a, xi; cf. Hoffmeyer and Emmeche 1991). Brier (1995) has
analyzed the problems of the integration of biosemiotics and cybernetics.
The term “ecosemiotics” was introduced by Winfried Nöth (1996), followed
by a series of responses in a special issue of “Zeitschrift für Semiotik”. However,
the semiotic approach to ecology was introduced earlier, e.g., by Alexandr Levich
(1983), whose particular interest concerned the applicability of Zipf’s law in the
ecological communities.
Hoffmeyer’s book (1996) deserves particular attention. He is more clear and
more radical than previous authors, claiming that biosemiotics is an approach which
can give the solution to the main problems of mind-body dualism and relationships
of humans and nature. A collective review of this book is going to be published in
“Semiotica”. However, there are many issues in the philosophy of biology about
which Hoffmeyer does not say a word. In the extremely complex and inter-twined
sphere of biological theories, silence can sometimes be the best answer, particu-
larly in the formation phase of its views. When the development proceeds, however,
more will become expressed and interpreted. And semiotics, among others, is hope-
fully teaching us to behave in an otherwise too complex mixture of meanings in the
theoretical spheres of biology.
Thus, to conclude the description of this last chapter, which began with Sebeok’s
reopening of Uexküll, one can characterize it as a rapid growth of biosemiotics
in this period. In addition to the publication of Uexküll’s translations into English,
many new authors came into the ﬁeld, special issues of journals appeared (Semiotica
120(3/4), 1998; 127(1/4), 1999; 134(1/4), 2001; “Zeitschrift für Semiotik” 8(3),
1986, 15(1–2), 1993, 18(1), 1996; European Journal for Semiotic Studies 9(2),
1997; Cybernetics and Human Knowing 5(1), 1998; 7(1), 2000; Sign Systems
Studies 30(1), 2001, etc.), a series of books were published within a short time
(Sebeok and Umiker-Sebeok 1992, Salthe 1993a, Witzany 1993, Pollack 1994, Yˇcas
1994, Hoffmeyer 1996a, Deacon 1997), and many books on semiotics paid much
attention to biosemiotics (Deely et al. 1986, Deely 1990, Nöth 1990, 1994, Sebeok
1990, 1994, Posner et al. 1997, Merrell 1996).
Historically Important Meetings
In addition to published works, epistolary and oral discourse, no doubt, also play a
role in scientiﬁc development. In this context, at least Thomas Sebeok’s contribution
has to be mentioned.
In a short time, a number of symposia, workshops and conferences in biosemi-
otics have been organized, almost all taking place within the last decade. It is
worth mentioning the workshop “The Semiotics of Cellular Communication in
the Immune System” in 1986 in Italy (Sercarz et al. 1988) with a contribution by
Umberto Eco (1988). Probably of particular importance were the small workshops
in Glottertal (Germany) which took place in 1990 and 1992, in which an attempt
was made to establish an International Biosemiotics Society (cf. Sebeok 1991: 7)
and in which some Copenhagen and Tartu biosemioticians ﬁrst met. Also, a meeting
“Biosemiotics and Biotechnology” in 1991 in Denmark should be mentioned. After

13
Theoretical Biology on Its Way to Biosemiotics
435
that, symposia on biosemiotics were held in International Congresses of Semiotics,
in Berkeley (USA) 1994, and in Guadelajara (Mexico) 1997. The meetings of the
International Society for the History, Philosophy and Social Studies of Biology
held in Leuven (Belgium) 1995, and in Seattle (USA) 1997, also included biosemi-
otic sections. An important event was the conference in Toronto, called “Semiosis.
Evolution. Energy”, in 1997. The congress “Symbiogenesis and Carcinogenesis” in
Freiburg, Germany (1998) was probably the ﬁrst meeting in experimental biology
which included a session on biosemiotics (Endocytobiology and Cell Research 13,
Supplement).
In Denmark, a series of smaller biosemiotic meetings were held, mainly due to
the activies of Jesper Hoffmeyer, Claus Emmeche, Svend Erik Larsen, and oth-
ers. Since the end of 1980s, the biosemiotic group was formed at the Institute
of Molecular Biology of the University of Copenhagen. There exists the Danish
Society for the Semiotics of Nature.
Concerning the relationships with theoretical biology, it is interesting to mention
that three regular seminars on theoretical biology, which arose independently in
St. Petersburg (leaded by Sergey Chebanov), in Moscow (Alexei Sharov, Alexandr
Levich), and in Tartu (Kalevi Kull, Toomas Tiivel) in 1970s, having a nomoge-
netic bias, all later made a shift towards biosemiotics. Together they organized the
conference “Biology and Linguistics” in Tartu in February 1978, which was proba-
bly one of the ﬁrst larger biosemiotic meetings on a world scale. In October 1988,
a small workshop “Semiotic approach in theoretical biology” was held at Laelatu
Biological Station (Estonia). From 1988 to 1990, Alexei Sharov organized a series
of seminars and “Winter Schools on Biosemiotics” at Moscow University. Sergej
Chebanov established similar activities at the University of St. Petersburg. In 1998,
Nikolai A. Zarenkov gave a lecture course “Semiotic-linguistic theory of biology”
at Moscow University.
In Estonia, about which I know more, a great deal is also going on. An issue of the
periodical “Vita aeterna” (no. 5, 1990) of the students’ Theoretical Biology Group of
Tartu University was devoted to biosemiotics. Since 1993, several guest scientists
(Thure von Uexküll, Jesper Hoffmeyer, Sergey Chebanov, Barend van Heusden,
Thomas A. Sebeok) have lectured on biosemiotics in Tartu University. In 1993,
the Jakob von Uexküll Center was established in Tartu. Recent Estonian Spring
Schools in Theoretical Biology were entitled “Theory of Recognition” (1995), and
“Languages of Life” (1996). A regular lecture course on biosemiotics was intro-
duced by Kalevi Kull in Tartu University in 1993, in the year of the death of Juri
Lotman, but still with his introductory words, dictated in hospital. Now, this course
is read every year and is included in the standard semiotics curriculum. Also, a
biosemiotic course was offered by zoologist Aleksei Turovski at Tallinn University
of Educational Sciences in 1997.10
10 Several major developments in the institutionalization of biosemiotics have taken place in the
21st century, after the writing of this article. I will only mention a few of them here. In 2001, as ini-
tiated by Copenhagen and Tartu biosemioticians, a new series of annual conferences known as the
international Gatherings in Biosemiotics have taken place, and has become the major biosemiotics
conference series in the world. A dedicated journal, Biosemiotics, and a book series (of which this

436
Kalevi Kull (1952– )
The 21st Century and Post-Darwinism
The majority of biosemioticians have been quite critical towards neo-Darwinism
(e.g., Salthe 1993a and 1997, Witzany 1993). Indeed, post-Darwinism as it has
developed in recent decades seems to correspond and ﬁt much better with the needs
of semiotic biology. Hoffmeyer (1996a: 58) wrote: “We need a theory of organ-
isms as subjects to set alongside the principle of natural selection, and Jakob von
Uexküll’s umwelt theory is just such a theory. Ironically, however, it is only through
integration with the theory of evolution that the umwelt theory can truly bear fruit.”
Except for some cases when this was used to denote the whole period after
Darwin’s death, the term post-Darwinism as signifying the overcoming of the neo-
Darwinian period was ﬁrst used not later than 1986, at a meeting in Osaka on
structuralism in biology (Ho 1989). That meeting, which declared itself in clear
opposition to the “mainstream” theoretical biology, also noted its historical continu-
ity to a “marginal” tradition in theoretical biology, coming from Joseph Needham,
Joseph Woodger and other members of the Cambridge Club of theoretical biology
(Goodwin et al. 1989: vii, Abir-Am 1987). On the other hand, it is very notice-
able that the nomogenetic approach in Russian biology, represented by Lev Berg,
Alexandr Lyubischev, Sergey Meyen and others, which has brought its tradition
back to Karl Ernst von Baer with his criticisms of Darwinism, resembles in many
aspects the above-mentioned structuralistic biology (Schreider 1977, Brauckmann
and Kull 1997). Meyen, in his later works, considered it possible to reach a theory
(a new synthesis) into which these particular views on evolution can be included.
The main emphasis of the post-Darwinian explanation of evolution is concerned
with the role of the form and activity of organism. The neo-Darwinian mechanism
of natural selection appears to represent a special case in the post-Darwinian picture
of evolution. In this context, it is interesting to note some recent trends in evolu-
tionary biology, which emphasize the role of an organism’s activity. One of these is
the resurgence of interest in the Baldwin effect – the importance of individual adap-
tation and learning for evolution (Baldwin 1896; e.g., Belew and Mitchell 1996).
The other is represented by works which consider epigenetic changes (through the
mechanisms of epigenetic inheritance) to be primary factors in evolutionary change
(Jablonka 1994). There are also other works emphasizing organisms as subjects of
evolution (Weingarten 1993, Kull 1993b).
Due to the results of molecular biological research and the modeling of complex
systems, it is evident that the material structure of living systems is now understood
in remarkable detail. In other words, the molecular mechanism of life is more or
volume is a part) have also been established, under the editorship of Marcello Barbieri and Jesper
Hoffmeyer. The International Society for Biosemiotic Studies has been established (Favareau 2006,
www.biosemiotics.org). Too, both graduate and undergraduate courses in biosemiotics have been
taught in the United States, Singapore, and Estonia – this latter university (Tartu University, whose
alumni include Karl Ernst von Baer and Jakob von Uexküll) being the ﬁrst in the world to offer a
doctoral degree in biosemiotics, and which now houses the biosemiotic library of the late Thomas
A. Sebeok).

13
Theoretical Biology on Its Way to Biosemiotics
437
less solved. However, as a matter of fact, biologists still cannot precisely deﬁne or
delimit what to call the living process. This seems to be a point at which, intuitively,
semiotics may be of assistance. However, if some set of molecular processes of a
cell will be identiﬁed as semiosis, i.e. truly semiotic, describable fully, including all
its components, in exact molecular terms, then, why should not this situation mean
that semiosis can be modeled mathematically. This would create a new situation for
semiotics itself, since no semiosis has been fully described before (in the sense of
an external “objective” point of view, the view from “nowhere” of natural science),
due to the participation of conscious mind in all cases. However, even in the case
of cellular semiosis, the system is not simple at all. A possible scenario of this says,
that the mathematical models, except may be the ones for the most primitive semi-
otic systems, are of such level of complication, and in principle not reducible to
more simple ones enabling comprehension without losing their identity with semio-
sis, that the only way to describe these systems is to apply the natural language,
as has traditionally been done in semiotics. This aspect has hardly been discussed
in biosemiotics (except of, for instance, avoidance of mathematics by Uexküll,
Hoffmeyer, etc.). However, this may be important in order to achieve the acceptance
of the semiotic view by biologists who are used to the natural scientiﬁc approach.
There exists an additional reason to believe in the fecundity of this scenario.
Namely, natural language presumes and includes the process of categorization.
Categorization discerns natural languages from formal ones – the latter use logic to
deﬁne and delimit their terms, whereas in natural languages the categorization which
delimits the signs is a pre-linguistic process, analogous to speciation, or category-
formation in perception. The categories as wholes with diffuse boundaries, although
separated from the neighboring categories by hiatuses, are objects upon which nat-
ural languages are based, and for the description of which they are well suited. This
is similar to the way in which we can quite easily describe biological species using
natural languages, the mathematical and formal deﬁnition of which causes many
problems. “Privileged sameness relations cannot be found for the demarcation of
the species” (Dupré 1981: 83). This is the same as if we tried to turn the scientiﬁc
analysis of tokens or words, particularly that which concerns their meanings, into a
mathematical theory. No doubt, the linguists who do it via their mother tongue, can
do it no worse.
Conclusion
In conclusion, has been a considerable difference between the holistic and reduc-
tionistic, or Baerian and Darwinian, schools of thought in biology in the successful-
ness of their attempts to conjoin signs and life, or semiotics and biology. Many of
the semiotic biologists can be identiﬁed as belonging to the holistic, or Baerian biol-
ogy. An explanation of the scarcity of semiotic biology in this century thus stems
from the fact that Baerian biology has been in a suppressed minority position almost
throughout of this century, except may be only for the ﬁrst and last decades (i.e., in
the periods of neovitalism or organicism, and post-Darwinism), when its supporters

438
Kalevi Kull (1952– )
were slightly better known or noticed. However, the dialogue between these two
lines of thinking in biology has never stopped, and has continuously enriched both
views. The rapid growth of biosemiotics in the last decade can be seen as a parallel
to the rise of post-Darwinism in evolutionary biology, which is also a result of that
dialogue. What is needed, and what it may hopefully bring, is both the broadening
and deepening of the views. This would include the better understanding and skillful
interpretation of deep but forgotten investigations, grasping more from scientists of
other views. However, this requires less ideology and more logic in science.
Many examples of semiotic interpretation of biological phenomena have already
been collected, and there is a set of ideas about the generalizations and paths to
pursue. Their review would grow into a volume or more. However, what is still
seemingly absent is a methodical explanation for ordinary biologists on how to
apply semiotic analysis to the systems which they know.
The next stage in the development of biosemiotics (in analogy to the develop-
mental logic of other branches of sciences), which may probably be reached soon,
is the stage of larger reviews which try to list and integrate the whole ﬁeld. And
of course, there should appear open criticism of the whole approach from various
sides – which has until now been quite exceptional and tentative.
We may therefore already notice, I believe, some signs of the beginning of the
third wave in theoretical biology (after its start in the turn of the century, its ﬁrst
wave in the 1920s and 1930s, and the second wave in the 1960s and 1970s), with
a possible keyword meaning. It may mean the synthesis of theoretical biology and
biosemiotics, biology and semiotics. Or it may turn out to have an even much deeper
meaning of its own.
References
Abir-Am, P. G. (1987). The biotheoretical gathering, trans-disciplinary authority and the incipient
legitimation of molecular biology in the 1930s: new perspective on the historical sociology of
science. History of Science 25, 1–70.
Anderson, M. (1990). Biology and semiotics. In: Koch, W. A. (Ed.) Semiotics in the Individual
Sciences, Part I. Bochum: Universitätsverlag Dr. N. Brockmeyer, pp. 254–281.
Anderson, M. (2003). Rothschild’s ouroborus. Sign System Studies 31.1, 301–314.
Anderson, M., Deely, J., Krampen, M., Ransdell, J., Sebeok, T. A., Uexküll, T. von (1984).
A semiotic perspective on the sciences: steps toward a new paradigm. Semiotica 52(1/2),
7–47.
Baer, E. (1984). How do reﬂexive systems communicate? In: Pelc, J. et al. (Eds.) Sign, System and
Function. Berlin: Mouton, pp. 1–11.
Baer, K. E. von (1864). Reden gehalten in wissenschaftlichen Versammlungen und kleinere
Aufsätze vermischten Inhalts. Erster Theil. St. Petersburg: H. Schmitzdorff.
Baldwin, J. M. (1896). A new factor in evolution. American Naturalist 30, 441–451, 536–553.
Barbieri, M. (1981). The ribotype theory of the origin of life. Journal of theoretical Biology 91,
545–601.
Barbieri, M. (1985). The Semantic Theory of Evolution. Chur: Harwood Academic Publishers.
Beadle, G. W., Beadle, M. (1966). The Language of Life: An Introduction to the Science of
Genetics. Garden City: Doubleday.
Belew, R. K., Mitchell, M. (Eds.) (1996). Adaptive Individuals in Evolving Populations: Models
and Algorithms. Reading: Addison-Wesley.

13
Theoretical Biology on Its Way to Biosemiotics
439
Bentele, G. (1984). Zeichen und Entwicklung: Vorüberlegungen zu einer genetischen Semiotik.
Tübingen: G. Narr.
Berlinski, D. (1978). On Systems Analysis: An Essay Concerning the Limitations of Some
Mathematical Methods in the Social, Political, and Biological Sciences. Cambridge (Mass.):
The MIT Press.
Bertalanffy, L. von (1932). Theoretische Biologie. Bd. 1. Berlin: Borntraeger.
Blandino, G. (1969). Theories on the Nature of Life. New York: Philosophical Library.
Bowler, P. J. (1983). The Eclipse of Darwinism: Anti-Darwinian Evolution Theories in the Decades
around 1900. Baltimore: The John Hopkins University Press.
Bramwell, A. (1990). Ecology in the 20th Century: A History. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Brauckmann, S., Kull, K. (1997). Nomogenetic biology and its western counterparts. In:
Naumov, R. V., Marasov, A. N., Gurkin, V. A. (Eds.) Lyubischevskie Chteniya 1997.
Ul’yanovsk: Ul’yanovskij gosudarstvennyj pedagogicheskij universitet, pp. 72–77.
Brendel, V., et al. (1986). Linguistics of nucleotide sequences: morphology and comparison of
vocabularies. J. Biomolecular Structure and Dynamics 4, 11–21.
Brier, S. (1995). Cyber-semiotics: On autopoiesis, code-duality and sign games in bio-semiotics.
Cybernetics and Human Knowing 3(1), 3–14.
Brock, F. (1939). Typenlehre und Umweltforschung: Grundlegung einer idealistischen Biologie.
(= Bios 9). Leipzig: J.A. Barth.
Bülow, G. von, Schindler, I. (1993). Schöpfung durch Kommunikation: Die Biosemiotik Friedrich
S. Rothschilds. Freiburg: Herder.
Bunge, G. (1887). Lehrbuch der physiologischen und pathologischen Chemie: In zwanzig
Vorlesungen für Ärzte und Studierende. Leipzig: Verlag von F.C.W. Vogel.
Cannon, H. G. (1957). What Lamarck really said. In Proceedings of the Linnean Society (London)
168, 70–78.
Chebanov, S. V. (1994). Man as participant to natural creation: Enlogue and ideas of hermeneutics
in biology. Rivista di Biologia 87(1), 39–55.
Csanyi, V., Kampis, G. (1985). Autogenesis: the evolution of replicative systems. Journal of
theoretical Biology 114, 303–323.
Dacqué, E. (1929). Leben als Symbol: Metaphysik einer Entwicklunslehre. 2te unveränderte
Auﬂage. München: R. Oldenburg.
Darwin, C. (1872). The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals. London: J. Murray.
D’Arsonval, J. A., Chauveau, G., Marey, E. J., Weiss, M. (Eds.) (1901). Traité de Physique
Biologique 1. Paris: Masson.
Deacon, T. (1997). The Symbolic Species. London: Penguin.
Deely, J. (1990). Basics of Semiotics. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Deely, J. (Ed.) (1995). Thomas A. Sebeok: Bibliography 1942–1995. Bloomington: Eurolingua.
Deely, J. N., Williams, B., Kruse, F. E. (Eds.) (1986). Frontiers in Semiotics. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press.
Delbrück, M. (1976). How Aristotle discovered DNA. In: Huang, K. (Ed.) Physics and our World:
A Symposium in Honor of Victor F. Weisskopf. New York: American Institute of Physics,
pp. 123–130.
Dupré, J. (1981). Natural kinds and biological taxa. The Philosophical Review 90(1), 66–90.
Eco, U. (1988). On semiotics and immunology. In: Sercarz, E. E., Celada, F., Michison, N.
A., Tada, T. (Eds.) The Semiotics of Cellular Communication in the Immune System. Berlin:
Springer, pp. 3–15.
Edelman, Gerald (1992). Bright Air, Brilliant Fire: On the Matter of the Mind. New York: Basic
Books.
Eder, J., Rembold, H. (1992). Biosemiotics – a paradigm of biology: biological signalling on the
verge of deterministic chaos. Naturwissenschaften 79(2), 60–67.
Elsasser, W. M. (1982). Biological Theory on a Holistic Basis. Baltimore: Privately printed.
Emmeche, C. (1992). Modeling life: A note on the semiotics of emergence and computation in
artiﬁcial and natural living systems. In: Sebeok, T. A., Umiker-Sebeok, J. (Eds.), Biosemiotics:
The Semiotic Web 1991. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 77–99.

440
Kalevi Kull (1952– )
Emmeche, C., Hoffmeyer, J. (1991). From language to nature: the semiotic metaphor in biology.
Semiotica 84(1/2), 1–42.
Favareau, D. (2006). Founding a world biosemiotics institution: The International Society for
Biosemiotic Studies. Sign System Studies, 33(2), 481–485.
Florkin,
M.
(1974).
Concepts
of
molecular
biosemiotics
and
of
molecular
evolution.
Comprehensive Biochemistry 29A, 1–124.
Friederichs, K. (1937). Ökologie als Wissenschaft von der Natur oder biologische Raumforschung
(= BIOS Bd. 7). Leipzig: J.A. Barth.
Goodwin, B. C., Sibatani, A., Webster G. C. (Eds.) (1989). Dynamic Structures in Biology.
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Gould, S. J. (1977). Ontogeny and Phylogeny. Cambridge (Mass.): The Belknap Press.
Gould, S. J., Lewontin, R. C. (1979). The spandrels of San Marco and the Panglossian paradigm:
a critique of the adaptationist programme. In Proceedings Royal Society of London B 205,
581–598.
Hartmann, E. von (1906). Das Problem des Lebens: biologische Studien. Bad Sachsa: H. Haacke.
Hering, E. (1912). Über das Gedächtnis als eine allgemeine Funktion der organisierten Materie.
2te Auﬂ. Leipzig: W. Engelmann.
Heusden, B. van (1994). Why Literature? An Inquiry into the Nature of Literary Semiosis.
Groningen: Rijksuniversiteit Groningen.
Ho, M.-W. (1989). A Structuralist of Process: Towards a Post-Darwinian Rational Morphology. In:
Goodwin, B. C., Sibatani, A., Webster, G. C. (Eds.) Dynamic Structures in Biology. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press, pp. 31–48.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1993). Biosemiotics and ethics. In: Witoszek, N., Gulbrandsen, E. (Eds.) Culture
and Environment: Interdisciplinary Approaches. Oslo: University of Oslo, pp. 152–175.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1995). The semiotic body-mind. In: Tasca, N. (Ed.) Essays in Honor of Thomas A.
Sebeok. Porto. (= Cruzeiro Semiotico 22/25), pp. 367–383.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1996a). Signs of Meaning in the Universe. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1996b). Evolutionary Intentionality. In: Pessa, E., Montesanto, A., Penna, M. P.
(Eds.) The Third European Conference on Systems Science. Rome: Edizioni Kappa,
pp. 699–703.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1997). Biosemiotics: towards a new synthesis in biology. European Journal for
Semiotic Studies 9(2), 355–376.
Hoffmeyer, J., Emmeche, C. (1991). Code-duality and the semiotics of nature. In: Anderson, M.,
Merrell, F. (Eds.) On Semiotic Modeling. Berlin, Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 117–166.
International Society for Biosemiotics. Homepage: www.biosemiotics.org
Jablonka, E. (1994). Inheritance systems and the evolution of new levels of individuality. Journal
of theoretical Biology 170, 301–309.
Jakobson, R. (1971). Selected Writings: II Word and Language. The Hague: Mouton.
Karpinskaya, R. (1994). S. V. Meyen’s contribution to the foundations of biology. Rivista di
Biologia 87(1), 113–117.
Kawade, Y. (1996). Molecular biosemiotics: molecules carry out semiosis in living systems.
Semiotica 111(3/4), 195–215.
Kesselring, T. (1994). A comparison between evolutionary and genetic epistemology: JeanPiaget’s
contribution to a post-darwinian epistemology. Journal for General Philosophy of Science
25(2), 293–325.
Krampen, M. (1981). Phytosemiotics. Semiotica 36(3/4), 187–209.
Krampen, M., Oehler, K., Posner, R., Sebeok, T. A., Uexküll T. von (Eds.) (1987). Classics of
Semiotics. New York: Plenum.
Kull, K. (1992). Evolution and semiotics. In: Sebeok, T. A., Umiker-Sebeok, J. (Eds.) Biosemiotics:
The Semiotic Web 1991. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 221–233.
Kull, K. (1993a). Semiotic paradigm in theoretical biology. In: Kull, K., Tiivel, T. (Eds.) Lectures
in Theoretical Biology: The Second Stage. Tallinn: Estonian Academy of Sciences, pp. 52–62.
Kull, K. (1993b). Recognition concept of species and a mechanism of speciation. Folia Baeriana
6, 133–140.

13
Theoretical Biology on Its Way to Biosemiotics
441
Kull, K. (1997). Organism as a self-reading text: on the origin of anticipation. In: Dubois, D. M.
(Ed.) CASYS’97: First International Conference on Computing Anticipatory Systems, Abstract
Book, II. Liege: Chaos asbl, pp. 28–32.
Lagerspetz, K. (1959). Teleological explanations and terms in biology. Annales Zoologici
Societatis Zoologicae Botanicae Fennicae ‘Vanamo’ 19(6), 1–73.
Lassen, H. (1939/1941). Leibniz’sche Gedanken in der Uexküll’schen Umweltlehre. Acta
Biotheoretica A5, 41–50.
Lenneberg, E. H. (1967). Biological Foundations of Language. New York: J. Wiley.
Levich, A. P. (1983). Semioticheskie struktury v ekologii, ili suschestvuet li ekologischeskij kod?
Chelovek i Biosfera 8. Moskva: Izdatel’stvo Moskovskogo Universiteta, 68–77.
Lieberman, P. (1984). The Biology and Evolution of Language. Cambridge (Mass.): Harvard
University Press.
Lindenmayer, A., Rozenberg, G. (Eds.) (1976). Automata, Languages, Development: At the
Crossroads of Biology, Mathematics and Computer Science. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publ.
Co.
Löfgren, L. (1981). Life as autolinguistic phenomenon. In: Zeleny, M. (Ed.) Autopoiesis: A Theory
of Living Organization. Amsterdam: North Holland, pp. 236–249.
Maynard Smith, J., Szathmary, E. (1997). Sprache und Leben. In: Murphy, M. P., O’Neill, L. A. J.
(Eds.) Was ist Leben? Die Zukunft der Biologie. Heidelberg: Spektrum Akademischer Verlag,
pp. 83–94.
Mayr, E. (1972). Lamarck revisited. Journal of the History of Biology 5(1), 55–94.
Mayr, E. (1988). Toward a New Philosophy of Biology: Observations of an Evolutionist.
Cambridge (Mass.): Harvard University Press.
McIntosh, R. P. (1988). The Background of Ecology: Concept and Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Merrell, F. (1996). Signs Grow: Semiosis and Life Processes. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Meyen, S. V. (1977). Printsip sochuvstviya. Puti v Neznaemoe: Pisateli Rasskazyvayut o Nauke
13, 401–430. Moskva: Sovetskij Pisatel’.
Meyer, A. (1934). Ideen und Ideale der biologischen Erkenntnis. Leipzig: J. A. Barth.
Meyer-Abich, A. (1963). Geistesgeschichtliche Grundlagen der Biologie. Stuttgart: G. Fischer
Verlag.
Miller, G. A., Galanter, E., Pribram, K. H. (1960). Plans and the Structure of Behaviour. New
York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Nöth, W. (1990). Handbook of Semiotics. Bloomington: Indiana Univeristy Press.
Nöth, W. (Ed.) (1994). Origins of Semiosis: Sign Evolution in Nature and Culture. Berlin: Mouton
de Gruyter.
Nöth, W. (1996). Ökosemiotik. Zeitschrift für Semiotik 18(1), 7–18.
Odum, E. P. (1964). The new ecology. BioScience 14, 14–16.
Oyama, S. (1985). The Ontogeny of Information: Developmental Systems and Evolution.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Paterson, H. E. H. (1993). Evolution and the Recognition Concept of Species. Baltimore: The John
Hopkins University Press.
Paton, R. (1997). Glue, Verb and Text Metaphors in Biology. Acta Biotheoretica 45(1), 1–15.
Pattee, H. H. (1997). The physics of symbols and the evolution of semiotic controls. In: Coombs,
M., Sulcoski, M. (Eds.) Control Mechanisms for Complex Systems: Issues of Measurement and
Semiotic Analysis. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico, pp. 9–25.
Pollack, R. (1994). Signs of Life: The Language and Meanings of DNA. London: Viking.
Posner, R., Robering, K., Sebeok T. A. (Eds.) (1997). A Handbook on the Sign-Theoretic
Foundations of Nature and Culture, vol. 1. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Powell, R. A. 1986. From semiotic of scientiﬁc mechanism to semiotic of teleology in nature.
In: Deely, J., Evans, J. (Eds.) Semiotics 1986. Lanham: University Press of America,
pp. 296–305.
Reinke, J. (1901). Einleitung in die theoretische Biologie. Berlin: Verlag von Gebrüder Paetel.

442
Kalevi Kull (1952– )
Richards, R. J. (1989). Darwin and the Emergence of Evolutionary Theories of Mind and Behavior.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Romanes, G. J. (1883). Mental Evolution in Animals. London: Kegan Paul and Trench.
Rosen, R. (1991a). Life Itself: A Comprehensive Inquiry into the Nature, Origin, and Fabrication
of Life. New York: Columbia University Press.
Rosen, R. (1991b). Beyond dynamical systems. Journal of Social and Biological Structures 14(2),
217–220.
Rothschild, F. S. (1989). Die Biosemiotik des menschlichen Gehirns. Dynamische Psychiatrie 22,
191–206.
Rothschild, F. S. (1994). Creation and Evolution: Evolution as an Inner Adaptation to God. New
Brunswick: Transaction Publishers.
Salthe, S. N. (1993a). Development and Evolution: Complexity and Change in Biology. Cambridge
(Mass.): The MIT Press.
Salthe, S. N. (1993b). Development and evolution as aspects of self-organization. In M. Sintonen
and S. Sirén (Eds.) Theory of Evolution: In Need of a New Synthesis? Philosophical Studies
From the University of Tampere, 50:5–18.
Salthe, S. N. (1997). Semiotics in biology: inside neo-Darwinism. Revue de la Pensee
d’aujourd’hui 25(7), 128–139.
Schlick, M. (1977). Notes and comments. In: Helmholtz, H. von (Eds.) Epistemological Writings.
Dordrecht: D. Reidel, pp. 163–185.
Schreider, J. A. (1977). A.A. Lyubischev kak strukturalist. Trudy po Znakovym Sistemam (Tartu)
9, 133–134.
Schult,
J.
(1989).
Biosemiotik
—
Gegenstandsbereiche
und
Anwendungsmöglichkeiten:
Anmerkungen zum Verhältnis von Biologie und Semiotik. Kodikas/Code 12(3/4), 261–274.
Schult, J. (1992). Species, signs, and intentionality. In: Sebeok, T. A., Umiker-Sebeok, J. (Eds.)
Biosemiotics: The Semiotic Web 1991. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 317–332.
Scudo, F. M., Ziegler, J. R. (Eds.) (1978). The Golden Age of theoretical ecology: 1923–1940.
Lecture Notes in Biomathematics 22.
Sebeok, T. A. (1969). Semiotics and ethology. In: Sebeok, T. A., Ramsay, A. (Eds.) Approaches to
Animal Communication. The Hague: Mouton, pp. 200–231.
Sebeok, T. A. (1977). Ecumenicalism in semiotics. In: Sebeok, T. A. (Ed.) A Perfusion of Signs.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, pp. 180–206.
Sebeok, T. A. (1989) [1979]. The Sign and its Masters. Lanham: University Press of America.
Sebeok, T. A. (1990). Essays in Zoosemiotics. Toronto: Toronto Semiotic Circle.
Sebeok, T. A. (1991). A Sign is Just a Sign. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Sebeok, T. A. (1994). Signs: An Introduction to Semiotics. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Sebeok, T. A. (1996). Galen in medical semiotics. Interdisciplinary Journal for Germanic
Linguistics and Semiotic Analysis 1(1), 89–111.
Sebeok, T. A., Umiker-Sebeok, J. (Eds.) (1992). Biosemiotics: The Semiotic Web 1991. Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Semon, R. (1911). Die Mneme als erhaltendes Prinzip im Wechsel des organischen Geschehens.
3. Auﬂ. Leipzig: W. Engelmann.
Sercarz, E. E., Celada, F., Mitchison, N. A., Tada, T. (Eds.) (1988). The Semiotics of Cellular
Communication in the Immune System. Berlin: Springer.
Sharov, A. (1992). Biosemiotics: A functional-evolutionary approach to the analysis of the sense
of information. In: Sebeok, T. A., Umiker-Sebeok, J. (Eds.) Biosemiotics: The Semiotic Web
1991. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 345–373.
Sommerhoff, G. (1974). Logic of the Living Brain. New York: Wiley.
Sonea, S. (1992). Half of the living world was unable to communicate for about one billion years.
In: Sebeok, T. A., Umiker-Sebeok, J. (Eds.) Biosemiotics: The Semiotic Web 1991. Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 375–392.
Stepanov, Y. S. (1971). Semiotika. Moskva: Nauka.
Stjernfelt, F. (1992). Categorical perception as a general prerequisite to the formation of signs? On
the biological range of a deep semiotic problem in Hjelmslev’s as well as Peirce’s semiotics. In:

13
Theoretical Biology on Its Way to Biosemiotics
443
Sebeok, T. A., Umiker-Sebeok, J. (Eds.) Biosemiotics: The Semiotic Web 1991. Berlin: Mouton
de Gruyter, pp. 427–454.
Tembrock, G. (1971). Biokommunikation: Informationsübertragung im biologischen Bereich.
Berlin: Akademie-Verlag.
Thompson, D’Arcy W. (1917). On Growth and Form. Cambridge: University Press.
Todt, D. (1987). Nachrichten aus der DGS, Bereich Biologie. Zeitschrift für Semiotik 9(3–4), 425.
Uexküll, J. von (1907). Die Umrisse einer kommenden Weltanschauung. Die neue Rundschau 18,
641–661.
Uexküll, J. von (1909). Umwelt und Innenwelt der Tiere. Berlin: J. Springer.
Uexküll,
J.
von
(1913).
Bausteine
zu
einer
biologischen
Weltanschauung.
Mhnchen:
Bruckmann A.-G.
Uexküll, J. von (1920a). Theoretische Biologie. Berlin: Gebr. Paetel.
Uexküll, J. von (1920b). Biologische Briefe an eine Dame. Berlin, Gebr. Paetel.
Uexküll, J. von (1928). Theoretische Biologie. 2te Auﬂ. Berlin: J. Springer.
Uexküll, J. von (1931a). Der Organismus und die Umwelt. In: Driesch, H., Woltereck, H.
(Eds.) Das Lebensproblem im Lichte der modernen Forschung. Leipzig: Quelle & Meyer,
pp. 189–224.
Uexküll, J. von (1931b). Die Rolle des Subjekts in der Biologie. Die Naturwissenschaften 19(19),
385–391.
Uexküll, J. von (1940). Bedeutungslehre. (= Bios, Bd. 10). Leipzig: J.A. Barth.
Uexküll,
J.
von
(1980).
Kompositionslehre
der
Natur:
Biologie
als
undogmatische
Naturwissenschaft (Herausgeg. von Thure v. Uexküll). Frankfurt am Main: Ullstein.
Uexküll, J. von (1982). The theory of meaning. Semiotica 42(1), 25–82.
Uexküll, J. von (1992). A stroll through the worlds of animals and men: A picture book of invisible
worlds. Semiotica 89(4), 319–391.
Uexküll, J. von, Kriszat, G. (1934): Streifzhge durch die Umwelten von Tieren und Menschen. (Ein
Bilderbuch unsichtbarer Welten.) (= Sammlung: Verst@ndliche Wissenschaft, Bd. 21). Berlin:
J. Springer.
Uexküll, T. von (Ed.) (1979). Lehrbuch der psychosomatischen Medizin. München: Urban.
Uexküll, T. von (1982). Semiotics and medicine. Semiotica 38 (3/4), 205–215.
Uexküll, T. von (1986). Medicine and semiotics. Semiotica 61 (3/4), 201–217.
Uexküll, T. von, Geigges, W., Herrmann, J. M. (1993). Endosemiosis. Semiotica 96(1/2), 5–51.
Waddington, C. H. (1972). Epilogue. In: Waddington, C. H. (Ed.) Towards a Theoretical Biology
4: Essays. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, pp. 283–289.
Walker, E. (Ed.) (1978). Explorations in the Biology of Language. Hassocks: Harvester Press.
Warming, E. (1895). Plantesamfund – Grundtræk af den økologiske Plantegeograﬁ. Kjøbenhavn:
P.G. Philipsens Forlag.
Weingarten, M. (1993). Organismen — Objekte oder Subjekte der Evolution? Philosophische
Studien zum Paradigmawechsel in der Evolutionsbiologie. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche
Buchgesellschaft.
Werner, H. (1919). Die Ursprünge der Metapher. Leipzig: Engelmann.
Witzany, G. (1993). Natur der Sprache - Sprache der Natur: Sprachpragmatische Philosophie der
Biologie. Würzburg: Königshausen & Neumann.
Woltereck,
R.
(1932).
Grundzüge
einer
allgemeinen
Biologie:
Die
Organismen
als
Gefüge/Getriebe, als Normen und als erlebende Subjekte. Stuttgart: F. Enke.
Woltereck, R. (1940). Ontologie des Lebendigen. Stuttgart: F. Enke.
Woodger, J. H. (1930/1931). The “concept of organism” and the relation between embryology and
genetics I–III. The Quarterly Review of Biology 5, 1–22, 438–463; 6, 178–207.
Woodger, J. H. (1952). Biology and Language: An Introduction to the Methodology of the
Biological Sciences including Medicine. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Yˇcas, M. (1994). O Prirode Zhivogo: Mehanizmy i Smysl [Meaning and Mechanics]. Moskva: Mir.

Chapter 14
Laws of Symbolic Mediation in the Dynamics
of Self and Personality
Friedrich S. Rothschild (1899–1995)
Introduction and Commentary: Friedrich S. Rothschild
Biosemiotics can not replace neuroanatomy and neurophysiology, because it must rely on
these disciplines in order to obtain the data for its analysis of communication processes.
However, in questions involving the connection of the psychic with the somatic, and the
coherence of the somatic and the psychic, a new comprehension, obviously inaccessible to
the pure physiology of the central nervous system, becomes feasible through it.
F. S. Rothschild (1963: 507)
Semiotican Myrdene Anderson reports that biosemiotics founder Thomas A.
Sebeok would often identify as cryptosemioticians, those prescient thinkers whose
work was deeply predictive of the future project of biosemiotic analysis without
them being aware of it as such (e.g., the ancient physician Galen). Conversely,
protosemioticians was the term that Sebeok would assign to those self-consciously
groundbreaking pioneers of biosemiotics who lived before the ﬁeld per se had been
established, such as Charles Sanders Peirce (Anderson 2003: 301). Biosemiotician
Kalevi Kull, in considering the belated discovery of Friedrich S. Rothschild’s six
decades’ worth of work by contemporary biosemioticans only at the turn of the
21st century, wonders whether either of these two terms would rightly apply to
Rothschild, given that “he both knew semiotics and applied it [to biology]” and
had even been the ﬁrst to use the term biosemiotics in a scientiﬁc paper, in 1963
(199: 129).
Yet, notes Kull, “there was simply no information exchange between Rothschild
and other biosemioticians” during the long course of Rothschild’s career as a neu-
rologist, psychiatrist and semiotician from 1935 to 1995. Accordingly, writes Kull,
“we need to add a fourth class [in addition to the proto-, crypto – and ‘contemporary
working’ semioticians of Sebeok’s] to classiﬁcation scheme – i.e., the category of
endemic semioticians” (1999: 129). “This is a branch of normal good scientists,”
writes Kull, “about whom nobody in our ﬁeld knows – or a small scientiﬁc group
who are developing the ﬁeld on their own, publishing in journals which are not
read by their colleagues in other countries” (ibid). Indeed, although Rothschild kept
working and publishing at least up until 1986, no mention of Sebeok or any other
biosemiotician appear in any of his work yet discovered. Peirce and Uexküll – as
445
D. Favareau, Essential Readings in Biosemiotics, Biosemiotics 3,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9650-1_14, C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010

446
Friedrich S. Rothschild (1899–1995)
well as Waddington and Prigogine – are speciﬁcally cited in Rothschild’s work,
however, and Rothschild was well-informed enough about the development of a
number of related areas of inquiry to take pains to specify exactly in what ways
his version of “biosemiotics” differs from the tenets of structural semiology, phe-
nomenology, information theory and cybernetics (Rothschild 1993: 507, 1994:
108–114).
Born on December 17, 1899, in Giessen, Germany, Friedrich Solomon
Rothschild studied medicine, medical psychology and psychiatry in the Universities
of Giessen and München, from 1918 to 1923. From 1925 to 1928, he worked in
Heidelberg with psychotherapist Frieda Fromm-Reichmann (1889–1957) and psy-
choanalyst Erich Fromm (1900–1980), and in Frankfurt from 1928 to 1933 with
neuroanatomist and clinician Kurt Goldstein (1878–1965). With the rise of the
Nazi party and the appointment of Adolf Hitler as Germany’s chancellor in 1933,
Rothschild, a Jew, ﬂed Germany for Palestine, eventually settling in Jerusalem,
where he worked as a Professor of Clinical Psychiatry in Hebrew University’s
Faculty of Medicine from 1936 until his retirement in 1965.
“As a leader of the Israel branch of the Association for Dynamic Psychiatry,”
reports Kull, “Rothschild published most of his later papers in the journal
Dynamische Psychiatrie. On June 24, 1989, a symposium entitled From Causality
to Communication – The Biosemiotics of Friedrich S. Rothschild, and dedicated to
Rothschild on the occasion of his 90th birthday was held in Berlin, at the German
Academy of Psychoanalysis, which resulted in a special issue of Dynamische
Psychiatrie 22 (3/4), 1989, and later a book by Bülow and Schindler (1993)” (Kull
1999: 131). Rothschild died on March 6, 1995, at the age of ninety-six, in Israel.
Rothschild’s decision to attempt to develop a biosemiotic theory for biology
came to him early in his career. In 1935, he published an extended monograph
summarizing his previous work on brain asymmetry entitled (when translated into
English) The Symbolism of Brain Structures: Studies on the Structure and Function
of the Central Nervous System in Vertebrates and Man. His subsequent books and
papers, none yet translated into English, reveal similar preoccupations: On the sim-
ilarities in the construction of the central nervous system and the endocrine system
(1934), The self and the regulation of experience (1950), The symbolic dances of
bees as a psychological and neurobiological problem (1953), The central nervous
system and the symbols of experience (1958), Transcendental phenomenology as the
semantics and structure of pyschophysical function (1961), and God and World in
Teilhard de Chardin’s biosemiotic evolutionary theory (1974).
Accordingly, within the few published works by Rothschild that are now avail-
able in English (Rothschild 1962, 1963, 1968, 1994), the wealth of convergence
with contemporary biosemiotic theory is striking. “Within the structure of the cen-
tral nervous system (CNS) and among the excitations that arise in it is revealed the
syntactic order of a communicating sign system,” writes Rothschild, explaining the
ideas that motivated his work in neuro-biosemiotics since the 1930s to an audience
of fellow neurologist in 1963. “This order is as necessary in the CNS as in any other
system in the service of communication, if it is to convey signiﬁcant messages,”
observed Rothschild, before cautioning his audience that:

14
Laws of Symbolic Mediation in the Dynamics of Self and Personality
447
The difﬁculties created by the categorical rift between manifestations of consciousness as
against physiological brain processes cannot be solved by merely proclaiming a unity of
body and mind. Nor will it sufﬁce to view these two avenues of analysis as two aspects
of a higher unity beyond the grasp of human understanding: the ﬁrst, the anatomical and
physiological analysis of processes occurring in the central nervous system, and the other,
the introspective analysis of the consciousness. For once this formula is accepted, nothing
prevents us from continuing in the style of the old dichotomy. Rather, it is necessary to
introduce novel methods of thought based on the intimate connection of psyche and soma,
rather than on their separation. For this purpose, the semiotic method is the only choice
remaining (1963: 475–476).
Only a neuroscience that includes a biosemiotic component, insists Rothschild,
can satisfactorily explain the workings of the CNS in its fullness (1963: 507).
Rothschild’s 1935 argument that “the meaning of the CNS manifested in conscious-
ness is lost by examining the CNS purely [in its physics] as an object – just as the
denotative meaning of a written word would be lost by such an examination,” wrote
philosopher and scientist Michael Polanyi (1891–1976) in 1965, “anticipates my
own theory of body and mind by thirty years” (Polanyi 1965: 809).1
Similarly, many of the hypotheses about the nature of brain function that
Rothschild advanced in 1960s predated by decades a number of similar hypothe-
ses later to be proposed by Antonio Damasio (1994, 1999) and Gerald Edelman
(1991, 2001) made on the basis of the subsequent forty years worth of neurobiolog-
ical research. In particular, Damasio’s psycho-neurobiological theories regarding
the hierarchy of reafferent neural processes that ﬁnally result in self-reﬂective
consciousness is well anticipated by Rothschild’s description of the cascading “rep-
resentation, re-representation, and re-re-representation of relations on the respective
levels” of the central nervous system that gives rise to the appearance of a
auto-reﬂective “self” (Rothschild 1963: 484). Equally impressively, Rothschild’s
neuroanatomical understanding appears to be considerably ahead of its time in
insisting that “these different levels [of neuronal organization] should not be thought
of as being localized in anatomically speciﬁc parts of the CNS, as in Jackson’s and
Penﬁeld’s conceptions . . . rather, the same elementary mass of ganglion cells [will
assume] different functional connections” under differing input and circumstances
(1963: 485), in the manner of Edelman and Tononi’s much later hypothesized
“transient yet dynamic functional clusters” (Edelman and Tononi 2001).
1 Rothschild’s analogy with the futility of attempting to analyze word meaning purely as a prob-
lem in physics is echoed by Albert Einstein’s observation (recalled by Howard Pattee in Chapter
Seventeen of this volume) that one could, if one wished, construct a graph of air pressures as a
way of “analyzing” the beauty and emotional power of a Beethoven symphony, but that one would
thereby be ignoring the very thing that, in doing so, one ﬁrst set out to explain. This same logic
underlies philosopher Daniel Dennet’s (1992) “ﬂight simulator video game” arguments against
the explanatory viability of a purely physicalist explanation of brain activity for understanding and
explaining our experience of “mind”. Observing the activity of the electronic impulses taking place
on the computer’s circuit board, no matter how minutely, Dennet argues, will not reveal the rele-
vant entities, categories, and relations that constitute the consequential semiotic products of those
activities for the user of the software.

448
Friedrich S. Rothschild (1899–1995)
Notable, too, is Rothschild’s prescient delineation of the relation between lan-
guage and the brain. Presaging the biosemiotic arguments of Terrence Deacon
(1997), and as opposed to the positivist conception of human language as “a
hard-wired and innate capacity” (as advocated by such linguistic theorists Noam
Chomsky (1975) and Steven Pinker (1994)), Rothschild agues that:
Man differs from other vertebrates in that a further communication system has become
superimposed over the central nervous system. This system, however, is not provided by
nature in form of a physical structure. Rather, every human being must learn it in infancy in
the form of language from his fellow men and must develop it personally. . .. In it, thought
and will emerge together with developing speech and transform perception, emotion, and
behavior in speciﬁc ways. Thus the function of the central nervous system becomes newly
organized. The original animal style of channeling the excitations becomes inhibited with
the emergence of thought and will and is cast in new molds of excitation conﬁgurations.
What fundamentally distinguishes man from the animal, then, is not his brain as an organ
given by nature. In spite of its particular development, it belongs to the same level of com-
munication systems as that of the anthropoid apes. It is, rather, the speciﬁc way in which
man uses his brain [within the systemic structure of language] (1962: 781).
Semiotician Myrdene Anderson notes how much of Rothschild’s thinking fore-
casts that of decades later biosemiotic work by Jesper Hoffmeyer – “Rothschild
emphasizes the semiotic signiﬁcance of membranes, borders, and edges as medi-
ators” (2003: 309), writes Anderson – who also notes parallels with the work of
Gregory Bateson. Like Bateson, Rothschild Posits that “in the [semiotic] intention-
ality of the noetic system – acting not vis-à-vis the world, but acting to experience
the world through the neural system – the ego emerges as an endless stage of
learning-for-the-sake-of-learning – what Bateson recognized as learning to learn,
or deutero-learning” observes Anderson (2003: 311). Accordingly, there are many
biosemioticians today who would welcome the realization of Rothschild’s sugges-
tion that “it would be an interesting biosemiotic exercise to describe the life cycle
of an anthropoid, say a chimpanzee, and to compare it with a human, in order to
emphasize the difference between an animal with a dominant neural system and an
animal with a dominant noetic system” (1994: 78).
Thus far, then, it would appear that Rothschild’s self-proclaimed “biosemiotics”
overlaps to a considerable extent with the contemporary project, and may be of
some use to it. As with almost all of the entries in this volume, however, one
must keep in mind that Rothschild’s biosemiotics came out of, and still carries
with it, the baggage of a certain intellectual background – in this case, one that
cannot at all points be effectively mapped onto the contemporary biosemiotic.
Most critically, Rothschild acknowledges throughout his writings that his think-
ing has been profoundly inﬂuenced by, and his work ultimately grounded in: (1)
the Lebenphilosophie of his contemporary Ludwig Klages (1872–1956), and (2) his
own personal conversion experience from atheism to Christianity, which took place
in the middle 1950s.
Well regarded in his own time, but relatively forgotten today, Ludwig Klages
(1872–1956) was a “biocentric psychologist” who understood the psychology of
human beings to be predicated upon the struggle between the vital, but unlabeled
and chaotic, Heraclitian ﬂux of immediate animal experience, and the delimiting
and “thanatonic” structures of symbolic thought. The product of a conﬂuence of

14
Laws of Symbolic Mediation in the Dynamics of Self and Personality
449
then-contemporary trends in German neo-Romanticism, Lebensphilosophie, and
existentialism, Klages held that “the original sin of mankind transpired at the
moment when the ecstatic, image-laden, and rhythmically pulsating life that man
enjoyed during the primordial phase of existence was invaded by ‘spirit’ (Geist),
an entity whose essence is expressed in such phenomena as the will-to-power,
purposeful activity, and the dictatorship of reason” (Cartney, 2001: o.l.).2
Klage’s basic opposition here can ultimately be seen as a posited duality between
the primacy of iconic biological experience and what is considered to be the degen-
eracy of linguistically and conceptually mediated experience (or the culture of
symbolic reference, to use Terrence Deacon’s term). Rothschild accepts Klages’
conceptual scheme, for the most part, and the corpus of Rothschild’s work reveals
an increasingly religious endeavor to reconcile these two “asymetrical” tenden-
cies within human nature, as well as to account for their evolutionary development
(as well as the justiﬁcation for that development) from simpler animal form. The
key to understanding Rothschild’s conclusions from a 21st century biosemiotican’s
perspective, I believe, is given here: “When developing biosemiotic theory, I did
not think of Christianity at all,” writes Rothschild, “Its point of departure is brain
anatomy, the asymmetry of the human organism, and the science and philosophy
of Klages” (1994: 256). “It was only after reading Teilhard de Chardin’s works
and studying the history of Christianity,” reports Rothschild, did he “realize the full
power and purpose of biosemiotic theory” (ibid).
The philosophy of Klages that was such a deep inﬂuence on Rothschild, as we
have seen, is an exaltation of what Peirce would call the immediacy of Firstness,
brute experience before words, and being at it appears to the organism before the
work of thought reduces (or to use Heisenberg’s term “collapses”) “the manifold of
2 A virulent and outspoken anti-Semite, Klages’ work today is celebrated on such websites as
the one dedicated to the founder of the American Racial Nationalism movement, Revilo Oliver, at:
http://www.revilo-oliver.com/Writers/Klages/Ludwig_Klages.html. Despite the good deal of fairly
scurrilous material on the pages surrounding it, the scholarship on Klages that has been collected
at that site is impressive (if a bit fawning) and will certainly prove of interest to those wishing
to better understand Rothschild’s thought. We learn there, for instance, that “Klages refuted the
doctrine of ﬁxed signs which had so misled his predecessors, who erroneously ascribed atomistic
character traits to discrete signs, without perceiving the contextual matrix from which these signs
are born. Yet the biocentric investigator does not concern himself with such expressive fragments:
for life can only be found in organic wholes” (Cartney: o.l.).
Even more provocatively: “In the unique phenomenology of Ludwig Klages, images consti-
tute the souls of such phenomena as plants, animals, human beings, and even the cosmos itself.
These images do not deceive: they express; these living images are not to be ‘grasped,’ not to be
rigidiﬁed into concepts: they are to be experienced. The world of things, on the other hand, forms
the proper subject of scientiﬁc explanatory schemes that seek to ‘ﬁx’ things in the ‘grasp’ of con-
cepts. ‘Things’ are appropriated by men who owe their allegiance to the will and its projects. The
agents of the will appropriate the substance of the living world in order to convert it into the dead
world of things, which are reduced to the status of the material components required for purposeful
activities, such as the industrial production of high-tech weapons systems. This purposeful activity
manifests the outward operations of an occult and dæmonic principle of destruction. In his three
volume Reason as the Antagonist of the Soul, Klages calls this destructive principle ‘spirit’ (Geist)
. . .[arguing that] it is precisely the images and their ceaseless transformations that constitute the
only realities” (Cartney o.l.).

450
Friedrich S. Rothschild (1899–1995)
sensuous impressions to a unity” (CP: 1.545). At the opposite end of Klages’ moral
universe is the idea of runaway Thirdness – lawfulness towards self-selected ends
regardless of the means. Rothschild’s project was to understand the evolution from
Firstness to Thirdness in living systems. Accordingly, his Haeckel-like evolutionary
taxonomy holds that organisms have been joined to the world through the indexical-
ity of Secondness (what Rothschild calls their “outer adaptation” of morphological
and physiological adaptation to the environment), and that each new system of law-
fulness in evolution (cellular, gastrula, neural, noetic) becomes superimposed upon
its still operative, but now increasingly less dominant, more primitive one. And
because each of these biological systems has evolved its own dedicated sign-system,
the second-level semiotic evolutionary process of “inner adaptation” – adaptation
of one biological sign system to another – becomes necessary (Rothschild 1994:
19–34, 43–65, 114–141).
The analysis of the interdependent communicative (i.e. semiotic) relations
between one naturally evolved sign system and another, and the embedded lawful-
ness by which each subsumes the other, are at the heart of Rothschild’s biosemiotics.
Yet this would seem to be examination into the ontogeny of end-directedness in
organisms and the phenomena of ever new lawfulness (and thus “end” genera-
tion) in evolution, of the kind that might accounted for in a Peircean perspective
(and perhaps, less satisfactorily, in a neo-Darwinian one) without any recourse at
all to deistic teleology. Yet, it turns out that the theories of Peirce and Darwin
apparently lacked the moral compulsion of those of Klages, which had so pro-
foundly shaped Rothschild’s thinking, however. So perhaps it is not surprising that
Rothschild instead found the Jesuit philosopher Pierre Teilhard de Chardin’s (1881–
1955) “orthogenetic theories of organisms’ ever complexifying progress towards
God” more applicable to his own study of the ever complexifying semiosis and
awareness in organisms.
“The things of the world express themselves in signs”, wrote Klages, and just
as the word on a page expresses the intention of its author, the things of the world,
argues Rothschild, express the intention of God. “Communication, not causality, is
the original ontological relation”, writes Rothschild (1994: 293), thus the ubiquity of
communication processes in Man do not terminate in “dead nature” at their external
pole. Rather, claims Rothschild, “the original ontological reality is a unity . . .God,
as the absolute unconditioned, in relation to the nature of which, all the processes in
the world are conditioned” (1994: 316). Likewise, God’s communication to us is the
creation of a world in which the conditioned and the unconditioned are themselves
in perpetual communication – with man being the transient creation of the former
pole and God being the eternal creator of the latter pole (1994: 315–317). With
Teilhard, Rothschild understood this apical form of being as a “forward spring” in
evolution, pulling all less developed forms towards its own (Teilhard 1950: 209).
In 1994, at age ninety-ﬁve, Rothschild oversaw an English translation of a
1986 summation of his life’s work, which itself draws heavily upon the ideas ﬁrst
presented in his 1935 Symbolik des Hirnbaus, and yet incorporates the strong com-
mitment to monotheism to which he converted around 1955 (1994: 324). Entitled
Evolution as Inner Adaptation to God (now remarketed in the United States as

14
Laws of Symbolic Mediation in the Dynamics of Self and Personality
451
Creation and Evolution: A Biosemiotic Approach), Rothschild’s magnum opus
situates his biosemiotic theory within a Manichaean cosmology of entropy and
negentropy that are identiﬁed throughout with Eros and Thanatos, respectively. In
their undifferentiated unity, these two constitute the Transcendental Subjectivity
(TS) – the principle, or form, of being that Rothschild identiﬁes with God. “TS is the
creative, psycho-physical power of God,” writes Rothschild, and “communication”
is the materialized [form, or lawful principle of] TS whereby God communicates
to the world, determines “meaning, transcends space and time, and directs the evo-
lution process” (1994: 296–298, 333). Thus, the downwardly causal effects of the
mind (or higher-level systems) upon the body in directing its activity reveal the same
“transcendental” organizing principles of that of God:
Although the [semiotic activity] in any higher system opposes that of the preceding one and
consequently inhibits it, nevertheless, it also has to adapt to this preceding one, because it is
dependant upon its information and [semiotic activity] if it is to realize its own. . . The model
and image of one’s own body as well as the model and the image of the world have to be
supported by the [semiosis] of the preceding systems in order to be experienced as images
pertaining to a real palpable world. Similarly, only in the same way do the behaviour pat-
terns become real behaviour, i.e. actions by movement. Thus we arrive again at the basic
task incumbent on the central nervous system as a communication system. This is the inte-
gration of reciprocally opposed modes of [semiosis] into an individuated experience and
behaviour (1963: 481, 488).
Critically, Rothschild uses the word “intention” here in all of the places where I
have inserted the word “semiosis” and its cognates, so as to illustrate the potential
usefulness of Rothschild’s ideas for contemporary biosemiotics, once the necessary
“frame of reference” has been shifted. But, of course, for Rothschild, semiosis is
the product of intention (deﬁned in his 1994 book’s glossary as “the psychological
activity directed to a goal” (1994: 332) – and not vice-versa, as it would be for many
biosemioticans. This must be the case, however, if Rothschild’s deistic teleology
as ﬁrst principle is to hold: “The relation between body and mind has the same
logical structure as the relation between clues and the image to which the clues are
pointing,” writes Rothschild (1994: 324).
Accordingly, while one side of the human organism points towards the objec-
tiﬁed subjectivity (or “man-ness”) that is manifested in it, the other side of the
human organism points towards the principle of transcendental subjectivity or
(“God-ness”) that is also manifested in it. The entire system is deeply bio-semiotic,
believes Rothschild, because his God is a form-creating and ultimately organizing
“principle” – i.e., the over-arching principle of self-organizing, self-preserving and
self-realizing process out of which the communicative and self-sustaining principles
of biological organization (or “life”) emerge and are themselves the signs. Signs, in
short, are ultimately noetic stepping stones and mediators for organisms – ﬁrst to
the world, then to each other, then to themselves, and ﬁnally to God.
By this point in his theory, Rothschild has undoubtedly ventured into areas
that most contemporary biosemioticians would hesitate to include within the
framework of biosemiotics. Still, there remain many interesting and potentially
suggestive insights to be found in Rothschild’s biosemiotic theorizing, and – as

452
Friedrich S. Rothschild (1899–1995)
we must do with the texts of all of the other authors in this volume – we must
take what may be useful and worth developing from these necessarily primi-
tive efforts, and leave the rest to mere historical interest. With regard to the
complex set of sign-exchanging biological relations that Rothschild is drawing
our attention to, however, his explorations into the organization and interaction
of sign processes in living systems may yet yield useable insights, once one
realizes that Rothschild’s Teilhardian orthogenesis is not the only explanatory
framework wherein his detailed observations about the nature of biological sign
processes and the need for translational “sign systems for joining sign systems”
may be fecund and coherent for biology.

14
Laws of Symbolic Mediation in the Dynamics of Self and Personality
453
Laws of Symbolic Mediation in the Dynamics
of Self and Personality (1962)
The concept of the symbol shows the way to overcome René Descartes’ partition
of man into the self as res cogitans and the body as res extensa. In the symbol,
psychological meaning and physical sign appear as a unit. We ﬁnd the personality
of a human being in the meaning of his words and actions, habits and gestures, and
we experience this meaning as being identical with its bodily bearer, resembling the
unity of symbol and meaning.
Klages (1950), in his studies of expression, and Spranger (1924, in his
Verstehende Psychologie of personality, apply this concept of the symbol. It is
unnecessary to probe the justiﬁcation of these authors for their application of it
because, for our point of view, a different use is central. Symbols are not only
a model for the unity of body and mind of people as they present themselves to
us outwardly in their behavior and appearance. Symbols also provide a method of
understanding this unity from within as it is reﬂected in the constitution of per-
sonality. This paper is based on the hypothesis that all emergence of psyche (or
experience) in man and animal is associated with sign systems in the function of
a symbolic medium, [analogous to the way that] human thought is linked with
language.
Let us start from language. Apart from its task in the communication with other
people, language, in inner virtual speech, acts as the medium for comprehending
and reﬂecting experience in thought. Only with the help of a symbolic sign system
in the form of language is man able to rise above the immediacy of his emotions
and perceptions toward the supremacy of reason and the experience of an objective
world of facts.
The central nervous system is a communication system that transforms the exci-
tations of the sense organs and the signals received through hormones and other
chemical substances into the code of its own excitations. Through these coded exci-
tations it steers the actions and reactions of the organism. The central nervous system
also enables the organism to decode the excitations generated in these vital com-
munication processes. Through the latter process the organism discloses to itself
in living experience, that is, in emotions and perceptions, the signiﬁcance of its
own situation and the character of its environment. Just as the decoding of words
yields meaning, the decoding of excitations within the central nervous system yields
perceptions, emotions, and imagery: that is, the phenomena of mental life.
Language ranks highest in the hierarchy of the internal sign systems, which are
superimposed in layers upon each other in the course of evolution. The lowest level
of communication processes corresponds to those of the somatic periphery, of the
sense organs, peripheral nerves, and muscles, and is directly related to palpable
reality. On the level of the vertebrates the neural canal is taken out of the somatic
periphery and forms, as the central nervous system, a superimposed system within
which the information of the lower communication system is reﬂected and brought
to a new synopsis and interpretation. In language man created the last and highest

454
Friedrich S. Rothschild (1899–1995)
in this evolution of communication systems. This system reﬂects the information
furnished by the central nervous system in a new synthesis and thus makes possible
an interpretation of life and the world through the logic of intellect and reason. The
meaning that man ﬁnds today within himself and in the universe is the result of an
interpretative process that evolved in the course of hundreds of millions of years
and produced appropriately organized internal sign systems. In this organization the
individual possesses a priori precepts on how to understand his situation in relation
to his environment (Rothschild 1958, 1959).
The evolution of subjectivity to the level of contemporary man is usually regarded
as an epiphenomenon of the evolution of life through gene mutations and the pres-
sures of selection according to neo-Darwinistic theory. However, can we be satisﬁed
with a genetic explanation of the human spirit that knows of no factors other
than the chance of mutation and the cruelty of selection? With all respect for its
sound scientiﬁc foundations one still feels that something is missing in this theory.
Supplementation is needed in order to make ourselves understandable to ourselves
as we are, with all the dimensions of our human inwardness. This supplement is
provided by the analysis of the evolution of internal sign systems along the lines of
the symbol theory of psychophysical relation. Protozoa, invertebrates, vertebrates,
and ﬁnally man appear as four developmental stages of subjectivity. In each stage,
a new sign system overlays the already established ones and makes the unfolding
of a new and higher level of experience possible. Using the information stored and
forever reactualized within the phylogenetically older systems, man ﬁnally achieved
his own depth and range of interpretation, and his freedom of response in the dia-
logue between self and the world. This, his own subjectivity, appears as the most
astonishing and the most revealing among the marvels of the universe.
It is impossible to examine fully and to prove scientiﬁcally in one paper the
soundness of our hypothesis that the human personality is constituted by a hier-
archy of inner communication systems, among which language ranks highest. Yet
the lawfulness prevailing in this hierarchy is simple and clear. Understanding of
the problematics of man including his psychopathology ﬂows with inner necessity
from this structure. This should make the value of our hypothesis evident even in a
sketchy exposition.
The scientiﬁc exploration of sign systems such as language we designate, with
Morris (1938), as semiotic. In this discipline usually three aspects are distinguished.
If we restrict ourselves to examine the physical form of the signs and the rules
of their arrangement, we comprehend the syntax. If, furthermore, we consider the
relation of the signs to their meaning, we engage in semantics, and as we include
the exploration of the concrete communication processes, we arrive at pragmat-
ics. Semiotic demands the consideration of all aspects in order to do justice to the
subject. Only in language, however, the demand to examine the three aspects of a
communication process can be fulﬁlled directly because language, not only assists in
constituting the ego, but it also expresses this constitution. In phylogenetically more
archaic communication systems such as the central nervous system, part of the func-
tions are unconscious and non-perceptual. Thus they are accessible only through
indirect methods. For the latter the semiotic of language in all its aspects, writing

14
Laws of Symbolic Mediation in the Dynamics of Self and Personality
455
included, serves as a model from which these indirect methods and hypotheses can
be derived.
Thus the meaning of the central nervous system’s code may be explored, of
course, by a phenomenological analysis of our own experience. For the study of the
utilization of this information, which is the pragmatics of communication with the
world, behavior may serve as material. The syntax, however, of this communication
system, in its relation to its semantics and to its pragmatics can be disclosed only
indirectly. Our knowledge of the anatomy and physiology of the central nervous
system, the many speciﬁc observations concerning the role of the various centers
of the central nervous system in their inﬂuence on experience and behavior, all this
knowledge is arranged according to the categories and interests of the neurophysiol-
ogist. Thus it does not conform to the task of the semiotician who has to ﬁnd within
the code of the central nervous system the speciﬁc order that enables the organism
to decode it as the order of experience. The situation of the semiotician resembles
that of the zoologist von Frisch. He searched in the observed behavior of bees for
the signals used by these animals to convey to their comrades where food could be
found. Through his research, the symbolism of the bee’s dancing was discovered
(von Frisch 1954).
It is not by chance that for Husserl (1928), the phenomenologist, language
appeared particularly suited to demonstrate various forms of intentionality. From
the point of view of the symbol theory of psychophysical relation, all phenomeno-
logical research can be used in semantics. In all stages of its evolution, subjectivity
intends only by means of symbolic structures, just as, by means of the words of a
sentence, it intends the thought expressed in that sentence. Through phenomenolog-
ical reduction, that is, by primarily refraining from any judgment as to the reality of
phenomena, Husserl isolated the semantic aspects. In other words, he separated the
imparting or interpretation of meaning from the pragmatic and the syntactic aspect.
Thus he evaded the encounter with the body-mind problem, speciﬁcally the fact that
subjectivity depends on actual communication processes that determine its mode
of linkage to reality. On this basis his phenomenology became a well substantiated
science of pure subjectivity.
A very different attempt of getting rid of the body-mind problem was made
by cybernetics. This discipline proceeded by excluding the semantic aspect of
communication and took upon itself the task of exploring the inner communica-
tion systems of organisms. The particular attraction of cybernetics resides in the
factually unfounded belief that this science of the communication of signals in
machines and in living systems will be able to replace a theory of the meaning
connected with those signals. This does not seem permissible. The category of
meaning may be introduced only if at the same time a subjectivity is accounted
for that either expresses itself through the spatial and temporal order of physical
events or comprehends them, as signs, the meaning of these signs, the seman-
tics ﬁnd no explanation in the mathematical physical framework of communication
and information theory. The latter deals with the technique of transmission, utiliza-
tion, and storing of signals. The meaning of the signals must be taken for granted
(Wiener 1948).

456
Friedrich S. Rothschild (1899–1995)
Phenomenology can provide the material for semantics, if it compensates for the
phenomenological reduction by including the life processes by which transcendental
subjectivity implements its sense-giving achievements. Biology and neurology ori-
entated towards communication theory can supply the material for a syntax if they
compensate for mechanistic reduction and acknowledge that the communication
processes within organisms convey meaning.
The understanding, moreover, of human production and behavior which Dilthey
(1957) originated as the method of humanities and, particularly, of history becomes
the method of the pragmatics of communication between all animated beings and
their environment. This approach presupposes acceptance of our position that the
history of subjectivity does not start with man, but that the human spirit was
preceded by many preliminary stages in the evolution of animals.
The symbol theory of psychophysical relation bridges the gulf between these dis-
parate avenues of research and unites their methods under the name of biosemiotic.
This approach that regards as its subject for exploration animals as unity of body and
psyche, and human beings as unity of body, mind, and spirit. We speak of biophysics
and biochemistry whenever methods used in the chemistry and physics of lifeless
matter are applied to material structures and processes created by life. In analogy
we use the term biosemiotic. It means a theory and its methods which follows the
model of the semiotic of language. It investigates the communication processes of
life that convey meaning in analogy to language.
My theorizing thus far would be only wishful thinking, had it not been possible
to formulate biosemiotic laws that led, amongst other results, to a novel understand-
ing of the connection between structure and function in the central nervous system.
Many of the biosemiotic interpretations concerning details of the central nervous
system as an internal communication system published by me in 1935 were con-
ﬁrmed since then by the subsequent developments of neurophysiology. The same
principles have been applied successfully to analyses of the structures and function
of intraorganismic information systems such as the vegetative nervous system and
to the hormonal system. The latter two systems adapt the sign systems, stratiﬁed in
hierarchic order through evolution, to each other, and make their integrated function
possible (Rothschild 1950). On the basis of these results, I feel justiﬁed in laying
before you the basic laws of biosemiotic even though it would exceed the frame of
this paper to provide the evidence and proof for their detailed formulations.
By laws I understand here the rules of syntax of each single communication sys-
tem and the rules valid for the simultaneous utilization of different communication
systems as they coexist in all animals and in man. If these rules are not followed,
the consequences resemble those of offenses against the grammar of the language
we use. The communications may become meaningless. Thus the organism may
become endangered by consciously or unconsciously failing to understand correctly
the situation in which it ﬁnds itself. If, as a consequence, it does not respond to it
correctly in the function of vital communication systems, it may mean death.
Organisms, moreover, do not merely live, they also experience life. For Instance
they can transcend the here and now of their body, perceive objects far removed
in space, actualize events long past. Thus the life giving transcendency becomes

14
Laws of Symbolic Mediation in the Dynamics of Self and Personality
457
transcendental subjectivity, the origin of an intentionality. It enables the organism to
interpret the meaning of-signs within inner communication systems as experiences,
and eventually to express their meaning in forms created by the organism itself,
culture and language, for instance.
There is a structural similarity between the syntax and the meaning of a symbolic
communication system. It is due to the intentionality that connects them. As the
meaning of a communication is comprehended, its syntax is understood better and,
as the syntax is understood, the meaning is clariﬁed. These circumstances are known
best from language. The ordering of reality achieved by thought corresponds to the
syntax of the language used in thinking. In analogy to this, in every communication
system that has emerged in the course of evolution, the syntax of the communication
system, and the intentionality of communications are connected in a lawful fashion.
Based on this connection it was possible to carry out the earlier mentioned semiotic
analysis of the central nervous system and to formulate the biosemiotic laws that I
propose to expound now.
Subjectivity occurs in three modes of genesis. It arises in the evolution of species
up to man in phylogenesis; it reveals itself in the development from the ovum to
the completed organism in ontogenesis; and in every moment of waking life it takes
shape as a form of autogenesis, of existential acts. It bears witness for the inner
unity of the life phenomenon that the same biosemiotic laws are valid in all three
forms of genesis. In each genesis the same single phases correspond to each other. If
I demonstrate the biosemiotic laws through the phases of life’s evolution, the results
can be transferred without difﬁculty into the other geneses.
Life may be compared to a stream in which the never-resting processes of matter
take their course and in which, on the other hand, the intentions of the transcend-
ing principle sustain an uninterrupted process of becoming, either in the growth of
organism’s forms or in its mode of behavior or experience. Despite this unceasing
movement of events streaming through them, the organisms remain stable as units
and also propagate as stable units. Today the distinction between living and life-
less matter is seen in this constancy of actually unstable structures, structures able
to maintain themselves against the entropy prevailing in matter, that is, against the
tendency toward diminishing order due to thermal motion.
In its most simple and original form this capacity of life appears in the genes, the
macromolecules within the chromosomes. Biologists hold that such units existed
and multiplied as autonomous structures in the primal atmosphere of the earth by
means of free hydrogen without oxygen. In this primal process, from the point of
view of biosemiotic, an intention of self-realization that achieves fulﬁllment by
self-reduplication ﬁnds expression. Such communication of their own essence to
other matter presupposes the capacity for these elemental organisms to preserve
their unity against all agents of change. Only if this requirement of inner self-
assertion is satisﬁed, that is, the established structure are secured as bearer of the
own essence or the self, is self realization possible. A disturbance of the established
arrangement in the macromolecules of the genes may lead to mutations that are
changes of essential character. These mutations may also destroy the structure of
the organism as a coherence of signs in a way that the synthesis of its meaning as

458
Friedrich S. Rothschild (1899–1995)
a unity, an essence, is no longer possible. Here meaninglessness equals lifelessness,
death.
This threat to given life elicits from the original passive state of the organism
a component of activity, of inner self-assertion, transforming it from an object
into a subject of intentionality. The ﬁrst biosemiotic law expresses the intention to
safeguard the structure that conveys the own essence, the self as a coherent unity. It
is the basic rule of biosemiotic syntax. The way it is realized can be thoroughly stud-
ied only if living and experiencing take place in differentiated organisms in which
different communication systems overlay each other and in which special organs
like cerebellum and the adrenal cortex serve exclusively this function of asserting
somatopsychic unity. The physiological concept of homeostasis refers to such
efforts of the organism. The ego’s mechanisms of defense, so searchingly studied in
psychoanalytic theory and practice, are psychological attempts to fulﬁll this require-
ment of preserving the organism as a somatopsychic unity in situations of conﬂict.
Their role in the dynamics of personality, particularly their relation to functions of
neurologic and hormonal control, becomes entirely understandable only if they are
recognized as inadequate solutions of the general problem of the inner unity of man.
Having outlined the manifestations of the ﬁrst biosemiotic law we must recon-
sider the primal structures of life in order to understand the necessity of the second
law. Self-realization, like that of a gene or a virus living independently, became
impossible during the known history of the earth. When immediately utilizable
sources of energy and building material were no longer available, photosynthe-
sis and respiration took over in order to provide energy for complicated anabolic
processes. This increased the danger of destruction for the structure carrying the
essential sense of the organism. Self-realization now necessitated fusion with the
alien element and the intention to understand it in order to deal with it, to handle
and use it, or to defend oneself against it. Self-realization now called for communi-
cation with the alien element in order to recognize its character. The monologue of
the steadily repeated own word in self-reduplication had to be joined by a dialogue
in which alien voices too could be heard.
Self-realization, however, and recognition of the alien essence are conﬂicting
intentions. This being the case they could produce at best only a static situation:
Life therefore could develop the abundance of its forms only after having suc-
ceeded in overcoming the contrast. This new evolutionary step is represented by
the diploidy of chromosomes and by the formation of the cell. In twos, or groups of
twos, couples of equal or very similar primal units with their centers of nucleic acid,
combined in symbiosis. One of the conjugates could attend to self-preservation and
self-realization, the other one to the fusion with the alien essence. At the same time
each of the partners allowed the other one to proﬁt from the diploid association and
the division of labor.
From this development, two structural characteristics of the cell resulted:
(1) The cytoplasm, as the instrument of reaction to and absorption of alien sub-
stances, was organized around the nucleus as the carrier of the individual
character. Thus a structure was joined to the organism that was dominated by the

14
Laws of Symbolic Mediation in the Dynamics of Self and Personality
459
genes while, also, substances and energies from the environment could become
effective in it.
(2) With the diploidy of chromosomes, an inner duality within the unity of the
organism, an inner polarization was initiated. This development beginning with
the protozoal cytoplasm led then to the formation of sense organs of the cerebral
hemispheres, and ﬁnally to the “thou,” “he,” “she,” and “it” of language. As
those symbolic representations of the other and the alien came about, they made
it possible, through the absorbed information, to interpret and to experience the
qualities and images of environment, of the non-ego. All this may be traced
back to the capacity for inner polarization that was acquired with diploidy.
The preceding observations may be formulated as the second biosemiotic law:
Inner polarization is necessary in order to permit the subjectivity of organisms to
communicate with the objects of the world simultaneously with realization of the
own self. This law dominates the arrangement of all communication systems from
the cell upward. The manifestation of this inner polarity include the differentia-
tion of motor and sensory systems in the sensorimotor foundations of experience
and behavior, the bisexual disposition of organisms, the asymmetry between right
and left, the differentiation of the vegetative nervous system into a parasympathetic
and sympathetic component, and the arrangement of the central nervous system in
homolateral and heterolateral centers (Rothschild 1950).
To the further evolution of subjectivity from the unicellular to the multicellular
animal and ﬁnally to man, a third law applies. By stages, new communication sys-
tems appear, laid out as if the information of each respectively earlier system was
processed by a reﬂecting consciousness. As a symbolic expression of this reﬂecting
intentionality each new system shows in its syntactic structure a mirrorlike inversion
in relation to the preceding system (Rothschild 1961). Based on this arrangement,
essential traits from the information of the reﬂected system can be abstracted, gath-
ered in new syntheses and organized in new symbolic structures. The particulars of
the relation between such a system of a higher order and the preceding system can
be studied in vertebrates in the relationship between the central nervous system on
one side, and the peripheral systems of the body on the other side. The latter, as we
saw earlier, corresponds to the communication system of the invertebrates.
Man differs from other vertebrates in that a further communication system
became superimposed over the central nervous system. This system, however, is
not provided by nature in form of physical structure. Every human being must learn
it in infancy in form of language from his fellow men and must develop it person-
ally. It is characteristic and essential, that here there is no information organized in a
new code, to be decoded by the new mode of intentionality, as was the case with the
central nervous system in relation to the peripheral system. While the information
is, within the old system, in the process of coding and decoding, it is comprehended
by the new mode of intentionality, the logical act of consciousness. The latter inter-
prets and organizes the information in a novel manner. In it thought and will emerge
together with developing speech and transform perception, emotion, and behavior
in speciﬁc ways. Thus the function of the central nervous system becomes newly

460
Friedrich S. Rothschild (1899–1995)
organized. The original animal style of channeling the excitations becomes inhib-
ited with the emergence of thought and will and is cast in new molds of excitation
conﬁgurations. What fundamentally distinguishes man from the animal is not his
brain as an organ given by nature. In spite of its particular development, it belongs
to the same level of communication systems as that of the anthropoid apes. It is
rather the speciﬁc way in which man uses his brain. It originates from one, usually
the left, hemisphere a new dominating communication system.
The primary independence from a code given within the individual body makes
the intersubjectivity possible that characterizes the new communication system. Its
form of functioning is identical for all persons and thereby endows the world of
human spirit with its objective character. It also necessitates the experience of the
essence of the other person, the Thou, in order to constitute itself. The analysis
of intersubjectivity is essential for the self-understanding of man; I can here only
mention the subject in passing. It may be found treated more exhaustively in Husserl
(1950), in Buber (1937, 1948) and most recently, in Teilhard de Chardin’s book: The
Phenomenon of Man (1959).
As each new inner communication system emerges in evolution, it transcends
its predecessor’s horizon of meaning and requires for its actualization a new mode
of intentionality. In this new form of intentionality, subjectivity is active and domi-
nates over that of the preceding system because it is in opposition to it and thereby
prevents an independent activity of the more archaic systems. The necessity of this
dominance constitutes the third biosemiotic law: without such dominance, the new
system cannot develop its function. This law can be validated not only semanti-
cally, by way of phenomenological investigation, but also pragmatically in behavior
and, above all syntactically through anatomical and physiological data. In the fol-
lowing I shall mention only some of its consequences for the dynamics of the
self.
[Human symbolic] acts in their independence from a biologically given code
transcend the whole world of phenomena in space and time and create a horizon of
things, ideas, and values that exist in their conceptual ﬁrmness beyond the heraclitic
stream of material and animal events. However, these concepts in their abstract-
ness are empty unless ﬁlled with meaning by the communication systems which
are subordinated to them. The controlling systems depend on the information and
the concretizing form of realization obtained from the dominated ones. The recent
research on sensory deprivation provides illustrations of the consequences of such
impoverishment in meaning caused by deﬁcient replenishment of information from
the dominated systems. Due to this dependency the clearest plan and the strongest
wish will remain mere thought and fantasy, if the movement impulses of the body
and muscular activity are not at their disposal for the purpose of putting them into
practice.
All dynamic problems of personality are rooted in this antinomy of dominance
and dependence in the human self. It is the most essential character of the acts of the
self that in their primary independence from any nature-given code, these acts are
free. The subjectivity of man can carry them out only if it is not actively engaged in
the intentionality of a more archaic system. Man’s potential freedom from the latter

14
Laws of Symbolic Mediation in the Dynamics of Self and Personality
461
raises him above all other creatures of nature; it holds, as in a metaphysical focus,
the mystery of the relation between man and the transcending principle. It offers
him greatness as well as tragedy.
One of the problems of man in this respect is the fact that this freedom must
adapt itself with each step of its realization to the communications of the preceding,
now only passively functioning systems. This means essentially that it must conform
with the ﬁrst and second biosemiotic law prevailing in these systems:
(1) No act of true self-realization is possible unless the free spirit and will of man
ﬁrst fulﬁlls the requirement of inner unity with the materiality and emotionality
of his organism.
(2) Man must recognize the bondage of ego to nonego and of nonego to ego, the
inner polarity, as the precondition of all communication.
This necessity to conform to the ﬁrst and second biosemiotic laws is experienced
as the demand of truth in our thinking and the demand for existential authenticity
in the decisions of our will. To maintain his inner freedom always within the frame
of truth and of existential authenticity is for the self of man such a tremendous and
difﬁcult task that he can fulﬁll it only imperfectly.
Man feels anxiety and guilt if he fails in this task, anxiety if not fulﬁlling the
intentionality of the dominated systems, guilt if not fulﬁlling that of the dominant
one. Nevertheless the ego has its defenses through which it evades feelings of anxi-
ety and guilt: Freud’s psychoanalysis made us thoroughly familiar with them. Both
forms of evasion serve the purpose of lessening the actualization of conﬂict between
the dominating and dominated systems; they do not demand from man the exer-
tion of true self-realization. Nature itself devised such methods. In rhythmic phases
it relinquishes unity, polarity, and dominance in order to ﬁnd the peace of sleep
through a state of inner passivity. The faculty for this change is used also in hinder-
ing communications from completing their course toward experience and behavior
whenever fulﬁllment of the biosemiotic laws is too difﬁcult. The best example of
such inhibition of communication is repression.
In a positive way, the shaping of experience and behavior is facilitated by play
and fantasy. For the child, the intentionality of play is fundamentally different from
that of the earnestness of adult situations. The freedom and sovereignty of the self in
play and fantasy does not call for obedience to the rules of the dominated systems.
Pathological dynamics begin if man evades the burden of the demands imposed by
the biosemiotic laws. Then he avails himself of the relief afforded by the intentional-
ity of play and by the change from waking to sleep at the very moment when his life
situation would demand wakefulness and seriousness to the highest degree. Thus the
natural failing of man in the face of his possibly superhuman task is aggravated not
only by self-deception regarding the true nature of his problem, but also by the strain
on his inner adaptability. All this disposes him increasingly toward decompensa-
tion and reduces his capacity for individuation and self-realization. Each personality
reveals in its characteristics the measure of success and failure that the self achieved
in confrontation with his long history of evolution.

462
Friedrich S. Rothschild (1899–1995)
References
Buber, M. (1937). I and Thou. Translated by Smith, R. G. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.
Buber, M. (1948). Between Man and Man. Translated by Smith, R. G. New York: Macmillan.
Dilthey, W. (1957). Gesammelte Schriften. 5. Band. 2nd edition. Teubner, B. G. Germany: Stuttgart.
Husserl, E. (1928). Logische Untersuchungen. Zweiter Band. I u. II Teil. 4th edition. Germany:
Max Niemeyer. Halle.
Husserl, E. (1950). Cartesianische Meditationen und Pamer Vortrage. Husserliana Bd. 1. Haag:
Martinus Nijhoff.
Klages, L. (1950). Grundlegung der Wissenschaft vom Ausdruck. 7th edition. Germany: H. Bouvier
& Co. Bonn.
Morris, C. W. (1938). Foundations of the Theory of Signs. Chicago, Ill: University of Chicago
Press.
Rothschild, F. S. (1935). Symbolik des Hirnbaus. Berlin, Germany: Karger.
Rothschild, F. S. (1950). Das Ich und die Regulationen des Erlebnisvorganges. Switzerland & New
York: Karger Basel.
Rothschild, F. S. (1959). Ueber die Symbolik der Strukturen mit psychophysischer Funktion.
Studium Generale 12, 242.
Rothschild, F. S. (1958). Das Zentralnervensystem als Symbol des Erlebens. Basel, Switzerland &
New York: Karger.
Rothschild, F. S, (1961). Transzendentale Phaenomenologie als Semantik der Strukturen mit
psychophysischer Funktion. Philosophia Naturalis 6, 485.
Spranger, E. (1924). Lebensformen. 4th edition. Halle, Germany: Max Niemeyer.
Teilhard de Chardin, P. (1959). The Phenomenon of Man. New York: Harper.
Von Frisch, K. (1954). The Dancing Bees. London, England: Methuen.
Wiener, N. (1948). Cybernetics. New York: Technology Press M. J. T. & Wiley.

Chapter 15
Concepts of Molecular Biosemiotics
Marcel Florkin (1900–1979)
Introduction and Commentary: Marcel Florkin
The recognition of systems of relata at the integrative molecular level indicates that
biomolecular order is governed by systems of signiﬁcation which we may consider
in a structuralist (intensive) perspective, besides the thermodynamic viewpoint and the
quantifying (extensive) viewpoint of information theory.
M. Florkin (1979: 13)
Biochemist Marcel Florkin was born in Liège, Belgium on August 15, 1900. He
published his ﬁrst scientiﬁc paper while still a medical student at the University of
Liège in 1926. Having graduated with his doctorate in medicine in 1928, Florkin
became the ﬁrst chair of the newly formed Department of Biochemistry on the
Faculty of Medicine at the University of Liège in 1934, where he worked for over
forty years, holding the position of professor emeritus from the time of his retire-
ment until his death on May 3, 1979. Over the course of an illustrious ﬁfty year
career, Florkin published over sixty scientiﬁc volumes and came to be recognized
as one of the founders of modern biochemistry. He was awarded both the French
Légion d′honneur and the prestigious Belgian Francqui Prize in Biological and
Medical Science for his pioneering work on comparative biochemisty, and in 1951
founded the Belgian Society of Biochemists, a society that counts over two thousand
members today.
His reputation already securely established within the history of biochemistry,
Marcel Florkin also occupies a signal place in the history of biosemiotics as well,
coining the very independantly of Sebeok, Rothschild and Stepanov, in order to
describe the sign-bearing syntax of biomolecular conﬁguration. Indeed, as early as
1934, decades before Hershey and Chase’s experiments establishing DNA as the
molecular vehicle of inheritance, Florkin had become convinced that “biochemical
correlations of morphological features do exist and that the study of biochemical
characteristics, had they not relied on sophisticated techniques, would have been
used by naturalists, instead of morphological observations, thus leading them with
equal success to the idea of evolution in biological systems” (Schoffeniels 1979:
354).
Perhaps not surprisingly, Florkin’s biographer and fellow biochemist, Ernest
Schoffeniels, recalls that even as a medical student, Florkin was closely associated
463
D. Favareau, Essential Readings in Biosemiotics, Biosemiotics 3,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9650-1_15, C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010

464
Marcel Florkin (1900–1979)
with the world of arts and letters, and was keenly interested in the history and evolu-
tion of ideas – interests that he maintained and cultivated his entire life (1979: 357).
“The epistemological concern appears early in the career of Marcel Florkin and is
best illustrated in [his 1944 treatise] L’Evolution Biochimique,” writes Schoffeniels,
calling the monograph “a cornerstone both in Florkin’s scientiﬁc career, and in the
development of a then rather young ﬁeld of investigation. It is certainly not presump-
tuous to state that the book was geminative in establishing the importance of the
biochemical approach in evolutionary thinking, and established Marcel Florkin as a
leading ﬁgure in the organization of scientiﬁc knowledge. There he showed that bio-
logical concepts such as those of [speciation] and adaptation ﬁnd their counterpart
at the molecular level” (1979: 356).
The then-radical thesis of L’Evolution Biochimique was that the biochemical
makeup of organisms could drive evolutionary change, and was not just the pas-
sive and derivative product of population-level selection pressure. This thesis met
a good deal of resitance at the time, as Florkin indicates in the following selection,
but became increasingly vindicated with the development of the ﬁeld of compara-
tive biochemistry that he helped pioneer. Thus, although the ideas of L’Evolution
Biochimique were several decades ahead of their time, from this point on in his
career, Marcel Florkin “would never disengage from his interest in solving, at the
molecular scale of dimension, the most irritating problems that biology presents to
the ingenuity of man,” writes Schoffeniels (1979: 354).
Among the large-scale problems that Florkin set himsef to solve in the devel-
oping ﬁeld of what we today call Molecular Biology were: (1) the organization
of a sound conceptual framework for the then newly born ﬁeld of evolutionary
biochemsitry; (2) the development of a pioneering and thoroughgoing biochemi-
cal systematics – which evolved into a 30 year long that resulted in the publication
of the 52 volumes comprising the three Florkin-edited and oftimes single-authored
book series: Comparative Biochemistry, Chemical Zoology, and Comprehensive
Biochemistry; (3) the continued effort to argue for the evolutionary biochemical
theses presented in L’Evolution Biochimique; and (4) of particular interest to the
history of biosemiotics: the attempt to understand biochemical interaction in what
Florkin christened its “biosemiotic” aspects.
Accordingly, the following selection presents Florkin’s wholly orginal “biosemi-
otic theory” of biochemical interaction. Appearing as the ﬁrst half of Volume 29 in
his Comprehensive Biochemistry series in 1974, Florkin’s ‘Concepts of molecular
biosemiotics and molecular evolution’ can be seen in many ways as the capstone of
his then 50 year long career in biochemistry. The result of a lifetime’s immersion
in a ﬁeld wherein “our present generally accepted knowledge on the biosynthetic
steps and chains that lead to the building blocks of cells have come about as an
aggregation of isolated facts, rather than a synoptic whole” (Jaenicke 1981: 615),
and completed just a few months before an auto accident left him crippled and in
ill health for the remaining ﬁve years of his life, Florkin’s Concepts of molecular
biosemiotics and molecular evolution, we may assume, was his attempt at syn-
thesizing all that a lifetime studying the chemistry of living beings had revealed
to him.

15
Concepts of Molecular Biosemiotics
465
It is, however, by no means an easy read. Fellow biochemist Lothar Jaenicke,
having elsewhere acknowledged Florkin as one of the “founders of comparative
biochemistry” (1981: 615), reviewed the following selection at the time of its pub-
lication, and found the text to be almost impenetrable. “The author’s phenomenal
knowledge of the facts and historical perspectives and his intellectual insight into
his material can only be marvelled at,” writes Jaenicke, but, he then notes, the dense-
ness of the terminology and the complexity of the systemic understanding proposed
“conveys little even to a fairly sophisticated reader” (1975: 190–191). The synop-
sis that Jaenicke ultimately prepared for his review, however, reveals a good deal
of understanding of Florkin’s project, and the ideas that Florkin was attempting to
argue for:
The intention [of the volume] is to bring systematic order into the presentation of phyloge-
netic development, in which the evolution of life is assumed to be from simple biomolecules
by asymmetric, autocatalytic, and aggregating forces. The molecular processes occurring
during the phylogenesis of organisms (Florkin’s “diachronic molecular epigenesis”) are
mostly considered on the basis of cellular chain molecules (Florkin’s “metabolic cate-
nary biosyntagms”) which become better suited to their structure, function, or regulation,
and more versatile, by lengthening or shortening, branching and ramiﬁcation. The causes
are point mutations, feedback, selection, gene duplication, etc. Useable biomolecules thus
function, after self-aggregation, into structures of higher order on the physiological and
ecological plane. (1975: 191)
Addressing himself, without his knowing it, to many of the same problems
then being analysed by physicist and future biosemiotician Howard Pattee, Florkin
begins his treatise with a discussion of the beneﬁts and limitations of applying
Information Theory to the explantions of biology. During the course of the bio-
chemical evolution of life on Earth, writes Florkin, “the reciprocal relations between
the various biosystems [ﬁrst jointly developed, and then further developed within,
an evolutionary ecosystem that] became more and more elaborate, leading to the
exchange of molecules that were not only of nutritional importance, but acquired
regulatory and control properties, acting as transferrers of signs and signals” (1974:
12). Accordingly, continues Florkin (by quoting Johnson), “In biology, the ‘exten-
sive’ property (information, or negative entropy) can have signiﬁcance for the
feasibility of living process only if it is modulated by an ‘intensive’ property which
indicates the ‘biological relevance’ or ‘purposefulness’ of that information” (1974:
10). The goal of a “biosemiotic” molecular biochemistry is thus to discover the
nature of these “intensive” (i.e., system internal) causal properties.
Florkin situates his understanding about the evolution of such “intensive causal
properties” within the “cybernetic molecular network” that constitutes the entirety
of the Earth’s biomass (1974: 11). The molecules that are precursors to biologi-
cal chemical messengers, and that have causal efﬁcacy upon other molecules in
such an ecosystem, Florkin refers to as ecomones (the –mones sufﬁx presum-
ably denoting their semio-chemical ontology, after the fashion of the pheromones,
allomones and kairomones that are studied by entomologists). In relationship with
one another, a pair of such molecules may be deemed co-actones acting, essen-
tially, as the polar molecular complements of stimulus-response dyads (Florkin’s

466
Marcel Florkin (1900–1979)
somewhat grammatically confusing term for such dyadic pairing throughout this
text is: “couples of relata”) (1974: 53–64).
Anticipating some of contemporary biosemiotics’ later terminology, Florkin
distinguishes between exocoactones – molecules “which are liberated in the [envi-
ronment] by a co-actor and [then exert causal inﬂuence on] the co-actee” – and
endocoacatones: “molecules which are not liberated by a coactor in the environ-
ment” but are instead liberated within the organism as biomolecules, which issue
from an active site to modify a passive site (1974: 12, 123). The co-evolution
of exo-coactonic and endo-coactonic action within an environment results in an
exponentially complexifying organizational and semiotic dynamic – biological
“evolution” as we commonly understand the term – and Florkin goes to great
pains in all his writings on “molecular evolution” to demonstrate that one result of
such phylogenetic evolution is a correspondingly complexiﬁed organizational and
semiotic dynamic at the level of organisms’ biochemistry.
Deriving his terminology and conceptual framework for semiotic organization
from what he sees as the “existential, not psychological” system of structural
semiology developed by pioneering linguist Ferdinand de Saussure (1857–1913),
Florkin’s description of the hierarchically generative semiotics of cellular biochem-
istry begins with the fundamental sign-bearing relationship of the bioseme:
The signiﬁcation system [in molecular biosemiotics] implies a sign (deﬁned as signiﬁcant +
signiﬁed) and a receptor, eventually reached through a sequence of intermediary steps. . .
at the level of a bioseme, the signiﬁcant, an aspect of molecular conﬁguration, and the
signiﬁed, an aspect of biological activity, compose the sign. . . [thus] the sign, of which a
bioseme is the minimal signiﬁcant, is a double-faced (signiﬁcant + signiﬁed) material entity
(molecular conﬁguration + biological activity). (1974: 15)
Interacting upon one another in the massively complex biochemical system that
is the organism, such biosemes become structurally united into biosyntagms – “a
unit of signiﬁcation higher than a bioseme and composed of signiﬁcant units in
a relation of reciprocal solidarity – i.e., an associative conﬁguration of biosemes”
(1974: 16, 123). Nucleotide bases are thus the biosemes of genetic transcription
that, when oriented to as codons, become the biosyntagms of genetic translation, in
that they bear a “higher-order” meaning or relevance for the activity of the yet even
higher-order biosyntagm of tRNA (1974: 27–34).
In both genetic expression and in intercellular organization and interaction,
therefore, as biomolecular order complexiﬁes, new and ever higher-order levels
of signiﬁcation becomes possible: “Some of these dense associations are architec-
tured in the form of the higher level of integration of cell organelles and of cells
themselves by recourse to a number of couples of relata such as enzyme-substrate,
hormone-receptor, multichain regulatory protein, etc.”, writes Florkin (1974: 11).
On higher levels still, maintains Florkin, “the molecular biosemiotics of the activ-
ities of the brain” (1974: 14) enable both human and animal cognition – and at
the ecological level, “a number of end-products of the biosynthetic catenary biosyn-
tagms are neither signiﬁcant at the molecular integrative level, nor at the structural or
physiological levels of the organism, but are signiﬁcant as ecomones” in the shared
surround of environment (1974: 106) – bringing the evolutionary feedback loop of

15
Concepts of Molecular Biosemiotics
467
biosemiotic signiﬁed and signiﬁcance full circle. “In such a perspective,” writes
Florkin, “the evolution of organisms and the evolution of the biomolecular order
(biochemical evolution) are recognized as interrelated facets of the same natural
reality” (1974: 116).
Developing these ideas from within the ﬁeld of laboratory biochemistry in the
early 1960s and 1970s, Marcel Florkin almost certainly was not aware of Thomas
A. Sebeok’s contemporaneous project of zoosemiotics – which was still almost
a decade away from its own exploration into endosemiotics, and its subsequent
rechristening as biosemiotics. Nor would he have been aware of psychologist
Friedrich Solomon Rothschild’s homonymous coining of the term “biosemiotics”
to describe the psychical-physical nexus of organisms, almost a dozen years ear-
lier. Indeed, it would have been a very interesting meeting had these three very
differently oriented thinkers ever met to exchange ideas.
Much unlike Sebeok and Rothschild, however, Florkin insisted that the biosemi-
otic “signs” that he was examining were “material and functional” – not denotative
nor connative – phenomena through and through. “The bioseme,” Florikin states
in no uncertain terms, “carries no Bedeutung or Sinn. Its signiﬁcant consists of an
aspect of molecular conﬁguration and its signiﬁed of an aspect of biological activ-
ity” (1974: 10). For this reason, argues biosemiotician Marcello Barbieri, Florkin’s
“dualistic model, based on Saussure” has not been taken up by contemporary
biosemiotics, as it presumes a genotype-phenotype duality that “is entirely deter-
mined by chemical necessity” and that therefore does not account for the critically
mediating role between genes and proteins that constitutes the “natural convention”
of the genetic code (Barbieri 2001: 201).
Still, Florkin’s models – besides being of great historical interest for the
prescience by which they foreshadow such later thinking as Valentin Tuchin’s
metasystems transition theory and Mario Gimona’s protein linguistics research
project – remain of interest to biosemioticians, as well, for their insistence upon the
critical role of emergent, higher-order semiotic properties in enabling the generativ-
ity of organismic development and evolution. Thus, collection of essential readings
in biosemiotics would be complete without the inclusion of the following historical,
and still very productively suggestive and illuminating, text.

468
Marcel Florkin (1900–1979)
Concepts of Molecular Biosemiotics (1974)
The Concept of Molecular Evolution
The expression “molecular evolution” covers a number of different topics. One of
them is prebiological evolution or “chemical evolution”. This domain is based on
the study of models and on the experimental development of different hypotheses, a
subject which will be dealt with in Chapter 5 (Vol. 29B).
Another aspect of molecular evolution, to which the present chapter is devoted, is
the study of the changes which can be identiﬁed at the molecular integrative level at
different points of the phylogenetic sequence of organisms (biochemical evolution).
The concept of descent with change at the molecular level was formulated in 1944
by the present author:
The study of biochemical characteristics depends upon techniques which are frequently
complicated, and such a study is more difﬁcult to accomplish than direct observation of
external morphological characters. Nevertheless, had naturalists started from these, rather
than from morphological observations they would have been bound to conceive the idea of
evolution of animals (Florkin 1949).
This “conﬁdent statement” as it is called by Dessauer’, has been ratiﬁed by
molecular evidence. As pointed out by Simpson’, the concept of evolution at the
molecular level was therefore conceived before the advent of molecular biology:
“Before the importance of DNA was known Florkin had already discussed the sys-
tematics and evolution of various families of molecules.” (Simpson 1964). To quote
H. F. Blum:
It was brought into particulary clear focus by Florkin in his little book: LYvolution biochim-
ique (1944) that we may trace an evolutionary pattern of biochemical compounds which
corresponds in its implication to our tracing of the evolution of morphological aspects of
the species of living organisms.
Once for all we wish to state that the expression “biochemical evolution” is an
elliptic one meaning the pattern of changes of biomolecular epigenesis (diachronic
molecular epigenesis) along the phylogeny of organisms, as derived by naturalists.
Oppositions to the Concept of Biochemical Evolution
The concept of “biochemical evolution” i.e. of the existence of a pattern of evolution
at the molecular level has been the object of much adverse criticism. “Mayr”, for
instance, has stated that
Much of the difference among organisms is a matter of difference of systems rather than in
unit components.
The same view, current at the time of the publication of Florkin’s book, has
been formulated again by another veteran biologist, P. Weiss, who brings up against

15
Concepts of Molecular Biosemiotics
469
molecular evolution the concept of the biochemical unity of organisms as claimed
by Baldwin and by Florkin.
This is a matter of semantics, as what these authors showed is the biochemi-
cal unity of organisms, as expressed in the common “central metabolic pathway”
common to all cells, from Protista to insects and vertebrates.
It is abundantly clear that the changes undergone by the metabolic pathways
grafted on to the central system, along the evolution of organisms consist, not only of
changes of systems by the recombination of existing units, but also of an increasing
number of unit components, the biocatalysts of the terminal and lateral extensions in
the metabolic pathways as well as of end-products. Another objection is expressed
by Mayr:
“No case is known to me,” he writes, “in which a change of body chemistry initiated a new
evolutionary trend. Invariably it was a change of habits or habitat which created a selection
pressure in favor of chemical adjustments” (1964: 68).
It will be enough to consider the importance of such biochemical innovations as
the system of calciﬁcation of the cuticle of a turbellarian ancestor of the molluscs,
the sclerotization of the cuticle of the annelid ancestors of Arthropods, the patterns
of ossiﬁcation in ﬁsh, the biochemical patterns of the amniote egg as it appeared
in reptiles, or the isosmotic intracellular regulation which allowed marine inverte-
brates to invade fresh water and land, to escape, while recognizing the role of natural
selection in its proper perspective, falling in a naive panselectionism.
It might be claimed that the epistemology of evolution is, as we have repeatedly
said, situated at the level of organisms, while the changes described by compara-
tive biochemists are situated at the molecular level. This would not be a fair deal,
as comparative biochemistry studies molecular changes with recourse to concepts
concerned with molecular conﬁgurations, reactions and activities, phylogeny being
called upon to provide the scheme of descendance, a frame and a situation of the
problem.
Synchronic Molecular Biosemiotics
The Fitness of the Environment
The surface of the earth receives energy almost entirely as solar radiations and this
intake of energy is compensated by terrestrial radiation. The biosphere is in a steady
state remote from the equilibrium state. The entropy of the biosphere deﬁned as the
whole biomass and its environment increases with time.
In an inﬂuential book published in 1948, Schrödinger (1948), impressed by the
new knowledge of the ordered hereditary transmission of relations between nucleic
acids and proteins, appearing as a contradiction with the statistical laws of physics
and with the tendency of things to go over into disorder, wrote:
Life seems to be ordered and lawful behaviour of matter, not based exclusively on its
tendency to go over from order to disorder, but based partly on existing order that is kept up.

470
Marcel Florkin (1900–1979)
Schrödinger deﬁnes the process by which an organism maintains itself at a fairly
high level of orderliness (fairly low level of entropy) as “sucking orderliness from
its environment” by which he means that while in the whole biosphere entropy
increases with time, entropy is kept at a fairly low level at certain points in the sys-
tem by displacement from randomness to order. Schrödinger states that the organism
not only transforms free energy into work and increases the entropy of the whole
system, but also feeds on “negative entropy” (abbreviated by Brillouin 1949 to
negentropy). Entropy is zero at 0 K and positive above it, while it is impossible to go
below. “Negative entropy” in Schrödinger’s expression means a displacement from
disorder to order. In the consideration of the ﬂow of energy through the biomass, it
is “free energy” which is generally referred to in calculations. The molecular free
energy is deﬁned as follows
G = H −TS
in which H is the molar energy content, T the absolute temperature and S the molec-
ular entropy content. As said above, the main free-energy source in organisms is
presently considered as being the high-energy bond of ATP. While it is common-
place to describe a chemical reaction in living organisms by deﬁning the reactants,
the products and the free-energy changes occurring in the reaction, in a number
of reactions in which ATP is hydrolyzed or synthesized, the process to which the
chemical reaction is coupled remains obscure; such is the case in muscular contrac-
tion, active transport, oxidative phosphorylation or photosynthetic phosphorylation.
These appear as aspects of “molecular energy machines” (McClare 1971) the theory
of which is not dealt with in classical thermodynamics and remains to be developed
as does the energetics of protein folding.
In 1913 appeared the widely read book of L. J. Henderson (1927), The Fitness
of the Environment, which was considered by some as a platitude and by others
as deserving endless commentaries which still are a subject of writing nowadays
(Brinton 1958, Parascandola 1971). Henderson rejects all sorts of teleological views
and quotes Bacon concerning ﬁnal causes, which are like vestal virgins.
They are dedicated to God, and are barren.
The core of Henderson’s thought is expressed by the sentence in which he
considers:
that peculiar and unsuspected relationships exist between the properties of matter and the
phenomena of life; that the process of cosmic evolution is indissolubly linked with the
fundamental characteristics of the organism; that logically in some obscure manner cosmic
and biological evolution are one,
and also, more concisely when he writes:
the whole evolutionary process, both cosmic and organic, is one.
In a lucid comment, Speakman (1966) expresses Henderson’s thought as follows:

15
Concepts of Molecular Biosemiotics
471
The environment seems to be well ﬁtted for the sustenance of life in ways over which the
organism has no control and which, indeed predate the existence of the organism.
The ways in which “cosmic and biological evolution are one” have been sought
in the laws of classical thermodynamics and more particularly in the Carnot-
Clausius principle. In the overall balance, cosmic and biological evolution result
in an increase of entropy as predicted by the second law. The concept of evolution
as an aspect of this law has been formulated by a number of authors and especially
by Lotka (1925) and by Blum (1968). It has been considered unacceptable by a
number of authors on the basis of the idea that evolution, as well as the maintenance
of the organisms imply, as stressed by Schrödinger, an increase in order.
That “cosmic and biological evolution are one”, as stated by Henderson, could
only be understood after the formulation by Prigogine (for a general formulation,
and literature, see Prigogine 1971) of the concept of chemical instabilities leading
to a spontaneous self-organization of the system both from the point of view of its
space order and its function: “there indeed exists a new state of matter induced by a
ﬂow of free energy far from equilibrium” (Prigogine 1971).
Short-time oscillations have been detected in a number of biochemical reactions
(Prigogine 1971) and arguments have been formulated in favour of instabilities
breaking dissipation symmetry, and leading to spatial organization. Chemical insta-
bilities may be associated with biological structures and with their change in
descent. These views confer a new interest upon “trafﬁc” pathways in the cyber-
netic network of the biochemical continuum and upon the system of signiﬁcation
expressed in their branching, control and regulation.
Furthermore it leads to a better deﬁnition of the vaguely deﬁned “internal factors”
of evolution, possibly by a consideration of the limitations imposed on primordial
proteins, with respect to their primary structure, by their mode of synthesis and their
persistence in the medium in which they developed, by taking into account the laws
of the thermodynamics of irreversible phenomena and particularly the entropic cri-
terion of evolution of energetically open systems (Glandsdorff and Prigogine 1964,
Prigogine 1971) according to which, as stated by Buvet (1971) “in open systems,
compounds of internal structures different from equilibrium ones spontaneously
arise, which may be considered to have no ‘raison d’etre’ other than bending this
entropy production in the way of minimalization”. In such a system the existence of
which involves a source of energy and a sink for the energy ﬂowing through the sys-
tem, energy is used up and dissipated for the maintenance of the steady state remote
from the equilibrium, a steady state depending on cyclic chemical processes and on
the chemical and energetic coupling of anabolic and catabolic cycles.
Molecular Information
The entropy (in the sense it has in thermodynamics) of a DNA molecule is a function
of the conﬁguration in which the atoms are ordered. It is expressed in the relation:
k · log D

472
Marcel Florkin (1900–1979)
(k, Boltzmann constant; D, measure of atomic disorder). In statistical terms, entropy
is deﬁned as
S = −k
1−n

i=1
log pi
 n
1 = 1; where pi = the probability of an idealized physical system in the state
i of n possible states). Szilard (1929) has pointed out the formal similarity of this
equation deﬁning entropy and the equation deﬁning information
H = −
1−n

i=1
pi log pi

0 ≤pi ≤1; n
1pi = 1; where pi = relative probability of the ith symbol generated
by a source).
The fundamental relations between information and entropy have been devel-
oped by Shannon and Weaver (1949) and by Brillouin (1956), to whose writings the
reader is referred.
In our present theory, displacement from randomness, or negentropy is quantiﬁed
in information, or rather in the quantity of information, expressed in “bits”.
This unit of information corresponds to the simplest possible form of message
transmission. In the case of a binary symbol, i.e. which can take two or only two
alternative forms (for instance “yes” or “no”, or a dot or dash in the Morse sys-
tem). The “elementary quantity of information” that can be transmitted by a simple
“binary” symbol (choice between two alternatives) corresponds to a bit (binary
digit)
2 bits correspond to a choice between 4 alternatives
3 bits correspond to a choice between 8 alternatives
4 bits correspond to a choice between 16 alternatives
or in general
n bits to a choice between 2n alternatives
The information content I corresponds to the number
I(bit) = ld2n
(ld = log2 = log to the base 2)
When we deal with several (n) symbols and with several (m) symbol types, the
general equation reads
I (bit) = ld mn = nld m = 3.32 n log10 m (bit)
As pointed out by Quastler (1953) who was the ﬁrst to understand the biological
pertinence of the information theory formulated by Shannon (1948) in 1948, an

15
Concepts of Molecular Biosemiotics
473
amino acid has about the information content of a word and a protein that of a prose
paragraph. He calculated the capacity of a mammalian DNA molecule as 2·1010
bits of information. Morowitz has calculated the information content of a cell of
Escherichia coli and found it equal to 2·1011 bits. These data illustrate the high
content of a mammalian cell in information deﬁned as negentropy i.e. in physical
terms.
Biomolecular Relata
As said above, negentropy is an extensive property and the information theory
quantiﬁes it. As noted by Johnson (1970):
. . . in biology, the extensive property; information or negative entropy can have signiﬁcance
for the feasibility of living process only if it is modulated by an intensive property which
indicates the biological relevance or purposefulness of that information.
Brillouin himself has written (Brillouin 1956):
the present theory of information completely ignores the value (or meaning) of the
information handled, transmitted or processed.
The whole mass of living organisms may in the perspective of the present discus-
sion, be considered as a large collection of molecules assembled in a certain order
and forming a biochemical continuum (Florkin 1965, 1966) composed of all the
molecular aspects of the organisms and of their metabolic extensions. This concept
situates the consideration of the whole biomass at the molecular level, i.e. a cyber-
netic molecular network. The sediments at the deepest bottom of the oceans, and
the organic matters coating sand and mud particles there, are linked to the surface
of the seas by a cloud of molecules, this cloud being of variable density. The same
notion applies to soils and to fresh water.
The whole of the biochemical continuum forms a large population of molecules
densely associated in parts and more separate in other regions. Some of the dense
associations are architectured in the form of the higher level of integration of cell
organelles and of cells themselves by recourse to a number of couples of relata such
as enzyme-substrate, hormone-receptor, multichain regulatory protein, etc., and a
mechanism has been developed for the replication of a material including in the
frame of the ﬂux of matter and energy, a ﬂux of information. In a cell there is a
ﬂow of information from nucleolus to cytoplasm and this is coupled with a ﬂow of
material particles, the ribosomes, dependent upon the activity of the nucleolus. Not
only are the ribosomal RNAs transferred in that way, but also the RNAs which carry
the speciﬁcity for protein synthesis. This information depends upon the existence,
in the nucleus, of a collection of DNA molecules inherited from the parents, carriers
of the molecular order expressed in the structure and nature of the organism.
Monocellular and pluricellular organisms associate in communities whose pop-
ulations maintain themselves and form, in association with different components of
the environment, ecosystems inside which and between which currents, not only of
matter and energy, but also of information are ﬂowing (Florkin 1966, Sondheimer

474
Marcel Florkin (1900–1979)
and Simeone 1970). The biochemical continuum is the result of a slow evolution
starting from the organic abiogenic continuum resulting from the prebiotic (chemi-
cal) evolution. The transition from the abiogenic organic continuum (Florkin 1969)
to the biochemical continuum is characterized by a decisive step: the emergence of
the steady state remote from the equilibrium state and of the prime aspects of nutri-
tion in the form of a ﬂow of matter and energy through the open system of organized
aggregates (precells, protocells).
As stated by Eigen (1971)
. . . General principles of selection and evolution at the molecular level are based on a stabil-
ity criterion of the (non-linear) thermodynamic theory of steady states. Evolution appears
to be an inevitable event, given by the presence of certain matter with speciﬁed autocat-
alytic properties and under the maintenance of the ﬁnite (free) energy ﬂow necessary to
compensate for the steady state production of entropy.
The reciprocal relations between the various biosystems and with the medium
became more and more elaborate, and it led to the exchange of molecules that
were not only of nutritional importance, but acquired regulatory and control prop-
erties, acting as transferrers of signs and signals. Many ecological aspects should
be classiﬁed as molecular reactions (liberation of molecular factors by organisms in
the habitat) and molecular actions (infringements of molecular factors upon organ-
isms). In an ecosystem, besides the contribution of the trophic chains in supplying
molecules endowed with nutritive functions and ensuring the ﬂux of matter and of
energy one may describe non trophic molecules active in insuring a ﬂux of infor-
mation as well as the constitution and maintenance of the community (ecomones
Florkin, 1965, 1966). An ecomone may have multiple actions. For instance, the
concentration of dissolved carbohydrates in sea water varies from place to place
and is a factor of the nature and growth of the phytoplancton. On the other hand the
ecological importance and the action as ecomones, of the carbohydrates is expressed
in the regulation of the pumping rate of Lamellibranchia.
Some ecomones are recognized as being speciﬁcally active in the process of the
coaction of organisms upon each other. Such speciﬁc substances or coactones are
determinant in the relationship between the coactor (active and directing organism)
and the coactee (passive and receiving organism). A number of coactones are lib-
erated by the coactor in the medium and reach the coactee. These we may call
exocoactones. Among these are, for instance the molecular factors of the orienta-
tion of animals through the perception of the odour of the animal taken as food. The
feeding behaviour of an animal when reaching a plant to which it has been attracted
by an exocoactone may be speciﬁcally unlocked by plant products which we may
call endocoactones.
A special category of exocoactones is represented by those substances produced
in a coactor and acting on a coactee, both coactor and coactee belonging to the
same species. These exocoactones are called pheromones. According to Karlson
and Lüscher (1959)
pheromones are deﬁned as substances which are secreted to the outside of an individual
and received by a second individual of the same species, in which they release a speciﬁc
reaction, for example a deﬁnite behaviour or developmental process.

15
Concepts of Molecular Biosemiotics
475
The other exocoactones and endocoactones, transmitting chemical signals to
individuals of other species we may call allomones, as suggested by Brown and
Eisner (1968).
The circulation of molecules and macromolecules through the biochemical con-
tinuum and the factors controlling their distribution is a ﬁeld of active biochemical
evolution and adaptation in which it is possible to detect the aspects of natural
selection shaping both sign and receptor and the evolution of reciprocal interactions
between organisms and between groups of organisms.
Molecular Biosemiotics
The recognition of systems of relata at the integrative molecular level indicates that
biomolecular order is governed by systems of signiﬁcation which we may consider
in a structuralist (intensive) perspective besides the thermodynamic viewpoint and
the quantifying (extensive) viewpoint of the information theory.
When Wiener once wrote that one could consider an organism as a language, he
meant that the concepts of information and cybernetics are applicable to organisms.
It would be better to resist the temptation of considering biomolecular relata along
the lines of language studies. Linguistics is dealing with linguistic signs, i.e. with
psychological entities, relating in the receptor’s mind a psychic acoustic image and
a concept. Language is a vector of ideas, as are other aspects of semiology, such as
the alphabet of the deaf-mutes, symbolic rites, marine signalization, etc. All these
languages, framed in the social mass, represent substitutes of human experience
which can be transmitted in space and time.
We shall therefore pray for the banishment of the abusive use of the term “lan-
guage” from the ﬁeld of molecular biosemiotics, while granting that there is, on
the other hand, a language and a graphology of the chemist and of the biochemist,
aspects which are not dealt with in this review.
Consequently, we ﬁnd it advisable to avoid the application of the speciﬁc con-
cepts of linguistics (word, phrase, etc.) to biosemiotics and, however tempting it
may be, to decide not to introduce such expressions into it.
While linguistic semiology deals with human psychological phenomena and the
communication of concepts, molecular biosemiotics deals with existential aspects
of cells and the relata it studies are not always of the nature of signals. It is on the
other hand imperative to keep the concepts of general semiology as understood in
the social mass of men, when they go beyond this domain to connote the ﬁeld of
molecular biosemiotics, as we believe that in a future development, linguistic semi-
ology will become based on molecular biosemiotics of the activities of the brain.
We shall therefore use in the perspective of this subject several general concepts
elaborated by De Saussure (1971) such as signiﬁcant and signiﬁed, synchrony and
diachrony, syntagm and system with the special meaning they have in molecular
biosemiotics. It must be noted that in the mind of F. de Saussure these concepts
arose from the consideration of existential (not psychological) aspects of natural
science.

476
Marcel Florkin (1900–1979)
To deﬁne the concept of signiﬁcant, Saussure recalls that water, H2O, is
signiﬁcant in a way which belongs neither to oxygen nor to hydrogen:
it is a combination of hydrogen and oxygen; taken apart, each of these elements has none
of the properties of water (De Saussure 1971) (translation by author)
Synchrony and diachrony are borrowed by De Saussure from the theory of
evolution, and diachronic is synonymous with evolutionary.
It is therefore ﬁtting to situate these concepts in the most general context of semi-
otics, the general science of signiﬁcation, of which linguistics and biosemiotics are
special aspects. However, the concept of the word is speciﬁcally linguistic as it
means the smallest free unit of denotation. It is a cultural unit and should conse-
quently not be confused with the material and functional (not denotating) units of
molecular biosemiotics. The same holds for the phrase and for discourse, which are
the support of connotative developments of values deﬁned by their situation in a
semantic ﬁeld. They belong to dialectic logic and not, as in the case of biosemiotics,
to structural logic.
Molecular biosemiotics is an aspect, not of human sciences, but of molecular
biology. As stated by De Saussure (1971), in linguistics, the sign which he consid-
ers as the association of a signiﬁcant and a signiﬁed, is arbitrary with reference to
the relation between its two faces. In molecular biosemiotics, on the other hand,
signiﬁcant and signiﬁed are in a necessary relation imposed by the natural relations
of material realities.
Biosemes
Minimal conﬁguration aspects, carriers (signiﬁcant) of molecular signiﬁcation
(signiﬁed), either sequential, structural, functional, protective, connective, motive,
signaling, catalytic, processing, regulating, priming, repressing, releasing, etc., we
shall call biosemes (units of signiﬁcant). The sign (theme of signiﬁcation) is formed
by the doublet of signiﬁcant and signiﬁed of the bioseme. The signiﬁcation system
implies a sign (signiﬁcant + signiﬁed) and a receptor, eventually reached through a
sequence of intermediary steps.
It must be noted that, while in the terminology of linguistic semiology, the sign
is “a double faced psychological entity”, the sign of which a bioseme is the mini-
mal signiﬁcant is a double-faced (signiﬁcant + signiﬁed) material entity (molecular
conﬁguration + biological activity). This avoids the controversial nature of the rela-
tion signiﬁcant (symbol) – reference (concept) – referent (the thing signiﬁed), as
introduced by Richards and Ogden (1924) in linguistics. The referent is the object
denoted by the signiﬁcant (in the case of the word tree, f.i., the object tree), while the
reference is the signiﬁcation (a concept) carried by the word to the receptor. This,
Pullman (1962) has deﬁned as the information carried to the receptor, what Frege
(1892) had deﬁned as Sinn in contrast to the referent which is Bedeutung. To illus-
trate the distinction, we may write /Charles Darwin/and/the author of the Origin

15
Concepts of Molecular Biosemiotics
477
of Species/. The Bedeutung remains the same but the reference (Sinn) is different.
The same difﬁculty concerning the linguistic signiﬁed appears in the opposition of
denotatum and designatum, denotation and connotation, denotation and meaning
(literature in Eco 1972).
At the level of a bioseme, the signiﬁcant, an aspect of molecular conﬁguration,
and the signiﬁed, an aspect of biological activity, compose the sign, and the theme
of signiﬁcation. This is one more reason if necessary, to avoid referring to “words”
and “sentences” when dealing with biomolecular aspects, while it is also a reason
for adopting the notion of the sign in a special section (biosemiotics) of general
semiotics. This denomination we shall apply to the general science of signs, while
applying the name of general semiology (Barthes 1964) to the discipline concerned
with systems of signs in relation with the laws of the languages framed in the social
mass.
A bioseme carries no Bedeutung or Sinn. Its signiﬁcant consists of an aspect of
molecular conﬁguration and its signiﬁed of an aspect of biological activity.
Biosemes, the units of signiﬁcation involved in molecular relata, correspond as
said above, to intensive aspects of negentropy. The system of signiﬁcation obtaining
in each case of relation with a receptor can be considered, not only from the intensive
point of view but also as categories of information. Such is “structural information”;
deﬁned by Büchel (1967) as the information required to construct a system from its
parts.
Büchel (1967) considers a watchmaker putting together the parts of a watch.
Whenever a mechanism containing an information of n bits is built, the thermodynamic
entropy of that mechanism or its environment must increase by the amount of at least kn
log 2 where k is the, Boltzmann constant. The quantity kn log 2 is, in fact, the information
measured not in bits but in caloric units (cal/grad) [cal/deg. C]. So we may consider the
information to be “structural negentropy” contained in the mechanism.
Büchel’s structural negentropy or structural information is denoted by Ryan
(1972) by the symbol IS.
Another category of information, “bound information”, an expression introduced
by Wilson (1968) is deﬁned by Ryan (1972) as the information which is “required
to specify the precise microstate of any resonant system”. What Ryan (1972) calls
“functional information” corresponds, according to his deﬁnition, to the entropy
change corresponding to the order put in (or maintained in) the environment-of-
action. We may tentatively recognize this functional information as corresponding
to an extensive aspect (information theory) of the intensive concept of the signiﬁed
as deﬁned above in the context of molecular biosemiotics.
While placing the general (extensive) aspect of organic evolution and its
inevitability in a thermodynamic context, we should carefully avoid deriving mech-
anisms of molecular evolution as a process (intensive aspects of biomolecular
changes in the phylogeny of organisms) from thermodynamic concepts, as it has
unfortunately sometimes been done, leading to utter confusion.

478
Marcel Florkin (1900–1979)
Biosyntagms
In the Macedonian “phalanx”, the term “syntagm” designated the compact unit com-
posed of specialized categories of warriors in several rows, pointing their weapons
at the periphery. A biosyntagm we shall recognize as being a unit of signiﬁcation
higher than a bioseme, and composed of signiﬁcant units in a relation of reciprocal
solidarity, i.e. an associative conﬁguration of biosemes.
A biomolecule may carry several biosyntagms and, on the other hand, a biosyn-
tagm may extend to several biomolecules. The biosyntagm corresponds to the
metonymic aspect of molecular biosemiotics. Cistrons, operons, the double helix
of DNA, enzymes, biosynthetic assembly chains, are examples of biosyntagms at
the integrative molecular level, and are composed of aspects of signiﬁcation sol-
idary in the course of the information process and presenting a relation of the whole
(biosyntagm) to the parts (biosemes)1.
Sequencing Biosyntagms
The signiﬁed of such biosyntagms, the composing biosemes of which are
nucleotides or codons, is of a sequencing nature, governing the sequence of
nucleotides or of amino acids, in their polymers. To this section belongs the sec-
ondary sequencing biosyntagm of DNA, the tertiary biosyntagm of tRNA and the
primary biosyntagm of mRNA. The reader is referred to Vol. 24 of this Treatise
for a detailed treatment of the biochemistry of these polynucleotides and of the
genetic code governing the couples of relata between mRNA, tRNA and ribosomes.
Limiting our attention to molecular biosemiotics, we may recall that the struc-
tural information of DNA is introduced in the course of its synthesis, which can
be reproduced in vitro in the presence of a DNA polymerase – a model in which the
information is introduced by hydrogen-bonding base pairing but in which base pairs
are recognized by the enzyme involved, which also excludes other base pairs. In one
of a number of models proposed to account for this property it is considered that,
as the polymerase contains a bioseme acting as a site for triphosphate, the template
binds a base which is accepted or rejected by the polymerase. When the base satis-
ﬁes – the geometry and is acceptable, the enzyme may undergo a (ligand-induced)
conﬁguration change and the synthesis proceeds (Fig. 15.1).
DNA polymerase, consisting of a single polypeptidic chain carries a biosyntagm
of several biosemes, coupling for a number of couples of relata. Kornberg (1969)
records at least ﬁve of them. The template site binds the chain where a base pair is
1 The term syntagm has been used by De Saussure (1971) in the ﬁeld of linguistics to designate
a succession of semes in time as it is impossible to articulate two different sounds at the same
time, an aspect which does not always obtain in molecular biosemiotics, while the time factor is
considered in catenary biosyntagms.

15
Concepts of Molecular Biosemiotics
479
Fig. 15.1 Catalytic sites in the active center of DNA polymerase (after Kornberg 1969)
formed. At the primer site, the growing chain is located. The primer terminus is a
site for recognition of 3′-hydroxyl group of the primer’s terminal nucleotide. The
incoming nucleotide substrates bind at the triphosphate site. There is also a site for
the hydrolytic cleavage of 5′-monophosphates from this end of the chain.
Heteropolymer tetramers frequently present multiple forms of associations of
their constituting units in the same organism or even in the same cell (polymor-
phism). A familiar example is afforded by lactate dehydrogenase, which is formed
by four polypeptide chains, each of mol. wt. 33,500 and which exists in ﬁve differ-
ent forms in rat tissues (isoenzymes). The overall reaction catalyzed is the same in
all cases, but they differ in an aspect of the signiﬁed, the Km value for the substrate.
The ﬁve isoenzymes are ﬁve different combinations of the two polypeptides M and
H, which are homologous but show differences in amino acid content and sequence.
M4 predominates in muscle and H4 predominates in heart. The other forms are M3H,
M2H2 and MH3, the relative amounts of which are under genetic control and differ
from tissue to tissue (Kaplan 1968).
Many cases of isoenzymes are known and they also are heteropolymer biosyn-
tagms, the different forms of which show differences with respect to kinetic
characteristics. Vertebrate hemoglobins are in most cases heteropolymer tetramers
composed of chains α and β in equal proportions (α2β2) Polymorphism has been
recognized in the hemoglobins of many vertebrate species. The horse has two
hemoglobins, with two different α chains and a common β chain (Trujillo et al.
1967). The two different α chains differ by the substitution of a glutamine for a
lysine (Kilmartin and Clegg 1967).

480
Marcel Florkin (1900–1979)
The well-known polymorphism of human hemoglobin results from the presence
of β and δ chains, a result of gene duplication. Fish have up to twenty hemoglobins.
In all these cases, common in animal forms, polymorphism results from the exis-
tence of multiple polypeptide chain types and the possibility results in the formation
of multiple heteropolymer tetramer types, showing diversiﬁcation at the level of
aspects of the signiﬁed.
Biosemiotics of the Flux of Information from DNA to Proteins
The origin of this ﬂux resides in the sequencing syntagm of DNA and results in the
sequenced syntagms of proteins.
(a) Genomic transcription (biosemes = bases)
(b) Translation (biosemes = codons)
In translation, the couple of relata established by mRNA is established between
a codon on itself and the anticodon nucleotide sequence of tRNA, the only molecule
to be recognized by mRNA. It is in the process of charging tRNA that the signiﬁed
of an amino acid expresses itself with respect to the accomplishment of polypeptide
sequencing. This very important biosemiotic aspect has been established in a most
elegant way by Chapeville et al. (1962).
The ribosome-mRNA syntagm is known as a polysome, in which the number of
ribosomes associated with mRNA varies.
An initiation codon as bioseme in the reading of a message phrases its translation
from triplets into amino acids.
The sequencing syntagm of DNA transcription is composed of biosemes consist-
ing of nucleotides, while in the couples of relata involving mRNA (i.e., translation)
the biosemes are the codons (base triplets, at least in general).
To recapitulate the biosemiotic aspects of the ﬂux of information in protein syn-
thesis, we may state that a ﬁrst couple of relata is established between an amino acid
and a speciﬁc activating enzyme. A second couple of relata is established between
the enzyme (with amino acid attached) and a speciﬁc tRNA. But the point of attach-
ment is non speciﬁc, as all tRNAs have the same three terminal nucleotides (see
Lewin 1970). In a third couple of relata, a speciﬁc triplet codon on mRNA is coupled
with its anticodon on tRNA. This is the domain of the code-translating mechanism.
From the point of view of biosemiotics it is important to recognize the universal-
ity of the generality of codon assignments. An important biosemiotic aspect is the
fact that, though the code is degenerate (i.e. that some amino acids have assigned
to them more than one codon) at the stage of translation (and of the formation of
a couple of relata between tRNA and the codons of mRNA), the couple of relata
involved is highly speciﬁc of the codon and of the speciﬁc anticodon bearing tRNA,
i.e. that for every codon there is a speciﬁc tRNA. The degeneracy of the code is
not biosemiotically situated at the translation stage, but in the fact that more than
one type of tRNA, in a given organism, is associated with some of the amino acids
(literature in Lewin 1970).

15
Concepts of Molecular Biosemiotics
481
Biosemiotic Characters of Amino Acids
We have met these properties when considering the nature of structural informa-
tion in the process of the folding of tertiary biosyntagms, and also in the stage
of formation of aminoacyl-tRNA. Information belonging to the amino acid units
of conﬁguration in polypeptide chains should be classiﬁed thermodynamically as
structural information. From the point of view of molecular biosemiotics, we may
consider the amino acid side groups as endobiosemes. In Fig. 15.2, the amino acid
side groups have been arranged to emphasize their relationship and their biosemiotic
content. The side groups b–g are hydrocarbons of progressive bulk and of parallel
progressive hydrophobicity. Phenylalanine, besides its great hydrophobicity, con-
tains an aromatic ring and like tyrosine and tryptophan, is able to contract couples
of relata with other aromatic rings through overlapping of π electron clouds (e.g. in
the interaction between protein and heme in myoglobin and hemoglobin). Histidine
has one pair of electrons on one of its nitrogen atoms, which is used in metal bind-
ing. Cysteine is able to form disulphide bridges. In proline the side chain may force
a bend on the polypeptide chain and may disrupt an α helix. Some of the side groups
contain ﬂat rings (f, g, m, n, u); two carry negative charges (q, r), three carry positive
charges (s, t, u). Three are hydroxyl-containing (k, 1, m).
According to the sequence of these groupings on the main chain, the protein molecule may
fold into a complex three-dimensional “globular” structure in which a large proportion of
the groups ﬁt into a precise but irregular arrangement. (Cairns-Smith 1971).
Dickerson and Geis (1969), discussing the nature of the structural information
governing the signiﬁcation of animal structural ﬁbrous proteins record three basic
conﬁgurations in these protein chains: the α-helix, the collagen triple helix and the
β sheet. If a strong and rigid material is used (tendon, ﬁsh scales) the collagen helix
is adopted, while the α helix is used if a more ﬂexible material is required, and the
β sheet (silk) if the material has to be ﬂexible, but strong. The resulting structure is
determined (structural information) by the amino acid content and sequences.
Pro and Hypro are incompatible with an α helix and such a helix occurs in the absence
of large quantities of these residues. Polyglycine itself, lacking side groups, has been crys-
tallised in both the β sheet and the polyproline helix, and the two classes with high glycine
content are just the silks and collagen. Just as the sequence (-Gly-Ser-Gly-Ala-Gly-Ala-)n
induces a β sheet structure, so the sequences similar to (-Gly-X-Pro-)n induce a collagen
triple helix. (Dickerson and Geis 1969).
We may now return to the couples of relata established between tRNA, syn-
thetase and amino acid; a relation in which the properties of the amino acid are
involved as speciﬁc biosemes. It has been shown that there is a change of signiﬁed
of the activating enzyme during complex formation, as a result of a conﬁguration
change (signiﬁcant), as a consequence of its association with tRNA. It has been
recognized, for instance, that in the cases of proline and valine, the enzyme-tRNA
complex is more resistant to heat that the enzyme (Chuang et al. 1967) and that the
binding of tRNA to the synthetase-amino acid-AMP complex induces in the protein
structure, a conﬁguration change resulting in a loss of helical structure (Ohta et al.
1967).

482
Marcel Florkin (1900–1979)
Fig. 15.2 Amino acid side chains (Cairns-Smith 1971)
It appears that the binding of the amino acid to its synthetase increases the avail-
ability of the site to tRNA on this synthetase. A model has been proposed by Yarus
and Berg (1969), indicating a number of successive ligand – induced conﬁguration
changes modifying the signiﬁcant and the signiﬁed of successive biosemes.

15
Concepts of Molecular Biosemiotics
483
As suggested in Fig. 15.3, the synthetase passes through four stages:
(1) isoleucine and ATP bind to the synthetase and there is a conﬁguration change
of the bioseme which acts as binding site for tRNA (from closed to open, a state
in which rapid entry and exit of tRNA is possible).
(2) As a result, isoleucyl-AMP is formed on the enzyme.
(3) The tRNA binds and the conﬁguration of the binding site speciﬁc for the amino
acid is thereby modiﬁed (change of signiﬁcant).
(4) Isoleucine is transferred on the tRNA.
Fig. 15.3 The catalytic cycle of isoleucyl-tRNA synthetase. (Yarus and Berg 1969)

484
Marcel Florkin (1900–1979)
(5) The amino acid leaves its site, with a change of the tRNA-binding site into the
“closed” form.
(6) Isoleucine and AMP bind, reconverting the tRNA-binding site into the “open”
form.
(7) With a loss of inorganic phosphate, isoleucyl-AMP is formed.
(8) Isoleucyl-tRNA is released and the conformation of the amino acid binding site
is changed.
As demonstrated by Baldwin and Berg (1966) the transfer or a wrong amino acid
to tRNA is avoided by the destruction of any “wrong” complex.
Multigene Biosyntagms
Chromosomes are mixed biosyntagms composed of molecules of DNA, of RNA and
of proteins.
The Conﬁguration of Biosemes
We know enough of the biosemes involved at the integrative molecular level to
deﬁne their conﬁgurations.
It must be pointed out that in the context of transient information, the transfer
is insured by labile couplings. These couplings may be ionic interactions, hydrogen
bonding or hydrophobic interactions. On the other hand the forces involved “must be
sufﬁciently localized so that they can build up a deﬁned geometric pattern” (Eigen
and De Maeyer 1966). Very speciﬁc binding may be due, for instance, to speciﬁc
types of H bonding as is the case in complementary base recognition (Stent 1971,
Watson 1970, Watson and Crick 1953), the pairs AU and GC being the strongest and
most stable, probably due to one strongly polarized hydrogen bond (Eigen 1971).
Tertiary biosyntagms often present a conﬁguration situating the nonpolar groups
(hydrophobic) inside and the polar ones outside. Non polar groups such as Val, Leu,
Ile, Pro and Phe show the distribution and as stated above are active in the folding
up of tertiary protein biosyntagms and structure stabilization. Non-polar biosemes
are sometimes found at the surface of the biosyntagm where they play a role for
instance in the formation of quaternary biosyntagms or in the formation of couples
of relata. Charged side chains of amino acids are generally situated at the outside.
As stated above, the bonds involved in information processing are labile non-
covalent bonds. However, the permanent storage of information for hereditary
transfer does require the formation of covalent bonds.
For the purpose of processing in synchronic epigenesis, the permanent form of
DNA is transferred into a transient form, mRNA, transient with respect to a time
lapse greater than the duration of a generation. While it is relatively permanent com-
pared with the time of incorporation of an amino acid into a peptide chain (Eigen
and De Maeyer 1966). An example for readout of information is the code transfer
from mRNA to an amino acid sequence, in which the transient form is represented

15
Concepts of Molecular Biosemiotics
485
by the speciﬁc interaction between complementary codons somehow checked by the ribo-
somal enzyme, the processing of the read information is the storage into the new permanent
form of amino acid sequence in the polypeptide chain. (Eigen and De Maeyer 1966)
While the information is in the labile form, errors may be introduced during
storage or readout for instance at the DNA level, producing point mutations.
Biosemes should not be considered as rigid conﬁgurations. Indeed a number of
aspects of ligand-induced conﬁguration changes may be identiﬁed, accompanied by
changes of the signiﬁed which are determinant in integration and regulation at the
molecular level.
Diachronic Molecular Biosemiotics
Diachronic Molecular Epigenesis
It is important to insist once more on the elliptic character of the expression
“biochemical evolution”, meaning changes at the biomolecular level along the phy-
logeny of organisms. The existence of this kind of change has ﬁrst been documented
by the present author (Florkin 1944, 1949) who has also used the expression “het-
eromorphic evolution” to designate, in the phylogenetic sequence of homologous
biomolecules, “the acquisition of a modiﬁed component, with a lesser degree of
isology” (Florkin 1960, 1957). But, as noted by Dobhzansky (1955):
We must remember that heredity, development and evolution are essentially epigenetic and
not preformistic. We do not inherit from our ancestors, close or remote, separate characters,
functional or vestigial. What we do inherit is instead, genes which determine the patterns of
developmental processes.
Given a set of DNA (sequencing) biosyntagms and a given set of environmen-
tal conditions, the development is determined. This is a synchronous process, a
derivation of order from the order provided by the parental genes, while the “hetero-
morphic” changes of biomolecules along the evolution of organisms is a diachronic
process, resulting from changes at the level of the genome or of the regulation of the
genome.
While the derivation of the phenotype from the genome is determined (in def-
inite environmental conditions) “biochemical evolution” is epigenetic as a process
as well, as Dobhzansky (1955) remarks, as heredity and development.
In evolution at the biomolecular level (molecular changes in the phylogeny
of organisms), what we consider is the diachronic (evolutionary) epigenesis of a
synchronic epigenesis.
Therefore the present author (Florkin 1971) has suggested using the phrase
“molecular epigenesis” (in evolution) or “diachronic (molecular) epigenesis” rather
than “molecular evolution” or “heteromorphic evolution”. As was stated above,
while the information is shunting the metabolic trafﬁc of synchronic molecular epi-
genesis and ﬂows in the labile form, errors may be introduced during storage and
readout, for instance at the DNA level with the production of mutations (Dixon

486
Marcel Florkin (1900–1979)
1966, Granick 1965, Jukes 1966b, Manwell and Baker 1970). This mutagenic aspect
is lacking in the case of amino acid sequences, unable to reproduce the error copy
and subject as stressed in a previous section, to conformation changes involved in
metabolic regulation.
When we analyze the simplest type of cell known to us, of a Mycoplasma, we
ﬁnd that it is composed of a set of 30 different kinds of biomolecules: twenty amino
acids, ﬁve nitrogenous aromatic bases (adenine, guanine, uracil, thymine, cytosine),
a fatty acid (palmitic acid), two sugars (α-D-glucose and α-D-ribose), glycerol and
choline (after Lehninger 1970). If we now consider the molecular composition of a
cell of Escherichia coli, we ﬁnd that it is composed of 70% of water and 30% of dry
matter. The latter is made of approximately the following numbers of molecules:
3000 proteins, 1 DNA, 1,000 RNA, 50 carbohydrates, 40 lipids, 500 intermediates
and building block molecules, 12 inorganic ions (percentage in weight: proteins,
15; nucleic acids, 7; carbohydrates, 3; lipids, 2; metabolites 2; inorganic ions, 1)
(Lehninger 1970).
In a way, the many forms of biomolecules found in mammals or in insects are
the descendants by an epigenetic process which is repeated in all individuals in the
course of their ontogeny, of those of their ancestors. To say that they are descen-
dants cannot however be taken without a grain of salt. When we refer to DNA
the diachronic molecular epigenesis is situated at the level of hereditary transfer
and we are dealing with real descendants. When we refer to other biomolecules
the epigenetic process consists of a molecular change at the level of the transient
molecules (RNA, enzymes, regulators, etc.) involved in the biosynthetic process
which is repeated in each of the descendants. Such changes concerned in modi-
ﬁcations of biosynthetic pathways involve not only a conﬁguration change of the
biomolecules, but a radical change of biological activity. This change of conﬁgura-
tion and of activity, which has been designated as “biochemical innovation” (Cohen
1963) as “functional epigenesis”, as “functional radiation” (Florkin 1971) we may,
in order to connote a biosemiotic aspect, designate as “commutation”.
Innovation of molecular activities is, as we shall see, one of the ways through
which the patterns of biosynthetic pathways are modiﬁed in the evolution of
organisms.
No invention of conﬁguration will reach the status of a bioseme except by enter-
ing into a couple of relata and it is only in this case that it will reach the threshold
of the impact of natural selection at the level of individual organisms.
Physiological Level
By function, the physiologists mean a collection of molecular activities, recog-
nizable, at a higher integrative level, in the phenomenology of their integrated
aspect.
If we consider, for instance, the electroplax membrane of the electric eel
Electrophorus electricus, we recognize at the membrane level the existence of
a receptor for acetylcholine, ligand-inducing conﬁguration changes (changes of

15
Concepts of Molecular Biosemiotics
487
signiﬁed) at the level of the membrane fabric, the result of which is a change of
membrane potential (literature, see Podelski and Changeux 1970).
If we consider, again at the level of cell membranes, the effectors of the adeny-
late cyclase system we recognize the adenylcyclase as the primary enzyme system
through which hormonal peptides alter the metabolism, the structure and the func-
tion at the level of target cells. In the target cell, information is carried by the
hormone to a receptor and it is received, decoded and transduced into the expres-
sion of the endocrine action at the molecular integrative level. In such a system the
receptor is coupled with a response mechanism, while in the case of the hormones
active at the genomic level, the receptor is selected among multiple receptors.
To quote Rodbell et al (1970):
In informational terms, this system selectively receives, translates and ampliﬁes the
“message” contained with the structure of the hormone to give a new messenger.
This kind of regulatory catenary biosyntagm is divided by Rodbell into several
biosemes: hormone-binding sites (discriminators), coupling processes (transducers)
and catalytic component (ampliﬁers).
As underlined above, the orthologous proteins show little or no variation of signi-
ﬁed in the course of the evolution of organisms. This is the case with cytochromes c,
all yielding to whatever organism they belong, the same ﬁrst-order rate constant for:
their reactions with bovine cytochrome c oxidase over a wide range of cytochrome c
concentrations (Smith 1984). But there are large variations, among the cytochromes
c of different species, of the binding of various inorganic anions by the ferric form
of the protein (Barlow and Margoliash 1961),
Margoliash et al. (1970) have suggested the existence of a correlation between the
ion-binding properties of cytochrome c and the transport properties of mitochondria
and proposed a model for the ion-carrier function of cytochrome c at the level of the
mitochondrial inner membrane (see the Harvey Lecture by Margoliash 1972).
Considering the integrative level of the “functions” at the higher level of
physiological integration we may recognize what the present author has called
“physiological radiations” (Florkin, 1960, 1966a, b, 1957, 1971, 1962, 1959, 1963,
1967), or “physiological epigenesis” (Florkin 1971). In such “radiations” (a term
used in a meaning akin to the familiar biological concept of adaptive radiations)
while the conﬁguration of a biomolecule is not modiﬁed, advantage is often taken
in the evolution of organisms at the physiological level, of different properties and
activities of the biomolecule, i.e. of other aspects of an already present signiﬁed.
Carotenoids, for instance, absorb light. In the case of the phototropism of plants,
they transfer the electromagnetic energy to an enzyme, while in photosynthesis,
they transfer it to chlorophyll. In animals, the absorption of light by the carotenoids,
obtained from plants and more or less modiﬁed, are used in many ethological
services: attraction of insects and birds towards ﬂowers and fruits, sexual dichro-
nism in insects, feather colours in birds resulting from different states of oxidation
of carotenoids of alimentary origin. On the other hand carotenoids may undergo
cis-trans isomerization which is utilized in vision as well as in the perception

488
Marcel Florkin (1900–1979)
of odours (Briggs and Duncan 1961). In ﬁsh, carotenoids are involved in photo-
response (Goodwin 1951). In the trout, for instance, xanthophores are coloured by
lutein and erythrophores by astaxanthin, two carotenoids involved in the nature of
skin colour (Steven 1948). But in certain species of ﬁsh, as for example in Salmo
iridaeus, another property of the same molecular unit is taken advantage of, the
molecule of astaxanthin being also used as a fertilization hormone (Hartmann et al.
1947). Many such physiological radiations, active at the physiological level, can be
identiﬁed.
Thyroid hormones exert their main signiﬁcation as growth stimulators but they
are involved in metamorphosis, in the regulation of basal metabolism, in protein
metabolism, in osmoregulation, etc.
Dopamine appears in the biosynthetic syntagm as a precursor of norepinephrine
(Kirshner 1959). On the other hand it seems to have assumed a neurohumoral role
at the level of the brain of mammals (Bertler and Rosengren (1959) and of Helix
(Kerkut and Walker 1961). It also plays a regulatory function at the level of the
heart of Venus mercenaria (Greenberg 1960). Finally the fact that dopamine is the
only catecholamine which can be identiﬁed in the ganglia of different mollusks
(lamellibranchiates or gastropods) (Sweeney 1963) is in accordance with the notion
that it plays in some organisms the same role as epinephrine or norepinephrine in
others.
Enzyme systems and their associated components (substrates, coenzymes, cellu-
lar regulators, hormonal regulators) frequently contribute to changes at the higher
physiological level by the introduction of one or several of their components into a
more specialized system. The visual function of the vitamins A is the only one it has
been possible to demonstrate in animals other than mammals and birds. In the lat-
ter two, without showing commutation, the carotenoid conﬁguration obtained a new
signiﬁed in controlling the formation of the mRNA commanding the keratin synthe-
sis in epithelial cells. In the visual cycle in which vitamins A are involved, retinene
is produced by the reduction of vitamin Al. The enzyme involved is the common
alcohol dehydrogenase. This universally distributed enzyme is inserted here in a
new system which is extremely specialized.
Peroxidase, in Balanoglossus is used as a luciferase (Dure and Cormier 1963).
We propose to deﬁne physiological radiations as the insertions of the same
molecular signiﬁcant (with possible uses of different aspects of the signiﬁed) in sev-
eral biosemiotic aspects at levels of integration higher than the molecular level. This
concept differs from the concept of commutation in which the molecular signiﬁed
is radically changed in phylogeny, and from the concept of heterotypic expression
(Mason) in which a biomolecule is involved by its unmodiﬁed biosemes in different
catenary biosyntagms at the molecular integrative level.
Physiological radiation (a concept which obtains at the physiological integrative
level) must also be distinguished from the concept of different utilizations of a same
biomolecule as receptor in the formation of couples of relata at the molecular level
of integration. We may designate such biomolecules as polygamic. Besides their
role as endobiosemes in protein macromolecules, amino acids show a high degree
of polygamy. As underlined by Krebs (1966).

15
Concepts of Molecular Biosemiotics
489
. . . Glycine takes part in the synthesis of purine bases, porphyrins, creatine, glutathione, bile
acids, and hippuric acid. Serine is a precursor of ethanolamine and choline, both of which
are constituents of phospholipids. Methionine plays a role in the synthesis of creatine and
choline, aspartic acid is a precursor of pyrimidines, and tyrosine is a precursor of adrenaline,
noradrenaline and thyroxine.
Ecological Level
A number of end-products of the biosynthetic catenary biosyntagms are neither sig-
niﬁcant at the molecular integrative level nor at the structural or physiological levels
of the organism, but are signiﬁcant as ecomones.
At the level of integration of ecosystems, the biosemiotic structure of ecomones
and of the structures with which they contract their coupling are problems for the
future. As in the case of messenger hormones, the contact of a coactone with a
receptor is at the starting point of a catenary informative syntagm.
Wilson and Bossert (1963) and Wilson (1965, 1968) have described ways in
which coactone actions may have been modiﬁed in the evolution of organisms. One
of these ways is the adjustment of fading time. For instance, by a reduction of the
emission rate or a raising of the threshold concentration, the lapse of time separat-
ing the emission of a pheromone and the disappearance of the active space can be
shortened. As Wilson (1970) remarks this has been “a chief design feature in the
evolution of alarm and trail systems” affording an increase in information per signal
and an “opportunity for the transmission of more discrete signals”.
As the duration of action of acetylcholine is shortened by its inactivation by
cholinesterase, a pheromone can also be deactivated. This is the case, for instance,
among bees; the pheromone 9-ketodecenoid acid, the queen substance ingested by
worker bees is enzymatically deactivated (Johnston et al. 1965). Instead of being
restricted, the active space of a coactone may be expanded. This is the case for the
insect sex pheromones, pinpointing very small targets within very large spaces.
Another evolutionary acquisition is the multiplication of coactone-producing
exocrine glands in the same species. In another aspect which we may call ecological
radiation of coactones, their signiﬁed is used in different ways in different ecologi-
cal contexts. trans-α-Keto-2-decenoic acid in the beehive, acts as a caste-inhibitory
pheromone while in the nuptial ﬂight it acts as the primary female sex-attractant.
Combinations may also introduce new signiﬁeds. When conﬁned with queens for
hours, beeworkers, combining scents acquired from the queen with their own, are
attacked by nest mates (Morse and Gary 1961).
Pluribiomolecular Nature of Biochemical Adaptations
Speciﬁc adaptive aspect of a molecule is not common and this is one of the reasons
for the occasional use of expressions, such as “non Darwinian evolution” or “neu-
tral changes”. We should keep in mind that adaptation at the molecular level is not

490
Marcel Florkin (1900–1979)
necessarily obvious at the level of a single molecular species. Rather, such adapta-
tions more commonly result from changes at the level of molecular species involved
in a complex polygenic adaptive mechanism. This concept has been formulated by
the present author (Florkin 1966). An example of the polygenic nature of biochem-
ical adaptations is provided by the cocoon of the silkworm (literature in Florkin
1966), The physical properties of ﬁbroin insuring the protective function of the
cocoon, depend on the peculiarities of protein synthesis in the distal part of the
silkgland. The structure of ﬁbroin, the main cocoon protein, may be explained by
the speciﬁc nature of a category of mRNA liberated therein. But a detailed analysis
shows that if the explanation of the composition and structure of ﬁbroin is situated
at the level of a given gene, the very existence of the cocoon depends on other fac-
tors as well: the nature of the speciﬁc food of Bombyx mori, the mulberry leaves; its
attraction by these leaves (endocoactones); the behaviour leading to masticate and
swallow the leaves (endocoactones); the enormous appetite of the silkworm during
the second part of the ﬁfth instar; the characteristics of the removal of the amino
acids from the hemolymph, the regulation of the nymphal weight, etc. All these
factors contribute to the very existence of a cocoon.
The cocoon formation in the silkworm appears originally as a secretion of a pro-
tective sheet for the prenymphal molt and the nymphal life in the conditions met in
nature by the wild ancestor of the domestic form. The protein ﬁbroin, the function
of which is related to its physical properties, largely derives from a great excess of
speciﬁc food rich in glutamic acid, glutamine, aspartic acid and asparagine. This
very speciﬁc food is ingested in great bulk during the period of activity of the silk
gland and thus provides it with a series of amino acids selectively absorbed. The
peculiar structure of ﬁbroin, with its recurring sections made up of small amino
acids, depends on the nature of the messenger RNA speciﬁc of the distal part of
the gland.
The period of activity of the silk gland is accompanied by a derivation of the
pyruvate-producing constituents of the food towards the posterior part of the gland
in which pyruvate is used to synthesize alanine, glycine and serine, according to
pathways corresponding to those found in other forms of animal life. Some glycine
and serine can also be included directly in the fabric of ﬁbroin, and this is also the
case for tyrosine, taken from the hemolymph. The aspartic and glutamic acids and
their amides, forming an important proportion of the proteins of mulberry leaves,
are among the main pyruvate producers in the silk glands. The ﬁnal section of the
silk thread is of endogenous origin. Its production is not only part of the accom-
plishment of an adaptation subserving ecological functions, but it also subserves the
physiological function of regulating the normal size of the nymph by a derivation of
a part of the substance of the larva towards the production of silk.
At the time of hatching, another adaptation at the cocoon level sets in. It depends
on the chemical structure of sericin, a protein synthesized in the distal segment
of the silk gland and coating the ﬁbroin ﬁbers. Sericin is the speciﬁc substrate of
an enzyme secreted by the moth and by which sericin is speciﬁcally dissolved,
permitting the separation of ﬁbroin threads and the passage of the imago (Kafatos
and Williams 1964).

15
Concepts of Molecular Biosemiotics
491
Coevolutionary Diachronic Epigenesis
Species evolve in relation to aspects of the environment but they do not evolve in
isolation.
The term “coevolution” was coined by Ehrlich and Raven (1964) to designate
evolutionary reciprocal interactions between different kinds of organisms among
which there is no exchange of genetic information. Molecular aspects of biochemi-
cal coevolution depend on the formation of couples of relata and can be identiﬁed
among groups of organisms living in a close ecological relationship.
The clearest demonstration of a coevolutionary diachronic molecular epigene-
sis has been accomplished by Ehrlich and Raven in their paper mentioned above
(Ehrlich and Raven 1964). An extensive survey of patterns of plant utilization and
information on factors affecting food plant choices shows that the emergence of
the biosynthesis of secondary plant substances has been critical in the evolution of
angiosperm subgroups and perhaps of the angiosperms themselves.
Reciprocal selective responses appear “as a factor in the origination of organic
diversity”.
Angiosperms have, in diachronic molecular epigenesis, developed catenary
biosyntagms leading to the biosynthesis of a variety of “secondary substances” (see
Chapter 2 of this Volume). These compounds are not inimical to the plant’s main-
tenance and growth. But some reduce the palatability of the plant for animals. This
protection would, so to speak, introduce the plant into a new adaptive zone, with a
possible evolutionary radiation and a characterization of new families. Another new
adaptive zone would be entered when a population of insects, for instance, would
become enabled to feed on some previously protected plant group. Here, in the
absence of competition from other phytophages the population of insects considered
would be free to diversify freely.
Ehrlich and Raven (1964) underline that in situations in which the supply of the
“preferred” plant is limited enough to become a factor of survival of a larva, the
change of food plant would be favoured. After the restriction of certain groups of
insects to a narrow range of food plants the formerly repellent substances of these
plants would become attractants.
In this ﬁeld the diachronic aspect must be kept in view, as a molecular innovation
may have had a selective advantage in the context of a remote period and that the
nature of the adaptive zone may have been modiﬁed by the organisms that entered it.
We refer the reader to the paper of Ehrlich and Raven for a wealth of arguments
in favour of the thesis that
the fantastic diversiﬁcation of modern insects has developed in large measure as the result
of a stepwise pattern of coevolutionary stages superimposed on the changing pattern of
angiosperm variation.(Ehrlich and Raven 1964)
Before the molecular coevolutionary aspects of food plant selection in butterﬂies
as documented by Ehrlich and Raven were described, the present author (Duchâteau
et al. 1953, Florkin 1966a, b) had described what we now call biochemical coevolu-
tion in the case of the “specialized” type of pattern of inorganic constituents of the

492
Marcel Florkin (1900–1979)
hemolymph in Lepidoptera, as well as in the larval stages of Hymenoptera which
they considered as an evolutionary aspect parallel to the evolution of angiosperms
(see Chapter 4, Vol. 29B).
Interesting cases of biochemical coevolution consist in the predator-prey rela-
tionship and the parasite-host relationship, the plants and pollinators relationship
or the relationship of partners in symbiosis. Allelopathy (a term coined by Molish
(1937) to designate the effects on the growth of a plant of products of other plants) is
active in the distribution patterns of plants (Muller 1966). All these aspects inserted
in the biochemical continuum provide examples of biochemical coevolution, char-
acterized by reciprocal evolutionary interactions and conﬁrming that, even at the
molecular integrative level, species do not evolve in isolation.
That the signiﬁed of biomolecules may be recognized as being involved at levels
of integration higher than the molecular one, for instance at the level of the self-
assembly in supramolecular structures, at the physiological or ecological levels is
reviewed in part IV.
While the concept of the evolution of organisms as an expression of biochem-
ical evolution remains a subject of study, it has received a great deal of support
from the recognition of the concordance of the phylogenetic trees of sequencing
or sequenced biomolecules and of the organisms concerned. This supports the con-
cept according to which the structure and nature of organisms are expressions of
the biomolecular order implemented by the heterocatalytic command of the spec-
iﬁcation of amino acid sequences. The pressure of natural selection should not be
considered as being exerted on speciﬁc biomolecules, but on organisms, i.e. on the
biomolecular order expressed in the structure and nature of the whole collection
of biomolecules of which the organism is made. This molecular order is subject to
changes in descent and to selection pressure. In such a perspective the evolution of
organisms and the evolution of the biornolecular order (biochemical evolution) are
recognized as interrelated facets of the same natural reality.

15
Concepts of Molecular Biosemiotics
493
Glossary
Alleles
Alternative forms of a gene occurring at a deﬁnite place on a chromosome.
Allelopathy
Effects of products of a plant on the growth of another plant.
Allomones
Coactones(see below) transmitting chemical signals to individuals of
other species
Analogy (biochemical)
Biomolecules having similar functions in different groups
of organisms are designated as analogous.
Anticodon
A sequence (on RNA) complementary of a codon (see below).
Battery of producer genes (Eucaryotes)
Unlinked structural (producer) genes
coordinated by integrator genes.
Bioseme
Minimal conﬁguration aspect, carrier (signiﬁcant) of molecular signi-
ﬁcation (signiﬁed), either sequential, structural, functional, protective, connective,
motive, signaling, catalytic, processing, regulating, priming, repressing, releasing,
etc.
Biosyntagm
An associative conﬁguration of biosemes composed of signiﬁcant
units in a relation of reciprocal solidarity.
Biosynthetic primary pathways
Biosynthetic catenary pathways of general
occurrence.
Biosystem
The expression of the diachronic (evolutionary, hereditary) relations of
biomolecules.
Catenary metabolic biosyntagms
Biosyntagms composed of chains of enzymes
involved in a catabolic or an anabolic metabolic pathway.
Central metabolic biosyntagm
A catenary biosyntagm found in the majority of
cells and allowing for the acquisition of free energy in the form of ATP high-energy
bonds, and for the provision of the starting points of biosynthetic pathways.
Cistron
Portion (biosyntagm) of the nucleotide sequence of DNA which provides
the sequencing information for a single polypeptide chain.
Coactones
Ecomones (see below) active in the process of relationship of an active
and directing organism and a passive and receiving organism
Codon
A bioseme consisting of three adjacent nucieotides and coding for an
amino acid.
Coevolution
Evolutionary reciprocal interactions between different kinds of
organisms among which there is no exchange of genetic information.
Commutation
Radical change of the signiﬁcant and of the signiﬁed of a
biomolecule in diachronic epigenesis.

494
Marcel Florkin (1900–1979)
Continuum (biochemical).
All molecular aspects of organisms and their molec-
ular extensions.
Diachronic (molecular) epigenesis
Diachronic (in the phylogeny of organ-
isms) epigenesis of the synchronic (limited to life span) epigenesis. Results in
biomolecular changes along the branches of phylogeny.
Ecomones
Non-trophic molecules contributing to insure, in an ecosystem, a ﬂux
of information between organisms.
Endocoactones
Coactones which are not liberated by the coactor in the environ-
ment
Evolution
Divergence in the gene pool of populations of organisms, resulting in
differential selection, by differential reproduction, of genetic variations in the pop-
ulations concerned and governed by interaction of population size, migration rate
and selection intensity.
Evolution (biochemical)
Trivial expression designating the pattern of changes
accomplished through diachronic molecular epigenesis along the phylogeny of
organisms.
Evolution (molecular)
Trivial expression including chemical (prebiological) evo-
lution and biochemical evolution (see above).
Exocoactones
Coactones liberated in the medium by a coactor and reaching the
coactee.
Heteropolymer
Quaternary biosyntagm resulting from the association of differ-
ent tertiary biosyntagms.
Heterotypic expression
Insertion of a bioseme in a new catenary biosyntagm.
Bibliography
Amimoto, K. (1966). Hiroshima Journal of Medical Sciences 15, 213.
Anderson, J. S., Bretscher, M. S., Clark, B. F. C. (1967). Nature 215, 490.
Anﬁnsen, C. B. (1959). The Molecular Basis of Evolution. New York: Wiley.
Asakura, S., Eguchi, G., Ino, I. (1964). Journal of Molecular Biology 10, 42.
Assembly of Intracellular Structures (1972). Federal Proceedings 31, 10.
Baguely, B. C., Staehelin, M. (1968). Biochemistry 7, 45.
Baldwin, A. N., Berg, P. (1966). Journal of Biological Chemistry 241, 839.
Baldwin, E. (1937). An Introduction to Comparative Biochemistry. London: Cambridge University
Press.
Barlow, G. H., Margoliash, E. (1961). Journal of Biological Chemistry 241, 1473.
Barthes, R. (1964). Eléments de Sémiologie. Paris: Du Seuil.
Bergmann, F. H., Berg, P., Dieckmann, M. (1961). Journal of Biological Chemistry 236, 1735.
Bertler, A., Rosengren, E. (1959). Acta Physiologica Scandinavica 47, 350.
Bloch, K. (1964). In: Leone, C. A. (Ed.) Taxonomic Biochemistry and Serology. New York: Ronald.
Blum, H. F. (1961). American Scientist 49, 474.

15
Concepts of Molecular Biosemiotics
495
Blum, H. F. (1968). Time’s Arrow and Evolution. 1st edition. 1951, 3rd edition. 1968. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Bogorad, L. (1963). Biogenesis of Natural Products. Oxford: Pergamon.
Bretscher, M. S. (1968). Nature 220, 1088.
Bretscher, M. S. (1969). Journal of Molecular Biology 42, 595.
Briggs, M. H., Duncan, R. B. (1961). Nature 191, 1310.
Brillouin, L. (1949). American Scientist 37, 554.
Brillouin, L. (1956). Science and Information Theory. 2nd edition. New York: Academic Press.
Brillouin, L. (1959). Vie, Matiere et Observation. Paris: A. Michel.
Brinton, C. (1958). In: Forbes, E. W., Finley, J. H. (Eds.) The Saturday Club: A century completed:
1920–1956. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Britten, E. J., Davidson, E. H. (1969). Science 165, 349.
Britten, R. J., Davidson, E. H. (1971). Quarterly Review of Biology 46, 111.
Britten, R. J., Kohne, D. E. (1968). Carnegie Inst. Wash., Year Book 66, 83.
Broda, E. (1970). Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 21, 145.
Broda, E. (1971). In: Schoffeniels, E. (Ed.). Biochemical Evolution and the Origin of Life.
Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Brown, J. C., Doty, P. (1968). Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 30, 284.
Brown, W. L., Eisner, T. (1968). In: Brown, W. L. American Naturalist 102, 188.
Büchel, W. (1967). Nature 213, 319.
Bueding, E. (1962). Federal Proceedings 21, 1039.
Burgers, A. C. J. (1961). Endocrinology 68, 698.
Buvet, R., Etaix, E., Godin, F., Lauuc, P., Ie Port, L. (1971). In: Buvet, R., Ponnamperuma, C.
(Eds.) Chemical Evolution and the Origin of Life. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Caiman, W. T. (1949). The Classiﬁcation of Animals. London: Methuen.
Cairns-Smith, A. G. (1971). The Life Puzzle. Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd.
Callan, H. G. (1972). Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B 181, 19.
Chakrahorty, K. P., Hurlbert, R. B. (1961). Biochimica and Biophysica Acta, 47, 607.
Chapeville, F., Lipmann, F., von Ehrenstein, G., Weisblum, B., Ray, W. J., Benzer, S., Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences (US) 48, 1086.
Chuang, H. Y. K., Atherly, A. G., Bell, F. E. (1967). Biochemical and Biophysical Research
Communications 28, 1013.
Clark, B. F. C., Marcker, K. A. (1966). Journal of Molecular Biology 17, 394.
Cohen, S. (1963). Science 139, 1017.
Crawford, I. P., Yanofsky, C. (1958). Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (US) 44,
1161.
Crick, F. H. (1958). Symposia of the Society for Experimental Biology 12, 138.
Crick, F. H. (1971). Nature 234, 25.
Danna, K., Nathans, D. (1972) Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (US) 69, 3097.
Dayhoff, M. O. (Ed.) (1973). Atlas of Protein Sequence and Structure 1972, Vol. 5, National
Biomedical Research Found, Georgetown, 1972, Vol. 5(Suppl. I).
de Saussure, F. (1971). Cours de Linguistique Générale. 3rd edition. Paris: Payor.
Dessauer, H. C. (1969). In: Systematic Biology. USA: National Academy of Sciences. p. 325.
Dickerson, R. E. (1964). In: Neurath, H. (Ed.) The Proteins, Vol. 2. New York: Academic Press.
Dickerson, R. E. (1971). Journal of Molecular Evolution 1, 26.
Dickerson, R. E., Geis, I. (1969). The Structure and Action of Proteins. New York: Harper and
Brown.
Dixon, G. H. (1966). Essays in Biochemistry 2, 147.
Dobhzansky, T. (1955). Evolution, Genetic and Man. New York: Wiley.
Dobzhansky, T. (1970). Genetics and the Evolutionary Process. New York: Columbia Press.
Dobhzansky, T. (1972). Science 175, 49.
Duchâteau, Gh., Florkin, M., Leclerq, J. (1953). Arch. Intern. Physiol. Biochim 61, 518.
Dure, M. S., Cormier, M. J. (1963). Journal of Biological Chemistry 238, 790.

496
Marcel Florkin (1900–1979)
Eco, U. (1972). La Structure Absente. Paris: Mercure de France.
Ehrlich, N. R., Raven, P. H. (1964). Evolution 18, 586.
Eigen, M. (1971). Naturwissenschaften 58, 465.
Eigen, M., de Maeyer, L. (1966). Naturwissenschaften 53, 50.
Erdtman, H. (1952). Progress of Organic Chemistry 1, 22.
Fitch, W. M., Margoliash, E. (1970). Evolutionary Biology 4, 67.
Florkin, M. (1941). Introduction à la Biochimie Générale. Paris: Masson.
Florkin, M. (1944). L’Évolution Biochimique. Masson: Paris.
Florkin, M. (1948). Experientia 4, 176.
Florkin, M. (1949). Biochemical Evolution (translation by Morgulis, S.). New York: Academic
Press.
Florkin, M. (1949). In: First International Congress of Biochemistry, 19–25 August 1949. Congress
Lecture, 23 Aug. 1949.
Florkin, M. (1957). Actes Soc. Helv. Sci. Nat 35.
Florkin, M. (1959). In: Clark, F., Synge, R. L. M. (Eds.) The Origin of Life all the Earth. Oxford:
Pergamon.
Florkin, M. (1960). Unity and Diversity in Biochemistry, (translation by Wood, T.). London:
Pergamon.
Florkin, M. (1962). Académie Royale de Belgique, Classe des Sciences 48, 819.
Florkin, M. (1963). In: Oparin, A. I. (Ed.) Evolutionary Biochemistry. Oxford: Pergamon.
Florkin, M. (1965). Académie Royale de Belgique Bulletin de la Classe des Sciences. 5th series 51,
239.
Florkin, M. (1966a). A Molecular Approach to Phylogeny. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Florkin, M. (1966b). Aspects Moléculaires de l’Adaptation et de la Phylogénie. Paris: Masson.
(The section of this book dealing with adaptation has been translated and brought up to date in:
Florkin, M, Schoffeniels, E., Molecular Approaches to Ecology. New York: Academic Press,
1969).
Florkin, M. (1967). Année Biology 6, 499.
Florkin, M. (1969). Académie Royale de Belgique Bulletin de la Classe des Sciences. 5th series 55,
257.
Florkin, M. (1971). In: Schoffeniels, E. (Ed.) Biochemical Evolution and the Origin of Life.
Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Florkin, M., Scheer, B. T. (Eds.) (1967–1972). Chemical Zoology, Vol. I–VII. New York: Academic
Press.
Fox, H. M. (1949). Proceedings of the Royal Society (London) Series B 136, 378.
Fraenkel-Conrat, H., Singer, B. (1957). Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 24, 540.
Frege, G. (1892). Über Sinn und Bedeutung. Zeitschrift für Philosophie und Philosophische Kritik
C: 25–50.
Freese, E. (1959). Journal of Molecular Biology 1, 87.
Freese, E. (1963). In: Taylor, J. H. (Ed.) Molecular Genetics. Part I. New York: Academic Press.
Fuchs, E., Millette, R. L., Zillig, W., Walter, G. (1967). European Journal of Biochemistry 3, 183.
Fuller, W., Hodgson, A. (1967). Nature 215, 217.
Gerhard, J. C., Schachman, H. K. (1965). Biochemistry 4, 1054.
Glandsdorff, P., Prigogine, I. (1964). Physica 30, 351.
Goodwin, T. W. (1951). Biochemical Society Symposia 6, 63.
Granick, S. (1950). Harvey Lectures 44, 220.
Granick, S. (1965). In: Bryson, V., Vogel, H. J. (Eds.) Evolving Genes and Proteins. New York:
Academic Press.
Greenberg, M. J. (1960). British Journal of Pharmacology 15, 365.
Gyurastis, E., Wake, R. (1973). Journal of Molecular Biology 73, 55.
Harris, I. (1960). British Medical Bulletin 16, 183.
Hartmann, M., Medem, F. G., Kuhn, R., Bielig, H. J. Z. (1947). Naturforsch 3, 330.
Haslewood, G. A. D. (1964). Biological Reviews of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 39, 537.
Haslewood, G. A. D. (1967). Bile Salts. London: Methuen.

15
Concepts of Molecular Biosemiotics
497
Haslewood, G. A. D. (1971). In: Schoffeniels, E. (Ed.). Biochemical Evolution and the Origin of
Life. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Hayward, R. S., Elicieri, G. L., Weiss, S. B. (1966). Cold Spring Harbor Symposia Quantitative
Biology 31, 459.
Hechter, O., Braun, T. H. (1971). In: Margoulies, M., Greenwald, F. C. (Eds.). Structure-Activity
Relationships of Proteins and Polypeptide Hormones. Amsterdam: Excerpta Medica.
Henderson, L. J. (1927). The Fitness of the Environment. New York: MacMillan.
Hill, R. L., Buettner-Janusch, J. (1964). Federal Proceedings 23(II), 1236.
Horowitz, N. H. (1945). Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (U.S.) 31, 153.
Huxley, J. (1942). Evolution, The Modern Synthesis. London: Allen and Unwin.
Ingram, I. (1963). The Hemoglobins in Genetics and Evolution. New York: Columbia University
Press.
Jacob, F., Monod, J. (1961)., Journal of Molecular Biology., 3 318. 85
Johnson, H. A. (1970). Science 168, 1545.
Johnston, N. C., Law, J. H., Weaver, N. (1965). Biochemistry 4, 1615.
Jukes, T. H. (1966a). Biochemical of Biophysical Research Communications 24, 744.
Jukes, T. H. (1966b). Molecules and Evolution. New York: Columbia University Press.
Kafatos, F. C., Williams, C. M. (1964). Science 146, 538.
Kaplan, N. O. (1968). Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 151, 382.
Karlson, P., Lüscher, M. (1959). Nature 183, 55.
Kerkut, G., Walker, R. J. (1961). Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology 3, 143.
Kilmartin, J. V., Clegg, J. B. (1967). Nature 213, 269.
Kim, S. H., Quigley, G. J., Suddath, F. L., McPherson, A., Sneden, D., Kim, J. J., Weinzierl, J.,
Alexander, R. (1973). Science 179, 285.
Kimura, M. (1968). Nature 217, 624.
King, J. L., Jukes, T. H. (1969). Science 164, 788.
Kirshner, N., Pharmacological Reviews 11, 350.
Kluyver, A. J., Donker, H. J. L. (1926). Chemie der Zelle und der Gewebe 13, 134.
Kmetec, E., Bueding, E. (1961). Journal of Biological Chemistry 236, 584.
Kornberg, A. (1969). Science 163, 1410.
Kornberg, H. L. (1966). Essays in Biochemistry 2, 1.
Koshland, D. E., Jr. (1969–1970). Harvey Lectures 65, 33.
Koshland, D. E., Jr. (1972). In: Akeson, A., Ehrenberg, A. (Eds.) Structure and Function of Oxido-
Reduction Enzymes. Oxford: Pergamon.
Krebs, H. A. (1966). In: Kaplan, N. O., Kennedy, E. P. (Eds.) Current Aspects of Biochemical
Energetics. New York: Academic Press.
Lai C. Y., Horecker, B. L. (1972). Essays in Biochemistry 8, 149.
Lehninger, A. (1966). Naturwissenschaften 53, 57.
Lehninger, A. (1970). Biochemistry, The Molecular Basis of Cell Structure and Function.
New York: Worth.
Lewin, B. M. (1970). The Molecular Basis of Gene Expression. London: Wiley.
Lewis, E. B. (1951). Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology 16, 159.
Lipmann, F. (1967). In: Koningsberger, V. V., Bosch, L. (Eds.) Regulation of Nucleic Acid and
Protein Biosynthesis. Amsterdam: Elsevier, p. 177.
Long, C. W., Pardy, A. B. (1967). Journal of Biological Chemistry 242, 4715.
Lotka, A. J. (1925). Elements of Physical Biology. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
Lucas-Lenard, J., Haenni, A. L. (1968). Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (US) 59,
554.
Manwell, C., Baker, C. M. A. (1970). Molecular Biology and the Origin of Species: Heterosis,
Protein Polymorphism and Animal Breeding. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Marcker, K. A., Clark, B. F. C., Anderson:, J. S. (1966). Cold Spring Harbor Symposia Quantitative
Biology 31, 279.
Margoliash, E. (1972). Harvey Lectures 66, 177.

498
Marcel Florkin (1900–1979)
Margoliash, E., Barlow, G. H., Beyers, V. (1970). Nature 228, 723.
Margoliash, E., Fitch, W. M. (1968). Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 21, 217.
Margoliash, E., Fitch, W. M. (1971). In: Marois, M. (Ed.) De la Physique Théorique à la Biologie.
Paris: C.N.R.S.
Margoliash, E., Fitch, W. M., Dickerson, R. E. (1971). In: Schoffeniels, E. (Ed.) Biochemical
Evolution and the Origin of Life. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Margoliash, E., Schjejter, A. (1966). Advances in Protein Chemistry 21, 113.
Mason, H. (1955). Advances in Enzymology 16, 105.
Mayr, E. (1964). Federal Proceedings 23, 1231.
McCarthy, B. J. (1965). Progress in Nucleic Acid Research 4, 129.
McClare, C. W. F. (1971). Journal of Theoretical Biology 30, 1.
McElroy, W. D., Seliger, H. H. (1963). In: Oparin, A. I. (Ed.), Evolutionary Biochemistry. Oxford:
Pergamon.
Molish, H. (1933). Pjlanzenchemie und Pﬂanzenoersandschaft. Vienna: Springer.
Molish, H. (1937). Der Einﬂuss einer Pﬂanze auf die andere. Allelopathie. Jena: Fischer.
Monod, J. (1970). Le Hasard et la Nécessité. Essai sw′ la Philosophie Naturelle de la Biologie
Moderne. Paris: Du Seuil.
Monod, J., Wyman, J., Changeux, J. P. (1965). Journal of Molecular Biology 12, 88.
Monodand, J., Cohen-Bazire, G. (1953). Comptes Rendus 236, 530.
Morowitz, H. J. (1955). Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics 17, 81.
Morse, R. A., Gary, N. E. (1961). Bee World 42, 197.
Mueller, P., Rudin, D. O. (1969). In: Sanadi, D. R. (Ed.) Current Topics of Bioenergetics, Vol. 3.
New York: Academic Press, p. 175.
Muller, C. H. (1966). Bulletin of the Torry Botanical Club 93, 332.
Neurath, H., Walsh, K. A., Winter, W. P. (1967). Science 158, 1638.
Ohno, S. (1970). Evolution by Gene Duplication. Berlin: Springer.
Ohta, T., Kinamura, M. (1971). Nature 233, 118.
Ohta, T., Shimada, I., Imahori, K. (1967). Journal of Molecular Biology 26, 519.
Parascandola, J. (1971). Journal of the History of Biology 4, 63.
Podelski, T. R., Changeux, J. P. (1970). In: Danielli, J. F., Moran, J. F., Triggle, D. J. (Eds.)
Fundamental Concepts In Drug-Receptor Interactions. New York: Academic Press.
Prakash, S., Lewontin, R. C., Hubby, J. L. (1969). Genetics 61, 841.
Prescott, D., Kuempel, P. (1972). Proceedings of the National Academic Sciences (US) 69, 2842.
Prigogine, I. (1971). In: Marois, M. (Ed.) De la Physique Théorique à la Biologie. Paris: C.N.R.S.
Prigogine, I. (1973). Introduction to Thermodynamics of Irreversible Processes. 3rd edition.
New York: Wiley, Nature 246, 67.
Pullman, B. (1971). In: Schoffeniels, E. (Ed.) Biochemical Evolution and the Origin of Life.
Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Pullman, B., Pullman, A. (1962). Nature 196, 1137.
Quastler, H. (Ed.) (1953). Information Theory in Biology. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Redﬁeld, A. (1946). American Naturalist 70, 110.
Reichert, E. T., Brown, A. P. (1909). The Crystallography of Hemoglobins. Washington: Carnegie
Institution.
Richards, A. (1924). The Meaning of Meaning (with Ogden, R. G.). London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul.
Richards J. H., Hendrickson, J. B. (Eds.) (1964). The Biosynthesis of Steroids, Terpenes and
Acetogenins. New York: Benjamin.
Robinson, T. (1963). The Organic Constituents of Higher Plants. Minneapolis: Burgess
Robison, G. A., Butcher, R. W., Sutherland, E. W. (1971). Cyclic AMP. New York: Academic
Press.
Rochleder, F. (1854). Phytochemie. Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhem Engelmann.
Rodbell, M., Birnbauer, L., Pohl, S. L., Kraus, H. J. M. (1970). Acta Diabetologica Latina. 7
(Suppl. I), 9.

15
Concepts of Molecular Biosemiotics
499
Rutter, W. J. (1964). Federal Proceedings 23, 1248.
Ryan, J. P. F. J. (1972). Journal of the Theoretical Biology 36, 139.
Saz, H. J. (1969). In: Florkin, M., Scheer, B. (Eds.) Chemical Zoology, Vol. 3. New York: Academic
Press.
Saz, H. J., Vidrine, A., Jr. (1959). Journal of the Biological Chemistry 234, 2001.
Saz, H. J., Weil, A. (1962). Journal of the Biological Chemistry 237, 2053.
Schmitt, F. O. (1956)., Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 100, 476.
Schrodinger, E. (1948). What is Life? London: Cambridge University Press.
Schwyzer, R. (1968). Journal of Modern Pharmacology (The Hague) 11, 254.
Shannon, C. E. (1948). Bell System Technical Journal 27, 379.
Shannon, C., Weaver, W. (1949). The Mathematical Theory of Communication. Urbana: University
of Illinois Press.
Sherrington, S. Ch. (1949). Goethe on Nature and Science. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press. p. 24.
Shulman, R. G., Ogawa, E., Wüthrich, K., Yamane, Y., Peisach, J., Blumberg, W. E. (1969). Science
175, 251.
Simpson, G. G. (1964). Science 146, 1535.
Smith, L., cited by E. Margoliash et al. (1984).
Smith, E. L., Margoliash, E. (1964). Federal Proceedings 23(II), 1243.
Sondheimer, E., Simeone, J. B. (Eds.) (1970). Chemical Ecology. New York: Academic Press.
Speakman, J. C. (1966). Molecules. New York: McGraw Hill.
Stadtman, E. R. (1966). Advances in Enzymology 28, 41.
Stadtman, E. R. (1971). Harvey Lectures 65, 97.
Stent, G. H., Advances in Virus Research 5, 95.
Stent, G. S. (1971). Molecular Genetics. San Francisco: Freeman.
Steven, D. M. (1948). Journal of Experimental Biology 25, 369.
Sweeney, D. (1963). Science 139, 1051.
Szilard, L. (1929). Zeitschrift für Physik 53, 840.
Teissier, G. (1962). Scientia 52, 1.
Tilney, L. G., Porter, K. R. (1967). Journal of Cell Biology 34, 327.
Traub, P., Nomura, M. (1968). Proceedings of the National Academic Sciences (US) 59, 777.
Trujillo, J. M., Walden, B., O‘Neil, P., Anstall, H. B. (1967). Nature 213, 88.
von Fürth, O. (1903). Vergleichende Chemische Physiologie der niederen Tiere. Iena: Fischer.
Wald, G. (1951). Science 113, 287.
Wald, G. (1963). In: Oparin, A. I. (Ed.) Evolutionary Biochemistry. Oxford: Pergamon.
Watson, J. D. (1970). Molecular Biology of the Gene. 2nd edition. New York: Benjamin
Watson, J. D., Crick, F. H. (1953). Nature 177, 964.
Watson, J. D., Crick, F. H. C. (1953). Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology 18,
193.
Watts, R. L. (1971). In: Schoffeniels, E. (Ed.) Biochemical Evolution and the Origin of Life.
Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Watts, R. L., Watts, D. C. (1968). Journal of Theoretical Biology 20, 227.
Weiss, P. (1969). In: Koestler, A., Smythies, J. R. (Eds.) New Perspectives in the Life Sciences.
London: Hutchinson.
Williamson, A. R. (1969). Essays in Biochemistry 5, 139.
Wilson, E. O. (1965). Science 149, 1064.
Wilson, E. O. (1968). In: Sebeok, T. (Ed.) Animal Communication. Bloomington, MD: Indiana
University Press.
Wilson, E. O. (1970). In: Sondheimer, E., Simeone, J. B. Chemical Ecology. New York: Academic
Press.
Wilson, E. O., Bossert, W. H. (1963). Recent Progress in Hormone Research 19, 673.
Wilson, J. A. (1968). Nature 219, 534.

500
Marcel Florkin (1900–1979)
Wood, W. B., Edgar, R. S., King, J., Lielausis, I., Henninger, M. (1968). Federal Proceedings 27,
1160.
Wright, C. S., Alden, R. A., Kraut, J. A. (1969). Nature 221, 235.
Yarus, M., Berg, P. (1969). Journal of Molecular Biology 42, 171.
Yates, R. A., Pardee, A. B. (1957). Journal of Biological Chemistry 227, 677.
Zeller, E. A. (1948). Advances in Enzymology 8, 459.
Zuckerkaudl, E., Pauling, L. (1965). In: Problems of Evolutionary and Technical Biochemistry,
Science Press, Academic Sciences U.S.S.R. (1964) in Russian. The original English version
has been published in Journal of Theoretical Biology 8, 357.

Chapter 16
Form, Substance and Difference
Gregory Bateson (1904–1980)
Introduction and Commentary: Gregory Bateson
The elementary cybernetic system with its messages in circuit is, in fact, the simplest unit of
mind; and the transform of a difference travelling in a circuit is the elementary idea. . . .The
way to delineate the system is to draw the limiting line in such a way that you do not cut
any of these pathways in ways which leave things inexplicable.
G. Bateson (1972: 465)
“[My father’s] intellectual path did not ﬁt neatly within any familiar disci-
pline,” writes cultural anthropologist Mary Catherine Bateson (1938– ), daughter
of polymath Gregory Bateson and anthropologist Margaret Mead – and the person
upon whom the precocious child interlocutor featured in Bateson’s Socratic-style
“meta-logue” analyses is modeled. Anthropologist, zoologist, social psychologist,
biologist, epistemologist, systems theorist, communications theorist and ecologist,
Gregory Bateson “grew up in a household focused on natural history, most espe-
cially on the debates surrounding evolution and genetics,” writes Mary Catherine,
“and was oriented from birth towards science” (2000: vii).
Born on May 9, 1904, Gregory Bateson was the third son of the legendary geneti-
cist William Bateson (1861–1926), the man who introduced modern science to the
work of Gregory Mendel, and whose own research into the phenomena of varia-
tion and discontinuity within the natural processes of evolution – which entailed an
iconoclastic challenging of the biometric reductionsism of his day – exerted a life-
long inﬂuence on Gregory’s turn of mind (Forsdyke 2009, Lipset 1982: 142–159).
“We commonly think of animals and plants as matter,” wrote the elder Bateson,
foreshadowing some of his son’s later preoccupations, “but they are really systems,
through which matter is continually passing” (1928: 209).1
The making of such distinctions as that between the material substrata of liv-
ing systems and the constitutive relations which alone make such systems living
systems would become a hallmark of Gregory’s lifelong attempt to delineate the
relations in which organismic “knowing” can have arisen from, and does yet ﬁnd its
1 Writing in 1971, at age sixty-ﬁve, Gregory Bateson would dedicate what would become his most
famous work, the collection of essays entitled Steps to an Ecology of Mind, in part to: “William
Bateson, my father, who was certainly ready in 1894 to receive the cybernetic idea” (1972: xxii).
501
D. Favareau, Essential Readings in Biosemiotics, Biosemiotics 3,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9650-1_16, C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010

502
Gregory Bateson (1904–1980)
rightful place in, the natural world. Convinced that a naturalistic account of “mind”
can only be intelligently undertaken from the bringing together of a multiplicity of
perspectives, and anticipating by decades both the feasibility and the necessity of
“interdisciplinary” research, “it was yet not clear for many years, even to Gregory,”
recounts his daughter, “that his disparate, elegantly crafted and argued essays
[on such topics as bilateral symmetry, alcoholism, animal communication and
cultural epistemology] were about a single subject” (2000: viii).
Obtaining, characteristically, a Bachelor of Science Degree in Natural Science
(with a concentration in zoology) from Cambridge University in 1925 – as well
as a Master’s Degree in Anthropology from that same institution ﬁve years later,
Bateson also conducted anthropological ﬁeldwork studying the Baining and Sulka
tribes of New Britain from 1927 to 1928. His ﬁrst ﬁeldwork in New Guinea was an
investigation of the social lives of the Iatmul people, which he undertook from 1929
to 1930. Subsequent to his graduation from Cambridge in 1930, Bateson returned
to New Guinea to conduct further ﬁeldwork in 1932, there meeting the American
anthropologist Margaret Mead (1901–1978), to whom he would later be married
from 1936 to 1950.
Naven, the book in which Bateson recounts his ﬁeldwork with the Iatmul, was
published in 1936. A groundbreaking work that contains the seeds of many of
Bateson’s later fully-developed ideas about double description, logical typing, and
the presence of systemic interactions within a circular social system that constrain
potential feedback runaway states (i.e., schismogenesis),2 Naven, Bateson writes in
its Epilogue, is a book as much about the nature of deriving “explanations” from
“data” per se (whether done by anthropologists, scientists or everyday people) than
it is a conventional “anthropological study” (1936 [1958]: 280–303). Notes Bateson
biographer and biosemiotic scholar Peter Harries-Jones:
At the time, theories of functionalism provided a formula enabling anthropologists to write
systematic accounts of local culture without worrying too much about the relations beween
subject and object, self and other, observer and the observed. By contrast, Naven, as its
subtitle – A Survey of the Problems Suggested by a Composite Picture of the Culture of a
New Guinea Tribe Drawn from Three Points of View – indicates, took the relationship of
observer to observed as its central focus. Naven discusses how ethnographic method gave
rise to “fallacies of misplaced concreteness” – a term Bateson borrowed from the English
philosopher Alfred North Whitehead – that derive from hiding points of view [as ‘points of
view’ – both others’ and one’s own – from oneself in one’s explanations] and treating them
instead as scientiﬁc data (1998: 64).
This
concern
with
the
careful
delineation
of
interdependent
and
multiply-embedded semiotic phenomena so as to avoid epistemological error
2 The cybernetic concept of “feedback” had not yet been formally developed at the time that
Bateson was writing Naven in 1936 (cf., though, Uexküll 1928), and Bateson credits his later
reception of the idea through the work of Warren McCulloch in 1942 as a turning-point in the
development of his understanding.

16
Form, Substance and Difference
503
would prove to be a driving force in Bateson’s later work in psychology, phi-
losophy, evolutionary theory and ecology – work which can be increasingly
characterized as “biosemiotic”, or at least “proto-biosemiotic”, as we shall see.
From 1936 to 1938, Bateson and Mead conducted ﬁeldwork together in Bali,
pioneering the use of motion-picture photography as an ethnographic medium.
The product of this work was their co-authored 1942 volume entitled Balinese
Character.3 In 1939, Bateson and Mead returned to United States, where Bateson
worked as Anthropological Film Analyst analyzing German propaganda ﬁlms at
the Museum of Modern Art in New York from 1942 to 1943, and for the United
States Ofﬁce of Strategic Services in Southeast Asia – where he occupied posts in
Ceylon, India, and Burma from 1943 to 1945. As Bateson scholar Peter Harries-
Jones notes, Bateson rarely supported himself with university teaching positions
or full-time academic afﬁliation, but instead ﬁnanced almost his entire career with
research grants allowing him to pursue his interests – and by so doing achieved a
degree of multidisciplinary sophistication that is still all too rare in academia (2008:
p.c.).
“In 1942,” recalls Bateson, “at a Macy Foundation conference, I met Warren
McCulloch and Julian Bigelow, who were then talking excitedly about feedback”
(1972: xix). Bigelow (1913–2003), then an electrical engineer, had been work-
ing with Norbert Wiener (1894–1964) at MIT on the development of automatic
anti-aircraft defence systems that could track moving targets and adjust their own
aim and ﬁring positions accordingly. Given that this project, by its very nature,
investigated the recursive relations of information and communication, signals and
response, Wiener would later coin the term cybernetics (from the Greek word
for “governor”) to denote “the entire ﬁeld of control and communication theory,
whether in the machine or in the animal” for which such “signal science” would have
applicability (1948: 11). Over time, biologists such as Warren McCulloch (1898–
1969) and mathematicians such as Walter Pitts (1923–1969) would advance such
cybernetic research into the newly-developing ﬁelds of cognitive science, computer
engineering and artiﬁcial intelligence.
“The writing of Naven had brought me to the very edge of what later became
cybernetics, but I lacked the concept of negative feedback,” recalls Bateson, “[and
so] when I returned from overseas after the war, I went to Frank Freemont-Smith of
the Macy Foundation to ask for a conference on this then-mysterious matter. Frank
said that he had just arranged such a conference with McCulloch as chairman. It thus
happened that I was privileged to be a member of the famous Macy Conferences on
Cybernetics” (1972: xix–xx). Convened as an interdisciplinary working group of
accomplished mathematicians, biologists, engineers, and anthropologists, the Macy
3 The onset of World War II had made it difﬁcult for scholars such as Mead to publish their research
ﬁndings in a timely fashion in academic journals, and Balinese Character is in many ways more
Mead’s own summative analysis of her ﬁndings than it is a true intellectual collaboration with
Bateson, whose central role in the project was to devise effective, unintrusive, and scientiﬁcally
responsible methods of ﬁlming naturally occurring social interaction, notes Peter Harries-Jones
(2009: p.c.).

504
Gregory Bateson (1904–1980)
Conferences on Cybernetics consisted of a series of ten conferences, held in various
locations in the United States during the period 1946–1953, and was dedicated to
such topics as self-organization in neural networks, homeostasis and learning, infor-
mation theory and Gestalt psychology, and social and linguistic constructions of the
“self” (Pias 2003).
Bateson would later recount his participation in these conferences as “one of
the greatest events of my life” (Brockman 1977: 10), and averring that “my debt
to Warren McCulloch, Norbert Wiener, John von Neumann, Evelyn Hutchinson and
other members of these conferences is evident in everything that I have written since
World War II” (1972: xx).
It would be to fundamentally misunderstand Bateson and his work to infer
from this statement, however, that “Bateson is a mechanist who supports a techni-
cal, computer-oriented approach to ecological order” cautions Peter Harries-Jones,
when, in fact, “the opposite is the case: far from being a mechanist, Bateson became
the single most committed reformer of cybernetics . . .[as well as] its most trenchant
critic [who] thoroughly and continually opposed its dominant face of determinism
and control” (1995: 104–105).
Whereas for mechanically oriented cyberneticians such as Shannon and Wiener,
the concept of “information” entailed the reduction of uncertainty and the
elimination of noise within a channel (Shannon and Weaver 1949; Wiener 1973), for
Bateson, “information” consists precisely in the detection of, and adaptation to, the
manifold of patterns (and, equally importantly: to the patterns of patterns) present
in the “noise” that is the source of the “transforms of experience” (1972: 465).
Bateson’s view was the foundation for what would retrospectively come to be
labeled “second-order cybernetics”, and the differences between this view and
the mechanical “ﬁrst-order cybernetics” born out the study of electro-mechanical
servo-mechanisms are numerous and profound.
In a passage exemplifying the difference in the two approaches, Bateson observes
that:
In a computer, which works by cause and effect, with one transistor triggering another, the
sequences of cause and effect are used to simulate logic. Thirty years ago, we used to ask:
Can a computer simulate all the processes of logic? The answer was yes, but the question
was surely wrong. We should have asked: Can logic simulate all sequences of cause and
effect? The answer would have been no. (1979: 58)
The world in which organisms ﬁnd themselves – and the world in which such
things as “organisms” themselves have come to be – is not the world of the mechan-
ical engineering theorists, wherein “signals” can deterministically cause, or even
unambiguously “point to” independently existing states of being in the world. Such
a conception assumes a Cartesian subject-object duality that would make biological
evolution impossible to explain naturalistically. Instead, it smuggles a God-like (or
mechanical engineer-like) “controller” into the explanation of even the most appar-
ently “self-organizing” and “self-regulating” systems, and endows the concept of
“information” with an almost phlogiston-like quality that can inhere in “things” like
neuronal and electrical impulses.

16
Form, Substance and Difference
505
Bateson, by contrast, saw that cybernetic theory implied that “information” itself
was a fundamentally relational concept – i.e., a “difference” between states of being
that existed not “in itself”, but only such as was registered as relevant to the work-
ings of a given system by that very system at a given moment (1979: 79). This move
from a “third-person” cybernetic view to one wherein the conﬁguration of a system
that has been made “ready to receive” a as indicating b in context c under conditions
d at a temporally co-ordinated time e makes relevant as areas of scientiﬁc inves-
tigation whole swathes of biological reality ignored by “command-and-control”
cybernetics, such as higher-order learning, context, ambiguity, purpose, adaptive
discontinuity, creative communication, and the critical importance of “relationship”
per se in the systemic holism of biological interaction and recursion.
“Learning” – in the very broadest sense of the term: the active bringing into
being of such relations – thus underlies the processes common to both evolution-
ary adaptation and cultural adaptation, concluded Bateson. And so, to investigate
the processes of both adaptive and maladaptive learning across the widest possible
spectrum of manifestation, Bateson undertook a series of outwardly-appearing “dis-
parate” research projects involving monkeys, dogs, otters, dolphins, octopi, as well
as human schizophrenics, alcoholics and families.
This research took place at a variety of institutes and under a variety of spon-
sorships, including the Langley-Porter Psychiatric Clinic in San Fransciso (1949–
1951), the Veterans Administration Hospital in Palo Alto, California under the aegis
of the University of California Medical School (1949–1950), Stanford University
(1951–1962), the Virgin Islands Communications Research Institute (1963–1964),
and the Oceanic Institute in Waimanalo, Hawaii (1964–1972), and resulted in a
number of Bateson’s most famous papers on communication, psychological dis-
order, epistemology, family dynamics, evolutionary and cultural adaptation, and
animal communication – papers which introduced such key Batesonian concepts
as logical typing, heterarchy of recursion, double description, metacommunication,
deutero-learning, double-bind epistemology, and the insistance upon clear explana-
tory distinctions between the concepts of map and territory, creatura and pleroma,
and analogue and digital coding.
By 1972, it was clear to Bateson – if not to many others – that the disparate
ﬁndings of his seemingly “scattered” research agenda did, in fact, add up to a coher-
ent whole. As his research assistants at the time recall, the reason that the research
projects, when seen together as a list on paper, appeared “all over the place” was
because that which was being examined was, in fact “all over the place” – or
ubiquitous – in the natural world (Wilder and Weakland 1981: 46). This ubiquity
consists in the irreducibly interactional processes whereby any system capable of
learning by trial and error can adapt itself to an ever-changing world that its own
actions help to constitute, as well as to further change. In the broadest way possi-
ble of understanding such processes, Bateson ﬁnally characterized them, in 1972, as
together constituting an “ecology of mind.”
Accordingly, Bateson entitled the collection of his twenty years worth of essays
considering these processes, Steps to an Ecology of Mind – choosing the word
“steps” to indicate the he, like so many of the authors whose work appears in this

506
Gregory Bateson (1904–1980)
volume, considered his own life’s work at best a prolegomena to a more fully devel-
oped science of the future. However, even though it is a collection of essays selected,
ordered and commented on by Bateson himself in the effort to make evident the
connections between the ideas contained therein, Steps to an Ecology of Mind does
not offer up its conclusions in a straightforward manner, nor does one exhaust its
labyrinthine depths of insight and suggestive possibilities in a single – or even in a
dozen – readings.
The publication of Steps to an Ecology of Mind did, however, establish Gregory
Bateson as an original and important thinker, one whose sui generis analyses of
the systemic relations underlying both nature and culture would prove to be a for-
mative inﬂuence on a generation of interdisciplinary thinkers – not least among
these being the biosemioticians Jesper Hoffmeyer, Terrence Deacon, Luis Bruni and
Søren Brier. Indeed, at a 2004 conference convened by Hoffmeyer to commemorate
the centenary of Gregory Bateson’s birth, interdisciplinary scholars from around
the world presented the results of their own Bateson-inspired work in biology,
anthropology, psychology, systems theory, linguistics and ecology. The title of the
conference (and the sub-title of the proceedings which have since been published)
was Gregory Bateson as a Precursor to Biosemiotics – and according to Mary
Catherine Bateson, who delivered its plenary lecture, both the conference as well
as the project of biosemiotics itself constitute exactly the kind of mutually engaged
dialogue between scientists and humanists that her father devoted his entire life both
advocating and exemplifying.
Gregory Bateson died on July 4th, 1980 at the Esalen Institute in Northern
California, two years after his retirement as a Professor of Anthropology and
Ethnology at the University of California in Santa Cruz. Having further developed
the ideas of Steps to an Ecology of Mind in his 1979 monograph Mind and Nature:
A Necessary Unity, and working constantly on what would later be issued as the
posthumous volumes Angels Fear (co-authored by Mary Catherine Bateson) and A
Sacred Unity (co-authored by Rodney Donaldson), Bateson struggled throughout
his life to develop and articulate his unique ecological vision – one which refused to
rest content within the pre-given paradigms and received disciplinary frameworks
of his time. It may not be too presumptuous to suppose, then, that Gregory Bateson
would have looked favourably upon the project of biosemiotics that is just now com-
ing into being, whether or not he would have agreed with all of its particular posits.
In the selection that follows, Bateson presents to a heterogeneous audience of
scholars an introductory overview of some of his most foundational ideas: the dis-
tinction between systems capable of drawing distinctions, and therefore, of knowing
(creatura) as compared to systems of purely mechanical interaction which have not
attained such capabilities (pleroma); the difference between representation (e.g., a
map) and that which exists independent of such representation (e.g., the territory
that such maps are attempting to depict); and the nature of “difference” per se and
its relation to the concept of “mind.” As such, this selection provides an excellent
entrée into the thought of Gregory Bateson for those encountering his work for the
ﬁrst time – just as it continues to serve as a rich vein of insight for those now seeking
to build upon these ideas in the ongoing development of biosemiotics.

16
Form, Substance and Difference
507
Form, Substance and Difference (1972)
Let me say that it is an extraordinary honor to be here tonight, and a pleasure. I am a
little frightened of you all, because I am sure there are people here who know every
ﬁeld of knowledge that I have touched much better than I know it. It is true that I
have touched a number of ﬁelds, and I probably can face any one of you and say I
have touched a ﬁeld that you have not touched. But I am sure that for every ﬁeld I
have touched, there are people here who are much more expert than I. I am not a
well-read philosopher, and philosophy is not my business. I am not a very well read
anthropologist, and anthropology is not exactly my business.
But I have tried to do something which Korzybski was very much concerned
with doing, and with which the whole semantic movement has been concerned,
namely, I have studied the area of impact between very abstract and formal philo-
sophic thought on the one hand and the natural history of man and other creatures
on the other. This overlap between formal premises and actual behavior is, I assert,
of quite dreadful importance today. We face a world which is threatened not only
with disorganization of many kinds, but also with the destruction of its environment,
and we, today, are still unable to think clearly about the relations between an organ-
ism and its environment. What sort of a thing is this, which we call “organism plus
environment?”
Let us go back to the original statement for which Korzybski is most famous-
the statement that the map is not the territory. This statement came out of a very
wide range of philosophic thinking, going back to Greece, and wriggling through
the history of European thought over the last 2,000 years. In this history, there has
been a sort of rough dichotomy and often deep controversy. There has been a vio-
lent enmity and bloodshed. It all starts, I suppose, with the Pythagoreans versus
their predecessors, and the argument took the shape of, “Do you ask what it’s made
of– earth, ﬁre, water, etc.?” Or do you ask, “What is its pattern?”
Pythagoras stood for inquiry into pattern rather than inquiry into substance.2
That controversy has gone through the ages, and the Pythagorean half of it has,
until recently, been, on the whole, the submerged half. The Gnostics followed
the Pythagoreans, and the alchemists follow the Gnostics, and so on. The argu-
ment reached a sort of climax at the end of the 18th century when a Pythagorean
evolutionary theory was built and then discarded – a theory which involved mind.
The evolutionary theory of the late 18th century, the Lamarckian theory, which
was the ﬁrst organized transformist theory of evolution, was built out of a curious
historical background which has been described by Lovejoy in The Great Chain of
Being. Before Lamarck, the organic world, the living world, was believed to be hier-
archic in structure, with Mind at the top. The chain, or ladder, went down through
[As noted in the original,1 this chapter is a transcript of the 19th Annual Alfred Korzybski
Memorial Lecture that Gregory Bateson delivered at the Oceanic Institute in Hawaii on January 9,
1970.]

508
Gregory Bateson (1904–1980)
the angels, through men, through the apes, down to the infusoria or protozoa, and
below that to the plants and stones.
What Lamarck did was to turn that chain upside down. He observed that animals
changed under environmental pressure. He was incorrect, of course, in believing
that those changes were inherited, but, in any case, these changes were for him
the evidence of evolution. When he turned the ladder upside down, what had been
the explanation, namely, the Mind at the top, now became that which had to be
explained. His problem was to explain “mind.” He was convinced about evolution,
and there his interest in it stopped. So that if you read the Philosophie Zoologique
(1809), you will ﬁnd that the ﬁrst third of it is devoted to solving the problem of
evolution and the turning upside down of the taxonomy, and the rest of the book
is really devoted to comparative psychology, a science which he founded. Mind
was what he was really interested in. He had used habit as one of the axiomatic
phenomena in his theory of evolution, and this of course also took him into the
problem of comparative psychology.
Now the status of mind and pattern as the explanatory principles which, above all,
required investigation was pushed out of biological thinking in the later evolutionary
theories which were developed in the mid-19th century by Darwin, Huxley, etc.
There were still some naughty boys, like Samuel Butler, who said that mind could
not be ignored in this way – but they were weak voices, and incidentally, they never
looked at organisms. I don’t think Butler ever looked at anything except his own
cat, but he still knew more about evolution than some of the more conventional
thinkers.
Now, at last, with the discovery of cybernetics, systems theory, information the-
ory, and so on, we begin to have a formal base enabling us to think about mind and
enabling us to think about all these problems in a way which was totally hetero-
dox from about 1850 through World War II. What I have to talk about is how the
great dichotomy of epistemology has shifted under the impact of cybernetics and
information theory.
We can now say – or at any rate, can begin to say – what we think a “mind” is. In
the next 20 years there will be other ways of saying it and, because the discoveries
are new, I can only give you my personal version. The old versions are surely wrong,
but which of the revised pictures will survive, we do not know.
Let us start from the evolutionary side. It is now empirically clear that Darwinian
evolutionary theory contained a very great error in its identiﬁcation of the unit of sur-
vival under natural selection. The unit which was believed to be crucial and around
which the theory was set up was either the breeding individual or the family line or
the subspecies or some similar homogeneous set of conspeciﬁcs. Now I suggest that
the last 100 years have demonstrated empirically that if an organism or aggregate of
organisms sets to work with a focus on its own survival and thinks that that is the
way to select its adaptive moves, its “progress” ends up with a destroyed environ-
ment. If the organism ends up destroying its environment, it has in fact destroyed
itself. And we may very easily see this process carried to its ultimate reductio ad
absurdum in the next 20 years. The unit of survival is not the breeding organism, or
the family line, or the society.

16
Form, Substance and Difference
509
The old unit has already been partly corrected by the population geneticists. They
have insisted that the evolutionary unit is, in fact, not homogeneous. A wild popula-
tion of any species consists always of individuals whose genetic constitution varies
widely. In other words, potentiality and readiness for change is already built into the
survival unit. The heterogeneity of the wild population is already one half of that
trial-and-error system which is necessary for dealing with the environment. The arti-
ﬁcially homogenized populations of man’s domestic animals and plants are scarcely
ﬁt for survival. And today a further correction of the unit is necessary. The ﬂexible
environment must also be included along with the ﬂexible organism because, as I
have already said, the organism which destroys its environment destroys itself.
The unit of survival is a ﬂexible organism-in-its-environment.
Now, let me leave evolution for a moment to consider what is the unit of mind.
Let us go back to the map and the territory and ask: what is it in the territory that
gets onto the map? We know the territory does not get onto the map. That is the
central point about which we here are all agreed. Now, if the territory were uniform,
nothing would get onto the map except its boundaries, which are the points at which
it ceases to be uniform against some larger matrix. What gets onto the map, in fact,
is difference, be it a difference in altitude, a difference in vegetation, a difference in
population structure, difference in surface, or whatever. Differences are the things
that get onto a map.
But what is a difference? A difference is a very peculiar and obscure concept. It
is certainly not a thing or an event. This piece of paper is different from the wood of
this lectern. There are many differences between them-of color, texture, shape, etc.
But if we start to ask about the localization of those differences, we get into trouble.
Obviously the difference between the paper and the wood is not in the paper; it
is obviously not in the wood; it is obviously not in the space between them, and it
is obviously not in the time between them. (Difference which occurs across time is
what we call “change.”)
A difference, then, is an abstract matter.
In the hard sciences, effects are, in general, caused by rather concrete conditions
or events-impacts, forces, and so forth. But when you enter the world of commu-
nication, organization, etc., you leave behind that whole world in which effects are
brought about by forces and impacts and energy exchange. You enter a world in
which “effects” – and I am not sure one should still use the same word – are brought
about by differences. That is: they are brought about by the sort of “thing” that gets
onto the map from the territory. This is difference.
Difference travels from the wood and paper into my retina. It then gets picked up
and worked on by this fancy piece of computing machinery in my head.
The whole energy relation is different. In the world of mind, nothing-that which
is not-can be a cause. In the hard sciences, we ask for causes and we expect them
to exist and be “real.” But remember that zero is different from one, and because
is different from one, zero can be a cause in the psychological world, the world of
communication. The letter which you do not write can get an angry reply; and the
income tax form which you do not ﬁll in can trigger the Internal Revenue boys into
energetic action, because they, too, have their breakfast, lunch, tea and dinner and

510
Gregory Bateson (1904–1980)
can react with energy which they derive from their metabolism. The letter which
never existed is no source of energy.
It follows, of course, that we must change our whole way of thinking about men-
tal and communicational process. The ordinary analogies of energy theory which
people borrow from the hard sciences to provide a conceptual frame upon which
they try to build theories about psychology and behavior-that entire Procrustean
structure-is non-sense. It is in error.
I suggest to you, now, that the word “idea,” in its most elementary sense, is
synonymous with “difference.” Kant, in the Critique of Judgment-if I understand
him correctly – asserts that the most elementary aesthetic act is the selection of a
fact. He argues that in a piece of chalk there are an inﬁnite number of potential facts.
The Ding an sich, the piece of chalk, can never enter into communication or mental
process because of this inﬁnitude. The sensory receptors cannot accept it; they ﬁlter
it out. What they do is to select certain facts out of the piece of chalk, which then
become, in modern terminology, information.
I suggest that Kant’s statement can be modiﬁed to say that there is an inﬁnite
number of differences around and within the piece of chalk. There are differences
between the chalk and the rest of the universe, between the chalk and the sun or the
moon. And within the piece of chalk, there is for every molecule an inﬁnite number
of differences between its location and the locations in which it might have been.
Of this inﬁnitude, we select a very limited number-which become information. In
fact, what we mean by information-the elementary unit of information-is a differ-
ence which makes a difference, and is able to make a difference because the neural
pathways, along which it travels and is continually transformed, are themselves pro-
vided with energy. The pathways are ready to be triggered. We may even say that
the question is already implicit in them.
There is, however, an important contrast between most of the pathways of infor-
mation inside the body and most of the pathways outside it. The differences between
the paper and the wood are ﬁrst transformed into differences in the propagation of
light or sound and travel in this form to my sensory end organs. The ﬁrst part of their
journey is energized in the ordinary hard-science way, from “behind.” But when the
differences enter my body by triggering an end organ, this type of travel is replaced
by travel which is energized at every step by the metabolic energy latent in the
protoplasm which receives the difference, recreates or transforms it, and passes it on.
When I strike the head of a nail with a hammer, an impulse is transmitted to its
point. But it is a semantic error, a misleading metaphor, to say that what travels in
an axon is an “impulse.” It could correctly be called “news of a difference.”
Be that as it may, this contrast between internal and external pathways is not
absolute. Exceptions occur on both sides of the line. Some external chains of events
are energized by relays, and some chains of events internal to the body are energized
from “behind.” Notably, the mechanical interaction of muscles can be used as a
computational model.3
In spite of these exceptions, it is still broadly true that the coding and transmission
of differences outside the body is very different from the coding and transmission
inside, and this difference must be mentioned because it can lead us into error. We

16
Form, Substance and Difference
511
commonly think of the external “physical world” as somehow separate from an
internal “mental world.” I believe that this division is based on the contrast in coding
and transmission inside and outside the body.
The mental world-the mind-the world of information processing-is not limited
by the skin.
Let us now go back to the notion that the transform of a difference traveling in
a circuit is an elementary idea. If this be correct, let us ask what a mind is. We
say the map is different from the territory. But what is the territory? Operationally,
somebody went out with a retina or a measuring stick and made representations
which were then put upon paper. What is on the paper map is a representation of
what was in the retinal representation of the man who made the map: and as you
push the question back, what you ﬁnd is an inﬁnite regress, an inﬁnite series of
maps. The territory never sets in at all. The territory is Ding an sich and you can’t
do anything with it. Always the process of representation will ﬁlter it out so that the
mental world is only maps of maps of maps, ad inﬁnitum.4 All “phenomena” are
literally “appearances.”
Or we can follow the chain forward. I receive various sorts of mappings which I
call data or information. Upon receipt of these I act. But my actions, my muscular
contractions, are transforms of differences in the input material. And I receive again
data which are transforms of my actions. We get thus a picture of the mental world
which has somehow jumped loose from our conventional picture of the physical
world.
This is not new, and for historic background we go again to the alchemists and
Gnostics. Carl Jung once wrote a very curious little book, which I recommend to all
of you. It is called Septem Sermones ad Mortuos, Seven Sermons to the Dead.5 In
his Memories, Dreams, Reﬂections, Jung tells us that his house was full of ghosts,
and they were noisy. They bothered him, they bothered his wife, and they bothered
the children. In the vulgar jargon of psychiatry we might say that everybody in the
house was as psychotic as hooty owls, and for quite good reason. If you get your
epistemology confused, you go psychotic, and Jung was going through an epistemo-
logical crisis. So he sat down at his desk and picked up a pen and started to write.
When he started to write the ghosts all disappeared, and he wrote this little book.
From this he dates all his later insight. He signed it “Basilides,” who was a famous
Gnostic in Alexandria in the 2nd century.
He points out that there are two worlds. We might call them two worlds of expla-
nation. He names them the pleroma and the creatura, these being Gnostic terms.
The pleroma is the world in which events are caused by forces and impacts and in
which there are no “distinctions.” Or, as I would say, no “differences.” In the crea-
ture, effects are brought about precisely by difference. In fact, this is the same old
dichotomy between mind and substance.
We can study and describe the pleroma, but, always, the distinctions which we
draw are attributed by us to the pleroma. The pleroma knows nothing of differ-
ence and distinction; it contains no “ideas” in the sense in which I am using the
word. When we study and describe the creatura, we must correctly identify those
differences which are effective within it.

512
Gregory Bateson (1904–1980)
I suggest that “pleroma” and “creatura” are words which we could usefully adopt
and it is therefore worthwhile to look at the bridges which exist between these two
“worlds.” It is an oversimpliﬁcation to say that the “hard sciences” deal only with
the pleroma and that the sciences of the mind deal only with creatura.
There is more to it than that.
First, consider the relation between energy and negative entropy. The classical
Carnot heat engine consists of a cylinder of gas with a piston. This cylinder is alter-
nately placed in contact with a container of hot gas and with a container of cold gas.
The gas in the cylinder alternately expands and contracts as it is heated or cooled by
the hot and cold sources. The piston is thus driven up and down.
But with each cycle of the engine, the difference between the temperature of the
hot source and that of the cold source is reduced. When this difference becomes
zero, the engine will stop.
The physicist, describing the pleroma, will write equations to translate the tem-
perature difference into “available energy,” which he will call “negative entropy,”
and will go on from there.
The analyst of the creatura will note that the whole system is a sense organ which
is triggered by temperature difference. He will call this difference which makes a
difference “information” or “negative entropy.” For him, this is only a special case
in which the effective difference happens to be a matter of energetics. He is equally
interested in all differences which can activate some sense organ. For him, any such
difference is “negative entropy.”
Or consider the phenomenon which the neurophysiologists call “synaptic sum-
mation.” What is observed is that in certain cases, when two neurons, A and B have
synaptic connection to a third neuron, C the ﬁring of neither neuron by itself is suf-
ﬁcient to ﬁre C; but that when both A and B ﬁre simultaneously (or nearly so), their
combined “impulses” will cause C to ﬁre.
In pleromatic language, this combining of events to surmount a threshold is
called “summation.”
But from the point of view of the student of creatura (and the neurophysiologist
must surely have one foot in the pleroma and the other in creatura), this is not sum-
mation at all. What happens is that the system operates to create differences. There
are two differentiated classes of ﬁrings by A: those ﬁrings which are accompanied
by B and those which are unaccompanied. Similarly there are two classes of ﬁrings
by B.
The so-called “summation,” when both ﬁre, is not an additive process from this
point of view. It is the formation of a logical products-a process of fractionation
rather than summation.
The creatura is thus the world seen as mind, wherever such a view is appropriate.
And wherever this view is appropriate, there arises a species of complexity which is
absent from pleromatic description: creatural description is always hierarchic.
I have said that what gets from territory to map is transforms of difference and
that these (somehow selected) differences are elementary ideas.
But there are differences between differences.

16
Form, Substance and Difference
513
Every effective difference denotes a demarcation, a line of classiﬁcation, and
all classiﬁcation is hierarchic. In other words, differences are themselves to be
differentiated and classiﬁed.
In this context I will only touch lightly on the matter of classes of differ-
ence, because to carry the matter further would land us in problems of Principlia
Mathematica.
Let me invite you to a psychological experience, if only to demonstrate the frailty
of the human computer. First note differences in texture are different (a) from dif-
ferences in color. Now note that differences in size are different (b) from differences
in shape. Similarly ratios are different (c) from subtractive differences.
Now let me invite you, as disciples of Korzybski, to deﬁne the differences
between “different (a),” “different (b),” and “different (c)” in the above paragraph.
The computer in the human head boggles at the task.
But not all classes of difference are as awkward to handle.
One such class you are all familiar with. Namely, the class of differences which
are created by the process of transformation whereby the differences immanent in
the territory become differences immanent in the map. In the corner of every serious
map you will ﬁnd these rules of transformation spelled out-usually in words. Within
the human mind, it is absolutely essential to recognize the differences of this class,
and, indeed, it is these that form the central subject matter of Science and Sanity.
An hallucination or a dream image is surely a transformation of something. But
of what? And by what rules of transformation?
Lastly there is that hierarchy of differences which biologists call “levels.” I mean
such differences as that between a cell and a tissue, between tissue and organ, organ
and organism, and organism and society.
These are the hierarchies of units or Gestalten, in which each sub-unit is a part of
the unit of next larger scope. And, always in biology, this difference or relationship
which I call “part of ” is such that certain differences in the part have informational
effect upon the larger unit, and vice versa.
Having stated this relationship between biological part and whole, I can now go
on from the notion of creatura as Mind in general to the question of what is a mind.
What do I mean by “my” mind?
I suggest that the delimitation of an individual mind must always depend upon
what phenomena we wish to understand or explain. Obviously there are lots of mes-
sage pathways outside the skin, and these and the messages which they carry must
be included as part of the mental system whenever they are relevant.
Consider a tree and a man and an axe. We observe that the axe ﬂies through the air
and makes certain sorts of gashes in a pre-existing cut in the side of the tree. If now
we want to explain this set of phenomena, we shall be concerned with differences
in the cut face of the tree, differences in the retina of the man, differences in his
central nervous system, differences in his efferent neural messages, differences in
the behavior of his muscles, differences in how the axe ﬂies, to the differences which
the axe then makes on the face of the tree. Our explanation (for certain purposes) will
go round and round that circuit. In principle, if you want to explain or understand

514
Gregory Bateson (1904–1980)
anything in human behavior, you are always dealing with total circuits, completed
circuits. This is the elementary cybernetic thought.
The elementary cybernetic system with its messages in circuit is, in fact, the
simplest unit of mind; and the transform of a difference travelling in a circuit is the
elementary idea. More complicated systems are perhaps more worthy to be called
mental systems, but essentially this is what we are talking about. The unit which
shows the characteristic of trial and error will be legitimately called a mental system.
But what about “me”? Suppose I am a blind man, and I use a stick. I go tap, tap,
tap. Where do I start? Is my mental system bounded at the handle of the stick? Is it
bounded by my skin? Does it start halfway up the stick? Does it start at the tip of the
stick? But these are nonsense questions. The stick is a pathway along which trans-
forms of difference are being transmitted. The way to delineate the system is to draw
the limiting line in such a way that you do not cut any of these pathways in ways
which leave things inexplicable. If what you are trying to explain is a given piece of
behavior, such as the locomotion of the blind man, then, for this purpose, you will
need the street, the stick, the man; the street, the stick, and so on, round and round.
But when the blind man sits down to eat his lunch, his stick and its messages will
no longer be relevant-if it is his eating that you want to understand.
And in addition to what I have said to deﬁne the individual mind, I think it neces-
sary to include the relevant parts of memory and data “banks.” After all, the simplest
cybernetic circuit can be said to have a memory of a dynamic kind-not based upon
static storage but upon the travel of information around the circuit. The behavior
of the governor of a steam engine at Time 2 is partly determined by what it did at
Time 1 – where the interval between Time I and Time 2 is that time necessary for
the information to complete the circuit.
We get a picture, then, of mind as synonymous with cybernetic systemthe rel-
evant total information-processing, trial-and-error completing unit. And we know
that within Mind in the widest sense there will be hierarchy of sub-systems, any one
of which we can call an individual mind.
But this picture is precisely the same as the picture which I arrived at in dis-
cussing the unit of evolution. I believe that this identity is the most important
generalization which I have to offer you tonight.
In considering units of evolution, I argued that you have at each step to include
the completed pathways outside the protoplasmic aggregate, be it DNA-in-the-cell,
or cell-in-the-body, or body-in-the-environment. The hierarchic structure is not new.
Formerly we talked about the breeding individual or the family line or the taxon, and
so on. Now each step of the hierarchy is to be thought of as a system, instead of a
chunk cut off and visualized as against the surrounding matrix.
This identity between the unit of mind and the unit of evolutionary survival is of
very great importance, not only theoretical, but also ethical.
It means, you see, that I now localize something which I am calling “Mind”
immanent in the large biological system-the ecosystem. Or, if I draw the system
boundaries at a different level, then mind is immanent in the total evolutionary struc-
ture. If this identity between mental and evolutionary units is broadly right, then we
face a number of shifts in our thinking.

16
Form, Substance and Difference
515
First, let us consider ecology. Ecology has currently two faces to it: the face
which is called bio-energetics-the economics of energy and materials within a coral
reef, a redwood forest, or a city-and, second, an economics of information, of
entropy, neg-entropy, etc. These two do not ﬁt together very well precisely because
the units are differently bounded in the two sorts of ecology. In bio-energetics it
is natural and appropriate to think of units bounded at the cell membrane, or at
the skin; or of units composed of sets of conspeciﬁc individuals. These boundaries
are then the frontiers at which measurements can be made to determine the additive-
subtractive budget of energy for the given unit. In contrast, informational or entropic
ecology deals with the budgeting of pathways and of probability. The resulting bud-
gets are fractionating (not subtractive.) The boundaries must enclose, not cut, the
relevant pathways.
Moreover, the very meaning of “survival” becomes different when we stop talk-
ing about the survival of something bounded by the skin and start to think of the
survival of the system of ideas in circuit. The contents of the skin are randomized at
death and the pathways within the skin are randomized. But the ideas, under further
transformation, may go on out in the world in books or works of art. Socrates as a
bio-energetic individual is dead. But much of him still lives as a component in the
contemporary ecology of ideas.6
It is also clear that theology becomes changed and perhaps renewed. The
Mediterranean religions for 5,000 years have swung to and fro between imma-
nence and transcendence. In Babylon the gods were transcendent on the tops of
hills; in Egypt, there was god immanent in Pharaoh; and Christianity is a complex
combination of these two beliefs.
The cybernetic epistemology which I have offered you would suggest a new
approach. The individual mind is immanent but not only in the body, It is imma-
nent also in pathways and messages outside the body; and there is a larger Mind of
which the individual mind is only a sub-system. This larger Mind is comparable to
God and is perhaps what some people mean by “God,” but it is still immanent in the
total interconnected social system and planetary ecology.
Freudian psychology expanded the concept of mind inwards to include the whole
communication system within the body-the autonomic, the habitual and the vast
range of unconscious process. What I am saying expands mind outwards. And both
of these changes reduce the scope of the conscious self. A certain humility becomes
appropriate, tempered by the dignity or joy of being part of something much bigger.
A part-if you will-of God.
If you put God aside and set him vis-à-vis his creation and if you have the idea
that you are created in his image, you will logically and naturally see yourself as
outside and against the things around you. And as you arrogate all mind to yourself,
you will see the world around you as mindless and therefore not entitled to moral
or ethical consideration. The environment will seem to be yours to exploit. Your
survival unit will be you and your folks or conspeciﬁcs against the environment of
other social units, other races and the brutes and vegetables.
If this is your estimate of your relation to nature and you have an advanced
technology, your likelihood of survival will be that of a snowball in hell. You will

516
Gregory Bateson (1904–1980)
die either of the toxic by-products of your own hate, or, simply, of over-population
and over-grazing.
The raw materials of the world are ﬁnite.
If I am right, the whole of our thinking about what we are and what other people
are has got to be restructured. This is not funny, and I do not know how long we have
to do it in. If we continue to operate on the premises that were fashionable in the
pre-cybernetic era, and which were especially underlined and strengthened during
the Industrial Revolution, which seemed to validate the Darwinian unit of survival,
we may have 20 or 30 years before the logical reductio ad absurdum of our old
positions destroys us. Nobody knows how long we have, under the present system,
before some disaster strikes us, more serious than the destruction of any group of
nations. The most important task today is, perhaps, to learn to think in the new way.
Let me say that I don’t know how to think that way. Intellectually, I can stand here
and I can give you a reasoned exposition of this matter; but if I am cutting down a
tree, I still think “Gregory Bateson” is cutting down the tree. I am cutting down the
tree. “Myself” is to me still an excessively concrete object, different from the rest of
what I have been calling “mind.”
The step to realizing-to making habitual-the other way of thinking-that one nat-
urally thinks that way when one reaches out for a glass of water or cuts down a
tree-that step is not an easy one.
And, quite seriously, I suggest to you that we should trust no policy decisions
which emanate from persons who do not yet have that habit.
There are experiences and disciplines which may help me to imagine what it
would be like to have this habit of correct thought. Under LSD, I have experienced,
as have many others, the disappearance of the division between self and the music
to which I was listening. The perceiver and the thing perceived become strangely
united into a single entity. And this state is surely more correct than the state in
which it seems that “I hear the music.” The sound, after all, is Ding an sich, but my
perception of it is a part of mind.
It is told of Johann Sebastian Bach that when somebody asked him how he
played so divinely, he answered, “I play the notes, in order, as they are written.
It is God who makes the music.” But not many of us can claim Bach’s correctness
of epistemology-or that of William Blake who knew that the Poetic Imagination was
the only reality.
The poets have known these things all through the ages, but the rest of us have
gone astray into all sorts of false reiﬁcations of the “self” and separations between
the “self” and “experience.”
For me another clue-another moment when the nature of mind was for a moment
clear-was provided by the famous experiments of Adalbert Ames, Jr. These are opti-
cal illusions in depth perception. As Ames’ guinea pig, you discover that those
mental processes by which you create the world in three-dimensional perspective
are within your mind but totally unconscious and utterly beyond voluntary control.
Of course, we all know that this is so-that mind creates the images which “we” then
see. But still it is a profound epistemological shock to have direct experience of this
which we always knew.

16
Form, Substance and Difference
517
Please do not misunderstand me. When I say that the poets have always known
these things or that most of mental process is unconscious, I am not advocating a
greater use of emotion or a lesser use of intellect. Of course, if what I am saying
tonight is approximately true, then our ideas about the relation between thought and
emotion need to be revised. If the boundaries of the “ego” are wrongly drawn or
even totally ﬁctitious, then it may be nonsense to regard emotions or dreams or our
unconscious computations of perspective as “ego-alien.”
We live in a strange epoch when many psychologists try to “humanize” their
science by preaching an anti-intellectual gospel. They might, as sensibly, try to
physicalize physics by discarding the tools of mathematics.
It is the attempt to separate intellect from emotion that is monstrous, and I sug-
gest that it is equally monstrous-and dangerous-to attempt to separate the external
mind from the internal. Or to separate mind from body.
Blake noted that “A tear is an intellectual thing,” and Pascal asserted that “The
heart has its reasons of which the reason knows nothing”; and we need not be put off
by the fact that the reasonings of the heart (or of the hypothalamus) are accompanied
by sensations of joy or grief. These computations are concerned with matters which
are vital to mammals – namely, matters of relationship, by which I mean love, hate,
respect, dependency, spectatorship, performance, dominance, and so on. These are
central to the life of any mammal and I see no objection to calling these computa-
tions “thought” – though certainly the units of relational computation are different
from the units which we use to compute about isolable things.
But there are bridges between the one sort of thought and the other, and it seems
to me that the artists and poets are speciﬁcally concerned with these bridges. It is
not that art is the expression of the unconscious, but rather that it is concerned with
the relation between the levels of mental process. From a work of art it may be
possible to analyze out some unconscious thought of the artist, but I believe that,
for example, Freud’s analysis of Leonardo’s “Virgin on the Knees of St. Anne”
precisely misses the point of the whole exercise. Artistic skill is the combining of
many levels of mind-unconscious, conscious and external-to make a statement of
their combination. It is not a matter of expressing a single level.
Similarly, Isadora Duncan, when she said “If I could say it, I would not have
to dance it,” was talking nonsense, because her dance was about combinations of
saying and moving.
Indeed, if what I have been saying is at all correct, the whole base of aesthetics
will need to be re-examined. It seems that we link feelings not only to the com-
putations of the heart but also to the computations in the external pathways of the
mind. It is when we recognize the operations of creatura in the external world that
we are aware of “beauty” or “ugliness.” The “primrose by the river’s brim” is beau-
tiful because we are aware that the combination of differences which constitutes its
appearance could only be achieved by information processing, i.e., by thought. We
recognize another mind within our own external mind.
And last, there is death. It is understandable that, in a civilization which sepa-
rates mind from body, we should either try to forget death or to make mythologies
about the survival of transcendent mind. But if mind is immanent not only in those

518
Gregory Bateson (1904–1980)
pathways of information which are located inside the body but also in external path-
ways, then death takes on a different aspect. The individual nexus of pathways which
I call “me” is no longer so precious because that nexus is only part of a larger mind.
The ideas which seemed to be me can also become immanent in you. May they
survive – if true.
Notes
1 A lecture delivered at the 19th Annual Alfred Korzybski Memorial Lecture Series at the Oceanic
Institute in Hawaii, on January 9, 1970.
2 R. G. Collingwood has given a clear account of the Pythagorean position in The Idea of Nature
(Oxford 1945).
3 It is interesting to note that digital computers depend upon transmission of energy “from behind”
to send “news” along wire from one relay to the next. But each relay has its own energy source.
Analogic computers, e.g., tide machines and the like, are commonly entirely driven by energy
“from behind.” Either type of energization can be used for computational purposes.
4 Or we may spell the matter out and say that at every step, as a difference is transformed and
propagated along its pathway, the embodiment of the difference before the step is a “territory”
of which the embodiment after the step is a “map.” The map-territory relation obtains at every
step.
5 Written in 1916, translated by H. G. Baynes and privately circulated in 1925. Republished by
Stuart & Watkins, London, and by Random House, 1961. In later work, Jung seems to have
lost the clarity of the Seven Sermons. In his “Answer to Job,” the archetypes are said to be
“pleromatic.” It is surely true, however, the constellations of ideas may seem subjectively to
resemble “forces” when their ideational character is unrecognized.
6 For the phrase “ecology of ideas,” I am indebted to Sir Geoffrey Vickers’ essay “The Ecology of
Ideas” in Value Systems and Social Process (Basic Books 1968). For a more formal discussion
of the survival of ideas, see Gordon Pask’s remarks in Wenner-Gren Conference on “The Effects
of Conscious Purpose on Human Adaptation,” 1968.

Chapter 17
The Physics and Metaphysics of Biosemiotics
Howard H. Pattee (1926– )
Introduction and Commentary: Howard H. Pattee
I deﬁne a symbol in terms of its structure and function. First, a symbol can only exist in
the context of a living organism or its artifacts. Life originated with symbolic memory, and
symbols originated with life. I ﬁnd it gratuitous to use the concept of symbol, even metaphor-
ically, in physical systems where no function exists. Symbols do not exist in isolation, but
are part of a semiotic or linguistic system.
H. H. Pattee (2001: 18)
While Thomas A. Sebeok was busy building cross-disciplinary networks in
Scandinavia and in eastern Europe during the last half of the twentieth century,
back in the West, individual researchers in the ﬁelds of neurobiology, clinical psy-
chology, molecular biology, artiﬁcial intelligence, and philosophy of mind – as well
as a few rare polymaths, such as Gregory Bateson – were independently inaugu-
rating their own attempts at either resolving or undoing the ingrained Cartesian
dichotomy separating bodies and minds. One of the few islands of Sebeok-style
multidisciplinary collaboration in the West, apart from the Macy Foundation con-
ferences of cybernetics discussed elsewhere in this volume, was the Rockefeller
Foundation series of conferences entitled Towards a Theoretical Biology that geneti-
cist Conrad Hal Waddington (1905–1975) held in Bellagio, Italy each year from
1966 to 1970, and that attracted such disparate participants as René Thom, Lewis
Wolpert, John Maynard Smith, Brian Goodwin, Richard Lewontin, Michael Arbib,
Walter Elsasser, David Bohm, Ernst Mayr, Alexander Graham Cairns-Smith and
Howard Pattee.
The invitation of Howard Pattee – a physicist whose doctoral research was in
X-ray optics – to a conference dedicated to the establishment of a more fully
explanatory biology, soon proved eminently justiﬁed. For as early as 1963, in a lec-
ture given at The Second International Conference on The Origins of Prebiological
Systems (featuring, among others Alexander Oparin, J.B.S. Haldane, J.D. Bernal,
Norman Pirie, and Sidney Fox), Pattee was forecasting to anyone in the scien-
tiﬁc community who was prescient enough to listen, that with the discovery of the
genetic code, science has not so much uncovered a self-evident set of answers to the
questions of the origins and organization of life, but instead, whole new set of even
519
D. Favareau, Essential Readings in Biosemiotics, Biosemiotics 3,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9650-1_17, C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010

520
Howard H. Pattee (1926– )
deeper scientiﬁc problems that may not necessarily be amenable to existing perspec-
tives and methodologies. Anticipating his own later “semantic closure” principle at
a time when the wave of enthusiasm for genetic reductionism was reaching its peak,
Pattee predicted:
we may expect that the origin of life problem will shift away from the evolution of the
building blocks and the elementary operations of joining them together, to the more difﬁcult
problem of the evolution of control in complex organizations. This problem is more difﬁcult
because the idea of ‘control’ is not deﬁned in the same sense as we can deﬁne [the relevant]
biochemicals [per se]. . .A live cell and a dead collection of the identical biochemicals in
the same structural organization differ essentially in the amount of intermolecular control
that exists in each unit (1965: 405–406).
And in the forty-ﬁve years subsequent to the making of that observation, Howard
Pattee, perhaps more than any other physicist, has been at the forefront of examin-
ing “precisely those dynamical aspects of physics that are necessary to implement
codiﬁed instructions” (in Umerez 2001) – or, in other words, in seeking an answer
to the question: “What are the physics necessary (if not sufﬁcient) for semiosis?”
Born in Pasadena, California on October 5, 1926, Howard Hunt Pattee traces
the origins of his development as a scientist and as a theoretical biologist to his
reading of biometrician Karl Pearson’s (1857–1936) 1892 classic The Grammar
of Science. Therein, Pearson asks rhetorically: “How, therefore, we must ask, is it
possible for us to distinguish the living from the lifeless, if we can describe both
conceptually by the motion of inorganic corpuscles?” (1892 [1937]: 287). Pattee
reports that he was no more than 13 years old when he came upon this passage,
which he recognized even then as offering not an unanswerable conundrum, but
the impetus for a research programme in biophysics – one which Pattee has since
pursued, often single-handedly, for his entire life.
Pearson’s question and its variants reappear in the questions that Pattee sets for
himself: “How does the motion of matter lead to records of this motion?” (1971:
310), “How are universal, inexorable, natural laws related to local, arbitrary sym-
bols?” (2001: 9) “How does a reversible dynamics gradually become an irreversible
thermodynamics?” (2005: 283), “What is the simplest possible ecosystem?” (1968:
219), “What does it mean to correlate some aspect of a dynamical law with a
timeless structure?” (2005: 285) and “How does a molecule become a message?”
(1969: 1) – these are, of course, biosemiotic questions all.
Yet long before he would lead a conceptual revolution in biophysics by attempt-
ing to work out possible solutions to these questions, Pattee was still working on
his PhD in physics in 1949 when he took note of the fact that similar concerns
were forcing themselves into the writings of physicists Niels Bohr (1885–1962),
Max Delbrück (1906–1981) and Erwin Schrödinger (1887–1961). “None of these
distinguished scientists [future Nobel Prize winners all] appeared to have any clear
answers to the problem of the relation of physics to life, so I knew that there must
be a fundamental problem here” recalls Pattee (2009: p.c.)
“At the time,” Pattee recounts elsewhere, “physics and mathematics were
inseparable in my mind [. . . which means that] I did not clearly distinguish
formal symbolic models from reality” (2001: 8). All that changed, however,

17
The Physics and Metaphysics of Biosemiotics
521
with Pattee’s reading of mathematician Hermann Weyl’s (1885–1955) then just-
published Philosophy of Mathematics and Natural Science in 1949. “Perhaps the
philosophically most relevant feature of modern science is the emergence of abstract
symbolic structures as the ‘hard core of objectivity’ behind – as [astrophysicist
Arthur Stanley] Eddington puts it – ‘the colorful tale’ of the subjective ‘storyteller’
mind” wrote Weyl, in a quote that seems to have awoken Pattee from his youthful
and dogmatic mathematical slumber (ibid).
By 1953, Pattee had completed his doctoral research at Stanford University,
where he was involved in the development of X-ray optics to be used for the study
of biological structure. Franklin and Gosling’s success in using X-ray diffraction to
reveal the physical structure of nucleic acids during this period, and the subsequent
revelations regarding the existence of a “genetic code,” only conﬁrmed Pattee in his
belief that the critical explanatory notion of “information” (as well as its related con-
cepts of prior “measurement” and posterior “records”) in molecular biology was at
best an empty-at-the-center placeholder, and that a scientiﬁc understanding of adap-
tive evolution would remain incoherent, or essentially ‘magical,’ Until such terms
could be scientiﬁcally deﬁned.
From 1961 to 1968, Pattee authored a set of “six dense papers on hered-
ity [wherein] he argues for the presence of some degree of pre-biotic molecular
order facilitating the appearance of macromolecular sequences (well before ‘self-
organization’ and ‘order for free’ ideas began to enjoy any notoriety)” notes Pattee’s
biographer Jon Umerez (2001: 164). During this period, Pattee also experimented
with several self-organizing schemes using “molecular automata” models for gen-
erating and replicating situated copolymer sequences through a neural-network-like
“training” or “learning” process, in the hopes of discovering the mechanics behind
the eventual canalization of “conformation-dependant propagation rules” that come
to function as nonholonomic constraints upon the system’s self-maintaining yet
adaptive dynamics (Pattee 1961, 1966).
As a result of this early work in “origin of life” modeling, writes Pattee, “I
eventually recognized a fundamental problem in all such rule-based self-organizing
schemes, namely, that in so far as the organizing depends on internal ﬁxed rules,
the generated structures will have limited potential complexity, and in so far as any
novel organizing arises from the outside environment, the novel structures have no
possibility of reliable replication without a symbolic memory that could reconstruct
the novel organization” (2001: 10). In short, claims Pattee, he came to appreciate the
fact that both Karl Pearson’s central question of 1892 about the distinction between
living and non-living systems, and John von Neumann’s observation in 1966 that
any possibly evolving self-reproducing automaton would require a non-dynamic
description to control its dynamic construction were both instances of “the same
general matter-symbol problem: how to bridge the necessary separation between a
rule and what it controls, a description and what it describes . . .the observer and the
observed, and even the mind and the brain” (2009: p.c., 2001: 10).
From a consideration of these related sets of problems, Pattee arrives, by 1968, at
the ﬁrst of his life’s work organizing principles: the articulation that “an epistemic
cut is required for [the organic functioning of] all dynamical laws” operative in the
construction and maintenance of any living system (1969a). Pattee’s “cut” is not

522
Howard H. Pattee (1926– )
just the operational concession made by the early 20th-century quantum physicists,
however (though that cut may be seen as yet another “special case” of the more
general phenomenon). Rather, writes Pattee:
this ‘cut’ has a primitive origin and is found in all living organisms. It is simply an extreme
case of the distinction made, even by the ﬁrst cells, between stimuli that cannot be corre-
lated and stimuli that can be correlated, or that follow a recognizable pattern. In terms of
information storage, we say that some records of events can have a compressed descrip-
tion (like laws) because of intrinsic correlations, while other records (like initial conditions)
have no shorter description than the records themselves (2001: 13).
Having come to this conclusion by 1969, Pattee’s centrally organizing research
question then became: “whether bridging the epistemic cut could even be addressed
in terms of physical laws” (ibid). Forty years into this project, Pattee writes: “I will
state at the outset that I have not solved this problem. In fact, even after decades
of effort, I have not made much progress other than clarifying the problem” (2005:
283). Yet Pattee is being too modest here by several orders. For while it is true
that neither he nor anyone else has yet to fully bridge what he calls the epistemic
cut between conﬁgurations of physical matter and the ability of that same matter
to “stand for” something other than itself (and, in so doing, exert a causal inﬂu-
ence not exhaustively reducible to its constituent physics), his tireless efforts in
this direction have spawned a generation (or perhaps, now, two) of physicists, sys-
tems theorists, and biosemioticians who have been both inspired and enlightened by
his work.
As one of the founders of the Biophysics programme at Stanford University
in 1958, Pattee’s transdisciplinary approach, and the nature of the questions
that he posed, planted the seeds for the later ﬂowering of such “epistemologi-
cally” concerned research agendas as Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Complex Adaptive
Dynamical Systems Theory, Second-Order Cybernetics, Cognitive Robotics and,
of course, Biosemiotics. In the following decade, his contributions to the Towards
a Theoretical Biology conferences would become widely cited and inﬂuential. Of
the distinguished group of thinkers taking part in the Bellagio conferences, Howard
Pattee was one of the few participants besides Waddington himself to give a paper
at each of the four annual meetings, and the titles of these papers reﬂect Pattee’s
abiding theoretical concerns: The physical basis of coding and reliability in bio-
logical evolution (1968a), Physical problems of heredity and evolution (1969a),
The problem of biological hierarchy (1970) and Laws and constraints, symbols and
languages (1972).
In 1971, Pattee joined the Center for Theoretical Biology at the State
University of New York at Buffalo, working with fellow biophysicist Robert Rosen
(1934–1998) and General Systems theorist Ludwig von Bertalanffy (1901–1972).
His pioneering papers published between 1969 and 1973 developed an evolutionar-
ily coherent Hierarchy Theory – one that can account for the increasing “simplicity”
(or “regularity”) exhibited by evolving systems as their own internal organization
becomes increasingly complex – and these papers, along with the groundbreaking
anthology in Hierarchy Theory that he published in 1973, together remain clas-
sic texts in that still-developing ﬁeld. And as a result of his work as a professor

17
The Physics and Metaphysics of Biosemiotics
523
(now Professor Emeritus) in Systems Science at the State University of New York
at Binghamton since 1975, Pattee’s ideas and inspiration have been realized in a
variety of fruitful ways by his students such as philosopher and neurophysiologist
Peter Cariani, cybernetician and cognitive scientist Cliff Joslyn, biophysicist and
computer scientist Michael Conrad and computational biologist and complex sys-
tems modeller Luis Rocha. Indeed, the multidisciplinary seriousness of his students
says much about Pattee as a teacher.
“This does not mean that anything like a scientiﬁc or philosophical school” has
formed around Pattee per se, writes Jon Umerez in a Special Issue of Biosystems
that is devoted to Pattee’s work, “but that the underlying motivation and the kind
of problems characteristic of Peirce’s thinking are being worked out, within their
own disciplines, by people scattered around both geographically and academically”
(2001: 172).
So, too, has Howard Pattee exerted a formative inﬂuence on post-Sebeokian
biosemiotics, especially as reﬂected in the work of Claus Emmeche and Jesper
Hoffmeyer, who seek, like Pattee, to understand the nature and the origin of
the “epistemic cut” between living systems and their surrounds (see especially
Hoffmeyer and Emmeche’s seminal 1991 paper on “code-duality”, and the dis-
cussion of same by Hoffmeyer in Chapter Nineteen of this volume.) Indeed, in
the selection that follows, Pattee draws very little distinction between the ideas of
“biosemiotics” and his own lifelong project having long averred that the projects
are, in many ways, “studying the same thing, using somewhat different approaches
and language” (2007: p.c.). Most consequentially of all, perhaps, Howard H. Pattee
stands as a premier role model for biosemioticians and for scientists everywhere,
in his lifelong dedication to the principle that the accomplishment of conceptual
precision in articulating one’s questions will, in time, help generate the explanatory
frameworks and vocabularies needed for addressing them.

524
Howard H. Pattee (1926– )
The Physics and Metaphysics
of Biosemiotics (2005)
Abstract Biosemiotics recognizes that life is distinguished from inanimate matter
by its dependence on material construction under the control of coded symbolic
description. This distinction between matter and symbol extends from the origin
of life throughout all of evolution to the distinction in philosophy between brain
and mind and the distinction in physics between laws and measurements. These
distinctions are an epistemic necessity that separates the knower from the known.
The origin of life requires understanding the origin of symbolic control and how
inanimate molecules becomes a message. I cannot solve this problem, but I discuss
the necessary physical conditions that would allow evolvable symbolic control of
matter to exist.
The Problem of Biosemiotics
The concept of Biosemiotics requires making a distinction between two categories,
the material or physical world and the symbolic or semantic world. The problem
is that there is no obvious way to connect the two categories. This is a classical
philosophical problem on which there is no consensus even today. Biosemiotics
recognizes that the philosophical matter-mind problem extends downward to the
pattern recognition and control processes of the simplest living organisms where it
can more easily be addressed as a scientiﬁc problem. In fact, how material structures
serve as signals, instructions, and controls is inseparable from the problem of the ori-
gin and evolution of life. Biosemiotics was established as a necessary complement
to the physical-chemical reductionist approach to life that cannot make this cru-
cial categorical distinction necessary for describing semantic information. Matter
as described by physics and chemistry has no intrinsic function or semantics. By
contrast, biosemiotics recognizes that life begins with function and semantics.
Biosemiotics recognizes this matter-symbol problem at all levels of life from
natural languages down to the DNA. Cartesian dualism was one classical attempt to
address this problem, but while this ontological dualism makes a clear distinction
between mind and matter, it consigns the relation between them to metaphysical
obscurity. Largely because of our knowledge of the physical details of genetic con-
trol, symbol manipulation, and brain function these two categories today appear only
as an epistemological necessity, but a necessity that still needs a coherent explana-
tion. Even in the most detailed physical description of matter there is no hint of any
function or meaning.
The problem also poses an apparent paradox: All signs, symbols, and codes, all
languages including formal mathematics are embodied as material physical struc-
tures and therefore must obey all the inexorable laws of physics. At the same time,
the symbol vehicles like the bases in DNA, voltages representing bits in a computer,
the text on this page, and the neuron ﬁrings in the brain do not appear to be limited

17
The Physics and Metaphysics of Biosemiotics
525
by, or clearly related to, the very laws they must obey. Even the mathematical
symbols that express these inexorable physical laws seem to be entirely free of these
same laws.
The Epistemic Cut
What does calling the matter-symbol problem “epistemological” do for us?
Epistemology by its very meaning presupposes a separation of the world into the
knower and the known. That is, if we can speak of knowledge about something, then
the knowledge representation, the knowledge vehicle, cannot be in the same cate-
gory as what it is about. This separation is often called the epistemic cut (e.g., Pauli
1994). In physics this cut is exempliﬁed by the fact that laws and measurements (or
states) must be separate categories. Why is this fundamental?
The laws are universal and do not depend on the state of the observer (symme-
try principles) while the initial conditions apply to the state of a particular system
and the state of the observer that measures them. The laws of physics are assumed
to be inexorable. That is, the laws do not allow alternatives and therefore the con-
cept of information that is deﬁned by the number of alternatives does not apply to
the laws themselves. A measurement, in contrast, is an act of acquiring informa-
tion about the state of a speciﬁc system that has many alternative states. Two other
explicit distinctions are that the microscopic laws are universal and reversible (time-
symmetric) while measurement is local and irreversible. There is still no question
that the measuring device must obey the laws. Nevertheless, the results of mea-
surement, the timeless semantic information, cannot be usefully described by these
time-dependent reversible laws (e.g., von Neumann 1955).
Physics usually assumes human observers. The origin of life question is: How
did this separation, this epistemic cut, originate? As Hoffmeyer (2000) has pointed
out, the apparently sharp epistemic cut between these categories makes it difﬁcult to
imagine how life began and how these two categories evolved at higher levels. The
epistemic cut appears to be a conceptual as well as a topological discontinuity. It is
difﬁcult to imagine a gradual cut. The problem arises acutely with the genetic code.
A partial code does not work, and a simple code that works as it evolves is hard to
imagine. In fact, this is a universal problem in evolution and even in creative thought.
How does a complex functioning set of constraints originate when no subset of
the constraints appears to maintain the function? How does a reversible dynamics
gradually become an irreversible thermodynamics? How does a paradigm shift from
classical determinism to quantum indeterminism occur gradually? At least in the
case of thought we can trace some of the history, but in the origin of life we have
no adequate history. Even in the case of creative thought, so much goes on in the
subconscious mind that the historical trace has large gaps.
I will state at the outset that I have not solved this problem. In fact, even after
decades of effort I have not made much progress other than clarifying the problem.
My approach has been to start at the most elementary level and with the simplest

526
Howard H. Pattee (1926– )
cases where the two categories of matter and symbol might meet in some objective
sense (Pattee 1969).
The problem is that even the simplest symbol system requires a code and an
interpreter to introduce objective function or meaning to a physical system, and
such a system has no obvious precursors. What I do claim, and what I will discuss,
is that even though symbol systems do not appear to be restricted by physical laws,
nevertheless there exist general lawful conditions that must be met for any symbol
system to exist. There are also good reasons to expect some symbol systems and
codes to be better than others in terms of their evolvability (Pattee 200la).
Simplifying the Problem
Biosemiotics has biological, linguistic, and philosophic components in addition to
the physics of symbols. These can certainly be studied proﬁtably without solv-
ing the matter-symbol problem or the origin of life problem. At the same time
we must not assume that a good biological model with semiotic controls in some
sense advances the basic matter-symbol problem. Biosemiotics also recognizes
that to objectify the concept of the epistemic cut between matter and symbol
we must make explicit what we mean by the acts of observation and interpreta-
tion at the most primitive level. This requirement for an irreducible triad of sign,
interpreter, and referent was a central point of C. S. Peirce’s semiotics. The key
issue is: What is an individual observation? What is an interpretation? Only with
an act like detection, pattern recognition, or observation does the need arise for
symbols as a category distinct from matter. Only with the concept of interpre-
tation of symbols do the concepts of semantic information and communication
arise.
So, the question of the origin of the epistemic cut can be approached by asking:
What are the conditions under which the simplest act of observation and interpreta-
tion take place? This question is ambiguous and a source of controversy even in the
highly evolved domain of physics where it is called the “measurement problem.”
Measurement is a physical process, but the function of measurement, recording spe-
ciﬁc initial conditions, is beyond physical laws to describe. One way to see this is to
ask for the cause of a measurement. What determines when and where a measure-
ment is made? Clearly this decision is not made by the laws, but by the observer.
In the context of the origin of life the question becomes even more ambiguous
because the most primitive observer is not deﬁned. To deﬁne the simplest observer
we might ask: What is the function of an observer? This leads to even more ambigu-
ous questions: What is the simplest function? What is the simplest system where a
physical interaction requires an interpretation because it has acquired signiﬁcance
or meaning beyond simply obeying the universal laws? What is the simplest sys-
tem that requires symbolic communication as a category distinct from physical
interactions?

17
The Physics and Metaphysics of Biosemiotics
527
The Generalized and Simpliﬁed Observer
In classical physics the concept of observer was taken for granted and interpreted
quite literally. Mode
physics changed this view. Maxwell’s demon, relativity, and
quantum theory forced physics to be more explicit about the role of the observer. The
classical literal observer was replaced by a metaphysical, metaphorical, and even
mythical abstraction that was used often in thought experiments. These observers
could not exist except in the imagination. Maxwell imagined an observer as a molec-
ular gatekeeper. Einstein imagined an observer riding a photon. Quantum theory
has imagined all kinds of observers at all levels from decohering wave functions to
Schrodinger’s cat to human consciousness.
What have all these observers in common? In all these cases of real or imagined
observers, the process of observation is itself considered as initiated by a system
separate from the system being observed. It is a terminated event resulting from an
interaction of a local, bounded individual system with a time-dependent dynamical
system. The individual is objectively separable from the surrounding, and the act
of observing is terminated by the appearance of some form of record, memory, or
consequence of the observed event. In other words, while the event being observed
is constantly changing according to the dynamical laws, the observation freezes
some aspect of the system by correlating it with a timeless structure or record. The
mathematician Emil Post (1965) saw the essence of writing symbols the same way.
He said, “Activity in time” is the source of symbols but this, “ . . . activity itself is
frozen into spatial properties.”
There are a lot of ambiguous terms here. What do we mean by an individual?
What is a record or a consequence of an observation? What does it mean to corre-
late some aspect of a dynamical law with a timeless structure? What is a timeless
structure according to physics? To answer these questions requires some discussion
of hierarchies of physical descriptions, since physical description can be extended
from the fundamental microscopic time-dependent dynamical laws to ever-larger
aggregates that have relatively ﬁxed macroscopic shapes. These are called solid bod-
ies, boundary conditions or constraints. They require a different description than the
microscopic laws.
Hierarchies of Description
The legacy of classical reductionism is the support of a common illusion. It is
the illusion that because everything must obey detailed microscopic physical laws,
it follows that such a description of this detail forms the most fundamental or
most “real” explanation for all higher-level behaviors. For at least a century physi-
cists have recognized, sometimes only tacitly, that this is not the case. The ﬁrst
failure of reductionism was thermodynamics with its irreversible laws that can
never be formally derived from or reduced to the reversible microscopic laws.
The conceptual problem is that in the microscopic laws the observables are about
rn

528
Howard H. Pattee (1926– )
individual particles, while the observables in statistical laws are about populations.
These descriptions illustrate the concept of complementarity used in the special
sense that neither of two descriptions can be derived from, nor reduced to the other.
Max Planck (1960) made the point: “For it is clear to everybody that there must
be an unfathomable gulf between a probability, however small, and an absolute
impossibility. . . Thus dynamics and statistics cannot be regarded as interrelated.”
The same complementarity exists between most hierarchical levels of descrip-
tion. The gulf between levels is not always as unfathomable as between determinism
and chance, but the necessity of multiple models remains clear. The lower-level
description details must remain tacit if the higher-level description is to be efﬁ-
cacious. Consequently, the relation between hierarchical levels appears as both
restrictive with respect to the lower-level details, but generative with respect to
higher-level behavior. There is no clearer example than natural language where the
lexical details restrict the potentially inﬁnite alphabetical sequences thereby gener-
ating small enough dictionaries to be practical, and grammars restrict the inﬁnity of
word sequences thereby generating meaning. The choice of word forms is largely
arbitrary as the thousands of languages show, but the constraints of grammar appear
to have strong semantic components and are nearly universal.
Unfortunately, the origin of natural language is itself too obscure to help us with
our more primitive problem. Igor Stravinsky (1970) expressed the apparent paradox
of constraints in the context of composing: “The more constraints one imposes, the
more one frees oneself from the chains that shackle the spirit . . . and the arbitrariness
of the constraint serves only to obtain precision of execution.”
As I mentioned, the next levels in physics above the microscopic and statisti-
cal dynamic levels are the molecular and solid-state levels that can be interpreted
as boundary conditions or constraints that are not usefully described by a tem-
poral dynamics. They are modeled as time-independent or stationary states, even
though we know that they change over longer time scales and are still dynamical
systems at the lower level shorter time scales. Differing time and energy scales are
a common distinction between hierarchical levels in physics (Simon 1962, Pattee
1973).
Levels of Constraint
Constraints form an open-ended category. Just because these structures do not
change relative to the lower level dynamics they enter the lower level dynamics
as boundary conditions on the possible motions. It is only because of this enormous
simpliﬁcation achieved by describing structures as constraints rather than by a sta-
tionary dynamics that descriptions of many large molecular structures and all types
of artifacts and machines are possible.
There are an endless number of structures that can act as semiotic constraints
on a dynamics (Pattee 2001b). They can be loosely classiﬁed as ﬁxed structures,
like crystals, tabletops, and train tracks, and ﬂexible structures, like enzymes,

17
The Physics and Metaphysics of Biosemiotics
529
escapements, and switches. Fixed constraints can limit or direct the path of a dynam-
ical system depending on the shape of the constraint, but to speak of controlling the
path of a dynamical system implies possible alternative paths and therefore con-
trol constraints must have more than one shape. Life is all about controlling rates
of dynamical systems and depends crucially on such allosteric constraints at the
macromolecular level, enzymes being the prime example.
Following Hertz, physicists call such path-dependent, ﬂexible, or allosteric con-
straints nonholonomic, and in most cases they are nonintegrable and modeling them
requires computer simulation. As I will discuss later, the physical existence of such
ﬂexible control constraints requires structures held together by both strong and weak
bonds. The point to remember is that while these ﬂexible molecular constraints
greatly restrict the detailed dynamics at the lower level they generate entirely new
dynamical behavior at the higher levels (Pattee 1973, Hofﬁneyer 1998, Juarrero
1998).
We assume that even the most complex symbol system, like the brain, has a cor-
rect and detailed physical description, at least in principle, but we recognize that
a correct model need not be a useful model. Recall Einstein’s reply when asked
if everything has a correct physical description. He said, “Yes, that is conceivable,
but it would be of no use. It would be a picture with inadequate means, just as if a
Beethoven symphony were presented as a graph of air pressure.” At this cognitive
level is seems clear that physical description is inadequate, but this is too complex
a level for my discussion. Remember, my aim is to ﬁnd the simplest level of com-
plexity where the description of a system in terms of physical laws alone becomes
inadequate or non-explanatory. Or ultimately, at what level of the hierarchy do codes
and symbols and intrinsic meaning enter the material world of physics?
Setting Up the Conditions for Evolution
Flexible constraints can function as codes and symbols but only under very special
conditions. I need to justify why these conditions are necessary. These conditions are
essentially the conditions for open-ended evolvability. This is not helping directly
with the origin problem. No matter how correctly we describe the macromolecules
of organisms in terms of physical models there is as yet no adequate model explain-
ing why collections of these molecules should organize into functional units like
metabolic cycles, memory and codes for self-replication that can support open-
ended evolution. All I can do is set up the problem clearly by specifying the
minimum logical and physical conditions necessary for evolution as we know it.
What preceded that level of complexity is precisely the origin of life problem.
Von Neumann was the ﬁrst to express the logic of self-replication that is capable
of open-ended evolution. His argument was entirely abstract and by no means log-
ically complete. It explicitly abstracted away matter, energy and all physical laws.
I will ﬁrst elaborate on von Neumann’s logic and then I will take up the neces-
sary physical conditions to realize this logic, or what he thought “may be the more

530
Howard H. Pattee (1926– )
important half” of the problem. Finally I will suggest some properties of mem-
ory, codes, symbolic control, and material construction that would promote efﬁcient
evolutionary search and natural selection.
The Logic of Self-replication
Von Neumann’s logical argument for the necessity of symbols as distinct from
dynamics in self-replication were intuitive and require elaboration to clarify his
points. The motivation for his argument was to understand complex systems and
to design computers, but his basic conclusions apply to existing cellular replication.
His logic is all the more remarkable because this work was done from 1948 to 1951
so he did not know in any detail how real cells replicate. Von Neumann began by
observing that the medium of communication that feeds the automaton is completely
different than the automaton itself or its output. This was his recognition that sym-
bols are a different category than matter, what is now called the software-hardware
distinction in computers.
Consequently, in order to implement his simulation of self-replication he needed
to create symbolic parts corresponding to the material parts of the automaton. He
then proposed “axiomatizing” the automaton in some way so that its output is more
like the hardware of the automaton. He saw that this is a problem because it appears
to erase the symbol-matter distinction that he had already recognized as important.
Nevertheless, his later logic conﬁrmed the necessity of a sharp distinction between
the symbols representing instructions or programs and the symbols representing
hardware or dynamical rules used to manipulate the symbols. He also warned: “By
axiomatizing automata in this manner one has thrown half the problem out the win-
dow and it may be the more important half. One does not ask the most intriguing,
exciting and important questions of why the molecules or aggregates that in nature
really occur. . . are the sorts of thing they are, why they are essentially very large
molecules in some cases, but large aggregations in other cases.” I will return to this
more important half later.
Von Neumann then introduced the concept of complexity and the “completely
decisive property of complexity, that there exists a critical size below which the
process of synthesis is degenerative, but above which the phenomenon of synthe-
sis, if properly arranged, can become explosive.” He was thinking of biological
evolution and its open-ended variety. The essential condition here is that the indi-
vidual self that is being replicated must be only one of an indeﬁnite number of
different potential selves all of which can be replicated by the same process. This
raises two questions: (1) How do you describe or represent the individual self that is
being replicated? And (2) What deﬁnes the set of all possible individual selves that
potentially can be replicated?
Logic will get you only so far with these questions. For example, the concept of
replication implies assembling or constructing a new individual that is like another.
Von Neumann realized that how this construction can be done will depend on the

17
The Physics and Metaphysics of Biosemiotics
531
nature of the available parts and on how the parts are to be assembled. He saw that
if the parts were too elementary, like atoms, then the assembly would be a long and
complicated process, while if the parts were too complex, like robots, then there
would be no real problem. He called this the “parts problem” and abstracted away
the matter and energy of real construction by deﬁning some functional operations
on parts, like recognizing, moving, cutting, joining, etc., that are to be symbolically
represented. There is a great amount of arbitrariness in these choices of parts and
operations, but as we shall see, the basic logical separation of symbolic description
and material construction will not depend on these choices.
The more fundamental question is how you make sure the replicated individual
is like the original. How do you make a copy? There are two approaches. One is
to copy the original parts themselves by inspection and then assembling the corre-
sponding part in the copy. The other is to use a description of the original that when
interpreted amounts to instructions enabling the assembly of the parts in the copy.
Both of these methods have advantages and disadvantages that go beyond logic
and depend on the physical nature of space, time, and the nature of the parts. Von
Neumann using heuristic reasoning found that taking advantage of both approaches
gives the most promising results, and in fact we now know that both approaches are
used in all living systems in the way that von Neumann proposed.
Inspection vs. Description
Von Neumann’s use of inspection and description are metaphors of highly evolved
cognitive activities that need to be more precisely deﬁned in the context of the
simplest replicating unit. Copying by inspection means using physical interaction
with the object directly without the use of a code, a translation, or an interpreta-
tion. Casting from a mold or template is such a direct process. Examples of direct
shape-matching processes are the copying of the base sequence in nucleic acids
and the binding of a substrate by an enzyme. I should emphasize here that the
physical interaction of base pairing and substrate binding are not in themselves
functional or semiotic processes. It is only by virtue of their roles in the process
of self-replication that they are interpreted as functional. Such a template might be
interpreted in Peirce’s terms as an iconic sign.
A description, on the other hand, requires more complicated physical interactions
that couple the description to what it stands for, its referent. This interaction in the
context of self-replication can be called a code or an interpretation, and because the
code constraints are themselves constructed from a description they are not deter-
mined by physical necessity. It is implicit in the concept of a code that it must apply
to more than one description. In fact, to allow evolution the code must apply to
an open set of potential descriptions. Again I emphasize that only by virtue of its
potential function for an individual’s survival can this be distinguished as a semiotic
process. This chemical arbitrariness in the coding enzymes Jacques Monod (1971)
calls the “principle of gratuity.” It is also this construction from a description that

532
Howard H. Pattee (1926– )
Barbieri (2004) calls “artifact-making,” a distingishing characteristic of life. It is the
reason that the semantics of genetic symbol systems and the novelties of evolution
have no adequate physical description even though they obey physical laws in every
detail.
It is not clear that von Neumann saw this point since he was concerned with the
logic, not the physics. However, he did argue that a description had the advantage
of being quiescent, relatively time-independent, and free of the dynamics of the sys-
tem it describes. He saw that copying by direct inspection in real time would run
into a problem with any dynamic part that was continually changing in time. What
state would be copied in that case? He also suggested that a complete and detailed
inspection, including inspecting the inspection components themselves, would prob-
ably lead to logical antinomies of self-reference. He did not elaborated on this, but
he may have been thinking of the measurement process in which detailed descrip-
tion leads to an inﬁnite regress unless terminated by an epistemic cut between the
system and the measuring device (von Neumann 1955).
Von Neumann’s Basic Argument
Because of these intuitions, Von Neumann began simply by postulating the exis-
tence of both symbolic and material components in the forms of a description and a
constructor. The constructor would both interpret and construct what was described
using parts from a reservoir. The constructor was universal with respect to an
open-ended set of descriptions one of which was the description of the constructor
itself. In his notation, A was the constructor and <p(A) was the description of the
constructor. If φ(A) was fed to A as instructions, A would construct a copy of itself,
A′. We can symbolize this as φ (A) →A = A′. This is not self-replication because
the description has not been replicated. One might at ﬁrst think that to copy the
description we also need to feed the constructor a description of the description,
φ [φ(A)], but this leads to an inﬁnite regress since that description must also be
copied, and so on.
This leads to the crucial recognition that a symbolic description, whatever form it
may take, has a physical structure that is independent of its interpretation. To read
the description means to interpret the description. To copy the description means
not to interpret the description but to copy only its physical structure. Since the
description is quiescent, this can be done by inspection or by some template pro-
cess. The constructor can only interpret the description, so it is necessary to add
another component, B, called the copier and its description φ (B). We then can
write φ (A + B) →(A + B) = φ

A′ + B′
→

A′ + B′
. This is almost self-
replication except for the ambiguity of how the material hardware output of the
constructor A connects up with the symbolic descriptive output of the copier B. In
other words, what is missing is just the answer to the classical problem of how the
symbolic description is related to the material construction. Von Neumann “solved”
this by creating a new control component, C, that inserts the new description into

17
The Physics and Metaphysics of Biosemiotics
533
the new hardware constructor and separates the offspring from the parent. This
amounted to what is called the operating system of a computer that takes care of
the software-hardware housekeeping. This is not a clear solution. In the cell we
know that the control of cell division is a very complex process that is not yet fully
understood.
The essential evolutionary consequence of this logic is that now any addi-
tional description, D, of some new structure or function when added to this basic
description will be constructed and incorporated into all future generations:
φ (A+B+C+D) →(A + B + C) = φ

A′ + B′ + C′ + D′
→

A′ + B′ + C′ + D′
This is as far as von Neumann’s logic takes us. The main point of his logic is that
open-ended evolution requires more than a complex time-dependent dynamics and
complex chemical reactions. There must be a time-independent passive memory that
by means of a coded description controls the dynamical rates of speciﬁc construc-
tions or chemical syntheses. What I will now take up are the physical requirements
that would allow such a complicated symbol-matter logical scheme to actually work
in a reasonably effective way. I repeat that this is not solving the origin problem. Von
Neumann himself had no clue. He thought, “That such complex aggregations should
occur in the world at all is a mystery of the ﬁrst magnitude.” In my view, the place
to look for clues is in the actual physical requirements of symbol systems where we
may imagine simpler systems than we ﬁnd in today’s highly evolved organisms that
satisfy these requirements.
Physical Requirements for Efﬁcient Memory
The physical conditions necessary for memory storage are relatively simple to state
as contrasted to the conditions for writing and reading of memory. The ﬁrst con-
dition is that there exist many inherently equiprobable constraint structures with
adequate stability. Equiprobable means that the structures are energy degenerate or
the energy of each state is the same. These states need not be exactly the same
energy as long as the energy differences do not signiﬁcantly affect the setting of the
state by writing or the communication of the state by reading. Linear copolymers
are the simplest common physical structures satisfying these conditions.
Such relatively time-independent memory structures function as long-term, high
capacity storage. They can exist physically in one, two, three dimensions, or n-
dimensional networks if deﬁned by connectivity. The advantages of the linear
sequence memory, like nucleic acids and Turing machine tapes, and language text
are (1) open-endedness or extendable capacity, (2) uniformity and simplicity of
writing and reading, including ease of random access, (3) universal coding for all
sequences, (4) storage is passive and relatively isolated from the dynamics under
its control. In the context of the origin of life, copolymer chains are the simplest
abiogenic structures that have the necessary stability and potential memory capacity.

534
Howard H. Pattee (1926– )
The disadvantages of linearity are (1) lack of parallel processing or associa-
tive access, (2) low density of information storage, and (3) the necessity for
an explicit code to couple one-dimensional energy degenerate sequences to the
energy-dependent three-dimensional dynamics.
One can also speak of analog memory and codes as in analog computation that
does not involve a language. This has been suggested by Hoffmeyer and Emmeche
(1991), Juarrero (1998), Hoffmeyer (1998) and Barbieri (2003) in contrast to dis-
crete or digital memories and codes. The problem with analogs is that they are
all special purpose structures like individual molecular messengers that have lim-
ited informational capacity and must be interpreted individually. An autocatalytic
or metabolic network may be interpreted as containing an implicit informational
dynamics, but lacking an explicit passive memory structure and code it is difﬁ-
cult demonstrate that they are more than an analogy or metaphor. In other words,
how do we show that a complete description of the dynamics is inadequate to
explain the behavior if there is no explicit non-dynamic memory structure? On
the other hand, as Hoffmeyer (2000) suggests, some form of implicit analog
codes may have existed as precursors of the explicit discrete codes of present
life.
Physical Requirements for Coding and Construction
In even the simplest existing cells the steps from the symbolic base sequence in
DNA to a functioning enzyme are too complex to have originated without simpler
intermediate stages. However, to control construction or synthesis, even the sim-
plest one-dimensional discrete-state memory storage that exists by virtue degenerate
energy states, must somehow control the rates of speciﬁc dynamical interactions.
This means that the linear degeneracy must be broken. This must be done by new
interactions between the linear storage elements. In present cells this is a com-
plex process that requires several steps. First, the DNA sequence is transcribed
to messenger RNA by template copying. Next the coding enzymes and transfer
RNAs translate the base triplet code to the corresponding amino acids that are then
joined in sequence by the messenger RNA and ribosome machinery. Finally, the
one-dimensional sequence folds into a functioning enzyme. In this process there
are cases of descriptions and constructions by both template inspection and coded
descriptive translations.
The discovery of enzymatic RNA made it possible to imagine a much simpler
translation process in which RNA can function both as a constructing enzyme and
as a symbolic description of an enzyme. By description I mean a passive structure
that can be copied by template inspection, and by construction I mean a dynamic
catalytic process that joins molecules by strong, covalent bonds. The main point is
that this double function is only possible by virtue of the two conﬁgurations of RNA,
the passive one-dimensional sequence memory and the folded three-dimensional
active ribozyme.

17
The Physics and Metaphysics of Biosemiotics
535
The Physics and Semiotics of Folding
Folding transformations are the most signiﬁcant semiotic process in all living
systems. Folding is fundamental because it is the process that transforms the pas-
sive symbolic informational sequences into dynamic rate-controlling constraints.
Physically to describe folding in any structure requires two types of bonds, strong
bonds that preserve the passive topological structure of what is folded, and weaker
bonds that acting together hold the active folded structure in place. This is just
the deﬁnition of folding. For example, to fold a sheet of paper means form-
ing a three-dimensional shape without changing the two-dimensional topology of
the sheet by tearing or gluing. As long as the strong-bond topological sequence
structure is energy degenerate it can serves as an informational constraint or a
passive memory. Folding removes this degeneracy by allowing new weak bond
interactions between the elements resulting in an active enzyme. A physical descrip-
tion of protein folding is an energy minimization process or a relaxation of many
weak bond interactions under the constraints of the strong bonds holding the linear
sequence together (Frauenfelder and Wolynes 1994).
How should we describe the semiotics of this process? What I want to avoid
is confusing the physics and the semiotics. First, I am deﬁning a condition for
symbolic information storage as a physically indeterminate (energy degenerate)
structure. I assume that all symbol vehicles obey physical laws and have, in prin-
ciple, a physical description, but that does not imply that they are physically deter-
mined. Quite the contrary is true. Such a degenerate sequence structure can have
an immense number of physically indeterminate sequences. Therefore the inter-
pretation or function of any such informational sequence is literally metaphysical
(beyond physics).
It is important to understand that from a physical point of view the actual folding
process is an entirely physical process of minimizing the energy under the con-
straints of the sequence. The strong-bonded sequence can be called informational
because it is one of many physically equivalent alternative sequences. The folding
itself is not informational because no new information is added in the process of
minimizing the energy. (There are special cases where folding information may be
added from scaffolding molecules.)
Semiotic Closure
The question is: How do we deﬁne the system that is interpreting the information?
I need an objective criterion for what “self ” is doing the interpreting, because there
are innumerable energy degenerate structures that are not descriptions and many
catalytic events that are not functional. Such a criterion must answer the question:
What is the nature of the individual organization that must reﬁne physical descrip-
tion with an interpretation? Such a criterion is satisﬁed by a physical implementation
of the logical “self ” that reads and interprets descriptions in von Neumann’s formal
self-replication.

536
Howard H. Pattee (1926– )
The essential logical requirement for self-replication that von Neumann
described is that all the components that implement description, translation, and
construction are themselves described, translated and constructed within the “self”
that is being replicated. This amounts to a logical closure that deﬁnes a “self.”
Physically this requires elaboration. There is more to the strong and weak bond
requirement than the ability of the weak bonds to cause the strong bonds to fold into
a functioning enzyme.
The strong bonds also stabilize the passive memory and the integrity of the pri-
mary structure of enzymes. The weak bonds bind the enzyme to its substrate and
control the rate of catalyzed strong bond formation. In effect, the strong bonds form
the skeleton for both descriptive and constructive molecules while the coordinated
organization of weak bonds deﬁne the shapes necessary to control the strong bonds,
both the strong bond folding and individual strong bond formation or breaking.
These are the physical conditions required to implement von Neumann’s logical
closure. I have called this semantic closure, but Luis Rocha (2001) has more accu-
rately called it semiotic closure because its realization also includes the syntax and
pragmatic physical controls.
This complex interrelationship of strong and weak bonds is the minimum phys-
ical requirement that allows the realization of von Neumann’s quiescent symbolic
description and dynamic material construction. Of course the actual physical forces
come in more than two strengths and evolution has reﬁned structures at many hier-
archical levels using different types of forces. Many types of strong and weak bonds
enter into the complex process of folding (e.g., Wolynes et al. 1995).
The Minimal Interpreter
Based on the concept of semiotic closure, I would deﬁne an interpreter as a semiot-
ically closed localized (bounded) system that survives or selfreproduces in an open
environment by virtue of its memory-stored controls and constructions. That dis-
tinguishes interpreters from inanimate physical systems that evolve dynamically
simply because they follow the memoryless state-determined laws of nature. I
believe that this minimal concept of interpreter is consistent with Ghiselin’s (1997)
more elaborate deﬁnition of an “individual” that also applies to higher levels, like
species, that are not adequately described by physical laws. However, there is still a
problem with deﬁning one individual interpreter.
Symbols exist in memory, but they are not symbols in isolation. Symbols are
recognized in an individual interpreting system just because they function in propa-
gating the system. But we cannot stop there. We immediately see that “propagating
a system” is ambiguous. The individual is not enough. The whole idea of evolu-
tion depends on a population of individuals that can differ in their memories. This
leads directly to the central issue of evolution: What kinds of symbolic descriptions,
control constraints and material constructions promote survival of populations? Of
course there is no complete answer to this question except the course of evolution

17
The Physics and Metaphysics of Biosemiotics
537
itself. All we can do is look carefully at what is actually going on in existing organ-
isms, and see if we can discover some answers to von Neumann’s question of why
the molecules are the sorts of thing they are.
Requirements for Efﬁcient Search and Selection
After asking this question von Neumann remarked that it was “a very peculiar
range” for the parts since they were many orders of magnitude larger than the phys-
ically elementary particles. He did not discuss this except to suggest that the size
had to do with the reliability of control since in automata there is a direct correla-
tion between number and size of parts and reliability. A certain level of reliability
is certainly one requirement in order to prevent error catastrophe, but another way
to look at the question is in terms of function. How small could an enzyme be and
accurately bind a substrate and catalyze a speciﬁc single bond. It would have to be
a large enough structure to establish a shape with the necessary speciﬁcity to rec-
ognize a substrate by folding up a linear chain. Simple models suggest that of the
order of 100 amino acids is necessary.
This size creates two fundamental problems. The ﬁrst problem is that the number
of copolymer sequences of such lengths is immense, well beyond actual enumera-
tion. One of the oldest, non-religious arguments against Darwinian evolution is the
apparent improbability of chance mutations producing any successful protein, let
alone a species. This is still an argument of “intelligent design” advocates. This
argument is based on the assumption of the sparseness of functional sequences and
the immensity of the search space. The weakness of this argument is that the actual
probabilities of the events in question are largely unknown.
Formulated in biosemiotic terms, to address this problem we need to know what
fraction of the innumerable potential symbol strings in a genetic memory has some
meaning or function when expressed by a population of individual interpreters.
We need to know how the enormous space of sequences maps into the space of
biological functions. The second classical problem is that functions appear to be
discretely separated. That is, one function does not smoothly transform into another
function. This results in the so-called trapping problem on a function or ﬁtness
landscape.
Both these problems have been studied extensively, greatly assisted by the use
of computational models. Of course, there are no pure theoretical answers. Some
basic empirical knowledge is required of the actual polymers that form the mem-
ory sequence space, the nature of codes that map to protein sequences, the nature
of folding, and the nature of the constructive or controlling enzymes. The auspi-
cious discovery of molecular genetics was that many mutations are neutral with
respect to function and ﬁtness (Kimura 1983). Along with the redundancy in the
genetic code, this neutrality permits searches over a wide region near a function
optimum or a local ﬁtness peak thereby alleviating the trapping problem. Trapping
is also greatly reduced by the large number of saddle regions that increases with

538
Howard H. Pattee (1926– )
the dimensionality of the memory sequence space (e.g., Kanerva 1988). This lends
weight to the concept of quasispecies and the advantages of mutation rates near the
error threshold (Eigen 1971, Eigen and Schuster 1979).
This search problem has been studied extensively for the simple RNA worlds of
sequences and their folding (e.g., Schuster et al. 1994, Schuster 1998, Crutchﬁeld
and Schuster 2003). Again the mapping of passive memory sequences to shapes that
could function as enzymes appears to be highly redundant with many sequences
resulting the same three-dimensional shape. Furthermore, these sequences are dis-
tributed more or less uniformly over the entire sequence space. This means that a
random search need not ﬁnd just one needle in a haystack, but only one of many
needles uniformly distributed over the whole haystack. That is, wherever a random
search begins in sequence space, it is likely that a description of a useful molecule
will be found nearby.
Analogies and Disanalogies of Genetics with Natural Language
Biosemiotics is the study of all forms of signiﬁcation and communication. It rec-
ognizes that life is distinguished from the nonliving world by its dependence on
signs. However, of the innumerable examples of pattern recognition, recording,
signaling, and communication throughout all levels of living organizations only
two clear examples of open-ended, creative language systems exist, the genetic
language and natural languages. These languages can be characterized by (1) a
small, ﬁxed alphabet, (2) one-dimensional expressions in discrete sequences, (3) an
immense sequences space with no signiﬁcant restriction or bias from physical laws,
(4) expressions not limited in what they can potentially describe by what currently
exists, (5) the interpretation of sequences or their function is complex requiring
highly parallel dynamic interactions. In the case of genetic sequences, the essential
step is folding in which many strong constraints and weaker forces act in parallel.
In the case of the brain, millions of neurons are involved in interpreting even the
simplest expressions.
Natural language structure illustrates the strong and weak bond principle, not
with a hierarchy of physical forces but with a hierarchy of rules. The lexical rules
are the most rigid beginning with the alphabet and the words in the lexicon. The
grammar rules are weaker than the lexical rules in the sense that syntax cannot
control or modify the alphabet or the dictionary. The semantics of the text does
not generally alter syntax. We usually assume our writing will not change the basic
meanings of words or the grammar rules depending on what we write. Similarly the
sequence or meaning of the code’s base triplets is not changed by the functions of
enzymes they describe. However, both languages have evolved exceptions to these
rules, the genetic system with special editing enzymes, reverse transcription and
cutting and splicing, and natural language with freedom to add new words and to
violate grammar rules with ﬁgures of speech.
Of course there are enormous differences between these languages both in their
embodiments, their stability, and in their range of meanings which one would

17
The Physics and Metaphysics of Biosemiotics
539
certainly expect considering they originated only at the very beginning and the end
of the evolutionary time scale. The genetic language began with the origin of life,
and it took 4 billion years of evolution to create brains with the capability to create
natural languages. The genetic language can be called highly successful in creating
adaptive functions that keep life going over this enormous time span. We often refer
to natural language as the deﬁning characteristic of human intelligence. The power
of language has dominated history and shaped all our cultures, but whether it will
tum out to be a longterm evolutionary success is not at all obvious. Human language
has not existed for more than 100,000 years and it is quite possible that it has become
both too powerful and too far removed from natural selection to beneﬁt the species.
It is already attempting to adapt genetic messages to human desires rather than to the
biological necessities for survival. Assuming humans survive the dangers of natural
language, one wonders what higher level of language might evolve. If humans do
not survive natural language, one wonders what alternative biosemiotic structures
might take its place.
References
Barbieri, M. (2003). The Organic Codes. An Introduction to Semantic Biology. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Barbieri, M. (2004). Life is “artifact-making.” Journal of Biosemiotics 1(1), 81–102.
Crutchﬁeld, J. P., Schuster, P. (Eds.) (2003). Evolutionary Dynamics: Exploring the Interplay of
Selection, Accident, Neutrality, and Function. New York: Oxford University Press.
Eigen, M. (1971). Self-organization of matter and the evolution of biological macromolecules.
Naturwissenschaften 58, 465–523.
Eigen, M., Schuster, P. (1979). The Hypercycle – A Principle of Natural Self-organization. Berlin:
Springer-Verlag.
Frauenfelder, H., Wolynes, P. G. (1994). Biomolecules: where the physics of complexity and
simplicity meet. Physics Today 47(2) (Feb. 1994), 58–64.
Ghiselin, M. T. (1997). Metaphysics and the Origin of Species. Albany, NY: University of New
York Press.
Hoffmeyer, J., Emmeche, C. (1991). Code duality and the semiotics of nature. In: Anderson, M.,
Merrell, F. (Eds.) On Semiotic Modeling. New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2000). Code-duality and the epistemic cut. In: Chandler, J., Van de Vijver, G. (Eds.)
Closure Emergent Organizations and their Dynamics. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, Vol. 90 l. pp. 175–l86.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1998). The unfolding semiosphere. In: Vijver, G. v. d, Salthe, S., Delpos, M. (Eds.)
Biological and Epistemological Perspectives on Selection and Self-organization. Dordrecht:
Kluwer.
Juarrero, A. (1998). Causality as constraint. In: Vijver, G. v. d., Salthe, S., Delpos, M. (Eds.)
Evolutionary Systems. Biological and Epistemological Perspectives on Selection and Self-
organization. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Kanerva, P. (1988). Sparse Distributed Memory. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kimura, M. (1983). The Neutral Theory of Molecular Evolution. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Monod, J. (1971). Chance and Necessity. New York: Knopf.
Pattee, H. H. (1969). How does a molecule become a message? Developmental Biology Supplement
3, 1–16.

540
Howard H. Pattee (1926– )
Pattee, H. H. (1973). The physical basis and origin of hierarchical control. In: Pattee, H.
(Ed.) Hierarchy Theory: The Challenge of Complex Systems. New York: George Braziller,
pp. 73–108.
Pattee, H. H. (2001a). The physics of symbols: bridging the epistemic cut. BioSystems 60, 5–2 l.
Pattee, H. H. (2001b). Irreducible and complementary semiotic forms. Semiotica 134(1–4),
341–358.
Post, E. (1965). In: Davis, M. (Ed.) The Undecidable. New York: Rowen Press, p. 420.
Planck, M. (1960). Survey of Physical Theory. New York: Dover, pp. 64, 66.
Pauli, W. (1994) The philosophical signiﬁcance of the idea of complementarity. In: Enz, C. P.,
von Meyenn, K. (Eds.) Writings on Physics and Philosophy. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, pp.
35–48 (see p. 41). First published under the title “Die philosophische Bedeutung der Idee der
Komplementarität” in Experientia 6(Heft 2), pp. 72–75, 1950.
Rocha, L. (2001). Evolution with material symbol systems. BioSystems 60(1–3), 95–l2l.
Schuster, P., Fontana, W., Stadler, P. E., Hofacker, I. L. (1994). From sequences to shapes and
back: a case study in RNA secondary structures. Proceedings of Royal Society London B 255,
279–284.
Schuster, P. (1998). Evolution in an RNA world. In: Ordand, M. G., Stocken, L. A. (Eds.)
Foundations of Modern Biochemistry, Vol. IV: More Landmarks in Biochemistry. Stamford,
CT: JAI Press, pp. 159–198.
Simon, H. A. (1962). The architecture of complexity: hierarchic systems. Proceedings of the
American Philosophical Society 106 (Dec. 1962), 467–482. Reprinted in Simon, H. A. (1996).
The Sciences of the Artiﬁcial. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 183–216.
Stravinski, I. (1970). Poetics of Music in the Form of Six Lessons (The Charles Eliot Norton
lectures). Cambridge: Harvard University Press, Bilingual Edition (June 1, 1970).
Von Neumann, J. (1966). Theory of Self-reproducing Automata. Edited and completed by Burks,
A. W. Urbana and London: University of Illinois Press, pp.74–87, 121–123.
Von Neumann, J. (1955). Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, pp. 4l8––42 l.
Wolynes, P. G., Onuchic, J. N., Thirumalai, D. (1995). Navigating the folding routes. Science 267,
1619–1620.

Chapter 18
Excerpts from The Symbolic Species
Terrence Deacon (1950– )
Introduction and Commentary: Terrence Deacon
The self that is the source of one’s experience of intentionality; the self that is judged by
itself as well as by others for its moral choices, the self that worries about its impending
departure from the world, this self is a symbolic self. It is a ﬁnal irony that it is the virtual,
not actual, reference that symbols provide, which gives rise to this experience of self. This
most undeniably real experience is a virtual reality.
T. Deacon (1997: 452)
In 1866, the recently formed Societe Linguistique de Paris passed an ofﬁcial
resolution banning the presentation of any further papers regarding the origins of
human language. The nature of the inquiry itself, it was decided, lacked even the
possibility of scientiﬁc certainty – and all work pertaining to it was likewise dis-
missed on the grounds of being empirically irresolvable, incorrigibly speculative
and unproductively divisive. Almost 150 years later, neurobiologist and biological
anthropologist Terrence W. Deacon would author an empirically vigorous and con-
ceptually groundbreaking study of language origins challenging many of the core
assumptions underlying both the biological innatist and the evolutionary psycholog-
ical theories of language evolution that had found their way into scientiﬁc discourse
since the Societe’s inquiry-blocking resolution.
Born in Seattle, Washington in 1950, Deacon received his bachelor’s degree
from Fairhaven College of Western Washington University. During this time,
Deacon also studied communications with systems theorist and Gregory Bateson
protégé, Anthony Wilden (1935– ) who was then teaching at Simon Fraser
University in British Columbia. While still an undergraduate, Deacon had already
authored a groundbreaking work of synthesis and scholarship entitled “Semiotics
and Cybernetics: The Relevance of C. S. Peirce” as his senior thesis in 1976.
Anticipating his own later arguments about the hierarchal nature of reference,
Deacon, in this early document, rechristens the Peircean categories of Firstness,
Secondness and Thirdness as potential, instantive and systemic relations, respec-
tively, in order to show the systematic “order by which signs can be progressively
constructed from simpler forms, and to which they can be analyzed or interpreted”
(1976: 30).
541
D. Favareau, Essential Readings in Biosemiotics, Biosemiotics 3,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9650-1_18, C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010

542
Terrence Deacon (1950– )
Reviewing this early thesis afresh in 2004, Deacon now considers it “very much
a youthful student’s document” and notes that he had written this text “before I had
realized that the icon-index-symbol relation should be conceived in a Batesonian
logical type framework, which became the background for the Symbolic Species
argument.”1 Moreover, adds Deacon, “when I wrote The Symbolic Species (1996)
two decades later, although I was a longtime serious Peircean convert, I did my
very best to absolutely minimize Peircean terminology and philosophy without
sacriﬁcing the underlying theory, in order to make it accessible” (2008: p.c.).
For all its author’s disclaimers, however, this early document remains an inci-
sive and still prescient text, one that is all the more impressive given both the age
at which – and the age in which – it was written. For in 1976, the synthesis of
Peircean and Batesonian ideas that Jesper Hoffmeyer would introduce to the scien-
tiﬁc community as constituting biosemiotics still lay another 20 years away – and
Deacon, at the time of developing this framework of analysis, was no more aware of
the parallel project for the scientiﬁc understanding of sign-use that Hoffmeyer was
developing (but not yet publishing) in Denmark, than Hoffmeyer would have been
of the writings of the American college student Terrence Deacon at that time. Nor
had Deacon come to his appreciation of the applicability of Peircean relations to
biological inquiry through an acquaintance with the work of Thomas A. Sebeok and
his colleagues at that time. Rather, and again like Hoffmeyer, Deacon seems to have
needed to creatively employ the conceptual tools provided by Peircean sign-logic
in order to better understand and explain the workings of the biological world. And
it is this project that he has pursued with a singular intensity and interdisciplinar-
ity ever since, educating himself in virtually every area of the life sciences from
animal ethology to molecular biology, and wedding this knowledge with insights
from philosophy, linguistics, anthropology, cybernetics, information theory and the
modeling of self-organizing systems.
After completing his undergraduate studies, Deacon enrolled in a graduate
program at Harvard University with the intention of studying the unpublished
works of Charles Sanders Peirce that are archived in Harvard’s Houghton Library.
Because he ultimately found it difﬁcult to interest an advisor in this effort, however,
Deacon eventually shifted his focus and enrolled in Harvard’s doctoral program
in Biological Anthropology, where he completed his Ph.D. thesis detailing the
circuitry of the neural homologues of language areas in monkey brains – while
independently continuing his studies of Peirce on the side. In 1984, Deacon was
offered an assistant professorship at Harvard, where he continued to work in both
neurobiologically-based Biological Anthropology and Peirce studies until 1992,
1 Professor Deacon was generous enough to provide me with a copy of this long-ago written
text, after the fact its existence came up in casual conversation at the Gregory Bateson Centennial
Conference that Jesper Hoffmeyer was hosting at the University of Copenhagen in 2005. A pub-
lished version from 1976 does exist (see the reference list for this section), although copies are
extremely rare. However, Deacon is willing to provide an electronic copy to anyone sending him a
request for it, and this and many of his other seminal papers can be downloaded from his website
at http://teleodynamics.com.

18
Excerpts from The Symbolic Species
543
when he accepted positions at both Harvard Medical School and Boston University.
After publishing The Symbolic Species, his groundbreaking synthesis of Peirce and
Biological Anthropology, in 1997, Deacon moved to the University of California at
Berkeley in 2002, where he currently holds senior positions in both Anthropology
and Neuroscience.
The explanatory power of multidisciplinarity is integral to Deacon’s work,
as reﬂected in his recent self-description of his research interests, wherein he
lists: “investigations into the neural basis and evolution of language; vertebrate
brain evolution and development; neuronal transplantation; evolutionary theory and
social-psychological-biological interactions; semiotic theory; emergence, complex
systems, self-organizing processes. My neurobiological research,” he writes, “is
focused on determining the nature of the human divergence from typical primate
brain anatomy, the cellular-molecular mechanisms producing this difference, and
the correlations between these anatomical differences and special human cognitive
abilities, particularly language. In pursuit of these questions I have used a variety
of laboratory approaches including the tracing of axonal connections, quantita-
tive analysis of regions of different species brains, and cross-species fetal neural
transplantation” (2007:o.l.).
Deacon’s empirical investigations into the brain’s neuronal organization and
its evolution across species – together with his concomitant theoretical investiga-
tions into the organization of organismic sign-processes and their evolution across
species – has, most recently, been augmented by his computer-modelling investiga-
tions into the thermodynamic emergence of persistent and reproducible form per se.
Together, these constitute the three bases upon which he hopes to articulate “a scien-
tiﬁcally precise theory of emergent dynamics”. Such a theory, hopes Deacon, would
at last “complete Charles Darwin’s [self-described] ‘unﬁnished one long argument’
[by revealing] the relationships between natural selection and self-organization pro-
cesses, the origins of life and proto-life, the emergent dynamics of neural processing
underlying conscious experience, and the emergence of teleological and semiotic
processes” both in nature and in that particular species of nature we call culture
(ibid).
Situated thusly, Deacon’s widely-inﬂuential The Symbolic Species: The
Co-Evolution of Language and the Brain (1997) is but one part of a projected trilogy
of monographs aimed at articulating with scientiﬁc precision the naturalistic history
that led “from matter to mattering.” Deacon’s soon-to-be released Homunculus: The
Emergence of Mind from Matter will constitute the second volume in this series,
and the tentatively titled Golem: Making Things Think will be the third. Reading
the titles in reverse order of their appearance reveals the explanatory scope and
width of Deacon’s project. Reading the one volume that has now appeared reveals
its explanatory breadth and depth.
In The Symbolic Species, Deacon synthesizes ﬁndings from anthropology, lin-
guistics and comparative neuroanatomy, as well as from his own laboratory research
in cellular and molecular biology, to inform his Peircean semiotic approach to the
question of language evolution. In it, he carefully delineates how the iconic and
indexical sign-processing abilities discoverable in other species are a necessary, but

544
Terrence Deacon (1950– )
not sufﬁcient, stepping-stone to the eventual evolution of self-consciously symbolic
human language use – and how human brains and minds evolved their unique char-
acteristics in response to the special demands imposed by increasingly symbolic
communication and interpretation practices. “To explain this difference” between
human and all other animal forms of sign-processing and cognition, writes Deacon,
“and to describe the evolutionary circumstances that brought it about, are the
ultimate challenges in the study of human origins” (1997: 22).
In the selection that follows, Deacon begins with a consideration of the oft-asked
question: “What is it that separates human cognitive ability from the cognitive
abilities of all other animals?” Along with many another thinker, Deacon’s short
answer is: “language.” Language alone, Deacon argues, provides the cognitive tools
for experientially transcending the animal prison of the physically pre-given, the
immediately consequential, and the eternal here-and-now. It does this by allowing
us to knowingly re-combine representational tokens of that reality – and all of its
counterfactual possibilities – “off-line”. Mastery in the manipulation of such vir-
tual possibility space interposes an unprecedented degree of deliberation into the
stimulus-response-consequence cycles of animal being, allowing for the eventual
development of logic, mathematics, technology, art – and for the species-speciﬁc
experience of personally narrative “selves” (1997: 254–278; 340–349).
Deacon parts ways with the majority of contemporary language theorists,
however, in averring that the fundamental phenomenon underlying and enabling
“language” is not its syntax, but the human capacity for symbolically referential
understanding. Accordingly, Deacon argues that neither language-speciﬁc genetic
mutations, nor human-unique brain structures are at the heart of the human lanu-
age capacity, and that although common computation-like rules appear to govern
syntax (and these, in turn, interact with the socially invented codes of arbitrary dif-
ference and différance), these phenomena are themselves but the later biological
and social evolutionary consequences of symbolic ability. An evolutionary shift in
early hominid social relations necessitated the development of a shared culture of
symbolic reference, argues Deacon, and this began a coevolutionary dynamic that
led both to changes in the brain and to the complexiﬁcation of language, recursively
(1997: 193–252; 349–410).
Thus, while acknowledging that human brains have undergone a number of
important evolutionary changes since the time of our pre-linguistic ancestors,
Deacon draws upon a wealth of neurobiological and anthropological evidence to
argue against theories that “invert evolutionary cause and effect” (1997: 53). He cri-
tiques theories that treat language as a “lucky after-effect of general intelligence”
or else the accident of some miraculous “mutation” that literally endowed humans
with the formal computation processes required for language (cf. Chomsky’s posited
“language acquisition device” and “universal grammar”) – and resists even moreso
the posit of an internal, a-priori “mental language” (cf. Fodor’s “mentalese”) that
is hard-wired into, and remains Locked away inside of, individual human brains.
Rather, argues Deacon, the species-speciﬁc capacity for symbolic “language” use
arose as, and remains still, the agent-internalized “orientation” to an externally exist-
ing system of meaning-making to which human brains have had to (and still have to)
adapt. “Symbolic thought does not come innately built in” to us, writes Deacon, “but

18
Excerpts from The Symbolic Species
545
develops by internalizing the symbolic processes that underlies language” (1997:
21–46; 411–464; 22).
It is precisely at this point, however, that the reader who has become accus-
tomed to thinking of “language” as the product of a computer-like brain’s built-in
coding-and-decoding mechanism, or as a purely cultural construct, unmoored in any
way to the material facts of biology and animal evolution, comes up against a seem-
ing paradox: If human thought is the internalization of external language use, then
what is human language use an externalization of – if not human thought?
Deacon’s answer to this paradox is a scientiﬁcally rigorous updating of the
inﬁnitely generative, yet fundamentally reality-grounded sign logic of Charles
Sanders Peirce. Carefully explicating Peirce’s notion of a symbolic relation as a
nested hierarchy of iconic (perceptual), indexical (associative) and higher-order,
rule-bound (conventional) referential relations, Deacon – very much in the spirit
of Peirce – shows how the employment of such a system as one’s primary way of
knowing about the world comes to manifest itself as an experiential heterarchy, or
emergent system, of signiﬁcant relations (as depicted schematically in Fig. 18.3 of
the selection that follows).
Fundamental, to Deacon’s argument is a reworking of evolutionary psycholo-
gist James Mark Baldwin’s (1861–1934) theory of organic selection, which argues
that the very context wherein natural selection takes place can itself be modiﬁed by
the behavior of its inhabitants – and that this modiﬁcation may, in turn, generate
subsequent new sets of selection pressures. Yet in invoking a Baldwinian theory of
language evolution, Deacon speciﬁcally resists what he refers to as “the Lamarkian
caricature” that Baldwin’s idea is often confused with – i.e., that assumes a sim-
ple transfer of adaptative response (cf. Pinker’s “language instinct”) from outside
to inside the genome (1997: 326). “No innate rules, no innate general principles,
no innate categories [for language] can be built in by evolution,” writes Deacon,
because for such emergent symbolic relations are not decomposable into invari-
ant cross-generational mappings between language structures and brain structures
(1997: 339). Biologically grammar could no more evolve than could biologically
innate words, argues Deacon. Instead, what human beings have evolved is “a con-
stellation of many indirectly related contributory inﬂuences and biases – and not an
innate replica of a prior facultative behavioral response” (1997: 326).
This constellation of bias and inﬂuences constitutes an orientation – or learning
emphasis – for a mode of being-in-the-world which has in a sense become a pre-
dominantly virtual world of our own evolutionary creation. An expanded pre-frontal
cortex arose as a response to the unique processing demands of community-
grounded symbol use, Deacon argues, and has resulted in a “front-heavy” cognitive
bias which induces us to “recode our experiences, to see everything as a representa-
tion”, to “always expect there to be a deeper hidden logic” to “ruminate, question,
wonder and infer” (1997:436)....and then to construct relationships, systems, soci-
eties and selves as answers to those questions and those inferences. In so doing, we
change our niche – and in return, our increasingly symbolic niche changes us.
Surely, Deacon argues, language and the brain have co-evolved. Yet for all its
conceptual depth, groundbreaking synthesis and explanatory rigor, Deacon does
not lose sight of the fact that the arguments presented The Symbolic Species can

546
Terrence Deacon (1950– )
only explain one part of a still larger puzzle regarding the puzzling ontological rela-
tionships between “things” and “thought.” For the biological systems whose use of
signs is examined in The Symbolic Species – i.e., animals and humans – are sys-
tems that are already purposeful, that come “pre-equipped” with sensory and motor
capabilities, and that have been immersed in long histories of sign-processing by
the time that the scientist comes to consider them. Having presented a compelling
and scientiﬁcally rigorous argument about how such biological systems’ sign sys-
tems are organized and operate, and how the sign systems of Homo sapiens differs
from, yet is biologically continuous with, the sign systems of other organisms,
Deacon argues that the question that then next demands an answer is: How have
such “systems” that are both “semiotic” and “biological” – come to be in the ﬁrst
place?
The Symbolic Species is Terrence Deacon’s attempt to provide scientiﬁc clarity
to the question: “How could human language have originated?” Within the next
few years, Terrence Deacon plans to publish the next two volumes in his career-
long effort to “complete Darwin’s one long argument” by addressing the even more
fundamental questions: “How could sign systems have originated?” and ”How could
biological systems have originated?”
“A scientiﬁcally adequate theory of semiotic processes must ultimately be
founded on a theory of information that can unify the physical, biological, cog-
nitive, and computational uses of the concept,” writes Deacon, “unfortunately, no
such uniﬁcation currently exists, and more importantly, the causal status of infor-
mational content remains ambiguous as a result. Lacking this grounding, semiotic
theories have tended to be predominantly phenomenological taxonomies rather than
dynamical explanations of the representational processes of natural systems” (2007:
123).
“Biosemiotics must be derived from scientiﬁcally precise and falsiﬁable ﬁrst
principles,” argues Deacon, and should not merely content itself with “analog-
ical generalizations from phenomenological semiotic taxonomies” (2006:o.1.).
Ultimately, he argues, we “must show how a phenomenological semiosis evolves
from biosemiosis,” and how the relations underlying biosemiosis emerge from their
constitutive thermodynamic, morphodynamic (e.g. self-organizing) and teleody-
namic (e.g. functional) levels of organization (ibid).
Deacon’s soon to be released next volume, tentatively titled Homunculus: The
Emergence of Mind from Matter, will expand on the arguments about evolutionary
semiosis presented in The Symbolic Species by explicating the kinds of self-
organizing dynamics that would be necessary for the prior evolution of physical
chemistry into “semio-chemistry” – and with it, the biological basis of reference.
Such an explication, if successful, would establish a much-needed explanatory
bridge from the scientiﬁc ﬁndings of classic information theory and physics to the
meaning-making processes of semiosis.
Until that time, the reader who has not yet read The Symbolic Species will ﬁnd
ample reasons for doing so after reaping the characteristically rich and profoundly
perspective-changing rewards awaiting in the following excerpt.

18
Excerpts from The Symbolic Species
547
Excerpts from The Symbolic Species (1997)
An Evolutionary Anomaly
As our species designation – sapiens – suggests, the deﬁning attribute of human
beings is an unparalleled cognitive ability. We think differently from all other crea-
tures on earth, and we can share those thoughts with one another in ways that no
other species even approaches. In comparison, the rest of our biology is almost
incidental. Hundreds of millions of years of evolution have produced hundreds of
thousands of species with brains and tens of thousands with complex behavioral,
perceptual, and learning abilities. Only one of these has ever wondered about its
place in the world, because only one evolved the ability to do so.
Though we share the same earth with millions of kinds of living creatures, we
also live in a world that no other species has access to. We inhabit a world full
of abstractions, impossibilities, and paradoxes. We alone brood about what didn’t
happen, and spend a large part of each day musing about the way things could have
been if events had transpired differently. And we alone ponder what it will be like
not to be. In what other species could individuals ever be troubled by the fact that
they do not recall the way things were before they were born and will not know
what will occur after they die? We tell stories about our real experiences and invent
stories about imagined ones, and we even make use of these stories to organize our
lives. In a real sense, we live our lives in this shared virtual world. And slowly, over
the millennia, we have come to realize that no other species on earth seems able to
follow us into this miraculous place.
We are all familiar with this facet of our lives, but how, you might ask, could
I feel so conﬁdent that it is not part of the mental experience of other species – so
sure that they do not share these kinds of thoughts and concerns – when they cannot
be queried about them? That’s just it! My answer, which will be argued in detail in
the following chapters, has everything to do with language and the absence of it in
other species. The doorway into this virtual world was opened to us alone by the
evolution of language, because language is not merely a mode of communication;
it is also the outward expression of an unusual mode of thought-symbolic represen-
tation. Without symbolization the entire virtual world that I have described is out
of reach: inconceivable. My extravagant claim to know what other species cannot
know rests on evidence that symbolic thought does not come innately built in, but
develops by internalizing the symbolic process that underlies language. So species
that have not acquired the ability to communicate symbolically cannot have acquired
the ability to think this way either.
The way that language represents objects, events, and relationships provides
a uniquely powerful economy of reference. It offers a means for generating an
essentially inﬁnite variety of novel representations, and an unprecedented infer-
ential engine for predicting events, organizing memories, and planning behaviors.
It entirely shapes our thinking and the ways we know the physical world. It is so
pervasive and inseparable from human intelligence in general that it is difﬁcult

548
Terrence Deacon (1950– )
to distinguish what aspects of the human intellect have not been molded and
streamlined by it. To explain this difference and describe the evolutionary circum-
stances that brought it about are the ultimate challenges in the study of human
origins.
The question that ultimately motivates a perennial fascination with human ori-
gins is not who were our ancestors, or how they came to walk upright, or even
how they discovered the use of stone tools. It is not really a question that has a
paleontological answer. It is a question that might otherwise be asked of psychol-
ogists or neurologists or even philosophers. Where do human minds come from?
The missing link that we hope to ﬁll in by investigating human origins is not so
much a gap in our family tree, but a gap that separates us from other species in
general. Knowing how something originated often is the best clue to how it works.
And we know that human consciousness had a beginning. Those features of our
mental abilities that distinguish us from all other species arose within the handful
of million years since we shared a common ancestor with the remaining African
apes, and probably can mostly be traced to events that took place only within
the last 2 million. It was a Rubicon that was crossed at a deﬁnite time and in
a speciﬁc evolutionary context. If we could identify what was different on either
side of this divide – differences in ecology, behavior, anatomy, especially neu-
roanatomy – perhaps we would ﬁnd the critical change that catapulted us into this
unprecedented world full of abstractions, stories, and impossibilities, that we call
human.
It is not just the origins of our biological species that we seek to explain, but the
origins of our novel form of mind. Biologically, we are just another ape. Mentally,
we are a new phylum of organisms. In these two seemingly incommensurate facts
lies a conundrum that must be resolved before we have an adequate explanation of
what it means to be human.
The Hierarchical Nature of Reference
The assumption that a one-to-one mapping of words onto objects and vice versa
is the basis for meaning and reference was made explicit in the work of the
turn-of-the-century French linguist Ferdinand de Saussure. In his widely inﬂuen-
tial work on semiology (his term for the study of language), he argued that word
meaning can be modeled by an element-by-element mapping between two “planes”
of objects: from elements constituting the plane of the signiﬁers (e.g., words) to ele-
ments on the plane of the signiﬁed (the ideas, objects, events, etc., that words refer
to).2 On this view, the mapping of vervet monkey alarm calls onto predators could
be considered a signiﬁer-signiﬁed relationship.3 But how accurately does this model
2 See de Saussure (1916). I have simpliﬁed this account considerably from what de Saussure
described. He recognized an orthogonal “plane” to that of reference, associated with the combina-
torial and diachronic (time-dependent) processes of language.
3 E.g., Cheney and Seyfarth (1992).

18
Excerpts from The Symbolic Species
549
word reference? Although it is natural to imagine words as labels for objects, or
mental images, or concepts, we can now see that such correspondences only capture
superﬁcial aspects of word meaning. Focusing on correspondence alone collapses a
multileveled relationship into a simple mapping relationship. It fails to distinguish
between the rote understanding of words that my dog possesses and the seman-
tic understanding of them that a normal human speaker exhibits. We also saw that
the correspondence of words to referents is not enough to explain word meaning
because the actual frequency of correlations between items on the two planes is
extremely low. Instead, what I hope to show is that the relationship is the reverse of
what we commonly imagine. The correspondence between words and objects is a
secondary relationship, subordinate to a web of associative relationships of a quite
different sort, which even allows us reference to impossible things.
In order to be more speciﬁc about differences in referential form, philosophers
and semioticians have often distinguished between different forms of referential
relationships. Probably the most successful classiﬁcation of representational rela-
tionships was, again, provided by the American philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce.
As part of a larger scheme of semiotic relationships, he distinguished three cate-
gories of referential associations: icon, index, and symbol.4 These terms were, of
course, around before Peirce, and have been used in different ways by others since.
Peirce conﬁned the use of these terms to describing the nature of the formal relation-
ship between the characteristics of the sign token and those of the physical object
represented. As a ﬁrst approximation these are as follows: icons are mediated by a
similarity between sign and object, indices are mediated by some physical or tempo-
ral connection between sign and object, and symbols are mediated by some formal
or merely agreed-upon link irrespective of any physical characteristics of either sign
or object. These three forms of reference reﬂect a classic philosophical trichotomy
of possible modes of associative relationship: (a) similarity, (b) contiguity or corre-
lation, and (c) law, causality, or convention. The great philosophers of mind, such as
John Locke, David Hume, Immanuel Kant, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, and
many others, had each in one way or another argued that these three modes of
relationship describe the fundamental forms by which ideas can come to be asso-
ciated. Peirce took these insights and rephrased the problem of mind in terms of
communication, essentially arguing that all forms of thought (ideas) are essentially
communication (transmission of signs), organized by an underlying logic (or semi-
otic, as he called it) that is not fundamentally different for communication processes
inside or outside of brains. If so, it might be possible to investigate the logic of
4 Though I will avoid most of Peirce’s complex terminology and only obliquely suggest the unique
philosophical context in which he embedded his semiotic theory, I believe the following analysis
will stay close to his original insights, which focused on representation as process, not as a static
relationship, and recognized these sign types as hierarchical levels of representation, not as opposed
categorical alternatives. For a brief set of excepts of some of Peirce’s core writngs on the topic,
I recommend Buchler, ed. (1955). Many of Peirce’s major writings on the semiotic basis of logic
were compiled in the Hartshorne and Weiss, eds., collection of Peirce’s papers (1978), especially
Vol. II.

550
Terrence Deacon (1950– )
thought processes by studying the sign production and interpretation processes in
more overt communication.
To get a sense of this logic of signs, let’s begin by considering a few examples.
When we say something is “iconic” of something else we usually mean that there
is a resemblance that we notice. Landscapes, portraits, and pictures of all kinds are
iconic of what they depict. When we say something is an “index” we mean that
it is somehow causally linked to something else, or associated with it in space or
time. A thermometer indicates the temperature of water, a weathervane indicates
the direction of the wind, and a disagreeable odor might indicate the presence of
a skunk. Most forms of animal communication have this quality, from pheromonal
odors (that indicate an animal’s physiological state or proximity) to alarm calls (that
indicate the presence of a dangerous predator). Finally, when we say something is a
“symbol,” we mean there is some social convention, tacit agreement, or explicit code
which establishes the relationship that links one thing to another. A wedding ring
symbolizes a marital agreement; the typographical letter “e” symbolizes a particular
sound used in words (or sometimes as in English, what should be done to other
sounds); and taken together, the words of this sentence symbolize a particular idea
or set of ideas.
No particular objects are intrinsically icons, indices, or symbols. They are inter-
preted to be so, depending on what is produced in response. In simple terms,
the differences between iconic, indexical, and symbolic relationships derive from
regarding things either with respect to their form, their correlations with other
things, or their involvement in systems of conventional relationships.
When we apply these terms to particular things, for instance, calling a particu-
lar sculpture an icon, a speedometer an indicator, or a coat of arms a symbol, we
are engaging in a sort of tacit shorthand. What we usually mean is that they were
designed to be interpreted that way, or are highly likely to be interpreted that way.
So, for example, a striking resemblance does not make one thing an icon of another.
Only when considering the features of one brings the other to mind because of this
resemblance is the relationship iconic. Similarity does not cause iconicity, nor is
iconicity the physical relationship of similarity. It is a kind of inferential process
that is based on recognizing a similarity. As critics of the concept of iconicity have
often pointed out, almost anything could be considered an icon of anything else,
depending on the vagueness of the similarity considered.
The same point can be made for each of the other two modes of referential rela-
tionship: neither physical connection nor involvement in some conventional activity
dictates that something is indexical or symbolic, respectively. Only when these are
the basis by which one thing invokes – another are we justiﬁed in calling their rela-
tionship indexical or symbolic. Though this might seem an obvious point, confusion
about it has been a source of signiﬁcant misunderstandings. For example, there
was at one time considerable debate over whether hand signs in American Sign
Language (ASL) are iconic or symbolic. Many signs seemed to resemble pantomime
or appeared graphically to “depict” or point to what was represented, and so some
researchers suggested that their meaning was “merely iconic” and by implication,
not wordlike. It is now abundantly clear, however, that despite such resemblances,

18
Excerpts from The Symbolic Species
551
ASL is a language and its elements are both symbolic and wordlike in every regard.
Being capable of iconic or indexical interpretation in no way diminishes these signs’
capacity of being interpreted symbolically as well. These modes of reference aren’t
mutually exclusive alternatives; though at anyone time only one of these modes may
be prominent, the same signs can be icons, indices, and symbols depending on the
interpretive process. But the relationships between icons, indices, and symbols are
not merely a matter of alternative interpretations. They are to some extent internally
related to one another.
This is evident when we consider examples where different interpreters are able
to interpret the same signs to a greater or lesser extent. Consider, for example, an
archeologist who discovers some elaborate markings on clay tablets. It is natural
to assume that these inscriptions were used symbolically by the people who made
them, perhaps as a kind of primitive writing. But the archeologist, who as yet has
no Rosetta Stone with which to decode them, cannot interpret them symbolically.
The archeologist simply infers that to someone in the past these may have been
symbolically interpretable, because they resemble symbols seen in other contexts.
Being unable to interpret them symbolically, he interprets them iconically. Some of
the earliest inscription systems from the ancient Middle Eastern civilizations of the
Fertile Cresent were in fact recovered in contexts that provided additional clues to
their representations. Small clay objects were marked with repeated imprints, then
sealed in vessels that accompanied trade goods sent from one place to another. Their
physical association with these other artifacts has provided archeologists with index-
ical evidence to augment their interpretations. Different marks apparently indicated
a corresponding number of items shipped, probably used by the recipient of the
shipment to be sure that all items were delivered. No longer merely iconic of other
generic writinglike marks, they now can be given indexical and tentative symbolic
interpretations, because something more than resemblance is provided.
This can also be seen by an inverse example: a descent down a hierarchy of
diminishing interpretive competence, but this time with respect to interpretive com-
petences provided by evolution. Let’s consider laughter again. Laughter indicates
something about what sort of event just preceded it. As a symptom of a person’s
response to certain stimuli, it provides considerable information about both the
laugher and the object of the laughter, i.e, (original) that it involved something
humorous. But laughter alone does not provide sufﬁcient information to reconstruct
exactly what was so funny. Chimpanzees also produce a call that is vaguely sim-
ilar to laughter in certain play situations (e.g., tickling). Consequently, they might
also recognize human laughter as indicating certain aspects of the social context
(i.e., playful, nonthreatening, not distressing, etc.), but they would likely miss the
reference to humor. I suspect that implicit in the notion of humor there is a symbolic
element, a requirement for recognizing contradiction or paradox, that the average
chimpanzee has not developed. The family cat and dog, however, probably do not
even get this much information from a human laugh. Not sharing our evolved pre-
disposition to laugh in certain social relationships, they do not possess the mental
prerequisites to interpret even the social signaling function of laughter. Experience
may only have provided them with the ability to use it as evidence that a human is

552
Terrence Deacon (1950– )
present and is probably not threatening. Nevertheless, this too is dependent on some
level of interpretative competence, perhaps provided by recalling prior occasions
when some human made this odd noise. Finally, there are innumerable species
of animals from ﬂies to snails to ﬁsh that wouldn’t even produce this much of a
response, and would interpret the laughter as just another vibration of the air or
water. The diminishing competences of these species corresponds with interpreta-
tions that are progressively less and less speciﬁc and progressively more and more
concrete. But even at the bottom of this descent there is a possibility of a kind of
minimalistic reference.
This demonstrates one of Peirce’s most fundamental and original insights about
the process of interpretation: the difference between different modes of reference
can be understood in terms of levels of interpretation. Attending to this hierarchi-
cal aspect of reference is essential for understanding the difference between the
way words and animal calls are related. It’s not just the case that we are able to
interpret the same sign in different ways, but more important, these different inter-
pretations can be arranged in a sort of ascending order that reﬂect a prior competence
to identify higher-level associative relationships. In other words, reference itself is
hierarchic in structure; more complex forms of reference are built up from simpler
forms. But there is more to this than just increasing complexity. This hierarchical
structure is a clue to the relationships between these different modes of reference.
Though I may fail to grasp the symbolic reference of a sign, I might still be able to
interpret it as an index (i.e., as correlated with something else), and if I also fail to
recognize any indexical correspondences, I may still be able to interpret it as an icon
(i.e., recognize its resemblance to something else). Breakdown of referential compe-
tence leads to an ordered descent from symbolic to indexical to iconic, not just from
complex icons, indices, or symbols to simpler counterparts. Conversely, increasing
the sophistication of interpretive competence reverses the order of this breakdown
of reference. For example, as human children become more competent and more
experienced with written words, they gradually replace their iconic interpretations
of these marks as just more writing with indexical interpretations supported by a
recognition of certain regular correspondences to pictures and spoken sounds, and
eventually use these as support for learning to interpret their symbolic meanings. In
this way they trace a path somewhat like the archeologist learning to decipher an
ancient script.
This suggests that indexical reference depends upon iconic reference, and sym-
bolic reference depends upon indexical reference – a hierarchy diagrammatically
depicted in Fig. 18.1. It sounds pretty straightforward on the surface. But this sim-
plicity is deceiving, because what we really mean is that the competence to interpret
something symbolically depends upon already having the competence to interpret
many other subordinate relationships indexically, and so forth. It is one kind of com-
petence that grows out of and depends upon a very different kind of competence.
What constitutes competence in this sense is the ability to produce an interpre-
tive response that provides the necessary infrastructure of more basic iconic and/or
indexical interpretations. To explain the basis of symbolic communication, then, we
must describe what constitutes a symbolic interpretant, but to do this we need ﬁrst

18
Excerpts from The Symbolic Species
553
Fig. 18.1 The hierarchic relationships between the three fundamental forms of reference-iconic,
indexical, and symbolic. Symbolic relationships are composed of indexical relationships between
sets of indices and indexical relationships are composed of iconic relationships between sets of
icons (diagrammed more pictorially in Figs. 3.2 and 3.3). This suggests a kind of semiotic reduc-
tionism in which more complex forms of representation are analyzable to simpler forms. In fact,
this is essentially what occurs as forms are interpreted. Higher-order forms are decomposed into
(replaced or represented by) lower-order forms. Inversely, to construct higher representation, one
must operate on lower-order forms to replace them (represent them) In C. S. Peirce’s terminology,
each is an interpretive process, and the new signs substituted for the previous signs at a different
level are “interpretants” of those prior signs (see text for details)
to explain the production of iconic and indexical interpretants and then to explain
how these are each recoded in turn to produce the higher-order forms.
So, we need to start the explanation of symbolic competence with an explanation
of what is required in order to interpret icons and build upward. Usually, people
explain icons in terms of some respect or other in which two things are alike. But
the resemblance doesn’t produce the iconicity. Only after we recognize an iconic
relationship can we say exactly what we saw in common, and sometimes not even
then. The interpretive step that establishes an iconic relationship is essentially prior
to this, and it is something negative, something that we don’t do. It is, so to speak,
the act ofnot making a distinction. Let me illustrate this with a very stripped-down
example.
Consider camouﬂage, as in the case of natural protective coloration. A moth on
a tree whose wings resemble the graininess and color of the bark, though not per-
fectly, can still escape being eaten by a bird if the bird is inattentive and interprets
the moth’s wings as just more tree. Admittedly, this is not the way we typically use
the term iconic, but I think it illuminates the most basic sense of the concept. If
the moth had been a little less matching, or had moved, or the bird had been a
little more attentive, then any of the differences between the moth and the tree
made evident by those additional differences would have indicated to the bird that
there was something else present which wasn’t just more tree. If the bird had been in
a contemplative mood, it might even have reﬂected on the slight resemblance of the
wing pattern to bark, at least for the fraction of a second before it gobbled the hap-
less moth. Some features of the moth’s wings were iconic of the bark, irrespective of
their degree of similarity, merely because under some interpretation (an inattentive
bird) they were not distinguished from it.
Now, it might seem awkward to explain iconicity with an example that, could
be considered to be no representation at all, but I think it helps to clarify the shift

554
Terrence Deacon (1950– )
in emphasis I want to make from the relationship to the process behind it. What
makes the moth wings iconic is an interpretive process produced by the bird, not
something about the moth’s wings. Their coloration was taken to be an icon because
of something that the bird didn’t do. What the bird was doing was actively scanning
bark, its brain seeing just more of the same (bark, bark, bark . . .). What it didn’t
do was alter this process (e.g., bark, bark, not-bark, bark . . .). It applied the same
interpretive perceptual process to the moth as it did to the bark. It didn’t distinguish
between them, and so confused them with one another. This established the iconic
relationship between moth and bark. Iconic reference is the default.
Even in an imagined moment of reﬂective reverie in which the bird ponders on
their slight resemblance, it is the part of its responding that does not distinguish wing
from bark that determines their relationship to be iconic. Iconic resemblance is not
based on some prior ground of physical similarity, but in that aspect of the inter-
pretation process that does not differ from some other interpretive process. Thus,
although a respect in which two things are similar may inﬂuence the ways they tend
to be iconically related, it does not determine their iconicity. Iconism is where the
referential buck stops when nothing more is added. And at some level, due either
to limitations in abilities to produce distinguishing responses or simply a lack of
effort to produce them, the production of new interpretants stops. Whether because
of boredom or limitations of a minimal nervous system, there are times when almost
anything can be iconic of anything else (stuff, stuff, stuff . . .).
What does this have to do with pictures, or other likenesses such as busts or
caricatures that we more commonly think of as icons? The explanation is essentially
no different. That facet or stage of my interpretive recognition process that is the
same for a sketch and the face it portrays is what makes it an icon. I might abstractly
reﬂect on what aspects of the sketch caused this response, and might realize that
this was the intention of the artist, but a sketch that is never seen is just paper and
charcoal. It could also be interpreted as something that soaked up spilled coffee
(and the spilled coffee could be seen as a likeness of Abe Lincoln!). Peirce once
characterized an icon as something which upon closer inspection can provide further
information about the attributes of its object. Looking at the one is like looking at the
other in some respects. Looking at a caricature can, for example, get one to notice for
the ﬁrst time that a well-known politician has a protruding jaw or ﬂoppy jowls. The
simpliﬁcation in a diagram or the exaggeration in a cartoon takes advantage of our
spontaneous laxness in making distinctions to trick us into making new associations.
In this way a caricature resembles a joke, a visual pun, and a diagram can be a source
of discovery.
In summary, the interpretive process that generates iconic reference is none other
than what in other terms we call recognition (mostly perceptual recognition, but
not necessarily). Breaking down the term re-cognition says it all: to “think [about
something] again,” Similarly, representation is to present something again. Iconic
relationships are the most basic means by which things can be re-presented. It is
the base on which all other forms of representation are built. It is the bottom of the
interpretive hierarchy. A sign is interpreted, and thus seen to be a representation,
by being reduced (i.e., analyzed to its component representations) to the point of

18
Excerpts from The Symbolic Species
555
no further reduceability (due to competence or time limitations, or due to pragmatic
constraints), and thus is ultimately translated into iconic relationships. This does not
necessarily require any effort. It is in many cases where interpretive effort ceases. It
can merely be the end of new interpretation, that boundary of consciousness where
experience fades into redundancy.
Interpreting something as an indexical relationship is this and more. Physical
contiguity (nearness or connectedness) or just predictable co-occurrence are the
basis for interpreting one thing as an index for another, but as with the case of icons,
these physical characteristics are not the cause of the indexical relationship. Almost
anything could be physically or temporally associated with anything else by virtue
of some extension of the experience of nearness in space or time. What makes one
an index of another is the interpretive response whereby one seems to “point to”
the other. To understand the relationship that indexical interpretations have to iconic
interpretations, it is necessary to see how the competence to make indexical inter-
pretations arises. In contrast to iconic interpretations, which can often be attributed
to interpretive incompetence or the cessation of production of new interpretants,
indexical interpretations require something added. In fact, icons arise from a failure
to produce critical indices to distinguish things.
Consider the example of a symptom, like the smell of smoke. When I smell
smoke, I begin to suspect that something is burning. How did my ability to treat
this smell as an indication of ﬁre arise? It likely arose by learning, because I had
past experiences in which similar odors were traced to things that were burning.
After a few recurrences it became a familiar association, and the smell of smoke
began to indicate to me that a ﬁre might be near. If we consider more closely the
learning process that produced the indexical competence, the critical role of icons
becomes obvious. The indexical competence is constructed from a set of relation-
ships between icons, and the indexical interpretation is accomplished by bringing
this assembly of iconic relationships to bear in the assessment of new stimuli. The
smell of smoke brings to mind past similar experiences (by iconically representing
them). Each of these experiences comes to mind because of their similarities to one
another and to the present event. But what is more, many of these past experiences
also share other similarities. On many of these occasions I also noticed something
burning that was the source of the smoke, and in this way those experiences were
icons of each other.
There is one important feature added besides all these iconic recognitions. The
repeated correlation between the smelling of smoke and the presence of ﬂames
in each case adds a third higher-order level of iconicity. This is the key ingredi-
ent. Because of this I recognize the more general similarity of the entire present
situation to these past ones, not just the smoke and not just the ﬁre but also their
co-occurrence, and this is what brings to mind the missing element in the present
case: the probability that something is burning. What I am suggesting, then, is that
the responses we develop as a result of day-to-day associative learning are the basis
for all indexical interpretations, and that this is the result of a special relationship
that develops among iconic interpretive processes. It’s hierarchic. Prior iconic rela-
tionships are necessary for indexical reference, but prior indexical relationships are

556
Terrence Deacon (1950– )
Fig. 18.2 A schematic diagram depicting the internal hierarchic relationships between iconic and
indexical reference processes. The probability of interpreting something as iconic of something
else is depicted by a series of concentric domains of decreasing similarity and decreasing iconic
potential among objects. Surrounding objects have a decreasing capacity to serve as icons for the
target object as similarities become unobvious. The form of a sign stimulus (S) elicits awareness
of a set of past stimulus memories (e.g., mental “images”) by virtue of stimulus generalization
processes. Thus, any remembered object (0) can be said to be re-presented by the iconic stim-
ulus. Similarly, each mental image is iconic in the same way; no other referential relationship
need necessarily be involved for an iconic referential relationship to be produced. Indexical ref-
erence, however, requires iconic reference. In order to interpret something as indexical, at least
three iconic relationships must b also recognized. First, the indicating stimulus must be seen as an
icon of other similar instances (the top iconic relationships); second, instances of its occurrence
mm also correlate (arrows) with additional stimuli either in space or time, and these need, to be
iconic of one another (the bottom iconic relationships); and third, past correlations need to be inter-
preted as iconic of one another (indicated by the concentric arrangement of arrows). The indexical
interpretation is thus the conjunction of three iconic interpretations, with one being a higher-order
icon than the other two (i.e., treating them as parts of a whole). As pointed out in the text, this is
essentially the kind of reference provided by a conditioned response. ICON, Associated by stim-
ulus generalization or conventional similarity; INDEX, Associated by spatial-temporal correlation
or part-whole contiguity
not in the same way necessary for iconic reference. This hierarchic dependency of
indices on icons is graphically depicted in Fig. 18.2.
Okay, why have I gone to all this trouble to rename these otherwise common,
well-established uses of perception and learning? Could we just substitute the word
“perception” for “icon” and “learned” association for index? No. Icons and indices
are not merely perception and learning, they refer to the inferential or predictive
powers that are implicit in these neural processes. Representational relationships are
not just these mechanisms, but a feature of their potential relationship to past, future,
distant, or imaginary things. These other things are not physically re-presented but
only virtually re-presented by producing perceptual and learned responses like those
that would be produced if they were present. In this sense, mental processes are no
less representational than external communicative processes, and communicative
processes are no less mental in this regard. Mental representation reduces to internal
communication.

18
Excerpts from The Symbolic Species
557
What, then, is the difference between these uncontroversial cognitive pro-
cesses underlying icons and indices and the kind of cognitive processes underlying
symbols? The same hierarchical logic applies. As indices are constituted by rela-
tionships among icons, symbols are constituted by relationships among indices (and
therefore also icons). However, what makes this a difﬁcult step is that the added
relationship is not mere correlation.
The Symbolic Threshold
The common sense idea is that a symbolic association is formed when we learn to
pair a sound or typed string with something else in the world. But in the terms we
have been developing, this is what we mean by an indexical association. The word
(iconically associated with past occurrences of similar utterances) and the object
(iconically associated with similar objects from past experiences) and their past cor-
relations enable the word to bring the object to mind. In this view, the association
between a word and what it represents is not essentially distinguished from the kind
of association that is made by an animal in a Skinner box. We might, for example,
train a rat to recognize a correlation between hearing the sound of the word “food”
and food being dropped into a tray. The conditioned stimulus takes on referential
power in this process: it represents something about the state of the apparatus for
the animal. It is an index of the availability of food in the Skinner box; a symp-
tom of the state of the box. Words can serve indexical functions as well, and are
sometimes used for this purpose almost exclusively, with minimal symbolic con-
tent. Consider, for example, the use of function words like “there,” exclamations
like “Aha!”, or even proper names like “George Washington.” These derive refer-
ence by being uniquely linked to individual contexts, objects, occasions, people,
places, and so on, and they defy our efforts to deﬁne them as we would typical
nouns or verbs.
One indication that someone understands the meaning of a new word is whether
they can use it in a new sentence or novel context. If the new word was just learned
as a part of an unanalyzed phrase, or mapped to some restricted acquisition context,
then we might not expect it to be correctly used out of this context. But the ability
to use a word correctly in a variety of contexts, while fair evidence of symbolic
understanding, is not necessarily convincing as a proof of understanding. The ability
to shift usage to a novel context resembles transference of one learning set; and
indeed, searching for the common learning set features among the many contexts
in which the same word might be used is a good way to zero in on its meaning.
If someone were to learn only this – i.e., that a particular phrase works well in a
range of contexts that exhibit similar features or social relationships they might well
be able to fool us into believing that they understood what they said. However, on
discovering that they accomplished this by simply mapping similar elements from
one context to another, we would conclude that they actually did not understand
the word or its role in context in the way we originally imagined. Theirs would be
an iconic and indexical understanding only. Being able easily to transfer referential

558
Terrence Deacon (1950– )
functions from one “set” to another is a characteristic of symbols, but is this the
basis for their reference?
Psychologists call transfer of associations from one stimulus to another similar
one “stimulus generalization,” and transfer of a pattern of learning from one con-
text to another similar context the transfer of a “learning set.” These more complex
forms of indexical association are also often confused with symbolic associations.
Transference of learning from stimulus to stimulus or from context to context occurs
as an incidental consequence of learning. These are not really separate forms of
learning. Both are based on iconic projection of one stimulus condition onto another.
Each arises spontaneously because there is always some ambiguity as to what are
the essential parameters of the stimulus that a subject learns to associate with a
subsequent desired or undesired result: learning is always an extrapolation from a
ﬁnite number of examples to future examples, and these seldom provide a basis for
choosing between all possible variations of a stimulus. To the extent that new stimuli
exhibit features shared by the familiar set of stimuli used for training, and none that
are inconsistent with them, these other potential stimuli are also incidentally learned.
Often, psychological models of this process are presented as though the subject has
learned rules for identifying associative relationships. However, since this is based
on an iconic relationship, there is no implicit list of criteria that is learned; only a
failure to distinguish that which hasn’t been explicitly excluded by the training.
Words for kinds of things appear to refer to whole groups of loosely similar
objects, such as could be linked by stimulus generalization, and words for qualities
and properties of objects refer to the sorts of features that are often the basis for
stimulus generalization. Animals can be trained to produce the same sign when
presented with different kinds of foods, or trees, or familiar animals, or any other
class of objects that share physical attributes in common, even subtle ones (e.g., all
hoofed mammals). Similarly, the vervet monkeys’ eagle alarm calls might become
generalized to other aerial predators if they were introduced into their environment.
The grouping of these referents is not by symbolic criteria (though from outside
we might apply our own symbolic criteria), but by iconic overlap that serves as the
basis for their common indexical reference. Stimulus generalization may contribute
essential structure to the realms to which words refer, but it is only one subordinate
component of the relationship and not what determines their reference.
This same logic applies to the transference of learning sets. For example, learn-
ing to choose the odd-shaped object out of three, where two are more similar to each
other than the third, might aid in learning a subsequent oddity-discrimination task
involving sounds. Rather than just transferring an associated response on the basis
of stimulus similarities, the subject recognizes an iconicity between the two learning
tasks as wholes. Though this is hierarchically more sophisticated association than
stimulus generalization – learning a learning pattern – it is still an indexical associ-
ation transferred to a novel stimulus via an iconic interpretation. Here the structure
(of the new training context is seen as iconic of a previous one, allowing the sub-
ject to map corresponding elements from the one to the other. This is not often an
easy association to make, and most species (including humans) will fail to discover
the underlying iconicity when the environment, the training stimuli, the speciﬁc

18
Excerpts from The Symbolic Species
559
responses required, and the reinforcers are all quite different from one context to the
next.
There are two things that are critically different about the relationships between
a word and its reference when compared to transference of word use to new con-
texts. First, for an indexical relationship to hold, there must be a correlation in
time and place of the word and its object. If the correlation breaks down (for
example, the rat no longer gets food by pushing a lever when the sound “food”
is played), then the association is eventually forgotten (“extinguished”), and the
indexical power of that word to refer is lost. This is true for indices in general. If a
smokelike smell becomes common in the absence of anything burning, it will begin
to lose its indicative power in that context. For the Boy Who Cried Wolf, in the
fable of the same name, the indexical function of his use of the word “wolf” fails
because of its lack of association with real wolves, even though the symbolic refer-
ence remains. Thus, symbolic reference remains stable nearly independent of any
such correlations. In fact, the physical association between a word and an appropri-
ate object of reference can be quite rare, or even an impossibility, as with angels,
unicorns, and quarks. With so little correlation, an indexical association would not
survive.
Second, even if an animal subject is trained to associate a number of words with
different foods or states of the box, each of these associations will have little effect
upon the others. They are essentially independent. If one of these associations is
extinguished or is paired with something new, it will likely make little difference
to the other associations, unless there is some slight transference via stimulus gen-
eralization. But this is not the case with words. Words also represent other words.
In fact, they are incorporated into quite speciﬁc individual relationships to all other
words of a language. Think of the way a dictionary or thesaurus works. They each
map one word onto other words. If this shared mapping breaks down between users
(as sometimes happens when words are radically reused in slang, such as “bad” for
“very good” or “plastered” for “intoxicated”), the reference also will fail.
This second difference is what ultimately explains the ﬁrst. We do not lose the
indexical associations of words, despite a lack of correlation with physical referents,
because the possibility of this link is maintained implicitly in the stable associations
between words. It is by virtue of this sort of dual reference, to objects and to other
words (or at least to other semantic alternatives), that a word conveys the informa-
tion necessary to pick out objects of reference. This duality of reference is captured
in the classic distinction between sense and reference. Words point to objects
(reference) and words point to other words (sense), but we use the sense to pick
out the reference, not vice versa.
This referential relationship between the words – words systematically indicat-
ing other words -forms a system of higher-order relationships that allows words to
be about indexical relationships, and not just indices in themselves. But this is also
why words need to be in context with other words, in phrases and sentences, in
order to have any determinate reference. Their indexical power is distributed, so to
speak, in the relationships between words. Symbolic reference derives from combi-
natorial possibilities and impossibilities, and we therefore depend on combinations

560
Terrence Deacon (1950– )
both to discover it (during learning) and to make use of it (during communication).
Thus the imagined version of a nonhuman animal language that is made up of
isolated words, but lacking regularities that govern possible combinations, ulti-
mately a contradiction in terms.
Even without struggling with the philosophical subtleties of this relationship, we
can immediately see the signiﬁcance for learning. The learning problem associated
with symbolic reference is a consequence of the fact that what determines the pair-
ing between a symbol (like a word) and some object or event is not their probability
of co-occurrence, but rather some complex function of the relationship that the sym-
bol has to other symbols. This is a separate but linked learning problem, and worse
yet, it creates a third, higher-order unlearning problem. Learning is, at its base, a
function of the probability of correlations between things, from the synaptic level
to the behavioral level. Past correlations tend to be predictive of future correlations.
This, as we’ve seen, is the basis for indexical reference. In order to comprehend a
symbolic relationship, however, such indexical associations must be subordinated
to relationships between different symbols. This is a troublesome shift of empha-
sis. To learn symbols we begin by learning symbol-object correlations, but once
learned, these associations must be treated as no more than clues for determining the
more crucial relationships. And these relationships are not highly correlated; in fact,
often just the reverse. Words that carry similar referential function are more often
used alternatively and not together, and words with very different (complementary)
referential functions tend to to (in the original text) be adjacent to one another in
sentences. Worst of all, few sentences or phrases are ever repeated exactly, and the
frequency with which speciﬁc word combinations are repeated is also extremely
low. Hardly a recipe for easy indexical learning.
One of the most insightful demonstrations of the learning difﬁculties associated
with the shift from conditioned associations to symbolic associations comes not
from a human example, but from a set of experiments that attempted to train chim-
panzees to use simple symbols. This study was directed by Sue Savage-Rumbaugh
and Duane Rumbaugh,5 now at the Language Research Center of Georgia State
University, and included four chimps, two of which, Sherman and Austin, showed
particular facility with the symbols. It is far from the “last word” on how far other
species can go in their understanding of language-like communication, and further
studies of another chimpanzee (from a different subspecies) that show more devel-
oped abilities6 will be described subsequently (see Chapter 4), but this work has
the virtue of exposing much of what is often hidden in children’s comparatively
easy entry into symbolic communication, and so provides an accessible step-by-
step account of what we usually take for granted in the process. In what follows
I will outline these experiments brieﬂy. Only the most relevant highlights will be
5 See Savage-Rumbaugh et al. (1978, 1980); and Savage-Rumbaugh (1986). In the stripped-down
account presented here, I focus only on the two of the four chimps who were most successful
(Sherman and Austin) and who continued to participate in subsequent language experiments.
6 Described in Savage-Rumbaugh and Lewin (1994).

18
Excerpts from The Symbolic Species
561
described and other aspects will be simpliﬁed for the sake of my purpose here.
Of course, my attempts to “get inside the chimps’ heads” during this process are
fantasy. Though I will use somewhat different terminology from the experimenters
to describe this transition from indexical to symbolic communication, I am rea-
sonably conﬁdent that my interpretation is not at odds with theirs. However, the
interested reader should refer to the excellent account of these experiments and their
signiﬁcance in Savage-Rumbaugh’s book describing them.
The chimps in this study were taught to use a special computer keyboard made up
of lexigrams-simple abstract shapes (lacking any apparent iconism to their intended
referents) on large illuminated keys on a keyboard mounted in their cage. Duane
Rumbaugh’s previous experiments (with a chimp named Lana)7 had shown that
chimps have the ability to learn a large number of paired associations between lex-
igrams (and in fact other kinds of symbol tokens) and objects or activities. But in
order to respond to critics and more fully test other features of this ability, Duane
and Sue began a new series of experiments with a group of chimps to test both
chimp-chimp communication and chimps’ ability to use lexigrams in combinations
(e.g., syntactic relationships). Not surprisingly, the chimps exhibited some interest-
ing difﬁculties when they were required to use lexigrams in combinations, but they
eventually solved their learning problems and exhibited a use of the lexigrams that
was clearly symbolic. In so doing they have provided us with a remarkably explicit
record of the process that leads from index to symbol.
In order to test Sherman and Austin’s symbolic understanding of the lexigrams,
the chimps were trained to chain lexigram pairs in a Simple verb-noun relation-
ship (a sequence glossed as meaning “give,” which caused a dispenser to deliver
a solid food, and “banana” to get a banana).8 Initially there were only 2 “verb”
lexigrams and 4 food or drink lexigrams to choose from, and each pair had to be
separately taught. But after successful training of each pairing, the chimps were
presented with all the options they had learned independently, and were required to
choose which combination was most appropriate on the basis of food availability
or preference. Curiously, the solution to this task was not implicit in their previ-
ous training. This was evident in the fact that some chimps tended stereotypically
to repeat only the most recent single learned combination, whereas others chained
together all options, irrespective of the intended meanings and what they knew about
the situation. Thus they had learned the individual associations but failed to learn the
system of relationships of which these correlations were a part. Although the logic
of the combinatorial relationships between lexigrams was implicit in the particular
combinations that the chimps learned, the converse exclusive relationships had not
been learned. For example, they were not explicitly trained to avoid any number
7 Rumbaugh (1977).
8 I have simpliﬁed the paradigm a bit by omitting mention of an additional key that signaled the
start of a trial (sometimes glossed in a sort of tongue-in-cheek fashion as “Please”) and one to
signify its end (sometimes glossed as a period). These were essentially irrelevant to the problem
except as added distractors, since they did not vary from trial to trial, and such glosses could be
quite misleading.

562
Terrence Deacon (1950– )
of inappropriate combinations such as “banana juice give.” Though these errors are
implicit for us, who treat them symbolically from the start, the combinatorial rules
that allow pairing in some but not other cases was vastly underdetermined by the
training experience (as it is also in a child’s experience of others’ word use).
It is not immediately obvious exactly how much exclusionary information is
implicit, hut it turns out to be quite a lot. Think about it from the naive chimpanzee
perspective for a moment. Even with this ultra-simple symbol system of six lex-
igrams and a two-lexigram combinatorial grammar, the chimpanzee is faced with
the possibility of sorting among 720 possible ordered sequences (6◦5◦4◦3◦2◦1) or
64 possible ordered pairs. The training has offered only four prototype examples,
in isolation. Though each chimp may begin with many guesses about what works,
these are unlikely to be in the form of rules about classes of allowed and disallowed
combinations, but rather about possible numbers of lexigrams that must be pressed,
their positions on the board, their colors or shape cues that might be associated with
a reward object, and so on. Recognizing this limitation, the experimenters embarked
on a rather interesting course of training. They set out explicitly to train the chimps
on which cues were not relevant and which combinations were not meaningful. This
poses an interesting problem that every pet trainer has faced. You can’t train what
not to do unless the animal ﬁrst produces the disallowed behavior. Only then can it
be immediately punished or at least explicitly not rewarded (the correlation prob-
lem again). So the chimps were ﬁrst trained to produce incorrect associations (e.g.,
mistaking keyboard position as the relevant variable) and then these errors were
explicitly not rewarded, whereas the remaining appropriate responses were. By a
complex hierarchic training design, involving thousands of trials, it was possible to
teach them to exclude systematically all inappropriate associative and combinatorial
possibilities among the small handful of lexigrams. At the end of this process, the
animals were able to produce the correct lexigram strings every time.
Had training out the errors worked? To test this, the researchers introduced a few
new food items and corresponding new lexigrams. If the chimps had learned the liq-
uid/solid rule, and got the idea that a new lexigram was for a new item, they might
learn more quickly. Indeed they did. Sherman and Austin were able to respond cor-
rectly the ﬁrst time, or with only a few errors, instead of taking hundreds of trials
as before. What had happened to produce this difference? What the animals had
learned was not only a set of speciﬁc associations between lexigrams and objects or
events. They had also learned a set of logical relationships between the lexigrams,
relationships of exclusion and inclusion. More importantly, these lexigram-lexigram
relationships formed a complete system in which each allowable or forbidden
co-occurrence of lexigrams in the same string (and therefore each allowable or for-
bidden substitution of one lexigram for another) was deﬁned. They had discovered
that the relationship that a lexigram has to an object is a function of the relationship
it has to other lexigrams, not just a function of the correlated appearance of both
lexigram and object. This is the essence of a symbolic relationship.
The subordination of the indexical relationships between lexigrams (symbol
tokens) and foods (referents or objects) to the system of indexical relationships
between lexigrams is schematically depicted in three stages of development in

18
Excerpts from The Symbolic Species
563
Fig. 18.3 A schematic depiction of the construction of symbolic referential relationships from
indexical relationships. This ﬁgure builds on the logic depicted in Fig. 18.2, but in this case the
iconic relationships are only implied and the indexical relationships are condensed into single
arrows. Three stages in the construction of symbolic relationships are shown from bottom to top.
First a collection of difference indices are individually learned (varying strength indicated by dark-
ness of arrows). Second, systematic relationships between index tokens (indexical stimuli) are
recognized and learned as additional indices (gray arrows linking indices). Third, a shift in (rever-
sal of indexical arrows) mnemonic strategy to rely on relationships between tokens (darker arrows
above) to pick out objects indirectly via relationships between objects (corresponding lower arrow
system). Individual indices can stand on their own in isolation, but symbols must be part of a closed
group of transformations that links them in order to refer, otherwise they revert to indices
Fig. 18.3. Individual indexical associations are shown as Single vertical arrows,
mapping each token to a kind of object, because each of these relationships is
independent
of
the
others.
In
contrast,
the
token-token
interrelationships
(e.g., between lexigrams or words), shown as horizontal arrows interconnecting
symbols, form a closed logical group of combinatorial possibilities. Every combina-
tion and exclusion relationship is unambiguously and categorically determined. The
indexical reference of each symbol token to an object after symbolic reference is

564
Terrence Deacon (1950– )
achieved is depicted with arrows reversed to indicate that these are now subordinate
to the token-token associations.
In the minimalistic symbol system ﬁrst learned by Sherman and Austin, refer-
ence to objects is a collective function of relative position within this token-token
reference system. No individual lexigram determines its own reference. Reference
emerges from the hierarchic relationship between these two levels of indexicality,
and by virtue of recognizing an abstract correspondence between the system of rela-
tionships between objects and the system of relationships between the lexigrams. In
a sense, it is the recognition of an iconic relationship between the two systems of
indices. Although indexical reference of tokens to objects is maintained in the tran-
sition to symbolic reference, it is no longer determined by or dependent on any
physical correlation between token and object.
This makes a new kind of generalization possible: logical or categorical gen-
eralization, as opposed to stimulus generalization or learning set generalization.
It is responsible for Sherman and Austin’s ability to acquire new lexigrams and
know their reference implicitly, without any trial-and-error learning. The system of
lexigram-lexigram interrelationships is a source of implicit knowledge about how
novel lexigrams must be incorporated into the system. Adding a new food lexigram,
then, does not require the chimp to learn the correlative association of lexigram
to object from scratch each time. The referential relationship is no longer solely
(or mainly) a function of lexigram-food co-occurrence, but has become a function
of the relationship that this new lexigram shares with the existing system of other
lexigrams, and these offer a quite limited set of ways to integrate new items. The
chimps succeed easily because they have shifted their search for associations from
relationships among stimuli to relationships among lexigrams. A new food or drink
lexigram must ﬁt into a predetermined slot in this system of relationships. There are
not more than a few possible alternatives to sample, and none requires assessing the
probability of paired lexigram food occurrence because lexigrams need no longer be
treated as indices of food availability. Like words, the probability of co-occurrences
may be quite low. The food lexigrams are in a real sense “nouns,” and are deﬁned
by their potential combinatorial roles. Testing the chimps’ ability to extrapolate to
new lexigram-food relationships is a way of demonstrating whether or not they have
learned this logical-categorical generalization, which is a crucial deﬁning feature of
symbolic reference.
At some point toward the end of the training, the whole set of explicitly presented
indexical associations that the chimps had acquired was “recoded” in their minds
with respect to an implicit pattern of associations whose evidence was distributed
across the whole set of trials. Did this recoding happen as soon as they had learned
the full set of combination/exclusion relationships among their lexigram set? I sus-
pect not. Try to imagine yourself in their situation for a moment. You have just come
to the point “where you are not making errors. What is your strategy? Probably, you
are struggling to remember what speciﬁc things worked and did not work, still at
the level of one-by-one associations.” The problem is, it is hard to remember all
the details. What you need are aids to help organize what you know, because there
are a lot of possibilities. But in the internal search for supports you discover that

18
Excerpts from The Symbolic Species
565
there is another source of redundancy and regularity that begins to appear, besides
just the individual stimulus-response-reward regularities: the relationships between
lexigrams! And these redundant patterns are far fewer than the messy set of dozens
of individual associations that you are trying to keep track of. These regularities
weren’t apparent previously, because errors had obscured any underlying systematic
relationship. But now that they are apparent, why not use them as added mnemonics
to help simplify the memory load? Forced to repeat errorless trials over and over,
Sherman and Austin didn’t just learn the details well, they also became aware of
something they couldn’t have noticed otherwise, that there was a system behind
it all. And they could use this new information, information about what they had
already learned, to simplify greatly the mnemonic load created by the many individ-
ual rote associations. They could now afford to forget about individual correlations
so long as they could keep track of them via the lexigram-lexigram rules.
What I am suggesting here is that the shift from associative predictions to sym-
bolic predictions is initially a change in mnemonic strategy, a recoding. It is a way of
ofﬂoading redundant details from working memory, by recognizing a higher-order
regularity in the mess of associations, a trick that can accomplish the same task with-
out having to hold all the details in mind. Unfortunately, nature seldom offers such
nice neat logical systems that can help organize our associations. There are not many
chances to use such strategies, so not much selection for this sort of process. We are
forced to create artiﬁcial systems that have the appropriate properties. The crucial
point is that when such a systematic set of tokens becomes available, it allows a
shift in mnemonic strategy that results in a radical transformation in the mode of
representation. What one knows in one way gets recoded in another way. It gets re-
represented. We know the same associations, but we know them also in a different
way. You might say we know them both from the bottom up, indexically, and from
the top down, symbolically. And because this recoding is based on higher-order rela-
tionships, not the individual details, it often vastly simpliﬁes the mnemonic problem
and vastly augments the representational possibilities. Equally important is the vast
amount of implicit knowledge it provides. Because the combinatorial rules encode
not objects but ways in which objects can be related, new symbols can immediately
be incorporated and combined with others based on independent knowledge about
what they symbolize.
[In a later series of experiments,] Sherman and Austin, as a result of their experi-
ence with a previous symbol system, receded new lexigram-object associations into
two new symbolic categories that superseded their individual associations. It took
them hundreds or thousands of trials to learn the ﬁrst simple one-to-many associa-
tions. This was because they began with no systemic relationship in their still small
lexigram repertoire for a general reference to “food” or “tool.” They had to learn
them the hard way, so to speak, indexically. But as soon as they did learn these
associations, they were primed to look for another higher-order logic, and once it
was discovered, they were able to use this logic to generalize to new associations.
Instead of hundreds or even thousands of trials, the availability of a symbolic coding
allowed them to bypass further trials altogether, an incredible increase in learning
efﬁciency. The chimps essentially knew something that they had never explicitly

566
Terrence Deacon (1950– )
learned. They had gained a kind of implicit knowledge as a spontaneous byproduct
of symbolic recoding.
I have chosen to recount this ape language study not because it portrays any
particularly advanced abilities in chimpanzees, or because I think it is somehow
representative. In fact (as noted earlier), more recent studies by these same experi-
menters, with a pygmy chimpanzee (or bonobo) named Kanzi, have demonstrated
far more effortless and sophisticated symbolic abilities.9 Rather, I have focused
on this earlier study because of the clarity with which it portrays the special
nature of symbol learning, and because it clearly exempliﬁes the hierarchic rela-
tionship between symbolic and indexical reference. The reductio ad absurdum
training ploy is particularly instructive, not because it is an essential element but
because it provides an explicit constructive demonstration of the index-by-index
basis of the eventual symbolic relationship. It also demonstrates how normal asso-
ciative learning strategies can interfere with symbol learning. Indexical associations
are necessary stepping stones to symbolic reference, but they must ultimately be
superseded for symbolic reference to work.
Unlearning an Insight
The problem with symbol systems, then, is that there is both a lot of learning and
unlearning that must take place before even a single symbolic-relationship is avail-
able. Symbols cannot be acquired one at a time the way other learned associations
can, except after a reference symbol system is established. A logically complete
system of relationships among the set of symbol tokens must be learned before the
symbolic association between any one symbol token and an object can even be deter-
mined. The learning step occurs prior to recognizing the symbolic function, and this
function only emerges from a system; it is not vested in any individual sign-object
pairing. For this reason, it’s hard to get started. To learn a ﬁrst symbolic relation-
ship requires holding a lot of associations in mind at once while at the same time
mentally sampling the potential combinatorial patterns hidden in their higher-order
relationships. Even with a very small set of symbols the number of possible combi-
nations is immense, and so sorting out which combinations work and which don’t
requires sampling and remembering a large number of possibilities.
One of the most interesting features of the shift in learning strategy that sym-
bolic reference depends upon is that it essentially takes no time; or rather, no more
time than the process of perceptual recognition. Although the prior associations that
will eventually be recoded into a symbolic system may take considerable time and
effort to learn, the symbolic recoding of these relationships is not learned in the
same way; it must instead be discovered or perceived, in some sense, by reﬂect-
ing on what is already known. In other words, it is an implicit pattern that must
be recognized in the relationships between the indexical associations. Recognition
9 Savage-Rumbaugh and Lewin (1994).

18
Excerpts from The Symbolic Species
567
means linking the relationship of something new to something already known. The
many interdependent associations that will ultimately provide the nodes in a matrix
of symbol-symbol relationships must be in place in order for anyone of them to
refer symbolically, so they must each be learned prior to recognizing their symbolic
associative functions. They must be learned as individual indexical referential rela-
tionships. The process of discovering the new symbolic association is a restructuring
event, in which the previously learned associations are suddenly seen in a new light
and must be reorganized with respect to one another. This reorganization requires
mental effort to suppress one set of associative responses in favor of another derived
from them. Discovering the superordinate symbolic relationship is not some added
learning step, it is just noticing the system-level correspondences that are implicitly
present between the token-token relationships and the object-object relationships
that have been juxtaposed by indexical learning. What we might call a symbolic
insight takes place the moment we let go of one associative strategy and grab hold
of another higher-order one to guide our memory searches.
For this reason, a child’s initial discovery of the symbolic relationships underly-
ing language is only the beginning of the demand on this type of learning/unlearning
process. Each new level of symbols coding for other symbolic relationships
(i.e., more abstract concepts) requires that we engage this process anew. This pro-
duces a pattern of learning that tends to exhibit more or less discrete stages. Since
the number of combinatorial possibilities that must be sampled in order to discover
the underlying symbolic logic increases geometrically with each additional level of
recoding, it is almost always necessary to conﬁne rote learning to one level at a
time until the symbolic recoding becomes apparent before moving on to the next.
This limitation is frustratingly familiar to every student who is forced to engage
in seemingly endless rote learning before “getting” the underlying logic of some
mathematical operation or scientiﬁc concept. It may also contribute to the crudely
stagelike pattern of children’s cognitive development, which the psychologist Jean
Piaget initially noticed.10 However, this punctuated pattern of symbolic conceptual
development is a reﬂection of symbolic information processing and not an intrinsic
feature of developing brains and minds.
The ability of Sherman and Austin to discover the abstract symbolic references
for “food” and “tool” provides an additional perspective on the difference between
indexical associations and symbolic associations. Consider the potential conﬂict
between the lexigram-object relationships they had previously acquired and this
new set of associations. If their prior associations were supported only by the corre-
lations in lexigram-object-reward occurrence, then re-pairing the same objects with
a new lexigram would be expected to partially if not totally extinguish the prior
association. Although it would be possible to provide additional contextual cues to
enable the chimps to decide which of two competing associative strategies to use
(e.g., simply run trials without the alternatives available) and thus learn and retain
both, there would still be interference effects (i.e., their prior associations might
10 Piaget (1952).

568
Terrence Deacon (1950– )
interfere both with relearning the new associations and with shifting between them
in different contexts). Unfortunately, data to assess this are not available, but we can
infer from Sherman and Austin’s learning shifts, and their subsequent maintenance
of the prior symbolic associations, that neither extinction nor interference was a
signiﬁcant problem.
This ability to remember large numbers of potentially competing associations is
an additional power of symbolic reference that derives from the shift in mnemonic
strategy to token-token relationships. Competition effects grow with increasing
numbers of overlapping associative categories in typical indexical reference rela-
tionships. Not only would the choice among alternatives in any use become a
source of confusion, but because they were competing for reinforcement, each
would weaken the association of the others. Though some of the interference effects
also attend symbol use, and often are a cause of word retrieval errors and analy-
sis delays, in terms of associative strength there is an opposite effect. Competing
sets of overlapping associative relationships on the indexical level translate into
mutually supportive higher-order semantic categories on the symbolic level. These
become sources of associative redundancy, each reinforcing the mnemonic trace
of the other. So, rather than weaken the strength of the association, they actually
reinforce it.
This helps to explain where the additional associative glue between words and
their referents comes from. Though token-object correlations are not consistently
available to the symbol user, indeed are rare, this loss of associative support is
more than compensated by the large number of other associations that are avail-
able through symbolically mediated token-token relationships. Individually, these
are comparatively weak associations, with a low correlated occurrence of any two
tokens in the same context; but they are not just one-to-one associations. They are
one-to-many and many-to-one associations that weave symbol tokens together into
a systematic network of association relationships, and the pattern has a certain coded
isomorphism with relationships between objects and events in the world. As a result
of sharing many weak interpenetrating indexical links, each indexical association
gains mnemonic support from a large number of others because they are multi-
ply coded in memory. Together, their combined associative strengths make them
far more resistant to extinction due to diminished external correlations with objects
than are individual indexical associations. Thus, not only is symbolic reference a
distributed relationship, so is its mnemonic support.
In summary, then, symbols cannot be understood as an unstructured collection
of tokens that map to a collection of referents because symbols don’t just represent
things in the world, they also represent each other. Because symbols do not directly
refer to things in the world, but indirectly refer to them by virtue of referring to
other symbols, they are implicitly combinatorial entities whose referential powers
are derived by virtue of occupying determinate positions in an organized system of
other symbols. Both their initial acquisition and their later use requires a combinato-
rial analysis. The structure of the whole system has a deﬁnite semantic topology that
determines the ways symbols modify each other’s referential functions in different
combinations. Because of this systematic relational basis of symbolic reference, no

18
Excerpts from The Symbolic Species
569
collection of signs can function symbolically unless the entire collection conforms
to certain overall principles of organization.
Symbolic reference emerges from a ground of nonsymbolic referential processes
only because the indexical relationships between symbols are organized so as to
form a logically closed group of mappings from symbol to symbol. This deter-
minate character allows the higher-order system of associations to supplant the
individual (indexical) referential support previously invested in each component
symbol. This system of relationships between symbols determines a deﬁnite and
distinctive topology that all operations involving those symbols must respect in
order to retain referential power. The structure implicit in the symbol-symbol map-
ping is not present before symbolic reference, but comes into being and affects
symbol combinations from the moment it is ﬁrst constructed. The rules of com-
bination that are implicit in this structure are discovered as novel combinations are
progressively sampled. As a result, new rules may be discovered to be emergent
requirements of encountering novel combinatorial problems, in much the same way
as new mathematical laws are discovered to be implicit in novel manipulations of
known operations.
Symbols do not, then, get accumulated into unstructured collections that can be
arbitrarily shufﬂed into different combinations. The system of representational rela-
tionships, which develops between symbols as symbol systems grow, comprises an
ever more complex matrix. In abstract terms, this is a kind of tangled hierarchic net-
work of nodes and connections that deﬁnes a vast and constantly changing semantic
space. Though semanticists and semiotic theorists have proposed various analogies
to explain these underlying topological principles of semantic organization (such
as ± feature lists, dictionary analogies, encyclopedia analogies), we are far from
a satisfactory account. Whatever the logic of this network of symbol-symbol rela-
tionships, it is inevitable that it will be reﬂected in the patterns of symbol-symbol
combinations in communication.
No Mind Is an Island
Because of our symbolic abilities, we humans have access to a novel higher-order
representation system that not only recodes experiences and guides the formation of
skills and habits, but also provides a means of representing features of a world that
no other creature experiences, the world of the abstract. We do not just live our lives
in the physical world and our immediate social group, but also in a world of rules
of conduct, beliefs about our histories, and hopes and fears about imagined futures.
This world is governed by principles different from any that have selected for neural
circuit design in the past eons of evolution. We possess no brain regions specially
adapted for handling the immense ﬂood of experiences from this world, only those
adapted for life in a concrete world of percepts and actions. These unsuited neural
systems have been forced into service, and do the best they can to accommodate to
an alien world and recode its input in more familiar forms. The consequences are
both marvelous and horrendous.

570
Terrence Deacon (1950– )
One of these alien realms is the realm of other minds. The problem of other minds
has recently found its way into studies of animal social behaviors-often phrased
in terms of a “theory of mind,” Basically, the question is whether animals know
that there is someone behind their perceptual experience of others. Do animals act
socially on the basis of what they think others are thinking? To have a “theory of
mind,” in this nonphilosophical sense, is to have a mental representation of the sub-
jective experience of others. A number of ingenious experiments have attempted to
test whether animals tend to behave in response to what they infer others know, feel,
or desire. Not surprisingly, the results are often hard to interpret.
It is a difﬁcult question to answer experimentally, because it is possible for
an intelligent and perceptive animal to learn to anticipate another’s behavior in
response to different conditions, irrespective of any model of why they are respond-
ing the way they do, and so give a false impression of representing a mental cause
as opposed to merely developing an unanalyzed, conditioned response. This experi-
mental difﬁculty is analogous to the problem we encountered earlier of determining
whether a given referential behavior is symbolic or merely indexical. The parallel is
not just a superﬁcial one. Both are questions about the mode of representation. Is the
representation of the expected behavior of the other mediated simply by a pairing of
past instances of others’ responses to similar circumstances, or by some additional
representations about how these responses are caused by (recoded as) the hidden
experiences of others?
Apart from postulating an innate “theory of mind module,” how could such a
mental representation be produced? In other words, what is necessary in order for
information from another’s behavior to be interpreted as representing another mind?
The nature of this representation will depend on whether the individual is only able
to interpret the behavior patterns as indices of future tendencies to behave, or is
able also to interpret them as indices of mental states. The lack of symbolic ref-
erential abilities in nonhuman species limits them to representation of associations
between stimuli, including the behaviors of others. These relationships can be quite
numerous and complex, providing the animal with extensive familiarity with the
predispositions of others. Probably most of the intimate behavioral knowledge we
gain about friends and family members is of this type.
But the additional step to building an independent mental representation of
the subjective experience of another, represented as if one were able to trade
places, requires a symbolic jump. Since indexical reference grows out of repeated
experiences of explicit pairing of stimuli or events, there is no possibility that
pairing with another’s mental state could be learned by association. It is an
abstract attribute, inferred from the systematic patterns of the indexical relation-
ships between observed conditions and behaviors, and identiﬁed with and opposed
to one’s own experiences. Constructing another point of view requires the ability to
maintain awareness of the indexical information, and to use this to produce a rep-
resentation of what it would be like to experience it from a different perspective,
a complicated double-negative referential relationship, This is a cognitive task that
almost certainly requires prefrontal cortex involvement, and evidence of failure to be
able to take the other’s perspective is a common disability of patients with signiﬁcant

18
Excerpts from The Symbolic Species
571
prefrontal damage. Some striking examples of related difﬁculties of taking another
“perspective” are described by Antonio Damasio in Descartes’ Error. In this regard
the hypersociality of Williams syndrome patients, and their intense monitoring and
solicitation of others’ responses in social interactions, may also be understood not
just as a function of modiﬁed affect but as a shift in cognitive style, in which an exag-
gerated prefrontal bias may lead to an exaggerated reliance on symbolic prediction
of others’ behaviors. This may be particularly important if indexical representation
of the predispositions of others is impaired. The inverse argument may also apply
to autistic individuals. Because of a difﬁculty with perspective shifting, they may
only develop knowledge of another’s predispositions to behave by virtue of atten-
tion on physical behaviors as indices. Thus, the ability to form a representation of
another’s mental experience, as opposed to just their predispositions, is both medi-
ated by symbols and dependent on many of the same mental operations and neural
substrates as are critical to symbolic abilities.
As novelists and poets amply demonstrate, the range of personas and experiences
that can be conveyed through symbolic media is unbounded. In a very real sense,
this gives us the ability to share a virtual common mind. Because symbolic repre-
sentation maintains reference irrespective of indexical attachment to any particular
experiences, when an idea or a narrative of someone’s experience is reconstructed
by another, it can be regrounded, so to speak, by interpreting it in terms of the iconic
and indexical representations that constitute the listener’s memory. Symbolic refer-
ence is interpreter-independent, because each interpreter independently supplies the
nonsymbolic ground for it.
Such Stuff as Dreams Are Made On
If consciousness is inevitably representational, then it follows that a change
in the nature of the way information gets represented inevitably constitutes a
change in consciousness. Consciousness of iconic representations should differ
from consciousness of indexical representations, and this in turn should differ from
consciousness of symbolic representations. Moreover, since these modes of repre-
sentation are not alternatives at the same level but hierarchically and componentially
related to one another, this must also be true of these modes of consciousness as
well. They form a nested hierarchy, where certain conditions in the lower levels
of consciousness are prerequisite to the emergence of consciousness at each higher
level.
All nervous systems support iconic and indexical representational processes,
irrespective of their size and complexity. They are the basic ingredients for
adaptation. To some extent, I suspect that every living nervous system exhibits con-
sciousness with respect to the iconic and indexical representations it can support.
It’s just that for some, this is a very limited realm. Their interpretive capacity will
determine their capacity for consciousness. The differences between species in this
regard are not qualitative, but quantitative. In species with more complex brains,
representational states will be more numerous, more diverse, have a greater range of

572
Terrence Deacon (1950– )
arousal amplitude, and will integrate across signals that cover a greater scope in both
space and time. Statistics of large numbers and immense differences in magnitude
have a way of making quantitative differences appear to be qualitative differences.
It is therefore easy to imagine that the human difference is a difference of this kind,
a signiﬁcant quantum increase in the capacity. And to some extent it is. It’s just not
the only or even the major difference.
To appreciate why human beings are able to experience conscious states unprece-
dented in evolution, we do not need to have solved the mystery of consciousness
itself. We do not need to understand the mechanism underlying conscious states in
order to recognize that since they are based on representations, any difference in
representational ability between species will translate into a difference in the ability
to be conscious of different sorts of things. The formal characteristics of the inter-
pretation process, whether iconic, indexical, or symbolic, will deﬁne the elements
of a creature’s conscious universe. So the development of an unprecedented form
of representation – symbolic representation – while not the origin of conscious-
ness, has produced an unprecedented medium for consciousness. This doesn’t deny
generic consciousness to other species; it only denies a particular aspect of con-
sciousness that is based on symbolic abilities. Our brains share a common design
logic with other vertebrate brains, and so we also share all those aspects of con-
sciousness that are mediated by the iconic and indexical representation that these
other species experience. Since iconic and indexical referential relationships are
implicit and essential components of symbolic reference, the modes of conscious-
ness that other species experience are an essential ground for consciousness of the
symbolic world. We live most of our concrete lives in the subjective realm that is
also shared with other species, but our experience of this world is embedded in the
vastly more extensive symbolic world.
The evolution of symbolic communication has not just changed the range of
possible objects of consciousness, it has also changed the nature of consciousness
itself. Common sense psychology suggests that a lot of thinking gets done in the
form of talking to oneself, editing and re-editing imaginary future or reconsid-
ered past conversations, even when this also involves writing or typing out these
thoughts to see how well the shorthand of imagined monologues translates into a
coherent argument. Of course, these sorts of internal conversations must be unique
to human brains while the majority of the other modes of thought are not. And
given that our brains have only recently been “made over” to aid language pro-
cessing, it is likely that the proportion of neural space and time dedicated to these
various mental activities strongly favors the nonlinguistic. This does not necessar-
ily imply that other species do not “replay troubling past experiences over and
over again, or that they are incapable of actively imagining possible experiences
in some immanent future.” They simply do not do so with the aid of symbolic ref-
erence or linguistic mnemonics. It also does not imply that imagistic thinking in
humans lacks symbolic character and symbolic logic, though these forms of cog-
nition are capable of following chains of association that are also uninﬂuenced by
language.

18
Excerpts from The Symbolic Species
573
The Russian cognitive psychologist L. S. Vygotsky suggested in the 1930s that a
signiﬁcant number of normal human psychological processes could be understood
as internalized versions of processes that are inherently social in nature.11 He gave
language a central role to play in this because its fundamentally social nature pro-
vides a mental tool for gaining a kind of subjective distance from the contents of
thought, that is, from our own subjective experiences. By importing, as it were,
an implicit speaker-listener relationship into cognition, we create a tool for self-
reﬂection by a sort of virtual social distancing from our own thought process. Thus
we can talk to ourselves as though talking to others. Vygotsky conceived of mental
development as a process of condensing and streamlining this internalized social
process.
Language functions as a sort of shared code for translating certain essential
attributes of memories and images between individuals who otherwise have entirely
idiosyncratic experiences. This is possible because symbolic reference strips away
any necessary link to the personal experiences and musings that ultimately sup-
port it. The dissociation allows individuals to supply their own indexical and iconic
mnemonics in order to reground these tokens in new iconic and indexical represen-
tations during the process of interpretation. My imagistic and emotional experience
in response to the episodes described in a novel is distinct from that of anyone
else, though all readers will share a common symbolic understanding of them.
The “subjective distance” from what is represented confers a representational free-
dom to thought processes that is not afforded by the direct recall or imagining of
experiences.
This is crucial for the development of self-consciousness, and for the sort of
detachment from immediate arousal and compulsion that allows for self-control.
Self-representation, in the context of representations of alternative pasts and futures,
could not be attained without a means for symbolic representation. It is this repre-
sentation of self that is held accountable in social agreements, that becomes engaged
in the experience of empathy, and that is the source for rational, reﬂective inten-
tions. According to Vygotsky, this sense of self emerges slowly as children mature.
It becomes progressively more facile in perspective shifting and at the same time
consolidates greater control over the other aspects of self that derive from nonso-
cial sources, such as the experience of pain and effort, the arousal of basic drives,
or the physical boundaries of control over events. And, as studies of this process
in various mentally and socially handicapped children suggest, the extent to which
it is developed depends both on the extent of exposure to relevant social-symbolic
experiences and on the symbol-processing capacity of the individual.
Unlike the interpretation of icons and indices (a process which is uniquely per-
sonal and insular within each brain), symbolic representations are in part externally
interpreted – they are shared. For example, though each of us supplies the interpre-
tation of the words and phrases we hear and use, on a moment-by-moment basis, the
11 Vygotsky (1978).

574
Terrence Deacon (1950– )
implicit injunctions and constraints that determine each individual interpretation are
borrowed from the society of users, and the symbolic reference that results is only
reliable insofar. As each interpretation corresponds with those performed by others.
Imagine that Washington Irving’s character, Rip Van Winkle, had remained in his
magical slumber for many centuries. Upon awakening, not only would he be out of
touch culturally, but he would ﬁnd himself constantly misinterpreting the meaning
of many still familiar-sounding words and phrases being spoken by those around
him. As languages evolve and meanings and patterns of use drift away from older
patterns, reference is maintained by continuity but not ﬁdelity to the past. Symbolic
reference is at once a function of the whole web of referential relationships and of
the whole network of users extended in space and time. It is as though the sym-
bolic power of words is only on loan to its users. If symbols ultimately derive their
representational power, not from the individual, but from a particular society at a
particular time, then a person’s symbolic experience of consciousness is to some
extent society – dependent – it is borrowed. Its origin is not within the head. It is not
implicit in the sum of our concrete experiences.
Consciousness of self in this way implicitly includes consciousness of other
selves, and other consciousnesses can only be represented through the virtual ref-
erence created by symbols. The self that is the source of one’s experience of
intentionality; the self that is judged by itself as well as by others for its moral
choices, the self that worries about its impending departure from the world, this self
is a symbolic self. It is a ﬁnal irony that it is the virtual, not actual, reference that
symbols provide, which gives rise to this experience of self. This most undeniably
real experience is a virtual reality.
In a curious way, this recapitulates an unshakable intuition that has been ubiqui-
tously expressed throughout the ages. This is the belief in a disembodied spirit or
immortal “pilgrim soul” that deﬁnes that part of a person that is not “of the body”
and is not reducible to the stuff of the material world. My ability to appreciate sym-
bolic reference is not “reducible” to the indexical or iconic reference I use to ground
my interpretation, though it is dependent on these lower-level modes of reference.
Symbolic reference is also independent of any particular interpretive process, and
retains its referential invariance despite interpretation by very different iconic and
indexical processes in different minds. Its virtual nature notwithstanding, it is the
symbolic realm of consciousness that we most identify with and from which our
sense of agency and self-control originate. This self is indeed not bounded within a
mind or body, and derives its existence from outside – from other minds and other
times. It is implicitly part of a larger whole, and to the extent that it too contributes to
the formation of other virtual selves and worlds, it is virtually present independent
of the existence of the particular brain and body that support it. This may seem a
shallow sort of disembodiment that pales in compared to mystical images of “out of
the body experience” – it is more similar to the legacy of self composers leave in
their music or great teachers bequeath to their students – but this symbolic aspect of
self is nonetheless the source of our internal experience of free will and agency.
Abstract symbolic objects, like the Pythagorean theorem, guide the design and
construction of innumerable human artifacts every day. Imagining counterfactual

18
Excerpts from The Symbolic Species
575
conditions, like what I might have done if I were the one who had stumbled on
a reported accident scene, can cause me to enroll in medical ﬁrst-aid training
and perhaps some day aid an accident victim. Even imagined worlds – Olympus,
Valhalla, Heaven, Hell, the “Other Side” – inﬂuence people’s behavior inthis world.
Indeed, assumptions about the “will” of an ineffable God have been among the most
powerful tools for shaping historical changes. These abstract representations have
physical efﬁcacy. They can and do change the world. They are as real and concrete
as the force of gravity or the impact of a projectile.
On the other hand, the self that persists to inﬂuence others and continue shaping
the world independent of the brain and body that originally animated it is detached
from the speciﬁc iconic and indexical experiences that once grounded it in a personal
subjective experience. This is precisely what makes it available for regrounding in
the subjective experience of others, of becoming part of the self that controls, and
feels, and connects with yet other selves from the locus of a different body and
brain. In this regard, this part of personal identity is intersubjective in the most
thoroughgoing sense of the term, and is capable of true transmigration, though not
necessarily as a uniﬁed whole.
By this twist of logic, or rather its untangling, we also again return to Descartes’
elaboration of the religious insight that only humans have a soul, and that this core
of the self derives from a realm that is of the nature of language, pure mathemat-
ics, or geometry. Descartes’ insight, currently maligned as archaic and antiscientiﬁc,
seems to have more than a passing similarity to the notion I have developed here. But
his rationalist assumptions-like those represented in theories of innate knowledge of
language, computational theories of mind, or claims that human brains have a spe-
cial essence/that imbues them with intentional ability-reﬂected an implicit analytic
or top-down perspective on the nature of symbolic reference. By failing to appreciate
the constitutive role of lower forms of reference, iconic and indexical reference, this
perspective kicks the ladder away after climbing up to the symbolic realm and then
imagines that there never was a ladder in the ﬁrst place. This leaves symbolic refer-
ence ungrounded and forces us to introduce additional top-down causal hypotheses,
such as the existence of an ephemeral soul or the assumption that there can be forms
of computation or mental language (mentalese) that are intrinsically meaningful, in
order to ﬁll in for this missing causal role in the explanation.
But unlike the eliminative materialist alternative, the perspective I have outlined
does not suggest that this top-down experience of self is all epiphenomenal nor that
some of the claims about the nature of the mind which derive from it are based on
mystical notions. The symbolic representation of self is solidly grounded in simpler
representations of self, derived from simpler forms of representation, and yet the
arrow of cognitive processes points neither from lower to higher nor from higher to
lower forms of reference. As symbolic reference and symbol minds co-evolved from
the nonsymbolic, each level of process drawing adaptive novelty from the other, so
do the levels of self-representation that constitute our experience bring themselves
into being in a moment-by-moment coevolutionary process. As the symbolic pro-
cess can be the co-author of our unanticipated brains, so can the symbolic self be
the co-author of the component neural processes that support it. We live in a world

576
Terrence Deacon (1950– )
that is both entirely physical and virtual at the same time. Remarkably, this virtual
facet of the world came into existence relatively recently, as evolutionary time is
measured, and it has provided human selves with an unprecedented sort of autonomy
or freedom to wander from the constraints of concrete reference, and a unique power
for self-determination that derives from this increasingly indirect linkage between
symbolic mental representation and its grounds of reference. With it has come a
more indirect linkage between mind and body, as well. So this provides a somewhat
different perspective on that curious human intuition that our minds are somehow
independent of our bodies; an intuition which is often translated into beliefs about
disembodied spirit and souls that persist beyond death. The experience we have of
ourselves as symbols is in at least a minimal sense an experience of just this sort
of virtual independence – it’s just not an independence from corporeal embodiment
altogether. Though this might seem like a weak consolation in comparison to the
freely transmigrating homunculus of mythical tradition, we should not underesti-
mate the miraculous power of symbols to break down even vast barriers of space,
time, and idiosyncratic experience that would otherwise separate us impenetrably.
As we have seen, the symbolic threshold is not intrinsic to the human-nonhuman
difference. It is probably crossable to some extent in many different ways by many
species. This means that we are not the only species that could possess such a
“pilgrim soul,” to use William Butler Yeats’s elegantly descriptive phrase. It was
a Darwinian accident, or miracle, of nature that this ability arose once and persisted
for so long; but it has provided each of us with the opportunity to participate in
bringing new “souls” into the world, not by procreation, but by allowing our own
symbolic selves to be shared by other human beings, and perhaps by other animals,
or perhaps eventually even by artifacts of our own creation.
Ends
Thirty spokes share the wheel’s hub.
but it is the hole in the center that provides its usefulness
Lao Tsu, from the Tao Te Ching
As a species, we seem to be preoccupied with ends, in all senses of the word. We
organize our actions around imagined extrapolations of the consequences they will
produce, We struggle in vain to comprehend the implications of our own impending
cessation of life. And we weave marvelously and elaborate and beautifully obscure
stories to ﬁll our need to ﬁnd purpose in the fabric of the universe. This ﬁlls no
obvious adaptive need. Our evolution never included selection favoring anything
like this intense and desperate drive. And yet it is so powerful as to be able to
overcome some of the most irresistible predispositions that evolution has provided.
If we are language savants compared to other species, then a preoccupation with
ends is the special exaggerated compulsion that complements our unique gift.
Symbolic analysis is the basis for a remarkable new level of self-determination
that human beings alone have stumbled upon. The ability to use virtual reference

18
Excerpts from The Symbolic Species
577
to build up elaborate Internal models of possible futures, and to hold these com-
plex visions in mind with the force of the mnemonic glue of symbolic inference and
descriptive shorthands, gives us unprecedented capacity to generate independent
adaptive behaviors. Remarkable abstraction from indexically bound experiences is
further enhanced by the ability of symbol to reference to pick out tiny fragments of
real world processes and arrange them as bouys to chart an inferential course that
predicts physical and social events. The price we pay for this is that our symbol-
ically mediated actions can often be in conﬂict with motivations to act that arise
from more concrete and immediate biological sources. Arguments in support of the
classic notion of free will frequently cite this capacity to use reason (that is, sym-
bolic inference and model building) to overcome desire and compulsion. One might
respond that calling some actions “free” and others not oversimpliﬁes what is really
only a matter of the degree of the strengths of competing compulsions to act, some
compulsions arising from autonomic and hormonal sources and others from our
imagined satisfaction at reaching a symbolized goal. But there is an important sense
in which these competing compulsions are not equal.
Those that arise from purely physiological sources, or physiological sources
mediated by conditioned associations, could be called bottom-up processes for pro-
ducing action. They are much more tied to mechanism and thus exhibit few degrees
of freedom and limited spontaneous variation, They are comparatively predictable,
though any organismic process inevitably exhibits tangled paths of causality. But
symbolically mediated compulsions to act are far more chaotic, in the technical
sense of that word, far more susceptible to the inﬂuence of tiny initial differences
in starting assumptions or ways of dividing up experiences and qualities symboli-
cally. This is because symbolically mediated models of things – whether theories,
stories, or just rationally argued predictions-exhibit complicated nonlinearity and
recursive structure as well as nearly inﬁnite ﬂexibility and capacity for novelty due
to their combinatorial nature. It is not so much that our actions arise from a totally
unconstrained and compulsion-free center of intentions, but that the potential start-
ing point, the intended purpose we have modeled, can be drawn from such a vast
variety of alternatives with little initial difference in motive power.
Final causality, according to Aristotle, is exhibited when processes are driven
not by antecedent physical conditions but by ends. In some ways this is like time
reversed. In hindsight it is easy to infer that certain past conditions were necessitated
by the way things turned out. Deductive inference is a lot like this sort of reﬂective
inversion of temporal and physical order. The consequence is already implicitly
included in the premises. In symbolic thinking, this results in what might be called
a sort of symbolic compulsion. Certain statements compel certain others. Aristotle
reserved another term for such compulsion – formal causality – but I think there is
an important way that this links to the other, classic conception of cause in terms
of the ways that symbols work. Little of our reasoning is so precise as to be called
deductive, and yet the way that certain beliefs compel others can have neatly this
force. Ideologies, religions, and just good explanations or stories thus exert a sort
of inferential compulsion on us that is hard to resist because of their mutually rein-
forcing deductive and inductive links. Our end-directed behaviors are in this way

578
Terrence Deacon (1950– )
often derived from such “compulsions” as are implicit in the form that underlies the
ﬂow of inferences. So one might say that thinking in symbols is a means whereby
formal causes can determine ﬁnal causes. The abstract nature of this source makes
for a top-down causality, even if implemented on a bottom-up biological machine.
Though the evolution of brains has been about systems for modeling and pre-
dicting events in the world, the evolution of symbolic abilities has not just ampliﬁed
this ability far beyond that in any other species, it has also introduced an insidi-
ously inverted modeling tendency. The symbolic capacity seems to have brought
with it a predisposition to project itself into what it models. The savant, instead of
seeing a ﬁeld of wildﬂowers, sees 247 ﬂowers. Similarly, we don’t just see a world
of physical processes, accidents, reproducing organisms, and biological informa-
tion processors churning out complex plans, desires, and needs. Instead, we see the
handiwork of an inﬁnite wisdom, the working out of a divine plan, the children of
a creator, and a conﬂict between those on the side of good and those on the side of
evil. We carry a nagging doubt about anything really being accidental. Coincidence
isn’t just coincidence, it’s a sign, and bad luck and disease don’t just happen, per-
haps a sorcerer has wished harm on the village. Wherever we look, we expect to ﬁnd
purpose. All things can be seen as signs and symbols of an all-knowing conscious-
ness at work, or the marks of mythical events that occur in a dream time, behind the
scenes of the universe. We are not just applying symbolic interpretations to human
words and events; all the universe has become a symbol.
This is the evidence that we have become symbolic savants in the deeper sense of
that metaphor. We are not just a species that uses symbols. The symbolic universe
has ensnared us in an inescapable web. Like a “mind virus,” the symbolic adaptation
has infected us, and now by virtue of the irresistible urge it has instilled in us to turn
everything we encounter and everyone we meet into symbols, we have become the
means by which it unceremoniously propagates itself throughout the world.
It is clear that we feel more comfortable in a world that is meaningful, living a
life that has meaning. The alternative is somehow too frightening. But why? Why
should the ability to acquire symbolic abilities and conceive of things symbolically
also bring with it a powerful urge to see it in every conceivable context? It could be
seen as part of the predisposition to acquire symbols in the ﬁrst place, part of the
overdesign of the mind to ensure that symbols get discovered. But I think it may be a
more mundane feature of cognitive and sensorimotor biases in general. The autistic
savant is in this way no different from the kitten that sees every small mobile object
as a representative prey toy, or the baby who interacts with every holdable object
as a thing to be put into the mouth – for reasons that probably ﬂow ineluctably
from the Darwinian-competitive structure of neural information processing. Brains
are spontaneously active biological computers in which activity patterns incessantly
compete for wider expression throughout each network. Under these conditions, the
dominant operation simply runs on its own and assimilates whatever is available.
In us, this appears to be the expression of what I have called front-heavy cognition,
driven by an overactive, busybody prefrontal cortex. It gets expressed as a need to
recode our experiences, to see everything as a representation, to expect there to be a
deeper hidden logic. Even when we don’t believe in it, we ﬁnd ourselves captivated

18
Excerpts from The Symbolic Species
579
by the lure of numerology, astrology, or the global intrigue of conspiracy theories.
This is the characteristic expression of a uniquely human cognitive style; the mark
of a thoroughly symbolic species.
One of the essentially universal attributes of human culture is what might be
called the mystical or religious inclination. There is no culture I know of that lacks
a rich mythical, mystical, and religious tradition. And there is no culture that doesn’t
devote much of this intense interpretive enterprise to struggling with the very per-
sonal mystery of mortality. Knowledge of death, of the inconceivable possibility
that the experiences of life will end, is a datum that only symbolic representa-
tion can impart. Other species may experience loss, and the pain of separation, and
the difﬁculty of abandoning a dead companion; yet without the ability to represent
this abstract counterfactual (at least for the moment) relationship, there can be no
emotional connection to one’s own future death. But this news, which all children
eventually discover as they develop their symbolic abilities, provides an unbidden
opportunity to turn the naturally evolved social instinct of loss and separation in on
itself to create a foreboding sense of fear, sorrow, and impending loss with respect
to our own lives, as if locking back from an impossible future. No feature of the
limbic system has evolved to handle this ubiquitous virtual sense of loss, Indeed, I
wonder if this isn’t one of the most maladaptive of the serendipitous consequences
of the evolution of symbolic abilities. What great efforts we exert trying to forget
our future fate by submerging the constant angst with innumerable distractions, or
trying to convince ourselves that the end isn’t really what it seems by weaving mar-
velous alternative interpretations of what will happen in “the undiscovered country”
on the other side of death.
In many ways this is the source both of what is most noble and most patholog-
ical in human behaviors. Supported by these interpretations, reason can recruit the
strength to face the threat of emptiness in the service of shared values and aspi-
rations. But the dark side of religious belief and powerful ideology is that they so
often provide twisted justiﬁcations for arbitrarily sparing or destroying lives. Their
symbolic power can trap us in a web of oppression, as we try through ritual action
and obsessive devotion to a cause to maintain a psychic safety net that protects us
from our fears of purposelessness. The interaction of symbolic cultural evolution
and unprepared biology has created some of the most inﬂuential and virulent sys-
tems of symbols the world has ever known. Few if any societies have ever escaped
the grip of powerful beliefs that cloak the impenetrable mystery of human life and
death in a cocoon of symbolism and meaning. The history of the 20th century, like
all those recorded before it, is sadly written in the blood that irreconcilable symbol
systems have spilt between them. Perhaps this is because the savantlike compulsion
to see symbols in everything reaches its most irresistible expression when it comes
to the symbolization of our own lives’ end. We inevitably imagine ourselves as sym-
bols, as the tokens of a deeper discourse of the world. But symbols are subject to
being rendered meaningless by contradiction, and this makes alternative models of
the world direct threats to existence.
Almost certainly this is one of the other deﬁning features of the human mentality:
an ever present virtual experience of our own loss. And yet we know so little about

580
Terrence Deacon (1950– )
what it is that we fear to lose. Perhaps if we understood this symbolic compulsion,
and the consciousness it brings with it, we might ﬁnd this emptiness at the center a
bit less disturbing.
References
Cheney, D., Seyfarth, R. (1992) Meaning, reference, and intentionality in the natural vocalizations
of monkeys. In: Nishida, T., McGrew, C. W., Marler, P., Pickford, M., de Waal, F. (Eds.) Topics
in Primatology, Vol. 1: Human Origins. Tokyo: Tokyo University Press.
de Saussure, F. (1916) Cours de linguistique générale. Paris: Payot. See also the 1969 translation
by Baskin, W.: Course in General Linguistics. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Peirce, C. S. (1978) Collected Papers. Vol. II. Elements of Logic. Hartshorne, C., Weiss, P. (Eds.),
Cambridge, MA: Belknap.
Piaget, J. (1952) The Origins of Intelligence in Children. New York: International Universities
Press.
Rumbaugh, D. (Ed.) (1977) Language Learning by a Chimpanzee: The Lana Project. New York:
Academic Press.
Savage-Rumbaugh, E. S. (1986) Ape Language: From Conditioned Response to Symbol. New
York: Columbia University Press.
Savage-Rumbaugh, E. S., Rumbaugh, D. M., Boysen, S. (1978) Symbolization, language and
chimpanzees: A theoretical reevaluation based on initial language acquisition processes in four
young Pan troglodytes. Brain and Language 6, 265.
Savage-Rumbaugh, E. S., Rumbaugh, D. M., Smith, S. T., Lawson, J. (1980) Reference: The
linguistic essential. Science 210, 922–925.
Savage-Rumbaugh, E. S., Lewin, R. (1994) Kanzi: The Ape at the Brink of the Human Mind.
New York: John Wiley.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978) Mind in Society. Initially translated by Luria, A. R. and Cole,M.,
John-Steiner, V., Scribner, S., Souberman, E. (Eds.) Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Part IV
The Contemporary Interdiscipline
of Biosemiotics

Chapter 19
The Semiotics of Nature: Code-Duality
Jesper Hoffmeyer (1942– )
Introduction and Commentary: Jesper Hoffmeyer
Transdisciplinarity will be of no help so long as everybody stays safely inside her own
disciplinary borders, politely transgressing no internal disciplinary taboos. Rather, ‘inter-
disciplinary scholarship’ only becomes fruitful when we collectively take the risk to confront
problems in the ways those problems may be seen within disciplines other than our own.
J. Hoffmeyer (2008: xvi)
A proliﬁc science writer and journalist, as well as a working university profes-
sor and molecular biologist, Jesper Hoffmeyer was born in Copenhagen, Denmark
on Februrary 21, 1942. “Born during the second world war in occupied Denmark
and to a family with strong anticlerical and moderate leftist persuasions,” recounts
Hoffmeyer, “I was destined to develop a materialistic, and indeed a positivistic,
understanding of our world. To ﬁght irrationalism in all its disguises was an inher-
ent value in my upbringing and in choosing to become a biochemist, I faithfully
continued along this path . . . But over time, it gradually occurred to me that some
of the central tenets of such materialistic self-conﬁdence were perhaps less secure
than had been previously assumed” (2010: forthcoming).
In particular, as a biochemist working at the University of Copenhagen’s
Molecular Biology Department during the rise of genetic determinism and the
promiscuous, if conceptually ungrounded, use of the term “information” in molecu-
lar biology in the 1960s and 1970s, Hoffmeyer became increasingly concerned over
the fact that, despite its self-evidently anti-scientiﬁc implications,
Cartesian dualism, to modern science, still holds good as a way of dividing the world into
two kingdoms: those of mind and matter, or the cultural and the natural spheres. . . .[As
a result,] we have no idea what to think about the various consequences for humanity of
biomedical technology. We have no real conception of how a minded humanity could have
evolved out of a mindless natural world, and not even the beginnings of a decent theory
as to what consciousness actually is. In short, we have not even touched on the question
of humanity’s place in nature. Indeed, how could we, when we have consistently placed
people – as minded beings – outside the brackets in the study of nature? . . .[Yet, rather than
facing up to these dilemmas, the institutional adoption of] Cartesian non-intervention is
still the easiest compromise and one which ensures that both the humanities and the natural
583
D. Favareau, Essential Readings in Biosemiotics, Biosemiotics 3,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9650-1_19, C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010

584
Jesper Hoffmeyer (1942– )
sciences can get on with their work undisturbed. And it is this boundary that biosemiotics
seeks to cross, in the hopes of establishing a link between the two alienated sides of our
existence – to give humanity its place in nature. (1996: 92–94).
Hoffmeyer’s work since that time has been devoted to bridging this deep divide
in human knowledge and self-understanding. It is therefore hardly surprising that
he would eventually make the acquaintance of Thomas A. Sebeok. Sebeok, in turn,
would become a great promoter of Hoffmeyer’s work, devoting an entire issue of his
journal, Semiotica, to a critical appreciation of Hoffmeyer’s seminal biosemiotics
monograph, Signs of Meaning in the Universe (1996).
The meeting between Sebeok and Hoffmeyer would not take place until 1990,
however but by 1985, report Hoffmeyer’s biographers, and independent of any
knowledge about Sebeok’s project whatsoever, Hoffmeyer had already begun work-
ing on his own project “to develop a semiotics of nature, or biosemiotics as he chose
to call this effort, [that could intelligibly explain how] all the phenomena of inherent
meaning and signiﬁcation in living nature – from the lowest level of sign processes
in unicellular organisms to the cognitive and social behavior of animals – could
emerge from a universe that was not [so] organized and meaningful from the very
beginning” (Emmeche et al. 2002: 41). And, parallel to Sebeok’s discoveries on the
other side of the Atlantic, Hoffmeyer’s investigations into the semiotic logic of rela-
tions between organisms and their environment (1984), between organisms and each
other (1988), and within organisms (1992) eventually led him to the triadic logic of
the 19th century scientist-philosopher Charles S. Peirce (1996, 2008).
“I was never interested in learning Philosophy or Semiotics simply for the sake of
learning them,” recalls Hoffmeyer during a roundtable discussion session featuring
some of the founders of contemporary biosemiotics in 2007, “Rather, I found that
I had to learn these things in order to be able to do Biology correctly” he recalls
(Favareau et al. 2008a: 3).
For “only a sufﬁciently rich concept of semiosis,” writes Hoffmeyer, “can pro-
vide the conceptual tools necessary to explanatorily re-integrate living creatures
(including, of course, human beings) into the natural world from which they came –
but from which they have since been effectively excluded by a scientiﬁc ontology
that has, at least since the time of Descartes, consistently encouraged scientists to
de-semiotize [or, conversely, to un-self-reﬂectively anthropomorphise] all the nat-
urally occurring communicative and fundamentally interactive processes of living
systems” (Hoffmeyer 2008: xvi, xiv).
Developing this rich notion of semiosis from within the scientiﬁc community was
an additional challenge for Hoffmeyer, just as it was for Sebeok, who was simul-
taneously trying to such an understanding from within the largely science-averse
intellectual community of the humanities. Yet, as was likewise the case with Sebeok,
Hoffmeyer’s personal passion and dedication to this project – as well as the ground-
breaking nature of the publications that he began producing – soon drew an ever-
growing coterie of like-minded individuals into his orbit. In 1984, his initial for-
mulation of a theory of analog-digital “code-duality” in biology was published, and
soon thereafter he began his intensive series of collaborations with biologist Claus
Emmeche, who would later go on to head the Center for the Philosophy of Nature

19
The Semiotics of Nature: Code-Duality
585
and Science Studies at the Neils Bohr Institute in the University of Copenhagen,
and to become a major ﬁgure in biosemiotics in his own right, in addition to author-
ing a body of related work on dynamic systems theory (1992, 2000a), artiﬁcial
intelligence (1991, 1994), and the history and philosophy of science (1999, 2002).
The story of Hoffmeyer’s subsequent 25 years work in disseminating biosemi-
otics into the larger scientiﬁc community and to the generally educated public –
and of his picking up of Thomas A. Sebeok’s torch by organizing interdisciplinary
biosemiotics conferences after the death of Sebeok in 2001–has been recounted in
considerable detail in the “history of biosemiotics” chapter that opens this anthol-
ogy as its Chapter One. However, some additional recollections of that era from
Hoffmeyer himself, prepared as part of a memorial volume to Thomas A. Sebeok,
provide a memorable picture of the project in its early days. As this text is unlikely
to be widely available elsewhere, and since the theoretical aspects of Hoffmeyer’s
biosemiotic project have already been substantially detailed in Chapter One, these
most recent autobiographical recollections are worth reprinting here in full, and help
serve as an excellent historical orientation to the reprinted selection that follows.
Writes Hoffmeyer:
“In the late 1980s I decided to brave the common sense conceptions of the nat-
ural science society in Denmark by actively engaging my research in pursuit of a
study of natural semiosis. This decision did bring me outside the good company of
science, but fortunately, it also brought me into the very good company of Thomas
A. Sebeok [whose] idea of animals as semiotic creatures was probably as much
at odds with hegemonial conceptions in the humanities as was the idea of ‘natural
semiosis’ in the scientiﬁc establishment. [The way in which this historic meeting
came about is as follows:] In 1988 Claus Emmeche and I wrote two papers ana-
lyzing different aspects of the concept of a semiotics of nature – mostly, at ﬁrst,
to clarify our own thoughts on the matter. Eventually we considered the possibil-
ity of publishing these papers that obviously did not ﬁt into the normal schemes of
scientiﬁc journals. Through tortuous paths, one of the papers reached the hands of
Myrdene Anderson, who offered to publish it in the book she was editing with Floyd
Merrell called On Semiotic Modelling (this was Hoffmeyer and Emmeche 1991).
The other paper was submitted to the Journal of Social and Biological Structures,
but never reached the editorial process since the journal had, unknown to us, just
recently stopped publishing. Tom Sebeok later told me that Harvey Wheeler, the
editor of this journal, had turned a couple of its unpublished papers over to him, and
among them was our joint paper, which then ﬁnally appeared in Semiotica in 1991
(as Emmeche and Hoffmeyer 1991). I recollect this event as the ﬁrst time that we
directly communicated with Tom.
“In retrospect, I think that two things are worthwhile noticing about the course of
events that ﬁnally led to the publication of these two early papers. First, the separa-
tion between natural science and the humanities was so ingrained in our minds that it
had not occurred to us, as biologists, to search the semiotic literature for precedents
of reﬂections on the semiotics of nature – and it was thus only after having submit-
ted the papers we learned about Tom Sebeok’s work. Second, very likely we might
have searched in vain for a scientiﬁc journal willing to publish those papers, and
the surprising open-mindedness towards our ideas that we did ultimately encounter

586
Jesper Hoffmeyer (1942– )
in the semiotic society does, to a high extent, reﬂect the efforts that Tom had, for
two decades, invested to implant biosemiotics into the recognized landscape of the
discipline. In the absence of the reception that our paper received from the semiotic
society, we might, I am afraid, have given up all together pursuing the subject of the
semiotics of nature any further than those two, then, unpublished manuscripts.
“There was one other string leading us to Sebeok’s world, however, and that was
a string leading the German semiotic society, especially Martin Krampen’s work
on phytosemiotics (Krampen 1981), and further to the late Thure von Uexküll,
who was then a professor emeritus of internal medicine at Ulm University. Tom
and Thure had become friends through their collaboration of reintroducing Jakob
von Uexküll’s work to the English speaking world (Uexküll 1982 (1940), Uexküll
1992), and now, in 1990, they cooperated on establishing the ﬁrst international
English-language meeting devoted exclusively to biosemiotics. The meeting was
organized by Jörg Hermann and took place on June 7–9, 1990, in the most beauti-
ful Schwartswald landscape at the Glotterbad Rehabilitation Clinic where professor
Hermann was, and still is, head of the medical section. And although these early
Glotterbad meetings did not, in the end, produce an international biosemiotic soci-
ety – that would have to wait until 2005 – they did surely signal the birth of
biosemiotics as a viable ﬁeld of study, if not a discipline.
“Thus, while for the next decade biosemiotics would mainly unfold its life in
modesty, and under a diversity of umbrellas – ranging from literature and semiotics
proper to evolutionary biology – it deﬁnitely did grow in maturity and authority dur-
ing the 1990s, helped to no slight degree by the efforts of Tom Sebeok, who not only
did everything he could to initiate, promote, and publish works on biosemiotics but
also was always personally available with advice and encouragement through his
legendary e-mail network. . . .[Accordingly,] in my speech of thanks at the occasion
of the 25th Annual Meeting of the Semiotic Society of America in 2000, where I was
awarded the Thomas A. Sebeok Fellowship, I dared prophesize that “I ﬁnd it reason-
able to expect that biosemiotics will slowly ﬁnd its way into the very diverse garden
of biological sciences. As such it will grow, we may hope, to become one strong
resource for biological theorizing, among others” (Hoffmeyer 2010: forthcoming).
By the time that Hoffmeyer received the Sebeok Fellowship award, biosemi-
otics as an interdisciplinary research agenda was indeed growing – and by 2004,
Hoffmeyer had completed his second major treatise on biosemiotics, from which
the following selection is reprinted. Translated by Hoffmeyer himself from Danish
into English, and appearing in 2008 as Biosemiotics: An Examination Into the Signs
of Life and the Life of Signs, this successor volume to his popular and easily acces-
sible Signs of Meaning in the Universe (1996) was written for a more scientiﬁcally
sophisticated audience, or at least one conceptually equipped by having read and
understood the prior text. Still, although the latter volume’s target audience is some-
what different than the former’s, Hoffmeyer’s journalism-honed prose remains as
unpretentious and accessible here as ever, requiring little in the way of preliminary
explanation, as Hoffmeyer discusses one of the fundamental notions of his biosemi-
otic theory – that of “code-duality” – in the following reprinted selection from his
most recent monograph on biosemiotics.

19
The Semiotics of Nature: Code-Duality
587
The Semiotics of Nature: Code-Duality (2008)
Preface
When a brown hare spots a fox approaching in the open landscape, the hare stands
bolt upright and signals its presence instead of ﬂeeing. The explanation for this
behavior, according to ethologist Anthony Holley (1993), is that a hare can easily
escape a fox simply by running – a fact that the fox seems to “know” (whether by
learning or instinct). Apparently, then, what is happening in this situation is that the
hare’s behavior sends a message to the fox: “I have seen you” – and as a result, they
can both be spared the effort of running.
A modern Darwinist may claim that this communicative exchange is easily
explained by the increased ﬁtness conferred upon individuals by the lowering of
their energy expenditures. That is an important insight with which I shall not quarrel.
And yet, I cannot help feeling that something is missing in this kind of explana-
tion. For how can we be so sure that these animals themselves – as environmentally
situated organisms of blood, ﬂesh and brain – take no creative part in their own
behavior? The Neo-Darwinist explanation would require us to delegate to their
genetic apparatus the whole burden of anticipating the outcome of all and every
future communicative situation these animals may encounter. But why would evo-
lution equip mammals with brains containing billions of extremely energy-costly
nerve cells if such brains were then not allowed to make any decisions not already
anticipated by the genes?
Charles Darwin (1871 [1981]) the more traditional Darwinists got it right in the
sense that no behavior is likely to evolve in the organic world that signiﬁcantly
lowers the ﬁtness of phenotypes exhibiting such behavior. This is an extremely
important insight – but it should not blind us to the deeper questions surrounding
the undeniable intentionality of communicative behavior. Living creatures are not
just senseless units in the gene survival game, they also experience life (and perhaps
even “enjoy” it as we say when human animals are concerned).
In other words, there is, as we shall see in this book, an element of natural play,
and not just of natural selection, discoverable in the natural world. There, organisms
never “try to survive” – for the simple reason that they cannot know that they are
going to die. Rather, they try to escape or to counteract life-threatening events as
those events present themselves; more precisely: they just do what they must to do
to live. In brief: Organisms strive, and this striving – a word Darwin did not himself
shy away from using – cannot be set aside in any genuine attempt to understand the
workings of animate natural systems.
Making scientiﬁcally responsible sense of this “striving” is one of the challenges
that the emerging scientiﬁc ﬁeld called biosemiotics sets out to accept – and it does
so by presenting an understanding that communication is more than just machine-
like exchange of information-packets. True communication, biosemiotics argues, is
based on semiosis, or sign processes. Sign processes are what this book is all about,
and I shall be delving deeply into the question of “What is a sign?” – As well as

588
Jesper Hoffmeyer (1942– )
many questions regarding how can signs be understood scientiﬁcally – throughout
this text.
For the purposes of this preface, however, it will sufﬁce for now just to say that
a sign is something that refers to something else – with the essential addition that it
takes somebody (i.e., a receptive living system) to make the reference. The meaning
conferred by a sign is thus acutely dependent on the nature and the context of its
receptive system, the sensing body – and its relations with externality are mediated
at all points by the active establishment and disestablishment of such signs. A sign
process, then, is more than just a mechanical transfer of information packets because
the sign embraces a process of interpretation. And yet, it is precisely the phenomena
that comprise this interpretative activity that is neglected (and not recognized as
engendering its own measure of causal efﬁcacy in the world) in both traditionally
conceived Information Theory and in most contemporary mainstream Evolutionary
Theory.
Yet by making just this slight (and empirically well-justiﬁed) expansion in our
basic view of nature – i.e., to accept that semiosis and interpretative processes are
essential components in the dynamics of natural systems – biosemiotics, as I hope
to show – provides the conceptual tools necessary to explanatorily reintegrate living
creatures (including, of course, human beings), into the natural world from which
they came . . . and from which they have been effectively excluded by a scientiﬁc
ontology that has, at least since the time of Descartes, consistently encouraged scien-
tists to de-semiotize all the naturally communicative and fundamentally interactive
processes of living systems.
Caveats
When I set out to write this book in 1999, biosemiotics was still in its initial phase
en route to becoming an autonomous ﬁeld of its own (I will provide some further
background on the history of the ﬁeld in the Post Scriptum to this book). Back then,
however, apart from a small group of semioticians who were following the lead
of the pioneering linguist and semiotician Thomas A. Sebeok, only a handful of
medical doctors and biologists were actively engaged in investigating the potential
of this newly developing perspective on the study of life. The whole ﬁeld was at the
time relatively open, but also largely anchored in a shared understanding of semiotic
processes derived from the pioneering sign logic of the American logician, scientist
and philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914).
Today, only one decade later, the situation has radically changed and biosemi-
otics has been taken up as a ﬁeld of study by chemists and physicists, as wells
as philosophers and cognitive scientists, anthropologists, psychologists and schol-
ars from many other disciplines in both the humanities and the natural sciences.
This growth spurt in the development of biosemiotics as an international research
project is welcome, since it will force every one of us who is working in this ﬁeld
to become more exacting in our arguments, and because it widens up the agenda of
the biosemiotic perspective to encompass the entire study of life.

19
The Semiotics of Nature: Code-Duality
589
But this recent rapid growth also entails that the views that I present in this book
may not cover all the competing conceptions of biosemiotics now being debated
within the ﬁeld. I have chosen, nevertheless, to keep the title Biosemiotics from the
original Danish edition of this book, for although there are certainly now other views
of the ﬁeld, this book surely comes close to expressing the original understanding
of biosemiotics as envisioned by Thomas A. Sebeok and Thure von Uexküll – as
well as, I feel conﬁdent, the majority (although certainly not all) of those scholars
that are currently engaged themselves in the development of biosemiotics.
It is unavoidable too, I suppose, that this text reﬂects my own original back-
ground as a biochemist and scientist. Many readers might have wished for a broader
treatment of areas such as zoosemiotics or medical biosemiotics, and also perhaps
for a more comprehensive analysis of Peircean philosophyas a resource base from
which to explicate the biosemiotic approach. I can only hope that such readers will
show tolerance towards these perceived deﬁcits in the text. No single person can
claim competence in all the varied scientiﬁc disciplines that must be brought into
play in order to reveal biosemiotics in all of its potential and, at the same time, to
consistently grapple with all the philosophical implications that it holds.
Similarly, another group of readers may argue that the investigation into sign
processes at the “micro level” – i.e., cytosemiotics and, in general, endosemiotics –
have been given undue emphasis in the book. I have done this for a reason, however.
For biosemiotics is often dismissed by scholars – not least, those from the human-
ities – who fundamentally misconceive it as an attempt to project anthropomorphic
features upon an existing world of nature that, as we all learned in school, can easily
be explained without reference to human mental states and constructs. Yet I believe
that no other caricature could more mischaracterize the true aims and principles of
biosemiotics – and indeed, I, too, discuss the fallacy of anthropomorphism in some
depth later in this book.
Rejecting anthropomorphic explanations of nature, while not falling into the
opposite trap of eliminative reductionism, biosemiotic analysis is yet, too, a rejec-
tion of the idea of scientiﬁc knowledge as a kind of knowledge obtained by taking, to
use Thomas Nagel’s felicitous expression, the “view from nowhere” – the assump-
tion that the knowledge of reality that we do have, in other words, does not include
ourselves as knowing creatures produced by, and inside of, the very same nature
that we are attempting to explain. This conception of scientiﬁc knowledge is not
only absurd, but it systematically corrupts our understanding of the world because
it hides the very tools that might help us to see how we both emerge from, and still
now essentially belong in, nature – and to thereby be able to scientiﬁcally answer
another question that Nagel puts to us: “How can it be the case that one of the (the
objective set of) ‘people in the world’ is . . . me?” (Nagel 1986: 13).
We may not feel that we can ever answer this question adequately, but a ﬁrst
premise for approaching such an answer must be that we can somehow explain the
existence of me-ness in the world. How could evolution create such a strange thing
as a self-reﬂective “me” or an “I”? An evolutionary theory that does not give us
any tools to see how such a question can be meaningfully answered leaves us as
objectiﬁed biological robots, or zombies. I must assert upfront that I ﬁrmly believe

590
Jesper Hoffmeyer (1942– )
that neither the reader nor I are zombies – and consequently, that a decent biology
must search for the evolutionary root forms of what it is to be an “I”, or a ﬁrst person
singularis.
A key to answering this question, I am going to argue in this work, lies in a sufﬁ-
ciently rich concept of semiosis. Biosemiotic analysis takes us back to the questions
of how life and semiosis ﬁrst appeared on Earth, and we shall see that these are,
in fact, not two distinct questions, but a single united one: semiosis is an essential
aspect of life already at the primitive unicellular level. It is my guess that readers
not only from the sciences, but also from the humanities, will be greatly surprised
to learn how nearly impossible it is to gain an understanding of the interactions
and organization constituting the world of living nature without a semiotic termi-
nology and – perhaps even more fundamentally, a semiotic way of thinking. I do
hope, moreover, that this book will show that the attempt to cross the traditional
borders between major areas in university life does bring us necessary new insights.
Transdisciplinarity will be of no help so long as everybody stays safely inside his or
her own disciplinary borders, politely transgressing no internal disciplinary taboos.
Rather, “interdisciplinary scholarship” only becomes fruitful when we collectively
take the risk to confront problems in the ways those very same problems may be
seen within disciplines other than our own.
Accordingly, the major challenge in writing this book has not so much been
to assemble and to present the many and varied kinds of knowledge that must be
assimilated in order for the biosemiotic project to take on its real signiﬁcance. It
does indeed appear at ﬁrst glance to be a far jump from the analysis of “languaging”
in the human animal to the analysis of “courtship trembling” in the water mite, or
from “the logic of self-organization and emergence” to “the biosemiotics of modern
petrochemical agriculture.” So I have tried to make clear all the conceptual links
and unique level properties that come into play as we move from one of these
phenomena to the other.
A harder problem by far, however, lies in the attempt to surmount the theoret-
ical and philosophical difﬁculties of putting insights from areas that traditionally
have been seen as “scientiﬁc” into play with insights that have traditionally seen as
“belonging to the humanities” (Hoffmeyer 1975). For on the one hand, biosemiotics
is engaged in developing conceptual tools for theoretical biology (and thereby also,
indirectly, for experimental biology), while on the other hand, biosemiotics con-
tributes to the development of a general semiotics that will be inclusive enough to
conceptualize the human being as being not only in, but also deeply of, nature – and
in so doing, biosemiotics contributes to renewed reﬂections in natural philosophy.
Moreover, because of the ambitious nature of the attempt, I have little doubt but
that readers coming from backgrounds on each side of the Cartesian disciplinary
divide will at times feel their scholarly sensitivities violated by this book. To them,
I may only suggest that they attempt to localize their misgivings not to the entire
project undertaken here, but only to such particular mistakes and misstatements as
they may ﬁnd herein – and to share my own hope that time will teach us all to do
a better job of transdisicplinary communication. For there is no way that we can
make progress, if we allow ourselves to remain stuck, each on our respective sides

19
The Semiotics of Nature: Code-Duality
591
of the Cartesian dividing line, in our attempts to understand a reality that refuses to
so divide itself.
And in that regard, I believe that I need to add one further note of explanation
here at the outset of this book. This concerns my belief that if communication across
large ranges of scientiﬁc disciplines shall succeed in producing new fruitful ideas, it
is absolutely necessary to transcend the narrow terminology of each particular dis-
cipline in our speaking to one another. Terms are used in very different senses inside
different disciplines and it has been my experience that everyday language should be
used as much as it is practically possible to do so when undertaking transdisciplinary
work, in order to make one’s ideas as explicit as possible to all participants in the
conversation. Thus, for example, throughout this book I have deliberately employed
illustrative materials that may seem like simple text book ﬁgures to the expert eye.
Such a commitment to baseline clarity and explicitness is often misunderstood as
disciplinary trivialization – but I believe that one should rather see it as a necessary
step in the research process itself. We do not get anywhere if we do not understand
each other, which means that the mediating process becomes itself a vital part of all
transdisciplinary research.
Code Duality
Weismannism
In the 1890s, the German naturalist August Weismann famously showed that
somatic cells and germ cells lead totally separate lives in the organism. A cell line
consists of a clone of cells that can be traced directly back to a single ancestor cell,
and Weismann argued that the separation between the cell lines that will become
sex cells and those that will differentiate into all of the other cells of the body takes
place early in embryogenesis. This ﬁnding was signiﬁcant, for it seemed to imply
that properties acquired by the organism during the course of its own life cannot
in any way affect the sex cells, and thus, the offspring. In other words: acquired
properties are not heritable – and in showing this, Weismann hoped he had safely
refuted the mechanism for evolution proposed nearly a century earlier by the French
biologist Jean Baptiste Lamarck (Lamarck 1809).
Yet as we shall see, Weismann’s new doctrine has turned out to be far from as
certain as it was for a long time thought to be. For by and large, it is difﬁcult to
understand the great and enduring signiﬁcance ascribed to Weismannism if one does
not also reﬂect upon the ideological and religious aspects of the scientiﬁc contro-
versy between Lamarckism and Darwinism that this doctrine more than anything
else would put an end to. That the cruel and purposeless process that natural selec-
tion essentially is should be the real cause behind the wonderful arrangement of
life forms in animate nature – and thus also the explanation for our own human
nature – was not a message that most people liked to believe. Many, therefore, took
refuge in various versions of neo-Lamarckism, doctrines that not only implied the

592
Jesper Hoffmeyer (1942– )
possibility that traits that one had cultivated in one’s own life could be inherited by
one’s children, but also – and more importantly – implied the belief that there was in
nature an inherent strive for perfection – la marche de la nature in Lamarck’s terms.
It should be noted here that at the end of the 19th century, Darwinism was nothing
like the uncontested theory in biology that it is today – and there was indeed no
really compelling biological evidence for its truth (Ruse 1979). Religious forces in
the United States, in particular, were capable of successfully ﬁghting Darwinism for
a considerable portion of the early 20th century – and especially in paleontology
the eventual conversion to Darwinism became a long, drawn-out affair. Similarly,
the animosity against religion was a frequent component in Darwinian rhetoric and
Weismann himself was a dedicated materialist with an aversion to the spiritualist and
vitalist overtones present in much neo-Lamarckian theorizing of the time (Depew
and Weber 1995, Depew 2003).
Dusty as these conﬂicts may seem today, there is no doubt that ﬁres are still smol-
dering within their ashes. For to the modern mind, Darwinism stands for rationality,
materialism, and clear separation of science from ideology or religion – whereas
Lamarckism brings associations of irrationalism and religious interference in scien-
tiﬁc matters. Thus, still today, critical re-considerations of Darwinism automatically
call forth a suspicion that it is, in fact, not just the speciﬁc postulates of Darwinism –
but scientiﬁc rationality as such – that is being rejected. The old conﬂicts between
science and the Church are not so easily forgotten.
Here, however, we must nevertheless venture to have a closer look at this whole
complex of ideas. For we are going to argue that Weismann’s doctrine is based
on a speciﬁc semiotic trick that is characteristic of living systems in general – a
trick which Weismann himself could not have uncovered, because it presupposes
a knowledge about the molecular-semiotic dynamics of life processes that had not
yet been discovered in his time. And yet while the inner core of Weismannism will
be in a certain sense conﬁrmed by this reformulated understanding, it is one which
in no way supports the aggressive transmission-genetic1 reduction of evolutionary
biology that Weismannism otherwise seems to justify. On the contrary, it appears
that the Weismann doctrine depends on a duality between analogue and digital rep-
resentations that opens the door to a sophisticated interaction between the domains
of the genetic and the somatic.
1 Genetics, properly speaking, comprises both a transmission aspect and an expression aspect.
The transmission aspect is concerned with the transmission of genes from generation to gener-
ation, whereas the expression aspect deals with the question of how genes actually do produce
the traits ascribed to them. For most of its history, however, the science of genetics has restricted
itself to the ﬁrst of these two aspects, the transmission phenomena, while more or less leaving
the expression problem for the future. It is one thing, for instance, to claim that the taboo against
incest is genetically anchored, quite another to explain how a gene might manage to cause such an
effect. See more on this in Chapter “Universe of Mind: The Semiophere”, especially Lenny Moss’s
distinction between gene-P and gene-D (Moss 2001). This emphasis on the transmission aspects,
of course, has made the reductionist strategy so much easier to perpetuate.

19
The Semiotics of Nature: Code-Duality
593
Life as a Dead End
In textbook versions of Weismann’s doctrine, the reader usually is shown a ﬁgure
with a sequence of sex cells connected by arrows from left to right, and where
from each sex cell, a diagonal arrow branches off point to a picture of an adult
organism. This last icon is normally depicted as a dead end with no further connec-
tions to its future sex cells or the progeny derived from these sex cells, as shown in
Fig. 19.1. The adult lions in Fig. 19.1 do of course contribute their sex cells to the
offspring, but since, according to Weismann’s doctrine, the sex cells are unaffected
by the actual life of the lions themselves, this contribution plays no autonomous
role in the scheme and should be left out. This ﬁgure is well suited to illustrate why
Weismann’s doctrine blocks the way for the Lamarckian belief in the inheritance of
acquired properties.
But if the arrows are meant to symbolize straightforward causal connections,
then the ﬁgure is less satisfactory. For parents certainly inﬂuence the life and sur-
vival chances of their offspring in many other ways than through delivering their sex
cells. Many species exhibit prolonged periods of parental care – and even in species
with no distinct parental care, offspring is typically left to hatch in suitable places
where the survival chances of the offspring are higher than they would be elsewhere.
Organisms, to a large extent, choose their own habitats and their own mating part-
ners. They select and consume resources, generate detritus, and construct important
components of their own environments such as nests, holes, burrows, paths, webs,
dams and chemical environments (Lewontin 1983, 1992).
The British biologist John Odling-Smee has suggested the term “niche construc-
tion” for the organism’s own contribution (positive or negative) to the establishment
of suitable ecological conditions for its offspring: “Organisms, through their
metabolism, their activities, and their choices, deﬁne, create and partly destroy their
own niches. We refer to these phenomena as ‘niche construction’” (Odling-Smee
1988; Odling-Smee et al. 1996). That organisms often downright destroy their own
living conditions at a locality is well known, as for example, can be seen by the
many documented instances of “ecological succession” wherein one species typi-
cally changes the ecology of its local environment such that a rival species can then
ﬂourish there, and in so doing wipes out the original species.
Fig. 19.1 Weismann’s doctrine. The ﬁlled circles represent sex cells (see text)

594
Jesper Hoffmeyer (1942– )
The Darwinian consensus has long been that we can by and large neglect these
kinds of inﬂuences, because such activities are seen as genetically determined.
According to this understanding, the genotype determines not only a morpholog-
ical phenotype, but also a behavioral phenotype. And thus in a statistical analysis,
the sex cell and its genome can therefore represent the individual and, for all intents
and purposes, its characteristic activity. It is, of course, admitted that the determin-
ism is not complete and thus the phenotypic variety that may be observed in one
and the same genotype (or gene pool, if the analysis concerns variations inside
a population) under different environmental conditions is then referred to with
(and supposedly explained by) concepts such as “reaction norm” or “phenotypic
plasticity.” However, since natural selection plays out over a huge number of gener-
ations and among many individual organisms, it is routinely assumed that the effect
of this type of variation will ultimately be averaged out, so that one may safely
bypass niche construction effects when accounting for the mechanisms driving
evolution.
Odling-Smee, not surprisingly, considers this an explaining away of the problem:
To us the idea that niche construction can be dismissed because it is the product of natu-
ral selection makes no more sense than the counterproposal that natural selection can be
disregarded because it is a product of niche construction. From the beginning of life, all
organisms have, in part, modiﬁed their selective environments, and their ability to do so
is, in part, a consequence of their naturally selected genes. Niche construction and nat-
ural selection are two processes, operating in parallel, but also interacting (Odling-Smee
2001: 118).
The intricate interplay between natural selection and niche construction may
be nicely illustrated by the survival strategy that has evolved in one of “Darwin’s
ﬁnches,” Cactospiza pallida, from the Galapagos Islands. This ﬁnch has constructed
a niche identical to the niche that elsewhere in the world is occupied by woodpeck-
ers. But instead of using its beak directly to drill a hole in the wood, C. pallida has
developed a technique of using a cactus spine held in its beak to dig the insect out.
In this case, Odling-Smee explains, it was not ﬁrst the anatomy of the bird that was
formed by natural selection to solve a given task – but rather, this ﬁnch, like so many
other species, utilized a much more general and ﬂexible adaptation: the capacity for
learning. The ability of the ﬁnch to use a cactus spine is not guaranteed by the pres-
ence of some relevant gene (“the gene for thorn digging?”) – and yet it develops
quite reliably as a consequence of the general ability of the bird to proﬁt from its
experiences in interacting with its milieu (Odling-Smee 2001).
In the context of this book, it would be tempting to say that the bird makes use
of its own semiotic competence to create an interpretant (a habit) upon seeing a
cactus spine in the relevant situation. And, as Odling-Smee remarks, this creation of
a new way of living (or niche) in itself implies that natural selection is now driven
to reinforce the selection pressure on the bird’s ability to learn.
In the traditional scheme, then, evolutionary processes may in principle be
described by just two equations. The ﬁrst describes the change of organisms (O)
as a function of organism and environment (E): d(O)/dT = f(O,E), and the second
describes the change in the environment as an autonomous process: dE/dT = g(E).

19
The Semiotics of Nature: Code-Duality
595
Already in his inﬂuential 1983 paper, Richard Lewontin showed that if one was to
pay regard to the fact that organisms themselves may often inﬂuence their niche, this
scheme would have to be changed to a set of coupled differential equations reﬂecting
the reality of the interaction between organisms and environment – and that, in fact,
each of them is a function of the other: dO/dT = f(O,E) and dE/dT = g(O,E). While
the process in the ﬁrst of these scenarios ﬁguratively might be depicted as species
that climb mountains, then, in the niche-construction scenario species would jump
trampolines in the sense that in this situation there are no ﬁxed equilibrium points
(Lewontin 1983).
We shall return to the difﬁculties of upholding an efﬁcient Weismann-barrier, in
the sense of a non-interventionist view of individuals in the evolutionary game of
natural selection. But before we pursue this problem any further, it is necessary to
take a closer look at a trend that I will call “the genocentric turn” in biology. This is
the tendency of biologists to shift the emphasis of their analyses and investigations
from the level of the organism to the level of the gene – seeing genes, rather than
organisms, as the operational level for selection.
Gene Selectionism
With Crick’s articulation of the central dogma, Weismannism obtained a sort of
molecular conﬁrmation. For since proteins may, roughly speaking, be identiﬁed with
the machinery of the body – and are as such directly responsible for its activity
and behavior – the implication of the central dogma was that the body machinery
cannot feed back into the genome. The body thereby ended as a strange blind alley in
evolutionary theory landscape. It is little surprise that a theory that sees organisms
as causal dead ends in the evolutionary game would sooner or later give birth to
the idea that organisms, rightly considered, are just instruments for the strategic
interests of genes. It was the well-writing Oxford biologist Richard Dawkins that,
back in 1976, disseminated this idea in his book “The Selﬁsh Gene.” And this was
an idea that met with considerable sympathy both inside and (particularly) outside
of biology. According to this idea, often called gene-selectionism, the organisms
that classical Darwinism focused on as the substrate for natural selection should be
seen rather as kinds of “survival machines” or “vehicles” that are merely used by
the genes in their competition for a ticket to the next generation.
According to this scenario, genes that have instructed their organisms well
increase their chances of becoming multiplied via their offspring. Thus, while
the organisms themselves are short-lived, their genes will continue to survive as
copies or replicas in (statistically speaking) half of the offspring. Genes in Dawkins’
terminology thus become replicators:
What was to be the fate of the ancient replicators? . . . Now they swarm in huge colonies,
safe inside gigantic lumbering robots, sealed off from the outside world, communicating
with it by remote control. They are in you and me; they created us, body and mind; and
their preservation is the ultimate rationale for our existence. Now they go by the name of
genes, and we are their survival machines (Dawkins 1976: 21).

596
Jesper Hoffmeyer (1942– )
G
S
KS
S
G
G
Fig. 19.2 Molecular
Weismannism. G = germ
cells, S = somatic cells
But something is jarring here, isn’t it? An over-smart semiotic loop perhaps:
“they created us . . . ”? After all, on the face of it, it was “us” that created the “gene.”
This is not a joke, for it highlights the essential trouble with Dawkins’ concept of
the “gene” – i.e., its misleading ambiguity as to what kind of a thing “the gene”
really is. For in fact, it was the Danish botanist Wilhelm Johannsen who in 1909
created the terms gene, genotype and phenotype. But Johannsen’s “gene” was very
different from the modern idea of genes, since Johannsen certainly did not imagine
that the gene existed as a material thing.2 For him, the gene was simply a tool for
calculations (similar to the measure of “IQ” that had been introduced at about the
same time by the French psychologist Alfred Binet). However, as is well known,
the concept of the gene was soon taken over by fruit-ﬂy geneticists who did not
have Johannsen’s reservations about a straightforward material interpretation. The
famous Drosophila Group led by Thomas Hunt Morgan came to see the genes as
“pearls on a string” (Morgan et al. 1915) – and after Watson and Crick’s discovery
of the DNA’s double-helix structure in 1953, we ﬁnally got the modern biochemical
concept of “the gene.” It is this biochemical concept of the gene that is implied when
we are told that the human genome contains some 25,000 genes.3
But when Dawkins (1976, 1989) writing about genes, claims that “they created
us,” a closer inspection reveals that “they” do not at all refer to the biochemical
genes but to a much less well-deﬁned entity called an “evolutionary gene.” The
evolutionary gene is refers to any short piece of DNA on a chromosome that segre-
gates and recombines with appreciable frequency. Such “pieces” must be reasonably
short, since it is essential for Dawkins’ hypothesis that the gene itself is a replicator,
meaning that it can multiply through replication. And this again presupposes that
this “gene” is not often broken up; and the longer the “gene” is, the higher is the
risk that it may be broken up by the processes of genetic recombination (e.g., by the
so-called “crossing-over” effect of meiotic division, the process whereby new germ
cells are formed.)
2 Johannsen actually compared the concept of the gene as a material structure that resides within
the cells with the naive belief – of the peasants of his own time – that a team of horses was hidden
inside the locomotive.
3 I had better be careful here. A few years ago, the estimated number of genes in the human
species was something like 80,000. After the publication of the map of the human genome in
2001, there were reported to be only 30,000–40,000 genes. And the latest estimate I saw had only
20,000–25,000 genes (Nature October 21, 2004).

19
The Semiotics of Nature: Code-Duality
597
Thus, one strange thing about Dawkin’s gene concept is that nothing guarantees
that the “gene” itself need be a functional unit. As Sterelny and Grifﬁths have put it:
If genes are just arbitrary DNA sequences, then most of them will have no more systematic
relation to the phenotype than an arbitrary string of letters has to the meaning of a book
(Sterelny and Grifﬁths 1999: 79).
We shall not pursue the implications of this observation any further here, but
content ourselves by noting that a clear understanding of what “a gene” in the above
sense really is recedes even further when the question is studied in more detail
(Neumann-Held 1998). So much more odd, then, is the claim that these ambiguous
and mysteriously “intentional” entities should have “created us body and mind.”
What we will note here, however, and what is especially problematic to a
Dawkinsian understanding, is the well-known chemical fact that DNA molecules
are essentially passive under normal physiological conditions. For as I have argued
elsewhere (Hoffmeyer 1997), it is the very inertness of the molecule under normal
conditions that makes DNA so adequate as a “memory”-carrier. One cannot well
“store memory” in a substrate that also takes an active part in the everyday business
of the cell.
But DNA molecules, as Evelyn Fox Keller (1995) reminds us, do nothing and
remain inert until the arrival of a varied and highly speciﬁc set of proteins that (as
we shall see in Chapter 5) have the manifold tasks of: opening up the double helix;
copying the signifying strand onto mRNA at a chosen site; modifying this mRNA
in a diversity of ways; transporting the mRNA out of the nucleus to the “protein
factories” (endoplasmatic reticulum) in the cytoplasm; and much, much more.
In eukaryotes, the passive DNA is protected by speciﬁc proteins inside the cell
nucleus, where it is continuously controlled and repaired when it has become dam-
aged. In short, the active components of the cell are the proteins that work together
in subcellular complexes or membranes – and, as we will see in Chapter 5, these
complexes are the real “doers” in cellular life that constitute the “agency” of the
cell. To ascribe such agency to DNA is highly contra-indicated from the chemical
point of view.
Digitalism
The widespread tendency to see DNA as the main actor in the unfolding life process
is probably due to the fact that the genetic code, as carried in the DNA molecules, is
a digital code. And, in fact, Western culture is profuse with “digitalism” – by which
I mean an exaggerated trust in the performative power of digital codes (Hoffmeyer
2002). Let me take a moment here to explain what I mean.
The word digital comes from the Latin word for ﬁnger, digit – and a digital
code is quite generally a code based on symbols that, like the ﬁngers, are dis-
continuous: for instance, the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. . . or the letters of any writing
system or alphabet. The lengthy strings of 0’s and 1’s that make up the algorithms
in binary computation “language” have recently come to stand as the quintessence

598
Jesper Hoffmeyer (1942– )
of digitality – but the prior invention of the book was already based on a digi-
tal code (of letters), so the modern distinction between so-called digital electronic
media and old-fashioned books is dangerously misleading when it comes to a clear
understanding of codes.
The alternative to a digital code is an analog code, and this kind of code is based
on the principle of analogy. In an old watch, for instance, the pointers circle the
watch dial in a kind of analogy of the (perceived) rotation of the sun around the
Earth. In the same way, the height of the mercury column in a thermometer can be
said to analogously reﬂect the magnitude of the actual temperature. One might also
call a glove an analog coding of a hand, and in a certain sense one might even see
the wings of the bird as an analogue codiﬁcation of the aerodynamic properties of
air currents.
Note, however, that the coding principle in digital codes is necessarily arbitrary,
relative to the content. That the word “horse” in English refers to a big grazing
mammal with a certain kind of mane cannot be recovered from the form of the letters
but must be known through another process, as when speaking to a Frenchman, that
same animal in French has the equally arbitary designation “cheval.” Digital codes
are necessarily based on symbolic signs (in the Peircean sign trichotomy), whereas
analog codes are based on icons and/or indices (as discussed in Chapter 8).
Since the genetic code is based on a sequence of discrete signs that are grouped
together in sequences of triplets (e.g. the trinucleotide sequence UUU that is trans-
lated to the amino acid phenylalanine) – and whose relation to the amino acids
they are coding for is mediated through a complex historically established interplay
between protein- and RNA molecules (see further in Chapter 5) – the genetic code
is a clear case of digital coding.
To return to my earlier point: In Western culture we are accustomed to think of
digital codes as superior to analog codes. He who masters numbers and letters (or
computers!) clearly has a higher status than he who relies on the less formalized,
analog ways of understanding reality. That science accords high authority to digital
coding schemes may of course be traced back to the Galilean idea (now so widely
adopted) that the language of God, or now reality, is mathematics. But it is hard to
escape the feeling that this privileging of the digital representation also somehow
reﬂects the separation between plan and execution that has been such an important
principle behind the success of the industrial society.
Since the execution of work in industrial production is supposed to follow deter-
ministically from the pre-given plan, there is left little or no space for interpretation
at the level of execution.4 In traditional industrial production, all creativity was del-
egated to the planners, and workers were not supposed to add anything innovative
to the process. The element of creativity was not part of work on the ﬂoor.
If we take this model and project it upon the theory of evolution, a “digital-
ist” reading of genetic expression follows naturally. For just as the overwhelming
4 Planning itself, of course, may contain elements of analog coding such as diagrams or drawings,
but these are generally superstructures based on numerical or otherwise abstract codiﬁcations.

19
The Semiotics of Nature: Code-Duality
599
productivity of industrial society was obtained through a separation of planning
from execution in a “master-servant” relation, evolutionary theorists have argued
that evolutionary creativity should be explained by a separation of the genetic
master plan (the DNA) from the mundane operations of the cytoplasm – with the
cytoplasmic processes themselves, of course, obeying the dictums of the genome.
Seen in this way, “digitalism” may be thought of as yet another example of
the well-known tendency of science to transform the dominating structures of
social reality into natural reality. But this account makes digitalism as a histori-
cal bias that belongs to a particular historical period, i.e., the epoch of industrial
society – and one might perhaps expect that it would gradually loose its hold over
the imagination of researchers as this form of production looses its dominant status
in society.
For in fact, the strict separation between planning and execution is scarcely typi-
cal anymore for production processes in the advanced sectors of almost any modern
economy. On the contrary, it is semiotic competence that is now increasingly in
demand. Thus it ought to amuse sociologists of science that “digitalism” now seems
increasingly challenged in science by models of embodiment – i.e., models where
the bodily anchoring of cognitive or biological functionality are seen as essential
to that functionality (Damasio 1994; Van Gelder and Port 1995; Deacon 1997;
Etxeberria 1998; Rocha 1998; Lakoff and Johnson 1999, Clark 2002).
The development of clever computers and robots has undoubtedly been facili-
tating this change of perspective (Hendriks-Jansen 1996; Clark 1997; Ziemke and
Sharkey 2001; Sharkey and Ziemke 2001a, b). The understanding that cognitive and
biological processes cannot really be comprehended in isolation from their char-
acter as somatic processes reﬂects a growing awareness in the computer age of
the fact that digital pre-speciﬁcations are essentially dependent on the agency of
autonomous structures and mechanisms acting in space and time. That such rela-
tions are best grasped from within a semiotic frame of reference seems obvious to
this author (Hoffmeyer 2002) – and the rejection of theoretical positions that ignore
the decisive signiﬁcance of our bodily existence for cognitive function has been, of
course, a central theme in the biosemiotic tradition (Hoffmeyer 1996; Brier 2000;
Kull 2000; Danesi 2001; Emmeche 2001; Favareau 2001).
Code-Duality
In 1991, Claus Emmeche and I suggested that life at the most fundamental level may
be characterized by a dynamic trait that we called code-duality – i.e. a recursive
and unending exchange of messages between analog and digital coding surfaces
(Hoffmeyer and Emmeche 1991, 2005, Emmeche and Hoffmeyer 1987).
As analog codiﬁcations, organisms recognize and interact with each other in eco-
logical space, whereas as digital codiﬁcations (genomes) they are passively carried
forward in time from generation to generation (in sexually reproducing species, after
recombination via meiosis and fertilization). Seen in this perspective, life must be
understood as “semiotic survival” – survival via a fundamental code-duality.

600
Jesper Hoffmeyer (1942– )
Our idea of code-duality was much inspired by Gregory Bateson’s grandiose
attempt in the book Mind and Nature to draw a connection between thought and
evolution as deeply related processes (Bateson 1979). We were also inspired by the
American biophysicist Howard Pattee’s suggestion that living systems must nec-
essarily operate through the interactions between two complementary “modes” –
a time-independent or symbolic (linguistic) mode and a time-dependent dynamic
mode (Pattee 1972, 1997). I shall return to a discussion of Pattee’s idea of an
“epistemic cut” shortly, but preliminary to that, let us here consider the original
presentation of the idea of code-duality. The idea was introduced in the context of a
discussion regarding what kind of “status” one should ascribe to life. In answering
this question, we took as our point of departure the Batesonian understanding of life
as systems possessing the ability to process information in the sense of “differences
that make a difference.” The following pages is a slightly modiﬁed version of the
original presentation in (Hoffmeyer and Emmeche 1991).
Who [is] the subject to whom the differences worked on by such a system should make a
difference? If one admits at all that living systems are information processing entities, then
the only possible answer to this question is: The system itself is the subject. Therefore
a living system must exist “for” itself – and in this sense it is more than an imaginary
invention of ours: For a system to be living, it must create itself, i.e. it must contain the
distinctions necessary for its own identiﬁcation as a system. Self-reference is the fundament
on which life evolves, it is its most basal requirement. (Tellingly, this fact does not pertain
to non-living systems: There is no reason for the hydrological cycle to know itself. Thus,
rivers run downstream due to gravity, water evaporates due to the solar heat, nowhere does
the system depend on self-recognition). Another way to express this whole matter is to say
that differences are not intelligible in the absence of a purpose. If nothing matters, matter is
everything.
But what is the basis of this self-reference that is at the basis of life? We shall suggest here
that the central feature of living systems allowing for self-reference – and thus the ability to
select and respond to differences in their surroundings – is code-duality, i.e. the ability of a
system to represent itself in two different codes, one digital and one analog.5 (Symbolically,
this code-duality may be represented through the relation between “the chicken and the
egg”)
Thus, self-reference clearly depends on some kind of re-description. The system must some-
how be able to construct a description of itself in order to perpetuate itself (Pattee 1972,
1977). This description furthermore must stay inactive in – or at least protected from – the
life-processes of the system, lest the description should change – and thereby ultimately die
with the system. In other words, the function of this description is to assure the identity of
the system through time: it is the memory of the system. In all known living systems, this
description appears in the digital code of DNA (or RNA) that is eventually distributed to the
germ cells.
We suggest that it is by no means accidental that the code for memory in living systems
is of a digital type. For what must be speciﬁed through the memorized description is not
the speciﬁc material details of the presently living system, but only their structural relations
5 Two decades ago, I suggested a less fully developed version of the idea of code-duality
(Hoffmeyer 1987).

19
The Semiotics of Nature: Code-Duality
601
in space and time.6 If such abstract speciﬁcations could be expressed through an analog
code, only very simple systems would be possible and those would probably not survive.
For a parallel: if human communication and memory depended solely on analog codes –
e.g. exclusively the ability to mime – if, in other words we did not posses the digital code
of language, our cultural memory would be as short as that of chimpanzees – and our social
structure would be accordingly as simple.
And in a complementary fashion, in order for the system to work the memorized description
in the digital code must be translated to the physical reality of an actual living system. For
this translation (the developmental process) to take place, the fertilized egg cell (in sexu-
ally reproducing species) must be able to decipher the coded instructions of the DNA7 as
well as to follow its instructions in a given way. This need for the active participation of
cellular structures in realizing the digital codiﬁcation of the DNA into its analogue pro-
tein and organism form shows us that a sort of ‘tacit knowledge’ is present in the egg
cell (Polanyi 1958; Pattee 1977). And the existence of this tacit knowledge inherent within
the cellular organization must be presupposed by, rather than materially built into, in the
DNA-description. Thus, the digital re-description alone is far from a total description of the
organism.
The realization in space and time of the structural relations speciﬁed in the digital code
determines what kind of differences in the surround the system will actually select and
respond to – or, in Uexküllian terms, these sepciﬁcations determine not just the anatomical
and physiological build up of the organims but also the kind of Umwelt the organism will
get Through this realization, a new phase in the perpetuation of the system is initiated: the
phase of active life. One might say that in this phase – the ‘analog phase’ – the “message”
of the memory is expressed.
Eventually, the system will survive long enough to pass on its own copy of the digitalized
memory (or part of it) to a new generation: this corresponds to a back-translation of the
message to the digital form. But this latter process takes on its true signiﬁcance only when
seen at the level of the population. For it is the population (rather than the single organism)
that passes on “messages” about conditions of life to the memory of the collective (the gene-
pool). The population could in this sense be considered a codiﬁcation that itself expresses
a message. This codiﬁcation, however, necessarily is analog – since it has to interact with
the physical surroundings, and thus must share with these surroundings the properties of
physical extension and contiguity.
6 For example, if the gene codes for a distinct enzyme, the rate of degradation of this enzyme
will determine how long the enzyme will remain active in the cell, and thus also determine the
concentration of metabolites that are available for catalytic reaction. Since the concentration of
metabolites will oft en have a regulatory inﬂuence on other cellular processes, the gene indirectly
also determines the temporal relations between these different processes (see Fig. 5.5). However,
the gene cannot, for good reason, determine precisely where in the cell a given molecule will be
located at a given time. This problem may perhaps be illustrated by imagining a protein that is the
size of a family car. The cell would, in relation, be the size of Copenhagen (although spherical
rather than ﬂat). And, due to the intricate internal structure of the cell, the freedom of movement
of the proteins inside the cell would hardly be any bigger than the freedom of movement of a car
in the street web of Copenhagen.
7 Please notice that there is no sequence of nucleotide triplets per se – just an endless string
of bases whose “reading” determines what will be acted upon as actual triplets. The base
sequence, CAGTCAAAGAAC, might for instance be read as composed by the triplets: CAG-
TCA-AAGAAC. But in another reading frame it might be read as C-AGT-CAA-AGA-AC. (See
Chapter “Universe of Mind: The Semiophere” for further details on the semiotics of the genome.)

602
Jesper Hoffmeyer (1942– )
The chain of events that sets life apart from non-life – i.e. the unending chain of responses
to selected differences – thus needs at least two codes: one code for action (behavior) and
one code for memory – the ﬁrst of these codes necessarily must be analog, and the second
very probably must be digital (Hoffmeyer and Emmeche 1991).
Looking back at this ﬁrst presentation it must be noted that many readers, unfor-
tunately, felt this concept of code-duality to be confusing, and presumably this
confusion has two main sources. One has to do with the way that the term “code”
is used, since the term has quite different connotations in different disciplines (e.g.,
jurisprudence, genetics, computing). The other source for confusion is more prin-
cipled and concerns the conception of living creatures as “codes.” This idea may
easily switch on a warning signal that what I am arguing for is a kind of universal
“pansemiosis” – Is everything in this world just signs, then? Am I claiming that
there is no reality beyond that of signs?
Let me immediately answer these two questions in the negative. The claim that
the world contains nothing but signs is as reductionistic and unfruitful as the claim
(in the epistemological sense) that all the phenomena of the world can be reduced
to their quanta of matter and energy.
Admittedly, what Peirce called “brute force” or the category of Secondness (cf.
Chapter 3) is an irreducible aspect of our world that cannot in a meaningful way
be thought away, as little as chance and Firstness can be neglected. And because of
this, John Deely has introduced the concept of physiosemiosis as a designation for
semiotic processes taking place in inanimate nature (Deely 1990, 1994, 2001; see
also Christiansen 2002; Taborsky 2002).
For example, the meteoric storms of the past are still visible today through the
traces they left as craters on our moon where craters may be seen as an enmattered
“memory” about those distant times. Now, it takes an intelligent being, of course,
to decode this connection between real-world states and events and to interpret the
cavities on the surface of the moon as meteor craters. But the possibility of such
an interpretative act was nevertheless latently present in the very “mark” of the
indentation itself – a mark, to be sure, that nobody took an interest in before human
beings started wondering about the puzzles of the universe.
Nature’s “taking of habits” – in other words, its tendency to develop new regu-
larities as the result of its own ongoing interactions – has been at work at all times.
Semiosis, or “the action proper to signs” (Deely 1991), should not be seen as an
either/or phenomenon that suddenly appeared on Earth when life began. A more
sensible view is that the origin of life initiated new avenues for semiosis to fol-
low, avenues that implied new and unheard kinds of freedom. Living systems are
anticipatory, in the sense that they systematically recognize and exploit (interpret)
important regularities (causal relations) in their surroundings, and in so doing living
systems gained access to the world of genuine triadic sign processes.
One should therefore distinguish between the kinds of semiotic processes that
occur in physical, biological, and psychological systems. Semiotic freedom is
much more pronounced in the latter two than in the former: In dealing with
purely physical systems, one can in almost all cases get away with disregarding
the semiotic dimension, with no lack of explanatory sufﬁciency. But this quickly

19
The Semiotics of Nature: Code-Duality
603
becomes absurd if human nature is one’s concern. Biology falls somewhere between
the two.
However, the word pansemiosis carries connotations to German Natur-
philosophie and especially to Friedrich Schelling’s conception of the world as
panpsychic. And regardless of what Schelling exactly did mean by this – and, as
this is uncertain, I shall not pursue the matter here – it does seem to me inappro-
priate to confuse natural processes with human psychology. But it may not follow
that this quite legitimate rejection of the overwhelmingly anthropocentric notion of
panpsychism should be conﬂated with, and thereby also infect the reception of the
concept of pansemiosis.
For this latter concept, explicitly, does not extend “humanness” to penetrate the
universe at large – but rather sees the human being as one among inﬁnitely many
instantiations of a universal semiosis. And since this confusion seems inescapable,
the term pansemiosis tends to block understanding more than it advances it. The
relevant answer to the “accusation” of pansemiosis, therefore, is to make clear that
the project of biosemiotics neither subscribes to nor advances the claim that there is
nothing in the world but signs.
Likewise, the concept of code-duality thus implies neither a reductive pansemio-
sis nor a naïve anthropomorphism. Having made this clear, let us now confront the
question of what, then, is meant by “code” in the expression “code duality.”
In its everyday meaning, the word “code” refers to the customary use of distinct
entities or actions for communicative ends, such as when we speak of a dress-code
or about different social milieus having different behavioral codes. In semiotics, the
term has had two rather different designations. Under the inﬂuence of Information
Theory, it was used in the 1960s and 1970s in the sense of: “a context-free set of
rules for the encoding, transmission and decoding of information” (Thibault 1998:
125). And as discussed in the section on the Central Dogma, the DNA code has been
conceived as a code in this sense.
But in attempting to apply this concept, complications abounded even in these
years. For even in the simple cases, where we limit ourselves to considering just
the essential “information transfer” from a gene segment of DNA to a functional
protein, it has proven to be impossible to speak of a genuinely “context-free” and
unbreakable set of rules that in all cases will assure the correct transfer of informa-
tion. For, and as we shall see in Chapter 5, the cellular – or organismic – context
exerts a number of causal consequences at several key steps in this process, often
in unpredictable ways (via so-called RNA-editing, for example, or via ambiguities
in the “correct” reading of those stop-codon triplets that determines the end point
for the addition of amino acids to the growing protein chain). Therefore, when the
shorthand term “genetic code” is now used – as it is more often than not – to express
the idea that genes are coding “for” certain speciﬁc phenotypic traits such as missing
eyes in salamanders or schizophrenia in human beings, we are of course much far-
ther from a position where one could talk about a “context-free” code in the precise
sense of Information Theory.
Yet the information-theoretical concept of “code” has been, and still is, of
great use in engineering the transfer of data (as distinct from “information”) in

604
Jesper Hoffmeyer (1942– )
telecommunication systems and underlies much of the efforts to build “intelligent
machines.” Modern semiotics, however, has abolished the conception of a code as
a “simple mechanism for pairing of concept and reference.”8 The focus in recent
years has been on understanding the concept of code as a vehicle for creation of
meaningful activity. Winfried Nöth puts it thus:
Als Kodes erforschen Semioitiker kulturelle Zeichensysteme der verschiedensten Art, von
der Verkehrszeichen bis zur Mode, vom Morsekode über der Kode der Heraldik bis zu den
Kodes des Theaters. Häuﬁg ist mit Kode nichts anderes als ein Zeichensystem gemeint
(Nöth 2000: 216).
From this point of view, a code is a semiotic resource that enables us to create
and express certain types of meaning but not others. Seen as a sign system, body
language, for example, is very well-suited to express emotional content such as
disgust, joy or ennui; it may also, when more artfully used, be narrative – as we
know it from mime. But it can only with much effort – if at all – express abstract
and logical connections, such as a non-existence or denial, as I shall discuss below.
Digital Codes
The term digital codes thus covers a whole set of codes, that are alike in that they are
all based on discrete sign tokens as well as an arbitrary (conventional, historical or
customary) relation between the sign token and the signiﬁed. This property endows
digital codes with certain special advantages that are unique to the phenomena we
call life and culture. Of these advantages, three in particular must be emphasized
(Hoffmeyer 2001):
The ﬁrst is that messages expressed in digital codes do not have to obey the limi-
tations of freedom imposed by natural laws. Possible as well as impossible messages
may be expressed in digital codes. Thus, in a novel, Meryl Streep might well have
lunch with Socrates; a mega size cod might ravage the streets of Oslo; or the wives
of pilots might start giving birth to children having wings. Conversely, it is hard to
see how any of these impossible events should be communicated via analog codings
such as mime – or at least not without additional use of conventional signs of many
kinds, including symbolic cultural gestures and sign language, both of which are
fundamentally digital codes.
Too, digital codes are, of course, always based in material processes and can for
that reason be destroyed: books may be burned, computers may be smashed, or the
freedom of speech might be restricted. But this kind of destructive action does not
change the reality of that content which has (at least once) been coded, only the
material carrier of the code.
8 One exception is the die-hard tradition based on Noam Chomsky’s ideas of a generative gram-
mar (Chomsky 1965), and in particular Jerry Fodor’s language of thought (Fodor 1975) or Steven
Pinker’s mentalese (Pinker 1994)– but see Deacon, (1997, 2003) for the biosemiotic rebuttal to
these ideas.

19
The Semiotics of Nature: Code-Duality
605
And exactly the same is the case for the digitally coded “message content” of
genes. This, too, has the freedom to be impossible in the sense that the fertilized
egg, by executing such coded instructions, could produce a non-viable individual.
And in fact, this happens all the time (among other reasons, because of the processes
of genetic crossing-over, whereby the hereditary material is recombined in new –
and not always viable – patterns). It is this property of digital codes that explains
the surprising evolutionary creativity of living systems, the incredible combinatorial
capacity and the consequent incessant testing of the eventual limits for possible
combinations.
The second advantage of digital codes is their time independence and consensual
objectivity. Digital codes are ideal codes for memory. Only because Plato wrote
down the dialogues of Socrates do we know them today. Had the dialogues not been
coded in written language, but instead in mimed episodes, they would probably not
have survived intact for more than a few generations at most.
The key to digital codes’ “objectivity” is that they depend on a shared convention.
The Canadian communication theorist Anthony Wilden has pointed to one critical
difference between analog and digital codes (among many others) as being that “a
digital code is ‘outside’ the sender and receiver and mediates their relationship; an
analog code is the relationship which mediates them” (Wilden 1980: 173).
At ﬁrst look, this deﬁnition might seem to ﬁt poorly with the understanding of
the genome as a digital code, because the genome is “transferred” through cellular
divisions (mitosis or meiosis) and therefore spatio-temporal continuity is maintained
between sender (the parent organisms) and receiver (the zygote, or fertilized egg).
But the topological detail that chromosomes “travel,” so to speak, from genera-
tion to generation inside a cell shouldn’t detract us from seeing that it is exactly
the principle of separation between germ cell and body processes (see the discus-
sion on Weismannism, above) that is the deeper reason why Lamarckian inheritance
does not work as an evolutionary principle.9 Thanks to its secluded existence in
protected isolation from the metabolic jungle of the cell – and thus due to its very
passivity – the DNA code is capable of conserving experiences (in the sense of
nucleotide sequences) shaped by past survival outcomes under the then prevailing
ecological conditions. Such structures are inherently signs of these past relations,
and this is exactly why genes are not functional in themselves, but must be unfolded
through the operation of an interpreting agency.
The third advantage of digital codes is that they can be used as tools for abstrac-
tion – and this is why they are necessary for making meta-messages, messages that
deals with the way that other messages should be understood. Gregory Bateson
pointed out that such meta-messages may well be communicated in the analog, and
he used the example of young monkeys engaged in so-called “play.” In these circum-
stances, when the monkeys snapped at one another while creating an simulation of
a combat situation, this snap would actually signify the following “meta-message”
about itself: “this is not a bite” (Bateson 1972: 177–193).
9 Lamarckian inheritance – by conﬂating the analog and the digital – loses the fertility of their
interplay, which, seen semiotically, is the key to evolution.

606
Jesper Hoffmeyer (1942– )
The negative message – the “absence” of a bite – cannot be directly communi-
cated in the analog, so instead it is announced as a positive message: the presence
of a bite-signifying snap. The snap is an indication of something that is not there.
Bateson also commented that this is probably as far as an analogically coded com-
munication event can go in the direction of the abstract category of “not.” For real
abstractions to take place, digital codes and their more arbitrary and “detached”
conventions are needed.
Thus, while we still do not know the full syntactic structure of the genetic code,
we know that the so-called “regulatory genes,” for example, function as such meta
messages – and the regular occurrence of atavistic reappearances such as the three
toed horse indicates that actual deletion is not the only way to get rid of out-
moded ontogenetic instructions. Active negation of what still remains may sufﬁce.
“Abstraction” in this sense thus furnishes the kind of creative plasticity that, in the
absence of which, the evolutionary process might perhaps not have become as rich
as it actually is.
Analog Codes
“If you say to a girl ‘I love you’, she is likely to pay more attention to the accom-
panying kinesics and paralinguistics than to the words themselves” writes Gregory
Bateson and continues: “We humans become very uncomfortable when somebody
starts to interpret our postures and gestures by translating them into words about
relationship. We much prefer that our messages on this subject remain analogic,
unconscious, and involuntary” (Bateson 1972: 374). Analog codings such as body
language go much further back in evolution than spoken language does and are also
much more strongly anchored in human emotional constitution. As Wilden says:
The analog is pregnant with meaning whereas the digital domain of signiﬁcation is, rel-
atively speaking, somewhat barren. It is almost impossible to translate the rich semantics
of the analog into any digital form for communication to another organism. [[On the other
hand:] what the analog gains in semantics it loses in syntactics, and what the digital gains
in syntactics, it loses in semantics. Thus, it is because the analog does not posses the syntax
necessary to say “No” or to say something involving “not” that one can refuse or reject in
the analog, but one cannot deny or negate (Wilden 1980: 163).
It must be admitted that the classiﬁcation of coding strategies into digital and
analog derives at least part of its attraction from the exaggerated weight that for-
merly was ascribed to such purely formal aspects of human communication, as its
grammar, its logical structure, its rationality, and so on. And more than perhaps
anybody else of his time, Gregory Bateson managed to uncover the paralinguistic
and paralogical dimensions of communication in humans as well as in animals.10
10 More recently, the related ﬁelds of Interactional and Conversation Analysis have disclosed
that an amazingly high proportion of everyday, moment-to-moment linguistic communication
is grounded in such paralinguistic interaction. For a biosemiotic perspective on this work, see
Favareau (2002, 2007).

19
The Semiotics of Nature: Code-Duality
607
He thereby acquired and advanced an acute understanding of the much overlooked
importance of analog codings in natural systems.
As a semiotic category, however, “analog coding” is perhaps not quite satis-
factory and I shall use it here primarily as a counter-concept to “digital coding.”
Speciﬁcally: I will use “analog coding” as a common designation for codings based
on some kind of similarity in the spatio-temporal continuity, or on internal rela-
tions such as part-to-whole, or cause-and-effect. “Digital coding,” in contrast, will
be used to designate sign systems where the relations of sign to signiﬁed are due to
a demarcation principle of purely conventional or habitual origin.
In Chapter 7, we will have a closer look at endosemiotic analog codings as index-
ical and iconic sign processes inside the organism. While on the ecosemiotic level,
we have already seen how Jacob von Uexküll occupied himself with what I am hear
calling analog codes. Uexküll sometimes referred to these as “contrapuntal duets”
and noted numerous examples in nature, such as the relation between ﬂies and spi-
ders or between birds and butterﬂies decorated with spots as icons for eyes. He
wrote: “By opening their wings they chase away the small birds that pursue them:
These birds automatically ﬂy away at the sight of the eyes of other small predators
that may suddenly appear” (Uexküll 1982 [1940], 59). Such spots are an example
of analog coding in nature.
Code-duality therefore implies that the singularis of the digital code is placed
on equal footing with the pluralis of analog codings that make up the biosemiosis
of life. This positioning of the single digital code as in a sense equal to the total-
ity of analog codings is justiﬁed by the unique properties of digital codes that I
have discussed above. Moreover, it is precisely the play between these two types of
coding that makes evolution possible, as analog and digital coding are two equally
necessary forms of referential activity. They appeared, I would argue, as twins in
the individuation process that gave rise to life’s internal logic. For as I have written
earlier:
. . . had it not been for digital coding there would have been no stable access to the temporal
world – i.e., the unidirectional continuum of pasts and futures – and therefore there could
have been no true agency or communication. On the other hand, had it not been for the
analog codes there could have been no true inter-action with the world, no other-reference,
and no preferences. To claim that only the digital twin is semiotic, whereas the analog twin
remains in the sphere of classical dynamics, is to block the only possibility for transcending
the ‘epistemic cut’ of Howard Pattee. Code-duality and semiosis open up a dimension of
our world and its evolution that is left underdetermined by thermodynamics. Organismic
“context space” expands at an accelerating rate in proportion to the increase in the semi-
otic sophistication of species11; for, simply put, there are so many more different ways to
be smart than there are different ways to be simple (and may this be the reason why the
speciation rate among mammals is ﬁve times higher than the speciation rate among lower
vertebrates) (Hoffmeyer 2001).
11 That “context space expands” in our biosphere is in accordance with the analyses given by
Stuart Kauffman (2000, 151), in the book Investigations, where he shows that the adjacent possi-
ble – i.e., the set of states that could possibly be realized in the next step of the ongoing material
reconﬁguration of the biosphere – exhibits exponential growth: “Our biosphere and any biosphere
expands the dimensionality of its adjacent possible, on average, as rapidly as it can.”

608
Jesper Hoffmeyer (1942– )
The concept of code-duality thus illuminates the semiotic core at the heart of
the evolutionary process12 and thereby also the evolving semiotic dynamic that
leads life on Earth toward the development of life forms possessing still more
sophisticated kinds of semiotic freedom (Hoffmeyer 1992).
Analog and digital codes are tricky concepts, however, because a code that in
one context is analog may in another context be digital and vice versa. Computer
games, for example, are of course operating on digital codings and yet the image
presented on the screen is an analog representation. And the converse is often true
for hieroglyphs, where the isolated signs may (at least in some cases) be taken as
analog codings – whereas the same signs, when interpreted as part of a text, become
symbols making up a digital code.13 The latter case is comparable with that of a
painting that, when seen in isolation, might perhaps represent an aspect of the inner
state of the painter’s mind, but which, when seen on the wall together with other
paintings at an exhibition, becomes instead one of a series of discrete signs that as
an ensemble make up a higher order message. In the terminology of Bateson, this
represents a shift in logical type14 in the sense that the painting as physical object
per se, and the painting as an exhibited artifact, do not belong to the same logical
type. One might perhaps even say that it is only in the context of the higher logical
type that the picture is indeed a painting.
Paintings, at any rate, would be a very different kind of thing if exhibitions did not
exist. The exhibition digitizes the work of the artist and at the same time conserves
it as a painting. Through this operation, the painting becomes simultaneously more
free and less engaging: It may now be recombined with other objects in collections,
in art historical-works, or even in interior design. But this increase in freedom is
paid for by a loss of individual meaningfulness – which may be the reason why
artists often do not like to sell their paintings.
Examples of such analog-digital shifts are numerous in the biological world15
and they are presumably always involved in the kind of phenomena we call emer-
gent. Analog codings, for example, may be digitized when brought to bear in
the processes of so-called quorum sensing. The word “quorum” is taken from
legal language, and is used in connection with meetings (typically general assem-
blies) where there have to be a certain number of attendants for the meeting to
12 Code-duality may also be seen as the semiotic core of cultural evolution (Hoffmeyer and
Emmeche 1991, 2005 [1991]).
13 The analog-digital gestalt shift may in some cases be observed in individual hieroglyphs that
may function both as ideograms and as phonograms. A hieroglyph resembling an eye may, depend-
ing on the context, signify either the notions blind, awake, or weep – but it may also signify simply
the sound ir, because the name for an eye is irt (Den store danske Encyclopædi vol. 8, p. 438).
14 Bateson is here referring to Bertrand Russell’s type theory (Russell and Whitehead 1910–1913).
15 Stjernfelt (1992) has observed that the linguistic concept of categorial perception perhaps might
be extended so as to cover transformations from iconic to symbolic representations quite generally,
and this idea concords with the signiﬁcance I have ascribed here to the analog-digital shift. An
alarmone, as will be discussed in connection with endosemiotics in Chapter “The Clever Hans
Phenomenon”, is yet another example of such a shift.

19
The Semiotics of Nature: Code-Duality
609
be legally competent to transact business. When this is the case, a quorum is said
to apply.
In biology, quorum sensing has become the designation for a kind of commu-
nicative activity in bacteria where the density of bacteria present is a causal factor.
In short, quorum sensing is due to a process where each single bacterium excretes
a certain chemical compound such that the concentration of this compound in the
medium will reﬂect the number of bacteria per unit of volume. Quorum sensing
occurs if the compound, after having reached a threshold concentration, binds to a
regulatory protein in the cell and thereby initiates the transcription of speciﬁc genes.
An interesting example of quorum sensing occurs in a species of squid, Euprymna
scolopes, that hunt small ﬁsh by night on the coral reefs off the coast of Hawaii.
Moonlight causes the squids to cast a shadow that makes them easy catch for preda-
tors. As a defense strategy E. scolopes has evolved a sophisticated way of emitting
light that effectively “hides” its own shadow. “Counter-illumination” is the name
given to this kind of camouﬂage, and it is only made possible by the squid’s symbi-
otic relationship with a luminous bacteria called Vibrio ﬁshery that live in the mantel
cavity of the squid. Living off of food provided by the digestive system of the squid,
the bacteria emit light of the exact same intensity and color as the light reaching the
squid from the moon, and this prevents predators from seeing the squid from below
(McFall-Ngai and Ruby 1998).
In the morning, the squids bury themselves in the sand and excrete 90–95% of
the bacteria, which brings their density well below the threshold level. Apparently
the squid is in full control of bacterial growth rate by adjusting the supply of oxygen,
and at sunset the population of bacteria reaches the threshold level once again.16
Interestingly enough, the same compound – N-acyl-homoserine lacton (with a
variable acyl group) – seems to be used as a “signal” in many different manifes-
tations of quorum sensing. In V. ﬁscheri, high concentrations of this compound17
cause an induction of the so-called lux-gene, and thereby a 100–1,000-fold increase
in bioluminescence. The concentration of N-acyl-homoserin lacton, quite generally
then, operates as an analog coded message about bacterial density – a message that
can then be digitized to become a sort of a either/or switch by which, in this case,
the squid switches on and off its “false” light.
The opposite situation, where natural digital codes are transformed to analog
codes, is known for instance from the nervous system. Here every single neuron
makes up an either/or mechanism in the sense that, either the cell delivers a series of
action potentials, or it doesn’t. In a typical nerve, however, there are large numbers
of axons running in parallel, and the accumulated signal will come as a continuously
varying signal reﬂecting the fraction of neurons that at each time emits an action
potential. And, as noted by Favareau (2002) the threshold at which a neuron does
or does not “ﬁre” its digital (all or nothing) action potential, is mediated throughout
16 A thorough treatment of the biosemiotics behind this phenomenon has been given by Luis Bruni
(2002, 2003).
17 The acyl-group in this case is a 3-oxohexanoyl group.

610
Jesper Hoffmeyer (1942– )
by the analog presence of the ever-changing number and kinds of neurotransmitter
molecules that are currently occupying the synaptic gap. Code-duality, then, seems
to be as much a property of neuronal transmission as it is of genetic transmission.
The Epistemic Cut
As already mentioned, one of the sources that inspired Emmeche and my work
on code-duality was the American biophysicist Howard Pattee’s theory that life
is characterized by its operating simultaneously in two complementary modes,
a “dynamic” mode and a “linguistic” mode. Pattee referred in this connection
explicitly to Niels Bohr’s application of the principle of complementarity on the
phenomenon of life (Pattee 1977). In later papers, Pattee talks about a semiotic
mode rather than a linguistic mode, but in principle the idea is the same. In 1997,
Pattee discussed his ideas by quoting John von Neumann:
We must always divide the world into two parts, the one being the observed system, the
other the observer . . .. That this boundary can be pushed arbitrarily deeply into the interior
of the body of the actual observer is the content of the principle of the psycho-physical par-
allelism – but this does not change the fact that in each method of description the boundary
must be put somewhere, if the method is not to proceed vacuously (von Neumann 1955).
Pattee then explicate his idea as follows:
Von Neumann deﬁnes a physical system, S, whose detailed behavior must follow from the
fundamental laws of physics, since these laws describe all possible behaviors. But if the
particular behavior of S is to be calculated, we must measure the initial conditions of S
by a measuring device, M. Therefore, the essential function of measurement is to gener-
ate a computable symbol, usually a number, corresponding to some aspect of the physical
system. Now, the measuring device also must certainly obey the laws of physics, even in
the process of measurement, so it is possible to correctly describe the measuring device by
the laws of physics. One must then think of the system and measuring device together as
just a larger physical system S = (S + M). But then to predict anything about S we must
have a new measuring device to make new measurements of even more initial conditions.
Obviously, this way of thinking gets us nowhere except an inﬁnite regress. The point is
that the function of measurement cannot be achieved by a fundamental dynamical descrip-
tion of the measuring device, even though such a law-based description may be completely
detailed and entirely correct. In other words, we can say correctly that a measuring device
exists as nothing but a physical system, but to function as a measuring device, it requires
an observer’s simpliﬁed description that is not derivable from the physical description. The
observer must in effect choose what aspects of the physical system to ignore and invent
those aspects that must be heeded. This selection process is a decision of the observer or
organism, and cannot be derived from the laws (Pattee 1997).
A few moments reﬂection as biologists shows us that not only humans but all liv-
ing creatures are fundamentally engaged in processes of measuring, and therefore
Pattee’s epistemic cut follows automatically from the above consideration:
we must deﬁne an epistemic cut separating the world from the organism or observer. In other
words, wherever it is applied, the concept of semantic information requires the separation of
the knower and the known. Semantic information, by deﬁnition, is about something (ibid).

19
The Semiotics of Nature: Code-Duality
611
Pattee is anxious to underline that his epistemic cut is not yet another version of
Cartesian dualism, but only a “descriptive dualism.” In the perspective of this book
it remains, however, a big question, as to whether or not Pattee is right in this – for
central to the current investigation is the question: Through what processes exactly
could a dynamic functional mode possibly become a semiotic functional mode?
Pattee is not very speciﬁc when it comes to this question.
As did Bohr, and later, von Neumann, Pattee has taken a far and courageous step
forward in facing the “limit-paradox” that necessarily arises when one subscribes to
an ontology of natural law – i.e. that conception of the world that Pattee formulates
quite unambiguously in the ﬁrst few lines of the quote given above, when he claims
that the laws of physics yet“describe all possible behaviors” (my italics).
To transfer Bohr’s complementarity principle of physics18 to the biological
sphere of life seems not, however, to be particularly helpful in solving the limit
paradox. For if complementarity is thought of as being ontological, then we are
right back in dualism, which Pattee explicitly condemns. But if complementarity
is thought of as being epistemic, then we must consider it as an assertion to the
effect that we cannot describe the semiotic dimension of the world in the same lan-
guage that we use to describe its dynamic aspects. And this, supposedly, is due to
the shortcomings of language or of thought as such: The semiotic aspect of life is,
so to say, just a glimmer that we cannot think ourselves apart from because we are,
in an existential sense, wrapped up in it.
This manner of thinking is, in fact, quite widespread and is related to the posi-
tion, recommended by the philosopher Daniel Dennett (1987), called “our taking
of the intentional stance.” Brieﬂy stated, this view holds that we cannot understand
the life of other humans (or of animals) without describing those lives as guided by,
or woven into, intentionality. This does not mean that these creatures possess inten-
tionality as a real property – rather, the thesis states only that we cannot understand
these creatures, unless we pretend that they do.
That scientists and philosophers willingly accept such an absurd conception of
what human life is about in its deepest or most fundamental content – that, in other
words, one accepts that the feelings, experiences, aspirations, sorrows and desires
of human beings (to say nothing of the experiential world of other forms of animal
life) is all just chimerical hot air, bears witness, in my mind, to how deeply anchored
the ontology of natural law is in the self-understanding of the scientiﬁc mind. I hope
the reader will excuse me for the comparison, but it really does remind me of the
ever-more complex (and increasingly less likely) sets of epicycles that Ptolemaic
astronomers had to introduce into their explanations of the planetary orbits in order
to uphold the belief in the geocentric system. Rather than seeking shelter in such
powerless conceptions about what, for all of us without exception, is the deepest
18 The complementarity principle of quantum theory refers to effects such as the wave-particle
duality, in which different measurements made on a system reveal it to have either particle-like
or wave-like properties. In Bohr’s understanding, complementarity reﬂected the weaknesses of
human language and not any deeper property of reality (Einstein and Infeld 1938).

612
Jesper Hoffmeyer (1942– )
and most real content of our lives – i.e., the fact that those such life is being experi-
enced – the author shall suggest that it is instead the ingrained belief in the exclusive
ontology of natural law that is given up.
This does not mean that we disregard the reality of those laws, but that we refrain
from reifying them as ultimate explanations and ﬁrst principles. And it means that
we, as Peirce recommended, should understand the natural laws that we see existing
as phenomena that are themselves in need of explanation.
Much in the same way that Einstein re-contextualized the “universal” laws of
Newton by showing them to be the local products of more general principles, Peirce
saw natural laws as the secondary products of a more general tendency in the uni-
verse to generate regularities (or “habits” as he often called them). Rather than
seeing the universe as characterized by lawfulness, its primary state, according to
Peirce, is indeterminacy and chance. And thus the formation of regularities, such as
for instance natural laws, must be explained by other means – for natural law thus
is a product of evolution, and not its source.
The tendency of nature to generate regularities – or, as it is more commonly
described today, to self-organize – may be understood as the very ﬁrst exposition
of the principle that will develop through cosmic evolution to become semiosis, the
ability of living systems on planet Earth (and possibly many other places in the
universe) to form interpretants – or self-maintaining and self-perpetuating habits, if
you like.
This change of basic viewpoint will allow us to reach a solution to Pattee’s para-
dox of the epistemic cut, because now we can assume that not only the “symbolic
functional modes” (related to DNA function), but also the “dynamic functional
modes” (related to the functional cytoplasm) are both, in the end, semiotic func-
tional modes. For the difference between the two modes is, at bottom, a difference
in the kind of semiotic dynamics involved. Thus, the sign processes characteris-
tic to the dynamic functional mode, i.e. the protein world so to say, are indexical
and iconic (i.e., analogly coded) rather than symbolic or digital as are the sign pro-
cesses connected to DNA function. The analog coded signs correspond to the jumble
of topologically organized indexical and iconic sign processes in the cells that are
responsible for the interpretation of the digital genetic instructions as well as the
execution of them. Or, as we wrote above: “To claim that only the digital twin is
semiotic whereas the analog twin remains in the sphere of classical dynamics is to
block the only possibility for transcending the semantic cut.”
Replicators and Interactors
Pattee’s distinction between the dynamic and the symbolic (or semiotic) domains
forms a strange and certainly non-intended parallel to Richard Dawkins’ distinc-
tion between vehicles and replicators, discussed above. As we saw, “gene vehicles”
are, in Dawkins’ terminology, a designation for organisms and thus for metaboli-
cally driven activities including movements and growth, or in short, the dynamic
domain. Replicators, on the contrary, are the genes themselves (in whatever way

19
The Semiotics of Nature: Code-Duality
613
such “genes” may be deﬁned in Dawkins’ context) and these, of course, corre-
spond to the symbolic domain in Pattee’s view. But there is an enormous difference
between the two theories, for the whole point of Dawkins’ construction is that repli-
cators are the real agents at the scene, whereas the contribution from organisms
(vehicles) are just that of passively assisting in the processes of copying and spread-
ing as many replicators as possible. Yet for Pattee, the measuring processes (i.e.
the processes whereby organisms are sensing and interpreting their environments)
are presupposed for the symbolic domain to make any sense at all, and to imagine
the relation between the symbolic and dynamic domains as a master-slave relations
makes no sense. But in Dawkins’ way of thinking replicators become masters while
the organisms/vehicles are obedient slaves whose untiring efforts only serve deliver
the much sought-after prize of multiplication to the replicators.
Metaphorically speaking, one might say that where Pattee thinks that the organ-
isms of this world use words in order to get along and to produce more organisms,
Dawkins thinks that the words use organisms to produce more words, and that the
organisms are just tools for this self-promoting process. Seen from the perspective
of both Pattee and biosemiotics, Dawkins commits a logical error in that he treats
symbols as if they were things (“replicators”) – and, worse yet, not merely “things”
but things with purpose, for the very term “replicator” implies a sort of agency – but
an agency that one can hardly imagine to be a property of a DNA molecule (Deacon
2002: 122). The gene may be legitimately termed to be “a replicative unit,” but it
can not, in normal the use of language, be a replicator.19
The American philosopher David Hull attempted to clarify this discussion by
substituting the term “interactor” for the term “vehicle” (Hull 1980). In Hull’s terms,
replicators are units that make more units like themselves (more or less reliably)
and thus conserve and transfer information across generations via the processes of
natural selection. Interactors, on the contrary, are units that spontaneously interact
with their surroundings in ways that may either promote or restrict the spread of
replicators. Replicators thus form lines of descendants and have kinship relations
with one another. Interactors have causal effects on their environments in the here
and now, during only the course of their own lifetimes. In most versions of genetic
Darwinism, organisms are interactors, whereas genes are replicators (Depew and
Weber 1995).
For years now, this dualistic terminology has managed to penetrate and, in fact,
to dominate debates on evolutionary theory. One may then choose to put special
emphasis on the fact that replicators effect interactors by supplying them with infor-
mation that may provide them with a competitive edge relative to other interactors
(as in theories of gene-selectionism). Or, one may instead put emphasis on the fact
that interactors inﬂuence replicators by their decisive role in determining which
information winds up being, in fact, transmitted to the next generation (as in clas-
sical selection theory). The question resolves to whether replicators or interactors
19 Dawkins would perhaps reject outright the notion of a symbolic domain as something really
existing. But then, how would he propose to solve the von Neumann-Pattee paradox?

614
Jesper Hoffmeyer (1942– )
should be ascribed causal priority in life’s evolution. Seen from the perspective of
the present book (cf. Chapter 3), the answer is that we are dealing here with two dif-
ferent kinds of causality, where replicators exert formal causality, while interactors
exert efﬁcient causality. Final causality, sensu Peirce,20 makes use of both tools and
is, in this context, connected to life’s code-dual structure.
In short, the replicator/interactor terminology relies on an inherent reiﬁcation
that serve to restrict discussions to a nearly rachitic21 understanding of causality.
And thus, by re-framing the evolutionary processes as the interdependent interac-
tions between digital and analog codings (wherein the contents coded belong to the
historical subject of the lineage, which is both the product of, and the subject for,
selection), biosemiotics de-privileges the theme of “the competition motive” that
has, almost to the point of obsession, dominated the understanding of evolution by
contemporary Darwinians.22
As an alternative to the fetishization of “Darwinian competition,” the semiotic
perspective makes us turn our investigation toward the processes whereby new
signiﬁcative patterns are generated and exchanged. Such processes seem to hold
the key to the general evolutionary trend towards the appearance of creatures that
increasingly depend for survival on their semiotic sophistication.
Organisms
Amusingly enough, it was Dawkins and his kindred souls who have helped paved
the way for a more biosemiotic understanding of life processes. For in the attempt
to procure the necessary lebensraum for gene-selectionism, they provided a number
of sharp arguments to show that positing “the organism” as the basic unit of biology
is an irreparably anthropomorphic construction.
For example: In most biological models, as well as in everyday “folk psychol-
ogy,” the prototype “organism” remains essentially a vertebrate, like ourselves.
Vertebrates are always well-integrated, coherent organisms with well-deﬁned forms.
20 “. . . that mode of bringing facts about according to which a general description of result is made
to come about, quite irrespective of any compulsion for it to come about in this or that particular
way, although the means may be adapted to the end. The general result may be brought about at
one time in one way, and at another time in another way. Final causation does not determine in
what particular way it is to be brought about, but only that the result shall have a certain general
character” (CP 1: 211).
21 Young readers may not know the disease rachitis – or rickets (which, by the way, in Denmark we
call “English disease”) – that is caused by a deﬁciency of vitamin D, and which, in the childhood
of this author, was still sufﬁciently common for everybody to know the characteristically hollow-
chested look of children having suffered from this disease.
22 Ironically, this is an obsession that plays right into the hands of precisely those radical social-
constructivist theories (e.g., those claims that reality, or at least the scientiﬁc model of it, is nothing
but a social construction set up to perpetuate unequal power relations) that many scientists so
despise.

19
The Semiotics of Nature: Code-Duality
615
They consist of genetically uniform cells and have well-deﬁned life-cycles, starting
with a single cell and ending in reproduction via the transmission of germ cells.
However, by far most organisms of this world are not vertebrates – and most of
them do not obey the aforementioned criteria very well. Neither plants nor fungi
have the kind of individual identity and autonomy that vertebrates have. Their life-
cycles do not necessarily start either from, nor as, single cells, and they are not
as genetically homogenous as are the vertebrates. Many invertebrate animals also
deviate from our conception of how a typical organism lives. Thus, for instance,
many insects undergo metamorphic changes that give them totally different body
shapes from that of their earlier life-stages – and many corals swim freely around
as individual larvae, but end up as colonies where individuality is completely
extinct.
The idea that most seriously undermined the classical concept of the organism
was probably Dawkins’ notion of the “extended phenotype” – for this idea implied
a dissolution of the supposed unity between the organism and the genotype. By the
term “extended phenotype,” Dawkins referred to situations where genes are selected
for because of their effect on a different organism than the one that is carrying the
gene. The phenotypic effect of the gene, in such cases, is played out in a foreign
organism.23 The most dramatic examples of this mechanism are probably found in
parasites. An example is a species of fungus, Enthomophtora muscae, that infects
and kills ordinary house ﬂies. In addition to killing the ﬂies, however, the para-
site also causes dead females to develop a set of special traits, such as distended
abdomens, that acts as sexually attractants to the male ﬂies . . .who are then subse-
quently infected and killed by the fungal parasite (Moeller 1993, cit. in Sterelny and
Grifﬁths 1999: 72).
Similarly, Stephen Jay Gould has discussed the case of the parasitic barnacles
of the crustacean Rhizocephala, which completely take over behavioral control in
the crabs that they parasitize. These parasites suspend the crab’s internal molt cycle
(which might otherwise allow the crab to shed the parasite) and successively trans-
form the brood care behaviors of the crabs in such a way that they will start nursing
the parasitic eggs instead of their own (Gould 1996: 15–16 ).
Morever, not only parasitism – but symbiosis, too – may be of a mutualistic kind,
as we saw in the case of the bladderwort in Chapter 3. Such interactive mutual-
ism is often so tightly interwoven that it feels more natural to talk about one “joint
organism” or a “superorganism” – as in the case of lichens (a general term for a
mutualistic ensemble of a fungi and algae). Another example is the fungus-growing
and -harvesting ants. In this case, the fungi produce sterile fruit that the ants use
to feed their larvae. The subterranean fungus gardens of such ants may be 20 m
long, and the fungi are nursed with a meticulousness that would awake indignation
in the unions of agricultural workers. This particular example of inter-species col-
laboration must be called an evolutionary success story, for it occurs in more than
200 versions, involving different species of ants and fungi respectively. And in some
23 Vehkavaara (2003) has suggested the term externalized purposes for this survival strategy.

616
Jesper Hoffmeyer (1942– )
cases the integration is so complete, that neither the ant nor the fungus could survive
without it.
Similarly, the partnership between higher plants and fungi that is found in root
modules, mycorrhiza, is also of vital importance for both partners. In this case, the
fungi extend out, as mycelium, into the soil and thereby provide their plant host
with improved access to nutrients and water. In turn, the fungi proﬁt from access
to the organic compounds that are produced by the plant. The mycelium can also
interconnect different plants – even of different species, writes Alan Rayner:
By providing communication channels between plants, mycorrhizal mycelia are thought
to enable adult plants to “nurse” seedlings through fungal ‘umbilical cords’, to reduce
competition and to enhance efﬁcient usage and distribution of soil nutrients (Rayner
1997: 63).
However, there is also a risk connected to this arrangement:
On the other hand, they can be piratized, as demonstrated by the yellow bird’s nest
plant, Monotropa hypopitys, which by tapping into mycorrhizal networks is able to divert
resources from the trees that participate in these networks (ibid).
Another of Rayner’s examples is the rot that is found in hollow trees. “Rot” is
intuitively conceived as a disease, but in trees it is often just one link in a normal
recycling process – i.e., a process whereby resources are redistributed from parts of
the tree that no longer take active part in the life processes to those other parts of the
tree where active life processes still occur. The growth of trees typically proceeds
in a thin layer just inside the bark, and as the tree ages, more and more dead wood
is left behind in the middle of the tree. Fungi then degrade the dead wood in the
middle, and thereby initiate a hollowing out of the tree (so-called “heart rot”) –
which then offers habitats for a wide range of different animals. By sending roots
into the resulting compost, the tree actively recycles the material derived from its
own dead wood.
Hardly anybody has a full overview of all the species that coexist in an old tree
but, counting microorganisms, the number may well approach one thousand. Yet
this should not surprises us, as the human organism, as is well-known, is itself the
domicile for numerous species of microorganisms that do useful or even vital work
for us – in the saliva, in the skin, in the intestinal tract, and elsewhere.
Accordingly, the biochemical and physiological interactions necessary to the
maintenance of these many symbiotic relations is equally quite comprehensive.
In the aforementioned case of quorum sensing, the newly hatched squid early on
develops a “ciliated microvillus ﬁeld that will tend to potentiate the bacterial inoc-
ulation” – and that is capable of preventing all bacteria other than V. ﬁscheri from
colonizing the light organ. Yet as soon as the light organ has been inoculated with V.
ﬁscheri a ‘programmed’ massive cell death is released, whereby the ciliated surface
coating is again eliminated.
This “program” is released thanks to a short-lived and irreversible signal emit-
ted by the bacteria, writes McFall-Ngai and Ruby (McFall-Ngai and Ruby 1998).
In brief: cells in the cavities in the light organ where the bacteria attach themselves
respond by undergoing comprehensive cytological alterations, during which some

19
The Semiotics of Nature: Code-Duality
617
of them swell to four times of their former volume, at the same time as a marked
increase in the number of microvilli sets in. At this point, the cells start excreting a
substrate that is rich enough to assure a very short bacterial generation time (time
lapse between divisions) of approximately 30 min. In the course of 10–15 h, the
density of bacteria is stabilized at a level that is determined by the host organism’s
regulation of the oxygen concentration. When the bacteria have reached their max-
imal density, they stop producing the proteins intended for formation of ﬂagella –
which may indicate that they use their ﬂagella for the sole purpose of getting access
to the light organ, for after having been so admitted, the ﬂagellas then become an
unnecessary burden (though it is not known at this time where the signal that blocks
the formation of ﬂagella comes from).
This slightly pedantic description of the mechanisms behind mutuality in the
squid V. ﬁscheri symbiosis is meant to illustrate how very subtle the integration
between symbiotic organisms often is, and has to be. When organisms that are so
fundamentally different that they belong to different species (or even to different
kingdoms) are going to cooperate, they are forced to overcome a host of obstacles
concerning the establishment of unambiguous reciprocal interactions at all levels,
from chemistry to social behavior.
The Darwinian calculus of gross reproductive advantages and disadvantage
seems strangely poor in this context, because it reduces almost to mystery the minu-
tiae of practical solutions to all the challenges of incompatibility. The naked end
result, the “increased ﬁtness” that is supposed to explain the eventual ﬁxation in the
gene pool of mutualistic interaction patterns, tends to hide the complex reality of
the moment-to-moment lived reality. Or to say it another way: By lumping together
the numerous subtle interaction processes into the one single conceptual viewpoint
of selection, one has already, in advance, ascribed priority to a retrospective view of
things. But since such an end point must always be “unknown” to the agents while
the process is actually going on, this perspective implies a systematic distortion of
our understanding of what really happens when new behavioral patterns appear.
From the biosemiotic perspective, it is rather obvious that the “control” mecha-
nisms overseeing all the numerous reciprocal processes that necessarily have to be
in place in order to scaffold an initial mutualism between organisms from different
species, need not be digitally and unambiguously coded at localized loci (i.e., on
the chromosome – where, not inconsequentially, mutational events might spoil the
cooperative interaction without being selected against). Yet outside of biosemiotics,
the idea that a non-digitized but relatively stable semiotic scaffolding of these inte-
gration mechanisms might establish itself is a strongly underestimated possibility, –
if it is considered at all.
The Analog Coding of Epigenisis
Before expounding the biosemiotic view, however, we must ﬁrst consider a cri-
tique of the classical Darwinian focus on the individual that does not, as the just
previously described criticisms do, deal with symbiotic relations (either parasitic

618
Jesper Hoffmeyer (1942– )
or mutualistic) – but instead claim that ordinary classical “individuals” should be
understood as conglomerates of competing cell lines – and that these cell lines,
rather than individuals, constitute the units of natural selection.
Yale biologist Leo Buss proposed just this theory in his book entitled The
Evolution of Individuality, wherein he delivers a frontal attack on the doctrine of
Weismannism. In it, Buss writes: “While Weismann’s inheritance theories were
ultimately proved ﬁctional, their corollary – that the individual is the sole unit of
biological organization – was nevertheless incorporated as a tacit assumption in the
modern synthetic theory of evolution” (Buss 1987: 3). But, Buss continues, as far
back as when the fundaments of the neo-Darwinian synthesis were put down, data
that contradicted Weismann’s doctrine were already known by embryologists. The
problem was that embryologists were strangely absent from the discussions leading
up to the modern synthesis – and so it happened that Weismann’s theory was canon-
ized as a synthesis, in spite of its being in disagreement with known developmental
patterns. For development exhibits signiﬁcant variation from one taxonomic group
to another, and in some cases the Weismannian hypothesis does indeed hold – but
in most cases it does not.
Buss, after reviewing the data on all the main taxonomic groups, shows that the
most common form for development is so-called somatic embryogenesis – where
there is no autonomous germ cell line. In somatic embryogenesis, one and the same
cell line may participate in somatic functions (as stem cells) and yet throughout
ontogenesis, conserve the competence to form germ cells. This mode of develop-
ment is possessed by all plant- and fungus groups and, with a single exception,
also by all protoctists (unicellular eukaryotic species). And even in the animal king-
dom, we ﬁnd somatic embryogenesis dispalyed in no fewer than nine taxonomic
groupings (among them cnidarians, bryozoa and even some annelida species (ibid:
21–22)) Thus, the particulars of so-called preformationistic embryogenesis, where
Weismann’s doctrine does obtain, are in no way typical for life forms on our planet.
And once Weismann’s theory is removed from center stage, “the vertebrate indi-
vidual” loses its favored position in biology, as well. With the loss of the individual
as the natural centre for the evolutionary process, a new space is then opened for
Buss’ own alternative perspective:
The thesis developed here is that the complex interdependent processes which we refer to
as development are reﬂections of ancient interactions between cell lineages in their quest
for increased replication. Those variants which had a synergistic effect and those variants
which acted to limit subsequent conﬂicts are seen today as patterns in metazoan cleavage,
gastrulation mosaicism, and epigenesis (Buss 1987: 29).
Buss’ book takes us on a fascinating (and essentially semiotic) journey into
the webs of cheating, humbug, bluff, and out-maneuvering that – according to his
theory – were the means that individual cell lines used in their reciprocal competi-
tion to become multiplied as much as possible (Chapter 7 examines some of these
processes in more detail). On the embryological process he writes:
Following a variable period of maternal control on embryonic cell fate, the metazoan
embryo becomes organized into one of several discrete bauplans via interactions between

19
The Semiotics of Nature: Code-Duality
619
embryonic cell lineages. The principal epigenetic interactions deﬁning cell fate – those
of induction, competence, and cell death – are all interactions in which one cell lineage
acts to limit the replication of another, while enhancing its own. The fact that embryos
develop by epigenesis is prima facia evidence that these very “programs’ represent interac-
tions between variant cell lineages arising in the course of the ontogeny of ancestral forms”
(Buss 1987: 30).
Buss’ heavy emphasis on “the competition motif” as the preferred explanatory
tool, is, as the reader should surely know by now, not shared by the author of
this book. But in placing the developmental process in the centre of his evolution-
ary thinking, Buss calls attention to an epigenetic perspective that underlines the
autonomous signiﬁcance of a long neglected domain – i.e., the domain that I have in
this book called “the analog code.” And this domain (or “coding”) is, in fact, noth-
ing more nor less than the semiotic loops coupling embryonic cell lines together
into a unit that – in spite of all internal competition – presses a shared destiny upon
them all.
We can conclude then, that Dawkins, Buss, and many of the others that have
challenged the classical conception of the individual organism as the uncontested
unit of selection, do indeed have convincing arguments. This, however, does not
persuade us to accept that genes or cell lines should then be automatically installed
in the role that the individual has surrendered.
On the contrary, it conﬁrms us in seeing evolution in the light of code-duality, for
if organisms are not natural units of selection, they are at least natural units of com-
munication. Via the digitally coded messages in their genome, they are literally in a
line of “communication” with both their ancestors and with their eventual offspring.
And via the multiple analog coded messages of their current bodies, they take part in
the local semiosphere and interact with other creatures, whether conspeciﬁc or not.
“The organism” must then be seen as a nodal point in a semiotic landscape – one
that gradually changes through time (evolution) and thereby leaves marks (genetic
changes) in the conservative DNA code.
It is to some extent a matter of taste if you would like to think of these remaining
marks by calling them “selected.” Since in any case, the proper efﬁcient causality
at issue here lies in the web of analogly coded communication, Dawkins’ position
would actually presuppose that “formal causality should be seen as primary to efﬁ-
cient causality.” . . .But this is a discussion that reminds one more than a little of the
medieval discussions arguing the sex of angels.
Life Cycles as Units of Evolution
In 1985, the American psychologist Susan Oyama of John Jay College in New York,
published an important book in which she recommended that we give up altogether
the idea that the developmental process is directed by some special “information”
that is “transmitted” by genes (Oyama 1985). The “information” that manifests
throughout the life cycle of an individual, Oyama claimed, is rather information

620
Jesper Hoffmeyer (1942– )
that is constructed by and with the developmental process itself. With a pertinent
choice of words, she named her book The Ontogeny of Information.
Oyama’s point – which is closely connected to the one taken in the present book –
is that developmental processes depend on “information” from a range of different
sources, and that genes are only one of these sources. The conception of a special
genetic “program” that unfolds its predetermined logic through embryogenesis is
mistaken, because this program – if the program metaphor should be valid at all –
is not self-reliant, but only works at all because it is played out in a context that is
derived from elsewhere.
And, indeed, there is no reason to believe that an organism could be prepro-
grammed to solve the multiple challenges it will meet in its lifetime. In this respect,
the organism confronts the same horizon of troubles that has ﬁnally convinced the
would-be creators of “autonomous agents” to change their paradigm from one of
rational preprogramming (the old artiﬁcial intelligence approach) to one of training
and learning (Clark 1997).
For from the very beginning, embryogenesis presupposes that tissues in the grow-
ing embryo have the capacity for selecting and responding appropriately to relevant
stimuli (which is exactly what an “autonomous” robot to some extent may learn
to do but cannot be instructed to do). The developmental process, in other words,
is not an instructional process, but a process of self-calibration. As such it is, of
course, supported by the ever-present availability of necesssary protein resources
that the cell at each moment may derive, by activating relevant sections of the
genetic library, but basically it remains a process where individuals create them-
selves in a self-organizing interaction with their environment (the metaphoric here
is my own, not Oyama’s).
The ordinary expression that “a gene codes for this or that trait” therefore tacitly
takes for granted that the conditions under which such a trait can be “expressed”
are the conditions that are “normal.” In cases where such conditions are not normal,
however, the trait in question may perhaps not be developed, even though the gene is
there. And as Paul Grifﬁths and Russel Gray have pointed out “normal conditions”
is not an unambiguous concept. Genes in an acorn, for instance, are supposed to
code “for” the development of an oak tree – but by far, most of all acorns do not
sprout but are eaten or just rot away on the forest ﬂoor. So in this case, what are the
“normal conditions” that this gene ﬁnds itself in? (Grifﬁths and Gray 1994, also cf.
Ruth Milikan’s discussion of functionality in Chapter 3).
This phrase “under normal conditions,” then, actually hides a whole lot of inter-
esting things, so that on the one hand we have the genes and on the other hand we
have “all the rest.” But here is an interesting symmetry. For just as one might say
that “a gene codes for a trait when conditions are normal,” one might equally jus-
tiﬁably say that “each and all other developmental resources code for a trait when
genes are normal.”
Many bird young, for example, must learn the song of their own species by ﬁrst
listening to the song of their parents. To say that “their song program probably is
coded for in the genes if things are normal” implies, with the invocation of “normal-
ity,” the fact that the bird parents do, in fact, sing. But one might as well say, that

19
The Semiotics of Nature: Code-Duality
621
the song of the young “is coded for in the song of the parents” – presupposing, of
course, that the necessary proteins – and thus genes – needed for constructing the
relevant anatomical structures in the throat are intact.24
This gene-environment symmetry argument is the central component in a com-
plex of ideas that Oyama, Grifﬁths, Gray and others have developed under the
name of Developmental Systems Theory (DST) (Oyama et al. 2001). According to
DST, species-speciﬁc traits are formed with the help of structured sets of develop-
mental resources within self-organizing processes, and there is no need to appoint
any “centralized information source.” Some of these developmental resources are
genetic, while most others – from the cytoplasmic machinery of the fertilized egg
to the social structurings that inﬂuence human psychological development – are
non-genetic.
It may perhaps come as a surprise to some readers that such parity between infor-
mation sources is suggested at all – for such is the extent to which the rhetoric of
modern genetics has managed to make us identify “heredity” and “genes” as two
sides of the same coin, such that our eyes have become closed to the obvious. For
organisms do, of course, inherit a lot of other things than just their genetic mate-
rial. Above all, they inherit a suitable milieu or habitat (without which, such genetic
material would remain inert).
Mice are not borne at the bottom of the sea, and ﬁsh not born on land, to spell
it out. Or, to give a more appropriate example: Cuckoo young are, as is well-
known, hatched in nests belonging to birds of other species, and it has therefore
been believed – following a suggestion by Konrad Lorenz – that the cuckoo, con-
trary to what is the case in other bird species, did not need to be imprinted on by
conspeciﬁc adult birds in order to mate with cuckoo partners. It was supposed, in
other words, that correct cuckoo behavior was genetically buffered. A recent study,
however, has shown that, at least in the cuckoo species Clamator glandarius, the
converse is true. Adult cuckoos in this species do actually look for nests with newly
hatched young – not necessarily their own – and then sit in a nearby tree singing
their songs. And this, apparently, is enough for the cuckoo young to take on the
cuckoo song – or to be reimprinted with it, in those cases where they had already
become imprinted on by the songs of the foster birds (Soler and Soler 1999).
The above serves as a good example of the point that I want to argue, because
with regards to it, nobody quarrels with the idea that genetic imprinting is involved.
What is noteworthy (and far too often overlooked), however, is that the inter-
dependence between genetic expression and learned behavior is so subtle. The latter
24 Molecular genetics has increasingly undermined the simple genotype-phenotype relationship
that was so passionately believed in just a few years ago. For it has become increasingly appar-
ent that genomic systems exhibit unexpectedly integrative aspects. The lactose-positive phenotype
in E. coli, for example, presupposes not only that the lac-operon proteins are expressed, but also
that the genes that code for adenylate cyclase and for the cAMP receptor protein are expressed. “In
many cases,” writes James A. Shapiro (1999, 25), “it is really impossible to assign a speciﬁc organ-
ismal phenotype to a particular locus, because its gene product(s) can participate in the execution
of multiple cellular or developmental programs.”

622
Jesper Hoffmeyer (1942– )
is not merely an addition to the former, as is often implied. Rather, the individual
organism only emerges out of a process of their dynamic interaction, and the full sig-
niﬁcance of such alternative types of “inheritance” only shows up when one learns
to see the intimate interplay between genetic heredity and environmental heredity.
Similarly, Konrad Lorenz’ concept of “innate behavior” was heavily criticized
as far back as the 1950s by the American psychologist Daniel S. Lehrman, who
pointed to many cases that contradicted Lorenz’ concept of “instinct.” In this regard,
we shall consider here the very illustrative case of prenatal “learning by doing” in
ducklings, as studied by developmental biologist Gilbert Gottlieb and as discussed
in Grifﬁths and Gray (1994: 279).
Ducklings normally acquire a preference for their mother’s species-speciﬁc call
signal from the very beginning of their lives. Gottlieb discovered, however, that
ducklings would not develop this “preference” if they were prevented from them-
selves vocalizing while still in the egg. Apparently, duckling embryos have to be
exposed to their own prenatal call sounds before they can develop a preference for
the quite different sounds of their mother’s call (Gottlieb 1981). It is important to
underline here, as Lehrman did and Gottlieb repeated, “that these sorts of facts do
not show that all traits are ‘learned.’ They show, rather, that reliable developmental
outcomes occur because of reliable interactions between the developing organism
and its environment” (in Grifﬁths and Gray 1994: 280).
A consequence of this increased emphasis on the importance of the non-genetic
resources in the expression of “genetic traits” is that Weismann’s doctrine becomes
directly misleading. For not only is the postulated separation between the germ cell
line and the somatic cell lines, as we have seen, the exception rather than the rule in
the biosphere – but even in those cases where it does apply, it cannot really be said
to play the exclusively decisive role ascribed to it by many geneticists.
Rather, it appears that the supposed “dead-end” organisms – i.e. the phenotypes –
via their interaction with the environment and with their offspring, yield a rich causal
input to the welfare of the next generation. In order to include this richer conception
of causality to our understanding of evolution, Grifﬁths and Gray suggest that nei-
ther genes nor individuals should be seen as units of evolution, and that such a role
should be ascribed rather – if at all – to the whole life cycle:
the individual, from a developmental systems perspective, is a process – the life cycle. It
is a series of developmental events which forms an atomic unit of repetition in a lineage.
Each life cycle is initiated by a period in which the functional structures characteristic of
the lineage must be reconstructed from relatively simple resources. At this point there must
be potential for variations in the developmental resources to restructure the life cycle in a
way that is reﬂected in descendant cycles (Grifﬁths and Gray 1994: 296).
Within the framework of such a process perspective, the whole replicator/
interactor distinction becomes rather misleading, for it is based on the unnatu-
ral dichotomization of the developmental process into “genes” and “all the rest.”
Dawkins, for instance, says that “when we are talking about development, it is
appropriate to emphasize non-genetic as well as genetic factors. But when we are
talking about units of selection a different emphasis is called for, an emphasis on the
properties of replicators” (Dawkins 1982: 98, italics added).

19
The Semiotics of Nature: Code-Duality
623
But this so idea only makes sense if one disregards the fact that many of those
factors that, in the course of the life-cycle, are responsible for the success of an
individual, are replicas of factors that were responsible for the success of the life-
cycle of its parents. A DNA segment – to stay within the terminology of Dawkins –
is not even itself a “replicator” in the strict sense of “something that is capable of
replicating itself.” For the replication of DNA-segments cannot take place without
the cellular machinery of proteins and membranes that – considered as topologically
ordered structures – are in themselves extra-genetic hereditary factors. And a range
of other developmental resources are likewise furthermore required for the life-cycle
to be realized in a viable way.
Grifﬁths and Gray therefore conclude that: “If we insist that a replicator have the
intrinsic power to replicate itself, there will be only one replicator, the life cycle.
But if we allow the status of ‘replicator’ to anything that is reliably replicated in
development, there will be many replicators” (Grifﬁths and Gray 1994: 300).
Developmental systems theory is largely consistent with a biosemiotic con-
ception of ontogenesis and evolution, and probably the most radical consequence
of DST is that the dichotomizing into organism and environment is severely
challenged. For in the traditional view, evolution is due to the exposure of indi-
vidual variants to selective forces caused by an independently existing milieu. But
according to DST, such variants (here: life-cycles) are by necessity already deeply
integrated into the environment, and the thus conception of differential success is
therefore no straight forward matter:
One variant does better than another, not because of a correspondence between it and
some preexisting environmental feature, but because the life cycle that includes interac-
tion with that feature has a greater capacity to replicate itself than the life cycle that lacks
that interaction (Grifﬁths and Gray 1994: 300).
Grifﬁths and Gray therefore suggest that:
Life cycles still have ﬁtness values, but these are interpreted not as a measure of a
correspondence between the organism and its environment, but as measures of the self-
replication power of the system. Fitness is no longer a matter of ‘ﬁttednes’ to an independent
environment. (Grifﬁths and Gray 1994: 301).
And this conception is not too distant from the concept of semiotic ﬁtness, that I
suggested in 1997:
Instead of genetic ﬁtness, evolutionary biology should try to develop a concept of semi-
otic ﬁtness. After all, ﬁtness depends on a relation, something can be “ﬁt” only in a given
context. Genes may be ﬁt only under certain environmental conditions, or environments
might perhaps be said to be ﬁt in the sense that their self-sustaining dynamic capacity has
been adapted to the actual genotype resources offered to them. But if genotypes and envi-
rotypes (Odling-Smee and Patten 1994) reciprocally constitute the context on which ﬁtness
should be measured, it seems we should rather talk about the ﬁt in its relational entirety,
that is as a semiotic capacity. The evolutionarily relevant ﬁtness concept of “semiotic ﬁt-
ness” should ideally measure the semiotic competence or success of natural systems in
managing the genotype-envirotype translation processes. The optimization of semiotic ﬁt-
ness results in the continuing growth and depth of interpretative patterns accessible to life
(Hoffmeyer 1997).

624
Jesper Hoffmeyer (1942– )
Genes are Indeed Special
Returning to our point of departure: Although Weismann’s doctrine certainly is not
waterproof in its substantial sense, it did at least illuminate an important aspect of
evolution that is still in need of much clariﬁcation. This aspect concerns the general
role of digital codes in evolution.
Because Weismann and several generations of biologists after him have reiﬁed
the digital code – ﬁrst as germ cells, then as chromosomes or genomes, and now,
as DNA-segments or replicators – it has been thought that this reiﬁed code could
carry the weight of exerting efﬁcient causality in the evolutionary process. And by
framing this strange efﬁcient causality as that of a “transport process” (where the
transported goods was called information), the mystiﬁcation had ﬁnally been made
complete. The missing substance in the concept of “genetic information transport”
has been thoroughly analyzed by Sahotra Sarkar (1996, 1997) who points out that
cracking the genetic code was the result of brilliant experimental work and was not,
to any signiﬁcant extent, helped by information-based reasoning,25 “At the very
most,” Sarkar says, the concept of a code carrying information “provides a succinct
look-up table on the basis of which one can predict the sequence of the polypeptide
chain that would be determined by a particular DNA chain provided at least ﬁve
conditions, discovered since 1966, are fulﬁlled. Unfortunately, if prediction is the
goal, these conditions are quite debilitating” (Sarkar 1996, 1997) For further details
see Emmeche (1999).
I claimed in Chapter 2 that the digital code appeared with the ﬁrst living systems
as a mechanism for the description of central constituents of the holistic arrange-
ment in prebiotic systems. This description (in DNA-code) implied a self-reference
in the absence of which a living system could not become a “self” (in the sense of
a system possessing a stable coupling of self-reference to alter-reference). The role
of the digital code is connected, then, to the vertical (temporal) continuation of the
self-specifying capacity of life. And in this chapter, we have seen that towards this
end, the digital code manifests three important characteristics: temporal stability
(memory), rich potential for combinatorics (renewal) and capacity for abstraction
(formation of meta-messages).
Digital codes, in our understanding, are therefore something special, and we bear
attention to the fact that there may yet hide a potential misunderstanding in the DST
conception of complete parity between the genes and other resources of the develop-
mental process. We certainly support the dethronement of genes from their relatively
25 I agree with Sarkar (1996) in his demonstration of the inconsistencies inherent in the infor-
mation concept of molecular biology. From this, however, Sarkar draws the conclusion that we
had better stick to strictly chemical-biological terminology. Biosemiotics draws the opposite con-
clusionand introduces an explicitly semiotic understanding, seeing information as the exchange of
signs or sets of signs, i.e., coded messages. A thorough discussion of this understanding is given
in Emmeche (1999). Sharov (1992) also has recommended a semiotic understanding of biological
information, and Jablonka (2002), as we saw in Chapter “The Logic of Signs”, uses a concept of
information that is nearly indistinguishable from the Peircean sign concept.

19
The Semiotics of Nature: Code-Duality
625
uncontested position as deterministic executants of control within the ontogenetic
process. But on the other hand, their role as digitally coded sign systems provide
them with a unique status that ought to be recognized. And by seeing life, as sug-
gested here, as being based on the incessant semiotic interactions between code-dual
systems – organisms in life-cycles – it is possible to respect the special role that
genes do in fact play, without thereby privileging them relative to all other factors
that contribute semiotic control within the life-cycles of the biological world.
Decoupled from the dynamics of cellular life, the genome is in one and the
same time conservative and promiscuous. From the one side it is protected against
changes, and from the other side, it becomes recombined all the time under the for-
mation of new genetic combinations. In the next chapter, we shall have a closer look
at such genetic semiotics.
References
Bateson, G. (1972). Steps to an Ecology of Mind. New York: Ballantine Books.
Bateson, G. (1979). Mind and Nature. A Necessary Unity. New York: Bentam Books.
Brier, S. (2000). Biosemiotics as a possible bridge between embodiment in cognitive semantics
and the motivation concept of animal cognition in ethology. Cybernetics & Human Knowing
7(1), 57–76.
Bruni, L. E. (2002). Does ‘quorum sensing’ imply a new type of biological information. Sign
Systems Studies 30(1), 221–243.
Bruni, L. E. (2003). A sign-theoretic approach to biotechnology. Dissertation. Copenhagen:
Institute of Molecular Biology, University of Copenhagen.
Buss, L. (1987). The Evolution of Individuality. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Christiansen, P. V. (2002). Habit formation as symmetry breaking in the early universe. Sign
Systems Studies 30(1), 347–360.
Clark, A. (1997). Being There. Putting Brain, Body, and World Together Again. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, A Bradford Book.
Clark, A. (2002). Is seeing all it seems? Action. Reason and the grand illusion. Journal of
Consciousness Studies 9(5/6), 181–202.
Damasio, A. (1994). Descartes’ Error. Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain. New York: Putnam
Books.
Danesi, M. (2001). Layering theory and human abstract thinking. Cybernetics & Human Knowing
8(3), 5–24.
Darwin, C. (1981 [1871]). The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Dawkins, R. (1976). The Selﬁsh Gene, 2nd ed., 1989. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dawkins, R. (1982). The Extended Phenotype: The Long Reach of the Gene. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Dawkins, R. (1989). The Selﬁsh Gene: New Edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Deacon, T. (1997). The Symbolic Species. New York: Norton.
Deacon, T. (2002). Problemet med Memer. Kritik 155/156, 120–126.
Deacon, T. (2003). Multilevel selection in a complex adaptive system: The problem of lan-
guage origins. In: Weber, B., Depew, D. (Eds.) Evolution and Learning. The Baldwin Effect
Reconsidered. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 81–106.
Deely, J. (1990). Basics of Semiotics. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Deely, J. (1991). Basics of Semiotics. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

626
Jesper Hoffmeyer (1942– )
Deely, J. (1994). How does semiosis effect renvoi? The American Journal of Semiotics 11(1/2),
11–61.
Deely, J. (2001). Four Ages of Understanding. The First Postmodern Survey of Philosophy from
Ancient Times to the Turn of the Twenty-ﬁrst Century. Toronto: Toronto University Press.
Dennett, D. C. (1987). The Intentional Stance. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press/Bradford Books.
Depew, D. (2003). Baldwin and his many effects. In: Weber, B., Depew, D. (Eds.) Evolution and
Learning. The Baldwin Effect Reconsidered. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 3–31.
Depew, D. L., Weber, B. H. (1995). Darwinism Evolving: Systems Dynamics and the Genealogy
of Natural Selection. Cambridge, MA: Bradford/The MIT Press.
Einstein, A. Infeld, L. (1938). The Evolution of Physics. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Emmeche, C. (1999). The Sarkar challenge to biosemiotics: Is there any information in a cell?
Semiotica 127(1/4), 273–293.
Emmeche, C. (2001). Does a Robot have an Umwelt? Reﬂections on the qualitative biosemiotics
of Jakob von Uexküll. Semiotica. Special issue on Jakob von Uexküll (Kull, K. Ed.).
Emmeche, C., Hoffmeyer, J. (1991). From language to nature: The semiotic metaphor in biology.
Semiotica 84(1/2): 1–42.
Etxeberria, A. (1998). Embodiment of natural and artiﬁcial agents. In: van de Vijver, G., Salthe, S.,
Delpos, M. (Eds.) Evolutionary Systems. Biological and Epistemological Perspectives on
Selection and Self-Organization. Dordrecht: Kluwer, pp. 397–412.
Favareau, D. (2001). Beyond self and other: On the neurosemiotic emergence of intersubjectivity.
Sign Systems Studies 30(1), 57–100.
Favareau, D. (2002). Constructing representema: On the neurosemiotics of self and vision. SEED
2(4), 3–24.
Favareau, D. (2007). Collapsing the wave function of meaning: The epistemological matrix of
talk-in-interaction. In: Hoffmeyer, J. (Ed.) Bateson as a Precursor for Biosemiotics. Dordrecht:
Springer.
Fodor, J. (1975). The Language of Thought. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Gottlieb, G. (1981). Roles of early experience in species-speciﬁc perceptual development. In:
Aslin, R. N., Alberts, J. R., Petersen, M. P. (Eds.) Development of Perception. New York:
Academic Press, pp. 5–44.
Gould, S. J. (1996). Triumph of the root-heads. Natural History 105, 10–17.
Grifﬁths, P. E., Gray, R. D. (1994). Developmental systems and evolutionary explanations. Journal
of Philosophy 91, 277–304.
Hendriks-Jansen, H. (1996). Catching Ourselves in the Act. Situated Activity, Interactive
Emergence, and Human Thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1975). Dansen om Guldkornet. En bog om biologi og samfund. København:
Gyldendal.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1987). The constraints of nature on free will. In: Mortensen, V., Sorensen, R. C.
(Eds.) Free Will and Determinism. Aarhus: Aarhus University Press, pp. 188–200.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1992). Some semiotic aspects of the psycho-physical relation: The endo-
exosemiotic boundary. In: Sebeok, T. A., Umiker-Sebeok, J. (Eds.) Biosemiotics: The Semiotic
Web 1991. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 101–123.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1996). Signs of Meaning in the Universe. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1997). Biosemiotics: Towards a new synthesis in biology. European Journal for
Semiotic Studies 9(2), 355–376.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2002). The central dogma: A joke that became real. Semiotica 138(1), 1–13.
Hoffmeyer,
J.,
Emmeche,
C.
(1991).
Code-duality
and
the
semiotics
of
nature.
In:
Anderson, M., Merrell, F. (Eds.) On Semiotic Modeling. New York: Mouton de Gruyter,
pp. 117–166.
Hoffmeyer, J., Emmeche, C. (2005 [1991]). Code-duality and the semiotics of nature. Journal of
Biosemiotics 1(1), 27–64.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2001). Life and reference. Biosystems 60(1/3), 123–30.
Holley, A. J. (1993). Do brown hares signal to foxes? Ethology 94, 21–30.

19
The Semiotics of Nature: Code-Duality
627
Hull, D. (1980). Individuality and selection. Annual Reviews of Ecology and Systematics 11,
311–332.
Jablonka, E. (2002). Information: Its interpretation, its inheritance, and its sharing. Philosophy of
Science 69, 578–605.
Kauffman, S. A. (2000). Investigations. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Keller, E. F. (1995). Reﬁguring Life: Metaphors of Twentieth-century Biology. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Kull, K. (2000). Organisms can be proud to have been their own designers. Cybernetics and Human
Knowing 7(1), 45–55.
Lakoff, G., Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the Flesh. New York: Basic Books.
Lamarck, J. B. (1809). Philosophie Zoologique, ou Exposition des Considération Relatives a
l’Histoire Naturelle des Animaux. Paris: Dentu.
Lewontin, R. C. (1983). Gene, organism, and environment. In: Bendall, D. S. (Ed.) Evolution from
Molecules to Men. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 273–285.
Lewontin, R. C. (1992). The dream of the human genome. The New York Review, 31–40.
McFall-Ngai, J., Ruby, E. G. (1998). Sepiolids and vibrios: When ﬁrst they meet. BioScience 48(4),
257–265.
Morgan, T. H., Sturtevant, A. H. et al. (1915). The Mechanism of Mendelian Heredity. New York:
Henry Holt.
Moss, L. (2001). Deconstructing the gene and reconstructing molecular developmental systems. In:
Oyama, S., Grifﬁths, P. E., Gray, R. D. (Eds.) Cycles of Contingency. Developmental Systems
and Evolution. Cambridge, MA: A Bradford Book, MIT Press, pp. 85–97.
Nagel, T. (1986). The View from Nowhere. Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press.
Neumann-Held, E. M. (1998). The gene is dead-long live the gene. Conceptualizing the gene
the constructionist way. In: Koslowsky, P. (Ed.) Developmental Systems, Competition and
Cooperation in Sociobiology and Economics. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, pp. 105–137.
Nöth, W. (2000). Handbuch der Semioitk. 2., vollständig neu bearbeitede und erweiterte Auﬂage.
Stuttgart: Verlag J. B. Metzler.
Odling-Smee, F. J. (1988). Niche constructing phenotypes. In: Plotkin, H. C. (Ed.) The Role of
Behavior in Evolution. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 72–132.
Odling-Smee, F. J. (2001). Niche construction, ecological inheritance, and cycles of contin-
gency in evolution. In: Oyama, S., Grifﬁths, P. E., Gray, R. D. (Eds.) Cycles of Contingency.
Developmental Systems and Evolution. Cambridge, MA: A Bradford Book, MIT Press,
pp. 117–126.
Odling-Smee, F. J., Laland, K. N., Feldman, M. W. (1996). Niche construction. American
Naturalist 147(4), 641–648.
Odling-Smee, F. J., Patten, B. (1994). The genotype-phenotype-envirotype complex: Ecological
and genetic inheritance in evolution. Manuscript.
Oyama, S. (1985). The Ontogeny of Information. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Oyama, S, Grifﬁths, P. E., Gray, R. D. (Eds.) (2001). Cycles of Contingency. Developmental
Systems and Evolution. Cambridge, MA: A Bradford Book, MIT Press.
Pattee, H. (1972). Laws and constraints, symbols, and languages. In: Waddington, C. H.
(Ed.) Towards a Theoretical Biology, Vol. 4. Edinburgh: University of Edinburgh Press,
pp. 248–258.
Pattee, H. H. (1977). Dynamic and linguistic modes of complex systems. International Journal for
General Systems 3, 259–266.
Pattee, H. H. (1997). The physics of symbols and the evolution of semiotic controls. Santa Fe
Institute Studies in the Sciences of Complexity, Proceedings Volume. Redwood City, CA:
Addison-Wesley.
Peirce, C. S. (1931–35). Collected papers I–VI. In: Hartstone, C., Weiss, P. (Eds.) Collected Papers
I–IV. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Pinker, S. (1994). The Language Instinct. The New Science of Language and Mind. London:
Penguin.
Polanyi, M. (1958). Personal Knowledge. London: Routledge.

628
Jesper Hoffmeyer (1942– )
Rayner, A. D. M. (1997). Degrees of Freedom. Living in Dynamic Boundaries. London: Imperial
College Press.
Rocha, L. (1998). Syntactic autonomy. Joint Conference on the Science and Technology of
Intelligent Systems, Gaithersburg, MD.
Ruse, M. (1979). The Darwinian Revolution. Chicago/London: University of Chicago Press.
Russel, B., Whitehead, A. N. (1910–13). Principia Mathematica vol. I–III. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Sarkar, S. (1996). Biological information: A skeptical look at some central dogmas of molec-
ular biology. In: Sarkar, S. (Ed.) The Philosophy and History of Molecular Biology: New
Perspectives. Dordrecht: Kluwer, pp. 187–231.
Sarkar, S. (1997). Decoding ‘coding’: Information and DNA. European Journal for Semiotic
Studies 9(2), 227–232.
Shapiro, J. A. (1999). Genome system architecture and natural genetic engineering in evolution.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 870, 23–35.
Sharkey, N., Ziemke, T. (2001a). Life, mind and robots: The ins and outs of embodiment. In:
Wermter, S., Sun, R. (Eds.) Symbolic and Neural Net Hybrids. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sharkey, N., Ziemke, T. (2001b). Mechanistic versus phenomenal embodiment: Can robot
embodiment lead to strong AI? Cognitive Systems Research 2(4), 251–262.
Sharov, A. A. (1992). Biosemiotics: A functional-evolutionary approach to the analysis of the
sense of information. In: Sebeok, T. A., Umiker-Sebeok, J. (Eds.) Biosemiotics: The Semiotic
Web 1991. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 345–374.
Soler, M., Soler, J. J. (1999). Innate versus learned recognition of conspeciﬁcs in great spotted
cuckoos Clamator glandarius. Animal Cognition 2, 97–102.
Sterelny, K., Grifﬁths, P. E. (1999). Sex and death. An Introduction to Philosophy of Biology.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Stjernfelt, F. (1992). Categorial perception as a general prerequisite to the formation of signs? On
the biological range of a deep semiotic problem in Hjelmslev’s as well as Peirce’s semiotics.
In: Sebeok, T. A., Umiker-Sebeok, J. (Eds.) Biosemiotics. The Semiotic Web 1991. Berlin/New
York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Taborsky, E. (2002). Energy and evolutionary semiosis. Sign Systems Studies 30(1), 361–381.
Thibault, P. J. (1998). Code. In: Bouissac, P. (Ed.) Encyclopedia of Semiotics. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, pp. 125–129.
Uexküll, J. von. (1982 [1940]). The theory of meaning. Semiotica 42(1), 25–87.
Van Gelder, T., Port, R. (1995). It’s about time: Overview of the dynamical approach to cognition.
In: Port, R., Van Gelder, T. (Eds.) Mind or Motion: Explorations in the Dynamics of Cognition.
Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books/MIT Press, pp. 1–43.
Vehkavaara, T. (2003). Natural interests: Interactive representation and the emergence of Objects
and Umwelt. Sign System Studies 30(2), 547–587.
von Neumann, J. (1955). The Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Wilden, A. (1980). System and Structure. New York: Tavistock.
Ziemke, T., Sharkey, N. (2001). A stroll through the worlds of robots and animals: Applying Jakob
von Uexküll’s theory of meaning to adaptive robots and artiﬁcial life. Semiotica 134(1–4),
701–746.

Chapter 20
Information and Semiosis in Living Systems:
A Semiotic Approach
Claus Emmeche (1956– ), João Queiroz (1963– ),
and Charbel El-Hani (1968– )
Introduction and Commentary: Claus Emmeche
When I ﬁrst tried to apply Peirce, I found many different interpretations of his work that
were essentially misinterpretations – interpretations having the idea that ‘the mind’ is the
name of some kind of mysterious entity that somehow imputes meaning upon the sign is
a very common, and a very Cartesian misinterpretation of Peirce. Peirce, from what I can
tell, would reject this kind of reiﬁed, non-processural view of ‘mind.’ So this makes relevant
the whole question of the supposed ‘locus’ of meaning: Is ‘meaning’ the kind of thing that
is physically ‘located’ at a certain place? Is it – as people often say – in the mind? Or
is it possible that talking about ‘the mind’ is really not the right way to phrase the whole
question of meaning?
C. Emmeche (2008: 19–20)
At the Ninth World Congress of the International Association for Semiotic
Studies in 2007, molecular biologist Jesper Hoffmeyer recalls the impetus leading
to the founding of “biosemiotics” as a research agenda in Denmark by himself and
Claus Emmeche in 1985 thusly:
After the discovery of the genetic code, many of my fellow scientists started talking about
a new ‘Information Age’ that we were supposed to be entering. And yet one of the things
that became most clear to me was that, in the discourse of Biology, one had a deeply inco-
herent notion of ‘information’ being used all the time, one wherein nobody really knows,
or attempts to explicitly deﬁne, what exactly the term ‘information’ means. Therefore, as
a biologist, it appeared to me that a very deeply informed concept of ‘information’ would
become central to the study of life processes. And, indeed, the word ‘information’ at any
rate, did become very central to Biology in those years. But, as I say, the necessary explana-
tory concepts behind the promiscuous kind of ‘placeholder’ use of this word were lacking.
So, around 1985, Claus Emmeche and I started wondering what exactly information means
in living systems, and we collaborated together a lot [in this investigation]in the early days
of biosemiotics (Favareau et al. 2008: 3)
Twenty-ﬁve years have elapsed since the time that Hoffmeyer recounts above –
and as the following selection by Claus Emmeche and his colleagues João Queiroz
and Charbel Niño El-Hani makes abundantly clear, the notion of “information” is
still used both promiscuously and without precise conceptual grounding in the life
sciences today. Now, as then, the goal of Emmeche and his colleagues is “not to get
rid of” the term information in biology “but rather to clarify it by using a proper
theoretical framework” (2005: 60).
629
D. Favareau, Essential Readings in Biosemiotics, Biosemiotics 3,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9650-1_20, C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010

630
Claus Emmeche (1956– ) et al.
Having helped birth the “semiotics of nature” movement that would later be
rechristened “biosemiotics” with Jesper Hoffmeyer at the University of Copenhagen
in 1985, Claus Emmeche traces his own interest in biology back to his elementary
school days “touring around with a little local club of naturalists, a youth faction of
amateur ﬁeld biologists called ‘Natur & Ungdon’ [Nature & Youth] and founded by
the Danish Nature Conservation Union back in the year of the Russian Revolution”
(2009: p.c.). Fourteen years Hoffmeyer’s junior, Emmeche recalls ﬁrst coming
across a book by Hoffmeyer during his ﬁrst summer after high school, just before
he was about to begin his undergraduate studies in the Department of Biology at
the University of Copenhagen in 1975. “What I found in his Dansen om Guldkornet
[roughly: “The Idol Worship of (Science’s) Gold” (1975)],” recalls Emmeche, “was
an intriguing combination of history of biology, political ecology, philosophical
anti-reductionist thinking and much more that I had never seen before. . .[and] it
provoked my conception of the topic I was going to study” (2002: 47).
Emmeche’s undergraduate studies, however, took him down the more traditional
route of biological training – “with strong emphasis on the rich details of compara-
tive vertebrate anatomy, botanical morphology, and other hot stuff like the taxonomy
of kormophytes” he recounts (ibid) – while Hoffmeyer at that time was already
known throughout Copenhagen as a public intellectual, author, and founder of a
critical leftist journal on science and technology. Recalling the intellectual atmo-
sphere of this period in a contribution to a Hoffmeyer festschrift published in 2002,
Emmeche comments upon the often under-appreciated fact that a post-1968 West
European student culture of “immanent critique” – wherein students (and their more
radical professors) sought to deconstruct the ideology and challenge the assumptions
of the very ﬁelds that they were actively studying – was pervasive in Denmark at
this time – and that what would later be called “biosemiotics” also has some of its
historical and philosophical roots in this ground (2002: 36–41, 48–50).
By the time that Emmeche ﬁnished his Master’s Degree in biology in 1984,
Hoffmeyer had already re-oriented the emphasis of his research away from the
experimental biochemical research he had been doing, and towards the investiga-
tion of the then emerging ﬁelds of “biotechnology” and “information technology” –
ﬁelds that the philosophically-inclined Emmeche also had an interest in. In 1985,
Emmeche secured a grant to have Hoffmeyer as his Ph.D. supervisor, and together
they embarked on the project to formulate a richer notion of information for use in
biology. The result of this collaboration was their seminal paper on “code-duality”
that was written in 1988, and published in two parts three years later (Emmeche and
Hoffmeyer 1991; Hoffmeyer and Emmeche 1991).
In this paper, inspired both by cybernetician Gregory Bateson’s distinction
between the nature of digital and analog codes (Bateson: 1972, 1979), as well as
physicist Howard Pattee’s parallel distinction between time-independent descrip-
tions and time-dependent dynamics (Pattee: 1969, 1972), Emmeche and Hoffmeyer
developed a theory of code-duality wherein life on any biological level is character-
ized by “the recursive and unending exchange of information between analog and
digital coding surfaces” (Hoffmeyer 2008: 80). Critically, and in contradistinction
to the often reiﬁed and undeﬁned “placeholder” use of the term information in biol-
ogy, Emmeche and Hoffmeyer make clear their very speciﬁc, and very different,

20
Information and Semiosis in Living Systems: A Semiotic Approach
631
conception of this term’s meaning right at the outset of their paper, whose ﬁrst
words, appearing in carefully chosen bold face header, are: “Biological information
is not a substance” (1997: 117). Instead, when Emmeche and Hoffmeyer claim that
“life on any biological level is characterized by the recursive and unending exchange
of information between analog and digital coding surfaces” they are talking neither
about the physical transfer of some mysterious “meaning”-bearing matter-energy
packets, much less about the emission and absorption of any form of any (even more
unlikely) self-conscious “knowledge” or ideas at the level of the cell. Rather, their
“recursive in-form-ation” refers to precisely the functional process phenomenon –
found only in living beings – whereby form and substance are mutually modiﬁed by
their incorporation sign processes.
Hoffmeyer expands upon the implications of his and Emmeche’s code-duality
framework at some length in Chapter Nineteen of this volume, (to which the inter-
ested reader is now directed). However, it is relevant to an even fuller reading
of the following selection to consider the introductory paragraphs of the semi-
nal “code-duality” paper here, so as to conceptually ground one’s understanding
to the developed to that will be in considerably more detail by Emmeche and his
colleagues in the selection that follows.
The biological discipline of morphology derives its name from the Greek word ‘morph.’
According to the etymological dictionary, the Romans probably took over this word from
the Greek, but in a distorted way. Thus, in Latin ‘morph’ became ‘form.’ From this Latin
word arose the verb informare: To bring something into form. And this again is the root
of the now fashionable word information. In spite of this likely etymological relationship
between morphology and information, however, the two areas occupy nearly antagonistic
positions in modern biology: While the study of the anatomical forms of organisms (mor-
phology), is now a rather outmoded discipline, the study of ‘biological information’ (in
DNA or RNA) is one of the most ﬂowering specialties of present biology. Clearly, in the
20th century, the term ‘information’ has been substituted for the term ‘form’ as the preferred
key to unlocking the fundamental problems of biology. It should be realized, however, that
the old dilemma of form and substance is not at all explained away through the introduction
of this new concept information. The dilemma merely assumes a new disguise.
Reading contemporary texts on biology – at whatever level it may be – one cannot escape
feeling, that the very notion of biological information serves to circumvent diffculties which
are in fact not solved. Thus, we are told, for instance, that in the fertilized egg of any
animal is carried ‘a programme’ specifying how this particular animal should be formed.
Although nobody claims detailed knowledge as to how this programme actually works, it
is understood that its creation is no serious mystery. Natural selection acting on the endless
succession of minor changes in the DNA-sequence (i.e. mutations) will do. The details
remain to be worked out, of course, but the main lines are ﬁrmly established. Essentially
this explanation amounts to a claim, that the actual forms of the organisms in this world can
be explained through the functionality of the genetic ‘programmes’ carried in the DNA of
these organisms. At ﬁrst sight this explanation may look sound enough. But the problem
circumvented through this kind of reasoning is the following: What is the relation between
DNA and the ‘programme’? How does this scheme take into account the eventual logic of
the programme itself? And, above all, who is the subject to whom this programme makes
sense?
Thus, the metaphor of a programme or of information serves to shift the attention from the
actual life-forms to the more invisible and badly understood level of latent life-forms which,
one assumes, is somehow ‘coded’ in the DNA of the fertilized egg. And here the whole
dilemma of form and substance suddenly disppears. DNA (a substance) and programme

632
Claus Emmeche (1956– ) et al.
(information/or potential form) is treated as one and the same thing. The evolutionary ﬂexi-
bility of DNA is seen as the basis for the evolutionary ﬂexibility of the genetic programme.
This identiﬁcation of substance and form at the lowest level explains the otherwise rather
astonishing easiness by which neo-Darwinism derives the form of biological structures from
their function. But biological information is not identical to genes or to DNA (any more
than the words on this page are identical to the printers ink visible to the eye of the reader).
Information, whether biological or cultural, is not a part of the world of substance. It nev-
ertheless depends on that world, since it has to do with the pattern of substance, the way
substance is organized or formed.
We suspect that the confusion of form and substance brought about through this rather
ill-considered use of the concept information lies at the root of fundamental problems of
present biology. And it is the aim of this paper to show, that if the concept of information
is not used to conceal the distinction between form and substance, it might be possible
to change the central perspective of biology in a fruitful way. The dynamics of biological
information belongs to another level of analysis than the dynamics of DNA molecules.
Biological information is expressed through signs and should be studied as such, i.e. as
a special case of semiotics, which we shall term the semiotics of nature (Hoffmeyer and
Emmeche 1991: 117–119).
Since the writing of this paper in 1988, Claus Emmeche and Jesper Hoffmeyer
have, both individually and collectively, developed these ideas considerably.
Subsequent to the association that they would make with Thomas A. Sebeok and
his colleagues a few years later, and with the formation of a Danish Society for the
Semiotics of Nature that brought together such kindred local scholars as Frederik
Stjernfelt, Mogens Kilstrup, Søren Brier and Peder Voetmann Christiansen, both
Hoffmeyer and Emmeche saw the need for incorporating the sign logic of Charles
Sanders Peirce more deeply and more extensively into their investigations of the
roles that sign processes play in life processes.
Emmeche, in particular – after completing his Ph.D. with Hoffmeyer and
going on to become an associate professor and the Director of the Center for
the Philosophy of Nature and Science Studies at the University of Copenhagen’s
Niels Bohr Institute – augmented his later investigations into the “semiotics of
nature” (now called “biosemiotics”) with Peircean-inﬂuenced investigations into
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, neural networking, self-organizing complex-adaptive sys-
tems and Artiﬁcial Life (Emmeche 1992, 1992a, 1994, 1997, 2000, 2003). Having
also an intense interest in the philosophy of science, Emmeche made the acquain-
tance of Brazilian philosopher of biology Charbel Niño El-Hani (1968– ) at a
meeting of the International Society for the History, Philosophy and Social Studies
of Biology in 1997. El-Hani and Emmeche were both extremely interested in the
notions of “emergence” and “downward causation” that were coming out of systems
theory at that time, and together discussed the possibility of testing the applicability
of such notions in biology. In 1999, they authored the ﬁrst of several papers together
on this topic, and eventually began collaborating with the Peirce scholar and cogni-
tive scientist João Queiroz (1963– ), who joined El-Hani as a professor of Semiotics
and Cognitive Science in the Graduate Studies Program in History, Philosophy and
Biology Teaching at the Federal University of Bahia not long after.

20
Information and Semiosis in Living Systems: A Semiotic Approach
633
Fig. 20.1 A schematic depiction of Peircean triadic sign action. The triadic relation forms a chain
of triads. The grey area at the bottom of the ﬁgure shows that all signs in the chain of triads ulti-
mately refer back to the same one dynamical object through a series of increasingly sophisticted
‘immediate (last)’ sign objects. The hooked arrows on top show the ever-mediating (last) interpre-
tant to (next) sign vehicle transitions that produce these ever-more precisely contextualized sign
interpretations. [Figure from El-Hani, Argyris and Queiroz 2007, reprinted with permission the
authors]
Fig. 20.2 The Peircean triadic sign action of immunological response. A model of one of the
signaling pathways triggered by activated B-cell antigen receptor (BCR) as a chain of triads. Notice
the interpretant-sign above transition and the changes in the occupants of the functional role of
object below, corresponding to the Fig. 20.1’s schematic of the sign. In both cases, veridical yet
generative referentiality in a signaling pathway is modeled in terms of these changes of occupants,
which show how the reference to the same external entity or process is maintained throughout the
signaling process. [Figure permissions as above]

634
Claus Emmeche (1956– ) et al.
Emmeche, El-Hani and Queiroz have continued to collaborate on the project of
investigating life processes from a complex-adaptive systems approach that incor-
porates Peircean sign-logic for the explication of such biological phenomena as
immunological response, genetic expression and signal transduction (2005, 2006,
2007, 2008). In 2009, El-Hani, Queiroz and Emmeche published a full-length mono-
graph of their work, entitled Genes, Information, and Semiosis. In it, they reveal the
fruitfulness of applying Peirce’s sign-logic for the explication and understanding of
the complex, multi-leveled processes of sign activity by which a system of inter-
nal relations (i.e., an organism) both maintains itself as a system distinct from –
and yet simultaneously maintains veridical relations with – the larger set of external
relations from where it emerged and where it now has its (semi-autonomous) being.
The Figs. 20.1 and 20.2, from a 2007 paper with systems scientist Arnellos
Argyris (1974– ), clearly illustrate the effectiveness of the strategy taken by
Emmeche and colleagues in Genes, Information, and Semiosis, and its improvement
over the naïve (i.e., either mechanical or cognitive-mystical) notions of information
decried in the original “code-duality” paper of 1991, as well as building upon that
paper’s nascent discussions regarding the unique biological relations of mutually
adaptive substance and form. Accordingly, in the following selection, Emmeche
and colleagues discuss the contemporary role of the information concept in the sci-
ences, and provide a more in-depth understanding of the unique explanatory beneﬁts
afforded by the Peircean approach.

20
Information and Semiosis in Living Systems: A Semiotic Approach
635
Information and Semiosis in Living Systems:
A Semiotic Approach (2005)
Abstract During the 1950s and 1960s, genetics and cell and molecular biology
have been swamped by terms borrowed from information theory. This “informa-
tion talk” still pervades these ﬁelds, including widely used terms such as “genetic
code”, “messenger RNA”, “transcription”, “translation”, “transduction”, “genetic
information”, “chemical signals”, “cell signaling” etc. As the concept of information
and its plethora of associated notions were introduced in biology, several problems
emerged, with which the tradition of biology was unprepared to cope. Instead of
deepening the discussion about “information talk”, the trend in the biological sci-
ences was one of treating “information” as merely sequence information in DNA or
proteins. Today, a number of researchers consider information talk as inadequate and
“just metaphorical”, expressing a skepticism about the use of the term “information”
and its derivatives in biology as a natural science. We disagree with this position,
claiming instead that the notion of information and other related ideas grasp some
fundamental features of biological systems and processes that might be otherwise
neglected. Our problem is not to get rid of information talk, but rather to clarify it
by using a proper theoretical framework. We intend to show that the use of semiotic
concepts and theories to interpret information talk can contribute to the construction
of a precise and coherent account of information in biology. For this purpose, we
introduce here a model of information as semiosis, grounded on Peircean semiotics.
Peirce’s formal science of signs provides an analytic framework in which infor-
mation can be modeled as a pragmatic triadic dependent process that irreducibly
connects signs, objects, and interpretants (effects on interpreters). According to the
model developed in this paper, information is treated as semiosis, i.e., the commu-
nication of a form or habit from an object to an interpretant through a sign, so as to
constrain (in general) the interpretant as a sign or (in biological systems) the inter-
preter’s behavior. We employ this treatment of information for building an account
of genes as signs and genetic information as semiosis.
Introduction
“Information” is a concept which is very important but problematic in biology (see
Oyama 2000, Stuart 1985, Sarkar 1996, Grifﬁths 2001, Jablonka 2002). The concept
of information in biology has been recently a topic of substantial discussion (See,
e.g., Maynard 2000, Godfrey-Smith 2000, Sarkar 2000, Sterelny 2000, Wynnie
2000, Jablonka 2002, Adami 2004). Furthermore, the evolution of new kinds of
information and information interpretation systems in living beings has received a
great deal of attention recently (See, e.g., Jablonka 1994, Jablonka and Szathmáry
1995, Maynard and Szathmáry 1995, 1999, Jablonka and Avital 1998). It is even
the case that the evolution of different ways of storing, transmitting, and interpret-
ing “information” can be treated as a major theme in the history of life (Maynard
and Szathmáry 1995, 1999, Jablonka 2002).

636
Claus Emmeche (1956– ) et al.
As Grifﬁths (2001) wrote recently, “genetic information” is a metaphor in search
of a theory. We think the same can be said, in general terms, of the current use of the
term “information” and its derivatives in biology. After all, a number of researchers
consider all information-talk as inadequate, taking a skeptical view towards the very
use of the term “information” and its derivatives in biology as a natural science (e.g.,
Stuart 1985, Sarkar 1996). Among the reasons for this skepticism, is the fact that the
use of that term in biology is not as precise as in the mathematical theory of commu-
nication. Second, although the standard account of genetic information refers to an
alleged semantic property of genes, it is not clear if and how any genuinely intrinsic
semantics is involved.
One possibility for building a theory of information in biology is to rely on
the mathematical theory of communication. The mathematical theory of commu-
nication is a branch of mathematics that arose out of communication theory. As
Shannon and Weaver deﬁned it, “[t]he fundamental problem of communication is
that of reproducing at one point either exactly or approximately a message selected
at another point” (1949: 31). According to Adams (2003: 472), “at the foundation
of information theory is the development of methods to measure the amount of
information generated by an event or events, and mathematical treatments of the
transmission characteristics of communication channels”. It relies on the theory of
probability to model information sources, ﬂow, and communication channels. The
amount of information is measured in terms of the unexpectedness of the sequence
of signals, written H= p i log (1/p i), where p is the probability of the ith form of
signal.
This theory allows one to deﬁne the amount of information as the measure of
the probability of selection of a particular message among the set of all possible
messages. The probabilistic measure of information provided by this theory is non-
semantic, indifferent to meaning (Shannon and Weaver 1949: 31, Cover and Thomas
1999, Jablonka 2002). Despite the fact that the meaning-free concept of information
theory can be invaluable in biological research for several purposes (Adami 2004),
controversy continues about a non-semantic understanding of information in biol-
ogy and whether it is sufﬁcient for a theoretical understanding of information in
biology. Jablonka (2002), for instance, argues that this concept is not sufﬁcient by
pointing out that, for instance, a DNA sequence encoding a functional enzyme and
a same-length sequence coding for a completely non-functional enzyme would con-
tain, according to the above-mentioned measure, the same amount of information. It
is obvious, however, that these two messages don’t mean the same thing to the cell.
This indicates the necessity of a deﬁnition of information in biology which includes
a semantic and a pragmatic dimension.
We think that a semantic and pragmatic notion of information and its derivatives
grasp some fundamental features of biological systems and processes that might be
otherwise neglected. In particular, the concepts of “code”, “information”, “signals”,
“message”, “signaling”, “transduction”, and so on must be regarded as necessary
for an understanding of the organization of relations in living beings in order to
make clear that what happens in such beings is much more than simple chem-
istry (for details, see Emmeche and Hoffmeyer 1991, Emmeche 1991, El-Hani et al.

20
Information and Semiosis in Living Systems: A Semiotic Approach
637
forthcoming). For instance, understanding control and regulation in cellular systems
without understand cell signaling is not possible. Bray argues that as “about 50%
of the genome of a multicellular organism may code for proteins involved in cell
signaling, – organisms can be viewed as complex information-processing systems,
where molecular analysis alone may not be sufﬁcient” (cited by Williams 1997:
476–477). Ideker and colleagues (2001: 343) consider that one of the consequences
of the Human Genome Project has been a strengthening of the view that “biology
is an informational science”, and even argue that biological research needs cross-
disciplinary scientists which should be educated through teaching of biology as an
informational science (p. 365).
The task of building a theory of information in biology becomes more and more
important as our knowledge about the structural and functional complexity of living
beings increase. In our view, the use of semiotic concepts and theories to interpret
information talk can signiﬁcantly contribute to a precise and coherent formulation
of the notion of information in biology. Our aim here is to introduce a model of
information as semiosis, grounded on Peircean semiotics. In the next section, we
will examine the interrelationships between the concepts of signs, semiosis, and
information in Peirce’s formal science of signs.
Information and Semiosis in Peirce’s Science of Signs
Peirce’s conception of Semiotics as the “formal science of signs” has had a deep
impact in philosophy, psychology, theoretical biology, and cognitive sciences (see
Queiroz and Merrell 2005, Freadman 2004, Fetzer 2001, Houser 1997, Deacon
1997, Hoffmeyer 1996, Tiercelin 1995, Freeman 1983, Brunning 1997).1 Peirce
deﬁned semiosis (meaning process) as an irreducible triadic relation between sign-
object-interpretant (S-O-I) (EP 2.171, CP 2.274). That is, according to Peirce, any
description of semiosis involves a relation constituted by three irreducibly connected
terms, which are its minimal constitutive elements (MS 318: 81; CP 2.242):
“My deﬁnition of a sign is: A Sign is a Cognizable that, on the one hand, is so determined
(i.e., specialized, bestimmt) by something other than itself, called its Object, while, on the
other hand, it so determines some actual or potential Mind, the determination whereof I
term the Interpretant created by the Sign, that that Interpreting Mind is therein determined
mediately by the Object” (CP 8.177. Emphasis in the original).
Peirce conceives a “Sign” or “Representamen” as a “First” which stands in such
a genuine triadic relation to a “Second”, called its “Object”, so as to be capable of
“determining a Third”, called its “Interpretant”, to assume the same triadic relation
to its Object in which it stands itself to the same Object (CP 2.274. See also CP
2.303, 2.242, 2.92, 1.541). The term “Sign” was used by Peirce to designate the
1 Readers wishing to learn more about Peirce’s philosophy and logic of semiotic should consult
Murphey 1993, Nöth 1995, Parker 1998, and Peirce 1931–1935, 1967, 1976, 1998, and 1982–2000,
as detailed in our Reference List.

638
Claus Emmeche (1956– ) et al.
irreducible triadic relation between S, O and I, as well as to refer to the ﬁrst term
of the triad (sometimes “Representamen”). Some commentators propose, then, that
we should distinguish between “Sign in a broad sense” and “Sign in strict sense”
(e.g, Johansen 1993: 62). We will systematically use the term “Sign” in this paper
to refer to the ﬁrst term of the triad, and “semiosis”, to refer to the whole triad. The
triadic relation between S, O and I is regarded by Peirce as irreducible, in the sense
that it is not decomposable into any simpler relation:
. . . by ‘semiosis’ I mean – an action, or inﬂuence, which is, or involves, a cooperation of
three subjects, such as a sign, its object, and its interpretant, this tri-relative inﬂuence not
being in any way resolvable into actions between pairs (CP 5.484).
Semiosis entails the instantiation of chains of triads. As Savan (1986: 134)
argues, an interpretant is both the third term of a given triadic relation and the ﬁrst
term (sign) of a subsequent triadic relation. This is the reason why semiosis cannot
be deﬁned as an isolated triad; it necessarily involves chains of triads (see Merrell
1995) (see Fig. 20.3).
Indeed, one of the most remarkable characteristics of Peirce’s theory of signs is
its dynamical nature. According to Merrell (1995: 78), “Peirce’s emphasis rests not
on content, essence, or substance, but, more properly, on dynamic relations. Events,
not things, are highlighted.” The complex (S-O-I) is the focal-factor of a dynamical
process (Hausman 1993: 72). As a process thinker, it was quite natural that Peirce
conceived semiosis as basically a process in which triads are systematically linked
to one another so as to form chains. Throughout this paper, it is also important to
avoid losing from sight the distinction between the interpreter, which is the sys-
tem which interprets the sign, and the interpretant. The interpreter is described by
Peirce as a “Quasi-mind” (CP 4.536), a description which demands, for its proper
interpretation, a clear recognition of Peirce’s broad concept of “mind” (Ransdell
1977, Santaella-Braga 1994). It is far from being the case that only conscious beings
can be interpreters in a Peircean framework. Rather, a transcription machinery syn-
thesizing RNA from a string of DNA or a membrane receptor recognizing a given
hormone, or an ant recognizing a leaf among several other objects in a garden (and
so on) can be regarded as interpreters in such a framework. A basic idea in a semi-
otic understanding of living systems is that these systems are interpreters of signs,
i.e., that they are constantly responding to selected signs in their surroundings. In
Fig. 20.3 The triadic relation S-O-I forming a chain of triads

20
Information and Semiosis in Living Systems: A Semiotic Approach
639
short, the interpreter does not have to be a conscious being, not even an organism,
as it may be some part or subsystem within an organism or a humanly-designed
product.2
We also need to consider here Peirce’s distinctions regarding the nature of objects
and interpretants.3 He distinguishes between the immediate and the dynamical
objects of a sign as follows:
We must distinguish between the Immediate Object – i.e., the Object as represented in
the sign – and – the Dynamical Object, which, from the nature of things, the Sign can-
not express, which it can only indicate and leave the interpreter to ﬁnd out by collateral
experience (CP 8.314. Emphasis in the original).
Or else:
. . . we have to distinguish the Immediate Object, which is the Object as the Sign itself repre-
sents it, and whose Being is thus dependent upon the Representation of it in the Sign, from
the Dynamical Object, which is the Reality which by some means contrives to determine
the Sign to its Representation (CP 4.536).
We should also take into account his distinction between the following two kinds
of interpretants:4
The Immediate Interpretant is the immediate pertinent possible effect in its unanalyzed
primitive entirety. [. . .]. The Dynamical Interpretant is the actual effect produced upon a
given interpreter on a given occasion in a given stage of his consideration of the Sign (MS
339d: 546–547. Emphasis in the original).
Let us consider, ﬁrst, Peirce’s distinction between the immediate and the dynamic
objects of a sign. The immediate object of a sign is the object as it is immedi-
ately given to the sign, the dynamical object in its semiotically available form. The
dynamical object is something which the sign can only indicate, something that
the interpreter should ﬁnd out by collateral experience (EP 2.498; CP 8.178). In
turn, Peirce deﬁnes the dynamical interpretant as the actual effect of a sign, while
the immediate interpretant is the “range of interpretability” of a sign – the range
of possible effects that a sign is able to produce (see Johansen 1993: 166–167).
The dynamical interpretant is the instantiation of one of the possible effects estab-
lished in the immediate interpretant. As the effect of the sign upon the interpreter
(or upon some interpreting system), the dynamical interpretant can be treated as
2 When a part or subsystem of a system is the interpreter, its actions as an interpreter will be
typically subordinated, i.e., regulated by the system as a whole (that we will call, in this case, a
“global” interpreter). We can call, as Jablonka (2002), the subordinated interpreters “interpretative
systems” within a global interpreter. It can happen that a system loses its control over one or more
of its included interpreters. In this case, dysfunctional states may result from the interpretation
of signs in that system. These are misinterpretation events. By “misinterpretation”, we mean the
interpretation of a sign that does not lead to a successful coping with its circumstances, i.e., that
does not contribute to the maintenanceof the dynamic stability of a system in a given context.
3 For a review of these topics, see Savan (1987), Liszka (1990), Short (1996).
4 In the context of our analysis, we will not employ the concept of Final Interpretant. It will not
play an important role in our current arguments, and, thus, we think we can leave it to subsequent
works.

640
Claus Emmeche (1956– ) et al.
being essentially equal to the signiﬁcance of the sign when seen in a dynamic and
process-oriented perspective.
The notions of “meaning”, “information”, “semiosis” intersect and overlap in
different ways (see Johansen 1993). Peirce (see Fitzgerald 1966: 84, Bergman 2000)
deﬁned meaning as connected to the triadic relation as a whole (EP 2:429), as well
as to different correlates of a triad – e.g., object (MS 11, EP 2:274), interpretant
(EP 2:496, EP 2:499; CP 4:536). For Debrock (1996), Peirce deﬁned “information”
at least ordinarily (CP 2.418), metaphysically (CP 2.418), as a connection between
form and matter, and logically (W 1.276), as the product of extension and intension
of a concept. Peirce described the function of a sign as that of “conveying” a form
from an object to an interpretant (EP 2:391):
. . . a Sign may be deﬁned as a Medium for the communication of a Form. –. As a medium,
the Sign is essentially in a triadic relation, to its Object which determines it, and to its
Interpretant which it determines. –. That which is communicated from the Object through
the Sign to the Interpretant is a Form; that is to say, it is nothing like an existent, but is a
power, is the fact that something would happen under certain conditions (EP2, p. 544, n.22).
Accordingly, in the biosemiotic approach to the notion of information we are
developing, signiﬁcantly inspired by Peirce, information is conceived as the com-
munication of a form from O to I through S (Fig. 20.4). The communication of a
form amounts to the transference of a habit embodied in the object to the inter-
pretant, so as to constrain (in general) the interpretant as a sign or (in biological
systems) the interpreter’s behavior
Or, to put it in more detailed terms, the production of an effect of the sign on the
interpreter results from the communication of the form of the object (as a regularity),
via sign, to the interpretant. The interpretant then becomes itself a sign which refers
to the object in the same manner in which the original sign refers to it (i.e., there
is an invariance in the reconstruction of the form of the object by the interpreter).5
Fig. 20.4 Semiosis as the
communication of a form
from the object to the
interpretant through the
mediation of the sign
5 It should be clear at this point that by “communication” we mean more than mere transmission
of a form.

20
Information and Semiosis in Living Systems: A Semiotic Approach
641
According to this approach, “information” can be strongly associated to the concepts
of “meaning” and “semiosis”. Peirce spoke of signs as “conveyers”, as a “medium”
(MS 793), as “embodying meaning”.
If we consider that Peirce deﬁned a sign both as “a Medium for the communica-
tion of a Form” and as “a triadic relation, to its Object which determines it, and to
its Interpretant which it determines”, we can say that semiosis is a triadic process of
communication of a form from the object to the interpretant by the sign mediation.
Therefore, in this framework, we can say that semiosis is information, if we deﬁne
this latter concept as above.
But what is a Form? Form is deﬁned by Peirce as having the “being of predicate”
(EP 2.544) and it is also pragmatically formulated as a “conditional proposition”
stating that certain things would happen under speciﬁc circumstances (EP 2.388).
For Peirce, it is nothing like a “thing” (De Tienne 2003), but something that is
embodied in the object (EP 2.544, n. 22) as a habit, a “rule of action” (CP 5.397,
CP 2.643), a “disposition” (CP 5.495, CP 2.170), a “real potential” (EP 2.388) or,
simply, a “permanence of some relation” (CP 1.415). We can say that Peirce fol-
lows a via media in which ‘form’ has both the character of ﬁrstness and thirdness.
This is in accordance with Bergman’s (2000: 236) proposal of communicated form
as a First of a Third. Form can also be deﬁned as potentiality (“real potential”, EP
2.388). If we consider this deﬁnition, we will also come to the conclusion that form
can show the nature of both ﬁrstness and thirdness. Consider that potentiality is not
the same as mere possibility. For the sake of our arguments, consider Peirce’s treat-
ment of Quality as a “mere abstract potentiality” (CP 1.422). Quality has the nature
of ﬁrstness, being essentially indeterminate and vague. But we can also talk about
a generality of Quality. In this case, we are beyond the domain of pure ﬁrstness,
as generality refers to some law-like tendency, and thus to the nature of thirdness.
Peirce works in this case with a merging of ﬁrstness and thirdness. As an abstract
potentiality, Quality is closer to a blend of ﬁrstness and thirdness than to pure ﬁrst-
ness. Such a treatment seems to be compatible with Peirce’s categorical scheme,
since, as Potter (1997: 94) stresses, “the categoreal structure which Peirce uses is
[. . .] highly subtle and complex, admitting of various combinations”.
An understanding of information as a communication of a form or habit embod-
ied in the object to the interpretant through the sign, which brings about a con-
strained set of effects on the interpreter, can be fruitfully connected to Rosenthal’s
(1997) pragmatic approach to meaning, but with some qualiﬁcation. Rosenthal
argues that meaning is an emergent relational pattern of behavior. Information, when
conceived as the communication of a form from O to I through the mediation of
S, can be seen as a process working as a constraining factor of possible patterns
of interpretative behaviors or processes. As meaning is also deﬁned by Peirce as
something communicated in semiosis (NEM 4:309), we will opt here for explaining
meaning as being associated with the interpretant, which, after all, embodies the
reconstructed form of the object.
Peirce (CP 8.177) writes that a sign determines an interpretant in some “actual”
or “potential” Mind (in other passages, a “quasi-mind”. See CP 4.536). We take this
suggestion to introduce in our analysis a differentiation between “potential” and

642
Claus Emmeche (1956– ) et al.
“effective” semiosis. Potential semiosis is deﬁned as a triadically-structured process
which is not taking place, which is only in potency. Effective semiosis, in turn, is a
sign in effective action, i.e., a sign which, by being actualized, has an actual effect
on the interpreter.
Following the distinction between potential and effective semiosis, we can deﬁne
potential information as a process of communicating a form which could be real-
ized in a given moment, while effective information is the communication of a
form from an object to an interpretant through the sign, i.e., a sign in effective
action. The notion of information as form communicated from O to I through the
mediation of S allows us to conceive it in a processual way, as a constraining
factor of possible patterns of interpretative behavior. When applying this gen-
eral semiotic approach to biological systems, information will most often be an
interpreter-dependent objective process. It cannot be dissociated from the notion of
a situated (and actively distributed) communicational agent (potential or effective).
It is interpreter-dependent in the sense that information triadically connects repre-
sentation (sign), object, and an effect (interpretant) on the interpreter (which can be
an organism or a part of an organism). In turn, the habit or form which is communi-
cated in information is embodied in the object, treated in the Peircean framework as
(dynamically) the primary constraining factor of interpretative behavior.6 Thus, the
form – as a regularity in the object – acts as constraint on the interpreter’s behav-
ior, but the interpreter always reconstructs the form of the object when interpreting
a sign. Nevertheless, the interpreter does so in such a manner that an invariance is
retained, which makes it possible, in fact, the very act of interpretation.
In sum, according to our interpretation of Peirce’s remarks quoted above, infor-
mation has a processual nature: information is the process of communicating a form
from the object to the interpretant through the sign. A framework for thinking about
information as a process can be built in Peircean terms by employing the following
deﬁnitions:
[Information = semiosis] A triadic-dependent process through which a form
embodied in the object in a regular way is communicated to an interpretant through
the mediation of a sign. [Potential information = potential semiosis] A process of
communicating a form from an object to an interpretant through the mediation of a
sign that could take place in a given moment, changing the state of the interpreter.
[Effective information = effective semiosis] The process by which a sign effectively
exerts an effect (interpretant) on some system (an interpreter) by making the inter-
pretant stands in a similar relation to something else (the object of the sign) as that to
which the sign stands, thus mediating the relation between object and interpretant.
The sign effectively communicates, thus, a form from the object to the interpretant,
changing the state of the interpreter.
6 The irreducibility of the triadic relation S-O-I is a logical property. Therefore, while it makes
no sense to sort out a primary constraining factor in such a logical relation, dynamically it makes
sense to sort out the dynamical object as the primary constraining factor of semiosis (for a detailed
discussion about this issue, see Short 1998: 31).

20
Information and Semiosis in Living Systems: A Semiotic Approach
643
To formulate the above deﬁnitions in a sufﬁciently clear way, we should deﬁne
what we mean by “process”. We follow here Rescher in his deﬁnition of a process
as “. . . a coordinated group of changes in the complexion of reality, an organized
family of occurrences that are systematically linked to one another either causally or
functionally” (Rescher 1996: 38). These deﬁnitions certainly raise several questions
and face a number of difﬁculties when they are seen against the background of other
accounts of information. We shall leave to a subsequent paper, however, a discussion
about how they relate to and result in controversies concerning a number of ideas
about what is information expressed by different authors.
A Biological Example: A Semiotic Analysis of the Genetic
Information System
As we argued above, the concept of information has been playing an important role
in the biological sciences since the mid-20th century, but it remains a problematical
notion, to which biologists have ascribed a metaphorical role. Understandably, it is a
controversial issue whether the concept of information and its derivatives should be
maintained or eliminated from biology. We assume that they should be kept in the
biological conceptual framework, but a semantic/pragmatic theory of information in
biology should be built, in order to ascribe precise meanings to those concepts and
to articulate them in proper explanations of sign processes in biological systems. As
a way of contributing to this endeavor, we have been using semiotic concepts and
theories to build an account of genes as signs and genetic information as semiosis
grounded on Peircean semiotics (El-Hani et al. forthcoming). As an example of
our application of the conceptual tools introduced in the previous section, we will
present here part of the results we obtained so far.7
When applying Peirce’s semiotics to understand the nature of genetic infor-
mation, it is inevitable to engage in interpretation about how to see, for instance,
the relationship between what molecular biologists and biophysicists call forms of
information processing (i.e., production and interpretation of signs) in a complex
living system such as the cell and forms of causality in that system. So, the anal-
ysis of the genetic information system given below is not the only way to apply
Peircean semiotics to this particular case; and some might object to the particular
way we addressed the problem. We also acknowledge that there are peculiar features
of the genetic information system which do not exactly conform to any standard
Peircian framework. Nevertheless, we think that we have been faithful both to the
basic insights and concepts of semiotics and to the ﬁndings of molecular biology,
and that the few changes we have made in speciﬁc semiotic conceptions (as we
shall explicate below) are necessitated by the growth of scientiﬁc knowledge about
the system analyzed.
7 For more details, we refer the reader to El-Hani et al. (forthcoming).

644
Claus Emmeche (1956– ) et al.
Some Basic Notions About the Genetic Information System
First, we should brieﬂy introduce some basic notions about the genetic information
system.8 Let us consider a very simple model of the process of gene expres-
sion (Fig. 20.5). During the synthesis of pre-mRNA (transcription), the four-base
language of DNA (as a sequence of nucleotides including the bases adenine, A, gua-
nine, G, cytosine, C, and thymine, T) is copied or “transcribed” into the four-base
language of RNA (with uracil, U, replacing T).
The effects of a protein-coding gene on a given cell or organism are regulated
mainly by control of gene expression at the level of transcription initiation. The
Fig. 20.5 A model of the steps of gene expression (From Campbell and Reece 2002). Many details
are omitted, for the sake of simplicity
8 We will deliberately avoid introducing a large number of details, which can be easily found in
any molecular and cell biology textbook (e.g., Lodish et al. 2003, Cooper and Haussman 2003,
Alberts et al. 2002, Lewin 2000). These books are also the basic sources in this section, unless
otherwise noticed. As the following paragraphs only summarize some elementary ideas in cell and
molecular biology, any reader who doesn’t feel any need of perusing these notions can simply skip
them.

20
Information and Semiosis in Living Systems: A Semiotic Approach
645
transcription of a gene can be either repressed, when the corresponding mRNA and
encoded protein or proteins are synthesized at low rates or not synthesized at all,
or activated, when both the mRNA and encoded protein or proteins are, ceteris
paribus, produced at much higher rates. Through the control of gene expression,
only a subset of all genes present in any cell type in a multicellular organism is
really expressed. Thus, from all the potential protein products a given cell type might
exhibit, only a speciﬁc number and variety will be present. This is the fundamental
basis for cell differentiation in multicellular organisms. In the end of the 1970s, it
was found that eukaryotic genes are split into pieces of coding sequence, named
“exons”, separated by non-coding segments, named “introns” (after Gilbert 1978).
The vast majority of genes in multicellular eukaryotes contain multiple introns and
the presence of such introns allows for the expression of multiple related proteins
from a single stretch of DNA by means of a process known as “alternative splicing”
(see below).
In eukaryotic protein-coding genes, introns are excised from a long “primary
transcript” (precursor mRNA or pre-mRNA), i.e., the RNA copy of an entire DNA
sequence containing both exons and introns, in a process known as RNA “process-
ing”, which includes other events not described here. After the introns are excised,
the coding exons are joined back together into a functional mRNA, which will be
transported to the cytoplasm of the eukaryotic cell, where protein synthesis will take
place. The effects of genes on the functioning of a cell or organism can also be reg-
ulated by means of alternative pre-mRNA splicing, so as to produce different gene
products from the same pre-mRNA. Alternative RNA splicing is an important mech-
anism for the production of different forms of proteins (isoforms) by different cell
types. The ﬁbronectin (FN) gene, for instance, generates more than 20 different FN
isoforms. The FN gene has approximately 75,000 nucleotides (75-Kb) and contains
numerous exons. After the FN pre-mRNA is transcribed from DNA, it undergoes
cell type-, development – and age-speciﬁc splicing. Each FN isoform is encoded by
a differently, alternatively spliced mRNA, and, therefore, each isoform results from
a unique combination of exons found in the FN gene (see Fig. 20.6).
Fig. 20.6 Cell type-speciﬁc splicing of ﬁbronectin pre-mRNA in ﬁbroblasts and hepatocytes.
The 75-kb FN gene (top) contains multiple exons. Introns are shown in the diagram as thin
lines and are not drawn to scale. Most of the introns are much longer than any of the exons.
The FN mRNA produced in ﬁbroblasts includes the EIIIA and EIIIB exons, whereas these
exons are spliced out of FN mRNA in hepatocytes (from Lodish et al. 2003. Available at
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/PubMed/)

646
Claus Emmeche (1956– ) et al.
Consider, for instance, the splicing of FN pre-mRNA in ﬁbroblasts and hepato-
cytes. In ﬁbroblasts, splicing of the FN pre-mRNA results in mRNAs containing
exons EIIIA and EIIIB. The ﬁbroblast FN isoform contains amino acid sequences
that bind tightly to proteins in the plasma membrane. This speciﬁc FN isoform con-
tributes to the adhesion of ﬁbroblasts to the extracellular matrix. In hepatocytes,
the major cell type in the liver, cell-type speciﬁc splicing results in functional
FN mRNAs lacking exons EIIIA and EIIIB. FN secreted by hepatocytes does
not adhere tightly to ﬁbroblasts or most other cell types, freely circulating in the
blood stream. When the wall of a vase is ruptured, hepatocyte FN plays a funda-
mental role in the formation of blood clots, due to the presence in the protein of
ﬁbrin-binding domains, amino acid sequences that bind to ﬁbrin, one of the main
constituents of blood clots. When hepatocyte FN is bound to ﬁbrin, it interacts
with integrins, cell-adhesion protein molecules found in the membranes of acti-
vated platelets. As a result, the blood clot is expanded through the addition of
platelets.
Finally, translation is an essential part of protein synthesis, consisting in the pro-
cess by which the nucleotide sequence of an mRNA serves as a template for the
synthesis of a polypeptide chain, i.e., for a series of events in which amino acids
are ordered and joined to form the primary structure of a protein. Three types
of RNA molecules are involved in translation, performing different but coopera-
tive functions. mRNAs are the “vehicles” of the genetic information transcribed
from DNA. The “message” at stake is “written” in the form of a series of three-
nucleotide sequences, called “codons”, each of which specifying a particular amino
acid. tRNAs play a fundamental role in the process of deciphering the codons in
mRNA. Each type of amino acid has its own subset of tRNAs. They act as trans-
porters, binding amino acids and carrying them to the growing end of a polypeptide
chain in response to speciﬁc codons in the mRNA. The reason why the correct
tRNA with its attached amino acid is selected at each step in protein synthesis lies
in the fact that each speciﬁc tRNA molecule contains a three-nucleotide sequence,
called an “anticodon”, that base-pairs with its complementary codon in the mRNA.
In this manner, for each speciﬁc codon in mRNA a speciﬁc amino acid, carried
by a speciﬁc tRNA, is included in a polypeptide chain, according to the rules
expressed in the almost universal “genetic code”. Along with 100 different proteins,
several types of rRNA are components of ribosomes, the complex and large macro-
molecular structures that act, so as to say, as guides to coordinate the assembly of
the amino acid chain of a protein. In fact, a rRNAs (a ribozyme), and not a pro-
tein, is probably the catalyst involved in the formation of peptide bonds in protein
synthesis.
Recognition of a codon in mRNA specifying a given amino acid by a partic-
ular tRNA is, in fact, the second step in “decoding” the genetic “message”. The
ﬁrst step is the attachment of the appropriate amino acid to a tRNA in a reaction
catalyzed by a speciﬁc aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase. The speciﬁcity of the attach-
ment between amino acids and tRNAs results from the capacity of each one of these
enzymes of recognizing one amino acid and all its compatible, or “cognate”, tRNAs.

20
Information and Semiosis in Living Systems: A Semiotic Approach
647
Therefore, the rules captured in the genetic code ultimately depend on the recogni-
tion activity of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. Although the terms “translation” and
“protein synthesis” are usually employed interchangeably, this is not correct, since,
although translation is obviously an essential step in protein synthesis, this process
involves further steps. Polypeptide chains undergo post-translational folding and
often other changes, as, for instance, chemical modiﬁcations and association with
other polypeptide chains, that are required for production of functional proteins. All
these steps in protein synthesis can undergo regulation.
A Semiotic Analysis of Genes and Genetic Information
If we take Peirce’s concepts of sign and semiosis as bases for analyzing what is a
gene, it will be the case that the action of a gene as a sign will have to be understood
as a relationship between three elements (Fig. 20.7). Given the account of infor-
mation developed in this paper, genetic information can be described as a semiotic
process. In these terms, there’s more to genetic information than just sequences of
nucleotides in DNA.
In this picture, a string of DNA (say, the FN gene) is treated as a sign. As a
protein-coding gene, the FN gene, for instance, stands – in a triadic-dependent rela-
tion – for a speciﬁc sequence of amino acids (immediate object) – one of the FN
isoforms, translated out of a mature mRNA after alternative splicing (which, as
the ﬁgure shows, can take place or not, depending on the string of DNA we are
Fig. 20.7 A semiotic analysis of the gene as a sign

648
Claus Emmeche (1956– ) et al.
analyzing)9 – through a process of reconstruction of a speciﬁc form (interpretant).10
Given that a sign is the mediating element in a semiotic process through which a
form is communicated from an object to an interpretant, we treat the interpretant
here as the reconstruction of a form (habit) which was embodied in an object. To be
more explicit, we deﬁned above information as the communication of a form from
the object to the interpretant, and we also argued that such a communication will
in turn constrain the behavior of the interpreter. What we mean by “reconstruction”
here is a process by which the form of a protein in a cell generation is communicated
through signs in DNA (in potency) to a cell in a subsequent generation. Thus, a reg-
ularity obtains (with possible evolutionary consequences) in the three-dimensional
structure and function of proteins along generations.
We will introduce the qualiﬁers “composite” and “simple” to incorporate a part-
whole relationship in our semiotic analysis of genes, referring to a stretch of DNA
or mature RNA as a whole as a composite sign, formed by clusters of simple signs,
codons. We can now introduce in our analysis the distinction between immediate
and dynamical object, and immediate and dynamical interpretant. In a Peircean
framework, the immediate object can be understood as the characteristics selected
in the sign as a means of indicating the dynamical object. It is not the case, in this
framework, that the immediate object is a condition of possibility for the dynami-
cal object. Nevertheless, in the case we are analyzing here the interpreter creates a
dynamical object of a given class (showing a given habit) on the grounds of indi-
cations present in the sign. A cell uses signs in DNA as a basis for synthesizing a
dynamical object sufﬁciently resembling a past dynamical object which does not
exist anymore but resulted in successful, adaptive experiences. This is the reason
why we claim that, in this case, the immediate object establishes conditions of
possibility for the dynamical object.
The dynamical object of a gene is a functional, folded, and chemically modi-
ﬁed protein, which is often not entirely speciﬁed in the sequences of nucleotides
or amino acids, but it is rather indicated by such sequences.11 Functional proteins
9 If alternative splicing does not occur, it will be the case that signs in DNA and signs in mature
mRNA will be equivalent.
10 In the case of genes, the objects at stake are entities, as described above. Nevertheless, it is
important to bear in mind that, in Peirce’s framework, it is not the case that the object of a sign
should necessarily be an entity, a thing, or even an existent. Consider, for instance, the following
passage: “The Objects – for a Sign may have any number of them – may each be a single known
existing thing or thing believed formerly to have existed or expected to exist, or a collection of such
things, or a known quality or relation or fact, which single Object may be a collection, or whole
of parts, or it may have some other mode of being, such as some act permitted whose being does
not prevent its negation from being equally permitted, or something of a general nature desired,
required, or invariably found under certain general circumstances” (CP 2.232).
11
To be more precise, we should consider that some proteins acquire their mature confor-
mation spontaneously. These proteins show the property of self-assembly. In this case, the
three-dimensional structure of a protein simply follows from its primary sequence of amino acids,
and, therefore, the immediate Object directly determines the dynamical Object. (Here we ﬁnd yet
another peculiar feature of the genetic information system, when compared to the standard Peircean

20
Information and Semiosis in Living Systems: A Semiotic Approach
649
are not always simply translated out of nucleotide sequences by a cell, but they are
rather found out through resources the cell acquire by collateral experience, i.e., by
habits that a cell acquire in its development towards the states characteristic of a
given cell type, and can be traced back to evolutionary processes.12 A functional
FN isoform, for instance, is a dynamical object. The composite immediate object
of a protein-coding gene is the sequence of amino acids of a polypeptide, as this is
the object represented in the gene’s vehicle, a string of DNA. Each amino acid, in
turn, is a simple immediate object. If we consider the sequence of amino acids of a
speciﬁc FN isoform, we will say, in the terms of our analysis, that such a sequence
is an immediate object of the FN gene. It is important to bear in mind, however, that
it is an immediate object, not the immediate object. After all, the FN gene codes
more than 20 different FN isoforms, all of them being possible immediate objects
of the FN gene as a sign in DNA.
The sequence of amino acids, the composite immediate object, is the dynamical
object in its semiotically available form. The sequence of amino acids of each FN
isoform amounts to a speciﬁc protein coded – in its semiotically available form –
in a mature RNA which results, after splicing, from a pre-mRNA transcribed from
the FN gene. The immediate object, a sequence of amino acids, can indicate a range
of possible functional proteins, dynamical objects, as a single amino acid sequence
can be folded in different ways in different cellular contexts. But we should not
lose from sight, however, that such an indication by the immediate object plays a
fundamental role in the reconstruction of the dynamical object, since it is not the
case that any three-dimensional protein can be produced from a given amino acid
sequence.13
The immediate interpretant of a codon as a simple sign is the range of inter-
pretability established by the rules of base pairing by which speciﬁc nucleotides
in DNA determine speciﬁc nucleotides in mRNA, or the range of interpretability of
three-nucleotide sequences in mature mRNA as established in the genetic code, a set
framework). There are a number of proteins, however, that cannot self-assemble and should be
assisted by proteins called “chaperones” in order to acquire their proper structures. In this case, the
sequence of amino acids, the Immediate object, only indicates the functional protein, the dynamic
object. In the text, we are dealing particularly with this case, which ﬁts Peirce’s understanding of
the relationship between immediate and dynamical objects. “Chaperones” can be treated, in these
terms, as part of the habits cells acquired in evolution.
12 Symptomatically, Godfrey-Smith (1999) and Grifﬁths (2001) argue that developmental infor-
mation is not stored in the genetic code, because the formal coding relation between codons in
DNA and amino acids in polypeptides speciﬁes only the primary structure of proteins.
13 In a Peircean framework, the immediate object can be understood as the characteristics selected
in the sign as a means of indicating the dynamical object. It is not the case, in this framework,
that the immediate object is a condition of possibility to the dynamical object. Nevertheless, in the
case we are analyzing here the interpreter creates a dynamical object of a given class (showing
a given habit) on the grounds of indications present in the sign. A cell uses signs in DNA as a
basis for synthesizing a dynamical object sufﬁciently resembling a past dynamical object which
does not exist anymore but resulted in successful, adaptive experiences. This is the reason why we
claim that, in this case, the immediate object establishes conditions of possibility to the dynamical
object.

650
Claus Emmeche (1956– ) et al.
Fig. 20.8 The genetic code. Sets of three nucleotides (codons) in an mRNA molecule are trans-
lated into amino acids during protein synthesis according to the rules shown in the table above
(from Grifﬁths et al. 1999. Available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/PubMed/)
of rules by means of which nucleotide sequences determine the addition of speciﬁc
amino acids to a growing polypeptide chain (Fig. 20.8).14 The dynamical interpre-
tant of a codon as a simple sign amounts, then, to the realization of one of the rules
of base pairing or of the genetic code. A composite sign in DNA determines a range
of possible composite immediate objects. It is true that there are cases in which a
stretch of DNA codes for only one protein product. In this case, the composite sign
in DNA determines only one immediate object. Nevertheless, in eukaryotic cells at
least, most stretches of DNA codes for several distinct proteins, as in the case of the
FN gene. Therefore, we can deﬁne the immediate interpretant of a composite sign
as the range of interpretability of that sign in DNA, i.e., as the possible immedi-
ate objects, the possible sequences of amino acids, that can be produced from that
sign in DNA. Alternative RNA splicing is understood, in these terms, as one of the
processes that enrich the range of interpretability, the immediate interpretant, of a
stretch of DNA. In the case of the FN gene, its immediate interpretant comprises
more than 20 possible composite immediate objects.
This analysis is in accordance with the deﬁnition of a sign as medium for commu-
nicating the form of an object to an interpretant. The interpretant can be seen, thus,
as a reconstruction of the form of an object. It follows that the immediate interpretant
of a stretch of DNA or mRNA as a composite sign, i.e., its range of interpretability,
amounts to the diversity of possibilities of reconstruction of the form of the compos-
ite immediate object, the sequence of amino acids in a polypeptide. The dynamical
14 By “coding”, we mean here a system of constraints which establishes a range of possible effects
of a sign (see Nöth 1995: 210).

20
Information and Semiosis in Living Systems: A Semiotic Approach
651
interpretant of a stretch of DNA or mRNA as a composite sign corresponds to the
effective reconstruction of a sequence of amino acids. In an alternatively spliced
gene, such as the FN gene, this realization involves the instantiation of a speciﬁc
splicing pattern in a given cell type, at a given developmental stage. Thus, one of
the possibilities established in the range of interpretability of a stretch of DNA, in
its immediate interpretant, is actualized. In a ﬁbroblast, for instance, when a speciﬁc
immediate object is synthesized, the ﬁbroblast-speciﬁc FN isoform, this means that,
from the range of possible sequences of amino acids that might be made out of the
FN gene – its immediate interpretant – a speciﬁc sequence was reconstructed – its
dynamical interpretant.
After it is actualized, an immediate object indicates a particular dynamical
object – say, a speciﬁc FN isoform. It is the dynamical object, then, that has an
effect on the cell as a global interpreter. We can deﬁne, then, a dynamical interpre-
tant of the dynamical object, a particular effect on a cell, among a range of possible
effects – the immediate interpretant of the dynamical object. This dynamical inter-
pretant is the actualization of one of the possible effects that a composite sign might
have on the interpreter. Its range of interpretability is the immediate interpretant of
the composite sign. This analysis faces the potential problem that it seems to treat
the sign as the primary constraining factor in semiosis, while this role is reserved
for the dynamical object in Peirce’s theory of signs. After all, we are describing here
how S (a sequence of nucleotides in DNA) determines O (a sequence of amino acids
in a polypeptide) through I (a range of possibilities of reconstruction of sequences
of amino acids).15 We accommodate this description into a Peircean framework by
examining the constraining action of the object in evolutionary terms (see Fig. 20.9).
Consider two different generations of a population, in times t1 and t2, and a protein
(dynamical object) in t1 that increases the likelihood of successful, adaptive expe-
riences of organisms possessing it. Therefore, that protein increases the likelihood
Fig. 20.9 The dynamical
object (functional protein) as
the primary constraining
factor of semiosis in the
genetic information system.
S, sign; DO, dynamical
object, IO, immediate object;
II, immediate interpretant; t,
generation time
15 In this picture, it is important to take in due account that we are not claiming that DNA causes or
brings about the protein as an object, since DNA is a set of data (or, as we prefer, signs) rather than
a program, a source of materials rather than a master agent in the cell. It is the DNA processing
system that produces the proteins. We are not claiming, therefore, that the sign causes the object.

652
Claus Emmeche (1956– ) et al.
that a gene (sign) encoding it will be present in high frequencies in the next gener-
ation, in t2. Indeed, the sequence of a gene is determined, by past natural selection,
because of the effects it produces (Maynard 2000: 177). This gene, in turn, will bring
to the next generation the potency to produce that protein, as a dynamical object, by
indicating it through its semiotically available form, its immediate object. Signs in
DNA will carry to future generations the potentiality of reconstructing the form of
that protein in generations to come. This means that that gene, as a sign, exerts a
determining inﬂuence on the range of possibilities of reconstructing sequences of
amino acids in the next generation. If we follow this set of ideas, we will be able
to see how, in evolutionary terms, O determines I through S, in conformity with
Peirce’s account of semiosis. Nevertheless, the role of O as the primary constrain-
ing factor of semiosis depends, in the genetic information system, on the role of S,
in a given generation, in determining O through I. We can say, in short, that the fact
that S determines O through I in a given population in t2 is itself determined by the
fact that O determined I by increasing the likelihood of S being present in a high
frequency in t2, by means of its involvement in successful experiences in t1.
The relationship between signs in DNA and the sequence of amino acids of a
protein (the composite immediate object) is established by a complex mechanism
of interpretation, involving transcription, RNA processing and translation. Thus, to
interpret a string of DNA, more than one interpretative system is required, including,
for instance, RNA polymerases, involved in the transcription of DNA into RNA, and
ribosomes, involved in the translation of mRNA into proteins. These interpretative
systems are parts or subsystems of a cell as a global interpreter, and their actions are
subordinated to the latter. That ultimately the whole cell participates in the network
necessary for the interpretation that is demanded for the effect of a gene product to
take place (cf. Emmeche and Hoffmeyer 1991) is shown by the impressive array of
signaling pathways regulating the interpretation of Signs in DNA.
Symptomatically, a Peircean approach to the gene concept entails that genetic
structures should not be seen in isolation from the larger system by which they are
interpreted. From this perspective, the meaning of a gene to its interpreter, the cell,
or, to put it differently, the biological meaningfulness of a gene, is found not only
in DNA sequences in a chromosome. After all, according to this approach, there is
more to genetic information than just a sequence of nucleotides in DNA. We will
have to include the effect of the gene-as-a-sign on the cell or organism, and, in fact,
the very role of cellular subsystems as interpreters of strings of DNA, in such a way
that they relate signs to speciﬁc dynamical objects, proteins which play a function
inside the cellular system and have an effect on it or on the organism of which the
cell is a part.
In sum, the semiotic analysis of the genetic information system developed above
leads to the following conclusions:
(i) Genes should be regarded as signs in DNA, which can only have any effect on
a cell through a triadic-dependent process (semiosis);
(ii) This process is genetic information and involves more than just genes as signs
in DNA but also objects and interpretants;

20
Information and Semiosis in Living Systems: A Semiotic Approach
653
(iii) Genetic information is the process by means of which a form in a dynamical
object (a functional protein) is communicated to an interpretant (the recon-
struction of a speciﬁc sequence of amino acids in a cell) by means of signs in
DNA.16
Concluding Remarks
There is controversy about the prospects of the non-semantic understanding of infor-
mation offered by the mathematical theory of communication for developing a
theory of information in biology. Despite the usefulness of this theory for several
purposes in biological research, there is still doubt whether it is sufﬁcient for the
understanding of biological information. We believe that biology needs a seman-
tic/pragmatic account of information. Throughout this paper, we argue that semiotic
concepts and theories, and, in particular, C. S. Peirce’s formal science of signs, can
lead to a precise and coherent formulation of the notion of information in biology.
Toward this end we have developed a model of information as semiosis, grounded
on Peircean semiotics. According to this model, information is conceived as the
communication of a form or habit from O to I through S, so as to constrain (in
general) the meaning of the interpretant as a sign or (in biological systems) the
interpreter’s behavior. Or, to put it differently, information is the same as semiosis,
i.e., a triadic-dependent process through which a form embodied in the object in a
regular way is communicated to an interpretant through the mediation of a sign.
The treatment of information in biology based on Peircean semiotics leads to
an account of genes as signs and genetic information as semiosis. According to
this account, genetic information is a triadic relation between a (composite) sign
in DNA, i.e., the sequence of nucleotides of a gene; an immediate object, i.e., the
sequence of amino acids of a polypeptide (or the sequence of nucleotides of a RNA);
and an immediate interpretant, i.e., the possibilities of reconstruction of speciﬁc
immediate objects, which amount to the range of interpretability of a (composite)
sign in DNA. Genetic information has, thus, a processual nature and should not
be identiﬁed with sequence information in a nucleic acid. Rather, it is a process by
means of which a form in a dynamical object (a functional protein) is communicated
to an interpretant (the reconstruction of a speciﬁc sequence of amino acids in a cell)
by means of signs in DNA.
16 In another paper, we substantiate and elaborate these conclusions by means of a more detailed
analysis of some processes in the genetic information system, namely, transcription and translation.
For this analysis, see El-Hani et al. (forthcoming).

654
Claus Emmeche (1956– ) et al.
References
Adami, C. (2004). Information theory in molecular biology. Physics of Life Reviews 1, 3–22.
Adams, F. (2003). The Informational Turn in Philosophy. Minds and Machines 13, 471–501.
Alberts, B., Johnson, A., Lewis, J., Raff, M., Roberts, K., Walter, P. (2002). Molecular Biology of
the Cell. 4th Edition. New York: Garland Science.
Bergman, M. (2000). Reﬂections on the role of the communicative sign. In Semeiotic. Transactions
of the Charles S. Peirce Society: A Quarterly Journal in American Philosophy. Spring,
XXXVI(2), 225–254.
Brunning, J. (1997). Genuine triads and teridentity. In: Houser, N., Roberts, D., Evra, J., (Eds.)
Studies in the logic of Charles Sanders Peirce. Indiana: Indiana University Press, pp. 252–270.
Campbell,
N.
A.,
Reece,
J.
B.
(2002).
Biology.
6th
Edition.
San
Francisco:
The
Benjamim/Cummings Publ. Co.
Cooper, G. M., Haussman, R. E. (2003). The Cell: A Molecular Approach. 3rd Edition. Sunderland-
MA: Sinauer.
Cover, T. M., Thomas, J. A. (1999). Information theory. In Wilson, R. A., Keil, F. C. (Eds.) MIT
Encyclopedia of the Cognitive Sciences. Cambridge-MA: MIT Press, pp. 404–406.
Deacon, T. (1997). The Symbolic Species: The Co-evolution of Language and the Brain. New York:
W.W. Norton & Company.
Debrock, G. (1996). Information and the metaphysical status of the sign. In Colapietro, V.,
Olshewsky, T. (Eds.) Peirce’s Doctrine of Signs – theory, applications, and connections. Berlin,
New York: Mouton de Gruyter, pp.80–89.
De Tienne, A. (2003). Learning qua semiosis. Semiotics Evolution Energy and Development 3,
37–53.
El-Hani, C.N., Queiroz, J., Emmeche, C. (Forthcoming). A semiotic analysis of the genetic
information system. Semiotica.
Emmeche, C. (1991). A semiotical reﬂection on biology, living signs and artiﬁcial life. Biology
and Philosophy 6:325–340.
Emmeche, C. (2003). Causal processes, semiosis, and consciousness. In Seibt, J. (Ed.) Process
Theories: Crossdisciplinary Studies in Dynamic Categories. Dordrecht: Kluwer, pp. 313–336.
Emmeche, C., Hoffmeyer, J. (1991). From language to nature – the semiotic metaphor in biology.
Semiotica 84(1/2), 1–42.
Fetzer, J. (2001). Computers and Cognition: Why Minds are not Machines. Dordrecht: Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
Fitzgerald, J. (1966). Peirce’s Theory of Signs as Foundation for Pragmatism. University of Notre
Dame: Mouton & Co.
Freadman, A. (2004). The Machinery of Talk – Charles Peirce and the Sign Hypothesis. Stanford:
Stanford University Press.
Freeman, E. (1983). The Relevance of Charles Peirce. La Salle, Illinois: Monist Library of
Philosophy.
Gilbert, W. (1978). Why genes in pieces? Nature 271, 501.
Godfrey-Smith, P. (1999). Genes and codes: Lessons from the philosophy of mind? In Hardcastle,
V. G. (Ed.) Biology Meets Psychology: Philosophical Essays. Cambridge-MA: MIT Press.
Godfrey-Smith, P. (2000). Information, arbitrariness, and selection: Comments on Maynard Smith.
Philosophy of Science 67(2), 202–207.
Grifﬁths, A. J. F., Gelbart, W. M., Miller, J. H., Lewontin, R. C. (1999). Modern Genetic Analysis.
New York: W. H. Freeman & Co.
Grifﬁths, P. (2001). Genetic information: A metaphor in search of a theory. Philosophy of Science
68(3), 394–403.
Hausman, C. (1993). Charles Sanders Peirce’s Evolutionary Philosophy. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1996). Signs of Meaning in the Universe. Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana
University Press.

20
Information and Semiosis in Living Systems: A Semiotic Approach
655
Houser, N. (1997). Introduction: Peirce as a logician. In Houser, N., Roberts, D., Evra, J. (Eds.)
Studies in the Logic of Charles Sanders Peirce. Indiana: Indiana University Press, pp. 1–22.
Ideker, T., Galitski, T., Hood, L. (2001). A new approach to decoding life: Systems biology. Annual
Review of Genomics and Human Genetics 2, 343–372.
Jablonka, E. (1994). Inheritance systems and the evolution of new levels of individuality. Journal
of Theoretical Biology 170, 301–309.
Jablonka, E. (2002). Information: its interpretation, its inheritance, and its sharing. Philosophy of
Science 69, 578–605.
Jablonka, E., Szathmáry, E. (1995). The evolution of information storage and heredity. Trends in
Ecology and Evolution 10, 206–211.
Jablonka, E., Lamb, M. J., Avital, E. (1998). ‘Lamarckian’ mechanisms in Darwinian evolution.
Trends in Ecology and Evolution 13, 206–210.
Johansen, J. (1993). Dialogic Semiosis. Indiana: Indiana University Press.
Lewin, B. (2000). Genes VII. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lizska, J. J. (1990). Peirce’s interpretant. Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society. Summer
XXVI(1), 17–61.
Lodish, H., Berk, A., Matsudaira, P., Kaiser, C. A., Krieger, M., Scott, M. P., Zipursky, S. L.,
Darnell, J. (2003). Molecular Cell Biology. 5th Edition. New York: W. H. Freeman & Co.
Maynard, S. J. (2000). The concept of information in Biology. Philosophy of Science 67(2),
177–194.
Maynard, S. J., Szathmáry, E. (1995). The Major Transitions in Evolution. Oxford: W. H. Freeman.
Maynard, S. J., Szathmáry, E. (1999). The Origins of Life: From the Birth of Life to the Origins of
Language. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Merrell, F. (1995). Peirce’s Semiotics Now. Toronto: Canadian Scholar’s Press.
Murphey, M. (1993). The Development of Peirce’s Philosophy. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.
Nöth, W. (1995). Handbook of Semiotics. Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press.
Oyama, S. (2000). The Ontogeny of Information: Developmental Systems and Evolution. 2nd
Edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Parker, K. (1998). The Continuity of Peirce’s Thought. Nashville:Vanderbilt University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1931–1935). The Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce. [Hartshorne, C., Weiss,
P. (Eds.) Cambridge-MA: Harvard University Press, 1931–1935], Vols. VII–VIII [Burks, A. W.
(Ed.) same publisher, 1958]. Electronic edition reproducing Vols. I–VI. Charlottesville: Intelex
Corporation. (Here referred as CP, followed by volume and paragraph number.)
Peirce, C. S. (1967). Annotated Catalogue of the papers of Charles S. Peirce. Amherst-MS:
University of Massachusetts. Robin, R. (Ed.) [References to manuscripts and letters by Charles
S. Peirce – MS and L – are in accordance with this catalogue.]
Peirce, C. S. [1893–1913] (1998). The Essential Peirce: Selected Philosophical Writings. Vol. II.
(Ed.) Peirce Edition Project. Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press. (Here
referred as EP2, followed by the number of the page.)
Peirce, C. S. [1839–1914] (1982–2000). Writings of Charles S. Peirce: a Chronological Edition.
Vol. 2. Ed. Peirce Edition Project. Bloomington: Indiana University. [Quoted as W, followed
by page number].
Peirce, C. S. (1976). New Elements of Mathematics by Charles S. Peirce, Carolyn E. (Ed.) The
Hague: Mouton. [Quoted as NEM, followed by page number].
Potter, V. (1997). Charles S. Peirce: On Norms and Ideals. Amherst, MA: University of
Massachusetts Press.
Queiroz, J., Merrell, F. (2005). Abduction – between subjectivity and objectivity. Semiotica
(Special Issue on Abduction) 153(1/4), 1–7.
Ransdell, J. (1977). Some leadings ideas of Peirce’s semiotic. Semiotica 19(3/4), 157–178.
Rescher, N. (1996). Process Metaphysics: An Introduction to Process Philosophy. New York: State
University of New York Press.

656
Claus Emmeche (1956– ) et al.
Rosenthal, S. (1997). Pragmatic Experimentalism and the Derivation of the Categories, In:
Brunning, J., Forster, P. (Eds.) The Rule of Reason. Toronto: University of Toronto Press,
pp. 120–138.
Santaella-Braga, L. (1994). Peirce’s broad concept of mind. European Journal for Semiotic Studies
6(3,4), 399–411.
Sarkar, S. (1996). Biological information: a skeptical look at some central dogmas of molec-
ular biology. In Sarkar, S. (Ed.) The Philosophy and History of Molecular Biology: New
Perspectives. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Sarkar, S. (2000). Information in genetics and developmental biology: Comments on Maynard
Smith. Philosophy of Science 67(2), 208–213.
Savan, D. (1986). Response to T. L. Short. Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society: A
Quarterly Journal in American Philosophy Summer XXII(2), 125–143.
Savan, D. (1987–1988). An Introduction to C. S. Peirce’s Full System of Semeiotic. Toronto
Semiotic Circle. Monograph Series of the TSC, Number 1.
Shannon, C. E., Weaver, W. (1949). The Mathematical Theory of Communication. Urbana-IL:
University of Illinois Press.
Short, T. L. (1996). Interpreting Peirce’s interpretant: a response to Lalor, Liszka, and Meyers.
Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society Fall XXXII(4), 488–541.
Short, T. L. (1998). What’s the use? Semiotica 122(1/2), 1–68.
Sterelny, K. (2000). The ‘genetic program’ program: A commentary on Maynard Smith on
information in Biology. Philosophy of Science 67(2), 195–201.
Stuart, C. I. J. M. (1985). Bio-informational equivalence. Journal of Theoretical Biology 113,
611–636.
Tiercelin, C. (1995). The relevance of Peirce’s semiotic for contemporary issues in cognitive sci-
ence. In Haaparanta, L., Heinamaa, S. (Eds.) Mind and Cognition: Philosophical Perspectives
on Cognitive Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Acta Philosophica Fennica 58, pp. 37–74
Williams, N. (1997). Biologists cut reductionist approach down to size. Science 277(5325),
476–477.
Wynnie, J. A. (2000). Information and structure in Molecular Biology: Comments on Maynard
Smith. Philosophy of Science 67(3), 517–526.

Chapter 21
Excerpts from Readers of the Book of Life
Anton Markoš (1949– )
Introduction and Commentary: Anton Markoš
What kind of creature is hidden under the notion of “hermeneutic biologists”? What do their
working hours look like? Well, you will not recognize them by their doings – they are busy
performing standard biology like anyone else. Maybe in the introductions and discussions
of their papers you will recognize slightly different accents and suggestions for opening
new realms within the framework of the current paradigm – but no revolutionary zealots
changing current paradigms! They know that plurality of view is the most precious gem in
the quest for wisdom.
A. Markoš (2002: 221)
At the time of his attendance at the ﬁrst annual Gatherings in Biosemiotics
conference in 2001, experimental cellular physiologist and philosopher of science
Anton Markoš had just completed a groundbreaking treatise entitled Readers of the
Book of Life – a book that called for the development of a “biohermeneutic” under-
standing of sign processes in living systems that proceeded not from a Peircean
or Uexküllian perspective, but from a grounding in the existential hermeneutics
of philosopher Hans-Georg Gadamer (1900–2002). Thus it was Markoš’s paper
presentation at that inaugural conference that led to the incorporation of the
‘biohermeneutic school’ of inquiry into contemporary biosemiotics.
Born on March 20, 1949 in the small mountain town of Kremnica, Czecho-
slovakia, Anton Markoš studied cellular physiology at the Charles University in
Prague, receiving his undergraduate degree in that subject in 1972, and his CSc (the
then Czech equivalent of the Ph.D.) in 1977. From 1977 to 1994, Markoš worked
as both a professor and as an experimental scientist in cell physiology at Charles
University, focusing particularly on energy metabolism and differentiation in the
protistan parasite Trypanosoma brucei, as well as in trichomonads and slime molds.
“In the air of a shortage of everything and bureaucratic bonds everywhere,” reports
Markoš about Soviet-era Czechoslovakia, “the most common chemicals had to have
been ordered two years in advance, and there was no real new equipment. Thus,
because I could do only a very limited range of science, I focused my attention to
reading and teaching” (2009: p.c.).
Seeking increased opportunities for research, Markoš secured himself short-
term fellowships at the Institute for Cell Pathology in Brussels, the Max-Planck
657
D. Favareau, Essential Readings in Biosemiotics, Biosemiotics 3,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9650-1_21, C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010

658
Anton Markoˇs (1949– )
Institute for Biology in Germany, and at Rockefeller University in New York.
In 1994, he entered the Charles University and the Czech Academy of Sciences
Center of Theoretical Study, where he was part of a four-year interdisciplinary
workshop bringing together biologists, philosophers, physicists, and historians of
science – and where he ﬁrst became acquainted with the hermeneutic philosophy
of Hans-Georg Gadamer, whose application to the intransigent problems of biology
immediately became clear to him.
An additional event critical, too, to his later development of the project of bio-
hermeneutics, recalls Markoš, took place “after the political turn of 1989, when
a group of previously underground philosophers and scientists, headed by Zdenˇek
Neubauer, got the chance to establish a small Department of Philosophy and History
of Science in the Faculty of Sciences at Charles University, with the goal of giving
apprentice scientists some insights into the existence of other corners of human
knowledge” (ibid). In 1998, Markoš was invited to enter this interdisciplinary
department, which he presided over from 2002 to 2008, and where he teaches still.
Subsequently, articles on biohermeneutics written by Markoš and his colleagues in
the department have been appearing regularly in biosemiotics journals, and in 2009,
Markoš co-authored a volume on biohermeneutics for the Springer Book Series
on Biosemiotics entitled Life as its own Designer, together with his colleagues
Drs. Filip Grygar, László Hajnal, Karel Kleisner, Zdenˇek Kratochvíl and Zdenˇek
Neubauer.
There, as throughout so much of Markoš’s biohermeneutic work, writes biosemi-
otician Marcello Barbieri, the starting point of Markoš’s biohermeneutics is the
problem of “novelty”:
Do genuine novelties exist in nature? Did real novelties appear in the history of life? In
classical physics, as formulated for example by Laplace, novelty was regarded a complete
illusion . . . [for Prague biohermeneutician Anton Markoš] this is precisely what Darwin’s
revolution was about. It was the introduction of contingency in the history of life, the idea
that all living organisms, and not just humans, are subjects, individual agents which act on
the world and which take care of themselves. . . .[Thus,] according to Markoš, the present
version of Darwinism that we call Modern Synthesis, or Neodarwinism, is a substantial
manipulation of the original view of Darwin, because it is an attempt to explain the irra-
tionality of history with the rational combination and recombination of chemical entities.
Cultural terms like information and meaning have been extended to the whole living world,
but have suffered a drastic degradation in the process. Information has become an expression
of statistical probability, and meaning has been excluded tout court from science. Darwin
has shown that the history of life is as contingent as the history of man, and Heidegger has
shown that man can create genuine novelties because he can interpret what goes on in the
world. From these two insights, Markoš. . .argues that we should go back to the basic con-
cepts of the humanities and study the history of life as a ‘narrative’, precisely as we study
the history of human affairs (Barbieri 2009: 228).
When asked about the biohermeneutic project during a panel discussion in 2007,
Markoš himself framed the project this way:
If you look at the last two hundred years of the history of Biology, you can always ﬁnd minor
groups of dissidents claiming that “There is something more to life than is being accounted
for in the standard science.” You ﬁnd this especially in the major works of literature. But
who alone succeeded in actually establishing this case? Only one single person succeeded.

21
Excerpts from Readers of the Book of Life
659
It was Darwin. Darwin brought ‘story’ – i.e., ‘history’ – into Biology, and into the sciences.
And it took a hundred and ﬁfty years to push story back out of Darwinian evolution to make
neo-Darwinism! But because, in fact, there are only two histories, or ‘stories’ that have been
allowed into science. One is the Big Bang, where the whole story is effectively condensed
into the ﬁrst one-tenth to the minus forty-two seconds of the universe – after which you
then just have normal functioning, the mechanical, clockwork functioning of the universe.
So that story already ﬁnished long ago. But the second story – that of biological evolution –
is still going on. Well, we’ve found the (his)‘story’ in life again. But since we see that in two
hundred years, only one single person was successful in synthesizing history and working
science, well . . . we must be careful in our optimism! (2008: 16–17)
“History”, “story”, “narrative”, “reading” and “text” are critical concepts in
Markoš’s biohermeneutics project, for, with Gadamer, Markoš asserts that “the
nature of knowledge” – all knowledge, whether mentally conceptualized or biologi-
cally embodied – “is hermeneutical and is rooted in experience, history and in struc-
tures” (2008: p.c.). He therefore eschews the idea that formalized equations between
“digital signs and bodily (or analog) entities can be reduced to an unequivocal cor-
respondence” (Cvrˇcková and Markoš 2005: 87). Instead, claims Markoš, scientists’
maps – of cell fate, of immunological response, of neuronal activity, and even of
protein synthesis – are at best helpful marks made by scientists’ for their own orien-
tation, but they are never to be confused with the vastly different multidimensional
territory wherein the objects of the biologists’ study must orient themselves accord-
ing to very different sets of signs and meanings than those that the scientist crudely
attempts to translate into the language of human symbolic terms (2002: 120).
What often become obscured by such a procedure, observes Markoš, is the fact
that, for the majority of more complex organisms – and certainly for mammals –
the action of interpretation upon a sign is “its own shortest description” and can-
not thus be algorithmically compressed (cf. Kauffman 2000). As a result, argues
Markoš’ wife and collaborator, fellow cell physiologist Fatima Cvrˇcková (1966– ),
all attempts to reduce this historically situated, though ever presently unique,
realm of living-acting-perceiving-and-signifying onto the “necessarily incomplete,
reduced, and ﬂattened” descriptions of the contemporary objectivist scientiﬁc model
cannot help but to obscure, instead of clarify, the very phenomenon that is a living
systems’ deﬁning characteristic – i.e., its ability to self-preservatingly “read” its
own immediately present situation, and to actively choose its response from among
a repertoire of available possibilities (Cvrˇcková, in Markoš 2002: 184).
These embodied repertoires, claims Markoš, have developed over the long his-
tory of evolutionary time in the manner of biological “texts” that have been literally
“inscribed” in organisms and are now “ready to hand” for them, in the Heideggerian
sense. Accordingly, organisms creatively use such embodied inscriptions as inter-
pretative resources for negotiating the current condition that they ﬁnd themselves
in. Such an understanding is the conceptual inverse of that of the genetically “pro-
grammed” organism that is at the mercy of the biological text (or code), which
controls it like the execution of a computer program stored inside an automaton.
Here, instead, it is the organism itself that is the ultimate “reader of the book of life”
that it inherits, on the one hand, and that it must perpetually “read” anew, on the
other.

660
Anton Markoˇs (1949– )
Yet, notes Markoš, for much of contemporary biology, “the genome is often
taken for a sui ipsius interpres (or self-interpreting text). According to this view,
the “interpretation” of a genetic script would mean simply decoding according to
a known key” (2002: 34). Markoš devotes a substantial portion of Readers of the
Book of Life (2002) to showing how gross and misleading an oversimpliﬁcation of
the actual processes instantiating genetic expression is expressed in such a claim.
Instead, he argues, a more realistic analogy for life processes than that of mechani-
cal decoding, would be that of genuine hermeneutic reading, which is “not merely
a matter of deciphering meaning – as such a method would simply reveal what is
already pre-existing – but rather, it is the very act of acquiring knowledge . . .and
creating meaning, as both knowledge and meaning will arise in the very process [of
the reading]” (2002: 35).
Markoš points us towards a quote from Hans-Georg Gadamer’s classic
hermeneutics text Truth and Method (1996) regarding written texts that, mutatis
mutandis, provides us with a fruitful new heuristic for thinking about the reading
(and the writing) of genetic texts:
The written word and what partakes of it is the intelligibility of mind transferred to the
most alien medium. Nothing is so purely the trace of the mind as writing, but nothing is so
dependent on the understanding mind either. In deciphering and interpreting it, a miracle
takes place: the transformation of something alien and dead into total contemporaneity and
familiarity. This is like nothing else that comes down to us from the past . . . That is why the
capacity to read, and to understand what is written, is like a secret art, even a magic, that
frees and binds us. In it, time and space seem to be superceded (Gadamer 1996: 163–64).
Similarly can one “read”, with scientiﬁcally trained eyes, the implications for
our understanding of evolutionary biology in Gadamer’s remarks that “understand-
ing is not to be thought of so much as an action of one’s subjectivity, but as the
placing of oneself within a process of tradition, in which past and present are
constantly fused,” and thus the “working out [of] appropriate projections, antici-
patory in nature, to be conﬁrmed ‘by the things’ themselves, is the constant task of
understanding” (Gadamer 1972: 267, 1975: 258).
For as Markoš shows us in the following selection, the living organization of
an organism changes the way it “reads” itself and its environment on a moment-
to-moment (as well as on an evolutionary) basis in a way that no machine logic
or mathematical formalization could ever predictively account for – and it is this
very embodiment of a possibility-collapsing “bio-logic” that allows a living system
to effectively explore and to creatively exploit novel state spaces, giving it “the
characteristics of a ﬁeld, a culture, a statement, and of course, [but only] sometimes,
also of a machine” (2002: 163).
Thus, like many biosemioticians, Anton Markoš ﬁnds himself attempting to
establish a scientiﬁcally viable and explanatorily more complete framework for the
understanding of biological being that “navigates between the Scylla of mechanism
and the Charybdis of teleology” (Havel and Markoš 2002). And as the epigraph that
begins this commentary indicates, he emphatically does not wish to “do away with”
the traditional and inﬁnitely valuable way of doing biological laboratory science.

21
Excerpts from Readers of the Book of Life
661
He wishes, instead, to augment it, after the fashion of Gadamer’s perspective-
widening “fusion of horizons” and Bateson’s knowledge-generating method of
“double-description” – i.e., with the realization that the laboratory scientist’s per-
spective is a perspective, and that the object of the biological laboratory scientist’s
investigation is a subject with a perspective of its own. The dialogic viewpoint
that emerges from this understanding Markoš refers to as an exploration into the
hermeneutics of the living. The following selection well represents this enterprise,
in what has now ﬁrmly been established as one of the most vibrant and promising
areas of inquiry in biosemiotics.

662
Anton Markoˇs (1949– )
Excerpts from Readers of the Book of Life (2002)
The difference between meaning in a formal system and in a language is a very important
one. . . It is in this: in a language, when we have learned a meaning for a word, we then make
new statements based on the meaning of the word. In a sense the meaning becomes active,
since it brings into being a new rule for creating sentences. This means that our command
of language is not like a ﬁnished product: the rules for making sentences increase when we
learn new meanings. . . [I]n a formal system, the theorems are predeﬁned, by the rules of
production. We can choose “meanings” based on an isomorphism between theorems and
true statements. But this does not give us the license to go out and add new theorems to the
established theorems. – Douglas R. Hofstadter
Why This Book?
The reader may ask why, when the neo-Darwinian paradigm seems to be invincible,
I wish to discuss branches of biology that are in concealed or open conﬂict with it.
Most such alternatives are without doubt “contaminated” by the humanities. Why
not adopt the view of Kováˇc, who sees them as dwelling in the tenets of Aristotelian
truths, eye-catching, intellectually extremely expressive but, alas, untrue? Why not
reject all alternative views with a resignation similar to that in the following passage
by Gould (1996) on Lamarckism?
We deny our preferences all the time in acknowledging nature’s factuality. I really do hate
the fact of personal death, but will not base my biological views on such distaste. Less
facetiously, I really do prefer the kinder Lamarckian mode of evolution to what Darwin
called the miserable, low, bungling, and inefﬁcient ways of his own natural selection – but
nature does not give a damn about my preferences, and works in Darwin’s mode, and I
therefore chose to devote my professional life to this study. (p. 37)
The reason for my apparently foolish task is my conviction that the neo-
Darwinian theory, like any other, reﬂects only a certain set of ideas and values.
Those who have espoused these ideas and values have focused their attention on
certain properties of living beings and generalized them into a viable theory. These
undoubtedly truthful and very efﬁcient ﬁlters help us to put our understanding of
reality in order. I am, however, convinced that there may be other ﬁlters, other theo-
ries that would allow us to discover different aspects of living beings. I must confess
to a “postmodern” heresy that it is we who construct truth in order to ﬁnd an ori-
entation in our world. Competition between several truths is more important than
the hegemony of a single Truth, however invincible it might look to us and our
contemporaries.
I do not believe that knowledge elaborated by the natural sciences is different
in principle from other forms of knowledge, just because science has found a way
to cumulatively improve the truth, whereas the humanities have just wandered in
an endless vicious circle for the last 2,500 years. I maintain that any knowledge is
both cumulative and circular. The circle, however, is not an erratic whirling, but a

21
Excerpts from Readers of the Book of Life
663
hermeneutic activity. Because of this, it is useful also to retain knowledge of half-
forgotten, abandoned alternatives, dead ends, and even frauds of the past – if for
no other reason then simply as a corrective for the overly conﬁdent and pompous
judgments of some protagonists of the theory reigning at a given time, as an anti-
dote against ideology. Neo-Darwinism is a beautiful ediﬁce of the human spirit, and
heuristically it is invaluable. However, we should venture into different regimes of
thought and seek for phenomena that are ignored, neglected, or even rejected by the
leading theory.
I see a hermeneutic approach as a good alternative in biology. If there are calls
for the uniﬁcation of knowledge, why not undertake the enterprise “democratically,”
from different angles and by different methods? Life on Earth arose as a result of
certain chemical and physical conditions in force on the virgin planet. Such condi-
tions opened – or better, created – new realms that had never been present before.
Because of this, life is, and at the same time is not, explicable by chemistry, thermo-
dynamics, and physics. The existence of replicators enabled one particular kind of
evolution. New realms came into existence because of that very fact, and they, too,
both are and are not explicable in terms of the “selﬁsh” replicator.
In this part of the book I present a survey of some biological theories that pro-
foundly inﬂuenced the development of biological science in the twentieth century.
I maintain a scheme similar to that in part I, where we moved from objectivism
to hermeneutics. In this part, the ground will be delimited by two extremes. One
is the postulate that the phenotypic characters (structure, physiology, and behav-
ior) of the organism can be derived from a basic, digital level of description, that
is, from information implemented in the molecule of DNA. Neo-Darwinism, the
leading paradigm of contemporary biology, lies close to this end of the scale. The
opposite extreme stresses the importance of bodily experience, history and environ-
mental contingencies and sees genetic makeup as a necessary but far from sufﬁcient
precondition. Close to this end of the scale belong the theories of biological ﬁeld,
epigenetics, and superorganism and what I call the language metaphor of life.
Between lie biological structuralism, vitalism, and also the theoretical background
of what became Lysenkoism. I follow the struggle to conciliate the contradictory
demands of the “living state” with objectivist science.
Mechanism Versus Organism
During the last 200 years, this topic has been treated ad nauseam by myriad works
of theoretical biology. Whole careers have been devoted to various stands on the
conﬂict, and elaborate philosophical systems have been developed, just to reach
the conclusion that either (1) living beings are nothing but machines or (2) living
beings are not machines and need some element in addition. Thus, the centuries-old
dispute addresses the single question of whether the living (the “organic”) can be
identiﬁed with the mechanism. If not, how to characterize it? One of the greatest
frustrations of biology lies in the fact that it is not able, despite incessant effort, to

664
Anton Markoˇs (1949– )
break through this “Aristotelian barrier” (see Chapter 1 for this concept) and provide
a clear resolution to this seemingly simple conﬂict.
The modern (Cartesian) tradition of thought. with its stress on strict causality,
has of course resisted any attempts to support the existence of anything other than
unequivocal causal chains and has instead proposed a machinelike conception of
life. Despite this, the problem of organicity has tendency to resurface again and
again. Abram (1996) has reﬂected it as follows:
First, the “mechanical philosophy” suggests that matter, itself, is ultimately inert, with-
out any life or creativity of its own. The great worth of the machine metaphor is that it
implies that the material world is, at least in principle, entirely predictable. According to
this metaphor, the material world operates like any machine according to ﬁxed and unvary-
ing rules; laws that have been built into the machine from the start. It has no creativity, no
spontaneity of its own. (pp. 234–235) A machine always implies someone who invented
the machine, a builder, a maker. A machine cannot assemble itself. . . . If we view nature as
machine, then we tacitly view it as something that has been built, something that has been
made from outside. (p. 242)
Abram, of course, only restates a classic problem for our times. Almost iden-
tical formulations can be found in Kant’s Critique of Judgement (1790). Also, for
Kant, organic beings should be distinguished from mechanical devices. In contrast
to machines, they possess one principal property: all their parts are at one and the
same time the cause and the effect of their form.
On the part of mainstream biology, now as in the past, the whole mechanism
versus organism problem has been declared a pseudoproblem or, in the milder form
of rejection, put aside with a comment that it is beyond the powers of contemporary
knowledge to solve it. In both cases, it is considered advisable to concentrate on
more relevant problems (e.g., modern, successful, mechanistic science) instead of
wasting time on metaphysical speculations. This advice has usually been followed –
biologists do not protest against a mechanistic understanding of their subject. The
prerequisite for understanding life in this framework is a linear and unidirectional
(i.e., mechanical) relationship between the genetic text as the cause and the phe-
notype pattern as the effect of the process. The absence, in recent decades, of any
alternative approaches has been balanced by the rocketing progress of mechanistic
theory, which is most often called modern or neo-Darwinian synthesis.
The Reproduction of the “Living Machine”
Suppose that a device exists that is executing a program in a constant environment.
This device has two functions: writing a copy of the program and building a copy of
itself. This is the essence of so-called von Neumann interstellar automaton; here on
Earth the cells of asexual microorganisms grown in a chemostat may be close to such
a scenario. Both functions are carried out by metabolic subroutines, which serve
both the production of construction parts and their compilation into an identical
copy of the interpreter. A machine functioning in this manner could build a copy of
itself in one of three ways (or a combination thereof):

21
Excerpts from Readers of the Book of Life
665
1. By building the new machine de novo from construction parts it has produced:
either they will self-assemble, or the mother machine will help to do this
2. By dividing into two nonidentical parts and completing them from the store
of construction parts (modules) synthesized in advance (semi-conservative
reproduction)
3. By growth and subsequent division into two identical copies of the original
machine
The task is, in the strict sense, fulﬁlled only in the ﬁrst case – in other cases, the
original phenotype in fact goes through changes, and there must be a loop in its
states that will reestablish the starting position. It is symptomatic that the ﬁrst
alternative is not present in living beings.1
Whatever the means of reproduction of our machine, two complications will
inevitably arise even in the absence of disturbances from the environment: copy
errors (owing to the fact that analogue magnitudes cannot be measured with abso-
lute accuracy) and attrition. The parts – but also the sensors and standards for space,
mass and other measures – will be subject to wear and tear, and consequently they
will not be able to produce an ideal copy of themselves. It could be argued that
one of the program’s subroutines might detect and replace the damaged parts, but
for this sensors are needed, which themselves are parts of the device. The demand
can therefore be satisﬁed only to some extent – by the high turnover of all parts of
the device, including those that execute the turnover. Replacement will become a
stochastic process, which necessarily is also prone to error. There are two ways out
of this vicious circle, both requiring an external source of information:
1. Invariant factor(s) in the environment that can serve as calibration standard(s):
ontogeny and physiology provide many examples of “bootstrapping” in the back-
ground of life cycles. The surrounding world thus interferes with the functioning
of the machine.
2. The number of replicas of the system is high: those differing from the norm (due
to errors) will be incompatible with their environment and will be eliminated.
In this case, there is no need for the environment to contain invariant factors.
Even in a variable environment, some variants in the progeny will cope with the
environmental demands.
If we compare both ways, we see that the ﬁrst is more or less applied in ontogeny;
the second is at the core of the Darwinian evolutionary paradigm. In both cases, even
1 At this point, many readers may argue that viruses are such an example, but this argument could
take us too far. First: is a virus alive? What Is its phenotype during periods when the virus itself
does not “exist,” when it is reduced to a piece of viral nucleic acid incorporated into a host cell?
What is the boundary of the viral organism? We could come to the conclusion that a virus is a
very atypical machine that incorporates a large part of the biosphere. We can, of course, pretend
that we “know” what a virus is, but the textbook deﬁnition does not fulﬁll the basic criterion of a
self-reproducing machine, that is, self-reproduction.

666
Anton Markoˇs (1949– )
a simple hypothetical system, with a constant genetic program and in a constant
environment, will necessarily produce variations. The whole developmental loop
will therefore require corrections from the environment (external or internal). But
again: Is an organism a machine?
Genotype and Phenotype
If the metaphor of organism as a machine is encountered frequently, it may be worth
delineating the boundaries within which it has a heuristic value and beyond which
it becomes a caricature. Every biology textbook begins with a statement that organ-
isms have a timeless, enduring component. This is the one-dimensional genetic
script, a digital code easily reproducible in a form implemented with nucleic acids
and transposable into other media (i.e., magnetic disk or a sheet of paper). The
nucleic acid can also be removed from the cell, stored, ampliﬁed in vitro, or inserted
into cells of virtually any biological species. Copying is highly accurate, and for all
practical reasons copies can be considered identical to the original. Mutations –
changes in the script – may occur either because the maintenance machinery
is not absolutely error-proof or because of external causes. Everything else, the
story goes on, in a living cell or an organism is of a corporeal, phenotypic, and
therefore ephemeral nature. Living beings embody a tension between an (eternal)
genetic code and a (transitory) pattern, or, more precisely, it is we who feel such a
tension.
With contemporary biological techniques, it is much easier to study the last-
ing genetic message than to study phenotypes. This is why the body of (scientiﬁc)
information concerning the genetic message is much more voluminous than is that
concerning phenotypes. It is no wonder, then, that there is a well-established theory
that considers genetic script both a necessary and a sufﬁcient cause of a pheno-
type. The theory is based mainly on the observation that a single, nondifferentiated
cell (e.g., a zygote) can give rise to a plethora of cell phenotypes, and that these –
in the case of multicellular organisms- will build the entire body. Such phenom-
ena, of course, do not necessarily mean causality; causality enters the ﬁeld only
when an assumption is introduced that the totality of functioning, differentiation,
and ontogeny is a function of the digital information in the form of a linear string of
symbols (bases).
Proteins can be considered as connecting links between the genetic information
and the body: The machinery of transcription and translation can, to a great extent,
be considered as constant and indifferent to whichever part of the information is
being read, what proteins are being built, and what proteins were built in the past:
The development of the whole system can be seen as an analogue of a computer
program: each step of the reading will modify the existing protein context, which
will modify the next decision as to which subroutines will be switched on, and so
forth. Differentiation and morphogenesis can then be understood as higher steps –
reiterations on other levels – of this simple successive program of differential protein
synthesis in different daughter cells arising from the zygote (see, e.g., Stubbleﬁeld
1986).

21
Excerpts from Readers of the Book of Life
667
If development always starts from a zygote (or a spore) with an identical setup,
the genome could be indeed considered a cause of the resulting phenotype. Such
causality can be proved, for example, by mutations of the genetic text. If everything
remains the same, a change in the sequence of bases will (or may) elicit a change in
the function of a particular protein. This will or may result in a change in the pheno-
type of a cell (organism), even up to the activation of programs that are normally not
in use or even forbidden. In similar cases, the direct causal relationship between the
genetic text and the phenotype should be obvious. Hindrances to the construction of
an artiﬁcial cell able to realize developmental program(s) would then be technical
only and would not exist in principle. E. 0. Wilson (1998: 91) compared the task
with the Moon mission in 1969: no new principal discoveries were necessary for its
accomplishment, only money and technical skill. The “Jurassic Park Fallacy” – the
conviction that the knowledge of the complete sequence of DNA of an individual is
wholly sufﬁcient for its “production” (resurrection, creation?) – reemerges period-
ically, not because of science ﬁction writers, but from the proclamations of serious
scientists (at least two such projects of resurrection were announced in 1999 for the
Tasmanian wolf and the Siberian mammoth).
But a strictly mechanistic approach may not be satisfactory. Even at the level
of transcription and translation, the above model will seem oversimpliﬁed. Genetic
information is a necessary but not sufﬁcient condition to assign shape, localization
and function to a protein that is synthesized. This fact was proved when the ﬁrst
attempts were made to synthesize commercially or medically important eukaryotic
proteins in bacteria (genetically transformed with the gene for the particular pro-
tein). Transcription or translation generally proceeded without problems, but outside
the context of their “maternal” cells, many proteins collapsed into nonfunctional
denatured chunks. We are now well aware of the fact that proper reading of the
genetic text is a function of a context constituted from hundreds of proteins and
other structures. The external and internal environments are sources not only of
physical and chemical “forcing” but also of signs, hints corning from other cells
and organisms. The receiver will recognize such signals and interpret and evaluate
them in the context of other signals and its own experience. All this, together with
the high interspecies similarity of genetic texts (recall, e.g., the genetic proximity of
humans and chimpanzees), suggests that species-speciﬁc morphologies will depend
not only on genetic but also on epigenetic interpretation processes. They are “cul-
tural” achievements – results of a “tradition” perpetuated in a given line, as well as
of active care on the part of an individual. If we accept such a notion, then life in all
its manifestations becomes a hermeneutic achievement.
Where is the “Information” Hidden?
Owing to its usage in many different connotations, the word “information” has
become largely devoid of meaning. To avoid misunderstanding, I will try to describe
how it is used here. First of all, I maintain, together with Hofstadter (1979), that
information as such does not exist objectively. Anything that can become infor-
mation will do so only if the interpreter can distinguish it from the background

668
Anton Markoˇs (1949– )
as a message and is able to interpret it. Hofstadter distinguished three levels of
information:
(1) The frame message is a clue, a trigger signaling to the interpreter the need for
a decoding device. Hofstadter gives the example of a sealed bottle washed up
on the seashore, with a piece of paper in it. A learned interpreter will instan-
taneously recognize it among junk on the beach, as something to be decoded.
Note the effort required even in such a simple example. Those able to receive
the message as a message must know that a bottle is an artifact and not some-
thing commonly encountered on the beach. They must know the common use
for bottles – they will not pay attention to an empty bottle or a bottle full of sea-
water. They should know something about the speciﬁc properties of bottles (that
bottles will not dissolve in seawater, will ﬂoat if sealed empty. etc.). They must
know the use of paper and distinguish writing from simple dirt. They probably
know that messages used to be sent in bottles. All this will arouse a receiver’s
willingness to focus attention on bottle and its message, and then a second level
of deciphering can take place.
(2) To understand the outer message means to know how to get an adequate
decoding mechanism to read the message proper. In Hofstadter’s example, the
message is in Japanese. The receivers, even if they cannot read Japanese. should
be able to decipher that it is in Japanese and act accordingly to ﬁnd a transla-
tor, The message itself cannot serve as a source of information for decoding –
the way of decoding should be deciphered independently of what the message
contains.
(3) The inner message is the message proper, which can reveal the meaning. This
level is the closest to a receiver, but ﬁrst the receiver must go through the ﬁrst
two levels of recognition, taking cues from outer characteristics of the infor-
mation medium. The experience of the receivers plays a decisive role here –
they must distinguish the message from the background and choose the ade-
quate decoding procedure. Similarly, if genetic messages are to be the cause
of anything, there must exist a receiver (mechanism, device, “subject”) that
is able to decipher them as such and interpret them. The outcome of such
an effort can be, for example, the selection of a particular program and its
execution.
But if we take the phenotype as a decoding mechanism, we immediately ﬁnd
ourselves in a difﬁculty, because the very act of reading the message may – and usu-
ally does – change the interpreting device itself. The execution of the developmental
program means entering the physical world. This would lead to an endless expansion
of new phenotypic variations, which are also subject to change owing to changes in
their environment. An incompatibility of the phenotype with the environment would
arise, quickly followed by the breakdown and death of our “device.” As one of the
key programs is the simple command “copy me,” which ensures error-free copying
of the message itself, we would very soon witness the collapse of the prerequisite of
the whole process – the message.

21
Excerpts from Readers of the Book of Life
669
The only way to avoid such a catastrophe is to provide a loop in the program
after some steps of execution, leading to the reestablishment of the initial condi-
tions, that is, a copy of the genetic message and of the original reading (interpreting)
device – the phenotype. The loop may be reset in several ways. One of them is
a limited choice of degrees of freedom – phenotypes- following one after another
in an invariable sequence and ending up back in the starting position. One exam-
ple of such a simple loop is the life cycle of a unicellular organism, for example,
a bacterium, which switches periodically between a vegetative cell and a unicellu-
lar spore. Environmental factors act as triggers for switching between states, or the
organism itself generates endogenous cues (rhythms). If cells of a common origin
can cooperate, then cellular phenotypes can arise that do not return to the initial
state and die without leaving descent. If there is at least one cell line that can close
the loop, there is nothing to prevent the generation of many abortive specialized cell
lines, which will help to ensure that the loop is closed by the single line that is able
to do so.
In multicellular sexually reproducing organisms all cell lines are abortive, and the
line of the organism can be saved only by fusing two gametes (which themselves are
abortive). Hence, an individual comes into existence from a newly formed cell line
equipped with a speciﬁc version of both genetic information and structures. A new
generation starts not from a precisely recreated initial state, but with a mélange of
genetic programs and construction elements: both the message and the interpreting
device are unique. A species will be characterized by an endless number of vari-
ants (dialects) of the genetic message – genotypes – and with a similar plethora of
interpreting devices. What, then, makes the whole process “species speciﬁc” in each
individual?
Genidentity
Faced with the enormous variability of living beings, we are confronted with the
question of what is that sameness that we can recognize in all manifestations of
life, and what is the essence of their unity in time? Is it a precisely copied genetic
message, a controlled network of relations, or genealogical lines? A very useful
concept here might be that of genidentity, introduced in 1922 by Kurt Lewin. He
posed a seemingly trivial question: How we can know that a thing in time t1 is
the same thing in time t2? The stone on my desk, or a star in the skies, remains the
same despite the possibility that it may undergo some change during the observation
period. Surprisingly, says Lewin, it is not easy to explain how we recognize the
identity of two objects a and b in two times (a1, a2, or b1, b2), and why we prefer the
relation a1–a2 and not a1–b2. Even when an object remains relatively stable in shape
and material (e.g., a stone, or test tubes in a rack), we often have to rely on a label
put on the specimen. It is this identity in time (stone a1 to stone a2) that Lewin called
“genidentity.” The relation of genidentity is not a logical one: from the logical point
of view, the object could have changed – acquired scrapes and cracks or changed
its color, or grew from child to adult, and so forth. This means that the relation

670
Anton Markoˇs (1949– )
of simple identity (Gleichheit) does not hold here. Nor can genidentity be reduced
to a mere sequence of changes to the object in time or of causal sequences (here
the relationship is open: genidentity and causality mayor may not mean the same).
Genidentity is the very precondition for the existence of physics or chemistry.
In the case of living beings, determining genidentity is of course not an easy task:
How can we assess the genidentity between a chicken and the hen it has grown into?
Here, again, if we cannot be absolutely sure (e.g., by witnessing the development of
the chicken into the hen), we have to rely only on labels – for example, a ring on
the leg or a DNA ﬁngerprint (and, of course, to believe in the genidentity of such
labels).
But what is the essence of the genidentity of two texts, if one is a copy of
another and may, moreover, contain typing errors or even word deletions? What
is the genidentity of different descriptions of the same thing, landscape, or situa-
tion? Such questions become important in the reconstruction of genealogical lines
where no label can be placed on the predecessors, and we are left with learned
guesses based on paleontology and other traces. A similar situation is encountered
in comparative biology. We must believe the experts who have been initiated into a
given ﬁeld, who are able to immerse themselves in the essence of the thing under
investigation; that is, we need a hermeneutic task. What, then, connects “the same”
in different times and situations? One answer comes from the concept of eidetic
biology.
Eidetic Biology
A corollary to both biological structuralism and hermeneutics of the living is the
“eidetic biology” developed and pursued by Neubauer (1996, 1997, 2001). The
central concept refers to the ancient Greek word eidos, which in the vernacular of
that time meant something like semblance, likeness, shape, kind. (In Czech texts,
Neubauer uses the word podoba.) Eidos refers to self-presentation or display of a
living being to the surrounding world: what it looks like. We recognize a primrose, a
lizard, a snowﬂake, a composition by Mozart, or a person by their eidos, the internal
characters they communicate to the outside world. We do recognize them at repeated
encounters, despite the fact that none of these “specimens” remains the same (see
also genidentity, above, and Chapter 3). No two absolutely identical snowﬂakes have
ever been formed: an encounter with any snowﬂake is in fact different from that
with any other. It is its eidos that makes us recognize something as something –
not only by being the same but also by being different. Eidos also endows us to
recognize – on the background of similarities – differences, individual features.
Thus, eidetic biology refers to everyday experience (with perception and self-
perception, knowledge, memory, etc.) to understand the nature of the living.
Eidos uplifts a mere thing to the realm of both being-like and being-different
from other specimens of the kind. It allows us to see “the difference that makes
the difference” (Bateson’s deﬁnition of information, 1988) and what is important –
ignore irrelevant differences. Such knowledge concerns the very being of the entity

21
Excerpts from Readers of the Book of Life
671
in question (I would say, along with Ruyer, that it somehow invites us to partici-
pate in its being, instead of only observing what is objectively visible, measurable,
classiﬁable from outside).
Eidos thus refers to the essence or identity of a thing, consisting of the unique
way in which it is related to everything else. This general relatedness makes up
both its being and its being-known by others. Eidos is what knowledge – and any
kind experience – is about. It is the “format” in which the information is received,
stored, and processed. This format is the prerequisite of the organic wholeness and
any reasonable, meaningful behavior.
One might suspect that eidos is simply a disguised Platonic idea. Neubauer’s
background ontology, however, is somewhat different. The difference, may be illus-
trated by the English usage of the term “idea.” In sayings such as “I have no idea,”
“It is a good idea,” and so forth, the word “idea” belongs to the natural, dynamic
sort of being that eidetic biology ascribes to all living existence. The ideas of our
everyday experience are being conceived and born here. They grow, differentiate,
recombine, adapt, compete, survive with fertility, or become extinct. (It is in this
sense Bateson speaks about the ecology of ideas.) And, most important, they are
not inert rules to obey: they are the very process of self-imitation through inside
formation – in-formation for short.
That is exactly what eidos – the nature of living beings, forms, and processes – is
like. Their likeness takes a form of relation of similarity, correspondence, analogy;
complementarity. The relation of likeness rests on a reference: whenever we say
that something is like something else, we must also state in what respect. To see the
likeness among things requires us to under- stand in what sense they are similar,
correspondent, alike. In Neubauer’s words, how they are ﬁtted and oriented in the
eidetic space. To know something means to understand its eidos, to enter its eidetic
ﬁeld, and to see in what respect diverse phenomena are related, are but different
aspects, cases, versions of the same thing. The eidetic space, once understood, is
open for exploration for new possibilities (eidetic variations), following known rules
of transformation or discovering new ones.
Understanding, orientation, discovering of new possibilities is knowledge gained
by interpretation – that is, a genuine hermeneutic feat. Eidetic biology under-
stands life processes precisely in these terms. It views living beings as eidetic
spaces or semantic ﬁelds of formative causation. Like knowledge and learning,
development and evolution are based on the interpretation of the embodied liv-
ing experience stored as eidos, that is, as a speciﬁc formative strategy; way of
formation – information, interpreted by imitation within the current context.
At ﬁrst glance, such an approach to living beings as mindlike existences might
seem to be in sharp contrast to the traditional view, according to which the bodily
existence is reducible to a particular composition of material parts ﬁlling the inert
geometrical space. For eidetic biology, the elements of life are elements of meaning
rather than chunks of Cartesian space; a mechanism is merely a projection of eidos
into a geometrical space. But any mechanism is by deﬁnition an eidos (purpose,
strategy; instruction) implemented in a special way of mechanistic causation (as an
abacus is an implementation of numbers into strings of beads). To make use of a
device – mechanical or not – means to understand it.

672
Anton Markoˇs (1949– )
Is such a shift of perspective as preposterous as orthodox scholarship holds it
to be? In the foreword written for the Czech version of this book (Markoš 2000),
Neubauer points out that such a switch of perspective had actually taken place within
the womb of the most orthodox and prevailing stream of recent biology – in the neo-
Darwinian theory of evolution. The spectacular and celebrated shift from organisms
to genes (so-called genocentric revolution; see Chapter 4) meant not just a shift
in scale dimension from macroscopic bodies to the molecular level: unwittingly, it
was accompanied by a deeper, ontological transition, from a material (geometrical,
mechanical) existence to the informational one. From the gene’s point of view, the
competition that is the driving force of evolution takes place not among different
living forms, but among different instructions, that is, formative strategies, ways
of life. Information does not increase through multiplication (redundancy): it is the
success to prevail – irrespective of the survival of its carriers (vehicles). Information
is selﬁsh. But its selﬁshness does not concern quantity, volume, or number of copies,
but rather quality, meaning, semantic content.
What is really being selected through natural selection, then, is eidos: the form
of evolutionary experience stored. Eidos is implemented not only in the genetic
text, but also in the way the text is used, that is, how it is understood. It refers to its
semantic context. The Darwinian struggle for survival corresponds to the “conﬂict of
interpretations” (Ricoeur 1976). A successful interpretation amounts to “ﬁtness” –
ability to ﬁt into the given context of relations and communications, to make use of
the polysemy of the eidos.
The very nature of Life as Life cannot be “survival.” A species (eidos in Greek, species in
Latin; in both cases semblance, appearance, expression) is nothing but the “eidetic space”
open for any individual to reveal its individuality and originality; in the way an artist, a
poet, or a scientist does. Not only are most living beings equipped by a unique version of
genetic information, they also represent a unique interpretation of their genetic thesaurus.
Any given interpretation – a decision among possible readings – discloses novel possibil-
ities of interpretation (a hermeneutic space), curtailing or excluding the others. Hence, an
organism is not merely a passive result of the realization of its “genetic program,” but an
active expression, an incarnation, a manifestation of a certain interpretation (application)
of a genetic recipe. The recipe, in its turn, has also arisen from the mutual competition of
different variants of reading. (Neubauer 1996: 21)
Neubauer’s eidetic biology puts the established scientiﬁc tradition into a larger
context of European thought. To disclose and select the link between mechanistic,
structuralist, and informatic (syntactic) tradition in biology on the one hand, and the
eidetic and semantic side of life on the other, it is necessary to recur to the concepts,
notion, and terminology of hermeneutics.
Organisms and the Art of Being Acquainted with the World
I now return to the metaphor of living beings as a natural language and attempt
a hermeneutic view. We should be able to work with phenomena such as under-
standing, memory, forgetting and remembering, invention and intentionality. My
approach will stress the historical, that is, the diachronic nature of living beings and

21
Excerpts from Readers of the Book of Life
673
their ability of mutual communication (given either by their common origin or by
relations that have been constantly enacted). This view does not reject the levels
described by neo-Darwinists or structuralists. There is no doubt that natural lan-
guages possess means that make it possible both to be highly precise and to save
time: various automatisms, phrases, idioms, quotations, styles, and so forth. The
point is that these levels are not the only means of expression.
“Objective information does not exist without a system, which “accepts” it,”
states Fiala, who continues:
Does the system, then, accept information or not? We are so entangled in object language
that we invite such questions. Information does exist – we can point to any library. But in
what sense does it exist? The text in a book does not in itself carry any information. If you
wish to persuade me of the contrary, you will remove the book from the shelf and ask me to
read it. Fine: in this instant information receives its “existence,” but this existence does not
reside in “that information”: but in my own structure as an observer. In this sense, there is
no such thing as a text without its reader. (p. 46)
To sum up some results of my quest so far: the genetic text, structure, and
genidentity are necessary but not sufﬁcient preconditions for the hermeneutics of
the living. What, then, do we need in addition? The answer is language, with its
discourse. Not computer language with its unequivocally deﬁned concepts, but a
natural language with all that it can encompass: its ability to express things in very
precise terms, but also its metaphors, ambiguous propositions, wit, and so forth.
What, then, is the Language, and Who is the Speaker?
If the original presuppositions concerning living beings become more and more
complicated, if we need more and more new assumptions, additions, and exceptions,
their heuristic value becomes obscure. In such a situation, there are two possible
outcomes: either to believe that intensive research in the chosen direction will lead
to a new level of uniﬁcation, a new paradigm, or to resign and look for different
views, images, and parables. The hermeneutic approach may be one of the options
to hand. The conformation of a single protein, the state of a protein network, cell
differentiation, an individual – all these can be understood as statements in a given
semantic ﬁeld. To take this approach, however, we must rid ourselves of mechanistic
conceptions:
Are the principles which determine and control the life process at the molecular level,
indeed mechanical? I doubt it. We know today that the laws of classical physics describing
the behavior of mechanic systems are nothing but averaged demonstrations of the situa-
tion in the microworld. The rules of the microworld are anything but mechanical. When
speaking of a single molecule of an enzyme whose state is determined by single atoms and
particles, to speak of “averaging” is nonsense. In what sense, then, can we speak about
“machines”? Yes, we speak of a proton turbine, sodium pump, hydrogen bridges, electron
cascades, single and double bonds, but we always should remember that these are examples
and conceptions applied to a reality of a completely different order. (Neubauer 1990: 144)
Even if the language metaphors seem strange, the “machine” ones are by no
means more natural. I therefore suggest forgetting about inveterate icons of, say, a

674
Anton Markoˇs (1949– )
protein molecule as a very long, intricately folded yardstick of amino acids, of the
lock-and-key models depicting binding the ligand, and so forth. Why not take it as
a ﬁeld of force, holonomic and nonlocal? In such a view, conformational changes
would become results of reshufﬂing of the ﬁeld, expressions of Neubauer’s eidos.
Through a similar prism, we can also observe other “hierarchical” levels and come
to a conclusion that, at all levels, living beings have the nature of a semantic ﬁeld
that encompasses all of them. The ﬁelds can combine into higher order ﬁelds, or
disappear- collapse into a mosaic. At some levels – for example, ecosystems – the
ﬁeld character can become suppressed (or simply obscured?); at other levels, it may
become obvious.
Whatever happens to living beings is interpreted by experience that is present as a
ﬁeld of different orders; episodes of life become parts of the overall ﬁeld. The fate of
such imprints can vary: they may disappear quickly, become diluted, change their
meaning because of a different reading; they may be even absolutized by natural
selection as the “only reading allowed.”
Science has not paid attention to intentionality, because research was directed
from the perspective of large numbers: the phenomena that were studied were those
that could be generalized and averaged, and if this was not immediately possi-
ble, standard conditions were created. From such standardized conditions, science
attempted to explain the world. It is obvious that much of what has been found under
standard conditions can be also applied to everyday practice: bridges are solid and
do not collapse, planes can ﬂy, the Pathﬁnder will land on Mars, chemical reac-
tions can be reproduced in any laboratory with the proper equipment, inbred mice
look and behave identically. All this, however, is no justiﬁcation for an inductive
claim that the world is as it is described. And here science once again comes up
against the second branch of human knowledge- call it humanities – which has
never ceased to stress the conditional nature of our knowledge. Physicists lived
through this encounter some hundred years ago, and biology is (I hope) on the edge
of rediscovering it today.
My main effort in this direction is to stress the idea of the semantic ﬁeld com-
bined with the intentionality of the living, which is the subject of Part III of this
book. I ask such questions as, What happens if we try to appoint as the stan-
dard observer not the scientist, but living organisms belonging to a given species,
with a consensus on how to interpret the genetic text? What happens if we replace
the observer with all species on a biotope and determine the consensus to be the
behavior of the community? What if we take cells in a multicellular organism as
observers, and the consensus as the morphogenetic pathway? My quest proceeds in
these directions.
The Speech of Proteins
When seen from outside, much of biology appears to be the building of data bases – making
the “whole life catalog.” Sometimes, in a pensive mood, I fancy that to biologists the living
world is a vast set of book collections held in interconnected libraries. In this dream, the

21
Excerpts from Readers of the Book of Life
675
biologists are like competent librarians who devise the most intricate classiﬁcation of every
new library they discover but never read the books. They sense that something is missing
from their lives, and this feeling intensiﬁes as new collections of books grow hard to ﬁnd.
I see the biologists expressing an almost palpable sense of relief when joined by molecular
biologists who dare to start the even greater task of classifying the words the book con-
tains. It means that the search for the answer to the awesome question of what the books
are about can be put off until the new and inﬁnitely detailed molecular classiﬁcation is
complete. – James E. Lovelock
Cells detect extracellular signals by allostery and then give those signals meaning by “reg-
ulated localization.” We suggest that this formulation applies to many biological processes
and is particularly well illustrated by the mechanisms of gene regulation. Analysis of these
mechanisms reveals that regulated localization requires simple molecular interactions that
are readily used combinatorially. This system of regulation is highly “evolvable,” and its
use accounts, at least in part, for the nature of the complexities observed in biological
systems. – Mark Ptashne and Alexander Gann
The focus of this chapter is the linear strings of digital molecular symbols, that is,
nucleic acids. These molecular sequences are often compared to a code or an algo-
rithm – a program. Here I explore the possibility that they might represent genuine
written texts. If so, then how are they read and who is the reader? The metaphor can
be formulated in two ways:
(1) The weaker variant will take the set of DNA sequences coding for proteins
for a dictionary of “words.” The cell is “consulting” the dictionary saved
as the sequence of DNA, selecting appropriate words (i.e., synthesizing pro-
teins), putting these words (i.e., proteins) into a proper grammatical form, and
embedding them into “sentences” or longer “utterances” that will constitute
the phenotype – parole. Note the distinction from the more common metaphor
of coding sequence: an entry in the dictionary is not the code of a given
word.
(2) In the stronger variant, the string of DNA is a genuine text that is read and
interpreted by the cell. The cell will behave according to how it interprets the
text; the interpretation is based on previous understanding, momentary con-
texts and/or layout for the future. This metaphor is again in opposition to the
metaphor of the genetic script as a program or an algorithm. A text written in
natural language is not an algorithm: it requires a reader, not hardware.
Both metaphors stimulate the top-down analysis rather than the more com-
mon bottom-up procedures of molecular biology. They offer a complementary
view that might, I believe, contribute to a better understanding of what living
beings are. I appeal to the reader not to take the preceding sentence as an empty
phrase: complementarity of the discrete (digital) with the continuous (analogue)
may lie at the very heart of understanding the living; their superposition may be
the only way to glimpse the being-in-the-world of living beings. We instinctively
turn toward the digital because it is more easily reproducible, measurable, appre-
hensible. We tend to forget that the digital text needs a reader whose nature is
not “digital.”

676
Anton Markoˇs (1949– )
At this point, I take a short digression for those who are not acquainted with
molecular biology.
Proteins
A molecule of protein is huge compared to “ordinary” small molecules (a protein
molecule can be from several thousands up to millions of daltons in size; compare
this with 2 daltons for a hydrogen, 18 for water and 180 for glucose). The func-
tion of practically any protein resides basically in two areas: (1) speciﬁc binding of
ligand(s) (i.e., a small molecule or a small region on a macromolecule) and (2) per-
forming some speciﬁc action after the ligand is bound (or released). Any molecule
or part thereof can serve as a ligand; the binding takes place in a special region of
the protein molecule called the binding site (every ligand requires a speciﬁc binding
site). The protein molecule can bear several binding sites for different ligands, each
usually situated on a different region – the domain – of the protein molecule. The
performance of the protein molecule resides in its ability to change its conformation
(shape) upon binding of its ligand(s).
This new constellation brings about a speciﬁc function for which the protein has
evolved. It may help a speciﬁc chemical transformation of the bound ligand(s) (as
in enzymes), transport of the ligand from one compartment to another (as in translo-
cators), binding of antigen (in antibodies), signal transmission (receptors), and so
forth. The given function may require not just one but several identical or differ-
ent protein molecules that are part of a higher order structure. Such spatiotemporal
structures (networks) are typical for both inside the cell and the extracellular space.
It is true that many proteins will maintain their speciﬁc conformations even when
isolated and in a homogeneous suspension, but such conditions are highly artiﬁcial.
Such a homogeneous space (if it exists at all) is very limited inside the cell – per-
haps the content of vacuoles and similar cisternae may be close to it. The cytoplasm;
however, is by no means homogeneous,2 and the same holds for the extracellular
space (Fig. 21.1). Space inhabited by bacteria is also highly structured: coatings,
sediments, mats, soil particles, and so forth, have a very complicated structure of
biogenic origin.
The protein molecule is primarily a: polypeptide, that is, a linear, nonrandom
polymer of hundreds to thousands of amino acids. Twenty species of amino acids
are being regularly inserted into the protein chains synthesized in cells. This means
that within a chain of, say, 500 amino acids, the number of theoretically possible
strings is 205OO -obviously, only a tiny fraction of all possibilities ever came into
existence. Only strings that are able to pack into a speciﬁc spatial conformation
compatible with function were selected during evolution; mutation in the protein
2 See, for example, Goodsell (1991), Porter et a1. (1983), Hess and Mikhailov (1995,1996), Ovádi
(1995), Schaff et al. (1997), Clegg (1992), Welch and Easterby (l994), Shapiro and Losick (1997),
Matthews and White (1993), and Westerhoff and Welch (1992).

21
Excerpts from Readers of the Book of Life
677
Fig. 21.1 Ultrastructure of the “living matter.” (a) Ultrastructure (highly schematic view) of an
animal cell. Note the interconnected network of cytoskeleton, nucleoskeleton, extracellular matrix,
and membranous cisternae of various origins and functions. (b) Schematic insight into bacterial
cytoplasm. (c) The structure of chromatin. Regular “spools” represent nucleosomes with rolled-on
DNA. In the foreground there is a segment of DNA freed from such a regular matrix – it may
contain a gene that is being transcribed. Round and oval symbols represent the service proteins
necessary for such a function (for a more detailed scheme, see Fig. 21.4); beamlike formations
symbolize the nucleoskeleton

678
Anton Markoˇs (1949– )
sequence (deletion, insertion, or replacement of amino acids) can lead to incompat-
ibility with the function of the protein. A protein molecule is not a replicator; that
is, the proper succession of amino acids when producing new strings of the kind
must be ensured by a medium different from the protein itself. I return to this point
further below.
To attain the speciﬁc conformation, however, may not be a matter of course for
a given string: virtually endless numbers of possible packings of a given poly-
mer exist. Despite this, in a living cell the protein has only a small number of
typical, strictly deﬁned conformations that enable it to perform its speciﬁc func-
tion. Nonfunctional conformations either do not appear or, if they do, are actively
detected and either repaired or destroyed. The question of how to ensure that the
protein is conﬁned to functional conformations lies at the core of the so-called
Levinthal paradox (Ruddon and Bedews 1997; Bryngelson et al. 1995; Bohr et al.
1996): if the functional conformation were sought by a random walk through all pos-
sible conformational states, then a chain of the size of an average protein domain
(i.e., about 100 amino acids long) would require an astronomical time to do this.
A newly synthesized protein, however, attains the conformation required with a
half-life of several seconds, either spontaneously or with the assistance of other
proteins.
The importance of cellular environment becomes obvious when we compare
naturally occurring half-lives of packing with those necessary when proteins are
synthesized in vitro. Such molecules either cannot attain the “natural” conforma-
tion at all, or can do so only after several hours and only in very dilute protein
solutions (fewer than 10 μg/ml; Ruddon and Bedews 1997). In much denser pro-
tein suspensions that (to some extent, perhaps) simulate the situation within a living
cell, the protein is unable to reach the functional conformation at all – in such a
chaotic environment, rapid aggregation and denaturation will occur. It should there-
fore be postulated that the cellular structures into which the new protein has been
born play a key role in the process.3 But even the time necessary, for in vitro pack-
ing is only a negligible fraction of that calculated from the Levinthal paradox. It
follows that the primary sequence of amino acids should be considered one of the
major determinants of the ﬁnal shape: at least some protein molecules “know,” even
if removed from the cellular context and left to themselves, a shorter path to the goal
than random searching through endless conformation space.
The function of a protein, and the evolution of this function, is a compromise
between two trends concerning the rigidity of conformation(s) required: higher
afﬁnity for the ligand can be attained only by more rigid conformation. Rigidity,
however, goes at the expense of the performance that depends on ability to switch
rapidly between working conformations (see, e.g., Gillespie 1991). Upon ﬁnd-
ing its ligand, the protein molecule can change between “allowed” conformations
either spontaneously or by the action of various speciﬁc or nonspeciﬁc agents
3 If we transform bacterial cells by, for example, mammalian genes, very often we get precipitates
of denatured protein. The bacterial cell will truly perform the synthesis of the polypeptide chain,
but it is unable to provide conformation information provided by the mammalian cell.

21
Excerpts from Readers of the Book of Life
679
present in its cellular environment. Escapes into abnormal conformations are not
allowed.
The Buildup of a Protein Molecule
The textbook icon of protein synthesis – transcription and translation – is summa-
rized in Fig. 21.2a. The shape of the molecule is the function of the sequence of
amino acids in the chain; the chain, in turn, was gained by unequivocal decoding
(in the process of translation) of another sequence – that of bases in the molecule
mRNA. The molecule of mRNA, ﬁnally, is nothing but a one-to-one transcription
of a special piece in the much longer molecule of DNA. It follows that the sequence
of amino acids in a newly synthesized protein molecule is largely, and in some
cases (especially in bacteria) even unequivocally, determined by the sequence of
bases in the coding sequence in DNA. A decoding machinery providing the task
– transcription and translation – must be present in the cell. Side by side with the
icon is the “central dogma of molecular biology,” that the ﬂow of information is
unidirectional, from nucleic acids (DNA or RNA) to proteins. Only DNA is the
replicator.
The icon is beautiful, economical, and elegant. It enables the construction of
causal chains and loops by assuming that a single level – that of DNA texts – is
the formative cause of epigenetic structures and processes. These emerge automat-
ically because they are totally contained in the genetic text, and the system, led by
cues from its environment, is channeled toward one of alternative decoding path-
ways (i.e., development). The model is compatible with the neo-Darwinian theory
of evolution and has indeed become part of its reiﬁcation.
A more realistic view of the whole process is shown in Fig. 21.2b, which
demonstrates that the deﬁnition of the coding sequence on the molecule of DNA
and making it available for transcription are not trivial tasks. Before RNA poly-
merase starts with the transcription, dozens of proteins must bind to the whole area
of the string containing the coding sequence in question. The binding sites often
extend thousands of bases upstream and downstream of the coding sequence.4 The
process, hence, requires change of the whole higher order structure, of which DNA
is but one constituent (in eukaryotes, the structure is called chromatin: Fig. 21.1c).
Thus, the very beginning of the whole process – the identiﬁcation and selection
of a particular DNA string to be read – can be apprehended as a hermeneutic act
of the body searching over the genetic text. A related activity is the determina-
tion of the quality of the primary transcripts, that is, the selection of those parts
of the gene, which will be transcribed into RNA. The genetic text may sometimes
start at different positions (promoters) and end at various termini; in such cases
we are confronted, in fact, with a set of (partially) overlapping sequences (see also
4 This is why I try to avoid the word “gene.” We may deﬁne it as that part or the string which is
transcribed into RNA – in that Case, however, the deﬁnition will not include all the ﬂanking labels.
Or we include these regions into consideration, at the price that we cannot sharply delineate the
boundaries of the gene.

680
Anton Markoˇs (1949– )
Fig. 21.2 The path from DNA to protein. (a–c) The ﬁrst line, 3′ to 5′, is a short piece of a much
longer DNA molecule, with the part transcribed into RNA highlighted as a rectangle. In RNA
molecules, rectangles highlight parts that will be translated into the amino acid chain of protein.
TAC (AUG), initiation codon for the ﬁrst amino acid methionine (M). Arrows on the DNA symbol-
ize sites for attachment of the transcription complex (left; see Fig. 21.4) and the site of its release
from DNA (right), (a). An idealized state: the sequence of amino acids in protein directly cor-
responds, via mRNA, to the sequence of nucleotides in DNA. Both transcription and translation
proceed from left to right. (b) The coding sequence is only part of the gene, ﬂanked by transcribed

21
Excerpts from Readers of the Book of Life
681
Fig. 21.3a, b). It must therefore be decided how the text will be read. Of course,
the ratio of different variants, as well as the rate of the whole process, can also be
precisely set.
The primary transcript (i.e., the RNA molecule) may enter into a complicated
decision process in which exons (i.e., the parts that will ﬁnally become compo-
nents of the resulting molecule of mRNA) are designated. The rest of the chain –
multiple and often very long strings (introns) – is cut out of the transcript and dis-
carded (Fig. 21.2c). Its important to note that the deﬁnition of exons and introns in
a transcript depends on the cell type and its functional context. Different variants of
mRNA – hence different proteins can be obtained from a single species of primary
transcript (see, e.g., Barnier et al. 1995; Kornblihtt et al. 1996).
There is no need at this point to go into all the subtleties of RNA manipula-
tion. Instead, I invite the reader to visit a small corner of the protein zoo, which is
depicted in Fig. 21.3. Schemes of two related genes, CREB and CREM, are shown
in Fig 21.3a. The genes code for a family of similar proteins that are engaged in
performing a plethora of regulatory functions in the cell. Even the layman will rec-
ognize the similarity of both genes and will come to the conclusion that resulting
proteins will probably display similar qualities.
The protein are able – as homo- or heterodimers (CREB)2, (CREM)2 and CREB-
CREM – to bind to speciﬁc regions of DNA and thus control the expression of great
variety of genes. Each kind of dimer can bind to different parts of DNA, thus regu-
lating expression of a different set of genes. Now consider a situation in which only
genes CREB and CREM were transcribed from the whole family, and the product
of each gene is only a single species of protein. Simply by manipulating the ratio
of CREB to CREM, the occurrence of particular dimers would differ substantially
and so would the intensity the transcription regulated by a particular dimer. Now
imagine the real potential of creating dimers not with two but with the whole set of
proteins produced. Figure 21.3b shows some of possible transcripts of the CREM
gene. But the story does not end here. Figure 21.3c shows an example of protein
products obtainable by further chemical modiﬁcations of a single domain of protein
(see below).
Nursing the Neonate Protein
As discussed above, native protein produced by translation is seldom ready-made,
and the site of its synthesis may not be its ﬁnal location. Usually it is in a “pre-
pro” form that requires further processing by a variety of other proteins. Even in
◀
Fig. 21.2 (continued) but untranslated regions. The primary transcript becomes mRNA after
derivatization on both ends. (c) Standard situation in eukaryotes: the coding sequences (exons,
numbered) are interrupted by noncoding sequences (introns). The primary transcript (hnRNA) is
processed to mRNA by excising introns and splicing the exons. The splicing can lead to multiple
varieties of mRNA, that is, to manifold different proteins that all are products of a single gene (only
two shown here)

682
Anton Markoˇs (1949– )
Fig. 21.3 Heterogeneityof transcription, demonstrated for one “family” of regulatory proteins,
CREB and CREM. (a) Schematic outline of the genes. Note two starting positions PI and P2
in CREM. (b) The repertoire of CREM products. Primary transcripts are submitted to process-
ing and splicing, which leads to multiple variants of mRNA owing to the selection of exons.
Some known variants of CREM and lCER mRNAs are shown here; the set is, of course,
ﬂuid both for a given cell type and over time. (c) Regulation of protein activity by reversible

21
Excerpts from Readers of the Book of Life
683
cases when no chemical modiﬁcation is required, the molecule may not be able to
attain the conformation required: help of speciﬁc processing proteins – “chaper-
ones” – is necessary. Other proteins will supply post-translational modiﬁcations of
the native molecule, for example, creation of disulﬁde bridges, attachment of pros-
thetic groups,5 excision of parts of the polypeptide chain, or derivatization of amino
acyl residues by glycosylation, lipidation, hydroxylation, sulfatation, phosphoryla-
tion, and so forth.6 Such processing will bring enormous micro heterogeneity to the
set of products synthesized according of a single type of mRNA (Fox 1991; Kobata
1992). It will result, in turn, in subtle modiﬁcation of the function of a particular
molecule. The derivatization process may continue throughout the whole lifetime of
the protein molecule.
The protein molecule must be also recognized at the site of its synthesis (cyto-
plasm) and subsequently transported and inserted to target compartment (i.e.,
mitochondria or the extracellular matrix).7 The process of localization often starts
at the level of mRNA, which may be anchored at a speciﬁc site in the cell or
even transferred from cell to cell (e.g., in oogenesis of Drosophila). Similarly, the
newly synthesized protein must be quickly and efﬁciently transferred to the com-
partments for which, it is designed. The rapid delivery is ensured by various types
of “addresses,” that is, cues on the molecule that are deciphered by the service
machinery.
In the development of latent genetic information into the body of the protein,
then, we must presume the presence of cellular machinery (or ﬁeld?) able to per-
form and control the whole process of proteosynthesis and subsequent embedding
of the new protein into the functional context. The very presence of the new protein
may change the state of the whole network, and as a result the network may start
reading different genetic texts, and so forth. Does the description above differ from
that given in any modern textbooks? At the ﬁrst sight, no. And yet the expression
“genetic control” was never used in our story.
◀
Fig. 21.3 (continued) phosphorylation. Above, the protein CREB and three variants of the protein
CRBM, each containing the domain called P-box. Below, detail of the sequence of this domain
(each letter is a symbol for one amino acid, e.g., S for serine). Arrows point to positions that can
be phosphorylated (and dephosphorylated – the modiﬁcations are reversible); symbols with arrows
designate different protein kinases known to be able to phosphorylate the particular site (protein
phosphatases not shown). Adapted from Foulkes and Sassone-Corsi (1996)
5 Attachment of prosthetic groups refers to attachment of chemical moieties that are not amino
acids and that enable the proper function of the given protein (e.g., RNA in ribonucleoprotein,
hemin in respiratory enzymes. etc.).
6 See, for example, Alix and Hayes (1983), Huttner (1987), Gordon et al. (1991), Lis and Sharon
(1993), and Wallis (1995).
7 See, for example. Shapiro and Losick (1997), Zimmermann (1998), Gorlich and Mattaj (1996),
Pfanner (1998), and Pfanner et al. (1997).

684
Anton Markoˇs (1949– )
Reversible Controls: Chemistry Yields to Semiosis
The system of the epigenetic regulation of a protein molecule has been perfected
by the reversible control of protein conformation, which can proceed in parallel
in many parts of the molecule. The control can be applied in two ways. The ﬁrst
is allosteric regulation by regulatory ligands that bind to speciﬁc binding sites on
the protein. A second possibility is chemical modiﬁcation of speciﬁc groups on the
molecule, most frequently phosphorylation and dephosphorylation by a large set
of special enzymes – protein kinases and protein phosphatases. These regulatory
enzymes are, in turn, also subject to such regulation (Fig. 21.3c).
In the case of allostery, the regulatory ligand can simply be taken as just another
ligand that can ﬁnely adjust the processes dependent on other binding sites on the
protein molecule. Yet there is an important difference here. Regulatory molecules
do not belong to the set of common nutrients as do, for example, glucose or oxy-
gen. Nutrients are “utilized” by all cells in a more or less similar fashion. The most
prominent property of regulatory molecules is that they play the role of signs. The
function of a sign may be carried simply by the amount of the signaling molecule,
its concentration gradient in the space, ﬂuctuation of its concentration in time, com-
bination with other signs, and so forth. The signaling molecule, therefore, is not
a pointer to itself, as in the case of metabolites: it represents something else. This
“something else,” the meaning carried by the molecule, is to be deciphered, inter-
preted by the cell. And because the signaling molecule refers to something other
than itself, it can mediate different meanings to different cells in the body; thus,
for example, epinephrine will evoke different responses in the heart, liver or blood
vessels. As in the case of reading, genetic texts, here also the speciﬁc interpreta-
tion has been won by the experience of the cell, organism, lineage, species. There,
as here, the given interpretations may be strictly unequivocal, but they can be also
ﬂexible, exploratory, putting to trial several possibilities. . . sometimes detrimental,
sometimes favorable for the interpreter.
The covalent modiﬁcation (introduced by speciﬁc enzymes) is even more impres-
sive. By this process, a genuine mutation is introduced into the protein molecule
(e.g., the serine residue in the chain of amino acids is replaced by phosphoserine),
with all the consequences such a mutation can bring about to the function of the
protein. The number of protein building blocks may thus rise from the initial twenty
to many tens of different amino acid residues. What is more important, such “muta-
tions” are to a great extent reversible by the action of other proteins, The protein
network thus inﬂuences the shape and performance of an individual protein at any
given moment (Fig. 21.3c).
The advantage of the above-mentioned regulation is obvious. Instead of harbor-
ing many paralogous genes coding very similar, redundant, proteins, only a single
crude, half-ﬁnished product is coded for. The particular form required is being ﬁnely
adjusted in the process of protein synthesis (transcription, RNA processing, transla-
tion) and ontogeny (noncovalent and covalent modiﬁcation, addition of functional
group, e.g., coenzymes, etc.).

21
Excerpts from Readers of the Book of Life
685
Does not the whole process resemble genuine reading and writing, expressing the
right grammatical tense, article, preﬁxes, and sufﬁxes appropriate for the context,
instead of blind decoding the genetic message?
Redundancy: Synonyms in Cellular Functions
Despite the possibility of ﬁne epigenetic adjustment of protein function, many cel-
lular functions are also secured by a high degree of redundancy, that is, by harboring
similar paralogue genes. Redundancy, then, is secured either by paralogue proteins
expressed concurrently, or by producing a “backup” protein version whenever the
primary function aborts. In the ﬁrst arrangement, the products of different but simi-
lar genes will perform different functions, but if one gene of the set is turned down
(e.g., by a mutation), the cognate proteins will often take over the missing func-
tion and save the normal course of affairs in the cell. In contrast, backup genes
remain silent if the master copy is functioning: they become activated only in case
of the breakdown of its function (of course, what is backup in one context may be
the master function in another). Note that redundancy is typical for regulatory pro-
teins – bypasses in metabolic functions are not that common (Fig. 21.3a; see, e.g.,
Nasmyth et al. 1991; Brookﬁeld 1997a, b; see also discussion of homeotic genes in
Chapter 13).
In language terms, the same meaning can be expressed by synonyms and
circumlocutions when the right expression is not at hand.
It is estimated that an average mammalian cell expresses about 10,000 genes
(i.e., about one quarter of its genetic thesaurus). About one tenth of them, the so-
called housekeeping genes, are engaged in maintaining basic functions – they are
uniformly expressed in every cell. The rest of the set differs from one cell in the
body to another, depending on its type, differentiation state, and momentary needs.
The number of protein forms attained in the way described above may be, as I
have shown above, much higher and, moreover, subject to continual qualitative and
quantitative rebuilding.
At the microscopical level, the microheterogeneity of both space and time in
the cell is enormously complex. This is why it is hard to apply classical chemistry
terms requiring high numbers of identical entities (molecules) to environments in
the living body. Even magnitudes such as concentration, pH, and so forth, can be
deﬁned only very vaguely for such environments. This leads to uncertainties regard-
ing the functional parameters of proteins in their natural environment. Perhaps what
is needed is not a chemical theory of life, but a theory of cellular protein neural net-
works capable of learning, adaptation, memory trace construction, forgetting, and
so forth. Such a model could serve as a starting point toward a deeper understanding
of the life of the cell. Bray (1995) considers all short-term behavior of an organism
to be a result of the activity of the protein neural network; I would go further and
apply this to longer time scales. One example of such a subnetwork of an “ordinary”
transcription unit is shown in Fig. 21.4.

686
Anton Markoˇs (1949– )
Fig. 21.4
Transcriptioninitiation
complex. To start
transcription of a coding
sequence, RNA polymerase
must be brought to a very
speciﬁc context in chromatin,
which is ensured by several
protein complexes.
Regulatory sequences TATA
box and Inr help anchoring
the whole complex upstream
of the coding sequence to be
transcribed. (a) Schematic
view of the RNA polymerase
complex. (b) Detail of the
factor TFIID, which is itself a
complex of several proteins.
The whole ensemble is
embedded into, and
constitutes a part of,
chromatin (see Fig. 21.1c)
The scheme, however, is misleading in two respects. First, it gives an impression
that the whole protein complex can be neatly distinguished, excised from the cell,
and studied as such. In reality, such schemes are our abstraction from the cellular
ﬁeld of which the protein complex is normally part. Second, proteins occurring in
the nodes of such a network or ﬁeld should be taken not as points but as ﬁelds
in themselves. What is more, the ﬁeld has been around as long as life itself. The
whole ediﬁce, then, can be taken as the semantic ﬁeld of the cell. Such a ﬁeld does
not implicate the existence of a source, a center of emanation as I have shown in
Gurwitschian speculations. The reader could object that the “ﬁeld” is but a metaphor
and that strict determination of cellular function has not been ruled out. No one
would deny that some strictly deterministic processes do occur in the cell, and that
they should be taken as the starting point of all the reasoning. I only maintain that
automatisms should be considered not a basic state from which all extrapolations are
to be made but, on the contrary, a highly derived and extreme case. I try to justify
this view in the next section.
Note that the whole molecular-biological reasoning could easily be turned upside
down to provide a synchronous structuralist model with its network of interactions
leading toward phenotypic attractors (faithfully and blindly, as in the preceding
case). Here the structure becomes the formative cause of living processes, and genes

21
Excerpts from Readers of the Book of Life
687
become mere parameters of canalizing functions. In such a perspective, new phe-
notypes in evolution are nothing but the discovery of ever-present possibilities. The
evolution of the genetic text (by, e.g., the accumulation of mutations) may contribute
to organismic evolution, but it is neither its cause nor its driving force: new structures
can establish themselves even despite mutation – selection processes, because they
have always existed as a potential. The only drawback of the structuralist approach
is its inability to reify the structures, whereas genetics believes that it has performed
the trick by reifying the formative principle – information – in the gene, as a piece of
DNA. It is not important that one of these complementary views has been dominant
whereas the second has been neglected. What is important is that, in my opinion,
we cannot decide between them. Both are, furthermore, tributaries of a mechanical
worldview (however much the structuralists may deny the fact) and can do without
any self-reference, intentionality, of living beings.
Dictionary
If we stick to the metaphor of DNA as the dictionary, proteins become words that
then become “statements” in the form of higher organizational units. Some state-
ments remain unchanged for very long periods of time and could be compared to
various clichés in language (cell structures, such as centrioles or some membranous
structures, but also metabolic units – metabolons; see, e.g., Srere 1990; Ovádi 1995;
Mathews 1993). Others can be compared to the dynamic and ever-changing ﬂow of
speech. An example of the second case may be the short-term coalitions of proteins
evoked by the presence of growth factors (see, e.g., Pawson and Scott 1997).
The classic iconography of biochemical textbooks presents a protein molecule
as a spatial distribution of beads connected by cords of different strength. In such a
representation, a conformational change is coupled with a local disruption of some
bonds and the creation of new ones. The word “local” is fundamental in this context,
suggesting a ﬁnal number of interactions, with a conformational change being a pro-
cess of gradual manipulation with each of them separately. The transition between
two stable “minima” is thus understood as a passage through a continuum of a great
number of intermediary states (deﬁned by their energy content). Problems with this
model start when it is declared to be reality itself and serves as a background for
generalizing theses concerning cell regulations, differentiation, evolution, and so
forth. Moving in such a direction can only end with a machine conception of the
cell’s “functioning”:
I suggest an alternative view that I believe will reveal aspects unknown or
underestimated by the classic model. Here the protein plays the role of a ﬁeld
with internal, nonlocal rules of conformational transition (it follows that discrete
intermediates do not exist). Different shapes (conformations) represent “grammat-
ical forms” obedient to the species-speciﬁc “grammar” of the cell. As I have
shown, the speaker (i.e., the cell) reigns over an extensive selection of different
“words” and “grammatical ﬁgures” present as a plethora of protein patterns, of their

688
Anton Markoˇs (1949– )
modiﬁcations, and of multiprotein structures. When necessary, new basic forms of
“words” can be retrieved from the dictionary (i.e., the genetic thesaurus) and modi-
ﬁed in the process of “speech” according to reigning grammatical rules. Elementary
protein utterances then assemble into higher order ﬁelds (discourses).
Consider, as an illustration, that the word “dog” has many meanings in the
English language. First of all, it denotes a familiar domesticated animal. The mean-
ing is then carried over to any carnivore of the family Canidae or, more precisely, the
male of such species. The meaning can then be transferred to denote various kinds of
unattractive or despicable persons and even to something worthless or of extremely
poor quality, or to an utter failure. The word can also be used for mechanical tools.
As a verb, it can be used as a synonym of tracking and chasing or for performing per-
functory actions (“dogging”). One can lead a “dog’s life” and learn to “let sleeping
dogs lie.” Add constellations (Canis Minor and Major), hot dogs, dog days, sun-
dog, and dogﬁsh. The word “dog” can have various conformations (dogs, doggy,
dogging. . . but, e.g., “doggation” is not allowed in English). Redundancy is ensured
by using many synonyms (hound, bitch, mongrel, etc.). The word “dog” bears a
“dictionary” semantic ﬁeld that represents an average value of all meanings; differ-
ent semantic ﬁelds from dog breeding, zoology, poetic language, suburb slang, and
so forth, are superposed over the dictionary entry. Still other nuances can be found
in individual usage. In the act of discourse, individual higher order semantic ﬁelds
are constructed. Understanding the meaning of the word as used in a given discourse
is a hermeneutic task that will cause the ﬁeld to “collapse” into a single meaning.
Now, it is true that a language is a kind of “agreement” among the speakers.
In English, one can imagine replacement of the word dog by, say, Hund or pes
(“dog” in German and Czech, respectively) or even some invented word like lihue
(of course, not any word would do, the unpronounceable ksfrachs would not be
accepted). Perhaps such a replacement would even work, but it would leave a terrible
scar on the language for a long time before new bonds to “hot dog,” “sun-dog,” and
the like become established. Isomorphism does exist in other languages – the Polish
dog and the Czech doga for mastiff can be easily recognized, and the same holds
for the French doguin(e) for pug or Czech buldok for a bull-dog; in all such cases,
however, the transferred word, lacks the original semantic ﬁeld it had in English
and enters the semantic ﬁeld of the language in question, with completely different
grammatical conformations. Finally, one has to learn that the word “dogma” has
nothing in common with dogs.
The whole problem of characterizing living processes may perhaps reside in the
emphasis that is placed on “processes” rather than on “living.” Such a functionalist
approach is typical of our civilization and spreads into life, science, medicine, world
views, and so forth.
Many of us became totally disgusted by the lessons in our mother tongue at
primary school. In my experience with Czech and Slovak schools, through these
lessons the language became transformed into “language processes” and required
endless grammar exercises and dictations; there was almost no time left for dis-
cussion and essays. The teacher unequivocally prescribed the “hermeneutics”: she
knew how to interpret the text, and the pupils were required only to memorize it.

21
Excerpts from Readers of the Book of Life
689
The situation is similar to many in biology, where speciﬁc interpretations found in
the textbooks are supposed to be the only ones allowed to be taken into account.
The situation can be compared with that of foreigners learning some words and
grammar and being able to compose grammatically correct sentences. These words
and sentences may even be fully comprehensible to native speaker but will still look
very strange to them, and native speakers would never utter those phrases them-
selves. (e.g., native English speakers living in Czech Republic are always surprised
by the phrase “We shall slowly go.” They hear it from Czech visitors who are about
to leave. Of course, it is a translation of the Czech phrase used at such occasions.
In this case, Native English speakers will even understand it, yet they would never
use it.) Similarly; we move in science into an unknown language with unknown
grammar and try, with a dictionary in our hands, to compose grammatically correct
sentences.
In the quest to understand living processes, proteins were removed from their
cellular context, and their properties have been corroborated in minute detail.
Experiments under controlled conditions create a context-free “grammar,” similar
to giving all the tenses of a verb in a language textbook. Moreover, most knowledge
of proteins came from the study of common metabolic enzymes: they occur in high
concentrations, can be easily extracted, and remain stable upon extraction, and their
properties can be easily studied. These proteins have the same role that grammatical
standards play in linguistics and all newly studied proteins are studied in the light
of such standards. This approach was, and is, invaluable, especially in the study of
the common metabolic enzymes. At the same time, we tend to prescribe only a sin-
gle “reading frame” for natural “speech acts”: only those that were created in the
laboratory are taken as legitimate.
In the language metaphor, the description of the molecular functioning of cells
as relying on automatisms is comparable with the world of laws, public notices,
directions for use, recipes and manuals, and, of course, scientiﬁc deﬁnitions. In
all such cases, we tend to encounter simple language, precisely deﬁned meanings
of words, and simple sentence structures. The languages of such text forms (of
course, only when written carefully) are not problematic, but this comes at a high
cost: the meaning can be totally changed or even destroyed by a single typograph-
ical error, incorrectly situated negation, or improper synonym. Closer examination
would reveal how much effort, processing of the meaning of words, and conceptual
reﬁnement has come from the past. What is seemingly simple and uncomplicated
carries with it much local and historical context and often cannot be translated to
other loci, times, or languages. It is fascinating to consider the presuppositions
that should be fulﬁlled for us to be able to understand far more complex texts, for
example, Euclidean theorems.
Even more illustrative is a thesis by Umberto Eco devoted to the genre of comic
strips, for which he uses as a sample case one of the earliest comics: reading Steve
Canyon confronts us with an autonomous genre based on the existence of code
shared by the readers. The author of Steve Canyon has recourse to this code when-
ever he has to articulate the message addressed to the intelligence, imagination,
or taste of the readers (Eco 1964). Transfer of such structures into a community

690
Anton Markoˇs (1949– )
that does not know them or accepts only some of their facets leads to endless mis-
understandings and conﬂicts and long-winded explanations. Such abbreviations of
linguistic, historical, and local contexts, however, represent only a marginal aspect
of the natural language. Language is rather characterized by the intentional fuzzi-
ness of the means used and, above all, high redundancy of messages. This is why the
context will usually smooth over small stumbles; omitted words or spelling mistakes
in texts can usually be tolerated without the breakdown of the message.
Metabolic pathways usually proceed automatically – it is a good measure of cred-
ibility that they always work in the expected manner. The cell does not have to bother
with an accurate study of the situation or go through a laborious decision-making
process – things have already been settled and are part of a shared code. Automatic
reactions save time; they are quick and usually correct. Because of the very existence
of the code, the cell can set aside the trivialities of everyday working arid pay more
attention to things that are truly important. Automatic reactions are characteristic of
all levels of living (e.g., cleavage of an egg, gait, instincts, conditioned reﬂexes, or
driving a car). Sometimes there is no way back, and the whole behavior is locked
in automatisms (e.g., insect instincts). Sometimes controls allow intervention when
necessary (as in driving).
Classic biochemistry came into existence as a description of a biochemical
automaton driven by energy potentials, with feedback from the concentrations of
metabolites. All the nuances that followed (e.g., regulation of protein function) were
absorbed into this original conception and became the starting point for expansion
to other functions (signaling pathways) and for the description of a cell as such.
This approach was conditioned by the existence of defects in the elementary pro-
tein grammar, for example, by mutations changing the meaning of the “sentence”
(e.g., metabolic diseases such as sickle cell anemia), which is fairly comparable to
a typing error in codiﬁed sentences in language.
The situation is analogous to the above-mentioned language of notices, comics,
road signs, and gestures, where no redundancy is allowed. They represent incredibly
efﬁcient abbreviations, but they work “for free” only in the community of users
that developed them. Other mutations are not visible at the ﬁrst sight, but they may
supply material for evolutionary modiﬁcations.
A protein catalyzing a given reaction or transporting a given ion across a mem-
brane does not usually have many degrees of freedom: it must fulﬁll the needs of
a particular reaction. Different forms of the same protein are usually interpreted as
adaptations to a different environment. Two or three replacements of amino acids
may be interpreted as a cause of why the species inhabits a niche different from
that of a closely related species.8 But living beings need not sit back and wait
for an adaptational change delivered by a mutation. A good example of this was
recently found in yeast. The yeast cell harbors two types of glucose transporter in its
membrane. Changing the ratio of the proteins can optimize the glucose intake in
8 See, for example. Gillespie (1991), Zimmermann (1998), Graves et al. (1983), Graves and
Somero (1982), and Watt (1977, 1983).

21
Excerpts from Readers of the Book of Life
691
standard environments. In the case of special needs, however, the cell can produce
multiple copies of both genes and perform recombination among the “slave” copies
(leaving the “master” copies untouched), providing a whole spectrum of transport
proteins. The cell is able to experiment with such special copies without changing
the “master” copy (Brown and Rosenzweig 1998). Large-scale recombinations tak-
ing place in bacteria are described in Chapter 14. In multicellular organisms, similar
processes allow, for example, the construction of genes for antibodies and T recep-
tors. But above all, it is in the massive recombination in gametogenesis that new
versions of the dictionary are produced. The dictionary does allow adjustments!
Another way of achieving an optimal setup is redundancy of performance, that is,
a higher degree of freedom, of regulatory pathways, allowing them to express “the
same” by different constituents of the pathway or by different pathways.
Proteins Emancipated
The main objective of hermeneutic biology should be to get rid of the genocentric
view that takes the genome as a recipe for building the body. It should pose questions
about the builder, who takes the genome as a mere dictionary of the language in
which the recipe is written. Proteins – “words” uttered in the language – enter into
complicated syntactic and semantic relations, which constitute the cellular parole.
The cell is thus a materialized parole.
From this viewpoint, we can pose methodological questions about what under-
standing can be gained from the contemporary genomic era, which is witnessing
the acquisition of complete sequences of genomes. The genome is understood as a
complete dictionary and source book of a cell, an individual, a species. Comparative
analyses will undoubtedly lead to a deeper understanding of the richness and evo-
lutionary position of a given language. But now another step is needed: to proceed
from the dictionary to utterances. The ﬁeld of grammar is being mapped very exten-
sively – for example, regulatory and metabolic networks. A new move in the ﬁeld
is the interconnection of gene dictionaries with protein utterances, as illustrated by
the KEGG database (Kanehisa 2000). The semantics of new science is no longer
a Cinderella, even if it is still hidden under names such as “mechanisms of the
regulation of gene expression.”
The utterances of the protein continuum themselves may; in turn, appear to be a
higher order dictionary for the ontogeny of a multicellular organism. This aspect is
treated in Chapter 13.
The Text and Its Reader
In the 1950s and 1960s, living beings were seen mainly in terms of biochemical
pathways and chemical (equilibrium) thermodynamics. Their functioning was lim-
ited by energy resources and concentrations of inputs, intermediates, and outputs.
Cells were described as machines driven by the difference in the free energy of

692
Anton Markoˇs (1949– )
inputs and outputs. Moreover, the whole image was strictly cyclical. From these
cyclical events extrapolations were made to acyclical ones, and ontogeny became
a process that is highly controlled by a deterministic genetic program. There is
no need to give a full summary here: it can be found in current textbooks and
monographs on the topic.
As mentioned above, the older concept of cells as bags full of enzymes and driven
by a program was later replaced by the idea of an elaborate network of structures
and information ﬂows. Cells have active access to their genetic thesaurus: they select
from it and interpret it in an unceasing confrontation with their own time and space
(i.e., coordinates within the tissue or organism) and with inputs from their environ-
ment. This work with the “source code” is dependent on the quality of the text itself
and the “tuning” of the cell (the above-mentioned coordinates. physiology, morphol-
ogy, and history) and is indeed to be viewed as a hermeneutic task. A medium for
this interpretative work, the “search for meaning,” is to hand in the form of nonlocal
morphogenetic ﬁelds, concentration gradients, complicated dynamic networks of
macromolecules (extracellular matrix, cytoskeleton, nucleoskeleton), and morpho-
logical structures of higher orders and longer duration.9 DNA is thus far from being
the algorithm prescribing how the body will look and how it will behave. It is a gen-
uine text to be read by an informed (or better initiated) reader. The cell, the body, is
an in-formation of experience (Chapter 3). Information is in fact “contained” in the
whole cell, a multicellular body equipped with temporal, spatial, internal, and exter-
nal cues and rules as to how to decipher the meaning of a great variety of signals.
Changes in the interpretation of any of this multilayered information accumulated
over billions of years can also be considered mutations and may even result in mis-
interpretations ending in aberrant development, or tumors, but from time to time
also to a new morphological variant.
In the quest to recognize the ultimate and simple causes of life, biology became
fascinated by a single kind of molecule: those able to perpetuate their structure –
nucleic acids, molecules that can serve as a medium for digital encoding of strings
of signs. But, strangely, the situation is reversed: whereas all molecules in the cell
can indeed be perpetuated over generations, in the case of the molecule of DNA this
is not true – owing to recombination processes in gametogenesis! Neubauer, in the
foreword to the Czech edition of this book (Markoš 2000), commented:
What is the difference between the replication of nucleic acids, and repeated chemical
production of other molecules? Why only in the ﬁrst case we have a need to stress the iden-
tity and continuity? Is it in the fact that all molecules are “produced” by other molecules,
whereas DNA is a product of DNA as its faithful replica?. . . No: nucleic acids must be built
enzymatically as any other biomolecules. And they themselves participate in many organic
syntheses having nothing to do with production of their own copies. From the chemical
and molecular-biological perspective the participation of DNA on its self-replication is of
little importance, and all the emphasis given to preﬁxes “self-” and “auto-” only play on
words. The conception that the “cell controls its own replication” describes the cell division
9 See, for example, Edelman et al., (1990), Müller (1996), Gilbert (1994), and Wolpert et al. (1998).

21
Excerpts from Readers of the Book of Life
693
truly; in contrast, the phrase that “DNA controls its replication” will hardly do justice to the
essence of replication. (p. 18)
The difference is in the different order of being. Bodies and their parts (cells,
organs) do appear again and again in each generation, as do molecules, but they
can only more or less resemble each other, whereas molecules can be absolutely
identical. This is because bodies are from the order of Neubauerian eidos, whereas
simple molecules are from the order of structures. Individual but identical molecules
will – under given conditions – behave uniformly; the rule does not hold for individ-
ual living bodies. I maintain that proteins are of the order of bodies, not structures
or molecules in the sense in which the term was developed for particles of simple
chemical species. A lot of effort must be developed in the laboratory to restrain their
hermeneutic properties and to study them as molecular entities.
Epilogue
I am deeply convinced that a single objective and noncontradictory view of the
world is impossible, and that for this reason we cannot limit ourselves to a sin-
gle preferred image of the world. By “we” I mean all cognizant beings – not only
humans with their culture and history, but all living beings. We all learn, on short
time scales, to breathe in this world, into which we were thrown as the smallest
branches of the tree of life, which has lasted for four billion years. Our “thrown-
ness” is based on the fact that our predecessors left at our disposal a digital text-the
inscription of experience – that is to be confronted with the world we belong to.
They also left behind their experience, embodied as our nature, our bodies – or
rather, the knowledge of how to build them. The environment, the frame for our
thoughts and behavior, ideas about what is adequate (equity, epieikeia, decorum),
belong to another class of legacy. Because of these two kinds of tradition, we feel
at home in our world. But “being at home” is not an obvious and automatic state –
it requires a high degree of hermeneutic effort. The common world in which we
all participate often requires a radical change in our system of values. Nothing is
“made” forever, “so that”: cultures that relied on the constancy of the world col-
lapsed in the ﬁrst breeze that came from an unexpected direction. The same holds
for species, which in this book I have compared to cultures. We do not live in a grad-
ualist world lasting for millions of years, which has brought about a perfection of
forms and physiology, tending toward perfect harmony! The game is still going on
here and now; with all the equipment at hand. Species – cultures that cannot revalue
their being according to the demand of time – must yield to other, more ﬂexible
outlines. The past and the future serve as prompts. The sociobiologists (sorry: evo-
lutionary ethologists) are right in that we carry with us all sorts of ballast that – once,
and in certain contexts- appeared to be useful. But the Golden Age with a constant
environment never existed – in the past, as now, hypotheses about the world were in
mutual conﬂict, and to be able to decide between them was, and is, a hermeneutic

694
Anton Markoˇs (1949– )
task (or art). We carry past layouts, and in the context of the present instant we reap-
praise, modify, recall or forget, pick up or throw them away, sometimes with fatal
consequences, sometimes with an aspiration to reach the stars.
The hermeneutic endeavor is very demanding of intellect, time, and resources.
But what kind of creature is hidden under the notion of “hermeneutic biologists”?
What do their working hours look like? Well, you will not recognize them by their
doings-they are busy performing standard biology like anyone else. Maybe in the
introductions and discussions of their papers you will recognize slightly different
accents and suggestions (see, e.g., the slight wording modiﬁcations illustrated in the
introduction to part III) opening new realms within the framework of the current
paradigm – no revolutionary zealots changing current paradigms! They know that
plurality of view is the most precious gem in the quest for wisdom.
I strongly believe that an organism cannot be deﬁned solely in terms of thermo-
dynamic, biochemical, and information magnitudes. If we want to understand the
difference between living beings and machines (however complicated), then mean-
ing (i.e., an internal interpretation of the situation, not forced on us from outside)
should become the central focus of our interest. It is here that, in my opinion, the
border between the living and nonliving lies. Understanding the hermeneutic situ-
ation present in us, in all living beings, is one of the ﬁrst steps on our long path in
such a direction.
References
Abram, D. (1996). The mechanical and the organic: Epistemological consequences of the Gaia
hypothesis. In: Bunyard, P. (Ed.) Gaia in Action: Science of the Living Earth. Edinburgh: Floris,
pp. 234–247.
Alix, J. -H., Hayes, D. (1983). Why are macromolecules modiﬁed post-synthetically? Biology of
the Cell 47, 139–160.
Atlan, H., Koppel, M. (1990). The cellular computer DNA: Program or data? Bulletin of
Mathematical Biology 52, 335–348.
Barnier, J. V., et al. (1995). The mouse B-raf gene encodes multiple protein isoforms with tissue-
speciﬁc expression. Journal of Biological Chemistry 270, 23381–23389.
Bateson, G. (1988). Mind and Nature. A Necessary Unity. Toronto: Bantam.
Bodnar, J. W., et al. (1997): Deciphering the language of the genome. Journal of Theoretical
Biology 189, 183–193.
Bohr, J., et al. (1996). The formation of protein structure. Europhysics News 27, 50–54.
Bonhoeffer, S., et al. (1996). No signs of hidden language in noncoding DNA. Physical Review
Letters 76, 1977.
Bray, D. (1995). Protein molecules as computational elements in living cells. Nature 376, 307–312.
Brookﬁeld, J. F. Y. (1997a). Genetic redundancy. Advances in Genetics 36, 137–155.
Brookﬁeld, J. F. Y. (1997b). Genetic redundancy: Screening for selection in yeast. Current Biology
7, R366–R368.
Brown, C. J., Rosenzweig, R. F. (1998). Multiple duplications of yeast hexose transport genes in
response to selection in a glucose-limited environment. Molecular Biology and Evolution 15,
931–942.
Bryngelson, J. D., et al. (1995). Funnels, pathways, and the energy landscape of protein folding: A
synthesis. Proteins: Structure, Function, and Genetics 21, 167–195.
Clegg, J. S. (1992). Cellular infrastructure and metabolic organization. Current Topics in Cellular
Regulation 33, 3–14.

21
Excerpts from Readers of the Book of Life
695
Eco, U. (1964). Apocalittici e integrati. Milano, Italy: Bompiani. Partial translation into English:
Apocalypse Postponed. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1994.
Edelman, G. M., et al. (Eds.) (1990). Morphoregulatory Molecules. New York: Wiley.
Fiala, J. (1991). Biologické základy poznáni (H. Maturana) [Biological fundamentals of knowledge
(H. Maturana)]. Scientia et Philosophia 1, 35–55.
Foulkes, N. S., Sassone-Corsi, P. (1996). CREM: A bZip transcription factor central to the cAMP
nuclear response. In: Goodbourn, S. (Ed.) Eukaryotic Gene Transcription. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, pp. 59–101.
Fox, J. L. (1991). Microheterogeneity of biological macromolecules. ASM News 57, 310–316.
Gilbert, S. F. (1994). Developmental Biology. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer.
Gillespie, J. H. (1991). The Causes of Molecular Evolution. New York: Oxford University Press.
Goodsell, D. S. (1991). Inside a living cell. Trends in Biochemical Sciences 16, 203–206.
Gordon, J. I., et al. (1991). Protein N-myristoylation. Journal of Biological Chemistry 266,
8647–8650.
Gorlich, D., Mattaj, I. W. (1996). Nucleocytoplasmic transport. Science 271, 1513–1518.
Gould, S. J. (1996). The Mismeasure of Man. New York: Norton.
Graves, J. E., Somero, G. (1982). Electrophoretic and functional enzymic evolution in four species
of eastern Paciﬁc barracudas from different thermal environments. Evolution 36, 97–106.
Graves, J. E., et al. (1983). Kinetic and electrophoretic differentiation of lactate dehydrogenases of
teleost species from the Atlantic and Paciﬁc coasts of Panama. Evolution 37, 30–37.
Hess, B., Mikhailov. A. (1995). Microscopic self-organization in living cells: A study of time
matching. Journal of Theoretical Biology 176, 181–184.
Hess, B., Mikhailov, A. (1996). Transition from molecular chaos to coherent spiking of enzymic
reactions in small spatial volumes. Biophysical Chemistry 58, 365–368.
Hofstadter, D. R. (1979). Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid. New York: Vintage.
Huttner. W. (1987). Protein tyrosine sulfation. Trends in Biochemical Sciences 12, 361–363.
Israeloff, N. E., et al. (1996). Can Zipf distinguish language from noise in noncoding DNA?
Physical Review Letters 76, 1976.
Jacob, F. (1974). The Logic of Living Systems. London: Allen Laine.
Kanehisa, M. (2000). Post-genome Informatics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kant. I. (1988). The Critique of Pure Reason, the Critique of Practical Reason and Other Ethical
Treatises, the Critique of Judgement, 30th ed. Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica, Inc.
Kobata, A. (1992). Structures and functions of the sugar chains of glycoproteins. European Journal
of Biochemistry 209, 483–501.
Kornblihtt, et al. (1996). The ﬁbronectin gene as a model for splicing and transcription studies.
FASEB Journal 10, 248–257.
Kováˇc, L. (1999/2000). Potreba syntézy prirodných a kultúrnych vied I–IV. [A need for uniﬁca-
tion of the natural and cultural sciences, pts. 1–4]. Vesmir 78, 644–649, 697–700, 79, 46–49,
105–109.
Lewin. K. (1922). Der Begriff der Genese in Physik. Biologie und Entwicklungsgeschichte [The
Concept of Genesis in Physics, Biology, and Evolution]. Berlin: Springier.
Lis, H., Sharon, N. (1993). Protein glycosylation. Structural and functional aspects. European
Journal of Biochemistry 218, 1–27.
Mantegna, R. N., et al, (1994). Systematic analysis of coding and noncoding DNA sequences using
methods of statistical linguistics. Physical Review Letters 73, 3169–3172.
Markoš, A. (2000). Tajemstvi hladiny. Hermeneutika ´zivého [the Czech version of this book].
Prague, Czech Republic: Vesmir.
Matthews, E. S., White. S. (1993). Electron transfer proteins – enzymes. Current Opinion in
Structural Biology 3, 902–911.
Müller, W. A. (1996). Developmental Biology. Heidelberg: Springer.
Nasmyth, K., et al. (1991). Some facts and thoughts on cell cycle control in yeast. Cold Spring
Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology 56, 9–16.
Neubauer, Z. (1990). Za kreacionismus a vitalismus [For creationism and vitalism]. In: Šetlik, I.
(Ed.) Hledáni Spoleˇcného Jazyka. Prague. Czech Repulic: Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences
Institute of Physiology, pp. 138–147.

696
Anton Markoˇs (1949– )
Neubauer, Z. (1996). Mimo dobro a zlo: Nietszchova biologická ontologie [Beyond good and evil:
Biological ontology of Nietzsche]. Kritický Sbornik 16, 15–22.
Neubauer. Z. (1997). Esse obiectivum – esse intentionale. Cestou k fenomenologické biologii.[Esse
obiectivum – esse intentionale. Towards phenomenological biology]. Science and Philosophy
8, 113–160.
Neubauer, Z. (2001). Biomoc. život jako v˚ule k moci. [Biopower. Life as a will toward power.].
Available at: http://www.vhled.cz, accessed May 2001.
Ovádi J. (1995). Cell Architecture and Metabolite Channeling. Heidelberg: Springer.
Pawson, T., Scott, J. D. (1997). Signaling through scaffold, anchoring, and adapter proteins.
Science 278, 2075–2080.
Pfanner, N. (1998). Mitochondrial import: Crossing the aqueous intermembrane space. Current
Biology 8, R262–R265.
Pfanner, N., et al. (1997). Mitochondrial preprotein translocase. Annual Review of Cell and
Developmental Biology 13, 25–51.
Popov, O., et al. (1996). Linguistic complexity of protein sequences as compared to texts of human
languages. BioSystems 38, 65–74.
Porter, K. R., et al. (1983). The cytoplasmic matrix. Modern Cell Biology 2, 259–302.
Ptashne, M., Gann, A (1998). Imposing speciﬁcity by localization: Mechanism and evolvability.
Current Biology 8, R812–R822.
Ricoeur, E. (1974). The Conﬂict of Interpretations: Essays in Hermeneutics. Evanston, IL:
Northwestern University Press.
Ricoeur, E. (1976). Interpretation Theory: Discourse and the Surplus of Meaning. Fort Worth:
Texas Christian University Press.
Ruddon, R. W., Bedows, E. (1997). Assisted protein folding. Journal of Biological Chemistry 272,
3125–3128.
Ruyer, R. (1974). La Gnose de Princeton [The Princeton Gnosis]. Paris: Fayard.
Schaff, J., et al. (1997). A general computational framework for modeling cellular structure and
function. Biophysical Journal 73, 1135–1146.
Searls, D. B. (1992). The linguistics of DNA. American Scientist 80, 579–591.
Shapiro, L., Losick, R. (1997). Protein localization and cell fate in bacteria. Science 276, 712–718.
Srere, P. A. (1990). Citric acid cycle redux. Trends in Biochemical Sciences 15, 411–412.
Stubbleﬁeld, E. (1986). A theory of developmental control by a program encoded in the genome.
Journal of Theoretical Biology 118, 129–143.
Tsonis. A. A., et al. (1997). Is DNA a language? Journal of Theoretical Biology 184, 25–29.
Voss, R. E. (1996). Comment on “linguistic” features of noncoding DNA sequences. Physical
Review Letters 76, 1978.
Wallis, G. A. (1995). The importance of being sulfated. Current Biology 5, 225–227.
Watt, W. B. (1977). Adaptations at speciﬁc loci. I. Natural selection on phosphoglucose isomerase
of Colias butterﬂies: Biochemical and population aspects. Genetics 87, 177–194.
Watt, W. B. (1983). Adaptation at speciﬁc loci. II. Demographic and biochemical elements in the
maintenance of the Colias PGI polymorphism. Genetics 103, 691–724.
Welch, G. R., Easterby, J. S. (1994). Metabolic channeling versus diffusion: Transition-time
analysis. Trends in Biochemical Sciences 19, 193–197.
Westerhoff, H. V., Welch, G. R. (1992). Enzyme organization and the direction of metabolic ﬂow –
physicochemical considerations. Current Topics in Cellular Regulation 33, 361–390.
Wilson, E. O. (1998). Consilience. The Unity of Knowledge. New York: Knopf.
Wolpert, L., et al. (1998). Principles of Development. London: Current Biology.
Zimmermann, R. (1998). The role of molecular chaperones in protein transport into the mammalian
endoplasmic reticulum. Biological Chemistry 379, 275–282.

Chapter 22
The Cybersemiotic Model of Communication:
An Evolutionary View on the Threshold between
Semiosis and Informational Exchange
Søren Brier (1951– )
Introduction and Commentary: Søren Brier
In establishing a new framework, I also hope to create a third culture, one that transcends
the incommensurability between C.P. Snow’s two cultures: science-technology, and the
humanities versus social sciences. I am trying to draw a map onto which a multitude of
viewpoints can be plotted and their subject areas characterized and compared with other
approaches. By erecting this framework, I hope to expand the dialogue between sciences,
the humanities, the social sciences, philosophy, and the existential quest to broaden our
concept of reason in accordance with my stance towards making common frames for the
open and systematic pursuits of knowledge and meaning.
S. Brier (2008: 13)
Because the domain of investigation that biosemiotics encompasses – i.e., the
investigation of sign use, as it may be observable in the activity of any living sys-
tem, at any level of its organization – is so diverse and complex, the accomplishment
of interdisciplinary synthesis and the search for unifying explanatory principles
have become increasingly pressing concerns. Having devoted over twenty years to
a focused attempt at synthesizing insights from ﬁrst- and second-order cybernet-
ics theory, ethology, sociology, embodied cognitive science and philosophy of mind
within a framework of Peircean sign logic, Danish biosemiotican Søren Brier has
articulated a cybersemiotic framework for the understanding of animal and human
evolution, communication, and cognition.
Winner of the prestigious Warren McCulloch Award from the American Society
of Cybernetics in 2008, Søren Brier has long been recognized as one of biosemi-
otic’s most interdisciplinary thinkers. Born in Copenhagen, Denmark, on July 12,
1951, Brier undertook his Master’s Degree studies in biology from the University of
Copenhagen supplemented with courses in psychology and brain processes, com-
parative psychology, and philosophy of science, earning his degree with a thesis
entitled “A critical and historical examination of ethology’s explanatory concepts
of perception, motivation and action” (Adfærdens årsager) that foreshadowed much
of his later writings in biosemiotics. Indeed, Jesper Hoffmeyer’s early writings in
Danish had inspired much of Brier’s own thinking at this time, and Hoffmeyer
himself was a member of Brier’s evaluation committee. Awarded a gold medal
in psychology for his essay on “the usefulness of hierarchical and probabilistic
697
D. Favareau, Essential Readings in Biosemiotics, Biosemiotics 3,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9650-1_22, C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010

698
Søren Brier (1951– )
models of motivation” Brier was simultaneously awarded a research fellowship at
the Psychological Laboratorium at the University of Copenhagen from 1981 to
1983, in order to continue research into the evolution of human cognition, sig-
niﬁcation and communication. His participation in the variety of interdisciplinary
discussion groups then revolving around such topics led him into the orbit of Jesper
Hoffmeyer’s nascent biosemiotic community (which was then meeting under the
name of the Danish Society for the Semiotics of Nature) in 1986.
That year also, Brier founded the interdisciplinary journal Paradigma, which,
through his collaboration with his colleague Ib Ravn, expanded Danish interest in
second order cybernetics and autopoiesis theory. Brier was editor of this transdisci-
plinary journal, which attained a circulation of over one thousand copies per issue
in Denmark, until 1990, when the journal came to the attention of American Society
for Cybernetics president Fred Steier. The overwhelmingly positive reception that
his idea received at the ASC led eventually to Brier replacing Paradigma with
the founding of the peer-reviewed quarterly Cybernetics and Human Knowing in
1992, with the collaboration of Steier. Supported by researchers such as Humberto
Maturana, Francisco Varela, Heinz von Foerster, Niklas Luhmann, Dirk Baecker,
Thomas Sebeok, Claus Emmeche and Jesper Hoffmeyer, Brier he continues to edit
Cybernetics and Human Knowing to this day.1
In 1994, Brier earned his Ph.D. in Philosophy of Information Science at the
Institute for the Study of Mathematics and Physics at Roskilde University, Denmark.
He was awarded the terminal D. Phil degree in 2006, and is currently a Professor
in the Semiotics of Information, Cognition and Communication Sciences at the
Department of International Culture and Communication Studies at Copenhagen
Business School. Since 1979, Brier has published over 170 scholarly articles, as
well as six books in Danish, and one in English (2008). This latter volume is enti-
tled Cybersemiotics: Why Information is Not Enough and is the culmination of
his thirty year effort to forge a scientiﬁcally viable interface between cybernetic
information science, autopoiesis, system theory, epistemology, and a Peircean based
biosemiotics.
Christening this explanatory and investigative framework “Cybersemiotics,”
Brier’s work proceeds from a grounding in the cybernetic theory of complex, adap-
tive systems, as it has developed from Norbert Wiener’s (1894–1964) mechanically-
inspired feedback models – or “ﬁrst-order” cybernetics – through the observer-
implicated “second order cybernetics” of Gregory Bateson (1904–1980) and Heinz
von Foerster (1911–2002), and as it has later been extended speciﬁcally into the
biological realm by Humberto Maturana (1928– ) and Francisco J. Varela’s (1946–
2001) concepts of autopoiesis. Maturana and Varela understood their ‘autopoietic’
1 Brier’s editorial and committee work – like his scholarly output – is prodigious, as he also serves
on the Editorial Board of the journals System Research and Behavioral Sciences Biosemiotics,
The Journal of Trans-person Studies, Triple C: The Journal of Cognition Communication and
Cooperation and Signs, and on the Board of the Science of Information Institute, the Foundation
of Information Science, and the Sociocybernetic Research Group of the International Sociological
Association.

22
The Cybersemiotic Model of Communication
699
framework as an attempt to explicate the ways in which an organism continu-
ally self-organizes and self-maintains itself, yet remains ‘structurally coupled’ to
its environment. Niklas Luhmann (1827–1998), in turn, built upon Maturana and
Varela’s ideas in an attempt to understand both social communication and the
structure of the individual human psyche as semi-autonomous systems that are yet
deeply inter-connected through the process of mutually inter-penetrative structural
coupling.
After having worked within this broad “cybernetic” tradition for many years,
however, Brier comes to the conclusion that – for all of their otherwise critically
important explanatory power in addressing the very real phenomena of decen-
tralized, emergent organization in complex systems – neither any of the existing
“ﬁrst-order” nor “second-order” cybernetic frameworks (including the systems
theory of Luhmann) can satisfactorily account for the phenomena of genuine sig-
niﬁcation and subjectivity in the natural world – much less for that species-speciﬁc
variety of subjectivity that manifests in the multi-leveled cybernetic organization of
human beings as “ﬁrst-person experience.”
Yet because the biological speciﬁcity of animal subjectivity plays such an impor-
tant role in the co-evolution of species, however – and because the semiotic
speciﬁcity of human subjectivity is inextricable from even the most “objective” sci-
entiﬁc explanations of phenomena (as physicists such as Einstein and Heisenberg
remind us) – Brier, along with many another biosemiotician, understands that one
of biosemiotics’ most important tasks at this time is to rehabilitate and to restore
to the concepts of signiﬁcation, meaning and “subjectivity” as a naturalistically
understandable and scientiﬁcally examinable phenomenon.
Accordingly, Brier ﬁnds both Charles S. Peirce’s semiotic triadic logic and Jakob
von Uexküll’s Umweltlehre to be particularly helpful correctives to the explanatorily
unsatisfactory “two-valued logic” of organism-environment duality still endemic to
much cybernetic theory. For example: Maturana and Varela, he notes,
see autopoietic living systems as ‘closed’ in their spatial and temporal organization and
reproduction. They are only ‘open’ to the world through their structural couplings with it.
Multicellular organisms are second order couplings among cells, and societies are third
order couplings among organisms. Luhmann turns this into a view of social organizations
as autopoietic systems created by communication . . . [Yet, he, too] has conceptualized
the three biological, psychological and socio-communicative levels as closed systems.
Although they are all present in the human being and functioning between them, there is no
direct ‘inner connection’ between them (2001: 798–799).
Understanding the inter-penetration taking place between such multiply embed-
ded and interdependent systems is the project of Brier’s cybersemiotics, which
weds insights from second-order cybernetic theory with insights from Jakob von
Uexküll’s Umweltlehre and from Charles S. Peirce’s systemic logic of sign rela-
tions. Uexküll’s Umweltlehre, notes Brier, does not artiﬁcially separate organism
and environment – and by so not doing, provides the framework for an “intrasemi-
otic” understanding whereby meaning can and does arise from the interactional
“closure” afforded by the generative functional cycle of perception, action and

700
Søren Brier (1951– )
consequence. Truer to the always subject-implicated processes of biological orga-
nization than are the machine-like descriptions of traditional cybernetic theory,
Uexküll’s Umweltlehre insights constitute a necessary but not sufﬁcient emendation
to the very real insights that cybernetics gives us into how complex systems work.
Accordingly, Brier updates and expands upon Uexküll’s “cryptosemiotic” concept
of Umwelt within a Peircean and biosemiotic evolutionary paradigm, rechristening
the expanded concept, a “signiﬁcation sphere” (2008: 32–34 et passim).
Yet, because Uexküll’s Umweltlehre is itself grounded in a Kantian metaphysics,
notes Brier, it can no more account for the veridicality of sign relations than can
Kantian epistemology. “The conﬂict,” John Deely writes succinctly, “is between an
idealist perspective – in which the mind knows only what it constructs – and the
semiotic perspective, in which what the mind constructs and what is partially preja-
cent to those constructions interweave objectively to constitute indistinctly what is
directly experienced and known” (1990: 122).
To accomplish this ﬁnal “organizational closure” between organisms and envi-
ronment (including, in the human case, the environment of “culture,” or symbolic
reference, as described by Terrence Deacon in Chapter Eighteen in this volume),
Brier ﬁnds that the incorporation of Peircean pragmatic realism is needed in order
to naturalistically explain both how veridical, real-world knowledge is possible
and how such knowledge is and must always be, just as Peirce afﬁrmed, “doubly
grounded” – with one foot ﬁrmly rooted in the existing patterns of mind-independent
reality, and the other just as inextricably planted in the observer-speciﬁc umwelt of
inherited and ongoing biological constitution, epistemological history, and inter-
personal social practice. Within such a framework, Brier introduces the technical
terms “pheno-semiotics”, “thought-semiotics,” “inter- and intra-semiotics” and
“sign games” – the latter of which supplies a semiotic foundation for understanding
both Winfried Nöth’s “ecosemiotics” as well Ludwig Wittgenstein’s (1889–1951)
more restricted anthropocentric concept of “language games”.
In sum, for over twenty ﬁve years, Søren Brier has labored upon the develop-
ment of “a philosophical framework for a trans-disciplinary information science or
semiotic doctrine” that is deeply informed by, yet cognizant of the limitations inher-
ent in, the wide variety of “mechanical-materialistic, pan-informational, Luhmanian
second order cybernetic, Peircian biosemiotic and pan-semiotic approaches” that
have been developed thus far (2003: 71). The result of that labor is Brier’s original
construction of a ﬁve-levelled cybersemiotic framework consisting in: “(1) a level of
Peircean Firstness [cybernetic ‘difference’], (2) a level of mechanical matter, energy
and force [Peircean Secondness], (3) a cybernetic and thermodynamic level of infor-
mation, (4) a level of sign games [broadly conceived] and (5) [in humans,] a level
of conscious language games” (ibid).
As is the case with all of our other authors, however, there is not space here
to explicate, even in summary fashion, Brier’s entire explanatory and investigative
conceptual framework for the examination of the role of meaning in nature and in
culture. Rather, and has been the practice throughout the rest of the volume, we have
chosen to reprint here a brief selection that introduces one small part of the author’s
larger explanatory framework, in the hopes that that will inspire the reader to consult

22
The Cybersemiotic Model of Communication
701
the larger corpus. Brier’s 2008 monograph Cybersemiotics: Why Information is
Not Enough, presents the Cybersemiotic framework in its fullest and most current
form to date, but here we have chosen his 2003 article, The Cybersemiotic model
of communication: An evolutionary view on the threshold between semiosis and
informational Exchange to introduce the reader to Brier’s work. In this paper, Brier
develops the framework of “intra-semiotics” for use in the study of the necessary
acts of inter-penetration taking place within the multiple autopoetic systems (i.e.,
ontological, biological, cultural-communicative, and phenomenological) that organ-
isms are both themselves, and are immersed in – and the subsequent emergence of
those overlapping “signiﬁcation spheres” wherein alone meaning can be made.

702
Søren Brier (1951– )
The Cybersemiotic Model of Communication:
An Evolutionary View on the Threshold between
Semiosis and Informational Exchange (2006)
Abstract This paper discusses some of the various suggestions that have been put
forth for a philosophical framework for a trans-disciplinary information science or
a semiotic doctrine. These are: the mechanical materialistic, the pan-informational,
the Luhmanian second order cybernetic approach, Peircian biosemiotics and ﬁnally
the pan-semiotic approach. The limitations of each are analysed. The conclusion
is that we will not have to choose between either a cybernetic-informational or a
semiotic approach. A combination of a Peircian-based biosemiotics with autopoiesis
theory, second order cybernetics and information science is suggested in a ﬁve-
levelled cybersemiotic framework. The ﬁve levels are (1) a level of Firstness, (2) a
level of mechanical matter, energy and force as Secondness, (3) a cybernetic and
thermodynamic level of information, (4) a level of sign games and (5) a level of
conscious language games.
These levels are then used to differentiate levels of information systems, sign
and language games in human communication. In our model Maturana and Varela’s
description of the logic of the living as autopoietic is accepted and expanded with
Luhmann’s generalization of the concept of autopoiesis, to cover also to psycho-
logical and socio-communicative systems. Adding a Peircian concept of semiosis to
Luhmann’s theory in the framework of biosemiotics enables us to view the interplay
of mind and body as a sign play. I have in a previous publication (see list of refer-
ences) suggested the term “sign play” pertaining to exosemiotics processes between
animals in the same species by stretching Wittgenstein’s language concept into the
animal world of signs.
The new concept of intrasemiotics designates the semiosis of the interpenetra-
tion between biological and psychological autopoietic systems as Luhmann deﬁnes
them in his theory. One could therefore view intrasemiotics as the interplay between
Lorenz’ biological deﬁned motivations and Freud’s Id, understood as the psycho-
logical aspect of many of the natural drives. In the last years of the development
of his theory, Lorenz worked with the idea of how emotional feedback introduced
just a little learning through pleasurable feelings into instinctive systems because,
as he reasoned, there must be some kind of reward of going through instinctive
movements, thus making possible the appetitive searching behaviour for sign stim-
uli. But he never found an acceptable way of modelling motivation in biological
science.
Here I am suggesting a cybersemiotic model to combine these approaches,
deﬁning various concepts like thought-semiotics, phenosemiotic and intrasemiotics,
combining them with the already known concepts of exosemiotics, ecosemiotics,
and endosemiotics into a new view of self-organizing semiotic processes in living
systems. Thus a new semiotic level of description is generated, where mind-body
interactions can be understood on the same description level.

22
The Cybersemiotic Model of Communication
703
Introduction
What are information, cognition, meaning, intelligence, mind and communication?
How did mind emerge out of natural evolution? What is the difference between ani-
mal, human and machine intelligence and communication? What is the difference
between physical and informational interaction? And, further, between the informa-
tional and the semiotic (sign level) and again language interactions. What and where
are the thresholds?
This article deals with the threshold problem in semiotics and information sci-
ence in the broader context of the attempts to make general scientiﬁc theories of
information, cognition and communication as we see, for instance, in the cognitive
sciences’ information processing paradigm (Brier 1992). The foundation of infor-
mation science international transdisciplinary group (FIS) has for more than ten
years discussed possible ways of making a broad philosophical framework to under-
stand basic concepts in a transdisciplinary information science. I am one of the few
biosemioticians in this group.
The purpose of these transdisciplinary theories is to help us frame the prob-
lems of understanding man-machine interface, intelligence and linguistic interaction
amongst other things by clearing up the epistemological problems of the difference
between how digital machines work, and how living systems perceive, think and
communicate. Furthermore, it is to ﬁnd out what the physical, chemical, biological,
psychological, and social foundations of communication are.
I want to discuss the question of threshold in a broader epistemological and
ontological context of the metaphysics of knowledge systems and further in a phi-
losophy of science context, taking into consideration Peircian semiotics, cybernetics
and information science (Brier 2000a, b, c). The relation and conﬂict between
informational and semiotic approaches comes into focus in this context. As we
shall see later, the semiotic threshold discussion is very similar to the problem of
whether objective information exists in nature, as required by the pan-informational
paradigm.
I view the threshold discussion as situated at the crossroad of the scientiﬁc
worldview and its cybernetic theory of information, general epistemology, the bio-
psychological theory of cognition and semiotic theory of signiﬁcation. It is a most
interesting point where our conception of nature/reality, cognition, communication
and the nature of knowledge, and our understanding of the human mind and the
relation of mind to matter are all involved at the same time. The threshold discus-
sion has also been going on for some time within the context of the informational
paradigm (Ruech/Bateson 1987: 67). Both the informational and the Peircian semi-
otic paradigms are transdisciplinary paradigms (Deely 1990) suggesting solutions
to our scientiﬁc problems of making a uniﬁed theory of nature, cognition and mind.
This is contrary to the traditional mechanistic scientiﬁc paradigm, where the concept
of mind as inner life has to be outside of the theory.
In their pan-version (everything is information or everything is signs) they both
suggest that the connection between mind and nature is either informational or

704
Søren Brier (1951– )
semiotic, which are in our mind as well as in nature. The pan-views make radical
changes in our conceptions of both mind and nature
1. The informational paradigm makes nature full of information and understands
our mind as a computer. But it cannot encompass a theory of meaning and
signiﬁcation.
2. The semiotic paradigm makes all nature signs but tends to deplete the liv-
ing of any special signiﬁcative abilities, and it tends to remove the idea of an
independent reality from physical nature.
On the other hand, the original mechanistic framework of classical physics did
not encompass concepts of information and meaningful signs at all. In previous
papers I have pointed out how pan-informational and pan-semiotic paradigms seem
to compete in covering the same subject area with a new transdisciplinary frame-
work (Brier 1992, 1999a, 2000a), each with speciﬁc advantages and drawbacks.
I have attempted to develop a non-reductionistic framework encompassing them
both called Cybersemiotics (Brier 1995, 1998a, b). This approach tries to deal
with the profound epistemological problems whose importance phenomenological
philosophy (Kirkeby 1997) has shown. By working it out, an attempt to make a
framework for studies of human cognition, understanding and language is launched,
which at the same time attempts to state the prerequisites for any scientiﬁc endeav-
our as such (Brier 2000d). Peircian semiotics, with its blend of phenomenology and
pragmatics, is therefore one of its foundations.
On this basis, I want to show how Cybersemiotics, through a series of models,
can describe the differences and continuity between inanimate and animate systems,
between living and socio-linguistic systems, and between those and mechanical and
cybernetic informational digital systems (mostly machines).
Previous Paradigms of Mater, Mind and Meaning
To clarify the problems, let us start by analysing paradigms that attempt to explain
the whole area from the foundation of nature to human intelligence, consciousness
and communication, or put in another way, explaining from the laws of nature to the
meaning of humans in culture. I will then discuss the limitations of such enterprises
in general. Then I will look at the shortcomings of every paradigm. I will then con-
struct a coherent framework, building on the viable parts of each (cybersemiotics).
Finally, I will present a model of the prerequisites for human communication, con-
centrating on the informational, semiotic and linguistic aspects of embodied human
communications.
At present, I can see six basic signiﬁcant models within science trying to
cover the whole range, from the basic patterns, laws and forces of inanimate
nature to the phenomena of life and consciousness within one paradigm and a few
all-encompassing basic concepts

22
The Cybersemiotic Model of Communication
705
1. The mechanical materialistic metaphysics that refuses to talk about information
and signs in nature including animals. It often presumes that the phenomenon
of thinking in meaningful signs, within humans, is not connected to conscious-
ness or sometimes not even to intentionality. These understandings are often
grounded in the view that these phenomena are illusory (eliminative materialism)
[references, e.g., Rorty, Paul Churchland]. This means that they do not con-
sider intentionality, free will and consciousness to have any real causal effects
on things in the physical/real world, including our own bodies. The difference
between the physical, the chemical and the biological level of reality is only
seen as a consequence of organisational levels.
2. Pan-informational metaphysics where information is seen as an objective part of
all nature and culture like matter and energy. Already in 1929 Szilard suggested a
converse relationship between information and entropy, referring to Boltzmann’s
thermodynamics, or statistical mechanics. Shannon and Weaver (1949), in fact,
referred to entropy in their own work as well, mainly because of similarities
with the equations that dealt with statistical events – equations originally written
to describe the outcomes of games of chance. But it was Norbert Wiener (1961)
who took the full step and declared that information not only is not matter or
energy, but that thermodynamic entropy is the opposite of the statistical concept
of information (Brier 1992) deﬁned as neg-entropy. This approach was supported
by Schrödinger (1967) in his book from 1942 What is life? (which places him
before Wiener, Shannon and Weaver) and later by Ruesch and Bateson (1987,
org. 1967), carried into Bateson’s (1973) Steps to an Ecology of Mind, and fur-
ther developed by Tom Stonier (Stonier 1997) just to mention a few important
ﬁgures. The result of all this was that information came to be viewed as the oppo-
site of entropy. Information could be understood as constructing order in the face
of disorder. Prigogine’s (Prigogine/Stengers 1984) self-organizing, dissipative
structures can be seen as gathering not only organized energy, but information,
and simultaneously dissipating energy and making entropy grow.
Thus, the concepts of energy, order, and information, on the one hand, and
entropy, disorder, and loss of information on the other, became connected in such
a way that we perceive information as having something to do with patterned
organization and the reduction of uncertainty (Combs/Brier 2001). Information
is then seen as the organizational aspect of nature. Stonier (1997) even talks about
“the infon” as a basic constituent of nature, much like MacKay (1969) SAW “the
logon” as the unit of destruction in the physical case.2
This approach is most often developed within a ﬁrst order cybernetics
metaphysics, which sees the world coming into being as a self-organized sys-
tem consisting of other self-organized systems. For Wiener and Bateson the
breakthrough was to unite the theory of information with the Bolzmanian inter-
pretation of thermodynamics and thereby overcoming the Cartesian duality of
2 Thanks to John Collier for pointing out MacKay to me and for his most valuable critique of an
earlier version of the manuscript.

706
Søren Brier (1951– )
mind and matter, but they did not manage to develop this into a full-ﬂedged
metaphysics.
Many other cyberneticians working with this general model clearly take inspi-
ration from Bertallanffy’s General Systems Theory. Here the anti-dualistic view
is based on an organismic evolutionary worldview including a theory of emer-
gence and holism with a belief in some kind of continuity between mind and
matter that is quite close to Peirce’s, but lacking his triadic philosophy. This
metaphysical aspect seems to be overlooked by many modern theorists, such as
Stonier, but not by Jantsch (1980), Lazslo (1995) and Goerner (1993), where a
new kind of eco-system-spiritualism or objective idealism seems to be devel-
oped as a holistic interpretation of the modern scientiﬁc results in Cosmology
and quantum ﬁeld theory. But how can such a notion dealing with the creation of
form say anything interesting about the nature of discourse?
3. The Luhmannian second order cybernetics approach where nature is seen as a
source of enumerable differences. Here the cybernetic system decides which dif-
ference should make a difference and become information in the organism and
its social communication in the human society. Somehow there is a situation
in which a cybernetic autopoietic system makes the ﬁrst distinction by making
a difference between the system and its surroundings. Luhmann (1995) never
explicates the nature of this Firstness before the ﬁrst distinction as Peirce does or
as phenomenologists like Heidegger and Blanchot’s work with. Still, his idea is
originally based on Spencer-Brown, who seems to work with a Buddhist inspired
theory of the Void or Emptiness, which seemingly contains the potentiality of
both mind and matter. But this aspect seems to be lost in Luhmann’s theory.
Inspired by Husserl, Luhmann embraces concepts of intentionality and mean-
ing, but in a Hegelian kind of functionalism minus the spirit. This paradigm,
in my view then, is close to the Peircian semiotic view except that it does not
have a collapsed triadic theory of the sign vehicle and lacks a developed the-
ory about the biological systems’ contribution to the generation of meaning
(Brier 1999b).
4. Peircian (bio)-semiotics is speciﬁc from other semiotic paradigms in that it not
only deals with intentional signs of communication but also encompasses non-
intentional signs such as symptoms of the body and patterns of in-animate nature.
It then encompasses both nature and culture. Peircian semiotics breaks with the
traditional dualistic epistemological problem of ﬁrst order science by framing its
basic concept of cognition: – Signiﬁcation – on a triadic semiotic philosophy.
The triadic semiotics is integrated with a theory of continuity between mind and
matter (Synechism) where the basic three categories (Firstness, Secondness and
Thirdness) are not only inside the perceiver’s mind, but also in the nature per-
ceived. This is connected to the second important ontological belief in Peirce’s
philosophy, namely Tychism that sees chance or chaos as basic characteris-
tics of Firstness. This is ﬁnally cornbined with an evolutionary theory of mind
(Agapism) where mind has a tendency to take habits in nature. Chaos or chance
is seen as a First, which is not to be explained further (for instance by regu-
larities). It is the basis of habit taking and evolution. The chaos of Firstness is

22
The Cybersemiotic Model of Communication
707
not seen as the lack of law as in mechanicism and rationalism, but as something
full of potential qualities to be manifested individually in Second ness and as
general habits and knowledge in the dynamic objects and semiosis in Thirdness
(Peirce 1992). This is the deep foundation of Peirce’s pragmatism. With chaos as
spontaneity at the foundation no laws will in reality be exact. There will always
prevail a little spontaneity on both the level of Secondness and Thirdness. As a
result of the initiative and work of Thomas Sebeok (1976, 1989), Peirce’s semi-
otics is now interpreted as covering all living signifying systems in a biosemiotic
approach.
In the biosemiotic interpretation based on the Peircian triadic semiotic philoso-
phy, semiosis thus works on a triadic basis in an evolutionary and pragmatic view.
The unmanifest Firstness is seen as chaos of qualia, basic form and feeling with
a tendency to take habits, which manifests through Secondness and Thirdness.
Matter is seen as “effete mind”. Matter and mind are united in the continuum
of Firstness and develop through “Evolutionary love” into Secondness’ manifes-
tations of resistance, force, dualistic concreteness and impenetrability of objects.
Secondness provides constraints on perception and cognition in the Thirdness of
true triadic sign processes. The term, quasi-semiotic objects then recognizes systems
in nature and culture, working with differences, often in a form of coding, instead of
physical causality on one hand and meaningful semiosis on the other. In nature, we
are in this context dealing with systems of Secondness that have established an infor-
mation level above the energetic and causal level of nature. The area, thus delimited
from true semiosis, is part of what classical ﬁrst order cybernetics considered its
subject area: goal oriented machines and pattern forming self-organized processes
in nature based on information. Still the exact role of the living systems in establish-
ing true semiosis is not very clear in Peirce’s theory and neither is the description
of the special biological qualities that make this happen. According to Santaella
Braga (1999), Peirce was on the track though recognizing chance-spontaneity in
the nerve cells as “the outward aspect of that which within itself is feeling” (Peirce
CP 6. 265).
The pan-semiotic metaphysics claims further that all environmental phenomena
are ultimately semiotic in their essence. The universe is perfused with signs as the
famous quote from Peirce goes. Peirce’s three categories are universal. Semiosis
is everywhere; either because everything is semiosis in its nature or because the
only way we can know anything is through semiosis. The latter is a pan-semiotic
constructivism encompassing both culture and nature. The construction of reality is
done by the human societies through living together in language. This kind of bio-
social constructivism takes this approach very close to Maturana’s bio-constructivist
development of the autopoiesis theory from a cybernetic perspective. Thus it is close
to becoming a human-centred metaphysics (a subjective idealism) with no explicit
idea of what nature could be in itself or, to put it another way, what kind of external
source there could be for the signs of nature.
The other version is the modern version of pan-semiotics claiming that signs are
as real as atoms and energy, actually that latter are also signs. These signs grow

708
Søren Brier (1951– )
by themselves as made clear in Merrell’s book (1996): Signs grow; Semiosis of life
processes. Reading Merrell, and Emmeche’s (2000) critique of him, it is clear that
Merrell is viewing signs as independent living beings growing by themselves. The
pansemiotic interpretation takes Peirce’s statements of teleonomy in causality and
that the universe is perfused with signs to mean that whenever there is Thirdness
there is semiosis. Then there is also semiosis in inanimate nature. Physio-semiotics,
as Deely (1992, 1997, 1998, 2001) calls it, suggests that semiosis is the core of evo-
lution. This means that although there are physical laws so rigid that they are almost
pure Secondness, in most laws in evolving nature there is a basic telonomy, which
has existed throughout evolution. Here classical physical laws are seen as univer-
sal, exact, and deterministic. Thermodynamic laws are by some (Prigogine/Stengers
1984) accepted as genuine statistical and biological “laws” much more teleonomic
and semiotic in nature. The fundamental question is if Thirdness really has to bee
seen as physiosemiosis?
Most modern versions of pan-semiotics are an interpretation of C.S. Peirce’s
semiotics, as he is the only philosophic semiotician to include natural signs in his
theory. One way to perceive the consequences of his triadic metaphysics and his
broad theory of mind, when placed in his theory of continuity (synechism) and evo-
lution, is to accept physiosemiosis, which John Deeley (op. cit.) was the ﬁrst to
do. This kind of realistic (objective idealistic) semiotic metaphysics certainly makes
the emergence of life and mind through self-organized new complexities of semiosis
much easier to accept but also raises new threshold problems. We will have to deﬁne
the qualitative differences between physiosemiosis, phytosemiosis, zoosemiosis and
antrophosemiosis. Biosemiotics has so far only wanted to encompass the last three
of them. There are some profound similarities between Peircian pansemiotics and
the organismic view of Bertalanffy’s general system theory that also refused mech-
anism as a possible basis for a scientiﬁc theory of evolution. Prigogine’s work and
his ﬁerce debate with mainstream mechanicists has shown that this is a central prob-
lem. The difference between the biosemiotic interpretation and a pan-semiotic one
is that the biosemiotic interpretation is limiting the ability of true semiosis to living
systems. Biosemiotics considers machine processes and pattern/signal interaction in
nature only as quasi-semiotic (not true triadic) processes.
As we can see from the short descriptions of the ﬁve basic views above then
the central distinction to be discussed are the threshold between living and “dead”
nature, and between living and mechanical systems, such as computers, and further
the difference between information and meaning. Another important part of this
discussion will be between the modern scientiﬁc approaches that deal with meaning
and the phenomenological part of reality on the one hand, and on the other to deal
with the demands on science to deliver true explanations of an independent reality.
This demand has increased ever since our religious and mythical frameworks were
challenged by the world view of the classical mechanical sciences, the rationality
and historical thinking of the Enlightenment, Darwinian evolution, the psychology
of modernity and ﬁnally the linguistic turn. It seems to place truth and meaning
in opposite camps. Let me therefore start with a short history and philosophy of
science perspective (based on Brier 2000d) on this matter.

22
The Cybersemiotic Model of Communication
709
The Explanatory Quest of the Sciences Since Religion
Lost Power
Ever since Galileo, through experiments and theories of an earthly science combined
with his enforcement of Copernicus’ view of the heavens, confronted the Catholic
Church’s worldview, religion as the upholder of a meaningful world has been chal-
lenged. The evolution of classical (mechanical) physical science and its concept of
universal mechanical natural laws were some of the most important instruments to
break the Church’s worldview and our view of our own place in it. The worldview
of the Catholic Church was one of the core foundations of the culturally produced
meaningfulness of the individual’s personal life. It told us where we came from,
where we could go and the meaning of our lives.
Further, since the philosophers of the Enlightenment and later Marx and Engels
broke the view of the social order as “heavenly sent”, a further disturbance in our
belief in that everything in our social order was “as it should be” was created.
Darwin destroyed our belief in man coming from a higher and meaningful place and
thus being endowed with a meaningful destiny, accordingly. He partly destroyed the
idea of the human soul as descended into our body from the “divine above”. Freud
spoiled our idea of being perfectly conscious and rational beings in control of our
language and ourselves and own drives. Nietzsche ﬁnally declared God “dead”, and
he and other philosophers left us in a nihilistic vacuum with no universal meaning
and values left.
Since then man has increasingly looked to science for new explanatory stories of
himself. It has lead to what Ilya Prigogine and Elisabeth Stengers called “World
Formula Thinking”; the belief that ﬁnal explanations can be found through sci-
ence, especially through algorithmic approaches such as in artiﬁcial intelligence,
the search for “the algorithms of the book of life” in the genes and in the Grand
uniﬁcation theories of physics, the last attempt of which was the super string the-
ory (Brier 2000d). Descartes’ dualism attempted to save the human soul from the
mechanistic grip of science, but his own followers’ experiments with brain lesions
in doves and the later reﬂexiological view in brain and behavioural science, further
developed with learning theories of “conditioning” by behaviourism, entrenched the
human mind and behaviour into the scientiﬁc subject area. Cybernetics, information
theory and science, plus the theory of artiﬁcial intelligence, have produced func-
tionalistic approaches of our understanding of cognition and communication (Brier
1992). These approaches are now combined in the transdisciplinary program of the
information-processing paradigm of cognitive science. It is promoting a paradigm
of cognition as a software program based on algorithms in the brain’s neurologi-
cal hardware (Brier 2000d). At the same time quantum mechanical ﬁeld theories get
more attention as possible tools to explain the continuum character of consciousness
(Penrose 1995).
Through science we have also learned to be sceptical towards systems that tend
to explain too much. Such systems are religious, mythical-magical or ideological-
political systems of belief and power. Still by the end of the 20th century modern sci-
ence encompasses attempts to combine evolutionary, historical and developmental

710
Søren Brier (1951– )
theories of the environment, the living systems, individual conscience and socio-
cultural linguistic meaning and values into one big scientiﬁc narrative, com-
pletely ignoring the post modernistic warnings against the deceptiveness of grand
narratives.
These stories are Grand Evolutionary Theories (GET) wanting to combine Big
Bang cosmology of the self-organization of energy and matter, and the evolution
theory of the living. Modern science attempts to explain life from physics and chem-
istry by computational A-life simulations, and through manipulating genes and other
chemicals. The ﬁnal proof of such a theory could be the artiﬁcial construction of life
through an independent synthesis of macromolecules and a combination of them,
creating the organelles within artiﬁcially created membranes producing a living cell.
This is being planned as I write.
As we in the sciences expect to explain matter as a speciﬁc form or organization
of energy, matter is then expected to provide the foundation for an explanation of life
as a unique organization of matter. The grand evolutionary story attempts to explain
them all in one story starting with energy from a quantum vacuum ﬁeld turning
into matter, time and space. By process of self-organization information and life is
supposed to emerge, and later again central nervous systems, social organization,
semiosis, communication, language, culture and consciousness.
Modern Big Bang cosmology combined with uniﬁed ﬁeld and super string theory
delivers the materialistic story about the reality we inhabit, which we now call the
Universe. It also tells the story about the evolution from radiation to subatomic par-
ticles, further how the atoms of the basic chemical elements were created through
“cooking in the stars” and supernova’s explosions, and ﬁnally the creation of the
multitude of molecules, climaxing in the macromolecules that are the essential
chemical components of living systems. This is then often combined with theo-
ries of objective information, which perceive energy as self-organizing into patterns
and systems of matter in the expanding universe and further on to living systems,
cognitive systems, linguistic and conscious systems in culture. Often this story is
combined with Richard Dawkins’ theory of the selﬁsh gene, and of culture as a col-
lection of selﬁsh memes (Dawkins 1989, Blackmore 2000). Growing up in a culture,
the child’s mind is infected with the memes of culture and its worldviews. They pro-
gram its mind with unitary ideas and causalities. This explanatory narrative of reality
and meaning is most often performed through religion in the pre-scientiﬁc and
its pre-industrial societies, but in the modern industrialized cultures, the scientiﬁc
rationality and worldview is more and more taking over.
I have here in a very general way outlined the character of these explanations.
But I doubt:
1. That such a grand story is scientiﬁcally possible.
2. That it is the true nature of science to construct this type of explanation.
3. That we will ever be able to provide in generally accepted shared language,
universal explanations that combine the four basic constituents of human exis-
tence (energy/matter, embodied life, language and conscious inner life) in one
discourse.

22
The Cybersemiotic Model of Communication
711
I suggest that natural science, social science, arts and humanities, practical sci-
ences, philosophy and any other systematic search for public knowledge starting
with: 1. Embodiment: our body is at least a main source of life and cognition.
2. Consciousness: consciousness is the source of an inner life of cognition, voli-
tion, feeling and perceptual qualities (qualia). 3. Situated in meaning: In semiosis
meaning is constructed through language in a social and cultural network of other
living, linguistic conscious systems. 4. Relatively autonomous environment: Placed
in an environment that seems partly independent of our perception and being (Brier
2000d).
As analysed above, humans are embodied, feeling and knowing cultural beings
in language. My point then is that this makes us live in four different worlds
1. Embodiment: Our body hood and our sharing of body hood with other living
species.
2. Inner Mental World: Our inner world of emotions and thoughts manifesting as
mind and consciousness.
3. Physical nature: The physico-chemical aspect of ourselves and of the environ-
ment of the natural world.
4. Culture: The cultural world of language and meaning.
I think that each of the four worlds calls on its own type of narrative. Physicists
and chemists tend to see the universe as basically consisting of matter, energy and
meaningless information. Biologists tend to end up seeing the universe basically as
a living being, the social and cultural sciences tend to see the world as constructed
from our social linguistic interpretations (unless they are dualistic and accept that
nature is as science describes it and only culture is constructed by man). Those deal-
ing with the phenomenological aspect of our being tend to be rather anti-scientiﬁc
and anti-realistic often viewing the world as a product of consciousness as product
of a linguistic system. But, like Peirce, I see the semiotic mind at the heart of all
four worlds. One of the strengths in Peirce’s semiotic philosophy is that qualia and
mind – as semiosis – are installed in the whole metaphysics from the beginning.
They cannot be explained as such because they can only be inferred as a necessary
prerequisite for producing the knowledge we want to discuss!
My main problem with the standard materialistic scientiﬁc evolutionary
paradigm is that I cannot see how physics – as an external science – on the basis
of the present deﬁnitions of matter, energy and deterministic law can ever alone fur-
nish us with the ﬁnal understanding of our inner lives and how consciousness arises.
If you work from an evolutionary view, combining the Big Bang theory with self-
organizing thermodynamics and chemistry adding Darwinism for biology systems,
and proceed with a somewhat materialistic theory of the development of man and the
history of language and culture, there is a severe problem of explaining life and con-
sciousness as this inner quality of perception, feeling, volition and cognition that we
all experience. I do not see quantum physics, the relativity theory or non-equilibrium
thermodynamics as being of any particular help concerning this problem although
they may be helpful to explain the physical aspect of consciousness.

712
Søren Brier (1951– )
I am, therefore, hesitant to put the understanding of Peirce’s semiotic philosophy
into a scheme, explaining life and consciousness from the development of inanimate
nature. The standard view of today combines an evolutionary view with a material-
ist ontology based on energy as the ultimate concept (in quantum physics, general
relativity theory and thermodynamics), hoping to explain life as a phenomenon of
chemical organization. When realizing that this is not enough, often the aid by some
kind of objectivistic information concept is sought, although this adds fundamental
new concepts, entities and ideas of organization to the paradigm that is foreign to
its basic metaphysical conceptions. The idea of my ﬁgure, and the epistemologi-
cal turn it is illustrating, is to escape the great explanatory burden of reductionistic
mainstream science, wanting to explain both life and consciousness from the basic
assumption of energy and mechanistic mathematical laws. The cybersemiotic view
sees scientiﬁc explanations as going from our present state, of socio-linguistically
based conscious semiosis in self-organized autopoietic systems, towards a better
understanding of the prerequisites of language and the self-conscious being. The
reduction made in any of the four directions has to remain consistent with the point
of departure in the middle.
Science only to a limited degree explains the world or our place in it beyond our
existential questions such as what is life, reality and meaning – not to talk of good
and bad. We had knowledge before we had science. Knowledge – which can be
deﬁned as the combination of qualia, objects and interpretants in semiosis – is one
of the big mysteries of the world. Being in the world in language, in body hood, in a
meaningful social context we always have to start “in medias res”. We will always be
bound to make some metaphysical presumptions based on our present understanding
and they will always show later to be too limited. But Peirce’s semiotics is a very
good non-reductionistic framework to start from since its point of departure is the
semiotic mind.
Somehow we will have to enlarge the conceptual framework within which we do
science if we want to make a connection, also to the phenomenological aspect of
reality and deal with the experience of meaning. Our task is to explain and under-
stand all four aspects of reality and our explanations of any of the corners will
only be one aspect of the explanation. My suggestion is that we start in the mid-
dle and extrapolate toward the four corners. Trying to explain all from one corner
is reductionism, no matter then in which corner we will end. For instance, I see
social constructivism as the same reductionistic totalitarism as physicalism and the
pan-informational paradigms.
Peirce’s insistence on Secondness as an independent existence revealing itself
in the end as the dynamic object for the ﬁnal interpretant is an insurance against
all sorts of (overly radical constructivism) too radical kinds of constructivism that
loose their grip in reality and transform into either subjective or collective idealism.
One way to deal with this paradoxical problem would be to be less ambitious about
the explanatory demands on science for the big scheme of things as Peirce shows
in his deep integration of science, religion and philosophy with semiosis (Brier
2004). Science gives a good economic understanding of certain processes often in
a way that allows prediction with a wanted precision within certain circumstances.

22
The Cybersemiotic Model of Communication
713
But it does not give universal explanations of the construction of reality, energy,
information, life, meaning, mind and consciousness.
Semiotics starts with the process of knowledge; how signiﬁcation is taking
place in living systems making perception and cognition possible. Peirce’s semi-
otics unites our explanatory schemes of deduction and induction through abduction
within the process of semiosis. Peirce suggests that we look at triadic semiosis as
the fundamental process of reality. Consciousness is built from semiotic processes.
In biosemiotics, semiosis is an essential part of all living systems. But again the
problem of total explanation arises: can we go on from here to a pan-semiotic view
without wanting to explain too much? My answer is that I doubt it. Instead I have
argued that it seems fruitful to accept and work with ﬁve different levels of inter-
action in nature, but not necessarily assume any evolutionary causal links between
them, i.e. indications that one level is supposed to give rise to the other assuming a
one way up-causality:
1. A non-manifest level with hypercomplex interactions. The concept of vacuum
in Quantum ﬁeld theory is one attempt from science to describe this state but
without a synechistic frame.
2. An energy level with energy based causal interaction by natural forces.
3. An informational level with signal and/or code causality.
4. A semiotic level with sign game causality within and among living systems.
5. A linguistic level with language-game-causality based on meaning between
conscious social systems.
Critique of Current Approaches
The point then is that the description of these levels did exist in different areas
of modern science, but they have never been connected in one theoretical or even
paradigmatic framework, although this is what mainstream eliminative mechanistic
science tries to accomplish but on an insufﬁcient philosophical background. Or to
be more precise, the present and past attempts have all had different problems and
inconsistencies:
1. Although classical mechanistic physics could describe certain connections,
forces and regularities in nature mathematically, and later with the help of quan-
tum mechanics the stability of matter, it is very difﬁcult to think of actual
evolution in a mechanistic worldview with rigid deterministic universal laws and
a Newtonian reversible time (Prigogine/Stengers 1984).
2. This is solved in the thermodynamic atomistic view based on complexity, self-
organizing dissipative structures and irreversible time. But here it is still difﬁcult
to understand how information and cognition can arise and self-organize from
pure physical matter and energy.
3. In the pan-informational paradigm information as organizing power is present
from the start. This makes self-organization and the emergence of cognition more

714
Søren Brier (1951– )
understandable especially when it is established in general systems theory that
has an organismic and emergent evolutionary worldview. But in this view it is
still difﬁcult to understand how living systems can arise as individual beings, how
they treat information differently from mechanical cybernetic systems, and also
what is the special quality of the semiotic creativity of self-conscious linguistic
embodied beings.
4. In second order cybernetics and autopoiesis theory, the idea of closure on
the biological, psychological and social communicative level explained by the
concept of autopoiesis: living systems’ self-organising, self-maintaining and
self-producing ability, much clariﬁes the special self-preserving ability and cog-
nition as well as the creation of an individualistic point of view. The conception –
especially of Maturana and Varela and also von Foerster – also comes close to
Jacob von Uexküll’s Umweltslehre (Brier 2001a). They all represent some kind
of bio-constructivism. Unfortunately it tends to be rather idealistic, sometimes
even solipsistic in certain formulations while, at the same time, it “paradoxically”
insists on the material reality of a biologic(al) observing system.
5. In Peircian semiotic philosophy these levels can be bound together by
Synechism, Tychism and Agapism combined with the evolutionary view of the
interaction of Firstness, Secondness and Thirdness. The view of Firstness as a
blend of mind and matter qualities and as containing qualia and living feeling
with a tendency to take habits is crucial to understand the self-organizing capabil-
ities of nature and how, what seem as “dead” matter, through self-organization in
evolution can become autopoietic and alive and has cognitive/semiotic abilities
and feelings (Brier 1999a). Re-interpreting Uexküll on this foundation creates
a biosemiotics that is much more suited to encompass the phenomenological
aspect of life and cognition, which is now conceptualised as signiﬁcation (Brier
2001a). Still, aspects of the development of embodiment, which Uexküll did
not think of, are partly missing. Concepts of closure and self-organization of
biological, psychological and social systems and their differentiation, devel-
oped in second order cybernetics and autopoiesis theory, need to be integrated
(Brier 2000a). Both Hoffmeyer and Emmeche do work with these aspects in
the theory development, which is already transgressing the original limits of
biosemiotics.
These are some of my reasons for being sceptical about totalitarian and reduc-
tionistic explanatory paradigms like mechanicism, pan-informationalism and a
pan-semiotic without thresholds, but also too radical forms of constructivism that
are out of touch with any non-linguistic reality. This is why the discussion of the
semiotic threshold in a Peircian framework becomes so crucial.
The cybernetic thinking of self-organization and system closure has, in my
opinion, made an important contribution to our understanding of living systems.
Already Jacob von Uexküll used some basic cybernetics in his “Funktionskreis”.
We can see the foundation laid both for biosemiotics and biocybernetics (second
order cybernetics and autopoiesis theory) in Uexküll’s work. But a combination
of Peircian semiotics and modern cybernetics is necessary to make the theory

22
The Cybersemiotic Model of Communication
715
broad enough in order to cover what is now called biosemiotics and to make the
framework develop beyond the present stage, encompassing the understanding of
the problem of the semiotic threshold, which is a core-epistemological problem.
Biosemiotics, in name and scope, is partly neglecting or ignoring the contribution
of second order cybernetics and autopoietic theory. However, the cyberneticians,
even as their work is combined and further developed into the area of human social
communication as in Luhmann’s work, instead tend to ignore the semiotic compo-
nent too much (Ort/Marcus 1999). In my view, to be able to combine the fruitful
work of both camps a broader foundation is needed. This is why I call my work
Cybersemiotics.
The cybersemiotic approach that I am working on, attempts to unite cybernetic,
systemic informational and semiotic approaches to deal with the problems of self-
organization, intentionality, selection of differences and constructivism avoiding
solipsism and idealism. This is – among other things – done by giving decisive
attention to the role of body hood in the construction of meaning using the viable
parts of the above-described ﬁve views by combining informational, cybernetic and
Peircian biosemiotic approaches in non-totalitarian or non-pan versions.
The cybersemiotic approach thus ascribes to a Peircian and Uexküllian biosemi-
otics and combines it with the theories of second order cybernetics (von Foerster)
and autopoiesis (Maturana and Varela 1980 and Luhmann 1995) that are already vis-
ible in Uexküll’s “Funktionskreis” (Sebeok 1986). It uses a Peircian and ethological
extension of Wittgenstein’s pragmatic language theory to distinguish between the
sign games of biological systems and the language games of humans. It acknowl-
edges the independent being of Firstness and Secondness (what would normally
be called the “physical world” but is now based in Peircian metaphysics). Finally
it underlines that the cybernetic machines, such as computers and robots are not
truly semiotic, but quasi or proto-semiotic (Nöth 2002). Machines lack autopoiesis,
reproduction, code-duality and inner organization of membranes (Hoffmeyer 1998)
and thus an individually and species based motivation and intentionality (Brier 1995
and 1998a). Combining the results of modern science with Peircian biosemiotics the
cybersemiotic framework operates with ﬁve levels of existence:
1. A primary chaotic level of continuity, quality and potentiality with a tendency
to take habits (Firstness). This goes beyond the physical conception of vacuum
ﬁelds that are still pure materialistic, but may be included as an aspect.
2. A “causal” level of matter, energy and causality by natural forces. This is
Secondness that has, as its inner aspect, will and mental force.
3. An informational cybernetic system level of informational signals, which encom-
passes the goal-oriented mechanical systems described by ﬁrst order classical
cybernetics. Described from a cybersemiotic view, concepts of information as
signals of differences only make sense as quasi signs (see Nöth 2002 for an
analysis).
4. The semiotic level belonging to all living systems (biosemiotics), which are so
far the only systems capable of true triadic semiosis (producing signiﬁcation
spheres in sign games). This level encompasses the work of Uexküll (1934) and

716
Søren Brier (1951– )
the ethologists such as Lorenz (1970–1971 and 1973) and Tinbergen (1973) in a
broader semiotic framework (Brier 1999b).
5. The level of conscious languaging systems (language games, arguments), to our
knowledge so far only occupied by humans.
Sign-making is thus immanent in nature, but only manifest in full triadic semio-
sis in living systems. Cybersemiotics has, so far, sided with biosemiotics in not
accepting physio-semiotics as a full-ﬂedged semiosis.
The Cybersemiotic Epistemology
Ever since Umberto Eco formulated the problem of the “semiotic threshold” in
1976, semiotics, especially Peircian semiotics, has developed even further into the
realm of biology. The efforts of Thomas Sebeok (1976, 1989), in particular, has lead
to the development of a biosemiotics encompassing all living systems as sign users –
including plants and microorganisms. This semiotics has even moved into the
organisms describing semiosis between body cells and in the cells (endosemiotics)
(Uexküll et al. 1993).
The question that is now becoming essential for the whole debate about the pos-
sibility of a transdisciplinary information/signiﬁcation science is, if the biosemiotic
Peircian framework that includes and reformulates Jacob von Uexküll’s theoretical
biology will comprise un-interpreted “natural” objects as signs. Most obvious phe-
nomena are autocatalytic and dissipative structures that emerge by the spontaneous
generation of order and patterns in nature. These objects were originally described
in physio-chemical terms. Now some of the pan-informational paradigm adherents,
such as Stonier, want to explain them in purely informational terms.
From a Peircian view these phenomena are protosemiotic, or quasisemiotic when
compared to the semiosis of living systems, as they are only displays of Secondness
(Nöth 2001). To distinguish the semiosis of the living systems from physiosemiosis,
I have applied the term sign games or biosemiosis (Brier 1995). We are not talking
about the situation that any natural thing can become a sign when placed in a mean-
ingful context by a living system, but about the objects and their processes per se.
The present quote from Peirce gives a very clear idea of the distinction between what
the thermometer as a physical thing does per se, and how it works when interpreted
by a doctor:
“The acceleration of the pulse is probably a symptom of fever, and the rise of the mercury
in an ordinary thermometer ... is an index of an increase of atmospheric temperature, which,
nevertheless, acts upon it in a purely brute and dyadic way. In these cases, however, a mental
representation of the index is produced, which mental representation is called the immediate
object of the sign; and this object does triadically produce the intended, or proper, effect of
the sign strictly by means of another mental sign” (CP 5.473 from Nöth 2002).
Another similar problem is the question of what machines, like computers, are
processing when no humans are interpreting. Is it signs or just signals? We know

22
The Cybersemiotic Model of Communication
717
that we codify the signals so they carry meaning for us in our context and therefore
they are signs to us, and forwarding that sign’s meaning through a pragmatic view
is what they do. But doesn’t this have to be in a living context where meaning is
already introduced through embodied minds existence? Relating to the question of
the semioticity of calculating machines, Nöth explains how Peirce coined the term
“quasi-semiosis” to deal with this problem. He writes:
“The term quasi-sign suggests an answer to the question whether there can be semiosis in
a machine of the kind which Peirce knew. A quasi-sign is only in certain respects like a
sign, but it does not fulﬁl all criteria of semiosis. While some criteria of semiosis may be
present in machines, others are missing. The concept of quasi-sign thus suggests degrees of
semioticity. Quasi-semiosis does not only begin with calculating machines. It can be found
in processes in which much simpler instruments are involved” (Nöth 2002: 8).
Through his synechism Peirce did not believe in a separation of mind and mat-
ter in a strict dualism. Peirce’s concept of mind is then extremely broad and does
not need to include consciousness or intentionality but only goal directedness. The
use of the term quasi-semiosis to designate “degenerated” semiosis near the shift
between Secondness, in machines, and Thirdness of the biosemiotic sign games,
stems ﬁrst of all from a lack of a triadic object relation. Nöth writes:
“Evidence of the quasi-semiotic nature of data processing comes from the dyadic nature
of the signs involved. The view that sign processing in computers is based on dyadic rela-
tionships is implicit in a widely held theory which states that computers can only process
signals..., i.e., mechanical stimuli followed by automatic reactions. Winograd & Flores
(1987), e.g., refer to signal processing when they write: “One could describe the opera-
tions of a digital computer merely as a sequence of electrical impulses traveling through a
complex net of electronic elements, without considering these impulses as symbols for any-
thing” .... What is missing for these signs to develop from dyadic to triadic signs is an object
relationship. The dyadic relations are merely dyadic relations of signiﬁcation, but there is no
denotation, no “window to the world” which allows to relate the sign to an object of expe-
rience ... the messages produced by a computer in the interface of humans and machines
are either messages conveyed by a human sender and mediated by the computer or they are
quasi-signs resulting from an automatic and deterministic extension of human semiosis”
(Nöth 2002: 8).
This brings us right into cybernetics, especially Bateson’s. Here information is a
difference that makes a difference for a cybernetically deﬁned “mind”. This mind
works primarily on differences with feedback loops based on energy. The energy
is not important for the coding process per se. But the critique directed at cyber-
netics’ concept of information and meaning has exactly been underlining that this
type of system based on information theory is only functionalistic and does not have
the capacity of encompassing meaning in a biological, not to say a human perspec-
tive (Brier 1992). The problems between these two transdisciplinary paradigms of
information and signiﬁcation seem to stem from the fact that they are coming from
opposite directions of the hierarchy of science and humanities when they develop
their theories of messages.
It seems to me then that if we want to get beyond just accepting that we have
two incompatible paradigms, we must abandon the pan-views. In the spirit of Niels
Bohr’s complementarity theory we must take one step back and:

718
Søren Brier (1951– )
1. Give up some of our ambitions of getting “to the bottom of things” including
laws and causality with our scientiﬁc approaches.
2. We must attempt to broaden our conceptual framework by – amongst other
things – integrating the observer and doer in our framework.
Peirce clearly does this in his triadic model of semiosis where the interpretant
is part of the theory through his concepts of the immediate and dynamic object.
A similar development has been carried through in second order cybernetics and
autopoiesis theory.
Maturana and Varela in their theory of autopoiesis do not apply the word informa-
tion at all when cognition is to be understood from within the autopoietic system.
Nothing is transferred from the environment to the living system that can be des-
ignated meaningful information. But they admit that you can say that, when you
observe from the outside, it looks like the system has obtained information. A way
to describe it is to say that information is created inside the autopoietic system when
it receives a disturbance, which as a species it is prepared for by the creation of a
structural coupling. Maturana and Varela (1980) do not view the structural cou-
pling as an information channel because no representations are moved through it.
Ethologists would say it had an instinctual perception where sign stimuli elicited an
Innate Release Response Mechanism (IRM) that released a preprogrammed instinc-
tive behaviour (see for instance Brier 2000b, 2001) Anyway, this constructivistic
biological cybernetics stresses the intimate evolutionary and developmental dynam-
ical relation between environment and organism. One can then from a cybersemiotic
perspective view autopoiesis combined with Hoffmeyer’s (1998) further points as a
condition for differences in the environment becoming meaningful signs through
the process of semiosis. But Maturana and Varela’s concepts do not in themselves
ﬁt with neither concepts of information science, nor with semiotic concepts, such as
semiosis as an interpretation.
It is now well established that there is an area of nature between the physical
causal level and the level of biosemiosis. I have argued that this level is the area
that cybernetics and information science has conceptualised. In my previous works
I have argued that cybernetic information science also erases a threshold between
causality and information when all nature becomes informationalised. It also ignores
the level of meaning, or what we now call second order semiosis, suggested to be
the subject area of biosemiosis. When information theory attempts to encompass
the area of meaning and semantics it passes and destroys the semiotic threshold too,
but now in the other direction, blurring the difference between informational and
semiotic processes, and thereby between mechanical signal manipulation or quasi-
semiotic systems and living systems. This produces all sorts of simplistic theories
about intelligences that are not able to grasp the cognitive processes special for
embodied living systems, not to speak of conscious socio-linguistic systems.
Even though I do not think that any of our systematic conceptual knowledge
systems can fully grasp the reality. I agree with Peirce and Bohm (1983) that there
must be some kind of infolded dynamic order in our reality, even though it is just
potential qualia and tendency to take habits. If this were not so, then the Thirdness,

22
The Cybersemiotic Model of Communication
719
which makes it possible for us to know something through the establishment of
interpretants based on the perception of some kind of regularity of differences would
not be possible.
My point here is to say that sign making is the threshold between cybernetics
and semiotics. That to make a difference make a difference is to establish a sign
for it (the interpretant) in an embodied mind. Before that it is only second order
cybernetic signals or quasi-semiotic according to Peirce. The whole subject area of
cybernetic information theory is in my view then quasi-semiotic. Underneath that is
the physicochemical level that in general is best described in terms of energy, matter
and causality by natural forces (Secondness), but it does have Thirdness processes
over long time frames. If you want, this is a kind of semiosis over long time with
the universe as subject.3 You can then call the biosemiotic level semiosis with the
species as subject and, ﬁnally, human language games as semiosis with individual
cultural persons (persona) as subject.
Cybersemiotics is a development of biosemiotics using, among other things,
Niklas Luhmann’s work for further development. Below we will go into more detail
describing a model for the levels of signiﬁcation and communication in humans.
Luhmann’s Triadic Autopoietic Systems
Luhmann has generalized the autopoietic concept of Maturana and Varela (1980)
in order to also comprise psychological thinking systems and socio-communicative
systems. He views the psyche as a silent inner system, a closed system of perception,
emotions and volitions. A special linguistic system has to be created for communi-
cation to happen. Communication is again an organizationally closed system. Only
communication communicates. Social systems are communicative systems with
human bodies and minds as surroundings!
To Luhmann (1995) communication is a sequence of selections, namely of
(1) information, (2) utterance and (3) meaning. The two ﬁrst have to be made by
what we traditionally call “the sender”, the last one by the receiver. He chooses his
understanding of the signs produced, and then one could say that a message is pro-
duced when the receiver says something that the sender chooses to understand as a
conﬁrmation of understanding of his ﬁrst message. Finally, in a fourth selection the
message is connected to present practice.
Although his view of information is loosely based on Shannon’s concept, it dif-
fers from it in that Luhmann (1995) does not believe in its use outside of human
social communication. Thus, he does not want to generalize it outside the analysis
of human messages. Also Luhmann does not seem to believe that information exists
in nature independently of human perception. The information concept functions
as a quantitative aspect within a meaningful human context. Further he combines
3 The formulation is a result of a discussion with Jesper Hoffmeyer on April 3, 2001, in my ofﬁce
at KVL. As such it is a way to interpret Deely’s physiosemiosis theory.

720
Søren Brier (1951– )
information with the aspects of utterance and meaning. Luhmann stresses that both
the sender and the receiver have to make their choices to produce a meaningful mes-
sage. I think that instinctive reactions would also count as such a choice. Information
is choices related to subject matter, utterance is choices pertaining to the way to
say something, and meaning is the choices of interpretation of the listener depend-
ing on his evaluation of the human context. I think that Luhmann’s theory has
problems producing a concept of meaning that relates deeply to the ﬂesh, blood
and life (conditions) of biological systems and the existential conditions of human
consciousness. Here pragmatic language philosophy, like Wittgenstein’s language
game theory and Lakoff and Johnson’s embodied cognitive semantics combined
with ethology, all seen within Peircian biosemiotic framework (Brier 2000a), tell us
that signs as concepts and classiﬁcations arise in our embodied biological and social
“life forms”. From our inner world we express our bodily experiences in social rela-
tions. It is especially regarding the social communicative construction of meaning
that Luhmann’s theory connects so well with semiotics. But Luhmann himself did
not connect to semiotics in any systematic way. In the following I will reformulate
this problem area from a cybersemiotic viewpoint.
The Cybersemiotic View of Cognition and Communication
One way to understand our inner mental world is to see it as a way of represent-
ing our bodily interactions with the environment through the constructions of a felt
signiﬁcation sphere. In this way an individual “point of view” as a centre of cog-
nition, interest and interpretation is created. What Spinoza calls conatus, self-value
and self-interest in preserving the individual’s and species’ self-organizing structure
is basic to living systems’ ability to signify. But this individual signiﬁcation sphere
is again perturbed by the species’ speciﬁc social interactions starting with mating,
rearing of the young, competing for hunting territory, and hierarchy in the group,
co-operation in food gathering and hunting. These social interactive activities ﬁrst
generate sign games, and later in evolution, the human language games.
The construction or development of meaningful and informative messages has as
a prerequisite autopoiesis, signiﬁcation and conatus/motivation/intentionality. It is
only within this triad that the selections of information, utterance and meaning are
possible.
Viewed in this way, Luhmann’s three autopoietic systems (see Luhmann 1990)
are all needed to create the meaning of a message and one needs the sign con-
cept to understand their interaction. One way of getting out of the impasse of
Luhmann’s functionalism, where the role of body and mind in the production and
meaning of social communication has not been adequately grasped by theory, is to
view the interpenetration between the three organizationally closed systems semiot-
ically. Signs acquire meaning where the systems interpenetrate. Interpenetration is
Luhmann’s term for the interaction between biological autopoiesis, psychic closure
and the socio-communicative system with its own closure at the social level. My

22
The Cybersemiotic Model of Communication
721
hypothesis is that sign and language games arise on the basis of the interpenetration
of the three different autopoietic systems.
Meaning is seen as being generated by the interpenetration of the systems. For
example, language is a part of the socio-communicative system, but it does not
really acquire meaning before it interpenetrates with the psychic system and gets to
indicate differences of emotions, volitions and perceptions “putting words” on our
silent inner being. But our cognitive, emotional and volitional qualities would only
have a weak connection to reality if they were not connected to the survival of
the living systems’ organization as a body in its interaction with the environment’s
differences in the development of a signiﬁcation sphere in the evolution of the
species.
Biosemiotics and metaphor theory have argued extensively for the importance
of embodiment in semiosis. In Brier (2000a), I have tried to show the connec-
tion between the biosemiotic (ethologically based) concept of motivation and the
motivational concept of embodied cognitive semantics. I have shown that ethol-
ogy and embodied metaphor theory have both discovered that the conception
of a sign as standing for something for somebody in a particular way is con-
trolled by some releasing mechanisms that connect motivation, perception and
behaviour/action into one systemic process as already Jacob von Uexküll described
in his “Funktionskreis” and, which Heinz von Foerster refers to as perceptual
“eigenvalues”. Instinctually, the actual IRM (Innate Release Mechanism) is chosen
through the urge coming from a speciﬁc motivation. This is again based on biologi-
cal expectancies and vital needs, like for food and mating. I argue that the linguistic
motivation that Lakoff and Johnson claim controls the ICM (Idealized Conceptual
Models) have connection to the biological motivations in many instances. This is
obvious in the much-used example where a woman classiﬁes a man as a bachelor,
and therefore as a potential mating partner. It is our bio-psychological embodiment
that ties these relations together.
Further I showed that a phenomenological-emotional concept was necessary to
understand the production of meaning. I want to point out here that this is consistent
with Peirce’s placing of feeling as an attribute of Firstness. In his evolutionary
theory, feeling becomes an immanent inner reality, also in matter. Knowledge
systems thus unfold from our bio-psycho-socio-linguistic conscious being. Their
function is to help us orient (ourselves) in the world and help us act together in
the most fruitful way, but they do not explain us to ourselves. Peirce’s view that
we cannot with any good reasons split the concepts of mind and matter from the
beginning, is a very sound and profound foundation for a transdisciplinary meta-
physical framework. I do not see any good reason why the inner world of cognition,
emotions and volition should not be accepted as just as real as the physical world as
well as our cultural world of signs and meaning. Finally to both the spiritualist and
the materialist, embodied life, even with only one cell as the body, has to be a basic
part of, or a component of constructing reality. We are thinking in or maybe even
with the body. The psyche and its inner world arise within and between biological
systems or bodies. With Peirce one may say that there will always be some kind of
psyche in any kind of biological autopoietic and code dual system. Still, a partly

722
Søren Brier (1951– )
autonomous inner world of emotions, perceptions and volitions, only seems to arise
in multicellular chordates with a central nervous system. Lorenz (1973) argues
that such a system with emotions and experiences of pleasure is necessary for
animals to have appetitive behaviour, searching for the objects or situations that can
elicit their instinctual behaviour and release the motivational urge built up behind
it. This is qualitatively different from how reﬂexes function on a signal, which
is a proto-semiotic informational level. Instinctual sign function is on a genuine
semiotic level.
Luhmann’s theory of the human socio-communicative being consisting of three
levels of autopoiesis can be used in cybersemiotics to distinguish between (1) the
languaging (Maturana) of the biological systems, which is the coordination of coor-
dination of behaviours between individuals of a species on the reﬂexive signal level,
(2) the motivation driven sign games of the bio-psychological systems and, ﬁnally,
(3) the well driven language games level of the self-conscious linguistic human
through generalized media in the socio-communicative systems. A semiotic under-
standing has thus been added to Luhmann’s conception, and his theory has been
placed in the Peircian triadic metaphysics. In the following section, I will explain
and develop this further.
Intrasemiotics
It is obvious that what we call language games arises in social contexts where we
use our mind to coordinate our willful actions and urges with fellow members of our
culture. Some of these language games are then about our conceptions of nature,
now ﬁltered through our common culture and language. But underneath that, we
also have emotional and instinctual bio-psychological sign games (Brier 1995) that
these function for humans as unconscious paralinguistic signs, such as facial mim-
ics, hand movement gestures and body positions with origin in the evolution of
species-speciﬁc signiﬁcation processes in living systems.
Simultaneously, we also have an internal communication going on between
our mind and body. In Luhmann’s version it is something different from what
Kull (1998) calls psychosomatics, as it is not a direct interaction with culture but
only with the psyche. On the other hand it is not only endosemiosis. The terms
endosemiosis and exosemiosis were probably both coined by Sebeok (1976: 3),
endosemiosis denoting the semiosis that takes place inside the organisms, and
exosemiosis being the sign process that occurs between organisms. Endosemiosis
became a common term in semiotic discourse (see Uexküll et al. 1993), meaning a
semiotic interaction at a purely biological level between cells, tissues and organs.
Nöth and Kull (2001) introduced the term ecosemiotics, speciﬁcally for the signiﬁ-
cation process of non-intentional signs from the environment or other living beings
that take a meaning for another organism, for instance, to a hunting animal, the
scent of prey. Thus the sign signifying an organism, as a suitable prey is not inten-
tionally emitted by the organism preyed on, and is therefore rather ecosemiotic than

22
The Cybersemiotic Model of Communication
723
exosemiotic. What can we then call the internal semiotic interaction between the
biological and the psychological systems?
I term the interaction between the psyche and the linguistic system thought semi-
otics. This is where our culture through concepts offers us possible classiﬁcations
of our inner state of feelings, perceptions and volitions. These, in their non-
conceptual or pre-linguistic states not recognized by conceptual consciousness, I
call phenosemiotic processes. For short I just call them phenosemiosis.
As the interactions between the psyche and the body are internal bodily, but not
pure biological as in endosemiotics, I call the semiotic aspect of this interpenetra-
tion between the biological and the psychological autopoiesis intrasemiotics (Brier
2000b). These different terms are coined to remind us that we deal with different
kinds of semiotics. In the future, we will have to study more speciﬁcally the way
semiosis is created in each instance.
Today we know that there are semiotic interactions between the hormone sys-
tems, the transmitters in the brain and the immune system and that their interactions
are very important for the establishment of the autopoietic system of second order,
which a multicellular organism constructs as a kind of biological self. Its parts are
cells that are themselves autopoietic systems and these are again on a new level
organized to an autopoietic system. But we do not know very well what the rela-
tions are between our lived inner world of feeling, volitions and intensions and this
system. It seems that certain kinds of attention on bodily functions, such as imaging,
can create physiological effects in this combined system. As mentioned above, this
is partly carried by different substances that have a sign effect on organs and spe-
ciﬁc cell types in the body (endosemiotics). We also know that our hormonal level
inﬂuences our sexual and maternal responses. Fear turns on a series of chemicals
that change the state and reaction time of several body functions, and so on. This is
a very signiﬁcant part of the embodiment of our mind, but intrasemiotics seem to
function as meta-patterns of endosemiotic processes. For example, our state of mind
determines our body posture through the tightness of our muscles. There is a subtle
interplay between our perceptions, thoughts and feelings and bodily state working
among other things through the reticular activation system. There is still a lot we do
not know about the interaction between these systems.
The nervous system, the hormonal system and the immune system seem to be
incorporated into one big self-organized sign web. Now, the autopoietic description
of living cybernetic systems with closure does not really open for sign produc-
tion per se, and semiotics in itself does not reﬂect very much about the role of
embodiment in creating signiﬁcation. Thus, the cybersemiotic suggestion to solve
this problem is that signs are produced when the systems interpenetrate in different
ways. The three closed systems produce different kinds of semiosis and signiﬁca-
tion through different types of interpenetration, plus a level of structural couplings
and cybernetic “Ianguaging”, as Maturana and Varela (1980) call it.
Autopoiesis theory underlines that two interpenetrating systems primarily are
closed black boxes to each other. But interpenetration between them develops
a coordination of coordination of behaviour that he calls languaging. Parts of
these systems are inherited on reﬂexive and instinctual levels and are foundational

724
Søren Brier (1951– )
for communication to develop. Then, in my opinion, it is through the reciprocal
structural coupling formed between the two systems signs can be produced and
exchanged. Maturana’s concept of languaging (coordination of co-ordinations of
behaviour) seems to be the bio-psychological connection between two individuals
in a social species. But it is not the sign and/or language game as such; it is the
underlying coqnit ive coupling that is the coordination necessary for communi-
cation to develop as a signiﬁcation system with its own organizational closure. I
would, therefore, suggest that we distinguish between languaging and sign games
at the level between reﬂexes and instinctual movements (Brier 2000b) as already
mentioned. Thus, the schooling behaviour of ﬁsh is reﬂexive informational but
courtship communication is instinctual sign games. The perception eliciting reﬂexes
is independent of motivation, whereas the perception of sign stimuli is motivation-
dependent, which leads into the instinctual sign games. Ethologists would here point
to how certain instinctual movements become ritualised and get a release value
for instinctive behaviour as “sign-stimuli”. As Lorenz (1973), in his last period,
realized that emotions had to be connected to the performances of instinctual move-
ments to create the motivational urge of appetitive behaviour, we here have criteria
to distinguish between the two levels (Brier 2000b). We here see how the connec-
tion between signs and internal or phenomenological understanding is constructed.
Lakoff (1987), and Lakoff and Johnson (1998) have shown us how this basic mecha-
nism of bodily meaning can be explained, by metaphorical processes, to encompass
socially and culturally produced signs.
Based on ethology and biosemiotics I claim that our cognition manifests itself
as embodied semiosis, motivated in our biological social interest that is a powerful
creator of structure and meaning in our signiﬁcation sphere. Most animal behaviour
is – like much of our linguistic categorizations and use of metaphors considered to
be unconscious. Still ethologists had to realize that motivation is not a physiological
concept (Brier 1992, 1998), emotional experiences are connected to the perception
and behaviours with an instinctive basis.
Sign games are developed into language games through evolution and in the
life of the infant human. As we are born and grow into human social communi-
cation the psyche is perfused with signs. Our mind is infected with language and
we become semiotic cyborgs or what we call humans. We are in this view born
as animals with a capacity to construct this interpenetration between the psychic
and socio-communicative systems, creating internal interpretants that are meaning-
ful to us because of the mutual structural couplings of languaging established in
evolution. Meaning is seen in biosemiotics, cognitive semantics, autopoiesis the-
ory and ethology as embodied. But with the new cybernetics and von Uexküll, I
suggest that embodiment is thought of as much broader than only the structure of
the nervous system, or even the integration of the neurotransmitter, the hormone
and the immune systems through reaction to common sign substances that they
secrete. As Fogh Kirkeby (1997) suggests, we should look at the body-mind or
the body-thought as a complex phenomenological dynamical system, including the
construction of the environment and the other (body-mind) systems that make it
possible for signiﬁcation to appear.

22
The Cybersemiotic Model of Communication
725
Realizing that a signiﬁcation sphere not only pertains to the environment, but
also to the perception of other members of the species in cultural and proto-cultural
behaviour as well as to perceptions of own mind and body hood, I use a little “eco”
as a preﬁx to the signiﬁcation sphere, when it is the aspect of it pertaining especially
to non-intentional nature and culture outside the species in question. In both inan-
imate nature, as well as in other species and in cultural processes, we can observe
differences that signify meaning to us, although never intended by the object.
The Cybersemiotic Model of Biosemiotics
I am going to present a rather complicated model, differentiating between differ-
ent levels of semiosis and signalling, pertaining to some of the questions already
brought up about the basis and the thresholds of semiosis within biosemiosis, but
without going to a pan-semiotic view. Ecosemiotics focuses on the part of our lan-
guage that is about how all living systems represent nature in signiﬁcation spheres,
ending with language games in culture. Cybersemiotics points out that the basis
of these eco-language games is the eco-sign games of animals, combined with a
signiﬁcation sphere, and created through evolution. Further, these are based on an
intricate interplay between the living system and its environment, establishing what
Maturana and Varela call structural couplings. The signiﬁcation sphere is a work-
able model of nature for this living system that as a species has existed and evolved
over millions of years.
This is also true for the human species, indicating that our language has a deep
inner connection to the ecology of our culture. Any existing culture is a collective
way of making a social system survive ecologically. As such, the cybersemiotic
theory of mind, perception and cognition is a realistic one, but not a materialis-
tic or mechanistic one. It builds on an inner semiotic connection between living
beings, nature, culture and consciousness carried by the three Peircian categories
in a synechistic and tychastic ontology in an agapistic theory of evolution deliv-
ering a philosophy going beyond the dualistic oppositions between ideal ism (or
spiritualism) and materialism (or mechanism).
We can go back and now see that the linguistic motivation, mentioned earlier,
must be placed in the area of thought-semiotics where our internal non-linguistic
phenosemiotic processes of mind meet with the concepts of language and imbue
them with inner meaning, whereas the animal motivation stems from the intrasemi-
otic area where the endosemotic processes of the body cells meet with the
phenosemiotic processes of mind and awareness. Thus body, mind and language
has been encompassed by a shared framework able to conceptualise their interac-
tions on the same process level but now integrating concepts of meaning and qualia.
The cybersemiotic model thus provides a new conceptual framework, in which these
different levels of motivation can be represented and distinguished in a way that
was not possibly in the earlier three different frameworks of biology, psychology
and socio-culture. Thus, by viewing meaning in an evolutionary light, as always

726
Søren Brier (1951– )
embodied, and seeing the body as semiotically organized in Peirce’s triadic world-
view, where mind as pure feeling is Firstness, a transdisciplinary framework can
be constructed that supersedes some of the limitations of the earlier divisions of
subject areas. This gives us hope that the cybersemiotic development of biosemi-
otics can contribute to a new inter- and transdisciplinary semiotic theory of mind,
cognition, communication and consciousness.
Conclusion
I have now analysed the most prominent attempts of creating transdisciplinary
frameworks for communication and cognition in physical nature, living nature,
human culture, and in society as well as computers. They are all attempts to bridge
the gap between Snow’s two cultures, science-technology versus humanities and
social sciences.
One major problem is how to place the mechanical, the living and the con-
scious system in relation to each other and how to ﬁt this into the evolutionary
framework of modern science. Another problem is how to ﬁnd an all-encompassing
unity without reducing one reality with another, making everything either physical,
informational/computational, or semiotic.
Firstly, respecting the different nature of the physical, the informational and
semiotical, how can we connect and understand the causal relations? Because we
do not have a framework that integrates mind and matter, science today is not
able to conceptualise how the conscious mind can causally inﬂuence the physio-
logical processes in the body. Biosemiotic analysis of internal processing in the
body (endosemiotics) and mind (phenosemiotics) in combination with systemic and
cybernetic models of self-organization and closure (intrasemiotics) seems to offer
an integrated approach to describing mind and bodily processes. Peircean semiotic
philosophy seems to be able to deliver a philosophical and metaphysical frame-
work without the limitations and ﬂaws of the purely mechanical or informational
approaches (including the computational information processing paradigm in cogni-
tive science). It is now generally realized that the mechanical and the computational
sciences can only describe limited and idealized aspects of reality. In both mechan-
ical and the computational areas we can understand, control and predict systems
with wonderful clarity and power. These systems, unfortunately, seem only to be
tiny samples of the types of systems that make up the Universe as we know it.
Recognizing that the social and psychological system of emotions, willpower and
meaning are just as real as the mechanical system, although of a different nature,
it is, no longer viable to model nature as pure mechanical or mind as only com-
putational. On the basis of Peirce’s philosophy, Cybersemiotic offers a different
and more comprehensive foundation that encompasses the previously mentioned
paradigms, but now relativized as being the most pertinent descriptions of certain
levels of reality. They are parts of a greater whole where not only efﬁcient causality
(physical), but also formal causality (informational) and ﬁnal (semiotic) causality

22
The Cybersemiotic Model of Communication
727
work as real forces, but manifesting at different levels. The view, in short, is that
semiosis is thus immanent in the universe and manifests clearly in the living systems
and becomes emancipated and self-organized in social systems.
References
Bateson, G. (1973). Steps to an Ecology of Mind: Collected Essays in Anthropology, Psychiatry,
Evolution and Epistemology. St. Albans: Paladin.
Blackmore, S. (2000). The Meme Machine. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bohm, D. (1983). Wholeness and the Implicate Order. New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul Inc.
Brier, S. (1992). Information and consciousness: A critique of the mechanistic concept of
information. Cybernetics & Human Knowing 1(2/3), 71–94.
Brier, S. (1995). Cyber-semiotics: On autopoiesis, code-duality and sign games in bio-semiotics.
Cybernetics & Human Knowing, 3(1), 3–25.
Brier, S. (1998a). The cybersemiotic explanation of the emergence of cognition: The explanation
of cognition signiﬁcation and communication in a non-cartesian cognitive biology. Evolution
and Cognition 4(1), 90–105.
Brier, S. (1998b). Cybersemiotics: A transdisciplinary framework for information studies.
BioSystems 46, 185–191.
Brier, S. (1999a). On the conﬂict between the informational and the semiotic communicational
paradigm. In: Proceedings from the 43rd Annual Conference of The International Society for
the Systems Sciences, 28 June–2 July, Asilomar, CA, USA. CDROM, Article No. 99169.
Brier, S. (1999b). Biosemiotics and the foundation of cybersemiotics. Reconceptualizing the
insights of ethology, second order cybernetics and Peirce’s semiotics in biosemiotics to
create a non-Cartesian information science. Semiotica 127(1/4), 169–198. Special issue on
Biosemiotics.
Brier, S. (1999c). What is a possible ontological and epistemological framework for a true univer-
sal “information science”? The suggestion of a cybersemiotics. In: Hofkirchner, W. (Ed.) The
Quest for a Uniﬁed Theory of Information: Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on
the Foundations of Information Science, 1996, Vienna, Austria. Amsterdam: Gordon & Breach,
pp. 79–99.
Brier, S. (2000a). On the connection between cognitive semantics and ethological concepts of
motivation: A possible bridge between embodiment in cognitive semantics and the motivation
concept in ethology. Cybernetics and Human Knowing 7(1), 57–75.
Brier, S. (2000b). The relation between the semiotic and the informational research programs in the
quest for a united theory for information, cognition and communication, Proceedings from the
7th International Congress of the International Association for Semiotic Studies/Association
Internationale de Semiotioue (IASS-AIS): Sign Processes in Complex Systems, Dresden,
University of Technology, October 6–11, 1999.
Brier, S. (2000c). Cybersemiotics as a suggestion for FIS. In: Proceedings of The World Congress
of the Systems Sciences and ISSS 2000, International Society for the Systems Sciences, 44 h
Annual Meeting, July 16–22, 2000, Toronto, Ontario Canada. Article No. 20150 – CD-ROM.
Brier, S. (2000d). Trans-scientiﬁc frameworks of knowing: complementarity views of the different
types of human knowledge. Yearbook Edition of Systems Research and Behavioral Science
17(5), 433–458.
Brier, S. (2001a). Cybersemiotics and Umweltlehre. Semiotica 134(1/4), 779–814. Special issue
on Jakob von Uexkull.
Brier, S. (2001b). Cybersemiotics, biosemiotics and ecosemiotics. In: Tarasti, F. (Ed.) 1ST
congress paper, Nordic Baltic Summer Institute for Semiotic and Structural Studies.
Ecosemiotics: Studies in Environmental Semiosis, semiotics of Biocybernetic Bodies,
Human/too Human/Posthuman. Part IV, June 12–21, 2001, in Imatra, Finland. pp. 7–26.

728
Søren Brier (1951– )
Brier, S. (2001c). Ecosemiotic and cybersemiotics. Sign System Studies 29(7), 107–120.
Brier, S. (2004). Peirce’s panethestic scientiﬁc mysticism. Proceedings from Symposium on
Peirce’s Religious Writing. Denver, May 2003.
Combs, A., Brier, S. (2001). Signs, information, and consciousness. SYSTEMS – Journal of
Transdisciplinary Systems Science 5(1,2), 2000; Polish Systems Society, Wroclaw, Poland.
Dawkins, R. (1989). The Selﬁsh Gene. Oxford Paperbacks.
Deacon, T. W. (1997). The Symbolic Species: The Co-evolution of Language and the Brain. New
York: Norton.
Deeley, J. (1990). Basics of Semiotics. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Deely, J. (1997). How is the universe perfused with signs? In: Spinks, C. W., Deely, J. (Eds.)
Semiotics. New York: Peter Lang.
Deely, J. (1997). Physiosemiosis and semiotics. In: Spinks, C. W., Deely, J. (Eds.) Semiotics. New
York: Peter Lang.
Deely, J. (2001). Physiosemiosis in the semiotic spiral: A play of musement. International
Colloquium “The Semiotic Threshold from Nature to Culture”, University of Kassel, Feb.
16–17.
Ellis, R. D., Newton, N. (1998). Three paradoxes of phenomenal consciousness: Bridging the
explanatory gap. Journal of Consciousness Studies 5(4), 419–42.
Emmeche, C. (2000). Transdisciplinarity, theory-zapping and the growth of knowledge. Semiotica
131(3/4), 217–228.
Kirkeby, O. F. (1997). Event and body-mind. An outline of a post-postmodern approach to
phenomenology. Cybernetics & Human Knowing 4(2/3), 3–34.
Goerner, S. J. (1993). Chaos and the Evolving Ecological Universe, the World Future General
Evolution Studies, Vol. 7. Luxembourg: Gordon and Breach.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1998). Surfaces inside surfaces. Cybernetics & Human Knowing 5(1), 33–42.
Jantsch, E. (1980). The Self-Organizing Universe. New York: Pergamon Press.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, Fire and Dangerous Things: What Categories Reveal About the Mind.
Chicago/London: The University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G., Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the Flesh: The Embodied Mind and Its Challenge
to Western Thought. New York: Basic Books.
Laszlo, E. (1995). The Interconnected Universe, Conceptual Foundations of Transdisciplinary
Uniﬁed Theory. Singapore: World Scientiﬁc.
Luhmann, N. (1990). Essays on Self-reference. New York: Colombia University Press.
Luhmann, N. (1995). Social Systems. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Lorenz, K. (1970/71). Studies in Animal and Human Behaviour I and II. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Lorenz, K. (1973). Die Rückseite des Spiegels: Versuch einer Naturgeschichte menschlichen
Erkennens. Munchen: Piper.
MacKay, D. M. (1969). Information, Mechanism and Meaning. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Marijuan, P. C. (1998). Foreword: Foundations of information science. Cybernetics & Human
Knowing 5(4), 2.
Maturana, H. R. (2000). The nature of the laws of nature. Yearbook Edition of Systems Research
and Behavioral Science, Systems Research 17(5), 459–468.
Maturana, H. R., Narela, F. J. (1980). Autopoiesis and Cognition: The realization of the Living.
London: Reidel.
Merell, F. (1996). Signs Grow: Semiosis of Life Processes. Toronto: University of Toronto
Press.
Nöth, W. (1995). Handbook of Semiotics. Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press.
Nöth, W. (2001). Introduction to Ecosemiosis, Tarasti, lSI Congress papers, Nordic Baltic Summer
Institute for Semiotic and Structural Studies Part IV, June 12–21, 2001 in Imatra, Finland:
Ecosemiotics: Studies in Environmental Semiosis, Semiotics of the Biocybernetic Bodies,
Human/too Human/ Post Human, pp. 107–123.
Nöth, W. (2002). Semiotic machines. Cybernetics & Human Knowing 9(1), 5–21.

22
The Cybersemiotic Model of Communication
729
Ort, N., Marcus, P. (1999). Niklas Luhmann: Sign as form – A comment. Cybernetics & Human
Knowing 6(3), 39–46.
Peirce, C. S. (1931–58). Collected Papers, Vol. I–VIII. In: Hartshorne, C., Weiss, P., Burks, A.
(Eds.) Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1992). The Essential Peirce: Selected Philosophical, Vol. 1 (1867–1893). Houser,
N., Kloesel, C. (Eds.) Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Penrose, R. (1995). Shadows of the Mind: A Search for the Missing Science of Consciousness.
London: Oxford University Press.
Prigogine, I., Stengers, I. (1984). Order Out of Chaos: Man’s New Dialogue with Nature. New
York: Bantam Books.
Ruesch, J., Bateson, G. (1987). Communication: The Social Matrix of Psychiatry. New York:
Norton (Original 1967).
Santaella Braga, L. (1999). Peirce and biology. Semiotica 127(1/4), 5–21. Special Issue:
Biosemiotica.
Schrödinger, E. (1967). What is Life? The Physical Aspect of the Living Cell and Mind and Matter.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press (Original 1942).
Sebeok, T. A. (1976). Contributions to the Doctrine of Signs. Bloomington: Indiana University
Press.
Sebeok, T. A. (1989). The Sign & Its Masters. Sources in Semiotics VIII. New York: University
Press of America.
Shannon, C. E., Weaver, W. (1949). The Mathematical Theory of Communication. Urbana, IL:
University of Illinois Press.
Stonier, T. (1997). Information and Meaning: An Evolutionary Perspective. Berlin: Springer.
Uexkull, J. von (1934). A stroll through the worlds of animals and men. A picture book of invisible
worlds. In: Schiller, C. H. (Ed.) (1957) Instinctive Behavior. The Development of a Modern
Concept. New York: International Universities Press. pp. 5–80.
Uexkull, T. von, Geigges, W, Herrmann, J. M. (1993). Endosemiosis. Semiotica 96(1/2), 5–51.
Wiener, N. (1961). Cybernetics or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine,
2nd Ed. New York: MIT Press and John Wiley & Sons (Orginal 1948).
Winograd, T., Flores, F. (1987). Understanding Computers and Cognition. Norwood, NJ: Alex
Publishing Corporation
Wittgenstein, L. (1958). Philosophical Investigation, 3rd Ed., translated by Anscombe G. E. M.
New York: Mac Millian.

Chapter 23
Excerpts from The Logos of the Bios
Günther Witzany (1953– )
Introduction and Commentary: Günther Witzany
Wittgenstein writes: “Is what we call ‘obeying a rule’ something that it would be possible
for only one man to do, and only once in his life? It is not possible that there should have
been only one occasion on which someone obeyed a rule. It is not possible that there should
have been only one occasion on which a report was made, an order given or understood,
and so on – To obey a rule, to make a report, to give an order, to play a game of chess,
are customs (uses, institutions)” To which I add: One sign alone is not a sign. A sign is a
sign only as part of a context of signs. In his analysis of the expression “to obey a rule”,
Wittgenstein provides proof that the identity of meanings logically depends on the ability to
follow intersubjectively valid rules together with at least one additional subject.
G. Witzany (2007: 196)
As should be overwhelmingly evident from the readings that have appeared in
this anthology so far, biosemiotics is an interdisciplinary reservoir of research ﬁnd-
ings and ideas that is fed by many streams. Even so, however, the trajectory of
its historical development has been such that it has barely intersected with many
other trends in thought that took place during the last century, such as those tak-
ing place under the general rubric of Analytical Philosophy. Quite possibly, such
non-intersection is the result of the self-avowed (human) “language-centric” nature
of the latter project, as inculcated at its outset by the works of Bertrand Russell
and the younger Ludwig Wittgenstein in initiating the so-called “linguistic turn”
in philosophy – wherein problems of “knowing” are reduced to problems in (by
necessity, exclusively human) propositional language clarity. Widening this rift was
the fact that this ‘turn’ was succeeded by analytic philosophy’s post-1960s “cogni-
tive turn” attempts at explicating a theory of (usually wholly anthropomorphic and
external-reality separated) “mind.” Rejecting what they see as both the unresolved
nominalism and the biologically naïve anthropocentrism permeating many of these
analyses, biosemioticians have traditionally been loathe to engage with the debates
taking place within analytic philosophy, ﬁnding the very terms of its discourse to be
a foundational roadblock to naturalistic inquiry.1
1 See Deely 2001 (especially Chapters “The Animal Mind”, “A Semiotic Perspective on the
Sciences: Steps to a New Paradigm”, “Theoretical Biology on its Way to Biosemiotics”, and “Laws
731
D. Favareau, Essential Readings in Biosemiotics, Biosemiotics 3,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9650-1_23, C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010

732
Günther Witzany (1953– )
Philosopher Günther Witzany, however, has pursued the developments in con-
temporary analytic philosophy as they have evolved beyond the problematic
premises of logical positivism and eliminative materialism, and has incorporated
insights from analytic philosophy’s still later 20th century “pragmatic turn” (i.e.,
speech act theory and action theory) to develop a “three-leveled biosemiotics”
of rule-governed, sign-mediated interaction that avoids the traps of both anthro-
pomorphism and of methodological solipsism, his naturalistic approach to the
understanding of “signs.”
Born in Salzburg, Austria on August 25, 1953, Günther Witzany studied philos-
ophy, political science and ethics at the universities of Salzburg and Munich before
founding the ﬁrst Philosophical Practice counseling and consultation practice in
Austria, in 1985. Witzany’s Telos – Philosophische Praxis, based on the “applied
philosophy” principles founded by Gerd B. Achenbach in 1982, applies philosoph-
ical inquiry and analysis to the ﬁelds of theoretical science, practical ethics (e.g.,
politics, business) and aesthetical appreciation and understanding.2
Between 1987 and 1992, Witzany was the author and editor of the nature philos-
ophy journal, Arche Nova, as well as of several books on natural philosophy, music
therapy, renewable energy, the problem of technocracy, and European community
(all these works in German, see reference list). During this time, too, Witzany
developed a philosophy of biology that he has christened “the theory of communica-
tive nature” – the goal of which is to demonstrate how sign processes within cells,
between cells, and between living individuals can be understood in their full syntac-
tic, semantic and pragmatic dimensions. “The method is a cross-disciplinary one,”
writes Witzany, and it draws extensively from insights and research ﬁndings pro-
vided by “philosophy (especially philosophy of nature, philosophy of language and
communication, philosophy of science), biology (and in particular microbiology,
molecular biology, epigenetics, evolution and development theory, social biology)
and semiotics (particularly biosemiotics, endosemiotics, and [Peircean Karl Otto
Apel’s] transcendental semiotics)” (2009: p.c.).
In contrast to similar frameworks such as information theory, systems theory,
biohermeneutics, biolinguistics, and even other schools of biosemiotics, Witzany’s
theory “insists upon the primacy of pragmatics, i.e. the relation of signs and sign-
using agents within those interactional contexts that alone determine the meaning of
the signs used” (ibid). For one of the major lessons of philosophy of language’s early
of Symbolic Mediation”, pp. 485–609) for an in-depth discussion contrasting modern philosophy’s
foundational commitments to the (human) mind-privileging “doctrine of ideas” with biosemiotics’
foundational commitments to the organism-and-environment privileging “doctrine of signs” – and
to the two very different explanatory pathways and destinations afforded by each.
2 Explains philosophical practitioner Shlomit Schuster: “Gerd Achenbach [b 1947] and most of
the European practitioners [of Philosophische Praxis] began practicing philosophy as a critique of,
and an alternative to, psychotherapy and psychoanalysis. Consequently, philosophical counseling
is not about ‘applying philosophy’, as if placing a poultice of Kant on the soul – but it is creative
philosophizing itself. Unlike Marinoff’s [similarly named but] Zen Buddhist and Ayn Rand inspired
therapy, Achenbach’s practice is derived from critical and skeptical sources, and philosophizing
with the client remains the only ultimate goal of the practice” (2005: o.l.).

23
Excerpts from The Logos of the Bios
733
failed attempts to analyze and to formalize truth claims by the examination of their
syntactic and semantic combinatorics alone, observes Witzany, is that such “context-
free” analyses shift the burden of meaning-making onto the (usually lifeless) sign-
vehicles, as opposed to the (always animate) sign users, where alone the processes
of meaning-making have their proper being.
Inspired by the “pragmatic turn” taken by philosophers such J.L. Austin
(1911–1960), John Searle (1932– ), Jürgen Habermas (1929– ), Karl Otto Apel
(1922– ), and, particularly, the later work of Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889–1951),
Witzany insists that we must look to the practices (and to the history of prac-
tices) in which signs gain their meaning, in order to understand the roles that they
play in the life of any given sign user or community of sign-users. Such practices,
as Wittgenstein insisted, are by deﬁnition social – and thus, with Habermas and
Apel, Witzany insists upon the replacement of the solus ipses sign-user with “an
intersubjective-communicative community of interpretations” as the proper subject
of knowledge – and as the object of our biosemiotics inquiries (2006: 3).
Analyzing the rules of syntactic and semantic sign-sequences can never reveal
to us the rules of interaction that invest those sequences with their pragmatic use
(which is to say: their semiotic “meaning” for the user), argues Witzany, and thus
any investigation or analyses of sign-mediated interactions must recognize and
account for the inextricable complementarity of syntactic (combinatorial), prag-
matic (context-sensitive) and semantic (content-specifying) rules underlying and
making possible every instance of sign use. Thus, a “three-leveled” biosemiotics
is necessary, in order “to discover and to reconstruct the rule systems according to
which [communities of interacting organisms] generate the contexts of interactions”
wherein “things” become “signs” and gain their “meanings” (Habermas 1971: 65).
Moreover, the tripartite interaction rules themselves take place on three
different – and, again, simultaneous and interdependent – levels of coordina-
tion and organization, argues Witzany. Thus, the establishment of meaning in
his “three-leveled biosemiotics” relies upon the tight (and historically generated)
interconnections between the processes of (1) intra-organismic communication
(i.e., sign-mediated interactions in cells and between cells), (2) inter-organismic
communication (sign-mediated interactions between individuals of the same or
closely related species), and (3) trans-organismic communication (sign-mediated
interactions between members of different species).
In all of these cases, writes Witzany, “the relationship of organisms to other
organisms is a communicative one: their mutual behavior underlies changeable
rules” that are quite distinct from the biological principles of ﬁxed natural law under-
lying organisms’ physiological relationships with the abiotic surround, towards
which “organisms cannot develop such a ‘to follow or not to follow’ relationship”
(2007: 209). It is for this reason, he writes, that Jakob von Uexküll’s Umwelt concept
cannot do justice to the fundamental differences between natural laws and rule-governed
sign-mediated interactions, because this concept reduces rule-governed sign-mediated inter-
actions to the information transmission effect – and therefore to a level of coding and
decoding via an individual organism’s physiological sensory organ. The intersubjective-
communicative character of the rule-governed sign-mediated interactions, and therefore

734
Günther Witzany (1953– )
the relationship to following or not-following commonly shared rules of sign-use, does
not manifest itself here. In investigating communication processes in and between organ-
isms, it is therefore sensible to supplement the Umwelt [‘in-world’] concept with a Mitwelt
[‘co-world’] concept. The Mitwelt concept underlines the difference between the cause-
and-effect reactions in natural laws and rule-governed sign-mediated interactions: Umwelt
thus becomes a helpful term in investigating those physiological inﬂuences on organisms
that are not components of rule-governed sign-mediated interactions, and Mitwelt becomes
the term for the integrative investigation of all rule-governed sign-mediated interactions of
organisms, i.e. all intra-, inter- and meta-organismic communication processes and their
developmental history.
In the series of publications written between 1995 and 2007 and appearing in
print, collectively, as The Logos of the Bios, Volumes 1 and 2, Witzany (2006, 2007)
demonstrates the fecundity of his three-leveled biosemiotics framework by applying
it to current research ﬁndings regarding viruses, bacteria, fungi, animals (especially
bees and corals) and plants. In the selection that follows, he highlights the differ-
ence that applying a “pragmatic turn” makes to our understanding of biological
organization, interaction, and evolution.

23
Excerpts from The Logos of the Bios
735
Excerpts from The Logos of the Bios (2007)
Introduction
Margulis’ Serial Endosymbiotic Theory explains the origin of nucleated eukaryotic
cells as a merging of archaebacterial and eubacterial cells. The paradigmatic change
offered by this theory is that the driving force behind evolution is not ‘ramiﬁca-
tion’ but ‘merging’. However, Margulis describes these symbiogenetic processes in
the language of mechanistic biology, using such terms as ‘fusion’, ‘merging’, and
‘incorporation.’
Biosemiotics argues that all cell–cell interactions are rule-governed sign-
mediated interactions – i.e., communication processes. As a discussion of plant
communication will demonstrate, the biosemiotic approach is not limited to the level
of molecular biology, but is also helpful in examining all sign-mediated interactions
between organisms on the phenotypic level, as well. Yet if biosemiotics is going
to use the terms such as ‘language’ and ‘communication’ to describe non-human
sign-mediated interactions, then the underlying scientiﬁc justiﬁcation of such usage
should be critically considered and explained.
Towards this end, I will here brieﬂy summarize the some of the relevant discus-
sions that took place amongst philosophers of language between 1920 and 1980
that led to what has been called ‘the pragmatic turn.’ I will argue that application
of this pragmatic turn to the philosophy of biology both lays the foundation for a
three-leveled biosemiotics, as well as justiﬁes it. I will also show how doing so helps
to avoid ‘the abstractive fallacy’ which is a recurring weakness of many of today’s
scientiﬁc methodologies.
Therefore: In order to extend the Serial Endosymbiotic Theory through its refor-
mulation within a biosemiotic perspective, I will proceed in the eight steps outlined
below:
The ﬁrst step will to be to brieﬂy present the aims of biosemiotics. Biosemiotics
investigates life processes, and more concretely, sign use within and between organ-
isms. Biosemiotics holds that no life processes could be coordinated and organized
without signs.
The second step is the outline of the Serial Endosymbiotic Theory. As Lynn
Margulis plausibly demonstrates, chance mutations were not necessarily responsible
for initiating the evolutionary process from prokaryotes to eukaryotes. Rather, merg-
ing processes by various prokaryotes via endosymbioses and the fusion of different
organisms may have just as likely have led ultimately to a eukaryotic cell.
The third step will be to show that Margulis’ ‘merging processes’ go beyond mere
physical and chemical changes in state of these cells. I argue that the symbiogenetic
integration of different genomes into a single genome is not just a chance merging or
fusion process, but rather it requires precise and error-free DNA/RNA processing –
i.e., not the chance integration of DNA components, but rather the integration of
entire gene blocks along with their phenotypic features.
The fourth step will be to show how competent DNA-processing underlies semi-
otic rules. Traditionally, it has been assumed that such nucleic acid processing could

736
Günther Witzany (1953– )
only be carried out by enzyme proteins: they were known to be responsible for key
DNA modiﬁcation processes such as DNA splicing, RNA editing, coding, copying,
major and ﬁne repair, transcription, translation, etc. They were considered unlikely
candidates for evolutionary genome editing. This would have created a paradox that
there had to be a DNA that coded for proteins that changed their own DNA-template,
as Watson formulated (“Enzymes cannot determine the order of the amino acids in
polypeptide chains.”) (Watson et al. 1992). Here, I show that this genome-editing
competence, with its higher-order regulatory function, was found not in the protein-
coding DNA (as it was previously thought), but in the non-protein-coding DNA
(long-termed insigniﬁcant “junk DNA”).
The ﬁfth step uses the example of plants to show that the biosemiotic thesis –
namely that sign-mediated interactions are the central aspect in coordinating and
organizing life processes – is valid not only in the intracellular-genetic realm, but
also in the intercellular organismic realm.
The sixth step demonstrates the necessity of specifying the scientiﬁc basis for
using such terms and concepts as ‘language’ and ‘communication’ when referring to
living nature. The history of science shows that the theoretical clariﬁcation of these
two terms took place in two historical phases. The ﬁrst was the ‘linguistic turn’ that
attempted to construct a language that could be applied to formulate exact state-
ments in the natural sciences. During the second phase, christened the ‘pragmatic
turn,’ it became apparent that the attempt to justify such a language failed because
the proponents had based their premises on an unrealistic model of language and of
the subject of knowledge.
The seventh step is the application of a biosemiotic approach that requires con-
sidering all three semiotic levels of rules (i.e., sign pragmatics, sign syntax, sign
semantics) to biological processes such as those studied in molecular biology, sym-
biogenesis, and the phenotypic communication within and between plants. In this
section, I will also show how a reductionistic abbreviation of any of these three
levels irrevocably leads to an abstractive fallacy, for which there are numerous
examples in the history of science.
The eighth step is the attempt to symbiologically expand the self-awareness of
biologists. The adoption of a pragmatic philosophy of biology could help to alter
the process of self-awareness in biologists, allowing them to scientiﬁcally compre-
hend themselves as biological entities who are permanently involved in symbiotic
processes; and reminding them that even in scientiﬁc discourse, they are dependent
participants in an indeﬁnitely ongoing dialogue within the scientiﬁc community.
1. What is the Aim of Biosemiotics?
Biosemiotics is a transdisciplinary science including theoretical and empirical stud-
ies; it investigates the use of signs within and between organisms. Signs may be
signals or symbols, most of them chemical molecules. In the highly developed
eukaryotic kingdoms, behavioral patterns of organisms also may serve as signs

23
Excerpts from The Logos of the Bios
737
(signals and/or symbols), as for example, the dances of bees; or the signs may be
phonetic, as in songbirds or humans. The signs obey semiotic rules of three types.
Syntactic rules determine combinatory possibilities – physical, chemical, spatial,
temporal, rhythmical. Pragmatic rules determine interactional content (e.g., regu-
latory pathways have signiﬁcant differences with metabolic pathways). And those
rules dependent on pragmatic interactional content are the semantic ones, i.e., the
meaning of signs and sign sequences (e.g. in signaling pathways).
Individuals in a population share a common set of signs and a common set of
rules. It can be applied to cell biology as well. Dependent on the situational context
of interacting entities, one sign, or sequence of signs, can have different mean-
ings or functions. Therefore, it is possible that different cell types come from the
same genome by the interpretation of different chromosomal methylation patterns.
Biosemiotics in the context of molecular cell biology includes not only sign pro-
cesses used within cells, but also embraces immunological, metabolic, neurological
and hormonal signaling pathways.
Zoosemiotics is considered the forerunner of contemporary biosemiotics.
Corresponding to the ﬁve taxonomic kingdoms zoosemiotics has been completed by
prokaryotic semiotics (bacteria), protoctist semiotics (eukaryotic microorganisms),
mycosemiotics (fungi) and phytosemiotics (plants) (Nöth 2000). To many biosemi-
oticians, the origin of life is the starting point of semiosis and vice versa (Witzany
1993; Hoffmeyer 1996; Barbieri 2001; Markos 2002; Emmeche and Hoffmeyer
2005; Pattee 2005).
So far, biosemiotic terms have been used as metaphors in molecular and evolu-
tionary biology, as well as in genetics and ecology, the conviction being that they
could ultimately be replaced by chemical and physical descriptions. As a result,
the paradigmatic differences between biosemiotic and chemical/physical descrip-
tions are becoming much more evident what enables biosemiotics to draw a clear
distinction between the biotic and abiotic domains: “Life is distinguished from the
nonliving world by its dependence on signs” (Pattee 2005). Thereby, it is possible to
use biosemiotics to expand the perspective on biological processes. Consequently,
the factors decisive for life processes do not consist only of the states of matter and
their corresponding chances based on natural laws, but also of the communication
and information processes within and among cells, tissues, organs, organisms. Their
importance determines the success or failure to promote life, growth, development,
disease and death in all living beings. Biosemiotics enables a broader understanding
of the complexity of life processes which could hardly be achieved by conventional
biological methods.
2. The Serial Endosymbiotic Theory
The Serial Endosymbiotic Theory is revolutionary because it reversed the evolution
vector from ramiﬁcation to merging. Eukaryotic cells, according to Margulis, are the
result of merging several different ancestor genomes (Margulis 1996, 1999, 2004;
Margulis et al. 2000; Margulis and Sagan 2002).

738
Günther Witzany (1953– )
Margulis refers to the term symbiogenesis as coined by Mereschkovsky and
Wallin. The authors argue that new tissues, organs, organisms and species arise
by entering into long-term, permanent symbioses. Bacteria were permanently
incorporated into animal and plant cells as plastids and mitochondria (Searcy
2003).
The important factor is the sequence of merging in symbiogenesis, i.e. the serial
evolution. The ﬁrst merger involved (1) thermoplasmic archaebacteria with motile
spirochaeta-like eubacteria that (2) were able to swim, to the nucleocytoplasm.
These forms were still anaerobic. This was followed by a merging with (3) aero-
bic organisms. This enabled them to survive the increasing oxygen concentrations.
The late and ﬁnal step was the merging with (4) photosynthetic bacteria. With this
approach, the Serial Endosymbiotic Theory contradicts traditional theories of evo-
lution, all of which ﬁrmly held that the direction lay in ramiﬁcation and not in
merging.
Cilia, the rods in the retina, the tail of sperm cells, sensory hairs and many
similar appendages of nucleated cells arose during the original merging of archae-
bacteria and a swimming bacterium. The bodies they contain so-called “centriole-
kinetosomes” arose through this archaic merger. There is also a genetic relationship
between cilia and microtubules at the surface of nuclei of plants, and between micro-
tubules and the mitotic spindles responsible for chromosome movement during cell
division. Baluska et al. (2004) have convincingly reconstructed this in their cell
body-theory. According to Margulis, the Spirochaeta are the modern, free-living
relatives of these symbiogenetically merged centriole-kinetosomes,
One integrated genome was sufﬁcient in the merger of archae and eubacterium, in
the Proctista two integrated genomes were necessary, in the fungi three, in animals at
least four, and in the plant kingdom (400 million years ago) at least 5, perhaps even 7
(Margulis 1996). Thus, the plant genome is the epitome of symbiogenetic evolution
processes and represents the most complex integration process. Considering that the
evolution of ﬂowering plants took place only about 150 million years ago, and that
their seeds and fruits provided the foundation for higher animals, then these revo-
lutionary symbiogenetic processes are relatively young compared with evolutionary
history as such (Margulis and Schwartz 1988).
The Serial Endosyrnbiotic Theory also supports her assumption by pointing
out that most of the DNA found in the cytoplasm of animals, fungi, plants and
protoctists comes from genes of bacteria that became organelles, and not from
genetic drift or mutations. Eukaryotic genes that participate in information process-
ing (translation, transcription etc.) show a close relationship to eubacteria. Genetic
factors that control metabolic processes, however, more closely resemble those of
archaebacteria.
Another advantage of the merging paradigm of the Serial Endosymbiotic Theory
is that DNA elongation (from bacterium to humans: 1–1,000 mm) need not be
attributed to chance, which would be highly improbable (Vollmert 1985), but
rather to a merging of entire gene-blocks. This demonstrates that complex genomic
make-ups can be passed on directly and that the step-by-step development via

23
Excerpts from The Logos of the Bios
739
chance mutations is outdated. There are strong reasons too, that eukaryotic nucleus
is of viral origin. Endogenous retroviruses are held to be competent in creating new
genes in large numbers, complex and simple ones (Villarreal and DeFilippis 2000;
Bell 2001; Ryan 2002; Villarreal 2004).
3. Not ‘Merging’, but ‘Communication’
Lynn Margulis uses in the Serial Endosymbiotic Theory the classic language of
mechanistic biology to describe the highly complex interactions of a symbiosis
and, subsequently, symbiogenesis. This language (“merging”, “fusion”, “incorpo-
ration”, etc.) is imprecise because it describes the altered state of matter, rather than
the semiotic aspects of genome editing, i.e., the syntactic, pragmatic and seman-
tic rules which determine combinatorial, interactional and functional aspects of the
integration processes of different prokaryotic genomes into one.
In fact, a multi-leveled, generative DNA-processing rather than “fusion” is
involved. Its success, however, depends on whether the necessary sign processes
proceed according to rules or whether they fail. Moreover, the integration of genetic
components into available genomes and, therefore, the creation of a new individual
do not involve “incorporation”, but rather rule-governed sign-mediated interactions
between cells and cell components.
The pragmatic philosophy of biology (Witzany 1993; Witzany 2000) and the
young science of biosemiotics (Kull 2005) demonstrate that life functions are always
related to sign processes. More precisely, sign processes regulate and constitute life
functions (Witzany 1993, 2006). If these sign processes are deformed or defective,
then life processes are compromised or terminated. Sign processes regulate life pro-
cesses on different levels simultaneously: intracellularly, within the cell (DNA, RNA
activities, messenger substances, etc.), and intercellularly as cell–cell communi-
cation. This is the intraorganismic level. In parallel, each organism also conducts
(species-speciﬁc) interorganismic and (trans-speciﬁc) metaorganismic communi-
cation processes (Witzany 1993; Hoffmeyer 1996; Barbieri 2001; Markos 2002;
Emmeche and Hoffmeyer 2005; Pattee 2005; Margulis 1996, 1999, 2004; Margulis
et al. 2000; Margulis and Sagan 2002; Searcy 2003; Baluska et al. 2004; Margulis
and Schwartz 1988; Vollmert 1985; Villarreal and DeFilippis 2000; Bell 2001; Ryan
2002; Villarreal 2004; Witzany 2000).
Should the symbiosis lead to a symbiogenesis, to the development of a new
species and, thus, to the disappearance of the formerly independent individuals,
then the result is generative DNA- processing in which genetically different gene
pools are combined into one genome. This requires a recombination that assimilates
the foreign data set, converting the external into the internal. Which genome edit-
ing competences are able to integrate an endosymbiotic genome in a host genome?
Manfred Eigen would ask how we should think about the correct rearrangement of
the “molecular syntax” (Witzany 1995).

740
Günther Witzany (1953– )
4. Symbiogenesis by DNA/RNA Processing
Over the last 25 years, tens of thousands of papers have been published in the ﬁeld
of molecular biology, genetics, biochemistry, epigenetics and similar disciplines.
They outline in great detail the intracellular processes of recombinant DNA, splic-
ing, RNA-editing, coding, copying, major and ﬁne repairs, transcription, translation,
RNA processing, insertion, the role of introns and exons in “reading” processes, the
complementary roles of DNAs and RNAs, even the signiﬁcance and indispensable
structural function of non-coding DNA (Cavalier-Smith and Beaton 1999; Sternberg
2002; Jaenisch and Bird 2003; Shapiro and Sternberg 2005; Schmitt and Paro 2004;
True et al. 2004; Wang et al. 2004; Baluska 2004).
Successful DNA/RNA processing requires numerous, speciﬁcally tailored
enzyme proteins. In all cases, DNA/RNA-processing enzyme proteins and also
interacting RNAs are involved in very precisely conducting these varied DNA-
processing steps. Any mistakes here typically have grave and often lethal conse-
quences for the organism.
Today there are strong reasons, that this processing on protein-coding DNA is
overruled by the genome processing abilities of DNA coding not for proteins but for
the micro-RNAs (Mattick 2001, 2003, 2005; Mattick and Gagen 2001; Spotswood
and Turner 2002; Turner 2002; Shapiro and Sternberg 2005). Especially the recom-
bination of two different genomes into one as happened in symbiogenesis we can
imagine through the text processing competences of active micro RNAs.
Active micro-RNAs control and integrate large-scale structures of the chro-
mosome. The number of different micro-RNAs is estimated to exceed several
10,000. Some of the discovered tasks of these micro-RNAs are co-suppression,
suppression of transposition, position effect variegation, start–stop signals, RNA
interference, imprinting; chromosomal methylation, transvection, transcriptional
and post-transscriptional gene silencing along with numerous other RNA–DNA,
RNA–RNA (trans-acting RNAs), RNA-protein interactions. These active RNAs are
as competent as proteins in catalysing, signaling and switching.
Cellular differentiation and phenotypic variation results primarily from variations
in this high order regulation, not in the proteins themselves or in their mutations. The
phenotypic variation in complex organisms is the result of a different use if a set if
protein-coding core components. The higher order regulation in non-protein-coding
genome architecture is able to manage a larger genetic data set in its phenotypic
range. As far as evolutionary processes are concerned, it is naturally much simpler
to change or expand a number of very small control sequences than to duplicate
an entire network of protein-coding DNA (Sternberg 2002; Shapiro and Sternberg
2005). Variations of this higher order regulation can create an enormous spectrum of
different protein expression proﬁles and we can understand why one and the same
gene can be used for multiple protein meanings. New reports suggest that the capa-
bilities of non-coding DNA with higher-order regulatory functions descended from
ancestral viral genome-editing competences that had been integrated by endogenous
retroviruses. While complete genetic functions were transferred to the nucleus after
the persistent retroviral infections, the regulatory LTR’s (Long Terminal Repeats)

23
Excerpts from The Logos of the Bios
741
which ﬂank the protein-coding genetic dataset are integrated in non-protein-coding
regions. In the human genome, several thousand such events are documented (Bell
2001; Ryan 2002; Villarreal 2004).
5. Plants’ Multilevel Communication Competence
Biosemiotic aspects are not only interesting on the intracellular genetic and epi-
genetic level but also in analyzing sign-mediated interactions between cells of
organisms, and between organismic bodies, e.g. plants. Plant scientists formerly
thought of plants also in terms of mechanistic biology as automatons. Meanwhile
research into the multilevel communication of plants revealed attributes like learn-
ing, memory, individuality and plasticity as an expression of so-called “plant
intelligence” (Trewavas 2003, 2004, 2005). During last 5 years plant research has
also shown that the old dichotomy of chemical versus neuronal-electric communi-
cation is misinterpretation. Today we know that 99% of neuronal communication is
based on chemical messenger substances, and that electric action potentials serve
merely to maintain the transport of messenger substances by long neuronal tracts
(Trewavas 2003). Therefore, the catchword for new directions in plant biology is
“plant neurobiology”, not “plant physiology”.
Plants represent a major success story in evolution and are the most recent
organismic kingdom. Higher plants make up 99% of the eukaryotic biomass on
our planet. At the same time, this success story also reﬂects the success of mul-
tilevel communicative actions by plants in their intra-, inter- and metaorganismic
stages: it represents a crucial dependency on successful communication with micro-
bial communities (Walker 2003; Bais et al. 2004), with fungi (especially in the
rhizosphere), with animals (especially with insects), and, in parallel, the multi-
level communication processes in and between cells, tissues and the whole body
(Trewavas 2003).
The communication on the molecular level between plant tissue and the plant
cells is exceptionally complex and encompasses nucleic acids, oligonucleotides,
proteins and peptides, minerals, oxidative signals, gases, hydraulic and mechani-
cal signals, electric signals, fatty acids, oligosaccharides, growth regulators, amino
acids, numerous secondary products, simple sugars, and many other as yet unstudied
aspects (Baluska et al. 2006).
6. Language and Communication: From Linguistic
Turn to Pragmatic Turn
For more than 10 years, most biological disciplines have increasingly been refer-
ring to “communication” and “language” in describing and explaining interactions
in and between cells, between tissues and organs, whole bodies, organisms, species-
speciﬁc and trans-species interactions. The inﬂuence of a linguistic vocabulary is

742
Günther Witzany (1953– )
omnipresent and has become irreplaceable. This calls for an up-to-date deﬁnition
of “language” and “communication” if we are to avoid using these terms in an
uncritical, unreﬂected or merely metaphorical manner.
In referring to the language of life, to nucleic- and amino acid codes, and to com-
munication in linguistic terminology in order to describe essential life processes, we
can rely on an unspoken and uncritical pre-understanding of language and commu-
nication, i.e, on metaphysical and/ or reductionistic prerequisites: We can say that
(1) we are working in standardized experimental setups and that theoretical pre-
conditions are not very interesting. We can say that (2) we refer to the world of
objects in the language of exact natural science whose validity claim is founded on
the laws of the physical world. We might assume that (3) observed things have a
direct empirical signiﬁcance that need not be further questioned because the laws
of physics correspond one-to-one with the material foundations of the linguistically
constructive human brain (universal syntax). We might also assume (4) an over-
lying meta-system in which human populations represent one of the subsystems
that communicates within itself and with co-systems in an information-theoretical
framework (Witzany 1995, 1998; 2002).
This suddenly leaves us directly in the midst a 60-year-long theory of science dis-
cussion that extended from approximately 1920 to 1980. It consisted of two phases,
and its ﬁrst result was (a) the linguistic turn the second result being (b) the pragmatic
turn.
(a) The linguistic turn was the result of an attempt to delimit the logic of science
from philosophy and other “unscientiﬁc” cognitive methods. In the aftermath of
Wittgenstein’s “Tractatus logico philosophicus”, the “Wiener Kreis” around Carnap,
Neurath, Feigl, Waismann, Kraft, Frank, Menger, Gödel, Hahn and in further devel-
opmental stages also Russel and Tarski held that no subjective phenomenology,
philosophy or similar discipline provided a suitable logic for an exact natural sci-
ence; rather, only protocol propositions of observations that are reproducible in
experimental setups are capable of depicting reality on a one-to-one basis; this is
also valid for propositions of a language of theory, that would have to be brought
into agreement with these protocol propositions.
What is required is a language that can be formalized, e.g. as logical calculations,
algorithms. This language would represent universal syntax that would be univer-
sally valid (i) for the things of the external world, (ii) for the physical laws and (ill)
for the material reality of the brain of humans speaking in formalizable propositions
(Witzany 1995).3 The history of science clearly documents the course of this discus-
sion. Logical empiricism had to abandon its efforts to achieve the ultimate validity
claim of a physicalistic universal language. Concepts such as empirical signiﬁcance,
3 The conviction of the possibility of an exact language of science was so deeply embedded – and
this might serve as an example of the valuation of emotions in purportedly emotion-free objec-
tivism – that, while it was refuted and ultimately rejected in the theory of science discourse and
in the history of science, it was and continues to be considered valid in many standard sciences,
curricula, underlying convictions.

23
Excerpts from The Logos of the Bios
743
initial and marginal conditions, veriﬁcation und falsiﬁcation, but above all the dispo-
sition terms, could not be adequately derived. Even the concept of “natural law” was
justiﬁable only under the assumption of an arbitrary experimental design that pre-
supposed a free will. Thus, the strongest, centuries-long argument against free will –
the determinism of the material world – principally needed autonomous researchers
if the term “natural law” was to be used justiﬁable in the natural sciences (Witzany
1995).
(b) In fact, the transition from the linguistic turn to the pragmatic turn has already
occurred in Wittgenstein’s “Philosophical Investigations” and in his analysis of
obeying (following) rules: “Is what we call ‘obeying a rule’ something that it would
be possible for only one man to do, and to do only once in his life? ( . . . ) It is not
possible that there should have been only one occasion on which someone obeyed
a rule. It is not possible that there should have been only one occasion on which a
report was made, an order given or understood, and so on – To obey a rule, to make a
report, to give an order, to play a game of chess, are customs (uses, institutions). To
understand a sentence means to understand a language. To understand a language
means to be master of a technique” (Wittgenstein 1972).
In his analysis of the expression “to obey a rule,” Wittgenstein provides proof
that the identity of meanings logically depends on the ability to follow intersub-
jectively valid rules with at least one additional subject; there can be no identical
meanings for the lone and lonesome subject. Communication is a form of social
action.
Following Wittgenstein’s analysis of rules, the theory-of-science discourse
derived and justiﬁed scientiﬁc statements based on an intersubjective communica-
tive concept of language and communication. At the same time, it replaced the
solipsistic subject of knowledge of subjectivism and objectivism with the “ultimate
opinion” of an “indeﬁnite community of investigators” of Peirce. The content of
argumentation developed by (language-game) Wittgenstein, Austin, Searle, Apel,
and Habermas proved the intersubjective-communicative character of thought,
experience and research (the a priori of the linguistic community) and was there-
fore able to avoid the omnipresent subject-object dichotomy and its unavoidable
consequences, solipsism and objectivism.
Before we can consider the terms “language” and “communication”, we must
understand the language of discussing these terms. We understand sentences in
a language in which we are linguistically competent; we understand sentences
in which the speaker presents propositions interconnected with validity claims.
Intersubjective validity of scientiﬁc knowledge requires therefore linguistic commu-
nication of meaning and consensus formation via statements. We do not understand
the ontology of natural phenomena or empirical observations, physiological pro-
cesses, systems, physical principles, but rather sentences and actions that underlie
grammatical, semantic and pragmatic rules that we share with the members of a
linguistic community. A prerequisite for understanding is therefore a historically
evolved social lifeworld, which provides the basis for the historical development
of the commonly shared language, i.e., a core set of signs which obey semiotic

744
Günther Witzany (1953– )
rules. This, however, means that problems with understanding can arise if we are
unaware of the grammatical, semantic or pragmatic rules that an uttering individual
is following.4
7. A Three-Leveled Semiotics and Classical Variations
of the ‘Abstractive Fallacy’
The pragmatic turn founded the intersubjective-communicative character of
thought, experience and research and was therefore able to avoid the omnipresent
subject-object dichotomy and its unavoidable consequences, solipsism and objec-
tivism or how Thomas McCarthy characterized the monological (third-person)
observer perspective: “The monological approach preordained certain ways of
posing the basic problems of thought and action: subject versus object, rea-
son versus sense, reason versus desire, mind versus body, self versus other, and
so on” (McCarthy 1984). As opposed to the linguistic turn, the pragmatic turn
enables an understanding of human language and communication that is coher-
ent with our communicative experience and with our subjective life. Such an
understanding of language and communication should allow us to describe the
intersubjective-communicative character of thought, experience and research in a
non-reductionistic manner, as well as to describe the everyday prerequisites for
successful communication, namely:
4 In order to reach an understanding with another speaker and establish an interrelationship, four
validity claims must be fulﬁlled: (1) An utterance must be understandable. If the partner cannot
understand the utterance, then he or she cannot answer (respond) appropriately. (2) The utter-
ance must be correct, i.e. the expressions used must be the correct ones to express the situation
(normative rightness). (3) It must be true – the expressed situation must correspond with reality
(propositional truth), (4) It must be sincere, i.e. be meant in the manner in which it was expressed.
The understanding of intersubjective acts of human communication is directed at three levels, on
that of (a) linguistic utterances, (b) actions, and (c) body-embedded expressions. Linguistic utter-
ances have an evident (locutionary) communicatory aspect. Depending on the intention, they can
use this grammatically clearly visible structure to mean something different: This represents their
not-immediately-evident (illocutionary) force, which prompts those who are addressed to react in
one way or another to one and the same grammatical structure of an expression. And they are part
of an (perlocutionary) action; perlocutionary acts are performed with the intention of producing a
further effect.
We do not need third-person observations and experimental studies to understand how understand-
ing functions. We can analyze the ordinary language that we ourselves use, in the ﬁrst or second
person, i.e., as a participant; here, we can ﬁnd all the elements of linguistic and communicative
action. In a ﬁrst step, we can determine that utterances such as requests, orders, questions, insinu-
ations, accusations, approval, declarations, fabrications, etc. are regulative, imperative, expressive,
objectifying, innovative, etc. actions with the intention of (a) establishing a commonly held under-
standing about something and (b) establishing an inter subjective relationship of action that enables
a common, coordinated action or appropriate division of labor (Witzany 2005 a).

23
Excerpts from The Logos of the Bios
745
– the simultaneous understanding of identical meanings in two interacting partners,
as expressed in successfully coordinated activity
– the differentiation between deep and superﬁcial grammar of a statement along
with differentiation between locutionary, illocutionary and perlocutionary speech
acts with which the statements are made
– the differentiation between communication-oriented action and strategic manipu-
lation of the communicating partners
– the critical judgment of the validity being claimed when making a particular
statement
Only with such an (universal-) pragmatic concept of language and commu-
nication, one which is neither subjectivistic nor objectivistic-naturalistic, can we
sensibly determine whether similar structural features exist in the non-human realm,
i.e., interactions within and between organisms which are sign-mediated (signals,
symbols) (Witzany 1993, 2000, 2005a, 2005b). In the human world, as well as in
non-human living nature, sign- use is not a solus ipse event, but needs individuals
which share common set of signs and semiotic rules.
It therefore makes little sense to refer to sign use in the communication pro-
cesses of plant or bacterial lifeworlds, all the while presupposing an objectivististic
language and communication concept, and using an empirical methodological ideal
to explain the evolution of communicative interactions from the amoeba to humans.
This would lead to the dead-end of the solipsistic subject of knowledge and hope-
less entanglement in the subject-object dichotomy of objectivism/ physicalism/
naturalism as described above by McCarthy.
The reverse pathway is more felicitous: beginning with humans, and human
self-understanding, which must be coherent with the concepts of “language” and
“communication” used.
The semiotics of Peirce is helpful in this respect. It can provide the irreducible
conditions for the appropriate analyses of sign-usage and linguistic communication
via a three-leveled semiotics.5
According to Peirce, a sign (1) designates something (2) to an interpreter (3).
Semiotics is therefore an irreducible three-leveled relation of syntactic, semantic
and pragmatic rules. Each of the 3 elements of the sign junction already presup-
poses in its junction the other two. According to Peirce, all those who reduce this
principally irreducible three-leveled relation to two or one level, have fallen victim
to an abstractive fallacy. The most common of these are (Apel 1974):
5 The decisive change versus Kant’s solus-ipse subject of knowledge (and subsequently the
objectivism in logical empiricism) is the “community of interpretation” in the “community of
investigators”. Scientiﬁc knowledge does not exist for a solipsistic subject if knowledge, but only
for members of a community of interpreters. With this, Peirce adheres to the intersubjective-
communicative character of thought, experience and research. (This is coherent with Wittgenstein’s
analyses of “obeying a rule”.)

746
Günther Witzany (1953– )
– Signs (1) without the signiﬁed (some)thing (2) and without sign interpreter (3):
it yields abstraction from the a priori of the linguistic community (i.e., the
intersubjective-communicative character of thought, experience and research as
described above) which reﬂects on the world and produces propositions with
validity claims. Examples are linguistic Platonism, model-Platonism of the logic
of science in the linguistic turn: in which the linguistic expressions or the
explanatory model are the real (some) thing.
– The sign interpreter (3) without signs (1) and without the signiﬁed (some)thing
(2): it yields idealism of consciousness: abstraction from the a priori of the linguis-
tic community (Descartes, Kant, Fichte, Hegel, Husserl): that is to say subjective/
objective reason is the real (some)thing. Language is only a secondary means of
explanation; the external world exists only through reason/rationality.
– Sign interpreter (3) and sign (1) without the signiﬁed (some)thing (2): this
yields semiotic idealism: sign and sign interpreters are the signiﬁed (some)thing.
Everything is a sign: Pansemiotics/ metaphysical semioticisrn.
– The signiﬁed (some)thing (2) without signs (1) and without sign interpreter (3):
It yields realism and materialism, preKantian ontology/metaphysics: Being is a
physical–chemical law of the material world. We are part of this particular mate-
rial and can at best recognize approximately, with our sense organs, partial per-
spectives of this material being. Sign use and sign interpretation are pre-scientiﬁc
constructions that lack a correspondence in the material world (illusion).
– The signiﬁed (some)thing (2) and the sign interpreter (3) without signs (1): yields
psychologism or affection-realism; Leibniz, Locke, Berkeley, Hume, positivism
of the sensory data, Popper: the observational language and theoretical language
of the logic of science can be brought into agreement. The material function of
the sensory organs adheres to a “universal syntax” that is identical to the laws of
physics and chemistry.
– The signiﬁed (some)thing (2) and the sign (1) without the sign interpreter
(3): yields onto semantic realism, constructivism, systems theory, information
theory. Abstraction from the a priori of the linguistic community yields subject-
less, syntactic-semantic phase of a modern science of logic in Carnap, Russel,
Frege, (Tractatus-)Wittgenstein, Tarski, Popper; solipsism and realism: each
speaker/listener is equipped with the same syntax (depicting material reality),
alleviating any need for communication about the structure of language or the
structure of the world. Abstraction by the cognizant subject produces scientiﬁcally
exact statements which depict, in agreement with the laws of physics and chem-
istry, material reality on a one-to-one basis. Subjects of knowledge only disturb
this naturalism and muddy the exact cognitive process.
8. Towards a Pragmatic Philosophy of Biology: Biologists
as Performative Participants
A pragmatic philosophy of biology is a philosophy of biology which integrates the
irreducible three-leveled semiotics. This approach avoids the abstractive fallacy and
allows us to understand language-like structured and communicatively organized

23
Excerpts from The Logos of the Bios
747
living nature in a non-solipsistic, non-objectivistic manner. It can therefore method-
ologically anchor the perspective of performative participants (ﬁrst/second person
perspective) of a planetary communicating community of living nature.
The pragmatic philosophy of biology enables a clear distinction between life
and the non-living. The unbridgable gap between a mechanistic and the commu-
nicative concept is that rule-governed sign-mediated interactions are restricted to
living individuals (-in-populations) and do not underlie natural laws solely. The
decisive difference between natural laws and semiotic rules is that every living being
underlies natural laws in a strict sense. Semiotic rules may be followed or not, may
be changed or not, may be generated or not. The fundamental difference between
living nature and non-living nature is that life depends on sign-mediated interac-
tions, i.e. communication processes which obey syntactic, pragmatic and semantic
rules, whereas crystallization of water to ice, for example, requires solely natural
laws rather than semiotic rules.
References
Apel, K. O. (1974). Zur Idee einer transzendentalen Sprachpragmatik. Die Dreistelligkeit
der Zeichenrelation und die “abstractive fallacy” in den Grundlagen der klassischen
Transzendentalphilosophie und der sprachanalytischenWissenschaftslogik. In: Simon, J.
(Ed.) Aspekte und Probleme der Sprachphilosophie. Freiburg/München: Verlag Karl Alber,
pp. 283–326.
Bais, H. P., Park, S. W., Weir, T. L., Callaway, R. M., Vivanco, J. M. (2004). How plants
communicate using the underground information superhighway. Trends in Plant Science 9,
26–32.
Baluska, F., Volkmann, D., Barlow, P. W. (2004). Eukaryotic cells and their cell bodies: Cell theory
revised. Annals of Botany 94, 9–32.
Baluska, F., Volkmann, D., Hlavacka, A., Mancuso, S., Barlow, P. W. (Eds.) (2006).
Communication in Plants. Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer Verlag.
Barbieri, M. (2001). The Organic Codes. The Birth of Semantic Biology. Ancona: PeQuod.
Bell, P. (2001). Viral eukaryogenesis: Was the ancestor of the nucleus a complex DNA virus?
Journal of Molecular Evolution 53, 251–256.
Cavalier-Smith, T., Beaton, M. J. (1999). The skeletal function of non-coding DNA: New evidence
from ancient cell chimeras. Genetics 106, 3–13.
Emmeche, C., Hoffmeyer, J. (2005). Code-duality and the semiotics of nature. Journal of
Biosemiotics 1, 27–64.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1996). Signs of Meaning in the Universe. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Jaenisch, R., Bird, A. (2003). Epigenetic regulation of gene expression: How the genome integrates
intrinsic and environmental signals. Nature Genetics suppl 33, 245–254.
Kull, K. (2005). A brief history of biosemiotics. Journal of Biosemiotics 1, 1–25.
Margulis, L., Sagan, D. (2002). Acquiring Genomes. A Theory of the Origin of Species. New York:
Basic books.
Margulis, L., Schwartz, K. V. (1988). Five Kingdoms. New York: W.H. Freeman and Company.
Margulis, L. (1996). Archaeal-eubacterial mergers in the origin of Eukarya: Phylogenetic classiﬁ-
cation of life. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
93, 1071–1076.
Margulis, L. (1999). Die andere Evolution. Heidelberg: Spektrum Akademischer Verlag.
Margulis, L. (2004). Serial endosymbiotic theory (SET) and composite individuality. Transition
from bacterial to eukaryotic genomes. Microbiology Today 31, 173–174.

748
Günther Witzany (1953– )
Margulis, L., Dolan, M. F. Guerrero, R. (2000). The chimeric eukaryote: Origin of the nucleus
from the karyomastigont in an amitochondriate protists. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America 97, 6954–6959.
Markos, A. (2002). Readers of the Book of Life. Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press.
Mattick, J. S., Gagen, M. J. (2001). The evolution of controlled multitasked gene networks: The
role of introns and other noncoding RNAs in the development of complex organisms. Molecular
Biology and Evolution 18, 1611–1630.
Mattick, J. S. (2001). Non-coding RNAs: The architects of eukaryotic complexity. EMBO Reports
2, 986–991.
Mattick, J. S. (2003). Challenging the dogma: The hidden layer of noncoding RNAs in complex
organisms. BioEssays 25, 930.
Mattick, J. S. (2005). Das verkannte Genom-Programm. Spektrum der Wissenschaft 3, 62–69.
McCarthy, T. (1984). Translator’s introduction. In: Habermas, J. (Ed.) The Theory of
Communicative Action, Vol. 1. Boston: Beacon Press, p. ix.
Nöth, W. (2000). Handbuch der Semiotik. Stuttgart: Metzler.
Pattee, H. H. (2005). The physics and metaphysics of biosemiotics. Journal of Biosemiotics 1,
223–238.
Ryan, F. (2002). Darwin’s Blind Spot: Evolution Beyond Natural Selection. Houghton: Mifﬂin.
Schmitt, S., Paro, R. (2004). A reason for reading nonsense. Nature 429, 510–511.
Searcy, D. G. (2003). Metabolic integration during the evolutionary origin of mitochondria. Cell
Research 13, 229–238.
Shapiro, J. A., Sternberg R. V. (2005). Why repetitive DNA is essential to genome function.
Biological Reviews 80, 1–24.
Spotswood, H. T., Turner, B. M. (2002). An increasingly complex code. Journal of Clinical
Investigation 110, 577–582.
Sternberg, R. V. (2002). On the roles of repetitive DNA elements in the context of a uniﬁed
genomic-epigenetic system. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 981, 154–188.
Trewavas, A. (2003). Aspects of plant intelligence. Annals of Botany 92, 1–20.
Trewavas, A. (2004). Aspects of plant intelligence: An Answer to Firn. Annals of Botany 93,
353–357.
Trewavas, A. (2005). Green plants as intelligent organisms. Trends in Plant Science 10, 413–419.
True, H. L., Berlin, I., Lindquist, S. L. (2004). Epigenetic regulation of translation reveals hidden
genetic variation to produce complex traits. Nature 431, 184–187.
Turner, B. M. (2002). Cellular memory and the histone code. Cell 111, 285–291.
Villarreal, L. P., DeFilippis, V. R. (2000). A hypothesis for DNA viruses as the origin of eukaryotic
replication proteins. Journal of Virology 74, 7079–7084.
Villarreal, L. P. (2004). Can viruses make us humans? Proceedings of the American Philosophical
Society 148, 296–323.
Vollmert, B. (1985). Das Molekül und das Leben. Reinbeck: Rowohlt.
Walker, T. S. (2003). Root exudation and rhizosphere biology. Plant Physiology 132, 44–51.
Wang, Y., Fischle, W., Cheung, W., Jacobs, S., Khorasanizadeh, S., Allis, C. D. (2004). Beyond the
double helix: Writing and reading the histone code. In: Bock, G., Goode, J. (Eds.) Reversible
Protein Acetylation. London: Novartis Foundation.
Watson, J. D., Gilman, M., Witkowski, J., Zoller, M. (1992). Recombinant DNA. New York: W.H.
Freeman and Company, p. 6.
Wittgenstein, L. (1972). Philosophical Investigations. Oxford: Basil & Blackwell.
Witzany, G. (1993). Natur der Sprache – Sprache der Natur, Sprachpragmatische Philosophie der
Biologie. Würzburg: Koenigshausen & Neumann.
Witzany, G. (1995). From the “logic of the molecular syntax” to molecular pragmatism. Evolution
and Cognition 1, 148–168.
Witzany, G. (1998). Explaining and understanding LIFE. Semiotics 120, 421–438.
Witzany, G. (2000). Life: The communicative structure. A New Philosophy of Biology. Norderstedt:
Libri Books on Demand.

23
Excerpts from The Logos of the Bios
749
Witzany, G. (2002). Reduction of biological phenomena? Deﬁcits of systems theory and the alter-
natives. In: Schmitz, W. (Ed.) Sign Processes in Complex Systems, Berlin/New York: Mouton
de Gruyter, pp. 303–307.
Witzany, G. (2005a). From biosphere to semiosphere to social lifeworlds. Biology as an under-
standing social science. TripleC – Cognition, Communication, Cooperation 3, 51–74.
Witzany, G. (2005b). Natural history of life: History of communication logics and dynamics. SEED
Journal 5, 27–55.
Witzany, G. (2006). The Logos of the Bios 1. Contributions to the Foundation of a Three-Leveled
Biosemiotics. Helsinki: Umweb.

Chapter 24
Biosemiotics: A New Understanding of Life
Marcello Barbieri (1940– )
Introduction and Commentary: Marcello Barbieri
“The genotype-phenotype model, physicalism, and natural selection are the three pillars of
modern biology, and currently they are totally alien to the idea that semiosis is fundamental
to life. This idea, therefore, can become part of biology only if we prove that all of the
above concepts can be replaced by more general ones. That is what biosemiotics is really
about. It is about a new biological paradigm that gives us (1) a new model of the cell, (2) a
real alternative to physicalism, and (3) a new mechanism of evolution. These are the great
novelties of biosemiotics”.
M. Barbieri (2007: 578)
Since the early 1970s, Italian embryologist and theoretical biologist Marcello
Barbieri has been developing a biosemiotic framework for biology based on his
analysis of the cell’s internal organic codes. Developing his theory of semantic biol-
ogy in complete independence from the Sebeokian biosemioticians, but now widely
recognized as a key ﬁgure in the development of 21st century biosemiotics, Barbieri
proposes an alternative biosemiotic paradigm that is not organicist and qualitative
in its origins, but mechanist and molecular instead – but that is just revolutionary a
framework for the attempt to scientiﬁcally investigate and understand the reality of
sign processes in life processes.
Born August 9, 1940 in Carpineti (Reggio Emilia), Italy, Marcello Barbieri
received his undergraduate education at the Liceo Classico Muratori in Modena,
and graduated from the Science Faculty of the University of Bologna with a degree
in Natural Sciences in December 1964. He joined the Institute of Histology and
Embryology of the Faculty of Medicine of the same University as a researcher in
molecular biology and as a teacher of biophysics for medical students the following
year, and in 1968 discovered how to isolate fractions of ribosome microcrystals
induced in chick embryos by hypothermia. In 1970, he was invited by Nobel
prize winning molecular biologist Max Perutz (1914–2002) to spend a semester
at the Medical Research Council’s Laboratory of Molecular Biology in Cambridge
(UK), where he made the acquaintance of Francis Crick (1916–2004), Hugh Huxley
(1924– ) and Aaron Klug (1926– ), all of whom, like Barbieri, were applying the
technologies of electron microscopy and X-ray crystallography in their attempts to
better understand the workings of the cell.
751
D. Favareau, Essential Readings in Biosemiotics, Biosemiotics 3,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9650-1_24, C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010

752
Marcello Barbieri (1940– )
In 1971, EMI announced the ﬁrst scanner for computerized tomography and
Barbieri began investigating its algorithms for the reconstruction of structures from
projections, which seemed to provide “new models for a mathematical simulation
of embryonic development” (2003: 67–91). Following this intuition, in 1972 and in
1974, Barbieri spent two semesters at the National Institute of Health in Bethesda,
Maryland, where he discovered that “structures can be reconstructed from incom-
plete information provided that the reconstructions are performed with iterative
methods that use memory matrices and codes; this suggested that organic memories
and organic codes must be essential, natural features of embryonic development”
(ibid).
This work into the embodied logic of embryonic development led Barbieri to
continue his studies of ribosome crystallization in a new light, and from 1975 to
1980 he worked at the Max-Plack-Institute für Molekulare Genetik in Berlin, inves-
tigating the damage to the ribosome transport system in chick embryos that was
causing the accumulation of ribosomes and inducing them to form microcrystals.
What Barbieri discovered was that the entire process was highly dependent not on
the sequences of DNA nucleotides per se, but on the particular stage of embry-
onic development having occurred up to the point of transport breakdown. This
realization, he recounts
convinced me that the differentiation of the ribonucleoprotein system of the cell was a pre-
condition for the differentiation of the whole cell. That, in turn, required an evolutionary
explanation, and I concluded that the evolution of the ribonucleoprotein system (i.e., the
ribotype) had to be a precondition for the origin and the evolution of the cell. This idea
appeared in 1981 in the Journal of Theoretical Biology, together with the concept that the
cell is not a genotype-phenotype duality but a trinity of genotype, phenotype and ribotype.
The cell, in other words, is not a biological computer made of software and hardware,
but a semiotic system made of software [genotype], hardware [phenotype] and codeware
[ribotype] [responsible for ‘reading’ as well as for ‘writing’ the system code] – and, thus,
that evolution takes place by two distinct mechanisms , i.e., by natural selection and by
natural conventions, as proposed in my 1985 book, The Semantic Theory of Evolution
(2008: p.c.).
Barbieri’s work on the two projects of prerequisite ribonucleoprotein differen-
tiation and on the ability to reconstruct prior form out of incomplete information
with the assistance of existing memory matrices and the appropriate codes, led
him to the realization that mainstream genetics’ unquestioning embrace of Wilhem
Johannsen’s 1909 posit that a living system could be exhaustively explained by
viewing it as a “genotype-phenotype duality” was a Cartesian oversimpliﬁcation
that had long outlived its explanatory usefulness, given all that science has since
discovered about the actual mechanisms of genetic and epigenetic development.
For genes do not ever manifest their proteins stereochemically, Barbieri reminds
us (2008: 580). Rather, the manifestation of phenotype from genotype is, in all
known cases of living being, mediated by the molecular “adaptor” machinery
of the ribozymes, which are needed to carry out the very two different recog-
nition processes that join speciﬁc sequences of nucleotides with speciﬁc amino
acids. Francis Crick had ﬁrst proposed the likelihood of such mediating “adaptor

24
Biosemiotics: A New Understanding of Life
753
molecules” in the early 1960s, and today the translational role of ribosomal tRNA in
genetic expression is scientiﬁc common knowledge. But, as Barbieri shows repeat-
edly throughout his work (1981, 1985, 1998, 2003, 2008) the implications that this
mediating domain of life processes holds for our understanding of the essential
bio-logic of living systems has thus far gone unrecognized, and is profound.
No physical nor chemical necessity links any given nucleotide sequence with
any given amino acid, notes Barbieri (2008: 580), and the very notion of a “codon”
itself implies a “reading sequence” that is a determination that, analogous to a
perceptual gestalt, has to be actively established by the speciﬁc orientation taken
towards the multiply-arrangeable materials present in a pre-given set – it is not a
self-categorizing, objectively invariant entity in itself (2008: 583).
Left to themselves, these two separate domains – one of linear nucleotide bases
and the other of three-dimensional proteins – would have no natural commerce.
Yet, in nature as it has evolved here on Earth, a “genetic code” has arisen that
ubiquitously does so link these disparate domains, guaranteeing biological speci-
ﬁcity via the translation apparatus of ribosome and tRNAs. It is the nature of such
a biological “code” itself – unaccounted for in Johannsen’s genotype-phenotype
duality and subsequently overlooked as a general organizing phenomenon in
biology – that Barbieri argues must now be analyzed and operationalized for
science.
In pointing to the need for a triadic explanation of not just genes and proteins,
but of genes (as one-dimensional information sequences), proteins (as three-
dimensional physical structures) and the mediating relations of the “codes of natural
convention” that have arisen in evolution, and that continue to generate the evolu-
tionary novelties of biology, Barbieri was not just calling for a new way of thinking
about how living cells operate today – but also of how living cells came to be in the
ﬁrst place. Thus, he insisted, was a semantic theory of evolution necessary, along
with a semantic theory of the cell – and from 1981 to the present, Barbieri has
worked incessantly to scientiﬁcally articulate them both.
In 1981, Barbieri proposed that the cell – the fundamental unit of all life – cannot
be conceptually caricaturized as a simple (and biochemicaly impossible) one-to-one
mapping of genotype to phenotype, but must be recognized instead as a triadically
constituted entity of genotype, ribotype and phenotype (1981: 547). No known
organism does or even could (to the best of our knowledge) lack these three lev-
els of organization, argues Barbieri – yet the pace of scientiﬁc research has now
become such, that progress in the clariﬁcation of our basic conceptual categories
(e.g., species, planet, information, measurement) often lags decades, if not cen-
turies, behind our progress in data collection and methodology. Such is the case with
the habitual collapsing of the trivalent genotype-translational apparatus-phenotype
relation into a dyadic (and, again, biologically impossible) genotype-to-phenotype
duality. “In a way,” wrote Barbieri in 1985, “this is like looking at the biological
universe from a Ptolemaic point of view” (1985: 138).
Accordingly, and as an answer to the “gene ﬁrst versus protein ﬁrst” debates
about of the origin of the cell that originated in the “replication ﬁrst versus
metabolism ﬁrst” theories of Haldane and Oparin, respectively (and that are still

754
Marcello Barbieri (1940– )
going on in their more modern forms to this day) Barbieri proposes a revolutionary
re-perspectivizing of the relations known to be operative in life:
The idea that ribosomes are mere intermediaries implies that the essence of their evolution
was to adapt to this role and to establish an increasingly accurate correspondence between
genes and proteins. But the biochemical evidence, on the other hand, tells us that the ribo-
somal RNAs have changed very little during the history of life. If there is a smooth working
unity between the components of the cell, and the ribosoids did not change much, clearly it
was the genotype and the phenotype which had to adapt to the ribotype, and not the other
way around . . . in my opinion, it does not even make sense to speak of the rest of the cell
as an independent entity of genotype and phenotype. ‘The rest of the cell’ is simply what-
ever managed to integrate with the primitive ribonucleoprotein systems and form a working
unity with them (1985: 137).
Such ancestral ribotypes, posits Babrieri, were, like their modern counterparts,
heterogenous systems consisting of both nucleic acids and proteins. During the
course of precellular evolution, he proposes, some ribosoids became particularly
well-suited for base-pairing while others were more well suited for aminoacylation
and for performing three-dimensional operations in space. Within this precellular
collective, then, there were what could be called ribogenotypes and ribophe-
notypes, and “the origin of the cell can be summarized by saying that the
genotype evolved as the extension of the ribogenotype, and the phenotype as the
extension of the ribophenotype”, as each of these later “speciation events” dif-
fused out of a common prior, and less specialized and differentiated, ancestry
(1985: 138)
Barbieri’s gene code theory is a radical re-thinking of the relations that give rise
to, and still sustain, cellular organization – yet upon careful consideration, it is just
as possible, and even more in line with traditional Darwinian thinking, than its alter-
natives. Barbieri himself illustrates this best when, in a later work, he compares the
“chicken or the egg” debate about the origins of cellular organization to the problem
of trying to explain the presence of a city full of objects that are assembled accord-
ing to instructions as an “instruction ﬁrst” versus an “object ﬁrst” dilemma – while
relegating as mere instruction-object “intermediaries” the city inhabitants who are
actually the entities that build the objects and who act upon yet other objects as
instructions – and from whom both objects and instructions must have originally
issued (2003: 154–155).
As a committed scientist and naturalist, however, Barbieri has no intention of
assigning to the ribotype any kind of supernatural or anthropomorphic “agency”
for its role in the bringing about and maintenance of this state of affairs. And so
the question that he sets himself becomes: What kind of natural processes are
we looking at when we observe the ubiquity of this gene-mediator-protein triad
throughout all of known biology? Barbieri concludes that the laws of chemistry
are at work here, of course, as well as the laws of physics, and natural selection
. . . plus one more law-like phenomenon in nature that is observable everywhere in
biology, and yet is still not fully recognized by biologists as such – i.e., the evo-
lutionary phenomenon of natural convention, of which the “genetic code” is only

24
Biosemiotics: A New Understanding of Life
755
one particular instance (albeit the earliest, and undoubtedly, the most vital one we
know of).
“Natural conventions” (1985: 160) are characterized by their being not the prod-
uct of strict physical and chemical necessity per se – i.e. they are regularities in
nature that have been produced by evolution, not by force. But they are no less
operative and consequential because of that, as the incessant and self-preserving
regularity of the genetic code makes clear. Rather, the introduction of such regula-
tory natural conventions in the proto-biological world gave rise to the “new kind of
anti-chaos” (2003: 153) that we recognize as life itself. Thus, all the major events of
macroevolution (the cell, the nucleus, the diversity of species) are all the results of
natural conventions, as they play out in the world of natural selection, posits Barbieri
(1985: 168).
In contradistinction to physico-chemical necessity, then, ‘natural conventions’
consist in the evolution of coding rules that establish a causal (but again, not
originally necessary) correspondence between two biological domains. These con-
ventions Barbieri calls organic codes, and they are objectively discoverable by
scientiﬁc examination and experimentation. The genetic code is, by far, the most
well-known example, but in the following selection, Barbieri presents a list of
twenty more. The unmistakable evidence that such a naturally conventional organic
code is in play, claims Barbieri, is the presence of adaptor molecules that perform
the two separate recognition processes that reliably join biological domains A and
B. As stated above, “this gives us an objective criterion in the search for organic
codes” in biology, writes Barbieri, “and their existence in nature therefore becomes,
ﬁrst and foremost, an experimental problem” (2005: 119).
The impact of Barbieri’s theories on contemporary biosemiotics, and the semi-
nal role that he now plays within the interdiscipline, are discussed in considerable
detail in the ‘history of biosemiotics’ chapter that opens this volume. In the fol-
lowing article, written at the invitation of prestigious multidisciplinary science
journal Naturwissenschaften, Barbieri offers an extraordinarily readable and con-
cise overview of his forty years of work in developing his far-reaching semantic
biology, drawing out just some of its major implications for biology, and bringing
the reader up to date on his own current involvement in the interdisciplinary research
agenda of biosemiotics. Surveying the current state of the ﬁeld, it is appropriate for
us to conclude this ﬁrst biosemiotic anthology with the words with which Barbieri
concludes his text:
“We have seen that biosemiotics has been developed independently by at least
ﬁve different lines of research. . . . This makes us realize that biosemiotics is still a
developing science where many issues, even important ones, remain to be settled.
Yet all versions of biosemiotics, at any rate, share the idea that semiosis is funda-
mental to life – i.e., that all living creatures are semiotic systems, and the important
point is that we already have enough experimental evidence in favor of that idea.
Biosemiotics, in conclusion, is a genuine new paradigm for both biology and semi-
otics, but its future is unpredictable . . .Nothing has been settled yet, everything is
on the move, and the exploration of the new continent of meaning has just begun”
(2008: 597, 2007: 112).

756
Marcello Barbieri (1940– )
Biosemiotics: A New Understanding
of Life (2008)
Abstract Biosemiotics is the idea that life is based on semiosis, i.e., on signs and
codes. This idea has been strongly suggested by the discovery of the genetic code,
but so far it has made little impact in the scientiﬁc world and is largely regarded as
a philosophy rather than a science. The main reason for this is that modern biology
assumes that signs and meanings do not exist at the molecular level, and that the
genetic code was not followed by any other organic code for almost four billion
years, which implies that it was an utterly isolated exception in the history of life.
These ideas have effectively ruled out the existence of semiosis in the organic world,
and yet there are experimental facts against all of them. If we look at the evidence
of life without the preconditions of the present paradigm, we discover that semiosis
is there, in every single cell, and that it has been there since the very beginning.
This is what biosemiotics is really about. It is not a philosophy. It is a new scien-
tiﬁc paradigm that is rigorously based on experimental facts. Biosemiotics claims
that the genetic code (1) is a real code and (2) has been the ﬁrst of a long series of
organic codes that have shaped the history of life on our planet. The reality of the
genetic code and the existence of other organic codes imply that life is based on two
fundamental processes – copying and coding – and this in turn implies that evolution
took place by two distinct mechanisms, i.e., by natural selection (based on copying)
and by natural conventions (based on coding). It also implies that the copying of
genes works on individual molecules, whereas the coding of proteins operates on
collections of molecules, which means that different mechanisms of evolution exist
at different levels of organization. This review intends to underline the scientiﬁc
nature of biosemiotics, and to this purpose, it aims to prove (1) that the cell is a real
semiotic system, (2) that the genetic code is a real code, (3) that evolution took place
by natural selection and by natural conventions, and (4) that it was natural conven-
tions, i.e., organic codes, that gave origin to the great novelties of macroevolution.
Biological semiosis, in other words, is a scientiﬁc reality because the codes of life
are experimental realities. The time has come, therefore, to acknowledge this fact
of life, even if that means abandoning the present theoretical framework in favor or
a more general one where biology and semiotics ﬁnally come together and become
biosemiotics.
Introduction
Semiotics is the study of signs, and biosemiotics can be deﬁned, therefore, as the
study of signs in living systems. This is the “literal” deﬁnition of the discipline,
a version that can be referred to as sign-based biosemiotics because it is explicitly
based on the concept of sign. Biosemiotics, however, can also be deﬁned as the study
of codes in living systems, a version that is referred to as code-based biosemiotics.
There have been historical disputes between the two versions but, as we will see,
they are not incompatible, and both share the idea that every living creature is a

24
Biosemiotics: A New Understanding of Life
757
semiotic system, i.e., that semiosis (the production of signs) is fundamental to life.
The evidence for this conclusion comes primarily from the genetic code, but mode
biology has never accepted it. The discovery of the genetic code has been universally
recognized as one of the greatest scientiﬁc breakthroughs of all times but not as
proof that semiosis exists at the molecular level. Mode
biology has not accepted-
let us repeat this–that the existence of the genetic code implies that every cell is a
semiotic system. And this is no accident. The rejection of the semiotic nature of
life has been, and continues to be, extremely widespread because it is the logical
consequence of at least three concepts that lie at the very heart of mode
biology.
1. The ﬁrst is the model that describes the cell as a duality of genotype and pheno-
type, i.e., as a biological computer where genes provide the software and proteins
the hardware. The crucial point is that a computer has codes but is not a semiotic
system because its codes come from a “codemaker”, which is outside it. This
makes it legitimate to say that cells too can have a code without being semiotic
systems. All we need, for that conclusion, is the idea that the genetic code was
assembled by natural selection, i.e., by a codemaker that is outside the cell just
as the human mind is outside the computer.
2. The second basic concept is physicalism, the doctrine that everything in life,
including signs and codes, is ultimately reducible to physical quantities. This
implies that the genetic code is not a “real” code but a linguistic expression that
biologists have adopted simply because it was intuitively appealing. Deep down,
according to this view, the genetic code is but a metaphor because all its features
must be completely accounted for by physical quantities.
3. The third basic concept of modern biology is the belief that every biological
novelty has been brought into existence by natural selection. The codes, be they
organic or mental, are outstanding phenomena, but as long as they are not a
mechanism of evolution, they do not account for anything fundamentally new.
This conclusion is reinforced by the fact that the genetic code appeared at the
origin of life, whereas the codes of culture arrived almost four billion years later.
They came into being respectively at the beginning and at the end of life’s history
and are considered, therefore, as utterly exceptional phenomena, not as ordinary
biological processes.
The genotype-phenotype model, physicalism, and natural selection are the three
pillars of mode
biology, and they are totally alien to the idea that semiosis is
fundamental to life. This idea, therefore, can become part of biology only if we
prove that all the above concepts can be replaced by more general ones. That is
what biosemiotics is really about. It is about a new biological paradigm that gives
us (1) a new model of the cell, (2) a real alternative to physicalism, and (3) a
new mechanism of evolution. These are the great novelties of biosemiotics, and
this review is dedicated almost exclusively to illustrating them. More precisely,
Part 1 is dedicated to the semiotic structure of the cell, Part 2 to the nature of
information and meaning, Part 3 to the organic codes, and Part 4 to the mecha-
nisms of evolution, whereas Part 5 will give a brief overview of the present state of
biosemiotics.
rn
rn
rn
rn
rn

758
Marcello Barbieri (1940– )
Part 1: The Semiotic Structure of the Cell
The Code Model of Semiosis
Semiotics is usually referred to as the study of signs (from the Greek semeion =
sign), but this deﬁnition is too restrictive because signs are always associated with
other entities. A sign, to start with, is always linked to a meaning. As living beings,
we have a built-in drive to make sense of the world, to give meanings to things, and
when we give a meaning to something, that something becomes a sign for us. Sign
and meaning, in other words, cannot be taken apart because they are the two sides
of the same coin. Semiotics, therefore, is not just the study of signs; it is the study
of signs and meanings together. The result is that a system of signs, i.e., a semiotic
system, is always made of at least two distinct worlds: a world of entities that we
call signs and a world of entities that represent their meanings.
The link between sign and meaning, in turn, calls attention to a third entity, i.e.,
to their relationship. A sign is a sign only when it stands for something that is other
than itself, and this otherness implies at least some degree of independence. It means
that there is no deterministic relationship between sign and meaning. Different lan-
guages, for example, give different names to the same object precisely because
there is no necessary connection between names and objects. A semiotic system,
therefore, is not any combination of two distinct worlds. It is a combination of two
worlds between which there is no necessary link, and this has an extraordinary con-
sequence. It implies that a bridge between the two worlds can be established only
by conventional rules, i.e., by the rules of a code. This is what qualiﬁes the semi-
otic systems, what makes them different from everything else: a semiotic system is
a system made of two independent worlds that are connected by the conventional
rules of a code. A semiotic system, in conclusion, is necessarily made of at least
three distinct entities: signs, meanings, and code.
Here, at last, we have a deﬁnition where it is stated explicitly that a code is
an essential component of a semiotic system. It is the rules of a code that create
a correspondence between signs and meanings, and we can say, therefore, that an
act of semiosis is always an act of coding, i.e., it is always a convention. More
precisely, we can say that an elementary act of semiosis is a triad of “sign, meaning,
and convention”, whereas a semiotic system is a whole set of signs and meanings
that are linked together by all the various conventions that make up a code.
Signs, meanings, and conventions, however, do not come into existence of their
own. There is always an “agent” that produces them, and that agent can be referred
to as a codemaker because it is always an act of coding that gives origin to semiosis.
In the case of culture, for example, the codemaker is the human mind since it is
the mind that produces the mental objects that we call signs and meanings and the
conventions that link them together. We come in this way to a general conclusion
that can be referred to as “the code model of semiosis”: a semiotic system is a triad
of signs, meanings and code that are all produced by the same agent, i.e., by the
same codemaker.

24
Biosemiotics: A New Understanding of Life
759
This conclusion is highly relevant to biology because it tells us precisely what
we need to prove in order to show that the cell is a semiotic system. We need to
prove that in every living cell there are four distinct entities: signs, meanings, code
and codemaker.
The Molecules of Life
Modern biology is based on three extraordinary experimental facts: (1) the discov-
ery that most biological structures and functions are ultimately due to proteins, (2)
the discovery that the hereditary instructions for making proteins are carried by
strings of nucleotides called genes, and (3) the discovery that genes are translated
into proteins by a universal set of rules, which has become known as the genetic
code.
These discoveries have conﬁrmed that genes and proteins are the key molecules
of life but have also revealed something totally unexpected about them. They have
shown that genes and proteins differ from all other molecules not only because of
their size, shape, or chemical composition but primarily because they are produced
in a totally different way. In the inorganic world, the structure of molecules is deter-
mined by the bonds that exist between their atoms, i.e., by internal factors. In living
systems, instead, genes are built by molecular machines which physically stick their
nucleotides together following the order of a template which is external to the grow-
ing molecule. In a similar way, proteins are made by molecular machines which
bind amino acids in the order prescribed by an external template of nucleotides.
Genes and proteins, in short, are assembled by molecular robots on the basis of
outside instructions. They are manufactured molecules, as different from ordinary
molecules as artiﬁcial objects are from natural ones. Indeed, if we accept the com-
monsense view that molecules are natural when their structure is determined from
within and artiﬁcial when it is determined from without, then genes and proteins can
truly be referred to as artiﬁcial molecules, as artifacts made by molecular machines.
This in turn implies that all biological objects are artifacts, and we arrive at the
general conclusion that life is artifact-making.
The discovery that genes and proteins are manufactured molecules has direct
implications for the origin of life because it tells us that primitive molecular
machines came into existence long before the origin of the ﬁrst cells. The simplest
molecular machines we can think of are molecules that could join other molecules
together by chemical bonds, and for this reason we may call them bondmakers.
Some could form bonds between amino acids, some between nucleotides, others
between sugars, and so on. It has been shown, for example, that short pieces of
ribosomal RNA have the ability to form peptide bonds, so it is possible that the
ﬁrst bondmakers were RNA molecules of small or medium-size molecular weights.
Among the various types of bondmakers, furthermore, some developed the ability
to join nucleotides together in the order provided by a template. Those bondmakers
started making copies of nucleic acids, so we can call them copymakers.

760
Marcello Barbieri (1940– )
In the history of life, molecular copying came into being when the ﬁrst copymak-
ers appeared on the primitive Earth and started copying nucleic acids. This implies
that natural nucleic acids had already been formed by spontaneous reactions on our
planet, but that was no guarantee of evolution. Only the copying of genes could
ensure their survival and have long-term effects, so it was really the arrival of copy-
making that set in motion the extraordinary chain of processes that we call evolution.
The ﬁrst Major Transition of the history of life (Maynard Smith and Szathmary
1995) is generally described as the origin of genes, but it seems more accurate to
say that it was the origin of molecular copying, or the origin of copymakers, the
ﬁrst molecular machines that started multiplying nucleic acids by making copies of
them.
The Genetic Code
Proteins are the key building blocks of all living structures, as well as the engines
of countless reactions that go on within those structures. For all their extraordinary
versatility, however, there is one thing they cannot do. Unlike genes, they cannot
be their own templates. It is simply not possible to make proteins by copying other
proteins. The transition from natural to manufactured molecules, therefore, was rel-
atively simple for genes but much more complex for proteins. Manufactured genes
could be made simply by copying natural genes, and all that was required to that
purpose were molecules which had a polymerase-like activity. Manufactured pro-
teins, instead, could not be made by copying, and yet the information to make them
had to come from molecules that can be copied because only those molecules can
be inherited. The information for manufacturing proteins, therefore, had to come
from genes, so it was necessary to bring together a carrier of genetic informa-
tion (a messenger RNA), a peptide-bondmaker (a piece of rib os omal RNA), and
molecules that could carry both nucleotides and amino acids (the transfer RNAs).
The ﬁrst proteinmakers, in short, had to bring together three different types of
molecules (messenger, ribosomal, and transfer RNAs), and were, therefore, much
more complex than copymakers.
The outstanding feature of the protein-makers, however, was not the number of
components. It was the ability to ensure a speciﬁc correspondence between genes
and proteins, because without it there would be no biological speciﬁcity, and with-
out speciﬁcity there would be no heredity and no reproduction. Life, as we know
it, simply would not exist without a speciﬁc correspondence between genes and
proteins.
Such a correspondence would be automatically ensured if the bridge between
genes and proteins could have been determined by stereochemistry, as one of the ear-
liest models suggested, but that is not what happens in Nature. The bridge is always
provided by molecules of transfer RNA, ﬁrst called adaptors, that have two recog-
nition sites: one for a group of three nucleotides (a codon) and another for an amino
acid. In this case, a speciﬁc correspondence could still be guaranteed automatically

24
Biosemiotics: A New Understanding of Life
761
if one recognition site could determine the other, but again that is not what happens.
The two recognition sites of the adaptors are physically separated in space and are
chemically independent. There simply is no necessary link between co dons and
amino acids, and a speciﬁc correspondence between them can only be the result of
conventional rules. Only a real code, in short, could guarantee biological speciﬁcity,
and this means that in no way the genetic code can be dismissed as a linguistic
metaphor.
Protein synthesis arose, therefore, from the parallel evolutions of the transla-
tion apparatus and of the genetic code, and the ﬁnal machine was a code-and-
template-dependent-protein-maker or, more simply, a codemaker. The second Major
Transition of the history of life is generally described as the origin of proteins, but
it would be more accurate to say that it was the origin of codemaking, or the origin
of codemakers, the ﬁrst molecular machines that discovered molecular coding and
started populating the Earth with codiﬁed proteins.
The Cell as a Trinity
The idea that life is based on genes and proteins is often expressed by saying that
every living system is a duality of genotype and phenotype. This model was pro-
posed by Wilhelm Johannsen in 1909, but was accepted only in the 1940s and
1950s when molecular biology discovered that genes are chemically different from
proteins and, above all, when it became clear that genes carry linear information,
whereas proteins function by their three-dimensional structures. The genotype-
phenotype duality is, therefore, a dichotomy that divides not only two different
biological functions (heredity and metabolism) but also two different natural enti-
ties (information and energy). It is the simplest and most general way of deﬁning a
living system and has become the foundational paradigm of moderu biology, the
scheme that transformed the energy-based biology of the 19th century into the
information-based biology of the 20th.
In the 1950s and 1960s, however, the study of protein synthesis revealed that
genes and proteins are not formed spontaneously in the cell but are manufactured
by a system of molecular machines based on RNAs. In 1981, the components of
this manufacturing system were called ribosoids, and the system itself was given
the collective name of ribotype (Barbieri 1981, 1985). The cell was described in
this way as a structure made of genes, proteins, and ribosoids, i.e., as a trinity of
genotype, phenotype, and ribotype.
This model is based on the conclusion that the ribotype had a historical prior-
ity over genotype and phenotype. Spontaneous genes and spontaneous proteins did
appear on the primitive Earth but could not give origin to cells because they did not
have biological speciﬁcity. They gave origin to copymakers and codemakers, and it
was these molecular machines made of ribosoids that evolved into the ﬁrst cells.
The RNAs and the proteins that appeared spontaneously on the primitive Earth
produced a wide variety of ribosoids, some of which were synthetizing ribosoids,

762
Marcello Barbieri (1940– )
whereas others were ribogenes, and others were riboproteins (or ribozymes). The
systems produced by the combination of all these molecules, therefore, had a
ribotype, a ribogenotype, and a ribophenotype. Eventually, evolution replaced the
ribogenes with genes and the riboproteins with proteins, but the synthetizing
ribosoids of the ribotype have never been replaced. This shows not only that the
ribotype is a distinct category of the cell but also that it is a category without which
the cell simply cannot exist.
The ribosoids of the ribotype are the oldest phylogenetic molecules that exist
on Earth (Woese 2000), and they ﬁrmly remain at the heart of every living cell.
Genes, proteins, and ribosoids are all manufactured molecules, but only ribosoids
can be also makers of those molecules. This concept can perhaps be illustrated by
comparing the cell to a city where proteins are the objects, genes are the instructions,
and ribosoids are the “makers” of both objects and instructions, i.e., the inhabitants
of the city.
It is an experimental fact, at any rate, that every cell contains a system of RNAs
and ribonucleoproteins that makes proteins according to the rules of a code, and
that system can be described, therefore, as a “code-andtemplate-dependent-protein-
maker” or more simply as a codemaker. That is the third party that makes of every
living cell a trinity of genotype, phenotype, and ribotype. The genotype is the seat of
heredity, the phenotype is the seat of metabolism, and the ribotype is the codemaker
of the cell, the seat of the genetic code.
The Deﬁning Feature of Signs and Meanings
A semiotic system is made of signs, meanings, code, and codemaker, and we know
that there is a genetic code in protein synthesis. We also know that proteins are made
by a system of ribonucleoproteins that is the physical seat of the genetic code and
functions, therefore, as the codemaker of the cell. This tells us that every living cell
does have a genetic code and a codemaker. But what about the other two entities?
Can we say that there are also signs and meanings at the molecular level? Can these
entities exist in the cell? In order to answer this question, let us examine ﬁrst the
traditional signs and meanings of culture and see if they have a qualifying feature
that can be extended to the molecular level.
The signs and meanings that we are familiar with are often the mental repre-
sentations of objects or events of the physical world. A sign, for example, can be a
spoken word, and its meaning can be a mental image. The mental image of an object
is normally evoked by different words in different languages, and this clearly shows
that mental sounds and mental images are separable. When they are separated, how-
ever, they no longer function as signs and meanings. To a non-English speaker, for
example, a word like “twitch” may have no linguistic meaning, and in this case,
it would be just a sound not a sign. There is no contradiction, therefore, in saying
that signs and meaning are distinct mental objects, and that they cannot be taken
apart because when they are taken apart, they simply stop functioning as signs and
meanings.

24
Biosemiotics: A New Understanding of Life
763
This makes us understand an extremely important feature of semiosis. It tells us
that a mental sign, or a mental meaning, is never an intrinsic property of a mental
object. It is something that the mind can give to a mental object and that the mind
can take away from it.
To this conclusion, one could object that terms like mental signs and mental
objects are a clear case of mentalism, and that this is no longer the received view,
today. The important point, however, is that the conclusion remains valid even if we
accept that the sounds and images of our perceptions are just the results of neuron
ﬁrings, and that the mind is but a product of the brain. Even in this case, the link
between the neuron ﬁrings that produce the signs and the meanings of any language
is based on the rules of a code and are totally dependent upon the agent of that code,
i.e., upon the codemaker of the system.
Signs and meanings simply do not exist without a codemaker and outside a
codemaking process. The codemaker is the agent of semiosis, whereas signs and
meanings are its instruments. We conclude, therefore, that signs and meanings are
totally dependent on codemaking, i.e., they are codemaker-dependent entities. This
is the qualifying feature that we were looking for because it is completely general
and can be applied to all systems. We can say, therefore, that signs and meanings
exist at the molecular level, and in particular, in protein synthesis, only if we prove
that in protein synthesis there are codemaker-dependent entities.
The Sequences of Genes and Proteins
All biochemistry textbooks tell us that there is a genetic code in protein synthe-
sis, but none of them mentions the existence of signs and meanings. At ﬁrst sight,
in fact, these entities do not seem to exist at the molecular level. The translation
apparatus can be regarded as a codemaker because it is the seat of the code that
creates a correspondence between genes and proteins, but these molecules appear to
have only “objective” chemical properties, not the “codemaker-dependent” prop-
erties that deﬁne signs and meanings. A messenger RNA, for example, appears
to be a unique and objective sequence of molecules, but let us take a closer
look.
A messenger RNA is certainly a unique and objective chain of nucleotides, but
in no way is it a unique sequence of co dons because different codemakers could
scan it in different ways. If the nucleotides were scanned two-by-two, for example,
the sequence of co dons would be totally different. The same chain of nucleotides,
in other words, can give origin to many sequences of co dons, and it is always the
codemaker that determines the sequence because it is the codemaker that deﬁnes the
codons. A linear sequence of codons, in short, does not exist without a codemaker
and outside a codemaking process. It is totally dependent on codemaking and is,
therefore, a codemakerdependent entity, which is precisely what a sign is.
In the same way, the linear sequence of amino acids that is produced by the
translation apparatus is also a codemaker-dependent entity because only a code-
maker can produce it. Any spontaneous assembly of amino acids would not make

764
Marcello Barbieri (1940– )
linear chains, and above all, it would not arrange the amino acids in a speciﬁc order.
Speciﬁc linear sequences of amino acids can be produced only by codemakers, but
different codemakers would arrange the amino acids in different ways, which shows
that the sequence of a protein is only one of the many possible “meanings” that
could be given to a string of nucleotides.
The sequence of a gene and the sequence of a protein, in conclusion, are not
objective properties of those molecules. They are codemaker-dependent proper-
ties because they do not exist without a codemaking process and because they
would be different if the codemaker had a different structure. The sequences of
genes and proteins, in short, have precisely the characteristics that deﬁne signs
and meanings. They are codemaker-dependent entities made of organic molecules
and are, therefore, organic signs and organic meanings. All we need to keep in
mind is that signs and meanings are mental entities when the codemaker is the
mind, but they are organic entities when the codemaker is an organic system
(Barbieri 2003a).
We reach in this way the conclusion that every living cell contains all four com-
ponents of semiosis (signs, meanings, code and codemaker) and is, therefore, a real
semiotic system.
Two Types of Signs
Signs have been divided since antiquity into two great classes that are traditionally
represented by symbols and symptoms. Augustine (389 AD) called them signa data
and signa naturalia, a distinction that continues to these days under the terms of con-
ventional signs and natural signs (Deely 2006; Favareau 2007). The conventional
signs are those where there is no physical relationship between signiﬁers and mean-
ings, and a connection between them can be established only by arbitrary rules, i.e.,
by conventions. Words, for example, are signs (because they “stand for” the named
entities) and are conventional signs because they are not determined by the charac-
teristics of the named entities. In the same way, there is no necessary connection
between symbols and the entities that they stand for (between a ﬂag and a country,
for example).
In natural signs, by contrast, a physical link is always present between signiﬁer
and signiﬁed. Typical examples are the symptoms that doctors use to diagnose ill-
nesses (spots on the skin, a fever, a swollen area, etc.), as well as a variety of cues
(smoke as sign of ﬁre, odors as signs of food, footprints as signs of organisms, etc.).
In all these cases, there is a physical relationship between the visible signs and the
invisible entities that they point to, and yet the relationship is underdetermined, so
much so that it takes a process of learning and an act of interpretation to establish
it. The diagnosis of an illness from symptoms, for example, is always an interpre-
tive exercise, and even simple associations, such as those between clouds and rain,
depend upon processes of learning and memory.
At the molecular level, we have seen that in protein synthesis, a sequence of
nucleotides is used as a sign by a codemaker to produce a sequence of amino acids

24
Biosemiotics: A New Understanding of Life
765
according to the rules of the genetic code. In that case, there is no necessary connec-
tion between the components of the two molecules and the codons of nucleotides
are used, therefore, as conventional organic signs, i.e., as organic symbols.
A sequence of nucleotides, however, can also be used by a copymaker to produce
a complementary copy of itself, and in that case, the relationship between the two
sequences is no longer established by adaptors but by direct physical interactions
between complementary regions. These interactions, however, occur between very
small regions of the molecules, and that means that the ﬁrst sequence provides only a
limited number of physical determinants for the second. The ﬁrst sequence, in other
words, does have a physical relationship with the second, but such relationship is
undetermined and represents, therefore, only a “cue”, i.e., a natural organic sign,
for the second.
We conclude that the distinction between natural and conventional signs exists
also at the molecular level and represents in fact a divide between two very different
types of molecular processes. Sequences of nucleotides are used as natural signs in
molecular copying and as conventional signs in molecular coding. The transcription
of genes, in other words, is based on natural organic signs, whereas the translation
of genes into proteins is based on conventional organic signs.
In both cases, a sequence of nucleotides provides “information” for the assembly
of a second sequence, but the “meaning” of that information is determined by the
molecular machine that actually performs the assembly. Organic information and
organic meaning, in short, are not intrinsic properties of the molecules that carry
them, and this raises a new problem. What kind of entities are they?
Part 2: The Nature of Information and Meaning
The Claim of Physicalism
In 1953, Watson and Crick proposed that the linear sequence of nucleotides repre-
sents the information carried by a gene. A few years later, the mechanism of protein
synthesis was discovered, and it was found that the sequence of nucleotides in genes
determines the sequence of amino acids in proteins with a process that amounts to
a transfer of linear information from genes to proteins. In both types of molecules,
therefore, biological information was identiﬁed with, and deﬁned by, the speciﬁc
sequence of their subunits.
The concept of biological information threw a completely new light on the
century-old mystery of inheritance (heredity is the transmission of information) and
quickly transformed the whole of biology from an energy-based into an information-
based science. It must be underlined, however, that biological information, or
biological speciﬁcity (as some prefer to call it), cannot be measured and cannot,
therefore, be regarded as a physical quantity. So, what is it? A similar problem
arises with the genetic code. The rules of a code cannot be measured and a code,
therefore, cannot be a combination of physical quantities. So what is it?

766
Marcello Barbieri (1940– )
According to an inﬂuential school of thought, biological information and the
genetic code are simply metaphors. They are linguistic constructions that we use
in order to avoid long periphrases when we talk about living systems, but no more
than that. They are like those computer programs that allow us to write our instruc-
tions in English, thus saving us the trouble to write them with the binary digits
of the machine language. Ultimately, however, there are only binary digits in the
machine language of the computer, and in the same way it is argued that there are
only physical quantities at the most fundamental level of Nature.
This conclusion, known as physicalism, or the physicalist thesis, has been pro-
posed in various ways by a number of scientists and philosophers (Chargaff 1963;
Sarkar 1996, 2000; Mahner and Bunge 1997; Grifﬁth and Knight 1998; Grifﬁth
2001; Boniolo 2003). It is probably one of the most deeply dividing issues of
moderu science. Many biologists are convinced that biological information and
the genetic code are real and fundamental components of life, but physicalists
insist that they are real only in a very superﬁcial sense, and that there is nothing
fundamental about them because they must be reducible, in principle, to physical
quantities.
It has to be pointed out that the physicalist thesis could be true. In fact it would be
rigorously true if genes and proteins were made by spontaneous assemblies because
these processes are fully described by physical quantities. The point, however, is
precisely that genes and proteins are not spontaneous molecules. They are molecular
artifacts because they are manufactured by molecular machines, and this gives us a
real alteruative to the physicalist thesis. More precisely, we can prove that physical-
ism is wrong if we show that it is valid only for spontaneous objects, i.e., if we show
that there is a fundamental difference between spontaneous objects and artifacts. To
this purpose, we need to go back to our question about biological information and
the genetic code.
Information is notoriously a difﬁcult issue, and often biologists tend to identify
it with genetic sequences, which are in fact only a particular type of information.
A proper introduction to this ﬁeld is undoubtedly called for, and the reader can
ﬁnd it in qualiﬁed publications such as those by Yockey (2005), Battail (2006), and
Forsdyke (2006), in addition of course to the classic papers by Shannon (1948).
Here, however, we are interested precisely in that particular type of information that
is expressed by sequences and in those particular relationships that are the rules
of the genetic code. Given that these entities cannot be measured, what exactly
are they?
Organic Information
In genes and proteins, as we have seen, biological (or organic) information has been
deﬁned as the speciﬁc sequence of their subunits. This deﬁnition, however, is not
entirely satisfactory because it gives the impression that information is a static prop-
erty, something that molecules have simply because they have a sequence. In reality,
there are countless molecules which have a sequence but only in a few cases this

24
Biosemiotics: A New Understanding of Life
767
becomes information. That happens only when copymakers use it as a guideline for
copying. Even copymakers, however, do not account, by themselves, for informa-
tion. Copymakers can stick subunits together and produce sequences, but without a
template, they would produce only random sequences, not speciﬁc ones. Sequences
alone or copymakers alone, in other words, have nothing to do with information.
It is only when a sequence provides a guideline to a copymaker that it becomes
information for it. It is only an act of copying, in other words, that brings organic
information into existence.
This tells us that organic information is not just the speciﬁc sequence of a
molecule but the speciﬁc sequence produced by a copying process. This defmition
underlines the fact that organic information is not a thing or a property but the result
of a process. It is, more precisely, an “operative” deﬁnition because information
is deﬁned by the process that brings it into existence. We realize in this way that
organic information is as real as the copying process that generates it, but we still
do not know what kind of entity it is. How does it ﬁt into our description of Nature?
According to a long tradition, natural entities are divided into quantities and qual-
ities. Quantities can be measured and are objective, whereas qualities are subjective
and cannot be measured. In the case of organic information, however, this scheme
breaks down. Organic information is not a quantity because a speciﬁc sequence can-
not be measured. But it is not a quality either because linear speciﬁcity is a feature
that we ﬁnd in organic molecules, and is, therefore, an objective feature of the world
not a subjective one.
A scheme based on quantities and qualities alone, in short, is not enough to
describe the world. In addition to quantities (objective and measurable) and qual-
ities (subjective and not-measurable), we must recognize the existence in Nature
of a third type of entities (objective but not-measurable). Information is one of
them, and we can also give it a suitable name. Since we can describe it only
by naming its sequence, we can say that organic information is a nominable
entity or that it belongs to the class of the nominable entities of Nature (Barbieri
2003b, 2004).
We conclude that organic information is a new type of natural entity, but we
also conclude that it belongs to the same class of objective entities that contains
all physical quantities. Therefore, it has the same scientiﬁc “status”as a physical
quantity. This, however, raises a new problem because there are two distinct classes
of physical quantities: a small group of fundamental quantities (space, time, mass,
charge, and temperature) and a much larger group of derived quantities. That dis-
tinction applies to all objective entities, so we need to understand whether organic
information belongs to the ﬁrst or to the second group.
Luckily, this problem has a straightforward solution because the sequences of
genes and proteins have two very special characteristics. One is that a change in
a single component of a biological sequence may produce a sequence which has
entirely new properties. This means that although a biological sequence can be said
to have “components”, it is at the same time a single indivisible whole. The second
outstanding feature is that from the knowledge of n elements of a biological sequence
we cannot predict the element (n + 1). This is equivalent to saying that a speciﬁc

768
Marcello Barbieri (1940– )
sequence cannot be described by anything simpler than itself, so it cannot be a
derived entity.
We conclude that organic information has the same scientiﬁc status as the physi-
cal quantities because it is an objective and reproducible entity. But we also conclude
that it does not have the status of a derived physical quantity because it cannot be
expressed by anything simpler than itself. This means that organic information has
the same scientiﬁc status as the fundamental physical quantities, i.e., that it is a fun-
damental (or irreducible) entity of Nature (a similar conclusion was also described
in Küppers 1990 and 1992).
Organic Meaning
A code is a set of rules, which establish a correspondence between the objects of
two independent worlds. The Morse code, for example, is a correspondence between
groups of dots and dashes with the letters of the alphabet, and in the same way, the
genetic code is a correspondence between groups of nucleotides and amino acids.
Let us notice now that establishing a correspondence between, say, object 1 and
object 2, is equivalent to saying that object 2 is the meaning of object 1. In the Morse
code, for example, the rule that “dot-dash” corresponds to letter “A”, is equivalent
to saying that letter A is the meaning of dot-dash. In the code of the English lan-
guage, the mental object of the sound “apple” is associated to the mental object
of the fruit apple, and this is equivalent to saying that fruit is the meaning of that
sound.
By the same token, the rule of the genetic code that a group of three nucleotides
(a codon) corresponds to an amino acid is equivalent to saying that amino acid is
the organic meaning of that codon. Anywhere there is a code, be it in the mental
or in the organic world, there is meaning. We can say, therefore, that meaning is an
entity which is related to another entity by a code, and that organic meaning exists
whenever an organic code exists (Barbieri 2003a).
The existence of meaning in the organic world may seem strange, at ﬁrst, but in
reality, it is no more strange than the existence of a code because they are the two
sides of the same coin. To say that a code establishes a correspondence between
two entities is equivalent to saying that one entity is the meaning of the other, so
we cannot have codes without meaning or meaning without codes. All we need
to keep in mind, once again, is that meaning is a mental entity when the code is
between mental objects, but it is an organic entity when the code is between organic
molecules.
Modern biology has readily accepted the concept of information but has carefully
avoided the concept of meaning, and yet, organic information and organic meaning
are both the result of natural processes. Just as it is an act of copying that creates
organic information, so it is an act of coding that creates organic meaning. Copying
and coding are the processes; copymakers and codemakers are their agents; organic
information and organic meaning are their results. But the parallel goes even further.
We have seen that organic information cannot be measured, and the same is true

24
Biosemiotics: A New Understanding of Life
769
for organic meaning. We have seen that organic information is an objective entity
because it is deﬁned by the same sequence for any number of observers, and that is
also true for organic meaning, which is deﬁned by coding rules that are the same for
all observers. Finally, we have seen that organic information is an irreducible entity
because it cannot be described by anything simpler than its sequence, and the same
is true for organic meaning, which cannot be deﬁned by anything simpler than its
coding rules.
Organic information and organic meaning, in short, belong to the same class of
entities because they have the same general characteristics: They both are objective-
but-not-measurable entities, they both are irreducible, or fundamental, entities of
Nature, and since we can describe them only by naming their components, they
both are nominable entities (Barbieri 2003b, 2004). Finally, let us underline that
they are the twin pillars of life because organic information comes from the copying
process that produces genes, while organic meaning comes from the coding process
that generates proteins.
Operative Deﬁnitions
Physical quantities have three fundamental properties: (1) they are objective, (2)
they are reproducible, and (3) they are deﬁned by operative procedures. This last
property is particularly important because it has provided the solution to one of
the most controversial issues of physics. The controversy was about the theoretical
possibility that the entity which is measured may not be the same entity which has
been deﬁned. This led to the idea that there should be no difference between what
is measured and what is deﬁned, i.e., to the concept of operative (or operational)
deﬁnition: a physical quantity is deﬁned by the operations that are carried out in
order to measure it.
It was this operational approach that solved the deﬁnition problem in physics,
and it is worth noticing that we can easily generalize it. Rather than saying that a
natural entity is deﬁned by the operations that measure it, we can say that a natural
entity is deﬁned by the operations that evaluate it in an objective and reproducible
way. The advantage of this generalized formulation is that it applies to all objec-
tive entities, so it can be used not only in physics but in biology as well. To this
purpose, we only need to notice that a measurement is an objective and repro-
ducible description of a physical quantity, just as the naming of a speciﬁc sequence
is an objective and reproducible description of organic information, and just as the
naming of a coded entity is an objective and reproducible description of organic
meaning.
Whereas the physical quantities are evaluated by measuring, sequences and codes
are evaluated by naming their components, but in both cases the entities in question
are deﬁned by the operations that evaluate them, and this is the essence of the oper-
ative approach. We may add that organic information and organic meaning can also
be deﬁned by the processes of copying and coding that bring them into existence,
and that too amounts to an operative deﬁnition (Barbieri 2003b, 2004).

770
Marcello Barbieri (1940– )
We conclude that organic information and organic meaning can be deﬁned by
generalized operative procedures that are as reliable as the operative procedures
of physics. This means that the deﬁnitions of information and meaning should no
longer be at the mercy of endless debates on terminology as they have been in the
past. The operative deﬁnitions are scientiﬁc tools which are justiﬁed by their own
prescriptions, so there is no point in asking whether they are right or wrong. All
we can ask of them is whether they contribute or not to our description and to our
understanding of Nature.
At this point, we can summarize all the above arguments with the following
concepts:
1. The sequence used by a copymaker during a copying process is organic
information.
2. The sequence used by a codemaker during a coding process is an organic sign.
3. The sequence produced by a codemaker during a coding process is an organic
meaning.
4. Organic information, organic signs, and organic meanings are neither quantities
nor qualities. They are a new kind of natural entities, which are referred to as
nominable entities.
5. Organic information, organic signs, and organic meanings have the same sci-
entiﬁc status as physical quantities because they are objective and reproducible
entities that can be deﬁned by operative procedures.
6. Organic information, organic signs, and organic meanings have the same scien-
tiﬁc status as fundamental physical quantities because they cannot be reduced to,
or derived from, simpler entities.
The Unexpected Properties of Artifacts
Sequences, codes, signs and meanings exist only in a world of artifacts because
they are brought into existence by copying and coding, the very processes that give
origin to artifacts. But can we really say that a set of artifacts is a world? Are there
regularities and laws in such a world in addition to those of physics and chemistry?
In order to ﬁnd this out, let us start from the special case of those particular human
artifacts that we call “numbers”.
There is little doubt that numbers arose by counting, and that counting was
favored by natural selection because it had practical advantages. The process of
counting, however, produces exclusively natural numbers, but then we have discov-
ered prime numbers, rational and irrational numbers, real and imaginary numbers,
and an endless stream of mathematical theorems. All these additional entities were
not produced by counting, and this is why some mathematicians say that natu-
ral numbers were invented by man but that all other rules of mathematics could
only be discovered, as if they had an existence of their own. In practice, this is
equivalent to saying that the world of mathematics was generated by the “genetic”
rule of counting, and then it developed into an increasingly complex world full of

24
Biosemiotics: A New Understanding of Life
771
additional or “epigenetic” properties. A world of artifacts, in short, may not be com-
pletely described by the coding rules that generate the artifacts. It may well have
unexpected rules of its own, rules that we may call epigenetic because they were
not present at the beginning and appeared only during a process of exploration and
development.
Can we extend this conclusion to other artifacts? Today, something similar seems
to exist also in the world of language, where it has been discovered that children
learn to speak by using only a limited number of inputs from the environment.
According to Chomsky (1975), this suggests the existence of a universal grammar,
a mechanism that has the ability to retrieve the countless rules of any particular
language from a limited sample of them. It is as if the brain of a child “explores”
the world of language and “discovers” an unlimited number of new rules simply by
applying the basic algorithm of the universal grammar.
A parallel conclusion appears to be valid also in the world of proteins. There is
a universal mechanism in every cell that produces linear polypeptides from linear
sequences of genes, but then the polypeptides fold up into three-dimensional pro-
teins whose forms and behaviors are not written in the genes, and living cells appear
to engage in a veritable exploration of the potentialities of the protein world.
Mathematics, language, and proteins are very different sets of artifacts, but deep
down, there is something in common between them. They all have (1) a genetic
algorithm that starts producing the objects of a potentially unlimited new world of
artifacts (numbers, words, or proteins) and (2) an exploratory procedure that brings
into existence additional or epigenetic properties of the new world that were not
present at the beginning. We conclude, therefore, that many types of artifacts have
unexpected properties which can be discovered only by a process of exploration,
and in those cases we can truly say that we are in the presence of new explorable
worlds. We also conclude that a complete description of a world of artifacts requires
new fundamental entities in addition to physical quantities, and that is tantamount
to saying that the claim of physicalism does not apply to the living world.
Schrödinger’s Prophecy
In 1944, Erwin Schrödinger wrote What is Life? – a little book that inspired gen-
erations of scientists and became a landmark in the history of molecular biology.
There were two seminal ideas in that book: one was that the genetic material is like
an aperiodic crystal, the other was that the chromosomes contain a code-script for
the entire organism.
The metaphor of the aperiodic crystal was used by Schrödinger to convey the
idea that the atoms of the genetic material must be arranged in a unique pattern in
every individual organism, an idea that later was referred to as biological speciﬁcity.
The metaphor of the code-script was used to express the concept that there must be
“a miniature code” in the hereditary substance, a code that Schrodinger compared
to “a Morse code with many characters”, and that was supposed to carry “the highly
complicated plan of development of the entire organism”. That was the very ﬁrst

772
Marcello Barbieri (1940– )
time that the word code was associated to a biological structure and was given a
biological function.
The existence of speciﬁcity and a code at the heart of life led Schrodinger to
a third seminal conclusion, an idea that he expressed in the form of a prophecy:
“Living matter, while not eluding the ‘laws of physics’ as established up to date,
is likely to involve hitherto unknown ‘other laws of physics’, which, however, once
they have been revealed, will form just an integral part of this science as the former”.
Schrodinger regarded this prophecy as his greatest contribution to biology, indeed,
he wrote that it was “my only motive for writing this book”, and yet that is the one
idea that even according to his strongest supporters did not stand up to scrutiny.
Some 30 years later, Gunther Stent gave up the struggle and concluded that “No
‘other laws of physics’ turned up along the way (Stent and Calendar 1978). Instead,
the making and breaking of hydrogen bonds seems to be all there is to understanding
the workings of the hereditary substance”.
Schrödinger’s prophecy seems to have been shipwrecked in a sea of hydrogen
bonds, but in reality that is true only in a very superﬁcial sense. The essence of the
prophecy was about the existence of something fundamentally new, and that turned
out to be true. As we have seen, life is based on organic information and organic
meaning, and these are indeed new fundamental entities of Nature. Schrödinger
invoked the existence of new laws rather than of new entities, but that was only a
minor imperfection and should not have been allowed to obscure the substance of
the prophecy.
There is, however, one thing that Schrodinger might not have appreciated in the
answer that here has been given to the question “What is Life?” Together with many
other physicists, he believed that scientiﬁc truths must have beauty, and the answer
“Life is artifact-making” might not be elegant enough to meet his criterion of truth.
Luckily, there is a simple way out of this impasse because the word artifact-making
maintains its meaning even when we drop all its letters but the ﬁrst three. In this
way, the statement that “Life is artifact-making” becomes “Life is art”, and that is a
conclusion that even Schrödinger might have approved of.
Part 3: The Organic Codes
The Fingerprints of the Organic Codes
Codes and conventions are the basis of all cultural phenomena and from time
immemorial have divided the world of culture from the world of nature. The rules
of grammar, the laws of government, the precepts of religion, the value of money,
the cooking recipes, the fairy tales and the rules of chess are all human conventions
that are profoundly different from the laws of physics and chemistry, and this has
led to the conclusion that there is an unbridgeable gap between nature and culture.
Nature is governed by objective immutable laws, whereas culture is produced by the
mutable conventions of the human mind.

24
Biosemiotics: A New Understanding of Life
773
In this century-old framework, the discovery of the genetic code in the early
1960s came as a bolt from the blue, but strangely enough it did not bring down the
barrier between nature and culture. On the contrary, various “protective belts” were
quickly built around the old divide with arguments that effectively emptied the dis-
covery of the genetic code of all its revolutionary potential. The ﬁrst protective belt
was the argument that the genetic code is fundamentally a metaphor because it must
be reducible, in principle, to physical quantities. The second protective belt was
the idea that the genetic code has been an extraordinary exception, something that
happened at the origin of life and was never followed by anything similar ever since.
But are we sure that the genetic code is the only organic code of the living world?
Luckily, this is a problem that we can deal with, because if other organic codes exist
we should be able to discover them by the standard experimental procedures of
science, just as we have discovered the genetic code.
The ﬁrst step, in this enterprise, is to underline the difference that exists between
copying and coding, a difference that is particularly evident in transcription and
translation. In transcription, an RNA sequence is assembled from the linear infor-
mation of a DNA sequence, and in this case a normal biological catalyst (an RNA
polymerase) is sufﬁcient because each elementary step requires a single recognition
process. In translation, instead, two independent recognition processes must be per-
formed at each step, and the system that performs the reactions (the ribosome) needs
special molecules, ﬁrst called adaptors and then transfer RNAs, in order to associate
codons to amino acids according to the rules of the genetic code. Without a code, in
fact, a codon could be associated to different amino acids and biological speciﬁcity,
the most precious of life’s properties, would be lost.
These concepts can easily be generalized. We are used to think that biochemical
processes are all catalyzed reactions, but in reality we should sharply distinguish
between catalyzed and codiﬁed reactions. Catalyzed reactions are processes (like
transcription) that require only one recognition process at each step, whereas cod-
iﬁed reactions require (like translation) two independent recognition processes at
each step and a set of coding rules. The catalyzed reactions, in other words, require
catalysts, whereas the codiﬁed reactions require adaptors, i.e., catalysts plus a code.
Any organic code is a set of rules that establish a correspondence between two
independent worlds, and this necessarily requires molecular structures that act like
adaptors, i.e., that perform two independent recognition processes. The adaptors are
required because the two worlds would no longer be independent if there were a
necessary link between them, and a set of rules is required in order to guarantee the
speciﬁcity of the correspondence. In any organic code, in short, we should ﬁnd three
major features:
1. A correspondence between two independent worlds.
2. A system of molecular adaptors.
3. A set of rules that guarantee biological speciﬁcity.
We conclude that the adaptors are the key molecules of the organic codes. They
are the molecular ﬁngerprints of the codes, and their presence in a biological process

774
Marcello Barbieri (1940– )
is a sure sign that process is based on a code. This gives us an objective criterion for
the search of organic codes, and their existence in Nature becomes, therefore, ﬁrst
and foremost, an experimental problem.
The Splicing Codes
One of the greatest surprises of molecular biology was the discovery that the primary
transcripts of the genes are often transformed into messenger RNAs by removing
some RNA pieces (called introns) and by joining together the remaining pieces (the
exons). The result is a true assembly because exons are assembled into messengers,
and we need, therefore, to ﬁnd out if it is a catalyzed assembly (like transcription) or
a codiﬁed assembly (like translation). In the ﬁrst case, the cutting-and-sealing oper-
ations, collectively known as splicing, would require only a catalyst (comparable to
a RNA-polymerase), whereas in the second case they would need a catalyst and a
set of adaptors (comparable to ribosome and tRNAs).
This suggests immediately that splicing is a codiﬁed process because it is imple-
mented by structures that are very much comparable to those of protein synthesis.
The splicing bodies, known as spliceosomes, are huge molecular machines like ribo-
somes and employ small molecular structures, known as snRNAs or snurps, which
are like tRNAs. The similarity, however, goes much deeper than that because the
snRNAs have properties that fully qualify them as adaptors. They bring together,
in a single molecule, two independent recognition processes, one for the beginning
and one for the end of each intron, thus creating a speciﬁc correspondence between
the world of the primary transcripts and the world of messengers.
The two recognition steps are independent not only because there is a physi-
cal distance between them but above all because the ﬁrst step could be associated
with different types of the second one, as demonstrated by the cases of alternative
splicing. The choice of the beginning and of the end of an intron, furthermore, is
the operation that actually deﬁnes the introns and gives them a meaning. Without a
complete set of such operations, primary transcripts could be transformed arbitrarily
into messenger RNAs, and there would be no biological speciﬁcity whatsoever.
In RNA splicing, in conclusion, we ﬁnd the three basic characteristics of all
codes: (1) a correspondence between two independent worlds, (2) the presence of
molecular adaptors, and (3) a set of rules that guarantee biological speciﬁcity. We
conclude, therefore, that the processing of RNA transcripts into messengers is truly
a codiﬁed process based on adaptors and takes place with rules that can rightly be
given the name of splicing codes (Barbieri 1998, 2003a).
The Signal Transduction Codes
Living cells react to a wide variety of physical and chemical stimuli from the envi-
ronment, and in general their reactions consist in the expression of speciﬁc genes.
We need, therefore, to understand how the environment interacts with the genes,

24
Biosemiotics: A New Understanding of Life
775
and the turning point, in this ﬁeld, came from the discovery that the exterual signals
(known as ﬁrst messengers) never reach the genes. They are invariably transformed
into a different world of internal signals (called second messengers) and only these,
or their derivatives, reach the genes. In most cases, the molecules of the external
signals do not even enter the cell and are captured by speciﬁc receptors of the
cell membrane, but even those that do enter (some hormones) must interact with
intracellular receptors in order to inﬂuence the genes (Sutherland 1972).
The transfer of information from environment to genes takes place, therefore,
in two distinct steps: one from ﬁrst to second messengers, which is called signal
transduction, and a second path from second messengers to genes, which is known
as signal integration. The surprising thing about signal transduction is that there are
hundreds of ﬁrst messengers (hormones, growth factors, neurotransmitters, etc.),
whereas the known second messengers are only of four types (cyclic AMP or GMP,
calcium ions, inositol trisphosphate, and diacylglycerol; Alberts et al. 1994).
First and second messengers, in other words, belong to two very different worlds,
and this suggests immediately that signal transduction may be based on organic
codes. This is reinforced by the discovery that there is no necessary connection
between ﬁrst and second messengers because it has been proved that the same ﬁrst
messengers can activate different types of second messengers, and that different
ﬁrst messengers can act on the same type of second messengers. The only plausible
explanation of these data is that signal transduction is based on organic codes, but
of course we would also like a direct proof.
The signature of an organic code, as we have seen, is the presence of adaptors
and the molecules of signal transduction do have the deﬁning characteristics of the
adaptors. The transduction system consists of at least three types of molecules: a
receptor for the ﬁrst messengers, an ampliﬁer for the second messengers, and a
mediator in between (Berridge 1985). The system performs two independent recog-
nition processes, one for the ﬁrst and the other for the second messenger, and the
two steps are connected by the bridge of the mediator. The connection, however,
could be implemented in countless different ways since any ﬁrst messenger can be
coupled with any second messenger, and this makes it imperative to have a code in
order to guarantee biological speciﬁcity.
In signal transduction, in short, we ﬁnd all the three characteristics of the codes:
(1) a correspondence between two independent worlds, (2) a system of adaptors that
give meanings to molecular structures, and (3) a collective set of rules that guarantee
biological speciﬁcity. The effects that external signals have on cells, in conclusion,
do not depend on the energy or the information that they carry, but on the meaning
that cells give them with rules that we can rightly refer to as signal transduction
codes (Barbieri 1998, 2003a).
The Cytoskeleton Codes
A cytoskeleton is absolutely essential for typical eukaryotic processes such
as phagocytosis, mitosis, meiosis, ameboid movement, organelle assembly, and

776
Marcello Barbieri (1940– )
three-dimensional organization of the cell, i.e., for all those features that make
eukaryotic cells so radically different from bacteria. The actual cytoskeleton, in
reality, is an integrated system of three different cytoskeletons made of ﬁla-
ments (microﬁlaments, microtubules, and intermediate ﬁlaments), each of which
gives a speciﬁc contribution to the three-dimensional form of the cell and to its
mobility.
The driving force of the cytoskeleton is a very unusual mechanism that biolo-
gists have decided to call dynamic instability. The cytoskeletal ﬁlaments-especially
microtubules and micro ﬁlaments-are in a state of continuous ﬂux where monomers
are added to one end and taken away at the other, and the ﬁlament is growing or
shortening according to which end is having the fastest run. But what is really
most surprising is that all this requires lots of energy, which means that the cell
is investing enormous amounts of energy not in building structures but in making
them unstable!
In order to understand the logic of dynamic instability, we need to keep
in mind that cytoskeletal ﬁlaments are unstable only when their ends are not
attached to special molecules that have the ability to anchor them. Every micro-
tubule, for example, starts from an organizing center (the centrosome), and the
extremity which is attached to this structure is perfectly stable, whereas the other
extremity can grow longer or shorter and becomes stable only when it encoun-
ters an anchoring molecule in the cytoplasm. If such an anchor is not found, the
whole microtubule is rapidly dismantled and another is launched in another direc-
tion, thus allowing the cytoskeleton to explore all cytoplasm’s space in a short
time.
Dynamic instability, in other words, is a mechanism that allows the cytoskele-
ton to build structures with an exploratory strategy, and the power of this strategy
can be evaluated by considering how many different forms it can give rise to. The
answer is astonishing: the number of different structures that cytoskeletons can cre-
ate is potentially unlimited. It is the anchoring molecules (that strangely enough
biologists call accessory proteins) that ultimately determine the three-dimensional
forms of the cells and the movements that they can perform, and there could be end-
less varieties of anchoring molecules. The best proof of this enormous versatility is
the fact that the cytoskeleton was invented by unicellular eukaryotes but was later
exploited by metazoa to build completely new structures such as the axons of neu-
rons, the myoﬁbrils of muscles, the mobile mouths of macrophages, the tentacles of
killer lymphocytes, and countless other specializations.
Dynamic instability, in conclusion, is a means of creating an endless stream of
cell types with only one common structure and with the choice of a few anchor-
ing molecules. But this is possible only because there is no necessary relationship
between the components of the cytoskeleton and the cellular structures that the
cytoskeleton is working on. The anchoring molecules (or accessory proteins) are
true adaptors that perform two independent recognition processes: microtubules on
one side and different cellular structures on the other side. The resulting correspon-
dence is based, therefore, on arbitrary rules, on true natural conventions that we can
refer to as the cytoskeleton codes (Barbieri 2003a).

24
Biosemiotics: A New Understanding of Life
777
The Compartment Codes
Eukaryotic cells not only produce molecules of countless different types but manage
to deliver them to different destinations with astonishing precision, and this gives us
the problem of understanding how they manage to cope with such an immensely
intricate trafﬁc. The ﬁrst step in the solution of this mystery came with the discov-
ery that the Golgi apparatus is involved not only in the biochemical modiﬁcation
of many molecules but also in the choice of their geographical destination. But the
truly remarkable thing is that all this is achieved with an extremely simple mech-
anism. More precisely, the Golgi apparatus delivers countless molecules to their
destinations with only three types of vesicles. One type has labels for the transport
of proteins outside the cell and another for their delivery to the cell interior, whereas
the vesicles of the third type carry no destination label and are programmed, by
default, to reach the plasma membrane. The solution is extraordinarily efﬁcient.
With a single mechanism and only two types of labels, the cell delivers a great
amount of proteins to their destinations and also manages to continually renew its
plasma membrane.
The Golgi apparatus, however, is a transit place only for a fraction of the cell
proteins. The synthesis of all eukaryotic proteins begins in the soluble part of the
cytoplasm (the cytosol) together with that of a signal that speciﬁes their geographical
destination. The piece of the amino acid chain that emerges ﬁrst from the ribosome
(the so-called peptide leader) can contain a sequence that the cell interprets as an
export signal to the endoplasmic reticulum. If such a signal is present, the ribosome
binds itself to the reticulum and delivers the protein into its lumen. If not, the synthe-
sis continues on free ribosomes, and the proteins are shed into the cytosol. Of these,
however, only a fraction remains there because the amino acid chain can carry, in its
interior, one or more signals, which specify other destinations such as the nucleus,
the mitochondria, and other cell compartments. Proteins, in conclusion, carry with
them the signals of their geographical destination, and even the absence of such
signals has a meaning because it implies that the protein is destined to remain in
the cytosol.
The crucial point is that there is no necessary correspondence between pro-
tein signals and geographical destinations. The export-to-the-nucleus signals, for
example, could have been used for other compartments or could have been totally
different. They and all the other geographical signals are purely conventional labels,
like the names that we give to streets, to cities, to airports, and to holiday resorts.
The existence of eukaryotic compartments, in other words, is based on natural con-
ventions, and to their rules of correspondence, we can legitimately give the name of
compartment codes (Barbieri 2003a).
A World of Codes
In the 1980s and 1990s, Edward Trifonov started a life-long campaign in favor
of the idea that the nucleotide sequences of the genomes carry several messages

778
Marcello Barbieri (1940– )
simultaneously and not just the message revealed by the classic triplet code. He
concluded that there are many overlapping codes in the genome and gave them the
collective name of sequence codes. That conclusion rests upon Trifonov’s deﬁnition
that “a code is any sequence pattern that can have a biological function” or “codes
are messages carried by sequences” or “a code is any pattern in a sequence which
corresponds to one or another speciﬁc biological function” (Trifonov 1989, 1996,
1999).
The plurality of codes described by Trifonov is a result of his particular deﬁni-
tion but is not necessarily limited by that, and may well be compatible with other
approaches. The splicing code, for example, is a code not only according to his
criterion but also according to the operative deﬁnition that a code is a set of rules
of correspondence implemented by adaptors. This suggests that Trifonov’s conclu-
sion may have a general validity, and at least some of his sequence codes could
well be true organic codes. For the time being, however, let us acknowledge the
fact that according to Trifonov’s deﬁnition, there are at least eight sequence codes
in the genomes of living creatures, in addition to the classic triplet code (Trifonov
1996): (1) the transcription codes, (2) the gene splicing code, (3) the translation
pausing code, (4) the DNA structure code, or DNA shape code, (5) the chromatin
code, (6) the translation framing code, (7) the modulation code, and (8) the genome
segmentation code.
Other authors have adopted different deﬁnitions of code, but this is hardly sur-
prising because biologists are used to employing concepts without waiting for their
precise deﬁnition (there are still many deﬁnitions of “species”, for example, but that
does not prevent biologists from using the word species in all cases). What really
matters is that the experimental evidence suggests the existence of a wide variety
of organic codes in Nature whatever is the criterion used for deﬁning them. More
precisely, the existence of the following has been reported:
1. The Adhesive Code (Readies and Takeichi 1996; Shapiro and Colman 1999)
2. The Sugar Code (Gabius 2000; Gabius et al. 2002)
3. The Histone Code (Strahl and Allis 2000; Turner 2000, 2002; Gamble and
Freedman 2002)
4. The Neural Transcriptional Codes (Jessell 2000; Flames et al. 2007)
5. A Regulatory Code in mammalian organogenesis (Scully and Rosenfeld 2002)
6. A Code of Post Translational Modiﬁcations (Khidekel and Hsieh-Wilson 2004)
7. A Neural Code for written words (Dehaene et al. 2005)
8. A Nuclear Receptors Combinatorial Code (Perissi and Rosenfeld 2005)
9. A Transcription Factors Code (Tootle and Rebay 2005)
10. An Acetylation Code (Knights et al. 2006)
11. An Estrogen Receptor Code (Leader et al. 2006)
12. The Metabolic Codes (Bruni 2007)
13. The RNA Codes (Faria 2007)
14. The Error-Correcting Codes (Battail 2007; Gonzalez 2008)
15. The Modular Code of the Cytoskeleton (Gimona 2008)
16. A Lipid-based Code in nuclear signaling (Maraldi 2008)
17. The Immune Self Code (Neuman 2008)

24
Biosemiotics: A New Understanding of Life
779
18. The Signal Transduction Codes (Faria 2008)
19. The Codes of Language (Cowley 2008)
20. The Musical Code (Reybrouck 2008)
These discoveries have largely been seen as proof of the extreme complexity of
life, which they certainly are, but they are also much more than that. They may look
like those increasingly complex epicycles that people had to invent in order to keep
the Ptolemaic system up, but in reality they raise fundamental questions and point to
a new Copernican framework for biology. We have already seen that the existence
of the genetic code proves that the cell is a semiotic system, and in the following
sections, we will see that the existence of many other organic codes brings to light
a new mechanism of evolution.
Part 4: The Mechanisms of Evolution
Molecular Change and Evolutionary Change
The mechanisms of evolution have been one of the most controversial issues in
biology and the great debate about them culminated, in the 1930s and 1940s, in the
Modern Synthesis, the theoretical framework where natural selection is regarded as
virtually the sole mechanism of evolutionary change.
Natural selection is due to chance variations in the transmission of hereditary
characters and is based, therefore, on the mechanism of molecular copying because
the copying of a gene is the elementary act that leads to heredity. When a process of
copying is repeated indeﬁnitely, however, another phenomenon comes into being.
Copying mistakes become inevitable, and in a world of limited resources not all
changes can be implemented, which means that a process of selection is bound to
take place. Molecular copying, in short, leads to heredity, and the indeﬁnite repeti-
tion of molecular copying in a world of limited resources leads to natural selection.
That is how natural selection came into existence. Molecular copying started it and
molecular copying has perpetuated it ever since. This means that natural selection
would be the sole mechanism of evolution if molecular copying were the sole basic
mechanism of life.
As a matter of fact, this could have happened. If living systems could have
been made entirely of RNA enzymes and RNA genes, only the copying of RNA
molecules would have been necessary, and natural selection could indeed have been
the sole mechanism of evolution. But that is not what happened. Long before the ori-
gin of the ﬁrst cells, proteins were being made on the primitive Earth, and proteins,
unlike genes, could not be made by copying.
Different Mechanisms at Different Levels
The discovery of the genetic code has proved that there are two distinct molecular
mechanisms at the basis of life, transcription and translation, or copying and coding.

780
Marcello Barbieri (1940– )
The discovery of other organic codes, furthermore, allows us to generalize this con-
clusion because it proves that coding is not limited to protein synthesis. Copying and
coding, in other words, are distinct molecular mechanisms, and this suggests that
they give origin to two distinct mechanisms of evolution because an evolutionary
mechanism is but the long-term result of a molecular mechanism. More precisely,
copying leads, in the long mn, to natural selection and coding to natural conventions.
In order to accept this conclusion, however, we must prove that the two mechanisms
are truly different, i.e., that coding cannot be reduced to copying. That is, therefore,
our challenge. We can prove that natural conventions are a distinct mechanism of
evolution only if we prove that copying and coding are two fundamentally different
mechanisms of molecular change.
Copying and Coding
Copying and coding are both capable of bringing novelties into the world, but they
do it in very different ways. By its very nature, the copying mechanism produces
either exact copies or slightly different versions of the copied molecules. This means
that natural selection produces new objects only by modifying previous ones, i.e.,
by making objects that are only relatively different from their predecessors. Natural
selection, in short, creates relative novelties, not absolute ones.
In the case of coding, the situation is totally different. The rules of a code are not
dictated by physical necessity, and this means that a new code can establish relation-
ships that have never existed before in the Universe. The objects that are assembled
by the rules of a new code can have no relationship whatsoever to previous objects.
Natural conventions, in short, create absolute novelties, not relative ones.
A second difference between the two mechanisms is that copying operates on
individual molecules, whereas coding involves a collective set of rules. The dif-
ference between natural selection and natural conventions, in other words, is the
difference that exists between individual change and collective change. An example
of this difference can be seen in any language whose evolution is due to variations
that take place not only at the level of the individual words but also at the level of
the collective rules of grammar.
A third difference between copying and coding is that they involve two different
entities. A variation in the copying of a gene changes the linear sequence, i.e., the
information of that gene. A variation in a coding rule, instead, changes the meaning
of that rule. The great difference that exists between copying and coding, and, there-
fore, between natural selection and natural conventions, comes from the difference
that exists between information and meaning.
There are, in conclusion, three major differences between copying and coding:
(1) copying modiﬁes existing objects whereas coding brings new objects into exis-
tence, (2) copying acts on individual objects whereas coding acts on collective rules,
and (3) copying is about biological information whereas coding is about biological
meaning. Copying and coding, in short, are profoundly different mechanisms of

24
Biosemiotics: A New Understanding of Life
781
molecular change, and this tells us that natural selection and natural conventions are
two distinct mechanisms of evolutionary change.
Different Mechanisms at Different Levels
The idea that natural selection can work at different levels of organization (genes,
organisms, species) has been at the center of countless debates in evolutionary biol-
ogy. Less attention has been given to the alteruative possibility that at different levels
of organization there may be at work different mechanisms of evolution. There is,
however, at least one case that gives us a clear example of this alteruative. It is the
origin of mitochondria in the precursors of the eukaryotic cells.
For a long time, it has been assumed that mitochondria came into being by grad-
ual evolution from within the cell, but then it was found out that they originated by
the incorporation of whole cells into other cells by endosymbiosis. Those two types
of cell had been in existence for millions of years before the symbiosis event, and
all their components had been copied at each generation and had been subject to
evolution by natural selection. Their coming together in symbiosis, however, was a
process that took place at the cellular level. It was the cells acting as whole systems
that gave origin to endosymbiosis. Their components had to be “compatible” with
endosymbiosis, but in no way had been selected for that purpose. Endosymbiosis,
in short, is a mechanism that exists only at the cellular level, not at the molecular
level, and represents, therefore, a distinct mechanism of evolution.
In the case of the organic codes, the situation is somewhat intermediate between
the molecular and the cellular level. The genetic code, for example, is at the same
time a supramolecular system and a subcellular one. All its molecular components
must be inherited and copied individually, and yet a code is necessarily a collective
entity. The important point is that coding, like endosymbiosis, does not exist at the
molecular level. Coding belongs to the supramolecular level just as endosymbiosis
belongs to the cellular level. There is no doubt that copying is absolutely necessary
for coding, but the crucial point is that it is not sufﬁcient for it because copying is
a molecular mechanism whereas coding is a supramolecular one. Coding cannot be
reduced to copying because they are fundamentally different mechanisms of molec-
ular change that operate at different levels of organization. We conclude, therefore,
that evolution was not produced only by natural selection but by natural selection
and by natural conventions (Barbieri 1985, 2003a), which in no way is a belittlement
of natural selection. It is only an extension of it.
Codes and Macroevolution
The role of the organic codes in the history of life can be appreciated by underlining
that their origins are closely associated with the great events of macroevolution. Any
time that a new organic code came into being, something totally new appeared in
Nature, something that had never existed before.

782
Marcello Barbieri (1940– )
The origin of the genetic code, for example, made it possible to produce proteins
with speciﬁc sequences and to pass them on indeﬁnitely to other systems. That gave
origin to biological speciﬁcity and to heredity, the most fundamental of life’s prop-
erties. The origin of the genetic code, in short, was also the origin of protein-based
life, i.e., of life-as-we-know-it.
Similar considerations apply to the other organic codes. The signal transduction
codes, for example, allowed primitive systems to produce their own signals and,
therefore, to separate their internal space from the outside environment. That was
a precondition for the origin of individuality, and in particular for the origin of the
cell.
Another great innovation was brought about by the codes of splicing because the
appearance of a complete set of splicing rules brought something unprecedented into
being. Splicing requires a separation in time between transcription and translation
and that was a precondition for their separation in space, i.e., for the origin of the
nucleus. The deﬁning feature of the eukaryotes, in other words, was made possible
by the origin of the splicing codes.
Many other eukaryotic innovations were brought into existence by other organic
codes. The cytoskeleton codes, for example, allowed the cells to build their own
scaffoldings, to change their own shapes, and to perform their own movements.
The origin of embryos was also associated with organic codes because typical
embryonic processes like cell determination, cell adhesion, cell migration, and
cell death have all the qualifying characteristics of codiﬁed phenomena (Barbieri
1998, 2003a).
In the case of embryonic development, furthermore, we have entirely new codes
before us. The correspondence is no longer between two types of molecules, like
genes and proteins or ﬁrst and second messengers, but between molecules and
cell-states. The determination of the body axes, for example, is obtained by a liuk
between molecules and cell memory. The body axes are the same in all triploblas-
tic animals, but their molecular determinants are of countless different types, which
shows that there is no necessary link between molecules and cell states. This means
that the link between molecular determinants and cell states can only be realized by
codes that we can refer to as body pattern codes.
The major events in the history of life, in short, went hand in hand with the
appearance of new organic codes, from the ﬁrst cells all the way up to multicellular
life, and this suggests a very deep link between codes and evolution. It suggests that
the great events of macroevolution were made possible by the appearance of new
organic codes.
The Contribution of the Codes
The history of life has been “punctuated” by the appearance of new organic codes,
and it has been deeply shaped by their characteristics. Five of them are particularly
important.

24
Biosemiotics: A New Understanding of Life
783
1. Discontinuity. The evolution of the individual rules of a code can take an
extremely long time, but the “origin” of a new code corresponds to the appear-
ance of a “complete” set of rules and that is a sudden event. The great
evolutionary novelties produced by a new code, therefore, appeared suddenly
in the history of life. This is a new explanation of the discontinuities that paleon-
tology has documented, and shows that natural selection and natural conventions
had complementary roles. Natural conventions account for the discontinuities of
the history of life, whereas natural selection explains the gradual transformations
that took place in between.
2. Invariance. The genetic code appeared at the beginning of the history of life
and has remained substantially the same ever since. The same apply to the deep
codes that deﬁne prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Once in existence, they have not
been changed despite the fact that all the molecular components of a code must
be inherited and are subject, therefore, to the chance variations of the copy-
ing mechanism and to the long-term results of that mechanism, i.e., to natural
selection and to neutral drift. The fact that the deep organic codes have been
conserved for billion of years suggests that their conservation is the top priority
in all living systems. Everything else can be changed except the rules of the basic
codes of life. While morphological structures did rise and fall countless times,
the “deep” organic codes have never been removed. This tells us that they truly
are the fundamentals of life, the invariants that persist while everything else is
changing.
3. Additivity. A new organic code has never abolished previous codes. The genetic
code has not been removed by the signal transduction codes, and neither of them
has been supplanted by the splicing codes. A new code has always been added
to the previous ones, which shows that new codes do not originate by the trans-
formation of previous codes. Once in existence, organic codes do not tend to
change, and the origin of a new code is always the origin of an entirely new set
of rules.
4. Stability. The genetic code is present in all living creatures, but the other organic
codes appeared in increasingly smaller groups. The greater the number of codes,
the smaller the number of species, which possess them. This shows that liv-
ing systems coexist whatever is the number of their codes. Eukaryotes did not
remove prokaryotes, and metazoa did not remove unicellular eukaryotes. Every
organic code, in short, represents a stable form of life.
5. Complexity. The addition of new organic codes to a living system can rightly be
regarded as an increase of complexity of that system. The structural complexity
of some organisms did diminish in time, as many cases of simpliﬁcation clearly
show, but the complexity of the codes has never been lowered. Even the animals
which lost or reduced the greatest number of parts, in order to lead a parasitic life,
have conserved all the fundamental codes of animal life. The number of organic
codes is, therefore, a new measure of biological complexity, and probably it
is more fundamental than all the other parameters which have been proposed
so far.

784
Marcello Barbieri (1940– )
The Contribution of Natural Selection
Life is essentially a manufacturing activity based on the molecular mechanisms of
copying and coding. This conclusion may appear to give importance only to internal
factors, as if the environment had almost no role to play, but that is far from being
the case. The concept that life is artifact-making gives at least three major roles to
the environment.
To start with, it is the environment that provides the building blocks for the man-
ufacturing activity of the living systems. All components of life come from the
environment and eventually go back to it, which means that any living system is
totally dependent on its surrounding world.
The second point is that it is the environment that decides whether the structures
manufactured by copying and coding are viable or not. Copying and coding have the
potential to create an unlimited number of artifacts, but not all of them actually work
in the real world. Copying and coding propose, but in the end it is the environment
that disposes of their products.
The third point is that the environment is not only the place where living systems
exist. It is also the place that living systems tend to become adapted to. We have
learned from Darwin that in a world of limited resources, not all organisms can
survive, and a process of selection is bound to take place. The survival can be a
matter of luck, but in general it is the degree of adaptation to the environment that
gives the best chances of success, and this means that organisms tend to become
more and more adapted to their environment.
The process of adaptation allows organisms to become increasingly capable
to cope with the surrounding world, and, therefore, to reduce the distance that
separates them from reality. Natural selection can be regarded, therefore, as a pro-
cess that allows organisms to incorporate increasing amounts of reality into their
constitution, even if the gap between internal and external reality can never be
abolished.
Francois Jacob has expressed this concept with admirable clarity: “If the image
that a bird gets of the insects it needs to feed its progeny does not reﬂect at least some
aspects of reality, there are no more progeny. If the representation that a monkey
builds of the branch it wants to leap to has nothing to do with reality, then there is
no more monkey. And if this did not apply to ourselves, we would not be here to
discuss this point” (Jacob 1982).
Common Descent
Darwin’s greatest contribution to Biology was probably the theory of Common
Descent, the idea that “all the organic beings which have ever lived on this Earth
may be descended from some one primordial form” (Darwin 1859). In fact, when
Dobzhansky (1973) wrote that “Nothing in biology makes sense except in the
light of evolution”, it was Common Descent that he had in mind. The idea that
all creatures of the present are linked to all creatures of the past is indeed the

24
Biosemiotics: A New Understanding of Life
785
greatest unifying theme in biology, the concept that we use as an Ariadne’s thread
to reconstruct the history of life.
Common Descent, however, is compatible with different mechanisms of evo-
lution, and in order to ﬁnd out the truth about it we need to know the actual
mechanisms that gave origin to biological objects in the course of time. How did
novelties appear in the history of life? Did new objects arise by natural selection
alone or by natural selection and by natural conventions?
If evolution took place only by natural selection, we would have to conclude that
nothing similar to the genetic code appeared again in the four billion years of life’s
history. But we know that many other organic codes exist in life, and this means
that there have been many other origins because any new organic code gives ori-
gin to unprecedented structures. We have, therefore, two very different versions of
Common Descent before us. Evolution by natural selection alone implies Common
Descent with a Single Origin, whereas evolution by natural selection and by natu-
ral conventions leads to Common Descent with Multiple Origins (this is not the old
theory that cells originated many times because the multiple origins are referred to
codes not to cells).
The idea that natural conventions bring absolute novelties into existence is equiv-
alent to saying that life has not lost its creative power in the course of time. The
origin of embryos, the origin of the mind, or the origin of language, for example, do
not seem to be less of a novelty than the origin of the cell. The theory of Common
Descent with Multiple Origins makes us realize that absolute novelties appeared
not only at the beginning but throughout the entire history of life. And that is not a
belittlement of Darwin’s theory of Common Descent. It is only an extension of it.
Part 5: Biosemiotics Today
Code-Based Biosemiotics
The discovery of the genetic code took place between 1961 and 1966 (Nirenberg and
Matthaei 1961; Speyer et al. 1963; Nirenberg et al. 1966; Khorana et al. 1966) and
inspired an approach to semiotics that can be referred to as code-based biosemiotics
because it assumes that coding is the deﬁning feature of semiosis.
The manifesto of this approach was written by George and Muriel Beadle in 1966
with a single simple sentence: “the deciphering of the genetic code has revealed our
possession of a language much older than hieroglyphics, a language as old as life
itself, a language that is the most living language of alleven if its letters are invisible
and its words are buried in the cells of our bodies” (Beadle and Beadle 1966).
In 1974, Marcel Florkin coined the term “biosemiotics” for the study of this
molecular language and gave the names biosemes and biosyntagms to the basic
units of molecular semiosis. He emphasized, however, that meaning does not exist at
the molecular level and claimed that the genetic code is a correspondence between
structures and functions, not between signs and meanings: “A bioseme carries

786
Marcello Barbieri (1940– )
no ‘bedeutung’, no ‘meaning’, because its signiﬁer is a molecular structure and
its signiﬁed is a biological function” (Florkin 1974). The idea that semiosis can
exist without meaning may seem paradoxical, today, and yet Florkin’s conclu-
sion was entirely logical because it was the consequence of two basic concepts of
mode
biology.
One is the idea that the cell is a duality of genotype and phenotype, i.e., a biolog-
ical computer made of genetic software and protein hardware. The crucial point is
that a computer contains codes but is not a semiotic system because its codes come
from a codemaker, which is outside the system. The second basic concept is the
idea that all biological novelties are generated by natural selection, i.e., by an agent,
which is outside the cell just as the human mind is outside the computer. But if the
cell is a biological computer assembled by natural selection, it is perfectly legitimate
to say that it is not a semiotic system, and this justiﬁes Florkin’s statement that there
is no real meaning in it. Ultimately, that leads to the physicalist thesis that there
is no real code either at the molecular level, and that molecular semiosis is merely
an illusion.
The computer model of the cell, in short, keeps semiosis out of the cell, and this
is why the ﬁrst true model of molecular semiosis was the idea that every cell is a
trinity of genotype, phenotype, and ribotype, i.e., the idea that the cell contains an
internal codemaker (Barbieri 1981, 1985). This was complemented by the idea that
coding is not reducible to copying, and, therefore, that natural selection (based on
copying) and natural conventions (based on coding) are two distinct mechanisms of
evolution (Barbieri 1985, 2003a).
Another important contribution to code-based biosemiotics came from the dis-
covery of an increasing number of organic codes. That development started with
the unveiling of the sequence codes by Trifonov (1987, 1989, 1996, 1999) and has
grown slowly but steadily ever since (Barbieri 2008).
The “code based” approach to biosemiotics, in short, is a road that started with
the recognition of semiosis at the molecular level and worked its way up by extend-
ing the concepts of code and meaning to the higher levels of biological organization.
At about the same time, however, there was also another road to biosemiotics that
was being developed. A road that went exactly the other way round, i.e., that started
at the higher levels and worked its way down towards the lower ones.
Sign-Based Biosemiotics
The idea that animals have feelings, psychologies, and even minds has been enter-
tained in various ways throughout the centuries, but for a long time it has been taken
almost for granted that only man is a semiotic animal, i.e., that only man makes use
of signs. This idea was explicitly challenged for the ﬁrst time only in 1963, when
Thomas Sebeok suggested that animal communication is also based on signs and
proposed the term zoosemiotics for the new science of animal semiosis (Sebeok
1963, 1972).
rn

24
Biosemiotics: A New Understanding of Life
787
That proposal set Sebeok out on a long search for evidence of semiosis in the
various ﬁelds of the life sciences, and eventually the hunt paid off. The ﬁrst deci-
sive clue came from reading, in 1976, the original German edition of Theoretische
Biologie by von Uexkiill (1928). That book convinced Sebeok that von Uexkiill had
already provided abundant evidence of semiosis in the animal world and had been
in fact the unintentional founding father of zoo semiotics. The next crucial develop-
ment was the extension of semiosis beyond the animal world, a generalization that
took place in various stages.
In 1981, Martin Krampen argued that plants engage in vegetable semiosis (phy-
tosemiotics), and in 1988, Sorin Sonea proposed that semiosis goes on even in the
bacterial world. Still in 1988, Giorgio Prodi suggested that a primitive form of
semiosis exists also in molecules and cells and gave it the name of protosemiosis
or natural semiosis (Prodi 1988). The word “zoosemiotics” became increasingly
inadequate, and in 1991 Sebeok replaced it with biosemiotics, a term proposed by
Stepanov in 1971, but which had appeared for the ﬁrst time in 1962 when Friedrich
Rothschild used it to illustrate a new approach to psychology (Kull 1999).
Sebeok’s greatest contribution, however, was probably the silent revolution that
he brought about in semiotics itself. Up to the 1960s, semiotics was a deeply divided
ﬁeld, virtually on the edge of anarchy, because it was still split into two major
schools, one founded by the Swiss linguist Ferdinand de Saussure (1857–1913) and
the other by the American philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914). The
main difference between them is that Saussure deﬁned the sign as a dual entity, a
combination of signiﬁer and signiﬁed (de Saussure 1916), whereas Peirce insisted
that it is a triadic relationship between a representamen, an object, and an interpre-
tant (Peirce 1931–1958). According to Peirce, any act of semiosis cannot involve
less than three parties because there must necessarily be a process of interpreta-
tion between sign and meaning. Sebeok’s silent revolution effectively disposed of
Saussure and put Peirce squarely at the center of semiosis. The most authorita-
tive treatise of semiotics, published in four volumes between 1997 and 2003 by
Roland Posner, Klaus Robering, and Thomas Sebeok, makes it clear that by the
1990s, semiotics had become a largely unitary ﬁeld, and that semiosis was deﬁned
in unmistakably Peircean terms:
We stipulate that the following is a necessary and sufﬁcient condition for
something to be a semiosis: A interprets B as representing C. In this relational char-
acterization of semiosis, A is the Interpretant, B is some object, property, relation,
event, or state of affairs, and C is the meaning that A assigns to B. (Posner et al.
1997).
By the 1990s, in short, the Peircean approach to semiotics had become almost
universally accepted, and it was taken virtually for granted that the extension of
semiosis ﬁrst to the animal world and then to the entire living world was nothing
but the extension of Peirce semiosis to life. Sebeok expressed this concept in no
uncertain terms by declaring that: “there can be no semiosis without interpretability”
(Sebeok 2001).
The identiﬁcation of semiosis with Peircean semiosis was also accepted by
Jesper Hoffmeyer in Signs of Meaning in the Universe (1996), the book where

788
Marcello Barbieri (1940– )
he wrote his manifesto and condensed it in the statement that “the basic unit of
life is the sign, not the molecule”. There was, therefore, a genuine continuity from
Sebeok to Hoffmeyer, and their biosemiotics can rightly be referred to as sign-based
biosemiotics, or more precisely, as interpretation-based biosemiotics.
The Role of Interpretation
In code-based biosemiotics, semiosis is deﬁned by coding not by interpretation. This
is because the rules of the genetic code have been virtually the same in all living sys-
tems and in all environments ever since the origin of life, which clearly shows that
they do not depend on interpretation. In sign-based biosemiotics, instead, interpre-
tation is a deﬁning feature of semiosis, and there is, therefore, a sharp difference
between the two approaches. But is this difference insurmountable? Could we not
say, for example, that the codemaker of the cell is also an “interpreter”? Why should
we not generalize the concept of interpretation and say that any act of coding is also
an act of interpretation?
In principle, of course, we could, but there is a caveat. If we generalize the con-
cept of interpretation in order to include coding, why do we not go the whole way
and generalize it even further? Why do we not say, following Taborsky (1999, 2002),
for example, that any function
f(x) = y
is an act of interpretation, whereby the function “f ” interprets “x” as representing
“y”? In this way, all physical laws expressed by functions like f(x) =y would be
processes of interpretation and, therefore, acts of semiosis.
This point is important because Peirce himself embraced this view and con-
cluded that semiosis exists everywhere in the Universe. We realize in this way that
if we extend the concept of interpretation, we end up with a pansemiotic view not
a biosemiotic one. If we want to keep the biosemiotic idea that semiosis exists only
in life, therefore, we must also keep the traditional concept of interpretation, and in
this case, we can no longer apply the Peirce model to the cell. This does not mean,
of course, that the Peirce model is wrong. It means that it is valid only for those
living systems that are capable of interpretation in the traditional sense of the word,
i.e., for organisms that have a nervous system.
It is likely that the behavior of the ﬁrst animals was almost entirely determined by
genes, but the number of hard-wired responses could not grow indeﬁnitely, and ani-
mals started resorting to processes of learning in order to increase their behavioral
repertoire. Learning how to respond to a signal, on the other hand, means learning
how to interpret that signal, and this amounts to the construction of a behavioral code
whose rules are context-dependent. At the same time, learning requires a memory
where the results of experience are accumulated, and this means that interpretation
is also a memory-dependent process. A process of interpretation, in short, is a new

24
Biosemiotics: A New Understanding of Life
789
type of semiosis that is profoundly different from organic semiosis because it is
dependent on learning, memory and context.
Systems capable of interpretation, in turn, evolved in many different ways and
eventually a third type of semiosis appeared, a semiosis that was based on symbolic
codes shared by all members of a community, i.e., on language (Deacon 1997).
The evolution of semiosis was characterized, therefore, by three great innovations:
(1) the origin of organic semiosis (the semiotic threshold), (2) the origin of inter-
pretation (the hermeneutic threshold), and (3) the origin of language (the symbolic
threshold). It was a process that started at the origin of life with context-free codes
and produced codes that were more and more context-dependent. Today, our cul-
tural codes are so heavily dependent on context that we can hardly imagine semiosis
without interpretation, and yet they are distinct processes, and we need to keep them
apart if we want to understand the origin and the evolution of life.
Five Schools and a Minimal Unity
In addition to code- and to sign-based biosemiotics, there are at least three other
schools that have recognized the existence of semiosis in organic life. One is the
school founded by Gregory Bateson who described evolution as a cosmic process
of learning (Hoffmeyer 2008). Another school is the approach developed within
physics by Howard Pattee who proposed, since the 1960s, that there must have been
an epistemic cut at the origin of life (Pattee 1969, 1972, 2001). The third school
was inspired by the philosophy of hermeneutics and was developed in particular by
Anton Markoš (2002) who argued that biology can catch the essentials of life only
by embracing the approach of the humanities.
There is no space, in this brief review, for these additional themes of biosemi-
otics, and the interested readers are invited to consult the literature and the historical
accounts (Favareau 2007). What is important, here, is to underline not only the exis-
tence of different schools of biosemiotics but also the fact that a few small steps
towards uniﬁcation have already been taken.
The ﬁrst came in 2004 at the fourth Gathering in Biosemiotics organized by
Anton Markos in Pragne. Jesper Hoffmeyer, Claus Emmeche, Kalevi Kull, Anton
Markos, and Marcello Barbieri met in a pub and decided that what was uniting them-
the introduction of meaning in biology was far more important than their divisions.
Up until then, Barbieri had referred to the science of biological semiosis as semantic
biology, or biosemantics, whereas Markos had been calling it biohermeneuthics, but
they accepted to give up their favorite names and to adopt the term biosemiotics that
Thomas Sebeok had been campaigning for with so much passion and vigor. That
is when biosemiotics really came of age. It happened when people decided to work
together not because they had the same ideas but because they accepted to put their
differences aside in the interest of a greater goal.
Today, the differences still exist, but there is also a “minimal unity” in the ﬁeld
because there are two basic principles, or postulates, that are accepted by virtually
all biosemioticians.

790
Marcello Barbieri (1940– )
1. The ﬁrst postulate is the idea that semiosis is unique to life, i.e., that a real divide
exists between life and inanimate matter. This sharply differentiates biosemiotics
from “pansemiotics”, the doctrine that accepts the existence of semiosis even in
the physical world.
2. The second postulate is the idea that semiosis and meaning are natural enti-
ties. This sharply divides biosemiotics from the doctrine of “intelligent design”
and from all other doctrines that maintain that the origin of life on Earth was
necessarily the product of a supernatural agency.
Today, in conclusion, biosemiotics is not yet a uniﬁed ﬁeld from an academic
point of view, but it is nonetheless a ﬁeld that provides a new paradigm for biology.
Almost everything remains to be written, but the important point is that the main
signposts of the new framework are already in place.
Conclusion
The major conclusion of this review is that biological semiosis is a reality because
semiosis is based on codes, and organic codes are experimental realities. An equiv-
alent formulation is that all living creatures are semiotic systems because organic
codes exist in all of them. This conclusion is based on a variety of arguments that
here have been divided, for convenience, into ﬁve parts.
1. In Part 1, we have seen that the cell can be described as a trinity of genotype, phe-
notype, and ribotype because it is made of three distinct types of informational
molecules that have three distinct biological roles. Genotype and phenotype are,
respectively, the seats of heredity and metabolism, whereas the ribotype is the
system that manufactures proteins on the instructions of genes according to the
rules of the genetic code. The crucial point is that the ribotype has the deﬁn-
ing features of a codemaker, whereas the sequences of genes and proteins are
codemaker-dependent entities and have the deﬁning features of signs and mean-
ings. This shows that the cell is a true semiotic system because it contains all the
essential features of such systems, i.e., signs, meanings, and code all produced
by the same codemaker.
2. In Part 2, we have faced the claim of physicalism, the conclusion that all natural
entities must be reducible to physical quantities. This claim is certainly valid for
spontaneous objects because all spontaneous reactions are completely accounted
for by physical quantities, but genes and proteins are not spontaneous molecules.
They are molecular artifacts that are manufactured by molecular machines by
copying and coding. The crucial point, here, is that the production of artifacts
requires not only physical quantities but also additional entities like sequences
and codes. These entities are as real as physical quantities in the sense that they
are equally necessary to the description of biological systems, and this means
that in no way can we dismiss them as linguistic metaphors. Physicalism, in
short, is not valid in a world of artifacts. It is valid only in a world of spontaneous

24
Biosemiotics: A New Understanding of Life
791
objects, and it is still popular today only because biology has not yet assimilated
the idea that genes and proteins are molecular artifacts, that the whole of life is
artifact-making.
3. In Part 3, we have seen that the experimental criterion which has led to the dis-
covery of the genetic code, i.e., the presence of adaptors, allows us to prove the
existence of many other organic codes. This makes us realize that the genetic
code was only the ﬁrst of a long list of organic codes, which appeared through-
out the history of life. We realize furthermore that the appearance of new organic
codes was associated with the great events of macroevolution, which is equiv-
alent to saying that the semiotic processes of coding have been instrumental in
shaping the history of life on our planet.
4. In Part 4, we have examined the central claim of the Modern Synthesis, the con-
clusion that natural selection is the sole mechanism that generates biological
novelties. The crucial point here is that natural selection is the long-term result
of molecular copying and would be the sole mechanism of evolution if copy-
ing were the sole basic mechanism of life. But there are two distinct molecular
mechanisms at the basis of life, copying and coding, and both of them have
long-term consequences. Copying leads in the long run to natural selection and
coding to natural conventions, which means that evolution took place by two dis-
tinct mechanisms. Natural selection produces new objects by modifying previous
ones, whereas natural conventions bring absolute novelties into existence. Even
the evolution of life, in short, was based on semiosis because natural conventions
represent a distinct mechanism of evolution.
5. In Part 5, we have seen that biosemiotics has been developed independently by
at least ﬁve different lines of research. One is the Sebeok-Hoffmeyer approach
that is based on Peirce’s deﬁnition of sign and assumes that interpretation is a
fundamental feature of semiosis. The second is the organic-codes line of research
where semiosis is based on coding, not on interpretation, and the other three
are the approaches developed respectively by Gregory Bateson, Howard Pattee,
and Anton Markos. This makes us realize that biosemiotics is still a developing
science where many issues, even important ones, remain to be settled.
All versions of biosemiotics, at any rate, share the idea that semiosis is funda-
mental to life, i.e., that all living creatures are semiotic systems, and the important
point is that we already have enough experimental evidence in favor of that idea.
Biosemiotics, in conclusion, is a genuine new paradigm for both biology and
semiotics, but its future is unpredictable. It truly is like a new continent whose
exploration has just begun.
References
Alberts, B., Bray, D., Lewis, J., Raff, M., Roberts, K., Watson, J. D. (1994). Molecular Biology of
the Cell. New York: Garland.
Augustine of Hippo (389 AD) De Doctrina Christiana. In: Green, W. M. (Ed.) Sancti Augustini
Opera, 1963, CSEL 80, Vienna.

792
Marcello Barbieri (1940– )
Barbieri, M. (1981). The ribotype theory on the origin of life. Journal of Theoretical Biology 91,
1545–1601.
Barbieri, M. (1985). The Semantic Theory of Evolution. London: Harwood Academic.
Barbieri, M. (1998). The organic codes. The basic mechanism of macroevolution. Rivista di
Biologia-Biology Forum 91, 481–514.
Barbieri, M. (2003a). The Organic Codes: An Introduction to Semantic Biology. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Barbieri, M. (2003b). Biology with information and meaning. History and Philosophy of the Life
Sciences 25:243–254.
Barbieri, M. (2004). The deﬁnitions of information and meaning. Two possible boundaries between
physics and biology. Rivista di Biologia-Biology Forum 97, 91–110.
Barbieri, M. (2008). The Codes of Life: The Rules of Macroevolution. Dordrecht: Springer.
Battail, G. (2006). Should genetics get an information-theoretic education. IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Magazine 25(1), 34–45.
Battail, G. (2007). Information theory and error-correcting codes in genetics and biological evolu-
tion. In: Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Introduction to Biosemiotics. Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 299–345.
Beadle, G., Beadle, M. (1966). The Language of Life. An Introduction to the Science of Genetics.
New York: Doubleday.
Berridge, M. (1985). The molecular basis of communication within the cell. Scientiﬁc American
253, 142–152.
Boniolo, G. (2003). Biology without information. History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences
25:255–273.
Bruni, L. E. (2007). Cellular semiotics and signal transduction. In: Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Introduction
to Biosemiotics. Springer: Dordrecht, pp. 365–407.
Chargaff, E. (1963). Essays on Nucleic Acids. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Chomsky, N. (1975). Reﬂections on Language. New York: Pantheon.
Cowley, S. J. (2008). The codes of language: turtles all the way up? In: Barbieri, M. (Ed.) The
Codes of Life: The Rules of Macroevolution. Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 319–345.
Darwin, C. (1859). On The Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection. London: Murray.
Deacon, T. W. (1997). The Symbolic Species: The Co-evolution of Language and the Brain. New
York: Norton.
Deely, J. (2006). On ‘semiotics’ as naming the doctrine of signs. Semiotica 158, 1–33.
Dehaene, S., Cohen, L., Sigman, M., Vinckier, F. (2005). The neural code for written words: A
proposal. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 9, 335–341.
de Saussure, F. (1916). Cours de Linguistique Generale. Paris: Payot.
Dobzhansky, T. (1973). Nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution. The
American Biology Teacher 35, 125–129.
Faria, M. (2007). RNA as code makers: A biosemiotic view of RNAi and cell immunity. In:
Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Introduction to Biosemiotics. Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 347–364,
Faria, M. (2008). Signal transduction codes and cell fate. In: Barbieri, M, (Ed.) The Codes of Life:
The Rules of Macroevolution. Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 265–283.
Favareau, D. (2007). The evolutionary history of biosemiotics. In: Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Introduction
to Biosemiotics. Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 1–67.
Flames, N., Pla, R., Gelman, D. M., Rubenstein, J. L. R., Puelles, L., Marin, O. (2007). Delineation
of multiple subpallial progenitor domains by the combinatorial expression of transcriptional
codes. The Journal of Neuroscience 27(36), 9682–9695.
Florkin, M. (1974). Concepts of molecular biosemiotics and molecular evolution. In: Florkin, M.
Stotz, E. H. (Ed.) Comprehensive Biochemistry, Vol. 29A. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 1–124.
Forsdyke, R. (2006). Evolutionary Bioinformatics. New York: Springer.
Gabius, H. -J. (2000). Biological information transfer beyond the genetic code: The sugar code.
Naturwissenschaften 87, 108–121.
Gabius, H. -J., Andre, S., Kaltner, H., Siebert, H. -C. (2002). The sugar code: Functionalle-
ctinomics. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1572, 165–177.

24
Biosemiotics: A New Understanding of Life
793
Gamble, M. J., Freedman, L. P. (2002). A coactivator code for transcription. Trends in Biochemical
Sciences 27(4), 165–167.
Gimona, M. (2008). Protein linguistics and the modular code of the cytoskeleton. In: Barbieri, M.
(Ed.) The Codes of Life: The Rules of Macroevolution. Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 189–206.
Gonzalez, D. L. (2008). Error detection and correction codes. In: Barbieri, M. (Ed.) The Codes of
Life: The Rules of Macroevolution. Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 379–394.
Grifﬁth, P. E. (2001). Genetic information: A metaphor in search of a theory. Philosophy of Science
68, 394–412.
Grifﬁth, P. E., Knight, R. D. (1998). What is the developmental challenge? Philosophy of Science
65, 276–288.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1996). Signs of Meaning in the Universe. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2008). A Legacy for Living Systems. Gregory Bateson as Precursor to Biosemiotics.
Dordrecht: Springer.
Jacob, F. (1982). The Possible and the Actual. New York: Pantheon Books.
Jessell, T. M. (2000). Neuronal speciﬁcation in the spinal cord: Inductive signals and transcriptional
codes. Nature Genetics 1, 20–29.
Johannsen, W. (1909). Elemente der exacten Erblichkeitslehre. Jena: Gustav Fischer.
Khidekel, N., Hsieh-Wilson, L. C. (2004). A ‘molecular switchboard’ covalent modiﬁcations to
proteins and their impact on transcription. Organic & Biomolecular Chemistry 2, 1–7.
Khorana, H. G., Bilchi, H., Ghosh, H., Gupta, N. et al. (1966). Polynucleotide synthesis and the
genetic code. Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology 31, 39–49.
Knights, C. D., Catania, J., Di Giovanni, S., Muratoglu, S. et al. (2006). Distinct p53 acetyla-
tion cassettes differentially inﬂuence geneexpression patterns and cell fate. The Journal of Cell
Biology 173, 553–544.
Krampen, M. (1981). Phytosemiotics. Semiotica 36(3/4), 187–209.
Kull, K. (1999). Biosemiotics in the twentieth century: A view from biology. Semiotica 127(1/4),
385–414.
Küppers, B. -O. (1990). Information and the Origin of Life. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Küppers, B. -O. (1992). Understanding complexity. In: Beckermann, A., Flohr, H., Kim, J. (Eds.)
Emergence or Reduction? Essays on the Prospects of Nonreductive Physicalism. Berlin: Walter
de Gruyter, pp. 241–256.
Leader, I. E., Wang, C., Popov, V., Fu, M., Pestell, R. G. (2006). Epigenetics and the estrogen
receptor. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1089, 73–87.
Mahner, M., Bunge, M. (1997). Foundations of Biophilosophy. Berlin: Springer.
Maraldi, N. M. (2008). A lipid-based code in nuclear signalling. In: Barbieri, M. (Ed.) The Codes
of Life: The Rules of Macroevolution. Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 207–221.
Markoš, A. (2002). Readers of the Book of Life: Conceptualizing Developmental Evolutionary
Biology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Maynard Smith, J., Szathrnary, E. (1995). The Major Transitions in Evolution. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Neuman, Y. (2008). The immune self code: From correspondence to complexity. In: Barbieri, M.
(Ed.) The Codes of Life: The Rules of Macroevolution. Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 247–263.
Nirenberg, M., Matthaei, J. H. (1961). The dependence of cell- free protein synthesis in E. coli upon
naturally occurring or synthetic polyribonucleotides. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 47, 1588–1602.
Nirenberg, M., Caskey, T., Marshal, R., Brimacombe, R. et al. (1966). The RNA code and protein
synthesis. Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology 31, 11–24.
Pattee, H. H. (1969). The physical basis of coding and reliability in biological evolution. In:
Waddington, C. H. (Ed.) Towards a Theoretical Biology, Vol. 1. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press, pp. 67–93.
Pattee, H. H. (1972). Laws and constraints, symbols and languages. In: Waddington, C. H. (Ed.)
Towards a Theoretical Biology, Vol. 4. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, pp. 248–258.
Pattee, H. H. (2001). The physics of symbols: Bridging the epistemic cut. BioSystems 60, 5–21.

794
Marcello Barbieri (1940– )
Peirce, C. S. (1931–1958). Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Perissi, V., Rosenfeld, M. G. (2005). Controlling nuclear receptors: The circular logic of cofactor
cycles. Nature Molecular Cell Biology 6, 542–554.
Posner, R., Robering, K., Sebeok, T. A. (1997). Semiotik/Semiotics: A Handbook on the Sign-
Theoretical Foundations of Nature and Culture, Vol. 1. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, p. 4.
Prodi, G. (1988). Material bases of signiﬁcation. Semiotica 69(3/4), 191–241.
Readies, C., Takeichi, M. (1996). Cadherine in the developing central nervous system: An adhesive
code for segmental and functional subdivisions. Developmental Biology 180, 413–423.
Reybrouck, M. (2008). The musical code between nature and nurture. In: Barbieri, M. (Ed.) The
Codes of Life: The Rules of Macroevolution. Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 395–434.
Rothschild, F. S. (1962). Laws of symbolic mediation in the dynamics of self and personality.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 96, 774–784.
Sarkar, S. (1996). Biological information. a skeptical look at some central dogmas of molecu-
lar biology. In: Sarkar, S. (Ed.) The Philosophy and History of Biology. Dordrecht: Kluwer
Academic, pp. 187–231.
Sarkar, S. (2000). Information in genetics and developmental biology. Philosophy of Science 67,
208–213.
Schrodinger, E. (1944). What is Life? Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Scully, K. M., Rosenfeld, M. G. (2002). Pituitary development: Regulatory codes in mammalian
organogenesis. Science 295, 2231–2235.
Sebeok, T. A. (1963). Communication among social bees; porpoises and sonar; man and dolphin.
Language 39, 448–466.
Sebeok, T. A. (1972). Perspectives in Zoosemiotics. The Hague: Mouton.
Sebeok, T. A. (2001). Biosemiotics: Its roots, proliferation, and prospects. In: Kull, K. (Ed.) Jakob
von Uexkiill: A Paradigm for Biology and Semiotics. Semiotica 134(1/4), pp. 61–78.
Shannon, C. E. (1948). A mathematical theory of communication. Bell System Technical Journal
27, 379–424, 623–656.
Shapiro, L., Colman, D. R. (1999). The diversity of cadherins and implications for a synaptic
adhesive code in the CNS. Neuron 23, 427–430.
Sonea, S. (1988). The global organism: A new view of bacteria. The Sciences 28(4), 38–45.
Speyer, J., Lengyel, P., Basilio, C., Wahba, A., Gardner, R., Ochoa, S. (1963). Synthetic polinu-
cleotides and the amino acid code. Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology 28,
559–567.
Stent, G. S., Calendar, R. (1978). Molecular Genetics. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman.
Stepanov, Y. S. (1971). Semiotika. Moscow: Nauka.
Strahl, B. D., Allis, D. (2000). The language of covalent histone modiﬁcations. Nature 403, 41–45.
Sutherland, E. W. (1972). Studies on the mechanism of hormone action. Science 177, 401–408.
Taborsky, E. (1999). Semiosis: The transformation of energy into information. Semiotica 127, 599–
646.
Taborsky, E. (2002). Energy and evolutionary semiosis. Sign Systems Studies 30(1), 361–381.
Tootle, T. L., Rebay, I. (2005). Post-translational modiﬁcations inﬂuence transcription factor
activity: A view from the ETS superfamily. BioEssays 27, 285–298.
Trifonov, E. N. (1987). Translation framing code and frame-monitoring mechanism as suggested
by the analysis of mRNA and l6 s rRNA nucleotide sequence. Journal of Molecular Biology
194, 643–652.
Trifonov, E. N. (1989). The multiple codes of nucleotide sequences. Bulletin of Mathematical
Biology 51, 417–432.
Trifonov, E. N. (1996). Interfering contexts of regulatory sequence elements. Cabios 12, 423–429.
Trifonov, E. N. (1999). Elucidating sequence codes: Three codes for evolution. Annals of the New
York Academy of Sciences 870, 330–338.
Turner, B. M. (2000). Histone acetylation and an epigenetic code. BioEssay 22, 836–845.
Turner, B. M. (2002). Cellular memory and the histone code. Cell 111, 285–291.

24
Biosemiotics: A New Understanding of Life
795
von Uexkiill, J. (1928). Theoretische Biologie 2te Auﬂage. Berlin: Julius Springer.
Watson, J. D., Crick, F. H. C. (1953). Genetical implications of the structure of deoxyribose nucleic
acid. Nature 71, 964–96.
Woese, C. R. (2000). Interpreting the universal phylogenetic tree. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 97, 8392–8396.
Yockey, H. P. (2005). Information Theory, Evolution, and the Origin of Life. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Commentary Bibliography and Further
Readings
The following bibliography of primary and secondary literature consulted in the
preparation of this volume is by no means exhaustive. Rather, I have here com-
piled a few short lists of only the most representative primary readings sufﬁcient
for the reader to attain a solid introductory grounding in each author’s main ideas,
and have augmented such lists with a number of suggested and easily accessible sec-
ondary readings meant to contextualize the author’s works and their reception within
the relevant ﬁelds of discourse. When consulting these chapter bibliographies and
list of suggested further readings, please note that each reprinted selection in this
anthology also contains its own original citation list that has been reprinted at the
conclusion of each selection. Many of these original reference lists (e.g., Anderson
et al.) reveal state-of-the-art scholarship at the time of their writing, and provide
critically important bibliographic information that has not been reproduced on the
following lists of suggested introductory readings. By using both sets of lists in tan-
dem, however, and by following the trail of signs that appear as reference texts beget
further reference texts, the reader should be able to proceed from the readings con-
tained in this introductory anthology to an increasingly full acquaintance with the
extant scholarship in the ﬁeld. – D.F.
Donald Francis Favareau (Pages 1a–1z)
Primary Literature
Favareau, D. (2001). Beyond self and other: The neurosemiotic emergence of intersubjectivity.
Sign Systems Studies, 30(1), 57–101.
Favareau, D. (2002). Constructing representema: On the neurosemiotics of self and vision.
Semiotics, Evolution, Energy and Development Journal, 2(4), 3–24.
Favareau, D. (2005). What is biosemiotics? Available online at: http://www.biosemiotics.org
Favareau, D. (2006). Founding a world biosemiotics institution: The International Society for
Biosemiotic Studies. Sign System Studies, 33(2), 481–485.
Favareau, D. (2007). The Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Introduction
to Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis. Dordrecht: Springer, pp.1–68.
Favareau, D. (2007a). Animal sensing, acting and knowing: Bridging the relations between brains,
bodies and world. In Witzany, G. (Ed.) Biosemiotics in Transdisciplinary Contexts. Helsinki:
Umweb, pp. 61–69.
797
D. Favareau, Essential Readings in Biosemiotics, Biosemiotics 3,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9650-1, C
⃝Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010

798
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Favareau, D. (2007b). How to Make Peirce’s Ideas Clear. In Witzany, G. (Ed.) Biosemiotics in
Transdisciplinary Contexts. Helsinki: Umweb, pp. 163–173.
Favareau, D. (2008). Collapsing the Wave Function of Meaning: The Epistemological Matrix of
Talk-in-interaction. In Hoffmeyer, J. (Ed.) A Legacy forLiving Systems: Gregory Bateson as a
Precursor to Biosemiotics. Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 169–212.
Favareau, D. (2008a). The biosemiotic turn: a brief history of the sign concept in pre-modernist
science. Biosemiotics, 1, 5–23.
Favareau, D. (2008b). Iconic, indexical and symbolic understanding. Journal of the American
Psychoanalytic Association, 56(3), 789–801.
Favareau, D. (2008c). Understanding natural constructivism. Semiotica, 172(1/4), 489–528.
Favareau, D. (2008d). Joining sign science with life science. The American Journal of Semiotics,
24(1–3), iii–xv.
Favareau, D. (2008e). The IASS Roundtable on Biosemiotics: A Discussion with Some of the
Founders of the Field (Claus Emmeche, Jesper Hoffmeyer, Kalevi Kull, Anton Markos,
Frederik Stjernfelt). The American Journal of Semiotics, 24/1, 1–21.
Additional Chapter References and Further Readings
Alexander, V. (2009). The poetics of purpose. Biosemiotics, 2, 77–100.
Andrade, E. (2003). Demonios de Darwin. Semiótica y termodinámica de la evolución biológica.
Bogota: Siglo del Hombre.
Arnellos, A., Spyros, V., Spyrou, T., Darzentas, J. (2006). The emergence of autonomous
representations in artiﬁcial agents. Journal of Computers, 1(6), 29–36.
Arnellos, A., Spyrou, T. and Darzentas, J. (2008). Emergence and downward causation in contem-
porary artiﬁcial agents: Implications for their autonomy and design guidelines. Cybernetics and
Human Knowing, 15(3/4), 15–41.
Arnellos, A., Spyrou, T. and Darzentas, J. (2010). Towards the naturalization of agency based on
an interactivist account of autonomy. New Ideas in Psychology, forthcoming.
Artmann, S. (2007). Computing Codes versus Interpreting Life. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Introduction
to Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis. Berlin: Springer, pp. 209–234.
Artmann, S. (2008). Organic problem solving: Biology, decision theory, and the physical symbol
system hypothesis. The American Journal of Semiotics, 24(1/3), 95–106.
Artmann, S. (2009). Basic semiosis as code-based control. Biosemiotics, 2(1), 31–38.
Baenziger, E. J. (2009). Alpha and Omega: The oldest and newest example of interphyloge-
netic semiotics – the orchid. Paper presented at the Ninth Annual International Gatherings
in Biosemiotics Conference. Charles University, Prague June 30–July 5, 2009.
Barbieri, M. (2004). The deﬁnitions of information and meaning: two possible boundaries between
physics and biology. Rivista di Biologia-Biology Forum, 97(1), 91–110.
Barbieri, M. (2006). Semantic biology and the mind-body problem: The theory of the conventional
mind. Biological Theory, 1(4), 352–356.
Barbieri, M. (Ed.) (2007). Introduction to Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis. Dordrecht:
Springer.
Barbieri, M. (Ed.) (2008a). The Codes of Life: The Rules of Macroevolution. Dordrecht: Springer.
Barbieri, M. (2008b). Biosemiotics: A new understanding of life. Naturwissenschaften, 95,
577–599.
Barbieri, M. (2008c). The code model of semiosis: The ﬁrst steps towards a scientiﬁc biosemiotics.
The American Journal of Semiotics, 24(1/3), 23–37.
Brands, M., Arnellos, A., Spyrou, T. and Darzentas, J. (2007). A biosemiotic analysis of sero-
tonin’s complex functionality. In Witzany, G. (Ed.) Biosemiotics in Transdisciplinary Contexts.
Helsinki: Umweb, pp. 125–132.
Apel, K. O. (1981). Charles S. Peirce: From Pragmatism to Pragmaticism. In Krois, J. M. (Trans.)
Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
799
Augustyn, P. (2009). Uexküll, Peirce, and other afﬁnities between biosemiotics and biolinguistics.
Biosemiotics, 2(1), 1–17.
Bailey, R. W., Matejka, L. and Steiner, P. (Eds.) (1978). The Sign: Semiotics Around the World.
Ann Arbor, MI: Michigan Slavic Publications.
Bains, P. (2006). The Primacy of Semiosis: An Ontology of Relations. Toronto; Buffalo: University
of Toronto Press.
Bakker, P. and Thijssen, J. (Eds.) (2007). Mind, Cognition, and Representation: The Tradition of
Commentaries on Aristotle’s De Anima. Aldershot, Hants, England; Burlington, VT: Ashgate
Publishing.
Barbieri, M. (Ed.) (2007). Is the cell a semiotic system? In Introduction to Biosemiotics: The New
Biological Synthesis. Berlin: Springer, pp. 179–208.
Baluška, F., Mancuso, S., Volkmann, D. and Barlow, P. (2004). Root apices as plant command
centres: the unique ‘brain-like’ status of the root apex transition zone. Biologia Bratislava, 59,
7–19.
Baluška, F., Volkmann, D. and Menzel, D. (2005). Plant synapses: actin-based domains for cell-to-
cell communication. Trends Plant Science, 10, 106–111.
Baluška, F., Volkmann, D. and Mancuso, S. (2006). Communication in Plants: Neuronal Aspects
of Plant Life. Berlin: Springer.
Barlow, P. W. (2007). Information in plant life and development: A biosemiotic approach. Triple-C:
The Journal of Cognition, Communication, and Cooperation, 5(2), 37–48.
Benosman, R. and Kang, S. B. (Eds.) (2001). Panoramic Vision: Sensors, Theory, and Applications.
New York, NY: Springer.
Bickhard, M. H. (1999). Representation in natural and artiﬁcial agents. In Taborsky, E. (Ed.)
Semiosis, Evolution, Energy: Towards a Reconceptualization of the Sign. Aachen: Shaker
Verlag, pp. 15–25.
Bickhard, M. H. (2003). The biological emergence of representation. In Brown, T. and Smith, L.
(Eds.) Emergence and Reduction: Proceedings of the 29th Annual Symposium of the Jean
Piaget Society. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, pp. 105–131.
Böll, M. (2008). Social is emotional. Biosemiotics, 1(3), 329–346.
Bouissac, P., Herzfeld, M. and Posner, R. (Eds.) (1986). Iconicity: Essays on the Nature of Culture:
Festschrift for Thomas A. Sebeok on his 65th Birthday. Tubingen: Stauffenburg Verlag.
Bouissac, P. (Ed.) (1998). Encyclopedia of Semiotics. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Brands, M., Arnellos, A., Spyrou, T. and Darzentas, J. (2007). A biosemiotic analysis of sero-
tonin’s complex functionality. In Witzany, G. (Ed.) Biosemiotics in Transdisciplinary Contexts.
Helsinki: Umweb, pp. 125–132.
Bruni, L. E. (2007). Cellular semiotics and signal transduction. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Introduction
to Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis. Berlin: Springer, pp. 365–408.
Bruni, L. E. (2008a). Gregory Bateson’s Relevance to Current Molecular Biology. In Hoffmeyer, J.
(Ed.) A Legacy for Living Systems: Gregory Bateson as a Precursor to Biosemiotics. Berlin:
Springer, 93–120.
Bruni, L. E. (2008b). Semiotic freedom: emergence and teleology in biological and cognitive
interfaces. The American Journal of Semiotics, 24(1/3), 57–74.
Bruni, L. E. (2008c). Hierarchical categorical perception in sensing and cognitive processes.
Biosemiotics, 1(1), 113–130.
Callebaut, W. (1993). Taking the Naturalistic Turn, or, How Real Philosophy of Science is Done.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Campbell, D. T. (1974). Evolutionary epistemology. In Schilpp, P. A. (Ed.) The Philosophy of Karl
R. Popper, LaSalle, IL: Open Court, pp. 412–463.
Cariani, P. (2001). Symbols and dynamics in the brain. Biosystems, 60, 59–83.
Chalmers, D. (1995). Facing up to the problem of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies,
2(3), 200–219.
Chang, H. L. (2008). Between nature and culture: a glimpse of the biosemiotic world in fourth
Century B.C.E. Chinese philosophy. The American Journal of Semiotics 24.1–3,159–170.

800
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Chien, J.(2006). Of animals and men: A study of umwelt in Uexküll, Cassirer, and Heidegger.
Concentric: Literary and Cultural Studies, 32.1, 57–79.
Clark, A. (1997). Being There: Putting Brain, Body, and World Together Again. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Clarke, D. S. (1987). Principles of Semiotic. London, New York, NY: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Clarke, D. S. (1990). Sources of Semiotic: Readings with Commentary from Antiquity to the
Present. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.
Cobley, P. (Ed.) (2006). Communication Theories. (Four Volumes). London: Routledge.
Cobley, P. (2008). Signiﬁers and subjects. In Petrilli, S. (Ed.) Approaches to Communication:
Trends in Global Communication Studies. Madison, WI: Atwood Publishing.
Cobley, P. (Ed.) (2009). The Routledge Companion to Semiotics. London: Taylor & Francis.
Cobley, P. (Ed.) (2010). Realism for the 21st Century: A John Deely Reader. Scranton and London:
University of Scranton Press.
Colapietro, V. (2001). Peirce’s Approach to the Self: A Semiotic Perspective on Human Subjectivity.
Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Colapietro, V. and Olshewsky, T. (Eds.) (1996). Peirce’s Doctrine of Signs: Theory, Applications,
and Connections. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Collier, J. (2004). Self-organization, individuation and identity. Revue Internationale de
Philosophie, 59, 151–172.
Collier, J., Talmont-Kasminski, K. (2004). Pragmatist pragmatics. Philosophica, 75, 61–88.
Collier, J. (2008). Information in biological systems. In Adriaans, P. and van Benthem, J. (Eds.)
Handbook of Philosophy of Science, Volume 8: Philosophy of Information. Amsterdam:
Elsevier.
Cowley, S. J. (2006). Language and biosemiosis: Toward unity? Semiotica, 162(1/4), 417–443.
Cowley, S. J. (2007). How human infants deal with symbol grounding. Interaction Studies, 8(1),
83–104.
Cowley, S. (2008). The codes of language: Turtles all the way up? In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) The Codes
of Life: The Rules of Macroevolution. Berlin: Springer, pp. 319–46.
Cowley, S. J. (2009). Language ﬂow: Opening the subject. Cognitive Semiotics, 4, 64–92.
Cvrˇcková, F. (2002). The Darwinian purpose enters the post-genomic era: A case study. In Havel, I.
and Markoš, A. (Eds.) Is There a Purpose in Nature? How to Navigate Between the Scylla of
Mechanism and the Charybdis of Teleology. Czech Republic: Vesmir, pp. 175–184.
Cvrˇcková, F., Markoš, A. (2007). Beyond bioinformatics: can similarity be measured in the digital
worlds? In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Biosemiotics: Information, Codes and Signs in Living Systems.
New York, NY: Nova Science Publishers, pp. 65–79.
Damasio, A. (1994). Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain. New York, NY:
Putnam.
Damasio, A. (1999). The Feeling of What Happens: Body, Emotion and the Making of
Consciousness. Orlando: Harcourt.
Danesi, M. (1995). Giambattista Vico and Anglo-American Science: Philosophy and Writing.
Berlin; New York, NY: Mouton de Gruyter.
Danesi, M. (2007). Towards a standard terminology for (bio)semiotics. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.)
Introduction to Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis. Berlin: Springer, pp. 283–98.
Deacon, T. (2006). Reciprocal linkage between self-organizing processes is sufﬁcient for self-
reproduction and evolvability. Biological Theory, 1(2) 2006, 136–149.
Deacon, T. (2006). Emergence: The Hole at the Wheel’s Hub. In Clayton, P. and Davies, P. (Eds.)
The Re-Emergence of Emergence. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 111–150.
Deacon, T. (2007a). Shannon-Boltzmann-Darwin: Redeﬁning information. Cognitive Semiotics,
(1), 123–148.
Deacon. T. (2007b). Towards a semiotic cognitive science: why neither the phenomenological
nor computational approaches are adequate. Conference presentation given at The Symbolics
Species Conference 2, University of Copenhagen, November 22–23, 2007. Available online at
http//:symbolicspecies.com

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
801
Deacon. T. (2008). A collection of published and unpublished papers. Available online at:
www.teleodynamics.com
Deacon, T. (2010). Homunculus: Evolution, Information, and the Emergence of Consciousness
(tentative title, forthcoming). New York, NY: W.W. Norton.
Deely, J. (2007). Augustine and Poinsot: The Protosemiotic Development. Scranton: University of
Scranton Press.
Deely, J. (2008). Descartes and Poinsot: The Crossroad of Signs and Ideas. Scranton: University
of Scranton Press.
Deely, J. (2009). Peirce and Poinsot: The Action of Signs from Nature to Ethics. Scranton:
University of Scranton Press.
Deely, J. (2010). Purely Objective Reality. Scranton: University of Scranton Press.
Deely, J., Petrilli, S. and Ponzio, A. (2005). The Semiotic Animal. Augusto Toronto: Legas.
Deely, J., Petrilli, S. and Ponzio, A. (2005). The Semiotic Animal. Augusto Toronto: Legas.
Deely, J., Williams, B. and Kruse, F. E. (Eds.) (1986). Frontiers in Semiotics. Bloomington, IN:
Indiana University Press.
De Groot, J. (Ed.) (2004). Nature in American Philosophy. Washington: Catholic University of
America Press.
Delaney, C. (1993). Science, Knowledge, and Mind: A Study in the Philosophy of C.S. Peirce. Notre
Dame: University of Notre Dame Press.
Deledalle, G. (2000). Charles S. Peirce’s Philosophy of Signs. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press.
Denizhan, Y. (2008). Roots of the contemporary mental model in ancient mythology. The American
Journal of Semiotics, 24(1/3), 145–158.
Depew, D. (1996). Darwinism Evolving: Systems Dynamics and the Genealogy of Natural
Selection. Boston, MA: MIT Press.
Donald, M. (1991). Origin of the Modern Mind: Three Stages in the Evolution of Culture and
Cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Eco, U. (1984). Semiotics and the Philosophy of Language. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press.
Edelman, G. (1992). Bright Air, Brilliant Fire: On The Matter of The Mind. New York, NY:
BasicBooks.
Edelman, G. and Tononi, G. (2000). A Universe of Consciousness: How Matter Becomes
Imagination. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Eder, J. and Rembold, H. (1992). Biosemiotics: A paradigm of biology: Biological signalling on
the verge of deterministic chaos. Naturwissenschaften, 79(2), 60–67.
El-Hani, C. N., Queiroz, J. and Emmeche, C. (2005). Information and semiosis in living systems:
A semiotic approach. Semiosis, Energy, Evolution and Development Journal, 1, 60–90.
El-Hani, C. N., Queiroz, J. and Emmeche, C. (2006). A semiotic analysis of the genetic information
system. Semiotica, 160(1/4), 1–68.
El-Hani, C. N., Queiroz, J. and Emmeche, C. (2008). A Peircean approach to ‘information’ and its
relationship with Bateson’s and Jablonka’s ideas, The American Journal of Semiotics, 24(1–3),
75–94.
El-Hani, C. N., Queiroz, J. and Emmeche, C. (2009). Genes, Information, and Semiosis. Tartu:
Tartu University Press.
Emmeche, C. (2004a). Causal processes, semiosis, and consciousness. In Seibt, J. (Ed.) Process
Theories: Crossdisciplinary Studies in Dynamic Categories. Dordrecht: Kluwer, pp. 313–336.
Emmeche, C. (2004b). Constructing and explaining emergence in artiﬁcial life. In Wise, M. N.
(Ed.) Growing Explanations: Historical Perspectives on Recent Science. Durham: Duke
University Press, pp. 301–326.
Emmeche, C. (2007). On the biosemiotics of embodiment and our human cyborg nature. In
Ziemke, T., Zlatev, J. and Frank, R. M. (Eds.) Body, Language and Mind. Volume 1:
Embodiment. New York, NY: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 379–410.

802
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Elsasser, W. M. (1998). Reﬂections on a Theory of Organisms. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins
University Press.
Faria, M. (2007). RNA as code makers: a biosemiotic view of RNAi and cell immunity. In Barbieri,
M. (Ed.) Introduction to Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis. Berlin: Springer,
pp. 347–64.
Faria, M. (2008). Signal transduction codes and cell fate. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) The Codes of Life:
The Rules of Macroevolution. Berlin: Springer, pp. 265–86.
Farina, A. (2008). The landscape as a semiotic interface between organisms and resources.
Biosemiotics, 1(1), 75–84.
Fernández, E. (2008). Signs and instruments: the convergence of Aristotelian and Kantian
intuitions in biosemiotics. Biosemiotics, 1(3), 347–359.
Freadman, A. (2004). The Machinery of Talk: Charles Peirce and the Sign Hypothesis. Stanford:
Stanford University Press.
Freeman, W. J. (2000). Neurodynamics: An Exploration in Mesoscopic Brain Dynamics. London;
New York, NY: Springer.
Fürlinger, A. (1998). Locomotion and cognition: from ﬁsh to hominids. Proceedings of the 26th
Goettingen Neurobiology Conference 1998. Vol 1. Stuttgart: Thieme.
Gimona, M. (2008). Protein linguistics and the modular code of the cytoskeleton. In Barbieri, M.
(Ed.) The Codes of Life: The Rules of Macroevolution. Berlin: Springer, pp. 189–206.
cellular semiotics. Biosemiotics, 3(1), forthcoming.
Goodwin, B. (2008). Bateson: biology with meaning. In Hoffmeyer, J. (Ed.) A Legacy for Living
Systems: Gregory Bateson as a Precursor to Biosemiotics. Berlin: Springer, pp. 145–52.
Goodwin, C. (2003). Conversational Frameworks for the Accomplishment of Meaning in Aphasia.
In Goodwin, C. (Ed.) Conversation and Brain Damage. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
pp. 90–116.
Goodwin, C. (2005). Seeing in Depth. In Derry, S. J., Schunn, C. D. and Gernsbacher, M. A. (Eds.)
Interdisciplinary Collaboration: An Emerging Cognitive Science. New York, NY: Lawrence
Erlbaum, pp. 85–122.
Goodwin, C. (2006). Human Sociality as Mutual Orientation in a Rich Interactive Environment.
In Enﬁeld, N. and Levinson, S. C. (Eds.) Roots of Human Sociality. London: Berg Press,
pp. 96–125.
Goodwin, C. (2007). Environmentally Coupled Gestures: Multimodal Utterances and Pointing in
Aphasia. In Duncan, S., Cassell, J. and Levy, E. (Eds.) Gesture and the Dynamic Dimensions
of Language. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, pp. 195–212.
Hofkirchner, W. and Ellersdorfer, G. (2007). Biological Information. Sign Processes in Living
Systems. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Biosemiotic Research Trends. New York, NY: Nova Science
Publishers, pp. 141–155.
Hofkirchner, W. (2009). How to achieve a uniﬁed theory of information. Triple-C: The Journal of
Cognition, Communication, and Cooperation, 7(2), 357–368.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2005). Origin of species by natural translation. In Yap, G. H. (Trans.),
Chang, H. L. (Ed.) Biosemiotics: Nature in Culture or Culture in Nature? Chung Wai Literary
Monthly, 34(7), 27–44.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2006). Uexküllian Planmässigkeit, Sign Systems Studies, 32, 73–97.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2006). Genes, Development and Semiosis. In Neumann-Held, E. and Rehmann-
Sutter, C. (Eds.) Genes in Development: Re-reading the Molecular Paradigm, Durham and
London: Duke University Press, pp. 152–174.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2006). Thure von Uexküll 1908–2004, Sign Systems Studies, 33.2, 487–494.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2007). Semiogenic scaffolding in nature. International Journal of Applied
Semiotics, 5, 81–94.
Hoffmeyer, J, (Ed.) (2008). A Legacy for Living Systems: Gregory Bateson as a Precursor to
Biosemiotics. Berlin: Springer.
Giorgi, F., Bruni, L. E., Maggio, R. (2010). Receptor oligomerization as a mechanism controlling

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
803
Hoffmeyer, J. (2008a). From thing to relation. On Bateson’s bioanthropology. In Hoffmeyer, J.
(Ed.) A Legacy for Living Systems: Gregory Bateson as a Precursor to Biosemiotics. Berlin:
Springer, pp. 27–44.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2008b). The semiotic body. Biosemiotics, 1(2), 169–190.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2009). Biosemiotics: An Investigation into the Signs of Life and the Life of Signs.
Scranton: Scranton University Press.
Hofstadter, D. (1979). Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid. Middlesex: Penguin.
Hookway, C. (1985). Peirce. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Houser, N. (1995). Semiotic as cognitive science. Cruzeiro Semiotico 22–25, 139–149.
Houser, N. (1997). Studies in the Logic of Charles S. Peirce. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press, 1997.
Hope, J. and Patoine, P. L. (2009). A biosemiotic approach to wine-tasting. Does a glass of white
wine taste like a glass of Domain Sigalas Santorini Asirtiko Athiri 2005? In Barbieri, M. (Ed.)
Biosemiotics, 2(1), 65–76.
Innis, R. E. (1985). Semiotics: An Introductory Anthology. London: Hutchinson.
Karatay, V. and Denizhan, Y. (2008). Individuation as a General Framework for Semiosis. Paper
presented at the Eight Annual International Gatherings in Biosemiotics Conference. University
of the Aegean, Syros, Greece June 23–28, 2008.
Kauffman, S. (1993). Origins of Order: Self-Organization and Selection in Evolution. New York,
NY, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kauffman, S. (1995). At Home in the Universe: The Search for Laws of Self-Organization and
Complexity. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Kauffman, S. (2000). Investigations. Oxford, New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Kleisner, K. (2007). The formation of the theory of homology in biological sciences. Acta
Biotheoretica, 55, 317–340.
Kleisner, K. (2008). The semantic morphology of Adolf Portmann: A starting point for the
biosemiotics of organic form? Biosemiotics, 1(2), 207–220.
Krampen, M. (Ed.) (1987). Classics of Semiotics. New York, NY: Plenum.
Kravchenko, A. V. (2003). The ontology of signs as linguistic and non-linguistic entities:
A cognitive perspective. Annual Review of Cognitive Linguistics, 1, 179–191.
Kull, K. (2005). Semiosphere and a dual ecology: paradoxes of communication. Sign Systems
Studies 33.1, 175–189.
Kull, K. (2007a). Biosemiotics and biophysics – the fundamental approaches to the study of
life. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Introduction to Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis. Berlin:
Springer, pp. 167–177.
Kull, K. (2007b). Biosemiotic conversations: Ponzio, Bakhtin, Kanaev, Driesch, Uexküll, Lotman.
In Petrilli, S. (Ed.) Philosophy of Language as the Art of Listening: On Augusto Ponzio’s
Scientiﬁc Research. Bari: Edizioni dal Sud, pp. 79–89.
Kull, K. (2009). Biosemiotics: To know what life knows. Cybernetics and Human Knowing,
16(3/4), 81–88.
Kull. K., Deacon, T., Emmeche, C., Hoffmeyer, J. and Stjernfelt, F. (2009). Theses on biosemiotics:
Prolegomena to a theoretical biology. Biological Theory, 4(2), 167–173.
Kull, K., Emmeche, C. and Favareau, D. (2008). Biosemiotic questions. Biosemiotics, 1(1), 41–55.
Llinás, R. R. (2001). I of the Vortex: From Neurons to Self. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lucid, D. P. (Ed.) (1977). Soviet Semiotics: An Anthology. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press.
MacIntyre, A. C. (1974 /1980). Epistemological crises, dramatic narrative, and the philosophy
of science. In Gutting, G. (Ed.) Paradigms and Revolutions: Appraisals and Applications of
Thomas Kuhn’s Philosophy of Science. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame, pp. 54–74.
Major, J. C. (2010). Neuronal vs. relational man: Epistemological and semiotic approaches.
Biosemiotics, 3(1), forthcoming.
Maran, T. (2007). Semiotic interpretations of biological mimicry. Semiotica, 167(1/4), 223–248.

804
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Maran, T. (2008). Towards an integrated methodology of ecosemiotics: The concept of nature-text.
Sign Systems Studies, 35(1/2), 269–294.
Markoš, A. (2004). In the quest for novelty: Kauffman’s biosphere and Lotman’s semiosphere.
Sign System Studies, 32, 309–327.
Markoš, A., Švorcová, J. (2009). Recorded versus organic memory: interaction of two worlds as
demonstrated by the chromatin dynamics. Biosemiotics, 2, 34–58.
Markoš, A., Grygar, F., Kleisner, K. and Neubauer, Z. (2007). Towards a Darwinian biosemiotics.
Life as mutual understanding. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Introduction to Biosemiotics. Dordrecht:
Springer, pp. 235–255.
Markoš, A., Grygar, F., Hajnal, L., Kleisner, K., Kratochvíl, Z. and Neubauer, Z. (2009). Life as its
Own Designer: Darwin’s ‘Origin’ and Western Thought. Dordrecht: Springer.
Matsuno, K. (2007). Who made the genetic codes, how and by what? In Fagot-Largeault, A.,
Torres, J. M. and Rahman, S. (Eds.) The Inﬂuence of Genetics on Contemporary Thinking.
Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 33–50.
Matsuno, K. (2008). Molecular semiotics toward the emergence of life. Biosemiotics, 1, 131–144.
Merrell, F. (1996). Signs Grow: Semiosis and Life Processes. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Merrell, F. (1997). Peirce, Signs, Meaning. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Morris, C. (2003). Life’s Solution: Inevitable Humans in a Lonely Universe. Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press.
Neuman, Y. (2008a). Reviving the Living: Meaning Making in Living Systems. Amsterdam:
Elsevier.
Neuman, Y. (2008b). The Immune Self Code: From Correspondence to Complexity. In
Barbieri, M. (Ed.) The Codes of Life: The Rules of Macroevolution. Berlin: Springer,
pp. 247–264.
Neuman, Y., Arnellos, A. and Nave, O. (2009). Sign-mediated concept formation. American
Journal of Semiotics, 24(1–3), 107–124.
Neuman, Y. and Nave, O. (2008). On the semio-mathematical nature of codes. Biosemiotics, 1(1),
99–112.
Nöth, W. (1990). Handbook of Semiotics. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Ogden, C. K., Richards, I. A. (1923 [1989]). The Meaning of Meaning: A Study of the Inﬂuence
of Language Upon Thought and of the Science of Symbolism. San Diego: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich.
Oren, R., Kull, K. and Noormets, A. (2008). Olevi Kull’s lifetime contribution to ecology. Tree
Physiology, 28(4), 483–490.
Oyama, S. (1985). The Ontogeny of Information: Developmental Systems and Evolution.
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Ozansoy, M. and Denizhan, Y. (2009). The endomembrane system: A representation of the
extracellular medium? Biosemiotics, 2(3), 255–268.
Pain, S. P. (2007). Inner representations and signs in animals. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Introduction to
Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis. Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 409–456.
Pain, S. P. (2009). Signs of anger: Representation of agonistic behaviour in invertebrate cognition.
Biosemiotics, 2(2), 181–192.
Parmentier, R. J. (1994). Signs in Society: Studies in Semiotic Anthropology. Bloomington, IN:
Indiana University Press.
Pattee, H (2001). The Physics of Symbols: Bridging the Epistemic Cut. BioSystems, 60, 5–21.
Pattee, H (2005). The physics and metaphysics of biosemiotics. Journal of Biosemiotics, 1,
281–301.
Patee, H. (2007). The Necessity of Biosemiotics: Matter-Symbol Complementarity. In Barbieri, M.
(Ed.) Introduction to Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis. Berlin: Springer, pp. 115–32.
Pattee, H. (2008). Physical and functional conditions for symbols, codes, and languages.
Biosemiotics, 1(2), 147–168.
Pattee, H. (2009). Response by H. H. Pattee to Jon Umerez’s paper: “Where does Pattee’s “How
does a Molecule become a Message?” belong in the history of Biosemiotics?” Biosemiotics,
2(3), 291–302.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
805
Peirce. C. S. ([1866–1913] 1931–1958). The Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce. In
Hartshorne, C. and Weiss, P. (Eds.) Volumes I–VI. Burks, A. W. (Ed.) Volumes VII–VIII.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. All eight volumes in electronic form. Deely, J.
(Ed.) Charlottesville, VA: Intelex Corporation (1994).
Petrilli, S. and Ponzio, A. (2005). Semiotics Unbounded: Interpretive Routes Through the Open
Network of Signs. Toronto; London: University of Toronto Press.
Poinsot, J. (1632 /1985). Tractatus de Signis. Deely, J. (English Trans.). Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Posner, R., Robering, K. and Sebeok, T. A. (1997). Semiotics: A Handbook on the Sign-Theoretic
Foundations of Nature and Culture. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Powell, R. A. (1986). From semiotic of scientiﬁc mechanism to semiotic of teleology in nature.
In Deely, J. and Evans, J. (Eds.) Semiotics 1986. Lanham: University Press of America,
pp. 296–305.
Prigogine, I. (1969), Structure, Dissipation and Life. Theoretical Physics and Biology. Amsterdam:
North-Holland.
Prigogine, I. and Stengers, I. (1984). Order Out of Chaos: Man’s New Dialogue With Nature.
Toronto; New York, NY: Bantam Books.
Queiroz, J., El-Hani, C. N. (2006). Towards a multi-level approach to the emergence of meaning
processes in living systems. Acta Biotheoretica, 54(3), 174–206.
Queiroz, J., Emmeche, C., El-Hani, C. N. (2005). Information and semiosis in living systems: a
semiotic approach. Semiotics, Evolution, Energy, and Development, 5, 60–90.
Queiroz, J., Emmeche, C., Kull, K., El-Hani, C. N. (2009). The biosemiotic approach in biology:
Theoretical bases and applied models. In Terzis, G. and Arp, R. (Eds.) MIT Companion to
Information and the Biological Sciences. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Queiroz, J. and Merrell, F. (2006). Semiosis and pragmatism: Toward a dynamic concept of
meaning. Sign System Studies, 34(1), 37–66.
R ˛aczaszek-Leonardi, J. (2009). Symbols as constraints: the structuring role of dynamics and self-
organization in natural language. Pragmatics and Cognition, 17(3), 653–676.
R ˛aczaszek-Leonardi, J., Scott-Kelso, J. A. (2008). Reconciling symbolic and dynamic aspects of
language: Toward a dynamic psycholinguistics. New Ideas in Psychology, 26(2), 193–207.
Rosen, R. (1991). Life Itself: A Comprehensive Inquiry into the Nature, Origin, and Fabrication of
Life. New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Rosenberg, A. and McShea, D. W. (2008). Philosophy of Biology. New York, NY: Routledge.
Savan, D. ([1976] 1989). An Introduction to C.S. Peirce’s Full System of Semiotic. Toronto: Toronto
Semiotic Circle.
Salthe, S. (2004). The natural philosophy of ecology: Developmental systems ecology. Ecological
Complexity, 2, 1–19.
Salthe, S. (2008). The system of interpretance: Naturalizing meaning as ﬁnality. Biosemiotics, 1(3),
285–294.
Santaella, L. (2002). Thomas A. Sebeok Studies Across the Semiotic Thresholds. In Danesi, M.
(Ed.) The Invention of Global Semiotics. Ottawa, ON: Legas, pp. 97–102.
Schmoranz, M. (2009).
Schumann, J. (1997). The Neurobiology of Affect in Language. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Schumann, J., Crowell, S. E., Jones, N. E., Lee, N. and Schuchert, N. (2005). The Neurobiology of
Learning: Perspectives from Second Language Acquisition. New York, NY: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Schumann, J., Lee, N., Mikesell, L., Joaquin, A. D. and Mates, A. (2009). The Interactional
Instinct: The Evolution and Acquisition of Language. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schumann, J., Favareau, D., Goodwin, C., Lee, N., Mikesell, L., Tao, L. H., Veronique, D. and
Wray, A. (2006). Language evolution: What evolved? Marges Linguistique, 11, 167–199.
Schmoranz, M. (2009). Becoming a semantic object: Bacterial colony as a bio-aesthetic model.
Paper presented at the Ninth Annual International Gatherings in Biosemiotics Conference.
Charles University, Prague June 30–July 5, 2009.

806
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Sercarz, E. E. (Ed.) (1988). The Semiotics of Cellular Communication in the Immune System.
Berlin; New York, NY: Springer.
Shannon, C. and Weaver, W. (1949). The Mathematical Theory of Communication. Urbana:
University of Illinois Press.
Short, T. L. (1983). Teleology in nature. American Philosophical Quarterly, 20, 311–320.
Short, T. L. (1992). Peirce’s semiotic theory of the self. Semiotica, 91 (1/2),109–131.
Short, T. L. (2007). Peirce’s Theory of Signs. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Skagestad, P. (1981). The Road of Inquiry, Charles Peirce’s Pragmatic Realism. New York, NY:
Columbia University Press.
Silverman, K. (1983). The Subject of Semiotics. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Slater, P. J. B. (1985). An Introduction to Ethology. London, New York, NY: Cambridge University
Press.
Stepanov, Y. S. (1971). Semiotika. Moscow: Nauka.
Stjernfelt, F. (2007). Diagrammatology: An Investigation on the Borderlines of Phenomenology,
Ontology, and Semiotics. Dordrecht: Springer.
Stjernfelt, F. and Schilhab, T. (Eds.) (2008). Papers from The Symbolic Species Conferences 2006
and 2007. Available online at: http://symbolicspecies.com
Stjernfelt, F. (2009). Simple animals and complex biology: Von Uexküll’s two-fold inﬂuence on
Cassirer’s philosophy. Synthese, forthcoming.
Švorcová, J., Markoš, A. (2009). Recorded versus organic memory: Interaction of two worlds as
demonstrated by the chromatin dynamics. Biosemiotics, 2(2), 131–150.
Taborsky, E. (1998). Architectonics of Semiosis, 1st ed. New York, NY: St. Martin’s Press.
Talmont-Kaminski, K. (2007). Reason, Red in Tooth and Claw: Naturalising Enlightenment
Thinking. In Gasset, G. (Ed.) How Successful is Naturalism? Warsaw: Ontos.
Talmont-Kaminski, K, and Collier, J. (2005). Saving the distinctions: Distinctions as the epis-
temologically signiﬁcant content of experience. In Marek, J. C. and Reicher, M. E. (Eds.)
Contributions of the Austrian Ludwig Wittgenstein Society XII. Kirchberg: ALWS, pp. 373–375.
Tarasti, E. (2000). Existential Semiotics. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Thayer, H. S. (1981). Meaning and Action: A Critical History of Pragmatism. Indianapolis, IN:
Hackett.
Thom, R. (1990). Semio Physics: A Sketch. Meyer, V. (Trans.) Redwood City, CA: Addison-
Wesley.
Thom, R. (1983). Mathematical Models of Morphogenesis. Brookes, W. M., Rand, D. (Trans.)
New York, NY: Halsted Press.
Thom, R. (1975). Structural Stability and Morphogenesis; an Outline of a General Theory of
Models. Fowler, D. H. (Trans.) Reading, MA: W. A. Benjamin.
Thompson, D. W. (1917). On Growth and Form. Cambridge, MA: University Press.
Thorndike, E. L. (1898). Animal intelligence: an experimental study of the associative processes
in animals. Psychological Review, Monograph Supplements, No. 8. New York, NY: Macmillan.
Tønnessen, M. (2003). Umwelt ethics. Sign Systems Studies 31.1, 281–299.
Tønnessen, M. (2009). Umwelt transitions: Uexküll and environmental change. Biosemiotics, 2(1),
47–64.
Ulanowicz, R. (2008). Process Ecology: Creatura at Large in an Open Universe. In Hoffmeyer, J.
(Ed.) A Legacy for Living Systems: Gregory Bateson as a Precursor to Biosemiotics. Berlin:
Springer, pp. 121–34.
Vakoch, D. A. (2004). The art and science of interstellar message composition. Leonardo, 37,
33–34.
Vakoch, D. A. (2008). Representing culture in interstellar messages. Acta Astronautica, 63,
657–664.
Waddington, C. H. (Ed.) (1968–1972). Towards a Theoretical Biology. An IUBS Symposium.
Chicago, IL: Aldine.
Weber, B. (2009).Embracing the biosemiotic perspective. Biosemiotics, 2(3), 367–375.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
807
Wheeler, W. (2006). The Whole Creature: Complexity, Biosemiotics and the Evolution of Culture.
London, Lawrence & Wishart.
Wheeler, W. (2008a). ‘Do not block the path of inquiry!’ Peircean abduction, the tacit dimension,
and biosemiotic creativity in nature and culture. The American Journal of Semiotics, 24(1/3),
171–188.
Wheeler, W. (2008b). Postscript on biosemiotics: Reading beyond words – and ecocriticism. In
Wheeler, W. and Dunkerley, H. (Guest Eds.) New Formations 64: Special issue ‘Earthographies:
Ecocriticism and Culture’.
Wheeler, W. (2009). The biosemiotic turn: Abduction, or, the nature of creative reason in nature and
culture. In Goodbody, A. and Rigby, K. (Eds.) Ecocritical Theory: New European Approaches.
Charlottesville VA: Virginia University Press.
Witzany, G. (2006). The Logos of the Bios 1: Contributions to the Foundation of a Three-leveled
Biosemiotics. Helsinki: Umweb.
Witzany, G. (2007a). The Logos of the Bios 2: Bio-Communication. Helsinki: Umweb.
Witzany, G. (Ed.) (2007b). Biosemiotics in Transdiciplinary Contexts: Proceedings of the
Gathering in Biosemiotics 6, Salzburg 2006. Helsinki: Umweb.
Witzany, G. (2008a). Bio-communication of bacteria and their evolutionary roots in natural genome
editing competences of viruses. The Open Evolution Journal, 2, 44–54.
Witzany, G. (2008b). The biosemiotics of plant communication. The American Journal of
Semiotics, 24, 39–56.
Witzany, G. (2008c). The viral origins of telomeres and telomerases and their important role in
eukaryogenesis and genome maintenance. Biosemiotics, 1(2), 191–206.
Witzany, G. (2009a). Biocommunication and Natural Genome Editing. Dordrecht: Springer.
Witzany, G. (2009b). Bacteria and viruses: communal interacting agents. In Chauhan, A.,
Varma, A. (Eds.) A Textbook of Molecular Biotechnology. New Delhi: I.K. International
Publishing.
Witzany, G. and Madl, P. (2009). Biocommunication of corals. International Journal of Integrative
Biology, 5(3), 152–163.
Wiley, N. (1994). The Semiotic Self. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Wise, M. N. (Ed.) (2004). Growing Explanations: Historical Perspectives on Recent Science.
Durham: Duke University Press.
Vehkavaara, T. (2007). From the logic of science to the logic of the living. The relevance of Charles
Peirce to biosemiotics. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Introduction to Biosemiotics: The New Biological
Synthesis. Berlin: Springer, pp. 257–282.
Jakob Von Uexküll (Pages 2a–2z)
Primary Literature
Uexküll, J. von (1892). Über secundäre Zuckung. Zeitschrift für Biologie, 28, 540–549.
Uexküll, J. von (1894). Zur Methodik der mechanischen Nervenreizung. Zeitschrift für Biologie,
31, 148–167.
Uexküll, J. von (1896). Über Reﬂexe bei den Seeigeln. Zeitschrift für Biologie, 34, 298–318.
Uexküll, J. von (1899). Der Neurokinet (Ein Beitrag zur Theorie der mechanischen
Nervenreizung). Zeitschrift für Biologie, 38, 291–299.
Uexküll, J. von (1902). Psychologie und Biologie in ihrer Stellung zur Tierseele. Ergebnisse der
Physiologie, 1(2), 212–233.
Uexküll, J. von (1905). Leitfaden in das Studium der Experimentellen Biologie der Wassertiere.
Weisbaden: J.F. Bergmann Verlag.
Uexküll, J. von (1909). Umwelt und Innenwelt der Tiere. Berlin: Julius Springer.
Uexküll, J. von (1907). Das Problem der tierischen Formbildung. Die neue Rundschau, 18,
629–632.

808
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Uexküll, J. von (1910). Die Umwelt. Die neue Rundschau, 21, 638–649.
Uexküll, J. von (1912a). Die Merkwelten der Tiere. Deutsche Revue (Stuttgart), Sept., 37, 349–355.
Uexküll, J. von (1912b). Vom Wesen des Lebens (I und II). Österreichische Rundschau, 33, 18–28,
420–431.
Uexküll, J. von (1912c). Studien über den Tonus. VI. Die Pilgermuschel. Zeitschrift für Biologie,
58(7), 305–332.
Uexküll, J. von (1912d). Das Subjekt als Träger des Lebens. Die neue Rundschau, 23, 99–107.
Uexküll, J. von (1912e). Wie gestaltet das Leben ein Subjekt? Die neue Rundschau, 23, 1082–1091.
Uexküll, J. von (1912f). Wirkungen und Gegenwirkungen im Subjekt. Die neue Rundschau, 23,
1399–1406.
Uexküll, J. von (1915). Volk und Staat. Die Neue Rundschau.
Uexküll, J. von (1917). Darwin und die englische Moral. Deutsche Rundschau, 173, 215–242.
Uexküll, J. von (1920). Theoretische Biologie, 1st ed. Berlin: Verlag von Gebrüder Paetel.
Uexküll, J. von (1922). Das Problem des Lebens. Deutsche Rundschau, 193, 235–247.
Uexküll, J. von (1926a). Theoretical Biology. Mackinnon, D. L. (Trans.). London: Kegan Paul.
Uexküll, J. von (1926b). Gott oder Gorilla. Deutsche Rundschau, 208, 232–242.
Uexküll, J. von (1926c). Ist das Tier eine Maschine? Bausteine für Leben und Weltanschauung von
Denkern alter Zeiten, 4(6), 177–182.
Uexküll, J. von (1928). Theoretische Biologie, 2nd ed. Berlin: Julius Springer.
Uexküll, J. von (1929). Welt und Umwelt. Aus deutscher Geistesarbeit, 5, 20–26, 36–46.
Uexküll, J. von (1931). Die Rolle des Subjekts in der Biologie. Die Naturwissenschaften, 19(19),
385–391.
Uexküll, J. von (1932). Menschenpläne und Naturpläne. Deutsche Rundschau, 231, 96–99.
Uexküll, J. von (1935). Die Bedeutung der Umweltforschung für die Erkenntnis des Lebens.
Zeitschrift für die gesamte Naturwissenschaft, 1(7), 257–272.
Uexküll, J. von (1937a). Umweltforschung. Zeitschrift für Tierpsychologie, 1(1), 33–34.
Uexküll, J. von (1937b). Die neue Umweltlehre: Ein Bindeglied zwischen Natur- und Kultur-
wissenschaften. Die Erziehung, 13(5), 185–199.
Uexküll, J. von (1938a). Zum Verständnis der Umweltlehre. Deutsche Rundschau, 256, 64–66.
Uexküll, J. von (1938b). Tier und Umwelt. Zeitschrift für Tierpsychologie, 2(2), 101–114.
Uexküll, J. von (1943). Darwins Verschulden! Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung, 82(22/23), 1.
Uexküll, J. von (1933). Staatsbiologie: Anatomie, Physiologie, und Pathologie des Staates, 2nd ed.
Hamburg: Hanseatische Verlagsanstalt.
Uexküll, J. von ([1933] 1957). A Stroll through the World of Animals and Men: A Picture Book
of Invisible Worlds. In Schiller, C. H. (Ed., Trans.) Instinctive Behavior: The Development of a
Modern Concept. New York, NY: International Universities Press, pp. 5–80.
Uexküll, J. von ([1933] 1992). A stroll through the worlds of animals and men: a picture book of
invisible worlds. Schiller, C. H. (Trans.). Semiotica, 89(4), 319–391.
Uexküll, J. von (1940). Bedeutungslehre. Bios 10. Leipzig: Johann Ambrosius Barth.
Uexküll, J. von ([1940] 1982). The theory of meaning. In Stone, B. and Weiner, H. (Trans.).
Semiotica, 42(1), 25–87.
Uexküll, J. von ([1909] 1985). Umwelt and the Inner World of Animals. In Mellor, C. J., Gove, D.
(Trans.), Burghardt, G. M. (Ed.) Foundations of Comparative Ethology. New York, NY: Van
Nostrand Reinhold, pp. 222–245.
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Augustyn, P. (2009). Uexküll, Peirce, and other afﬁnities between biosemiotics and biolinguistics.
Biosemiotics, 2(1), 1–17.
Barbieri, M. (2002). Has biosemiotics come of age? Semiotica, 139(1/4), 283–295.
Brier, S. (2001). Cybersemiotics and Umweltlehre. Semiotica: Special Issue on Jakob von Uexküll,
134(1/4), 779–814.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
809
Chang, H. L. (2004). Semiotician or semiotician or hermeneutician? Jakob von Uexküll revisited.
Sign Systems Studies, 32(1/2), 115–138.
Chien, J. (2006). Of animals and men: A study of umwelt in Uexküll, Cassirer, and Heidegger.
Concentric: Literary and Cultural Studies, 32(1), 57–79.
Chien, J. (2005). The controversy of umwelt across the Germany-France border. Chung-Wai
Literary Monthly, 34(7), 45–57.
Chien, J. (2006). Schema as both the key to and the puzzle of life: Reﬂections on the Uexküllian
crux. Sign Systems Studies, 32(1/2), 187–208. Tartu: Tartu University Press.
Chien, J. (2007). The French reception of Jakob Von Uexküll’s umwelt: A regional variation of
global semiotics. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Biosemiotic Research Trends. New York, NY: Nova
Science, pp. 57–80.
Deely, J. (1990). Basics of Semiotics. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Deely, J. (2001). Umwelt. Semiotica, 134(1–4), 125–135.
Deely, J. (2002). What Distinguishes Human Understanding? Indiana: St. Augustine’s Press.
Emmeche, C. (2001). Does a robot have an Umwelt? Reﬂections on the qualitative biosemiotics of
Jakob von Uexküll. Semiotica, 134(1/4), 653–693.
Favareau, D. (2007). Animal sensing, acting and knowing: bridging the relations between brains,
bodies and world. In Witzany, G. (Ed.) Biosemiotics in Transdisciplinary Contexts. Helsinki:
Umweb, pp. 61–69.
Figge, U. L. (2001). Jakob von Uexküll: Merkmale and Wirkmale. Semiotica, 134(1/4), 193–200.
Fuster, J. M. (2003). Cortex and Mind: Unifying Cognition. Oxford, New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Harrington, A. (1996). Jakob von Uexküll: Biology against Democracy and the ‘Gorilla-Machine’
Reenchanted Science: Holism in German Culture from Wilhelm II to Hitler. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, pp. 34–71.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1996). Signs of Meaning in the Universe. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2000). The biology of signiﬁcation. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, 43(2),
252–268.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2006). Uexküllian planmässigkeit. Sign Systems Studies, 32, 73–97.
Kull, K. (1998). On semiosis, umwelt, and semiosphere. Semiotica, 120(3/4), 299–310.
Kull, K. (1999). Biosemiotics in the twentieth century: a view from biology. Semiotica, 127(1/4),
385–414.
Kull, K. (2001). Jakob von Uexküll: An introduction. Semiotica, 134(1/4), 1–59.
Kull, K. (2004). Uexküll and the post-modern evolutionism. Sign System Studies, 32, 99–114.
Kull, K. and Torop, P. (2003). Biotranslation: translation between umwelten. In Petrilli, S. (Ed.)
Translation Translation. Amsterdam: Rodopi, pp. 313–328.
Lagerspetz, K. (2001). Jacob von Uexküll and the origins of cybernetics. Semiotica, 134(1–4),
643–651.
Mildenberger, F. (2007). Umwelt als Vision: Leben und Werk Jakob von Uexküll. Stuttgart: Franz
Steiner Verlag.
Nöth, W. (1994). Origins of Semiosis: Sign Evolution in Nature and Culture. Berlin: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Nöth, W. and Kull, K. (Eds.) (2001). Special Issue: The Semiotics of Nature. Sign Systems Studies
29.1.
Pattee, H. (1969). How does a molecule become a message? In Lang, A. (Ed.) 28th Symposium of
the Society of Developmental Biology. New York, NY: Academic Press, pp. 1–16.
Pattee, H. (1972). Laws and constraints, symbols and languages. In Waddington, C. H. (Ed.)
Towards a Theoretical Biology 4. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, pp. 248–258.
Pattee, H. (1991). Measurement-control heterarchical networks in living systems. International
Journal of General Systems, 18, 213–221.
Pattee, H. (1991). Measurement-control heterarchical networks in living systems. International
Journal of General Systems, 18, 213–221.

810
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Pattee, H. (1995). Evolving self-reference: Matter, symbols and semantic closure. Communication
and Cognition: Artiﬁcial Intelligence 12(1–2), 9–27.
Pattee, H (2001). The Physics of Symbols: Bridging the Epistemic Cut. in BioSystems, 60, 5–21.
Pattee, H (2005). The physics and metaphysics of biosemiotics. Journal of Biosemiotics, 1,
281–301.
Patee, H. (2007). The Necessity of Biosemiotics: Matter-Symbol Complementarity. In Barbieri, M.
(Ed.) Introduction to Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis Berlin: Springer, pp. 115–32.
Evolving self-reference: Matter, symbols and semantic closure. Communication and Cognition:
Artiﬁcial Intelligence 12(1–2), 9–27.
Pattee, H (2001). The Physics of Symbols: Bridging the Epistemic Cut. BioSystems, 60, 5–21.
Pattee, H (2005). The physics and metaphysics of biosemiotics. Journal of Biosemiotics 1,
281–301.
Patee, H. (2007). The Necessity of Biosemiotics: Matter-Symbol Complementarity. In Barbieri, M.
(Ed.) Introduction to Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis Berlin: Springer, pp. 115–32.
Rizzolatti, G., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L. and Gallese, V. (1997). The space around us. Science, 277,
190–191.
Roepstorf, A. (2001). Brains in scanners: An Umwelt of cognitive neuroscience. Semiotica,
134(1/4), 747–765.
Rüting, T. (2003). Jakob von Uexküll: Theoretical Biology, Biocybernetics and Biosemiotics.
Available at: www.math.uni-hamburg.de/home/rueting/UexECMTB.doc
Rüting, T. (2004). The history and signiﬁcance of Jakob von Uexküll and of his institute in
Hamburg. Sign System Studies, 32(1/2), 35–72.
Salthe, S. (2001). Theoretical Biology as an anticipatory text: The relevance of Uexküll to current
issues in evolutionary systems. Semiotica, 134, 359–380.
Schiller, C. (Ed.) (1957). Instinctive Behavior: The Development of a Modern Concept. New York,
NY: International Universities Press.
Sebeok, T. A. (Ed.) (1977). Neglected ﬁgures in the history of semiotic inquiry: Jakob von Uexküll.
In The Sign and Its Masters. Lanham, MD: University Press of America, pp. 187–207.
Sebeok, T. A. (1988). ‘Animal’ in biological and semiotic perspective. In Ingold, T. (Ed.) What is
an Animal? London: Unwin Hyman, pp. 63–76.
Sebeok, T. A. (1998). The Estonian connection. Sign Systems Studies, 26, 20–41.
Sebeok, T. A. (2001). Biosemiotics: its roots, proliferation, and prospects. Semiotica, 134(1), 18.
Sebeok, T. A. and Danesi, M. (2000). The Forms of Meaning: Modeling Systems Theory and
Semiotic Analysis. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Stjernfelt, F. (2001). A natural symphony? To what extent is Uexküll’s Bedeutungslehre actual for
the semiotics of our time? Semiotica, 134(1/4), 79–102.
Stjernfelt, F. (2009). Simple animals and complex biology: Von Uexküll’s two-fold inﬂuence on
Cassirer’s philosophy. Synthese, forthcoming.
Sutrop, U. (2001). Umwelt – word and concept: two hundred years of semantic change. Semiotica,
134(1/4), 447–462.
Tinbergen, N. (1942). An objectivistic study of the innate behaviour of animals. Bibliotheca
biotheoretica, 1, 39–98.
Uexküll, T. von (1982a). Meaning and science in Jakob von Uexküll’s concept of biology.
Semiotica, 42(1), 1–24.
Uexküll, T. von (1982b). Semiotics and the problem of the observer. In Deely, J., Lenhart, M. D.
(Eds.) Semiotics 1982 (Proceedings of the Semiotic Society of America. New York, NY: Plenum
Press.
Uexküll, T. von (1987). The sign theory of Jakob von Uexküll. In Krampen, M., Oehler, K.,
Posner, R., Sebeok, T. A., von Uexküll, T. (Eds.) Classics of Semiotics. New York, NY: Plenum
Press, pp. 147–179.
Wiener, N. (1948 [1961]). Cybernetics or Control and Communication in the Animal and in the
Machine. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
811
Ziemke, T. and Sharkey, N. (2001). A stroll through the worlds of robots and men: applying Jakob
von Uexküll’s theory of meaning to adaptive robots and artiﬁcial life. Semiotica, 134(1/4),
701–746.
Charles Sanders Peirce (Pages 3a–3z)
Primary Literature
Peirce. C. S. ([1866–1913] 1931–1958). The Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce. In
Hartshorne, C. and Weiss, P. (Eds.) Volumes I–VI. Burks, A. W. (Ed.) Volumes VII–VIII.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. All eight volumes in electronic document format.
Deely, J. (Ed.) Charlottesville, VA: Intelex Corporation. Original printing history follows:
Peirce, C. S. (1931). Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, Volume 1: Principles of
Philosophy. Hartshorne, C. and Weiss, P. (Eds.) Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1932). Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, Volume 2: Elements of Logic.
Hartshorne, C. and Weiss, P. (Eds.) Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1933). Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, Volume 3: Exact Logic:
Published Papers. Hartshorne, C. and Weiss, P. (Eds.) Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1933). Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, Volume 4: The Simplest
Mathematics. Hartshorne, C. and Weiss, P. (Eds.) Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1934). Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, Volume 5: Pragmatism and
Pragmaticism. Hartshorne, C. and Weiss, P. (Eds.) Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1935). Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, Volume 6: Scientiﬁc Metaphysics.
Hartshorne, C. and Weiss, P. (Eds.) Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1958). Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, Volume 7: Science and
Philosophy. Burks, A. (Ed.) Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1958). Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, Volume 8: Reviews,
Correspondence, and Bibliography. Burks, A. (Ed.) Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1955). Philosophical Writings of Peirce. Buchler, J. (Ed.) New York, NY: Dover
Publications.
Peirce, C. S. (1975–1987). Charles Sanders Peirce: Contributions to The Nation in Four Volumes.
In Ketner, K. L. and Cook, J. E. (Eds.) Lubbock: Texas Technological University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1976). The New Elements of Mathematics by Charles S. Peirce.Eisele, C. (Ed.) The
Hague: Mouton.
Peirce, C. S. (1981). Writings of Charles S. Peirce: A Chronological Edition, Volume 1, 1857–1866.
Peirce Edition Project (Eds.) Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1984). Writings of Charles S. Peirce: A Chronological Edition, Volume 2, 1867–1871.
Peirce Edition Project (Eds.) Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1985). Historical Perspectives on Peirce’s Logic of Science: A History of Science.
Eisele, C. (Ed.) Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Peirce, C. S. (1992). Reasoning and the Logic of Things: The Cambridge Conferences Lectures of
1898. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1989). Writings of Charles S. Peirce: A Chronological Edition, Volume 4, 1879–1884.
Peirce Edition Project (Eds.) Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1986). Writings of Charles S. Peirce: A Chronological Edition, Volume 3, 1872–1878.
Peirce Edition Project (Eds.) Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1993). Writings of Charles S. Peirce: A Chronological Edition, Volume 5, 1884–1886.
Peirce Edition Project (Eds.) Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1994). The Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, Volumes I–VIII. (Electronic
document format). Deely, J. (Ed.) Charlottesville, VA: Intelex Corporation.

812
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Peirce, C. S. (2000). Writings of Charles S. Peirce: A Chronological Edition, Volume 6, 1886–1890.
Peirce Edition Project (Eds.) Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (2009). Writings of Charles S. Peirce: A Chronological Edition, Volume 8: 1890–1892.
Peirce Edition Project (Eds.) Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Peirce, C. S., Welby-Gregory, V. (1977). Semiotic and Signiﬁcs: The Correspondence between
C. S. Peirce and Victoria Lady Welby. In Hardwick, C. S. (Ed.) Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University Press.
Robin, R. S. (1967). Annotated Catalogue of the Papers of Charles S. Peirce. Amherst, MA:
University of Massachusetts Press.
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Apel, K. O. (1981). Charles S. Peirce: From Pragmatism to Pragmaticism. Krois, J. M. (Trans.)
Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press.
Auspitz, J. L. (1994). The wasp leaves the bottle: Charles Sanders Peirce. The American Scholar,
63(4), 602–618.
Brent, J. (1993). Charles Sanders Peirce: A Life. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Brent, J. (2000). A brief introduction to the life and thought of Charles Sanders Peirce. In Muller, J.
and Brent, J. (Eds.) Peirce, Semiotics and Psychoanalysis. Baltimore: John Hopkins University
Press, pp.1–15.
Colapietro, V. (1989). Peirce’s Approach to the Self: A Semiotic Perspective on Human Subjectivity.
Albany: State University of New York Press.
Colapietro, V. (2004a). C. S. Peirce. In Marsoobian, A. and Ryder, J. (Eds.) Blackwell Guide to
American Philosophy. London: Blackwell, pp. 75–100.
Colapietro, V. (2004b). Striving to speak in a human voice: A Peircean contribution to metaphysical
discourse. The Review of Metaphysics, 58(2), 367–98.
Colapietro, V. and Olshewsky, T. (Eds.) (1996). Peirce’s Doctrine of Signs: Theory, Applications,
and Connections. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Deely, J. (2001). Charles Sanders Peirce and the recovery of the signum. In Four Ages of
Understanding: The First Postmodern Survey of Philosophy From Ancient Times To The Turn
of The Twenty-First Century. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, pp. 609–663.
Delaney, C. (1993). Science, Knowledge, and Mind: A Study in the Philosophy of C.S. Peirce. Notre
Dame: University of Notre Dame Press.
Deledalle, G. (1990). Charles S. Peirce, 1839–1914: An intellectual biography. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Deledalle, G. (2000). Charles S. Peirce’s Philosophy of Signs. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press.
Fisch, M. (1986). Peirce, Semeiotic, and Pragmatism: Essays by Max H. Fisch. Bloomington, IN:
Indiana University Press.
Fisch,
M.
(1978).
Peirce’s
general
theory
of
signs.
In
Sebeok,
T.
(Ed.)
Sight,
Sound,
and
Sense.
Bloomington,
IN:
Indiana
University
Press,
pp. 31–70.
Freadman, A. (2004). The Machinery of Talk: Charles Peirce and the Sign Hypothesis. Stanford:
Stanford University Press.
Hilpinen, R. (1982). On C. S. Peirce’s theory of the proposition: Peirce as a precursor of game-
theoretical semantics. The Monist, 65, 182–188.
Hilpinen, R. (1995). Peirce on language and reference. In Ketner, K. L. (Ed.) Peirce and
Contemporary Thought. New York, NY: Fordham University Press, pp. 272–303.
Hintikka, J. (1997). The place of C.S. Peirce in the history of logical theory. In Brunning, J. and
Foster, P. (Eds.) The Rule of Reason. Toronto: Toronto University Press, pp. 13–33.
Hookway, C. (1985). Peirce. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
813
Hookway, C. (2000). Truth, Rationality, and Pragmatism: Themes from Peirce. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Houser, N. (1992a). Introduction to Essential Peirce: Selected Philosophical Writings, Volume 1.
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, pp. xix–xli.
Houser, N. (1992b). The Fortunes and Misfortunes of the Peirce Papers. In Balat, M. (Ed.) Signs
of Humanity. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 259–268.
Houser, N. (1992). Charles S. Peirce: American Backwoodsman. In Burch, R. W. and Saatkamp,
H. J. (Eds.) Frontiers in American Philosophy, College Station: Texas A & M University Press,
pp. 285–293.
Houser, N. (1997). Studies in the Logic of Charles S. Peirce. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press, 1997.
Houser, N. (1998). Introduction to Essential Peirce: Selected Philosophical Writings, Volume 2.
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, pp. xvii–xxxviii.
Houser, N. (2005). Peirce in the 21st century. Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society, 41(4),
729–39.
Hulswit, M. (2002). From Cause to Causation: A Peircean Perspective. Berlin: Springer.
Leo, R. F. and Marietti, S. (2006). Semiotics and Philosophy in C. S. Peirce. Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge Scholars Press.
Liszka, J. (1996). A General Introduction to the Semeiotic of Charles Sanders Peirce. Bloomington,
IN: Indiana University Press.
Merrell, F. (1996). Signs Grow: Semiosis and Life Processes. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Merrell, F. (1997). Peirce, Signs, Meaning. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Nöth, W. (1990). Peirce. Handbook of Semiotics. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press,
pp. 39–47.
Parmentier, R. J. (1994). Signs In Society: Studies In Semiotic Anthropology. Bloomington, IN:
Indiana University Press.
Petrilli, S. and Ponzio, A. (1996). Peirce and Medieval Semiotics. In Colapietro, V. and
Olshewsky, T. (Eds.) Peirce’s Doctrine of Signs: Theory, Applications, and Connections. Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 351–364.
Ransdell, J. (1986). Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914). In Sebeok, T. and Eco, U. (Eds.)
Encyclopedic Dictionary of Semiotics. The Hague: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 673–695.
Ransdell, J. (2000). Peirce and the Socratic tradition in philosophy. Transactions of the Charles S.
Peirce Society, 36(3), 341–346.
Ransdell, J. (2003).The relevance of Peircean semiotic to computational intelligence augmentation.
Semiosis, Evolution, Energy, and Development Journal, 3(3), 5–36.
Santaella, L. (1998). Sign and Time in the Semiotics of Charles Sanders Peirce. In Hess-Lüttich,
E. W. B. (Ed.) Zeit & Zeichen. Tubingen: Gunter Narr Verlag, pp. 252–262.
Santaella, L. (1999). Peirce and biology. Semiotica, 127(1/4), 5–21.
Santaella, L. (2005). The universality and fecundity of Peirce ´s categories. Semiotica, 154(1/4),
405–414.
Santaella, L. (2003). Why there is no crisis of representation in Peirce. Semiotica, 143(1/4), 45–52.
Savan, D. (1989 [1976]). An Introduction to C.S. Peirce’s Full System of Semeiotic. Toronto:
Toronto Semiotic Circle.
Short, T. L. (1982). Life among the legisigns. Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society, 18(4),
285–310.
Short, T. L. (2007). Peirce’s Theory of Signs. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Skagestad, P. (1981). The Road of Inquiry: Charles Peirce’s Pragmatic Realism. New York, NY:
Columbia University Press.
Stjernfelt, F. (2007). Diagrammatology: An Investigation on the Borderlines of Phenomenology,
Ontology, and Semiotics. Dordrecht: Springer.
Taborsky, E. (1998). Architectonics of Semiosis. New York, NY: St. Martin’s Press.
Thayer, H. S. (1981). Meaning and Action: A Critical History of Pragmatism. Indianapolis, IN:
Hackett.

814
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Vehkavaara, T. (2002). Why and how to naturalize semiotic concepts for biosemiotics. Sign Systems
Studies, 30(1), 293–313.
Vehkavaara, T. (2007). From the logic of science to the logic of the living. The relevance of Charles
Peirce to biosemiotics. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Introduction to Biosemiotics: The New Biological
Synthesis. Berlin: Springer, pp. 257–82.
Note: Online resources include hypertext editions of many ofPeirce’s writings at Arisbe: The Peirce
Gateway at www.cspeirce.com, original scholarship at The Digital Encyclopedia of Charles S.
Peirce at http://www.digitalpeirce.fee.unicamp.br,and both study resources, as well as links to
additional online versions of many of Peirce’stexts at The Virtual Centre for Peirce Studies at
http://www.helsinki.ﬁ/science/commens. The quarterly journal The Transactions of the Charles S.
Peirce Society is an excellentresource for the most current scholarship on Peirce, as is the Peirce-L
Discussion Forum listserve run by Joseph Ransdell and subscribable via the Arisbe website.
Charles William Morris (Pages 4a–4z)
Primary Literature
Morris, C. (1925). Symbolism and Reality: A Study in the Nature of Mind. Dissertation, University
of Chicago. Reprinted, Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 1993.
Morris, C. (1927). The concept of the symbol I. Journal of Philosophy, 24, 253–262.
Morris, C. (1927). The concept of the symbol II. Journal of Philosophy, 24, 281–291.
Morris, C. (1928). The prediction theory of truth. Monist, 38, 494–501.
Morris, C. (1928). Neo-pragmatism and the ways of knowing. Monist, 38, 387–401.
Morris, C. (1929). Has Russell passed the tortoise? Journal of Philosophy, 26, 449–459.
Morris, C. (1929). The relation of formal to instrumental logic. In Smith, T. V. and Wright, W. K.
(Eds.) Essays in Philosophy. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago, pp. 253–268.
Morris, C. (1931). Mind in process and reality. Journal of Philosophy, 28, 113–127.
Morris, C. (1932). Six Theories of Mind. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago.
Morris, C. (1932). Truth, action, and veriﬁcation. Monist, 42, 321–329.
Morris, C. (1934). Pragmatism and metaphysics. Philosophical Review, 43, 549–564.
Morris, C. (1935). Philosophy of science and science of philosophy. Philosophy of Science, 2,
271–286.
Morris, C. (1935). The relation of the formal and empirical science within scientiﬁc empiricism.
Erkenntnis, 5, 6–14.
Morris, C. (1937). Logical Positivism, Pragmatism and Scientiﬁc Empiricism. Paris: Hermann
et Cie.
Morris, C. (1938a). Foundations of the Theory of Signs. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago
Press.
Morris, C. (1938b). The unity of science movement and the United States. Synthese, 3, 25–29.
Morris, C. (1938c). Peirce, Mead and pragmatism. Philosophical Review, 47, 109–127.
Morris, C. (1944). Liberation from the machine mind. Biosophical Review, 7, 9–10.
Morris, C. (1946). Signs, Language and Behavior. New York, NY: Prentice-Hall.
Morris, C. (1946). The signiﬁcance of the unity of science movement. Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research, 6, 508–515.
Morris, C. (1948). Signs about signs about signs. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 9,
115–133.
Morris, C. (1948). Recent studies in meaning and communication. Sigma, 2, 454–458.
Morris, C. (1948). The Open Self. New York, NY: Prentice-Hall.
Morris, C. (1951). The science of man and uniﬁed science. Proceedings of the American Academy
of Arts and Sciences, 80, 37–44.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
815
Morris, C. (1956). Varieties of Human Value. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. Reprinted,
1973.
Morris, C. (1957). Philosophy and the behavioral sciences in the United States. Chinese Journal of
Contemporary Philosophy and Social Sciences, 1–8.
Morris, C. (1958). Words without meaning. Contemporary Psychology, 3, 212–214.
Morris,
C.
(1961).
Values,
problematic
and
unproblematic,
and
science.
Journal
of
Communication, 11, 205–210.
Morris, C. (1964). Signiﬁcation and Signiﬁcance; A Study of the Relations of Signs and Values.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Morris, C. (1970). The Pragmatic Movement in American Philosophy. New York, NY: George
Braziller.
Morris, C. (1971). Writings on the General Theory of Signs. Den Haag: Mouton.
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Black, M. (1949). The semiotic of Charles Morris. In Black, M. (Ed.) Language and Philosophy.
New York, NY: Cornell University Press, pp. 168–185.
Bouissac, P. (Ed.) (1998). Encyclopedia of Semiotics. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Carnap, R. (1942). Introduction to Semantics. Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Cook, G. (1993). George Herbert Mead, The Making of a Social Pragmatist. Urbana: University
of Illinois Press.
Deledalle, G. (2000). Semiotic and semiotics: Peirce and Morris. In Charles S. Peirce’s Philosophy
of Signs. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, pp. 114–119.
Dewey, J., Bentley, A. F. (1949 [1989]). Knowing and the Known. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois
University Press.
Ducasse, C. J. (1942). Some comments on C. W. Morris’s ‘Foundations of the Theory of Signs’.
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 3, 43–52.
Fiordo, R. A. (1976). Charles Morris and the Criticism of Discourse. Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University Press.
Gentry, G. V. (1947). Signs, interpretants, and signiﬁcata. Journal of Philosophy, 44, 318–324.
Graham, E. (1948). Logic and semiotic. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 9, 103–114.
Hahn, H., Neurath, O. and Carnap, R. (1929). The scientiﬁc conception of the world: the Vienna
circle. In Sarkar, S. (1996). The Emergence of Logical Empiricism: From 1900 to the Vienna
Circle. New York, NY: Garland Publishing, pp. 321–340.
Hartshorne, C. (1979). Charles Morris. Obituary. Semiotica, 28(1–2), 193–194.
Kaplan, A. (1943). Content analysis and the theory of signs. Philosophy of Science, 10, 230–247.
League, R. (1977). Psycholinguistic Matrices: Investigation into Osgood and Morris. Den Haag:
Mouton.
Mead, G. H. (1932). The Philosophy of the Present, edited, with an Introduction, by Arthur
E. Murphy. La Salle: Open Court.
Mead, G. H. (1934). Mind, Self, and Society. In Morris, C. W. (Ed.) Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Mead, G. H. (1936). Movements of Thought in the Nineteenth Century. Moore, M. H. (Ed.)
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Mead, G. H. (1938). The Philosophy of the Act, edited, with an Introduction, by Charles W. Morris.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Nöth, W. (1990). Morris. In Handbook of Semiotics. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press,
pp. 48–55.
Ogden, C. K., Richards, I. A. (1923 [1989]). The Meaning of Meaning: A Study of the Inﬂuence
of Language Upon Thought and of the Science of Symbolism. San Diego: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich.

816
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Neurath, O., Bohr, N., Dewey, J., Russel, B., Carnap, R., Morris, C. (1938.) Encyclopedia and
uniﬁed science, Vol. 1. No. 1. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Pelc, J. (1978). A guide to Morris. Semiotica, 23(3–4), 377–381.
Petrilli, S. (1999). Charles Morris’s biosemiotics. Semiotica, 127(1/4), 67–102.
Petrilli, S. and Ponzio, A. (Eds.) (2005). About Morris. In Semiotics Unbounded. Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, pp. 167–201.
Posner, R. (1987). Charles Morris and the behavioral foundations of semiotics. In Krampen, M.
(Ed.) Classics of Semiotics. New York, NY: Plenum, pp. 23–57.
Posner, R. (1998). Charles Morris. In Bouissac, P., (Ed.) Encyclopedia of Semiotics. New York,
NY: Oxford University Press.
Rice, P. B. (1947). The semiotic of Charles Morris. Kenyon Review, 9, 303–311.
Rochberg-Halton, E. and McMurtrey, K. (1983). The foundations of modern semiotic: Charles
Peirce and Charles Morris. American Journal of Semiotics, 2(1–2), 129–157.
Romeo, R. (1979). Charles William Morris, 1901–1979. Ars Semiotica, 2, 381–385.
Rossi-Landi, F. (1953). Charles Morris. Rome: Fratelli Bocca.
Rossi-Landi, F. (1975). Signs about a master of signs. Semiotica, 13, 155–197.
Sebeok, T. A. (1981). The image of Charles Morris. In Eschbach, A. (Ed.) Zeichen über Zeichen
über Zeichen. Tübingen: Narr, pp. 267–285.
Shook, J. (2009). Charles Morris. In Cummings, L. (Ed.) The Pragmatics Encyclopedia. London:
Routledge.
Smith, V. E. (1948). Dr. Charles Morris and semiotic. The Modern Schoolman, 25, 140–144.
Juri Mikhailovitch Lotman (Pages 5a–5z)
Primary Literature
Lotman, J. (1970 [1977]). The Structure of the Artistic Text. Voon, R. (Trans.). Ann Arbor, MI:
University of Michigan Press.
Lotman, J. (1972 [1976]). Analysis of the Poetic Text. Voon, R. (Trans.). Ann Arbor, MI: University
of Michigan Press.
Lotman, J. (1973). Different cultures, different codes. Times Literary Supplement, Oct. 12,
1213–1215.
Lotman, J. (1974a). The sign mechanism of culture. Semiotica, 12(4), 301–305.
Lotman, J. (1974b). On some principal difﬁculties in the structural description of a text. Linguistics,
121, 57–63.
Lotman, J. (1974c). The individual creative career and the typology of culture codes. Soviet Studies
in Literature: A Journal of Translations, 10(4), 88–90.
Lotman, J. (1975). Myth, name, culture. Soviet Studies in Literature: A Journal of Translations,
11(2/3), 17–46.
Lotman, J. (1975). On the metalanguages of a typological description of culture. Semiotica, 14(2),
97–123.
Lotman, J. (1976a). Semiotics of Cinema. Suino, M. E. (Trans.) Ann Arbor, MI: University of
Michigan Press.
Lotman, J. (1976b). Culture and information. Dispositio: Revista Hispanica de Semiotica Literaria,
1(3), 213–215.
Lotman, J. (1976c). On the reduction and unfolding of sign systems. Soviet Studies in Literature:
A Journal of Translations, 12(2), 44–52.
Lotman, J. (1977a). Primary and Secondary Communication Modeling Systems. In Lucid, D. P.
(Ed.) Soviet Semiotics: An Anthology. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, pp. 95–98.
Lotman, J. (1977b). The dynamic model of a semiotic system. Semiotica, 21(3/4), 193–210.
Lotman, J. (1977c). The problem of meaning in secondary modeling systems. New Literary
History, 8, 22–37.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
817
Lotman, J. (1988). Text within a text. Soviet Psychology, 26(3), 32–51.
Lotman, J. (1989). The semiosphere. Soviet Psychology, 27(1), 40–61.
Lotman, J. (1990). Universe of the Mind: A Semiotic Theory of Culture. Shukman, A. (Trans.)
London: Tauris.
Lotman, J. (1991a). Semiotics and the Historical Sciences. In Granzon, B., Bo and Florin, M.
(Eds.) Dialogue and Technology: Art and Knowledge. Springer Series of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
and Society. London: Springer, pp. 165–180.
Lotman, J. (1991b). Technological progress as a problem in the study of culture. Poetics Today,
12(4), 781–800.
Lotman, J. (1994). The text within the text. Leo, J., Mandelker, A. (Trans.) Publications of the
Modern Language Association, 109(3), 377–384.
Lotman, J. (1997). Culture as a subject and an object in itself. Trames, 1(1), 7–16.
Lotman, J. (2002). Semiotics of the individual and society. Sign Systems Studies, 30(2), 573–576.
Lotman, J. (2003). On the Metalanguage of a Typological Description of Culture. In Gottdiener,
M., Mark (Ed.) Semiotics. London: Sage Publications, pp. 101–125.
Lotman, J. ([1984] 2005). On the semiosphere. Clark, W. (Trans.) Sign Systems Studies, 33(1),
215–239.
Lotman, J. (2006). The Text and the Structure of its Audience. Shukman, A. (Trans.) In Cobley,
Paul (Ed.) Communication Theories Volume 3: Critical Concepts in Media and Cultural
Studies. London: Routledge, pp. 64–70.
Lotman, J. (2000). Culture and Explosion. Clark, W. (Trans.) Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Lotman, J. and Uspensky, B. (1978). On the semiotic mechanism of culture. New Literary History,
9(2), 211–232.
Lotman. J., Uspenskij, B. A. (1984). The Semiotics of Russian Culture. A Shukman (Ed.) Ann
Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Lotman, J., Uspenskij, B. A., Ivanov, V. V., Toporov, V. N. and Pjatigorskij, A. M. (1975). Theses
on the Semiotic Study of Cultures. In Sebeok, T. A.. (Ed.) The Tell-Tale Sign: A Survey of
Semiotics. Lisse, Netherlands: Peter de Ridder, pp. 57–84.
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Andrews, E. (2003). Conversations with Lotman: Cultural Semiotics in Language, Literature and
Cognition. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Baran, Henryk (Ed.) 1976. Semiotics and Structuralism: Readings from the Soviet Union. White
Plains, NY: International Arts and Sciences Press.
Bouissac, P. (Ed.) (1998). Encyclopedia of semiotics. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Chang, H. L. (2002). Is language a primary modeling system? On Juri Lotman’s semiosphere. Sign
System Studies, 31(1), 9–23.
Chang, H. L. (2005). Biosemiotics: Nature in culture or culture in nature? Chung Wai Literary
Monthly, 34(7), 27–44.
Chang, H. L. (2008). Between nature and culture: a glimpse of the biosemiotic world in fourth
Century B.C.E. Chinese philosophy. The American Journal of Semiotics 24.1–3,159–170.
Chang, H.-L. (2009). Semioticians make strange bedfellows! Or, once again: Is language a primary
modelling system? Biosemiotics, 2(2), 169–180.
Cobley, P. (2006). (Ed.) Communication Theories. London: Routledge.
Cobley, P. (2009). Juri Lotman. In Cobley, P. (Ed.) The Routledge Companion to Semiotics.
London: Taylor & Francis, pp. 260–1.
Deely, J. (2007). The primary modeling system in animals. In Petrilli, S. (Ed.) Philosophy of
Language as the Art of Listening: On Augusto Ponzio’s Scientiﬁc Research. Bari: Edizioni
dal Sud, pp. 79–89.
Denizhan, Y. (2008). Roots of the contemporary mental model in ancient mythology. The American
Journal of Semiotics, 24(1/3), 145–158.

818
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Granville, J. (2004). Lotman, Yuri. In Millar, J. R. (Ed.) The Encyclopedia of Russian History. New
York, NY: Macmillan.
Grzybek, P. (1998). Moscow-Tartu school. In Bouissac, P. (Ed.) Encyclopedia of Semiotics. New
York, NY: Oxford University Press, pp. 423–425.
Kotov, K. and Kalevi, K. (2006). Semiosphere versus biosphere. In Brown, K. (Ed.) Encyclopedia
of Language and Linguistics, Vol. 11. Oxford: Elsevier, pp. 194–198.
Kristeva, J. (1994). On Juri Lotman. Publications of the Modern Language Association, 109(3),
375–376.
Kull, K. (1998a). Semiotic ecology: Different natures in the semiosphere. Sign Systems Studies,
26, 344–371.
Kull, K. (1998b). On semiosis, umwelt, and semiosphere. Semiotica, 120(3/4), 299–310.
Kull, K. (1999). Towards biosemiotics with Yuri Lotman. Semiotica, 127(1/4), 115–131.
Kull, K. (2005). Semiosphere and a dual ecology: paradoxes of communication. Sign Systems
Studies 33.1, 175–189.
Kull, K. (2007). Biosemiotic conversations: Ponzio, Bakhtin, Kanaev, Driesch, Uexküll, Lotman.
In Petrilli, S. (Ed.) Philosophy of Language as the Art of Listening: On Augusto Ponzio’s
Scientiﬁc Research. Bari: Edizioni dal Sud, pp. 79–89.
Kull, K. and Torop, P. (2003). Biotranslation: translation between umwelten. In Petrilli, S. (Ed.)
Translation Translation. Amsterdam: Rodopi, pp. 313–328.
Liukkonen, P. (2008). uri Lotman (1922–1993). Author’s Calendar: Books and Writers. Available
online at: http://www.kirjasto.sci.ﬁ/lotman.htm
Lucid, D. (Ed.) (1977). Soviet Semiotics: An Anthology. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press.
Magnus, R. (2008). Biosemiotics within and without biological holism: A semio-historical
analysis. Biosemiotics, 1(3), 379–396.
Mandelker, A. (1994). Semiotizing the sphere: Organicist theory in Lotman, Bakhtin, and
Verdnadsky. PMLA, 109(3), 385–96.
Markoš, A. (2004). In the quest for novelty: Kauffman’s biosphere and Lotman’s semiosphere.
Sign System Studies, 32, 309–327.
Markoš, A. (2004). In the quest for novelty: Kauffman’s biosphere and Lotman’s semiosphere.
Sign System Studies, 32, 309–327.
Merrell, F. (2001). Lotman’s semiosphere, Peirce’s categories, and cultural forms of life. Sign
Systems Studies, 29(2), 385–415.
Nakhimovsky, A. D., Nakhimovsky, A. S. (Eds.) (1985). The Semiotics of Russian Cultural
History: Essays by Juri M. Lotman, Lidia Ginsburg, and Boris A. Uspenskii. London: Cornell
University Press.
Nöth, W. (2006a). Júri Lótman on metaphors and culture as self-referential semiospheres.
Semiotica, 161, 249–263.
Nöth, W. (2006b). Semiotic Bodies, Aesthetic Embodiments, and Cyberbodies. Kassel: Kassel
University Press.
Paterson, J. M. (1993). Tartu school. In Makaryk, I. R. (Ed.) Encyclopedia of Contemporary
Literary
Theory:
Approaches,
Scholars,
Terms.
Toronto:
Toronto
University
Press,
pp. 208–211.
Posner, R., Robering, K. and Sebeok, T. A. (Eds.) (1997). A Handbook on the Sign-Theoretic
Foundations of Nature and Culture. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Petrilli, S. and Ponzio, A. (2005). Semiotics Unbounded: Interpretive Routes Through the Open
Network of Signs. Toronto; London: University of Toronto Press.
Reid, A. (1990). Literature as Communication and Cognition in Bakhtin and Lotman. New York,
NY: Garland.
Sebeok, T. A. (1991). In what sense is language a primary modeling system? In Anderson, M.,
Merrell, F. (Eds.) On Semiotic Modeling. Berlin, Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 327–339.
Sebeok, T. A. (1998). The Estonian connection. Sign Systems Studies, 26, 20–41.
Sebeok, T. A. (2000). The music of the spheres. Semiotica, 128(3/4), 527–535.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
819
Sebeok, T. A. (2001). Biosemiotics: its roots, proliferation, and prospects. Semiotica, 134(1), 18.
Sebeok, T. A. and Danesi, M. (2000). The Forms of Meaning: Modeling Systems Theory and
Semiotic Analysis. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Shukman, A. (1977). Literature and Semiotics: A Study of the Writings of Yuri M. Lotman.
Amsterdam: North Holland Press.
Shukman, A. (1978). Lotman: the dialectic of a semiotician. In Sebeok, T. A. (Ed.) The Sign:
Semiotics Around the World. Ann Arbor, MI: Michigan Slavic Contributions, pp. 194–206.
Torop, P. (2003). Semiospherical understanding: textuality. Sign Systems Studies, 31(2), 323–329.
Torop, P. (2005). Semiosphere and/as the research object of the semiotics of culture. Sign Systems
Studies, 33(1), 159–173.
Voigt, V. (1995). In memorium of ‘Lotmanosphere’. Semiotica, 105(3/4), 191–206.
Waldstein, M. (2008). The Soviet Empire of Signs: A History of the Tartu School of Semiotics.
Berlin: VDM Verlag.
Wheeler, W. (2009). Creative evolution: A theory of cultural sustainability. Communications,
Politics and Culture, 42(1).
Vakoch, D. A. (2004). The art and science of interstellar message composition. Leonardo, 37,
33–34.
Vakoch, D. A. (2008). Representing culture in interstellar messages. Acta Astronautica, 63,
657–664.
Thomas Albert Sebeok (Pages 6a–6z)
Primary Literature
Sebeok, T. A. (1960). Style in language: Proceedings of the 1958 Conference on Style. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Sebeok, T. A. (1962). Coding in the evolution of signalling behavior. Behavioral Science, 7,
430–442.
Sebeok, T. A. (1963). Communication among social bees; porpoises and sonar; man and dolphin.
Language, 39, 448–466.
Sebeok, T. A. (1965). Animal communication. Science, 147, 1006–1014.
Sebeok, T. A. (1965). Psycholinguistics: A Survey of Theory and Research Problems. Bloomington,
IN: Indiana University Press.
Sebeok, T. A. (1969). Semiotics and ethology. In Sebeok, T. A., Ramsay, A. (Eds.) Approaches to
Animal Communication. The Hague: Mouton, pp. 200–231.
Sebeok, T. A. ([1971] 1976). ‘Semiotics’ and its congeners. Reprinted in Contributions to the
Doctrine of Signs. The Hague: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 47–58.
Sebeok, T. A. (1972). Perspectives in Zoosemiotics, (Janua Linguarum, Series Minor, 122). Berlin:
Mouton.
Sebeok, T. A. (1975a). Zoosemiotics: At the Intersection of Nature and Culture. In Sebeok, T. A.
(Ed.) The Tell-tale Sign: A Survey of Semiotics. Lisse: Peter de Ridder Press, pp. 85–96.
Sebeok, T. A. (1975b). The semiotic web: A chronicle of prejudices. Bulletin of Literary Semiotics,
2, 1–63 reprinted in Sebeok 1976, pp. 149–188.
Sebeok, T. A. (1976). Contributions to the Doctrine of Signs. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press.
Sebeok, T. A. (1977a). Zoosemiotic components of human communication. In Sebeok, T. A. (Ed.)
How Animals Communicate. Bloomington, IN, London: Indiana University Press, pp. 1055–
1977.
Sebeok, T. A. (1977b). Ecumenicalism in semiotics. In Sebeok, T. A. (Ed.) A Perfusion of Signs.
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, pp. 180–206.
Sebeok, T. A. (Ed.) (1977c). How Animals Communicate. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press.

820
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Sebeok, T. A. (1977d). Neglected ﬁgures in the history of semiotic inquiry: Jakob von Uexküll. In
The Sign and Its Masters. Lanham, MD: University Press of America, pp. 187–207.
Sebeok, T. A. (1978). Sight, Sound, and Sense. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Sebeok, T. A. (1979). The Sign and Its Masters. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Sebeok, T. A., Umiker-Sebeok, J. (Eds.) (1980). Speaking of Apes: A Critical Anthology of Two-
Way Communication with Man. New York, NY: Plenum Press.
Sebeok, T. A. (1981a). The Play of Musement. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Sebeok, T. A. (1981b). Semiotics in the United States. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Sebeok, T. A. and Rosenthal, R. (Eds.) (1981). The Clever Hans Phenomenon: Communication
with Horses, Whales, Apes, and People. New York, NY: New York Academy of Sciences.
Sebeok, T. A. (Ed.) (1986a). Encyclopedic Dictionary of Semiotics. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Sebeok, T. A. (1986b). Encyclopedic Dictionary ofSemiotics. Berlin; New York, NY: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Sebeok, T. A. (1986c). I Think I Am A Verb: More Contributions To The Doctrine of Signs. New
York, NY: Plenum Press.
Sebeok, T. A. (1988). ‘Animal’ in biological and semiotic perspective. In Ingold, T. (Ed.) What is
an Animal? London: Unwin Hyman, pp. 63–76.
Sebeok, T. A. (1990a). Essays in Zoosemiotics. Toronto: Toronto Semiotic Circle.
Sebeok, T. A. (1990b). Sign science and life science. In Deely, J. (Ed.) Semiotics 1990. Lanham,
MD: University Press of America, pp. 243–252.
Sebeok, T. A. (1991). A Sign is Just a Sign. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Sebeok, T. A. (1995). Into the rose-garden. In Deely, J. (Ed.) Thomas A. Sebeok: Bibliography
1942–1995. Bloomington, IN: Eurolingua, pp. 116–125.
Sebeok, T. A. (1996a). Galen in medical semiotics. Interdisciplinary Journal for Germanic
Linguistics and Semiotic Analysis, 1(1), 89–111.
Sebeok, T. A. (1996b). Signs, bridges, origins. In Trabant, J. (Ed.) Origins of Language. Budapest:
Collegium Budapest, pp. 89–115.
Sebeok, T. A. (1997). The evolution of semiosis. In Posner, R., Robering, K. and Sebeok, T. A.
(Eds.) Semiotics: A Handbook on the Sign-Theoretic Foundations of Nature and Culture, Vol. 1.
Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, pp. 436–446.
Sebeok, T. A. (1998). The Estonian connection. Sign Systems Studies, 26, 20–41.
Sebeok, T. A. (2001a). Biosemiotics: its roots, proliferation, and prospects. Semiotica, 134(1), 18.
Sebeok, T. A. (2001b). The Swiss Pioneer: In Nonverbal Communication Studies, Heini Hediger
(1908–1992). Ottawa, ON: Legas.
Sebeok, T. A. (2001c). Global Semiotics. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Sebeok, T. A. and Danesi, M. (Eds.) (1994). Encyclopedic Dictionary of Semiotics. Berlin: Mouton.
Sebeok, T. A. and Danesi, M. (2000). The Forms of Meaning: Modeling Systems Theory and
Semiotic Analysis. Berlin; New York, NY: Mouton de Gruyter.
Sebeok, T. A., Hayes, A. S. and Bateson, M. C. (Eds.) (1972). Approaches to Semiotics: Cultural
Anthropology, Education, Linguistics, Psychiatry, Psychology (Transactions of the Indiana
University Conference on Paralinguistics and Kinesics), Janua Linguarum, Series Major 15,
2nd ed. (original edition, 1964). Berlin: Mouton.
Sebeok, T. A. and Ramsay, A. (Eds.) (1969). Approaches to Animal Communication. The Hague:
Mouton.
Sebeok, T. A. Umiker-Sebeok, J. (Eds.) (1980). Speaking of Apes: A Critical Anthology of Two-Way
Communication with Man. New York, NY: Plenum Press.
Sebeok, T. A., Umiker-Sebeok, J. (Eds.) (1992). Biosemiotics: The Semiotic Web 1991. Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
821
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Baer, E. (1987). Thomas A. Sebeok’s doctrine of signs. In Krampen, M. (Ed.) Classics of Semiotics.
New York, NY: Plenum Press, pp. 181–210.
Barbieri, M. (2003). Biology with information and meaning. History and Philosophy of the Life
Sciences, 25, 243–254.
Barbieri, M. (Ed.) (2007). Introduction to Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis. Dordrecht:
Springer.
Bernard, J. (2001). Obituary: Thomas A. Sebeok November 9, 1920–December 21, 2001. Available
at the website for the International Association for Semiotic Studies page: http://www.uni-
ak.ac.at/culture/withalm/semiotics/AIS/sem-people/sebeok/TASebeok-obit.html
Bouissac, P., Herzfeld, M. and Posner, R. (Eds.) (1986). Iconicity: Essays on the Nature of Culture:
Festschrift for Thomas A. Sebeok on his 65th Birthday. Tubingen: Stauffenburg Verlag.
Brier, S. (Ed.) (2003). Thomas Sebeok and the biosemiotic legacy. Special Memorial Issue of
Cybernetics and Human Knowing 10.1.
Cobley, P. (2009). (Ed.) The Routledge Companion to Semiotics. London: Taylor & Francis.
Danesi, M. (1998). (Ed.) The Body in the Sign: Thomas A. Sebeok and Semiotics. Ottawa, ON:
Legas.
Danesi, M. (2000). The biosemiotic paradigm of Thomas A. Sebeok. In Tarasti, E. (Ed.)
Commentationes in Honorem Thomas A. Sebeok Octogenarii. Imatra: ISI, pp. 5–29.
Danesi, M. (Ed.) (2001). The Invention of Global Semiotics. Ottawa, ON: Legas.
Danesi, M. (2007). The Quest for Meaning: A Guide to Semiotic Theory and Practice. Toronto:
University of Toronto Press.
Deely, J. (1995). Thomas A. Sebeok: Bibliography 1942–1995. Bloomington, IN: Eurolingua.
Deely, J. (2000). A new beginning for the sciences. In Perron, P., Sbrocchi, L. G., Colilli, P.,
Danesi, M. (Eds.) Semiotics as a Bridge between the Humanities and the Sciences. Ottawa,
ON: Legas, pp. 103–116.
Deely, J. (2004). Thomas Albert Sebeok, biologist manqué. International Association for Semiotic
Studies 2004 World Congress, Lyon. Available at: http://carbon.cudenver.edu/∼mryder/
itc/sebeok.html
Deely, J.,Williams, B. and Kruse, F. E. (Eds.) (1986). Frontiers in Semiotics. Bloomington, IN:
Indiana University Press.
Eder, J. and Rembold, H. (1992). Biosemiotics: A paradigm of biology: Biological signalling on
the verge of deterministic chaos. Naturwissenschaften, 79(2), 60–67.
Emmeche, C. (2000). Transdisciplinarity, theory-zapping and the growth of knowledge. Semiotica,
131(3/4), 217–228.
Emmeche, C. (2002). Taking the semiotic turn, or how signiﬁcant philosophy of biology should be
done. Sats, The Nordic Journal of Philosophy, 3(1), 155–162.
Favareau, D. (2007). The Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Introduction
to Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis. Berlin: Springer, pp. 1–65.
Houser, N. (2005). Sebeok’s Contribution to Peirce Scholarship. In Danesi, M. (Ed.) The Invention
of Global Semiotics. Ottawa, ON: Legas, pp. 83–90.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2002). Obituary: Thomas A. Sebeok. Sign Systems Studies, 30(1), 383–385.
Kull, K. (1999). Biosemiotics in the twentieth century: a view from biology. Semiotica, 127(1/4),
385–414.
Kull, K. (2003). Thomas A. Sebeok and biology: Building biosemiotics. Cybernetics and Human
Knowing, 10(1), 47–60.
Kull, K. (2005). A brief history of biosemiotics. Journal of Biosemiotics, 1, 1–34.
Nöth, W. (1990). Handbook of Semiotics. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Ogden, C. K., Richards, I. A. ([1923] 1989). The Meaning of Meaning: A Study of the Inﬂuence
of Language Upon Thought and of the Science of Symbolism. San Diego: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich.
Petrilli, S. and Ponzio, A. (2001). Thomas Sebeok and the Signs of Life. Great Britain: Icon Books.

822
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Petrilli, S. and Ponzio, A. (2005). About Sebeok. In Semiotics Unbounded: Interpretive
Routes Through the Open Network of Signs. Toronto; London: University of Toronto Press,
pp. 203–230.
Petrilli, S. and Ponzio, A. (2008). A tribute to Thomas A. Sebeok. Biosemiotics, 1(1), 25–40.
Santaella, L. (2002). Thomas A. Sebeok: Studies across the Semiotic Thresholds. In Danesi, M.
(Ed.) The Invention of Global Semiotics. Ottawa, ON: Legas, pp. 97–102.
Posner, R., Robering, K. and Sebeok, T. A. (1997). Semiotics: A Handbook on the Sign-Theoretic
Foundations of Nature and Culture. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Smith, W. J. (1974). Zoosemiotics: Ethology and the theory of signs. In Sebeok, T. A. (Ed.) Current
Trends in Linguistics, 12 The Hague: Mouton, pp. 561–626.
Tarasti, E. (Ed.) (2000). Commentationes in honorem Thomas A. Sebeok octogenarii. Imatra:
International Semiotics Institute.
Tasca, N. (Ed.) (1995). Ensaios em homenagem a: Essays in Honor of Thomas A. Sebeok. Porto:
Almeida.
Vehkavaara, T. (2002). Why and how to naturalize semiotic concepts for biosemiotics. Sign Systems
Studies, 30(1), 293–313.
Vlahakis, G. (2002). Thomas A. Sebeok, Senior Fellow at SLIS, Passes On. SLIS (School of
Library and Information Science) News, Indiana University. January 3, 2002. Available at:
http://www.slis.indiana.edu/news/story.php?story_id=364
Heine K. P. Hediger (Pages 7a–7z)
Primary Literature
Hediger, H. (1950). Wild Animals in Captivity: An Outline of the Biology of Zoological Gardens.
Butterworth, London.
Hediger, H. (1955). Studies of the psychology and behaviour of captive animals in zoos and
circuses. London: Butterworths Scientiﬁc Publications.
Hediger, H. (1965a). Man as a social partner of animals and vice-versa. Symposia of the Zoological
Society of London, 14, 291–300.
Hediger, H. (1965b). Environmental factors inﬂuencing the reproduction of zoo animals. In Beach,
F. A. (Ed.) Sex and Behaviour. New York, NY: John Wiley, pp. 319–354.
Hediger, H. (1966). Report on Taronga Zoological Park, pp. 1–45. New Wales: Parliament of New
South Wales. V.C.N. Blight, Government Printer.
Hediger, H. (1968). The Psychology and Behaviour of Animals in Zoos and Circuses. Sircom, G.
(Trans.) New York, NY: Dover Publications.
Hediger, H. (1969a). Man and Animal in the Zoo. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Hediger, H. (1969b). Comparative observations on sleep. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
Medicine (London), 62, 153–156.
Hediger, H. (1970). The development of the presentation and the viewing of animals in zoo-
logical gardens. In Aronson, L. R., Tobach, E., Lehrman, D. S., Rosenblatt, J. S. (Eds.)
Development and Evolution of Behavior: Essays in Memory of T. C. Schneirla. San Francisco,
CA: Freemand & Co., pp. 519–528.
Hediger, H. (1974). Communication, between man and animal. Image Roche (Basel) 62, 27–40.
Hediger, H. (1976). Proper names in the animal kingdom. Experientia, 32, 1357–1364.
Hediger, H. (1977). Nest and home. Folia Primatol, 28, 170–187.
Hediger, H. (1981). The Clever Hans phenomenon from an animal psychologist’s point of view.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 364, 1–17.
Hediger, H. (1983). Natural sleep behaviour in vertebrates. In Monnier, M. (Ed.) Functions of the
Nervous System. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 105–130.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
823
Hediger, H. (1985). A lifelong attempt to understand animals. In Dewsbury, D. A. (Ed.) Leaders
in the Study of Animal Behavior: Autobiographical Perspectives. Lewisburg, PA: Bucknell
University Press, pp. 144–181.
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Bickerton, D. (1990). Language and Species. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Böll, M. (2008). Social is emotional. Biosemiotics, 1(3), 329–346.
Cerella, J. (1979). Visual classes and natural categories in the pigeon. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 5, 68–77.
Cheney, D. L. and Seyfarth, R. M. (1982). How vervet monkeys perceive their grunts: ﬁeld
playback experiments. Animal Behaviour, 32, 519–529.
Cobb, J, B., Jr. and Grifﬁn, D. R. (Eds.) (1978). Mind in Nature: Essays on the Interface of Science
and Philosophy. Washington: University Press of America.
Ekan, P., Friesen, W. V. and Ellsworth, P. (1972). Emotion in the Human Face. New York, NY:
Pergamon Press.
Deacon, T. (1997). The Symbolic Species: The Co-Evolution of Language and The Brain. New
York, NY: W.W. Norton.
Deacon, T. (1997). Evolution and intelligence: beyond the argument from design. In Scheibel, A.
and Schopf, W. (Eds.) The Origin and Evolution of Intelligence. New York, NY: Jones and
Bartlett Publishers, pp. 103–135.
Favareau, D. (2007). Animal sensing, acting and knowing: Bridging the relations between brains,
bodies and world. In Witzany, G. (Ed.) Biosemiotics in Transdisciplinary Contexts. Helsinki:
Umweb, pp. 61–69.
Fellers, J. and Fellers, G. (1976). Tool use in a social insect and its implications for competitive
interactions. Science, 192, 70–72.
Frankael, G. S. and Gunn, D. L. (1940). The Orientation of Animals: Kineses, Taxes and Compass
Reactions. London: Oxford Unviersity Press. Reprint 1961, New York, NY: Dover.
Frisch, K. von (1967). The Dance Language and Orientation of Bees. Massachusetts: Harvard
University Press.
Gardner, R. A. and Gardner, B. T. (1969). Teaching sign language to a chimpanzee. Science, 165,
664–672.
Gould, J. L., Gould, C. G. (1994). The Animal Mind. New York, NY: Scientiﬁc American Library.
Hauser, M. (1996). The Evolution of Communication. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Graziano, M. and Cooke, S. (2006). Parieto-frontal interactions, personal space, and defensive
behavior. Neuropsychologia, 44, 845–859.
Green, S. and Marler, P. (1979). The analysis of animal communication. In Marler, P. and
Vandenbergh, J. G. (Eds.) Handbook of Behavioral Neurobiology. Vol. 3, Social behavior and
communication, chap. 3. New York, NY: Plenum.
Grifﬁn, D. R. (1981). The Question of Animal Awareness. New York, NY: Rockefeller Press.
Grifﬁn, D. R. (1984). Animal Thinking. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hall, E. (1963). A system for the notation of proxemic behaviour. American Anthropologist, 65,
1003–1026.
Hauser, M., Chomsky, N. and Fitch, W. T. (2002). The faculty of language: What is it, who has it,
and how did it evolve? Science, 298, 1569–1579.
Katz, D. (1937). Animals and men. In Studies in Comparative Psychology. New York, NY:
Longmans, Green, p. 7.
Kleisner, K. (2008). The semantic morphology of Adolf Portmann: a starting point for the
biosemiotics of organic form? Biosemiotics, 1, 207–219.
Krebs, J. R. and Davies, N. B. (1978). Behavioural Ecology, An Evolutionary Approach. Oxford:
Blackwell.

824
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Lestel, D. (2002). Human and animal communications, language and evolution. Sign Systems
Studies, 30(1), 201–212.
Mackintosh, N. G. (1974). The Psychology of Animal Learning. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Martinelli, D. (2005). A whale of a sonata: Zoomusicology and the question of musical structures.”
Semiosis, Energy, Evolution and Development Journal, 2005(1), p. 2–29.
Maier, N. R. F. and Schneirla, T. C. (1935). Principles of Animal Psychology. New York, NY:
McGraw-Hill. Reprint with supplement, 1964, New York, NY: Dover.
Miles, H. L. (1983). Apes and language: the search for communicative competence. In de Luce, J.
and Wilder, H. T. (Eds.) Language in Primates: Implications for Linguistics, Anthropology,
Psychoogy, and Philosophy. New York, NY: Springer.
Munn, N. L. (1933). An introduction to animal psychology. In The Behavior of the Rat. Cambridge,
MA: Riverside Press, pp. 39–40.
Pain, S. P. (2007). Inner representations and signs in animals. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Introduction to
Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis. Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 409–456.
Pain, S. P. (2009). Signs of anger: Representation of agonistic behaviour in invertebrate cognition.
Biosemiotics, 2(2), 181–192.
Patterson, F. G., Linden, E. (1981). The Education of Koko. New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston.
Pepperberg, I. M. (1981). Functional vocalizations by an African Grey parrot (Psittacus erithacus).
Zeitschrift für Tierpsychologie, 55, 139–160.
Pfungst, O. (1907). Das Pferd des Hern von Osten (Der kluge Hans). Leipzig: Joh. Ambrosious
Barth.
Premack, D. (1976). Intelligence in Ape and Man. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Pribram, K. H. (1978). Consciousness, classiﬁed and declassiﬁed. Behavioural Brain Science, 1,
590–592.
Romanes, George John (1883). Mental Evolution in Animals. London: Kegan, Paul and Trench.
Rizzolatti, G., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L. and Gallese, V. (1997). The space around us. Science, 277,
190–191.
Rosenthal, R. (1966). Experimenter Effects in Behavioural Research. New York, NY: Appleton.
Savage-Rumbaugh, S. (1986). Ape Language: From Conditioned Response to Symbol. New York,
NY: Columbia University Press.
Savage-Rumbaugh, S, and Lewin, R. (1994). Kanzi: The Ape at the Brink of the Human Mind. New
York, NY: John Wiley.
Schumann, J., Favareau, D., Goodwin, C., Lee, N., Mikesell, L., Tao, L. H., Veronique, D. and
Wray, A. (2006). Language evolution: What evolved? Marges Linguistique, 11, 167–199.
Sebeok, T. (1972). Perspectives in Zoosemiotics. The Hague: Mouton.
Sebeok, T. (1979). The Sign and Its Masters. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Sebeok, T. (1980). Looking in the destination for what should have been sought in the source. In
Sebeok, T. A. (Ed.) Speaking of Apes. New York, NY: Plenum.
Sebeok, T. (1990). Essays in Zoosemiotics. Toronto: University of Toronto.
Sebeok, T. (2001).Biosemiotics: its roots, proliferation, and prospects. Semiotica, 134(1/4), 61–78.
Sebeok, T. (2001). The Swiss Pioneer in Nonverbal Communication Studies: Heini Hediger (1908–
1992). Ottowa: Legas.
Seyfarth, R., Cheney, D. and Marler, P. (1980). Monkey responses to three different alarm calls:
Evidence of predator classiﬁcation and semantic communication. Science, 210, 801–803.
Sharov, A. (2009). The role of utility and inference in the evolution of functional information.
Biosemiotics, 2(1), 101–116.
Premack, D. and Premack, A. (1983). The Mind of an Ape. New York, NY: W W Norton.
Rumbaugh, D. (Ed.) (1977). Language Learning by a Chimpanzee: The Lana Project. New York,
NY: Academic Press.
Thorndike, E. L. (1898). Animal intelligence: An experimental study of the associative processes
in animals. Psychological Review, Monograph Supplements, No. 8. New York, NY: Macmillan.
Tønnessen, M. (2003). Umwelt ethics. Sign Systems Studies 31.1, 281–299.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
825
Turovski, A. (2000). The semiotics of animal freedom: A zoologist’s attempt to perceive the
semiotic aim of H. Hediger. Sign Systems Studies, 28, 380–387.
Walker, S. (1983). Animal Thought. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Wilden, A. (1972). System and Structure: Essays in communication and exchange. London:
Tavistock Publications.
Martin Krampen (Pages 8a–8z)
Primary Literature
Krampen, M. (Ed.) (1965a). Design and Planning. Waterloo: University of Waterloo, University
Press.
Krampen, M. (1965b). Signs and Symbols in Graphic Communication (Design Quarterly).
Minneapolis: Walker Art Center.
Krampen, M. (1979). Meaning in the Urban Environment. London: Pion.
Krampen, M. (1968). Signs and symbols in graphic communication. Design Quarterly, 62, 3–31.
Krampen, M. (1980). Typical Perceptions of Actual and Ideal Job Conditions By Canadian
Industrial Designers. Ontario: University of Waterloo.
Krampen, M. (1981). Phytosemiotics. Semiotica, 36(3/4), 187–209; reprinted Deely, Williams and
Kruse. 96–103.
Krampen, M. (1983). Icons of the road. Semiotica, 43(1/2), 1–204.
Krampen, M. (1991). Children’s Drawings: Iconic Coding of the Environment. Berlin: Springer.
Krampen, M. (1992). Phytosemiotics revisited. In Biosemiotics. The Semiotic Web 1991. Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 213–219.
Krampen, M. (1994). Phytosemiotics. In Sebeok, T. A., et. al. (Eds.) Encyclopedic Dictionary of
Semiotics, 2nd ed. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 726–730.
Krampen, M. (1997). Phytosemiosis. In Posner, R., Robering, K., Sebeok, T. A. (Eds.) Semiotics:
A Handbook on the Sign-Theoretic Foundations of Nature and Culture. Berlin: Walter de
Gruyter, pp. 507–522.
Krampen, M. (2001). No plant – no breath. Semiotica, 134(3/4), 415–421.
Krampen, M. (2007). World of Signs: Global Communication By Pictographs. Stuttgat: Avedition.
Krampen, M. and Canter, D. (1988a). New directions in environmental particpation. In Stea, D.
(Ed.) Ethnoscapes Vol. 3. Farnham: Ashgate Publishing.
Krampen, M. and Canter, D. (1988b). Environmental perspectives. In Stea, D. (Ed.) Ethnoscapes
Vol. 1. Farnham: Gower.
Krampen, M. and Hormann, G. (2003). The Ulm School of Design: Beginnings of a Project of
Unyielding Modernity (German Edition). Zurich: Wiley-VCH.
Krampen, M., Oehler, K., Posner, R., Sebeok, T. A., Uexkull and T. von (Eds.) (1987). Classics of
Semiotics. Berlin: Springer.
Krampen, M. and Schempp, D. (2000). Glass Architects. Basel: Birkhauser.
Krampen, M. and Seitz, P. (Eds.) (1967). Design and Planning 2: Computers In Design and
Communication. New York, NY: Hastings House.
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Attenborough, D. (1995). The Private Life of Plants: A Natural History of Plant Behavior.
Princeton University Press.
Baenziger, E. J. (2009). Alpha and Omega: The oldest and newest example of interphyloge-
netic semiotics – the orchid. Paper presented at the Ninth Annual International Gatherings
in Biosemiotics Conference. Charles University, Prague June 30–July 5, 2009.

826
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Baluška, F., Volkmann, D. and Barlow, P. (1999). Hormone-cytoskeleton interactions in plant cells.
In Hooykaas, P. P. J., Hall, M. A., Libbenga, K. R. (Eds.) Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
of Plant Hormones. Amsterdam, New York, NY: Elsevier Science.
Baluška, F., Mancuso, S., Volkmann, D. and Barlow, P. (2004). Root apices as plant command
centres: the unique ‘brain-like’ status of the root apex transition zone. Biologia Bratislava, 59,
7–19.
Baluška, F., Volkmann, D. and Menzel, D. (2005). Plant synapses: actin-based domains for cell-to-
cell communication. Trends Plant Science, 10, 106–111.
Baluška, F., Volkmann, D. and Mancuso, S. (2006). Communication in Plants: Neuronal Aspects
of Plant Life. Berlin: Springer.
Barlow, P. W. (2007). Information in plant life and development: A biosemiotic approach. Triple-C:
The Journal of Cognition, Communication, and Cooperation, 5(2), 37–48.
Brenner, E., Stahlberg, R., Mancuso, S., Vivanco, J., Baluška, F., Van Volkenburgh, E. (2006). Plant
neurobiology: an integrated view of plant signaling. Trends in Plant Science, 11, 413–419.
Deely, J. (1982). On the notion of phytosemiotics. In Deely, J. and Evans, J. (Eds.) Semiotics 1982.
Lanham: University Press of America, pp. 541–554.
Deely, J. (1989). Physiosemiosis and semiotics. In Spinks, C. W., Deely, J. (Eds.) Semiotics 1998.
New York, NY: Peter Lang Publishing, Inc., pp. 191–197.
Deely, J. (1990). Physiosemiosis and phytosemiotics. Basics of Semiotics. Bloomington, IN:
Indiana University Press, pp. 83–104.
Farina, A. (2008). The landscape as a semiotic interface between organisms and resources.
Biosemiotics, 1(1), 75–84.
Filleur, S. (2005). Nitrate and glutamate sensing by plant roots. Biochemical Society Transactions,
33, 283–286.
Frimi, J. (2003). Auxin transport – shaping the plant. Current Opinion in Plant Biology, 6, 7–12.
Frimi, J. and Wisniewska, J. (2005). Auxin as an intercellular signal. In Flemming, A. (Ed.)
Intercellular Communication in Plants, Annual Plant Reviews 16. Blackwell Publishing,
pp. 1–26.
Harries-Jones, P. (2009). Honeybees, communicative order, and the collapse of ecosystems.
Biosemiotics, 2(2), 193–204.
Kleisner, K. (2008). The semantic morphology of Adolf Portmann: A starting point for the
biosemiotics of organic form? Biosemiotics, 1(2), 207–220.
Kull, K. (2000). An introduction to phytosemiotics: Semiotic botany and vegetative sign systems.
Sign Systems Studies, 28, 326–350.
Kull, T. (1995). Genet and ramet dynamics of Cypripedium calceolus in different habitats. In
Clonality in Plant Communities. Oborny, B. and Podani, J. (Eds.) Grangärde, Sweden: Opulus
Press, pp. 95–104.
Kull, T. and Arditti, J. (Eds.) (2002). Orchid Biology: Reviews and Perspectives. Berlin: Kluwer
Scientiﬁc Publishers.
Mancuso, S. and Shabala, S. (2006). Rhythms in Plants. Berlin, Springer.
Maran, T. (2007). Semiotic interpretations of biological mimicry. Semiotica, 167(1/4), 223–248.
Maran, T. (2008). Towards an integrated methodology of ecosemiotics: The concept of nature-text.
Sign Systems Studies, 35(1/2), 269–294.
Narby, J. (2005). Intelligence in Nature. New York, NY: J. P. Tarcher Press.
Nöth, W. (1994). Origins of Semiosis: Sign Evolution in Nature and Culture. Berlin: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Nöth, W. (1998). Ecosemiotics. Sign Systems Studies, 26, 332–343.
Nöth, W. (1999). Ecosemiotics and the Semiotics of Nature. In Taborsky, E. (Ed.) Semiosis,
Evolution, Energy: Towards A Reconceptualization of the Sign. Aachen: Shaker, pp. 73–88.
Nöth, W. and Kull, K. (Eds.) (2001). Special Issue: The Semiotics of Nature. Sign Systems
Studies 29.1.
Pickard, B. G. (1973). Action potentials in higher plants. Botanical Review, 39, 172–201.
Roschchina, V. V. (2001). Neurotransmitters in Plant Life. Enﬁeld: Science Publishers.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
827
Salthe, S. N. (1993). Development and Evolution: Complexity and Change in Biology. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Šamaj, J., Baluška, F. and Menzel, D. (2006). Endocytosis in Plants. Berlin: Springer.
Sebeok, T. A. (1990). The sign science and the life science. In Bernard, J., Deely, J., Voigt, V.,
Withalm, G. (Eds.) Symbolicity. Lanham: University Press of America, pp. 243–252.
Sebeok, T. A. (2001a). Biosemiotics: its roots, proliferation, and prospects. Semiotica, 134(1), 18.
Sebeok, T. A. (2001b). Global Semiotics. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Schumann, J., Favareau, D., Goodwin, C., Lee, N., Mikesell, L., Tao, L. H., Veronique, D. and
Wray, A. (2006). Language evolution: What evolved? Marges Linguistique, 11, 167–199.
Shepherd, V. A. (2005). From semi-conductors to the rhythms of sensitive plants: the research of
J. C. Bose. Cellular Molecular Biology, 51, 601–619.
Simons, P. (1992). The Action Plant: Movement and Nervous Behavior in Plants. Oxford Press.
Stahlberg, R. (2006). Historical overview on plant neurobiology. Plant Signaling and Behavior,
1, 6–8.
Tønnessen, M. (2003). Umwelt ethics. Sign Systems Studies 31.1, 281–299.
Tønnessen, M. (2009). Umwelt transitions: Uexküll and environmental change. Biosemiotics, 2(1),
47–64.
Trebacz, K. (2006). Electrical signals in long-distance communication in plants. In Baluška, F.,
Volkmann, D., Mancuso, S. Communication in Plants: Neuronal Aspects of Plant Life. Berlin:
Springer, pp. 277–280.
Trewavas, A. (2003). Aspects of plant intelligence. Annals of Botany (London), 92, 1–20.
Trewavas, A. (2005). Green plants as intelligent organisms. Trends Plant Sci. 10 413–419.
Uexküll, J. von (1957). A Stroll through the World of Animals and Men: A Picture Book of
Invisible Worlds. In Schiller, C. H. (Ed., Trans.) Instinctive Behavior: The Development of
a Modern Concept. New York, NY: International Universities Press, pp. 5–80.
Uexküll, J. von (1920). Theoretische Biologie, 1st ed. Berlin: Verlag von Gebrüder Paetel.
Wilden, A. (1972). System and Structure: Essays in Communication and Exchange. London:
Tavistock Publications.
Witzany, G. (2006a). The Logos of the Bios 1: Contributions to the Foundation of a Three-leveled
Biosemiotics. Helsinki: Umweb.
Witzany G (2006b). Plant communication from biosemiotic perspective. Plant Signaling &
Behavior, 1(4), 169–178.
Witzany, G. (2007). The Logos of the Bios 2: Bio-Communication. Helsinki: Umweb.
Witzany, G. (2008). The biosemiotics of plant communication. The American Journal of Semiotics,
24(1/3), 39–56.
Yamagami, M., et al. (2004). Two distinct signaling pathways participate in auxin-induced swelling
of pea epidermal protoplasts. Plant Physiology, 134, 735–747.
Thure Von Uexküll (Pages 9a–9z)
Primary Literature
Uexküll, T. von (1953). Der Mensch und die Natur: Grundziige einer Naturphilosphie. Bern:
A. Francke AG.
Uexküll, T. von (1963). Grundfragen der Psychosomatischen Medizin. Reinbek: Rowohlt.
Uexküll, T. von (Ed.) (1979). Lehrbuch der psychosomatischen Medizin. München: Urban.
Uexküll, T. von (1981). Lehrbuch der Psychosomatischen Medizin. Munchen, Wien, Baltimore:
Urban and Schwarzenberg.
Uexküll, T. von (1982a). Meaning and science in Jakob von Uexküll’s concept of biology.
Semiotica, 42(1), 1–24.
Uexküll, T. von (1982b). Semiotics and the problem of the observer. In Deely, J., Lenhart, M. D.
(Eds.) Semiotics 1982 (Proceedings of the Semiotic Society of America. New York, NY: Plenum
Press.

828
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Uexküll, T. von (1982c). Semiotics and medicine. Semiotica, 38(3/4), 205–215.
Uexküll, T. von (1986a). From index to icon: a semiotic attempt at Interpreting Piaget’s develop-
mental theory. In Bouissac, P., Herzfeld, M., Posner, R. (Eds.) Iconicity. Essays on the Nature of
Culture. Festschrift for Thomas A. Sebeok on his 65th birthday. Tübingen: Stauffenberg Verlag,
pp. 119–140.
Uexküll, T. von (1986b). Medicine and semiotics. Semiotica, 61(3/4), 201–217.
Uexküll, T. von (1987). The sign theory of Jakob von Uexküll. In Krampen, M., et al. (Eds.)
Classics of Semiotics. New York, NY: Plenum, pp. 147–179.
Uexküll, T. von (1989). Possible contribution of biosemiotics to the problem of communication
among lymphocytes. In Sercarz, E. E., Celada, F., Mitchison, N. A. and Tada, T. (Eds.) The
Semiotics of Cellular Communication in the Immune System. Berlin: Springer, pp. 25–24.
Uexküll, T. von (1992a). Varieties of semiosis. In Sebeok, T. A., Umiker-Sebeok, J. (Eds.)
Biosemiotics: The Semiotic Web 1991. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 455–470.
Uexküll, T. von (1992b). Introduction: the sign theory of Jakob von Uexküll. Semiotica, 89(4),
279–315.
Uexküll, T. von (1993). Biosemiotik. In Titzmann, M., Michael (Ed.) Zeichen(theorie) in der
Praxis: 6. Internationaler Kongreß der Deutschen Gesellschaft für Semiotik 8–11 Oktober
1990. Passau: Wiss.-Verlag Rothe.
Uexküll, T. von (1994). Integrierte psychosomatische Medizin in Praxis und Klinik. 3. Auﬂ. Adler,
R., Bertram, W., Haag, A., Herrmann, J., Köhle, K. and Uexküll, T. von (Eds.) Stuttgart:
Schattauer.
Uexküll, T. von (1995). A statement to Sebeok’s semiotic self. Schola Biotheoretica, 21, 101–103.
Uexküll, T. von (1997). Biosemiose. In Posner, R., Robering, K., Sebeok, T. A. (Eds.) Semiotics:
A Handbook on the Sign-Theoretic Foundations of Nature and Culture Vol. 1. Berlin: Walter de
Gruyter, pp. 447–457.
Uexküll, T. von (1999). The relationship between semiotics and mechanical models of explanation
in the life sciences. Semiotica, 127(1/4), 647–655.
Uexküll, T. von (2001). Units of survival. Semiotica, 134(1/4), 103–106.
Uexküll, T. von (2004). Eye witnessing Jakob von Uexküll’s umwelttheory. T. Rüting (Trans.) Sign
Systems Studies, 32(1/2), 373–374.
Uexküll, T. von, Geigges, W. and Herrmann, J. M. (1993). Endosemiosis. Semiotica, 96(1/2), 5–51.
Uexküll, T. von and Grassi, E. (1945). Wirklichkeit als Geheimnis und Auf trag. Bern: A. Francke
AG.
Uexküll, T. von and Grassi, E. (1950). Von Ursprung und Grenzen der Geisteswissenschaften und
Naturwissenschaften. Bern: A. Francke AG.
Uexküll, T. von and Uexküll, J. von (1947). Der Sinn des Lebens. Godesberg: Verlag Helmut
Küppert.
Uexküll, T. von and Uexküll, J. von (2004 [1943]). The eternal question: biological variations on a
Platonic dialogue. Edgar, E. V. (Trans.) Sign Systems Studies, 32(1/2), 329–362.
Uexküll, T. von and Wesiack, W. (1997). Scientiﬁc theory: a bio-psycho-social model. In von
Uexküll, T. (Ed.) Psychosomatic Medicine. München: Urban and Schwarzenberg, pp. 11–42.
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Bickhard, M. (2003). The Biological Emergence of Representation. In Brown, T. and Smith, L.
(Ed.) Emergence and Reduction: Proceedings of the 29th Annual Symposium of the Jean Piaget
Society. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, pp. 105–131.
Brands, M., Arnellos, A., Spyrou, T. and Darzentas, J. (2007). A biosemiotic analysis of sero-
tonin’s complex functionality. In Witzany, G. (Ed.) Biosemiotics in Transdisciplinary Contexts.
Helsinki: Umweb, pp. 125–132.
Bruni, L. E. (2007). Cellular semiotics and signal transduction. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Introduction
to Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis. Berlin: Springer, pp. 365–408.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
829
Bruni, L. E. (2008a). Gregory Bateson’s Relevance to Current Molecular Biology. In Hoffmeyer, J.
(Ed.) A Legacy for Living Systems: Gregory Bateson as a Precursor to Biosemiotics Berlin:
Springer, 93–120.
Bruni, L. E. (2008b). Semiotic freedom: emergence and teleology in biological and cognitive
interfaces. The American Journal of Semiotics, 24(1/3), 57–74.
Bruni, L. E. (2008c). Hierarchical categorical perception in sensing and cognitive processes.
Biosemiotics, 1(1), 113–130.
Buschek, O., Uexküll, M. von and Köhle, K. (Eds.) (1988). Thure von Uexküll: Festschrift zum 80.
Geburtstag am 15. Märtz 1988. München: Urban and Schwarzenberg.
Cobley, P. (2009). Endosemiosis. In Cobley, P. (Ed.) The Routledge Companion to Semiotics.
London: Taylor & Francis, pp. 213–244.
Eder, J. and Rembold, H. (1992). Biosemiotics: A paradigm of biology: Biological signalling on
the verge of deterministic chaos. Naturwissenschaften, 79(2), 60–67.
El-Hani, C. N., Arnellos, A. and Queiroz, J. (2007). Modeling a semiotic process in the
immune system: signal transduction in B-cell activation. Triple-C: The Journal of Cognition,
Communication, and Cooperation, 5(2), 24–36.
El-Hani, C. N., Queiroz, J. and Emmeche, C. (2005). Information and semiosis in living systems:
a semiotic approach. Semiosis, Energy, Evolution and Development Journal, 1, 60–90.
El-Hani, C. N., Queiroz, J. and Emmeche, C. (2006). A semiotic analysis of the genetic information
system. Semiotica, 160(1/4), 1–68.
El-Hani, C. N., Queiroz, J. and Emmeche, C. (2008). A Peircean approach to ‘information’ and its
relationship with Bateson’s and Jablonka’s ideas, The American Journal of Semiotics, 24(1–3),
75–94.
El-Hani, C. N., Queiroz, J. and Emmeche, C. (2009). Genes, Information, and Semiosis. Tartu:
Tartu University Press.
Damasio, A. (1999). The Feeling of What Happens: Body, Emotion and the Making of
Consciousness. Orlando: Harcourt.
Favareau, D. (2002). Constructing representema: On the neurosemiotics of self and vision.
Semiotics, Evolution, Energy and Development Journal, 2(4), 3–24.
Fernández, E. (2008). Signs and instruments: the convergence of Aristotelian and Kantian
intuitions in biosemiotics. Biosemiotics, 1(3), 347–359.
Geigges, W. (2005). Nachruf auf Thure von Uexküll. Psychotherapie, Psychosomatik, medizinische
Psychologie, 55, 84–85.
Goudsmit, A. (2009). Sense and self-referentiality in living beings. Biosemiotics, 2(1), 39–46.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1998). Biosemiotics. In Bouissac, P. (Ed.) Encyclopedia of Semiotics. New York,
NY: Oxford University Press, pp. 82–84.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2004). Thure von Uexküll er død. Politiken, 17.10.5.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2008). The semiotic body. Biosemiotics, 1(2), 169–190.
Giorgi, F., Bruni, L. E., Maggio (2010). Receptor oligomerization as a mechanism controlling
cellular semiotics. Biosemiotics, 3(1), forthcoming.
Krampen, M. (2004). Thure von Uexküll – arzt, wissenschaftler, semiotiker. Zeitschrift für
Semiotik, 26(3/4), 421–428.
Kull, K. and Hoffmeyer, J. (2005). Thure von Uexküll 1908–2004. Sign Systems Studies, 33(2),
487–494. von Uexküll, Thure. (1986). Medicine and Semiotics. Semiotica, 61, 201–217.
Loringhoven, H. F. von (2005). Nachruf auf Prof. Dr. Med. Thure Baron von Uexküll
Nachrichtenblatt der Baltischen Ritterschaften, 47(1), 15–18.
Markoš, A., Švorcová, J. (2009). Recorded versus organic memory: Interaction of two worlds as
demonstrated by the chromatin dynamics. Biosemiotics, 2(2), 131–150.
Nöth, W. (1990). Handbook of Semiotics. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Ozansoy, M. and Denizhan, Y. (2009). The endomembrane system: A representation of the
extracellular medium? Biosemiotics, 2(3), 255–268.
Salthe, S. (2008). The system of interpretance: Naturalizing meaning as ﬁnality. Biosemiotics, 1(3),
285–294.

830
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Sebeok, T. A. (2001). Biosemiotics: its roots, proliferation, and prospects. Semiotica, 134(1/4),
61–78.
Sharov, A. (2009). The role of utility and inference in the evolution of functional information.
Biosemiotics, 2(1), 101–116.
Tiivel, T. and Kull, K. (1999). Thure von Uexküll: symbiosis of biology, medicine, and semiotics.
In Wagner, E., et al. (Eds.) From Symbiosis to Eukaryotism: Endocytobiology VII. Geneva:
Geneva University Press, pp. 657–661.
Tuffs, A. (2004). Thure von Uexküll: a pioneer of psychosomatic medicine. British Medical
Journal, 329, 1047.
Uexküll, G. von and Uexküll, T. von (1950). Vorbemerkung. In Uexküll, J. von, pp. 13–14.
Uexküll, J. von (1940). Bedeutungslehre, Bios 10. Leipzig: Johann Ambrosius Barth. Translated
from the German by Barry Stone and Herbert Weiner as ‘The Theory of Meaning’. T. von
Uexküll (Ed.) Semiotica, 42(1), 25–82.
Uexküll, J. von (1957). A stroll through the world of animals and men; a picture book of invisible
worlds. In Instinctive Behavior: The Development of a Modern Concept, translated from the
German by Claire H. Schiller. New York, NY: International Universities Press, Inc., pp. 5–80.
Wesiack,
W.
(2005).
Nachruf
auf
Thure
von
Uexküll
(1908–2004).
Zeitschrift
für
Psychosomatische Medizin und Psychotherapie, 51, 1–3.
Witzany, G. (2006). Serial Endosymbiotic Theory (SET): The biosemiotic update. Acta
Biotheoretica, 54, 103–117.
Witzany, G. (2008). The viral origins of telomeres and telomerases and their important role in
eukaryogenesis and genome maintenance. Biosemiotics, 1(2), 191–206.
Witzany G (2009). Noncoding RNAs: Persistent viral agents as modular tools for cellular needs.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1178, 244–267.
Giorgio Prodi (Pages 10a–10z)
Primary Literature
Prodi, G. (1974). La scienza, if potere, la critica. Bologna: II Mulino.
Prodi, G. (1977). Le basi materiali della signijicazione. Milano: Bompiani.
Prodi, G. (1982). La storia naturale della logica. Milano: Bompiani.
Prodi, G. (1983a). L’uso estetico dellinguaggio. Bologna: II Mulino.
Prodi, G. (1983b). Lingua e biologia. In Segre, C. (Ed.) Intorno alla linguistica. Milano: Feltrinelli,
pp. 172–202, 308–319.
Prodi, G. (1988a). Signs and codes in Immunology. In Sercarz, E. E., Celada, F., Mitchison, N. A.,
Tada, T. (Eds.) The Semiotics of Cellular Communication in the Immune System. Berlin:
Springer, pp. 53–64.
Prodi, G. (1988b). Material basis of signiﬁcation. Semiotica, 69, 191–241.
Prodi, G. (1988c). Teoria e metodo in biologia e medicina. Bologna: Editrice.
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Artmann, S. (2008). Organic problem solving: Biology, decision theory, and the physical symbol
system hypothesis. The American Journal of Semiotics, 24(1/3), 95–106.
Artmann, S. (2009). Basic semiosis as code-based control. Biosemiotics, 2(1), 31–38.
Barbieri, M. (Ed.) (2007). Is the cell a semiotic system? In Introduction to Biosemiotics: The New
Biological Synthesis. Berlin: Springer, pp. 179–208.
Battail, G. (2008). Genomic error-correcting codes in the living world. Biosemiotics, 1(2),
221–238.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
831
Battail, G. (2009). Applying semiotics and information theory to biology: a critical comparison.
Biosemiotics, 2(3), 303–320.
Bickhard, M. (2003). The Biological Emergence of Representation. In Brown, T. and Smith, L.
(Ed.) Emergence and Reduction: Proceedings of the 29th Annual Symposium of the Jean Piaget
Society. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, pp. 105–131.
Bruni, L. E. (2007). Cellular semiotics and signal transduction. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Introduction
to Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis. Berlin: Springer, pp. 365–408.
Cariani, P. (2001). Symbols and dynamics in the brain. Biosystems. 60, 59–83.
Christiansen, P. V. (2000). Macro and Micro-Levels in Physics In Andersen, P. B., Emmeche, C.,
Finnemann, N. and Christiansen, P. V. (Eds.) Downward Causation: Minds, Bodies and Matter.
Århus: Aarhus University Press, pp. 51–62.
Cimatti, F. (2000), The circular semiosis of Giorgio Prodi. Sign Systems Studies, 28, 351–379.
Collier, J. (2008). Information in biological systems. In Adriaans, P. and van Benthem, J. (Eds.)
Handbook of Philosophy of Science, Volume 8: Philosophy of Information. Amsterdam:
Elsevier.
Denizhan, Y. and Karatay, V. (2002). Evolution of the window. Sign System Studies, 30(1),
259–270.
Denizhan, Y. and Karatay, V. (2002). Evolution of the window. Sign System Studies, 30(1),
259–270.
El-Hani, C. N., Arnellos, A. and Queiroz, J. (2007). Modeling a semiotic process in the
immune system: Signal transduction in B-cell activation. Triple-C: The Journal of Cognition,
Communication, and Cooperation, 5(2), 24–36.
Florkin, M. (1949). Biochemical Evolution. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Florkin, M. (1966). A Molecular Approach to Phylogeny. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Florkin, M. (1974). Concepts of molecular biosemiotics and molecular evolution. In Florkin, A.
M. and Stotz, E. H. (Eds.) Comprehensive Biochemistry, Volume 29. Amsterdam: Elsevier,
pp. 1–124.
Gimona, M. (2008). Protein linguistics and the modular code of the cytoskeleton. In Barbieri, M.
(Ed.) The Codes of Life: The Rules of Macroevolution. Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 189–206.
Joslyn, C. (2001). The semiotics of control and modeling relations in complex systems. Biosystems,
60, 131–148.
Katz, G. (2008). The hypothesis of a genetic protolanguage: An epistemological investigation.
Biosemiotics, 1(1), 57–74.
Markoš, A., Švorcová, J. (2009). Recorded versus organic memory: Interaction of two worlds as
demonstrated by the chromatin dynamics. Biosemiotics, 2(2), 131–150.
Matsuno, K. (2007). Who made the genetic codes, how and by what? In Fagot-Largeault, A.,
Torres, J. M. and Rahman, S. (Eds.) The Inﬂuence of Genetics on Contemporary Thinking.
Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 33–50.
Matsuno, K. (2008). Molecular semiotics toward the emergence of life. Biosemiotics, 1(1),
131–144.
Nöth, W. (2001). Protosemiotics and physicosemiotics. Sign System Studies, 29(1), 13–26.
Ozansoy, M. and Denizhan, Y. (2009). The endomembrane system: A representation of the
extracellular medium? Biosemiotics, 2(3), 255–268.
Paolucci, G. (1996). A Remembrance: Giorgio Prodi. Stem Cells, 11(S2), i–ii.
Pattee, H. (1961). On the origin of macromolecular sequences. Biophysics, 1, 683–710.
Pattee, H. (1965). The recognition of hereditary order in primitive chemical systems. In Fox, S.
(Ed.) The Origins of Prebiological Systems. New York, NY: Academic Press, pp. 385–405.
Pattee, H. (1969a). How does a molecule become a message? In Lang, A. (Ed.) 28th Symposium
of the Society of Developmental Biology, Academic Press, New York, pp. 1–16.
Pattee, H. (1969b). Physical conditions for primitive functional hierarchies. In Whyte, L. L.,
Wilson, A. G. and Wilson, D. (Eds.) Hierarchical Structures. New York, NY: American
Elsevier, pp. 161–177.

832
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Pattee, H. (1971). The recognition of description and function in chemical reaction networks. In
Buvet, R. and Ponnamperuma, C. (Eds.) Chemical Evolution and the Origin of Life. New York,
NY: North Holland, pp. 42–50.
Pattee, H. (1991). Measurement-control heterarchical networks in living systems. International
Journal of General Systems, 18, 213–221.
Pattee, H. (1995). Evolving self-reference: Matter, symbols and semantic closure. Communication
and Cognition: Artiﬁcial Intelligence 12(1–2), 9–27.
Powell, R. A. (1986). From semiotic of scientiﬁc mechanism to semiotic of teleology in nature.
In Deely, J. and Evans, J. (Eds.) Semiotics 1986. Lanham: University Press of America,
pp. 296–305.
Riofrio, W. (2008). Understanding the emergence of cellular organization. Biosemiotics, 1(3),
361–378.
Rocha, L. M. (2001). Evolution with material symbol systems. Biosystems, 60, 95–121.
Rosen, R. (1991). Life Itself: A Comprehensive Inquiry into the Nature, Origin, and Fabrication of
Life. New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Salthe, S. (1985). Evolving Hierarchical Systems: Their Structure and Representation. New York,
NY: Columbia University Press.
Salthe, S. (1993). Development and Evolution: Complexity and Change in Biology. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Sebeok, T. (1990). Sign science and life science. In Deely, J. (Ed.) Semiotics 1990. Lanham, MD:
University Press of America, pp. 243–252.
Sebeok, T. A. (1991). A Sign is Just a Sign. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Sebeok, T. A.(2001). Global Semiotics. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Sebeok, T. A. (2001). Biosemiotics: its roots, proliferation, and prospects. Semiotica, 134(1), 18.
Sercarz, E. E. (Ed.) (1988). The Semiotics of Cellular Communication in the Immune System.
Berlin; New York, NY: Springer.
Sharov, A. (2009). The role of utility and inference in the evolution of functional information.
Biosemiotics, 2(1), 101–116.
Uexküll, T. von (1997). Biosemiose. In Posner, R., Robering, K., Sebeok, T. A. (Eds.) Semiotics:
A Handbook on the Sign-Theoretic Foundations of Nature and Culture Vol. 1. Berlin: Walter de
Gruyter, pp. 447–457.
Uexküll, T. von, Geigges, W. and Herrmann, J. M. (1993). Endosemiosis. Semiotica, 96(1/2), 5–51.
René Thom (Pages 11a–11z)
Primary Literature
Thom, R. (1968a). Topologie et signiﬁcation. L’ Âge de la Science 4. Paris: Dunod, pp. 219–242.
(English translation in Thom 1983).
Thom, R. (1968b). Une théorie dynamique de la morphogénèse. In Waddington, C. H. (Ed.)
Towards a Theoretical Biology Volume 1. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, pp. 152–166.
(English translation in Thom 1983).
Thom, R. (1970). Topologie et linguistique. In Haeﬂiger, A. and Narasimhan, R. (Eds.) Essays
on Topology and Related Topics; Memoires Dedies a Georges de Rham. New York, NY,
Heidelberg, Berlin: Springer, pp. 226–248.
Thom, R. (1973). De l’icone au symbole: esquisse d’une theorie du syrnbolisme. Cahiers
Internationaux de Symbolisme 22–23, 85–106. (English translation in Thom 1983).
Thom, R. (1974). La linguistique, discipline morphologique exemplaire. Critique 30. Paris:
Editions de Minuit, pp. 235–245.
Thom, R. (1975a). Structural Stability and Morphogenesis: An Outline of a General Theory of
Models. Fowler, D. H. (Trans.) Reading: Benjamin/Cummings.
Thom, R. (1975b). Les mathematiques et l’intelligible. Dialectica, 29(1),71–80.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
833
Thom, R. (1977). Autobiography of René Thom. In Atiyah, M., Iagolnitzer, D. (Eds.) Fields
Medallists Lectures. Singapore: Singapore University Press, pp. 71–76.
Thom, R. (1978). De quoi faut-il s’etonner? Circe, 8–9, 7–91.
Thom, R. (1980). L’espace et les signes, Semiotica, 29(3–4), 193–208.
Thom, R. (1983). Mathematical Models of Morphogenesis. Brookes, W. M. and Rand, D. (Trans.)
New York, NY: Halsted Press.
Thom, R. (1987a). Epistemology of evolutionary processes. In Callebaut, W., Pinxten, R. (Eds.)
Evolutionary Epistemology. Reidel, D., pp. 97–105.
Thom, R. (1987b). An Inventory of Waddingtonian Concepts. In Goodwin, B. and Saunders, P.
(Eds.) Theorical Biology: Epigenetic and Evolutionary Order from Complex Systems.
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, pp. 1–7.
Thom, R. (1989). Structural Stability and Morphogenesis: An Outline of a General Theory of
Models, 2nd ed. Boulder: Westview Press.
Thom, R. (1990). Semio-Physics: A Sketch. Meyer, V. (Trans.) Redwood City, CA: Addison-
Wesley, Advanced Book Program.
Thom, R. (1991a). Saillance et prégnance. In Dorey, R. (Ed.) L’inconscient et la Science. Paris:
Dunod, pp. 64–82.
Thom, R. (1991b). Relativité du vrai, relativisme de l’intelligible. Epistemologia, 15(1), 3–20.
Thom, R. (1992). Apologie du logos. Paris: Hachette.
Thom, R. (2003). Oeuvres complètes. CD-ROM edited by Institut des Hautes Etudes Scientiﬁques.
France: Bures-sur-Yvette. France.
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Andersen, P. B., Emmeche, C., Finnemann, N. O. and Christiansen, P. V. (2000). Downward
Causation: Minds, bodies and matter. Aarhus: Aarhus University Press.
Anderson, P. W. (1972). More is different. Science, 177(4047), 393–396.
Arnold, V. I. (1984). Catastrophe Theory. Berlin: Springer.
Aubin, D. (2001). From Catastrophe to Chaos. In Bottazzini, U., Dalmedico, A. D. (Eds.) Changing
Images in Mathematics: From the French Revolution to the New Millenium. London: Routledge,
pp. 255–279.
Aubin, D. (2004). Forms of explanation in the catastrophe theory of René Thom: topology,
morphogenesis and structuralism. In Wise, M. N. (Ed.) Growing Explanations: Historical
Perspectives on Recent Science. Durham: Duke University Press, pp. 95–130.
Augustyn, P. (2005). Art – depression – ﬁction: A variation on Rene Thom’s three important kinds
of human activity. Semiotica, 156(1/4), 197–209.
Baer, E. (1987). Sebeok’s ‘Thomism’. In Krampen, M. (Ed.) Classics of Semiotics New York, NY:
Plenum, pp. 196–201.
Barbieri, M. (1985). The Semantic Theory of Evolution. New York, NY: Harwood Academic.
Barbieri, M. (2008). The Codes of Life: The Rules of Macroevolution. New York, NY: Springer.
Bateson, G. (1972). Steps to an Ecology of Mind: Collected Essays in Anthropology, Psychiatry,
Evolution, and Epistemology. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Borel, A. (1998). Twenty-ﬁve years with ‘Nicolas Bourbaki’. Notices of the American Mathematics
Monthly, 45(3), 373–379.
Bouissac, P. (Ed.) (1998). Encyclopedia of Semiotics. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Bourbaki, N. (1948). L’architecture des mathématiques. In Lionnais, F. L. (Ed.) Les Grands
Courants de la Pensée Mathématique. Paris: Cahiers du Sud. (Translated into English as The
architecture of mathematics. 1950). American Mathematics Monthly, 57, 221–232.
Boutout, A. (1993). Catastrophe theory and its critics. Synthese, 96, 167–200.
Bundgaard, P. F. and Stjernfelt, F. (2010). René Thom’s semiotics and its sources. In Wildgen,
W. (Ed.) Semiosis and Catastrophes: René Thom’s Semiotic Heritage. Bern: Peter Lang,
forthcoming.

834
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Campbell, D. T. (1974). ‘Downward causation’ in hierarchically organised biologicalsystems. In
Ayala, F. J., Dobzhansky, T. (Eds.) Studies in the Philosophy of Biology. Berkeley, Los Angeles:
University of California Press, pp. 179–186.
Carney, J. (2008). Advertising and the predation loop: A biosemiotic model. Biosemiotics, 1(3),
313–328.
Edelman, G. M., Giulio, T. (2001). A Universe of Conciousness: How Matter Becomes
Imagination. NewYork: Basic Books.
Holland, J. H. (1996). Hidden Order: How Adaptation Builds Complexity. New York, NY: Basic
Books.
Gell-Mann, M. (1995). The Quark and Jaguar: Adventures in the Simple and the Complex. New
York, NY: Henry Holt and Company.
Gilbert, F. S. (1991). Epigenetic landscaping: Waddington’s use of cell fate bifurcation diagrams.
Biology and Philosophy, 6, 135–154.
Gleick, J. (1987). Chaos: The Making of a New Science. New York, NY: Viking.
Goldstein, K. (1939). The Organism. Cincinnati: American Book.
Goodwin, B. (2001). How The Leopard Changed Its Spots: The Evolution of Complexity. New
jersey: Princeton University Press.
Guckenheimer, J. (1978). The Catastrophe controversy. Mathematical Intelligencer, 1, 15–20.
Hopf, H. (1960). The work of R. Thom. Proceedings of the International Congress of
Mathematicians 1958. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge Uiniversity Press, pp. lxiii–lxiv.
Kauffman, S. (1995). At Home In The Universe: The Search for Laws of Self-Organization and
Complexity. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Lorenz, E. (1963). Deterministic nonperiodic ﬂow. Journal of Atmospheric Sciences, 20, 130–141.
O’Connor, J. J. and Robertson, E. F. (2003). René Thom. In The MacTutor History of Mathematics
Archive. University of St Andrews, Scotland. Available online at www-history.mcs.st-
and.ac.uk/history/Biographies/Thom.html
Pattee, H. (1972). Laws and constraints, symbols and languages. In Waddington, C. H. (Ed.)
Towards a Theoretical Biology 4. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, pp. 248–258.
Poston, T. and Stewart, I. (1978). Catastrophe Theory and Its Applications. London: Pitman.
Prigogine, I. and Stengers, I. (1984). Order Out of Chaos: Man’s New Dialogue With Nature.
Toronto, ON, New York, NY: Bantam Books.
Prodi, G. (1977). Le basi materiali della signijicazione. Milano: Bompiani.
Prodi, G. (1980). Material basis of signiﬁcation. Semiotica, 69, 191–241.
Prodi, G. (1988). Signs and codes in immunology. In Sercarz, E. E., Celada, F., Mitchison, N. A.
and Tada, T. (Eds.) The Semiotics of Cellular Communication in the Immune System. Berlin:
Springer, pp. 53–64.
Rosen, R. (1991). Life Itself: A Comprehensive Inquiry into the Nature, Origin, and Fabrication of
Life. New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Ruelle, D. and Floris, T. (1971). On the nature of turbulence. Communications of Mathematical
Physics, 20, 167–192.
Ruelle, David. (1981). Small random perturbations of dynamical systems and the deﬁnition of
attractors. Communications of Mathematical Physics, 82, 137–151.
Salthe, S. and Furhman, G. (2005). The cosmic bellows: The big bang and the second law. Cosmos
and History: The Journal of Natural and Social Philosophy, 1(2), 295–318.
Sebeok, T. A. (1976). Contributions to the Doctrine of Signs. Lisse: Peter de Ridder Press.
Sebeok, T. A. (1977). Ecumenicalism in semiotics. In A Perfusion of Signs (Advances in Semiotics)
Bloomington, IN, London: Indiana University Press, pp. 180–206.
Sebeok, T. A. (1979). The Sign and Its Masters. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Smale, S. (1967). Differentiable dynamical systems. Bulletin of the American Mathematical
Society, 73, 747–817.
Sperry, R. W. (1986). Discussion: macro- versus micro-determinism. Philosophy of Science, 53,
265–270.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
835
Stjernfelt, F. (2002). Recollections. In Emmeche, C., Kull, K., F. Stjernfelt. Reading Hoffmeyer,
Rethinking Biology. Tartu: Tartu University Press, pp. 57–61.
Stjernfelt, F. (2007). Diagrammatology: An Investigation on the Borderlines of Phenomenology,
Ontology, and Semiotics. Dordrecht: Springer.
Thompson, D. W. (1917). On Growth and Form. Cambridge, MA: University Press.
Waddington, C. H. (1939). An Introduction to Modern Genetics. New York, NY: Macmillan
Waddington, C. H. (1957). The Strategy of the Genes: A Discussion of Some Aspects of Theoretical
Biology. London: Allen and Unwin.
Waddington, C. H. (Ed.) (1968–1972). Towards a Theoretical Biology. Chicago, IL: Aldine.
Whitney, H. (1955). On singularities of mappings of Euclidean spaces. Annals of Mathematics, 62,
374–410.
Woodcock, A. and Davis, M. (1978). Catastrophe Theory. New York, NY: Dutton.
Zeeman, E. C. (1977). Catastrophe Theory: Selected Papers, 1972–1977. Reading, MA: Addison-
Wesley, Advanced Book Program.
Zeeman, C. (1980). Catastrophe Theory: Selected Papers, 1972–1977. Reading: Addison-Wesley.
Myrdene Anderson, John Deely and Joesph Ransdell
(Pages 12a–12z)
Primary Literature
Anderson, M. (1986). From predator to pet: Social relationships of the Saami reindeer-herding
dog. In Anderson, M. (Ed.) Human Alloanimal Social and Symbolic Relation. Special issue of
Central Issues in Anthropology 6.3, 3–11.
Anderson, M. (1990). Biology and semiotics. In Koch, W. A. (Ed.) Semiotics in the Individual
Sciences. Bochum: Universitätsverlag Dr. N. Brockmeyer, pp. 254–281.
Anderson, M. (1991). Reindeer and magic numbers: the making and maintenance of the Saami
stereotype. In Anderson, M., Larson, K. (Eds.) Self and Society, Stereotype and Ethnicity.
Special issue of Ethnos 56.3–4, 200–209. Stockholm: Ethnographic Museum of Stockholm.
Anderson, M. (1997). Body as nexus—natural, factual, artifactual, evocative. In Semiotics Around
the World: Synthesis in Diversity. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 905–908.
Anderson, M. (1998). The meaning of play as a human experience. In Fromberg, D. P., Bergen,
D. (Eds.) Play From Birth to Twelve: Contexts, Perspectives, and Meanings. New York, NY:
Garland Publishing, pp. 103–109.
Anderson, M. (1999). Ethnography as translation. Athanor 10.2, 181–187.
Anderson, M. (2001). A trickster of, by, and for our time: Y2K from conception to postmortem.
In Spinks, C. W. (Ed.) Trickster and Ambivalence: The Dance of Differentiation. Madison, WI:
Atwood Publishing, pp. 135–142.
Anderson, M. (2005). The Saami yoik: translating hum, chant, or/and song. In Gorlée, D. L. (Ed.)
Song and Signiﬁcance: Virtues and Vices of Vocal Translation. Amterdam: Editions Rodopi,
pp. 213–233.
Anderson, M. (2006). Space, time, motion, habit, and Saami reindeer ‘nomadism’. Koht ja
Paik/Place and Location; Studies in Environmental Aesthetics and Semiotics, 5, 119–129.
Anderson, M., et al. (1984). A semiotic perspective on the sciences: steps toward a new paradigm.
Semiotica, 52(1/2), 7–47.
Deely, J. (1965). Evolution: concept and content. Part I, Listening, 10, 27–50.
Deely, J. (1967). The situation of Heidegger in the tradition of Christian philosophy. The Thomist,
31, 159–244.
Deely, J. (1968). The immateriality of the intentional as such. The New Scholasticism, 42, 293–306.
Deely, J. (1969). The philosophical dimensions of the origin of species. The Thomist, 33(1),
75–149.

836
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Deely, J. (1971a). The Tradition Via Heidegger: An Essay on the Meaning of Being in the
Philosophy of Martin Heidegger. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Deely, J. (1971b). Animal intelligence and concept-formation. The Thomist, 35(1), 43–93.
Deely, J. (1975). Reference to the non-existent. The Thomist, 39(2), 254–308.
Deely, J. (1977). ‘Semiotic’ as the doctrine of signs. Ars Semiotica, 1(2), 41–68.
Deely, J. (1982). Introducing Semiotic: Its History and Doctrine. Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University Press.
Deely, J. (1986). Semiotic in the thought of Jacques Maritain. Recherche Sémiotique/Semiotic
Inquiry, 6, 1–30.
Deely, J., Williams, B. and Kruse, F. E. (Eds.) (1986). Frontiers in Semiotics. Bloomington, IN:
Indiana University Press.
Deely, J. (1986a). On the notion of phytosemiotics. In Deely, J., Williams, B., Kruse, F. (Eds.)
Frontiers in Semiotics. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, pp. 96–103.
Deely, J. (1986b). Semiotic as framework and direction. In Deely, J., Williams, B., Kruse, F. (Eds.)
Frontiers in Semiotics. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, pp. 264–271.
Deely, J. (1990). Basics of Semiotics. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Deely, J. (1994a). The Human Use of Signs, or: Elements of Anthroposemiosis. Savage, MD:
Rowman & Littleﬁeld Publishers.
Deely, J. (1994b). What happened to philosophy between Aquinas and Descartes? The Thomist,
58(4), 543–568.
Deely, J. (1995a). A prospect of postmodernity. Listening, 30(1), 7–14.
Deely, J. (1995b). The primum cognitum and our knowledge of essences. In Corrington, R. and
Deely, J. (Eds.) Semiotics 1993. New York, NY: Peter Lang, pp. 35–49.
Deely, J. and Beuchot, M. (1995). Common sources for the semiotic of Charles Peirce and John
Poinsot. Review of Metaphysics, 48, 539–566.
Deely, J. (1997). The four ages of understanding between ancient physics and postmodern semi-
otics. In Spinks, C. W. and Deely, J. (Eds.) Semiotics 1996. New York, NY: Peter Lang,
pp. 229–239.
Deely, J. (2000a). The Latin foundations for semiotic conscioussness: Augustine (ﬁfth century AD)
to Poinsot (seventeenth century). Recherche Sémiotique/Semiotic Inquiry, 20, 11–32.
Deely, J. (2000b). A new beginning for the sciences. In Perron, P., Sbrocchi, L. G., Colilli, P.,
Danesi, M. (Eds.) Semiotics as a Bridge between the Humanities and the Sciences. Ottawa,
ON: Legas, pp. 103–116.
Deely, J. (2001a). Four Ages of Understanding: The First Postmodern Survey of Philosophy from
Ancient Times to the Turn of the Twenty-First Century. Toronto: University of Toronto.
Deely, J. (2001b). Umwelt. Semiotica, 134(1–4), 125–135.
Deely, J. (2002). What Distinguishes Human Understanding? South Bend, IN: St. Augustine’s
Press.
Deely, J. (2004a). Why Semiotics? Ottawa, ON: Legas.
Deely, J. (2004b). The role of Thomas Aquinas in the development of semiotic consciousness.
Semiotica, 152(1–4), 75–139.
Deely, J. (2004c). The Thomistic import of the neo-Kantian concept of umwelt in Jakob von
Uexküll. Angelicum, 81(4), 711–732.
Deely,
J.
(2004d).
Thomas
Albert
Sebeok,
biologist
manqué.
International
Association
for
Semiotic
Studies
2004
World
Congress,
Lyon.
Available
at:
http://carbon.cudenver.edu/∼mryder/itc/sebeok.html
Deely, J. (2007a). Intentionality and Semiotics: A Story of Mutual Fecundation. Scranton:
University of Scranton Press.
Deely, J. (2007b). Augustine and Poinsot: The Protosemiotic Development. Scranton: University
of Scranton Press.
Deely, J. (2008). Descartes and Poinsot: The Crossroad of Signs and Ideas. Scranton: University
of Scranton Press.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
837
Deely, J. (2009). Peirce and Poinsot: The Action of Signs from Nature to Ethics. Scranton:
University of Scranton Press.
Deely, J., Petrilli, S. and Ponzio, A. (2005). The Semiotic Animal. Augusto Toronto: Legas.
Ransdell, J. (1976). Another interpretation of Peirce’s semiotic. Transactions of the Charles S.
Peirce Society, 12, 97–110.
Ransdell, J. (1977). Some leading ideas of Peirce’s semiotic. Semiotica, 19(3/4), 157–178.
Ransdell,
J.
(1978).
A
misunderstanding
of
Peirce’s
phenomenology.
Philosophy
and
Phenomenological Research, 38, 550–553.
Ransdell, J. (1979a). The epistemic function of iconicity in perception. Peirce Studies, 1, 51–66.
Ransdell, J. (1979b). Semiotic objectivity. Semiotica, 26, 261–288.
Ransdell, J. (1980). Semiotic and linguistics. In Rauch, I., Carr, G. F. (Eds.) The Signiﬁying
Animal: The Grammar of Language and Experience. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press, pp. 135–185.
Ransdell, J. (1981). Semiotic causation: a partial explication. In Ketner, K. L. et al. (Eds.)
Proceedings of the Charles S. Peirce Bicentennial International Congress. Lubbock: Texas
Tech University Press, pp. 201–206.
Ransdell, J. (1982). On the Paradigm of Experience Appropriate for Semiotic. In Herzfeld, M. and
Lenhart, M. (Eds.) Semiotics 1980. New York, NY: Plenum Press, pp. 427–438.
Ransdell, J. (1986a). Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914). In Sebeok, T. and Eco, U. (Eds.)
Encyclopedic Dictionary of Semiotics. The Hague: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 673–695.
Ransdell, J. (1986b). On Peirce’s Conception of the Iconic Sign. In Bouissac, P., Herzfeld, M.
and Posner, R. (Eds.) Iconicity: Essays on the Nature of Culture: A Festschrift for Thomas A.
Sebeok. Stauffenburg: Verlag.
Ransdell, J. (1989). Is Peirce a phenomenologist? Ètudes Phénoménologiques 9–10, 51–75.
Ransdell, J. (1992). Teleology and the Autonomy of the Semiosis Process. In Balat, M. (Ed.) Signs
of Humanity. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 239–258.
Ransdell, J. (2000). Peirce and the Socratic tradition in philosophy. Transactions of the Charles S.
Peirce Society, 36(3), 341–346.
Ransdell, J. (2003). The relevance of Peircean semiotic to computational intelligence augmenta-
tion. Semiosis, Evolution, Energy, and Development Journal, 3(3), 5–36.
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Augustyn, P. (2009). Uexküll, Peirce, and other afﬁnities between biosemiotics and biolinguistics.
Biosemiotics, 2(1), 1–17.
Bouissac, P. (Ed.) (1998). Encyclopedia of Semiotics. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Bouissac, P., Herzfeld, M. and Posner, R. (Eds.) (1986). Iconicity: Essays on the Nature of Culture:
Festschrift for Thomas A. Sebeok on his 65th Birthday. Tubingen: Stauffenburg Verlag.
Brier, S. (Ed.) (2003). Thomas Sebeok and the biosemiotic legacy. Special Memorial Issue of
Cybernetics and Human Knowing 10.1.
Cobley, P. (Ed.) (2006). Communication Theories. (Four Volumes). London: Routledge.
Cobley, P. (Ed.) (2009). The Routledge Companion to Semiotics. London: Routledge.
Cobley, P. (Ed.) (2010). Realism for the 21st Century: A John Deely Reader. Scranton and London:
University of Scranton Press.
Colapietro, V. (1989). Peirce’s Approach to the Self: A Semiotic Perspective on Human Subjectivity.
Albany: State University of New York Press.
Colapietro, V. (2004). Striving to speak in a human voice: A Peircean contribution to metaphysical
discourse. The Review of Metaphysics, 58(2), 367–98.
Colapietro, V. (2005). Conjectures concerning an uncertain faculty claimed for humans. Semiotica,
153(1/4), 413–30.
Colapietro, V. (2006). Toward a pragmatic conception of practical identity. Transactions of the
Charles S. Peirce Society, 42(2), 173–205.

838
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Colapietro, V. and Olshewsky, T. (Eds.) (1996). Peirce’s Doctrine of Signs: Theory, Applications,
and Connections. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Danesi, M. (1998). Sign, Thought, and Culture. Montreal: Canadian Scholars Press.
Danesi, M. (Ed.) (2001). The Invention of Global Semiotics. Ottawa, ON: Legas.
Danesi, M. (2007). The Quest for Meaning: A Guide to Semiotic Theory and Practice. Toronto:
University of Toronto Press.
Eder, J. and Rembold, H. (1992). Biosemiotics – a paradigm of biology: biological signalling on
the verge of deterministic chaos. Naturwissenschaften, 79(2), 60–67.
Fernández, E. (2008). Signs and instruments: the convergence of Aristotelian and Kantian
intuitions in biosemiotics. Biosemiotics, 1(3), 347–359.
Hope, J. and Patoine, P. (2009). A biosemiotic approach to wine-tasting: does a glass of white
wine taste like a glass of Domain Sigalas Santorini Asirtiko Athiri 2005? In Barbieri, M. (Ed.)
Biosemiotics, 2(1). Berlin: Springer, pp. 65–76.
Houser, N. (1992). The fortunes and misfortunes of the Peirce papers. In Balat, M. and Deledalle-
Rhodes, J. (Eds.), Deledalle, G. (Gen. Ed.) Signs of Humanity Vol. 3. Berlin: Mouton de
Gruyter, pp. 1259–1268.
Maran, T. (2008). Towards an integrated methodology of ecosemiotics: the concept of nature-text.
Sign Systems Studies, 35(1/2), 269–294.
Matsuno, K. (2008). Molecular semiotics toward the emergence of life. Biosemiotics, 1, 131–144.
Merrell, F. (1996). Signs Grow: Semiosis and Life Processes. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Nöth, W. (1990). Handbook of Semiotics. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Nöth, W. (1994). Origins of Semiosis: Sign Evolution in Nature and Culture. Berlin: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Nöth, W. and Ljungberg, C. (Eds.) (2003). Special Issue: The Crisis of Representation: Its Semiotic
Foundations and Manifestations. Semiotica, 143, 1–4.
Nöth, W. (2006). Semiotic Bodies, Aesthetic Embodiments, and Cyberbodies. Kassel: Kassel
University Press.
Petrilli, S. and Ponzio, A. (2001). Thomas Sebeok and the Signs of Life. Great Britain: Icon Books.
Petrilli, S. and Ponzio, A. (2005). Semiotics Unbounded: Interpretive Routes Through the Open
Network of Signs. Toronto; London: University of Toronto Press.
Poinsot, J. (1632/1985). Tractatus de Signis. Deely, J. (English Trans.) Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Posner, R., Robering, K. and Sebeok, T. A. (1997). Semiotics: A Handbook on the Sign-Theoretic
Foundations of Nature and Culture. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Powell, R. A. (1986). From semiotic of scientiﬁc mechanism to semiotic of teleology in
nature. In Deely, J., Evans, J. (Eds.) Semiotics 1986. Lanham: University Press of America,
pp. 296–305.
Santaella, L. (1991). The semiotic of John Poinsot. The Journal of Speculative Philosophy, 5(2),
151–159.
Santaella, L. (1999). Peirce and biology. Semiotica, 127(1/4), 5–21.
Santaella, L. (2002). Thomas A. Sebeok: Studies Across the Semiotic Thresholds. In Danesi, M.
(Ed.) The Invention of Global Semiotics. Ottawa, ON: Legas, pp. 97–102.
Sebeok, T. A. (2001a). Global Semiotics. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Sebeok, T. A. (2001b). Biosemiotics: its roots, proliferation, and prospects. Semiotica, 134(1), 18.
Sebeok, T. A. and Danesi, M. (2000). The Forms of Meaning: Modeling Systems Theory and
Semiotic Analysis. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Sebeok, T. A. and Danesi, M. (Eds.) (1994). Encyclopedic Dictionary of Semiotics. Berlin: Mouton.
Shintani, L. (1999). Roman Jakobson and biology: ‘A system of systems’. Semiotica, 127(1/4),
103–113.
Stjernfelt, F. (1999). Biosemiotics and formal ontology. Semiotica, 127(1/4), pp. 537–566.
Wheeler, W. (2008). Postscript on biosemiotics: Reading beyond words – and ecocriticism. In
Wheeler, W., Dunkerley, H. (Guest Eds.) New Formations 64: Special issue ‘Earthographies:
Ecocriticism and Culture’.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
839
Wheeler, W. (2009). The biosemiotic turn: abduction, or, the nature of creative reason in nature
and culture. In Goodbody, A., Rigby, K. (Eds.) Ecocritical Theory: New European Approaches.
Charlottesville: Virginia University Press.
Kalevi Kull (Pages 13a–13z)
Primary Literature
Kull, K. and Kull, O. (1989). Dinamicheskoe modelirovanie rosta derev’ev [Dynamical Modelling
of Tree Growth]. Tallinn:Valgus.
Kull, K. (1992). Evolution and semiotics. In Sebeok, T. A., Umiker-Sebeok, J. (Eds.) Biosemiotics:
Semiotic Web 1991. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 221–233.
Kull, K. (Ed.) (1992). Baer and Modern Biology. Tartu: University of Tartu Press.
Kull, K. (1998a). On semiosis, umwelt, and semiosphere. Semiotica, 120(3/4), 299–310.
Kull, K. (1998b). Organism as a self-reading text: Anticipation and semiosis. International Journal
of Computing Anticipatory Systems, 1, 93–104.
Kull, K. (1998c). Semiotic ecology: Different natures in the semiosphere. Sign Systems Studies,
26, 344–371.
Kull, K. (1999a). Biosemiotics in the twentieth century: A view from biology. Semiotica, 127(1/4),
385–414.
Kull, K. (1999b). On the history of joining bio with semio: F.S.Rothschild and the biosemiotic
rules. Sign Systems Studies, 27, 128–138.
Kull, K. (1999c). Towards biosemiotics with Yuri Lotman. Semiotica, 127(1/4), 115–131.
Kull, K. (1999d). A Teleology of the Estonian Research Tradition. Talk given for the Baltic and
Finnish Studies Association at Indiana University, November 9, 1999. Available online at:
http://www.iub.edu/∼bafsa/articles.html
Kull, K. (2000a). An introduction to phytosemiotics: semiotic botany and vegetative sign systems.
Sign Systems Studies, 28, 326–350.
Kull, K. (2000b). Organisms can be proud to have been their own designers. Cybernetics & Human
Knowing, 7(1), 45–55.
Kull, K. (2000c). Closure, information, and thermodynamics, Part IV: Active motion, commu-
nicative aggregations, and the spatial closure of umwelt. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 901, 8.
Kull, K. (2001a). Jakob von Uexküll: An introduction. Semiotica, 134(1/4), 1–59.
Kull, K. (2001b). Living forms are communicative structures, based on the organic codes.
Cybernetics and Human Knowing, 8(3), 91–94.
Kull, K. (2003). Thomas A. Sebeok and biology: Building biosemiotics. Cybernetics and Human
Knowing, 10(1), 47–60.
Kull, K. and Torop, P. (2003). Biotranslation: translation between umwelten. In Petrilli, S. (Ed.)
Translation Translation. Amsterdam: Rodopi, pp. 313–328.
Kull, K. (2003). Ladder, tree, web: The ages of biological understanding. Sign Systems Studies,
31(2), 589–603.
Kull, K. (2004). Uexküll and post-modern evolutionism. Sign Systems Studies, 32(1/2), 99–114.
Kull, K. (2005). Semiosphere and a dual ecology: Paradoxes of communication. Sign Systems
Studies 33.1, 175–189.
Kull, K. (2005). A brief history of biosemiotics. Journal of Biosemiotics, 1, 1–34.
Kull, K. (2007a). Biosemiotics and biophysics: The fundamental approaches to the study of life.
In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Introduction to Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis. Berlin:
Springer, pp. 167–177.
Kull, K. (2007b). Biosemiotic conversations: Ponzio, Bakhtin, Kanaev, Driesch, Uexküll, Lotman.
In Petrilli, S. (Ed.) Philosophy of Language as the Art of Listening: On Augusto Ponzio’s
Scientiﬁc Research. Bari: Edizioni dal Sud, pp. 79–89.

840
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Kull, K. (2009). Biosemiotics: To know what life knows. Cybernetics and Human Knowing,
16(3/4), 81–88.
Kull, K. and Tiivel, T. (Eds.) (1988). Lectures in Theoretical Biology. Tallinn: Valgus.
Kull. K., Deacon, T., Emmeche, C., Hoffmeyer, J. and Stjernfelt, F. (2009). Theses on biosemiotics:
Prolegomena to a theoretical biology. Biological Theory, 4(2), 167–173.
Kull, K., Emmeche, C. and Favareau, D. (2008). Biosemiotic questions. Biosemiotics, 1(1), 41–55.
Hoffmeyer, J. and Kull, K. (2003). Baldwin and Biosemiotics: What Intelligence is for. In Weber,
B., Depew, D. (Eds.) Evolution and Learning: The Baldwin Effect Reconsidered. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, pp. 253–272.
Oren, R., Kull, K. and Noormets, A. (2008). Olevi Kull’s lifetime contribution to ecology. Tree
Physiology, 28(4), 483–490.
Pattee, H. H. and Kull, K. (2009). A biosemiotic conversation: Between physics and semiotics.
Sign Systems Studies, 37(1/2), 311–331.
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Bundgaard, P. and Sternfelt, F. (Eds.) (2009). Kalevi Kull. In Signs and Meaning: Five Questions.
Copenhagen: Automatic Press/VIP.
Callebaut, W. (1993). Taking the Naturalistic Turn, or, How Real Philosophy of Science is Done.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Cobley, P. (2008). Specialization, semiosis, semiotics. Sign Systems Studies, 36(2), 514–519.
Cobley, P. (2009). Kalevi Kull. In Cobley, P. (Ed.) The Routledge Companion to Semiotics. London:
Taylor and Francis, p. 251.
Crowe, N. (1997). Nature and the Idea of a Man-Made World: An Investigation into the
Evolutionary Roots of Form and Order in the Built Environment. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Danesi, M. (Ed.) (2001). The Invention of Global Semiotics. Ottawa, ON: Legas.
Danesi, M. (2007). The Quest for Meaning: A Guide to Semiotic Theory and Practice. Toronto:
University of Toronto Press.
Deely, J. (2001a). Four Ages of Understanding: The First Postmodern Survey of Philosophy from
Ancient Times to the Turn of the Twenty-First Century. Toronto: University of Toronto.
Deely, J. (2001b). Umwelt. Semiotica, 134(1–4), 125–135.
Deely, J. (2002). What Distinguishes Human Understanding? South Bend, IN: St. Augustine’s
Press.
Deely, J. (2000). A new beginning for the sciences. In Perron, P., Sbrocchi, L. G., Colilli, P.,
Danesi, M. (Eds.) Semiotics as a Bridge between the Humanities and the Sciences. Ottawa,
ON: Legas, pp. 103–116.
Elsasser, W. M. (1998). Reﬂections on a Theory of Organisms. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins
University Press.
Emmeche, C. (2002). Taking the semiotic turn, or how signiﬁcant philosophy of biology should be
done. Sats, The Nordic Journal of Philosophy, 3(1), 155–162.
Emmeche, C., Kull, K. and Stjernfelt, F. (2002). Reading Hoffmeyer, Rethinking Biology. Tartu:
Tartu University Press.
Favareau, D. (2007). The Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Introduction
to Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis. Berlin: Springer, pp. 1–67.
Favareau. D. (2008a). The IASS Roundtable on Biosemiotics: A Discussion with Some Founders
of the Field (Claus Emmeche, Jesper Hoffmeyer, Kalevi Kull, Anton Markos, Frederik
Stjernfelt). The American Journal of Semiotics, 24/1, 1–21.
Favareau, D. (2008b). Joining sign science with life science. The American Journal of Semiotics,
24(1–3), iii–xv.
Hauser, S. (1996). Repräsentationen der natur und umweltmodelle. Zeitschrift für Semiotik, 18(1),
83–92.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
841
Harries-Jones, P. (2009). Honeybees, communicative order, and the collapse of ecosystems.
Biosemiotics, 2(2), 193–204.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2008a). Biosemiotics: An Examination into the Signs of Life and the Life of Signs.
Scranton: University of Scranton Press.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2008b). The semiotic niche. Journal of Mediterranean Ecology, 9, 5–30.
Hornborg, A. (1996). Ecology as semiotics: outlines of a contextualist paradigm for human ecol-
ogy. In Descola, P., G. Pálsson (Eds.) Nature and Society: Anthropological Perspectives.
London: Routledge, pp. 45–62.
Kotov, K. (2002). Semiosphere: A chemistry of being. Sign Systems Studies, 30(1), pp. 41–56.
Lotman, J. (1984 [2005]). On the Semiosphere. Clark, W. (Trans.) Sign Systems Studies, 33(1),
215–239.
Lotman, J. (1990). Universe of the Mind: A Semiotic Theory of Culture.Shukman, A. (Trans.)
London: Tauris.
Magnus, R. (2008). Biosemiotics within and without biological holism: A semio-historical
analysis. Biosemiotics, 1(3), 379–396.
Maran, T. (2007). Semiotic interpretations of biological mimicry. Semiotica, 167(1/4), 223–248.
Maran, T. (2008). Towards an integrated methodology of ecosemiotics: the concept of nature-text.
Sign Systems Studies, 35(1/2), 269–294.
Nöth, W. (1994). Origins of Semiosis: Sign Evolution in Nature and Culture. Berlin: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Nöth, W. (1998). Ecosemiotics. Sign Systems Studies, 26, 332–343.
Nöth, W. (1999). Ecosemiotics and the Semiotics of Nature. In Taborsky, E. (Ed.) Semiosis,
Evolution, Energy: Towards A Reconceptualization of the Sign. Aachen: Shaker, pp. 73–88.
Nöth, W. and Kull, K. (Eds.) (2001). Special Issue: The Semiotics of Nature. Sign Systems Studies
29.1.
Petrilli, S. and Ponzio, A. (2005). Semiotics Unbounded: Interpretive Routes Through the Open
Network of Signs. Toronto; London: University of Toronto Press.
Posner, R., Robering, K. and Sebeok, T. A. (1997). Semiotics: A Handbook on the Sign-Theoretic
Foundations of Nature and Culture. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Roepstorff, A., Bubandt, N. and Kalevi, K. (Eds.) (2003). Imagining Nature: Practices of
Cosmology and Identity. Aarhus: Aarhus University Press.
Rosen, R. (1991). Life Itself: A Comprehensive Inquiry into the Nature, Origin, and Fabrication of
Life. New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Sebeok, T. A. (1998). The Estonian connection. Sign Systems Studies, 26, 20–41.
Sebeok, T. A. (2001a). Biosemiotics: its roots, proliferation, and prospects. Semiotica, 134(1), 18.
Sebeok, T. A. (2001b). Global Semiotics. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Sebeok, T. A., Umiker-Sebeok, J. (Eds.) (1992). Biosemiotics: The Semiotic Web 1991. Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Simmons, I. G. (1993). Interpreting Nature: Cultural Constructions of the Environment. London:
Routledge.
Stjernfelt, F. (2002). Recollections. In Emmeche, C., K Kull, F Stjernfelt (Eds.) Reading Hoffmeyer,
Rethinking Biology. Tartu: Tartu University Press, pp. 57–60.
Sutrop, U. and Kull, K. (1985). Theoretical Biology in Estonia. Tallinn: Valgus.
Tønnessen, M. (2003). Umwelt ethics. Sign Systems Studies 31.1, 281–299.
Tønnessen, M. (2009). Umwelt transitions: Uexküll and environmental change. Biosemiotics, 2(1),
47–64.
Ulanowicz, R. (2008). Process Ecology: Creatura at Large in an Open Universe. In Hoffmeyer, J.
(Ed.) A Legacy for Living Systems: Gregory Bateson as a Precursor to Biosemiotics Berlin:
Springer, pp. 121–34.
Wheeler, W. (2008). Postscript on biosemiotics: Reading beyond words – and ecocriticism. In
Wheeler, W., Dunkerley, H. (Guest Eds.) New Formations 64: Special issue ‘Earthographies:
Ecocriticism and Culture’.

842
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Friedrich S. Rothschild (Pages 14a–14z)
Primary Literature
Rothschild, F. S. (1930). Über Links und Rechts. Zeitschrift für die gesamte Neurologie und
Psychiatrie, 124, 451–511.
Rothschild, F. S. (1932). Empﬁnden und Schauen als Elementarfunktionen der Sinnlichkeit. in:
Prinzhorn, H. (Ed.) Die Wissenschaft am Scheidewege von Leben und Geist. Festschrift Ludwig
Klages. Leipzig: J.A. Barth.
Rothschild, F. S. (1934). Von der Uebereinstimmung im Aufbau des Zentralnervensystems und des
Systems der Hormone. Zeitschrift für die gesamte Neurologie und Psychiatrie, 151, 54–88.
Rothschild, F. S. (1935). Symbolik des Hirnbaus: Erscheinungswissensch. Untersuchungen ueber
den Bau und die Funktionen des Zentralnervensystems der Wirbeltiere und des Menschen.
Berlin: Karger.
Rothschild, F. S. (1950). Das Ich und die Regulation des Erlebnisvorganges. Basel: S. Karger.
Rothschild, F. S., Streiﬂer, M. (1950). On eyedness in homonymous hemianopia. Journal of
Nervous Mental Disorders, 116, 59–64.
Rothschild, F. S. (1952). Das kh und die Regulationen des Erlebnisvorganges. Basel, Karger.
Rothschild, F. S. (1953). Die symbolischen Tänze der Bienen als psychologisches und neurologis-
ches Problem. Schweizer Zeitschrift für Psychologie 12.
Rothschild, F. S. (1958). Das Zentralnervensystem als Symbol des Erlebens. Bibliotheca
Psychiatrica et Neurologica 103. Basel: S. Karger.
Rothschild, F. S. (1961). Transzendentale Phaenomenologie als Semantik der Strukturen mit
psycho-physischer Funktion. Philosophic Naturalis, 6, 485–518.
Rothschild, F. S. (1962). Laws of symbolic mediation in the dynamics of self and personality.
Annals of New York Academy of Sciences, 96, 774–784.
Rothschild, F. S. (1963). Posture and psyche In Halpern, L. (Ed.) Problems of Dynamic Neurology.
New York, NY: Grune & Stratton, pp. 475–509.
Rothschild, F. S. (1968). Concepts and methods of biosemiotic. Scripta Hierosolymitana, 20,
163–94.
Rothschild, F. S. (1977). Gott und Welt in der Evolutionstheorie der Biosemiotik und des Teilhard
de Chardins. In Kollegium, E. (Ed.) Wer und Was und Wo ist Gott? Zürich: Theologischer
Verlag, pp. 387–405.
Rothschild, F. S. (1986). Die Evolution als innere Anpassung an Gott. Abhandlungen zur
Philosophie, Psychologie und Pädagogik. Bonn: Bouvier.
Rothschild, F. S. (1989). Die Biosemiotik des menschlichen Gehirns. Dynamische Psychiatrie,
22(3/4), 191–206.
Rothschild, F. S. ([1994] 2000). Creation and Evolution: A Biosemiotic Approach (Evolution as an
Inner Adaptation to God). New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Anderson, M. (2003). Rothschild’s ouroborus. Sign Systems Studies 31.1, 301–313.
Baldwin, J. M. (1895). Consciousness and evolution. Science, 2, 219–223.
Baldwin, J. M. (1902). Development and evolution. New York, NY: Macmillan.
Bateson, G. and Bateson, M. C. (1987). Angels Fear: Towards an Epistemology of the Sacred.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Bülow, G. von (1989). Symposium zu Ehren des 90. Geburtstags von Professor Dr. med. Friedrich
S. Rothschild. Dynamische Psychiatrie, 22(3/4), 279–285.
Bülow, G. von, and Schindler, I. (1993). Schöpfung durch Kommunikation: Die Biosemiotik
Friedrich S. Rothschilds. Freiburg: Herder.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
843
Cartney, J. C. (2001). The Biocentric Metaphysics of Ludwig Klages. Available online at:
http://www.revilo-oliver.com/Writers/Klages/Ludwig_Klages.html
Chardin, T. de (1959). The Phenomenon of Man. New York, NY: Harper.
Chebanov, S. V. (1994). Man as participant to natural creation: Enlogue and ideas of hermeneutics
in biology. Rivista di Biologia, 87(1), 39–55.
Changeaux, J. (1985). Neuronal Man. New York, NY: Pantheon Books.
Chomsky, N. (1975). Reﬂections on Language. New York, NY: Pantheon Books.
Cobley, P. (2007). Semioethics and anti-humanism. In Petrilli, S. (Ed.) Comunicazione,
Interpretazione, Traduzione. Mimesis.
Cobley, P. (2008). Signiﬁers and subjects. In Petrilli, S. (Ed.) Approaches to Communication:
Trends in Global Communication Studies. Madison, WI: Atwood Publishing.
Colapietro, V. (2006). Toward a pragmatic conception of practical identity. Transactions of the
Charles S. Peirce Society, 42(2), 173–205.
Colapietro, V. (2005). Conjectures concerning an uncertain faculty claimed for humans. Semiotica,
153(1/4), 413–30.
Cowley, S. (2008). Meaning in nature: Organic manufacture? Biosemiotics, 1(1), 85–98.
Damasio, A. (1999). The Feeling of What Happens: Body, Emotion and the Making of
Consciousness. Orlando: Harcourt.
Denizhan, Y. (2008). Roots of the contemporary mental model in ancient mythology. The American
Journal of Semiotics, 24(1/3), 145–158.
Dennett, D. (1995). Darwin’s Dangerous Idea. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster.
Favareau, D. (2007). The Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Introduction
to Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis. Berlin: Springer, pp. 1–67.
Freeman, W. J. (2000). Neurodynamics: An Exploration in Mesoscopic Brain Dynamics. London;
New York, NY: Springer.
Fuster, J. M. (2003). Cortex and Mind: Unifying Cognition. Oxford; New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Heidegger, M. (1962). Being and Time. London: SCM Press.
Heidegger, M. (1966). Discourse on Thinking. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Heidegger, M. (1993). Martin Heidegger: Basic Writings. In Krell, D. F. (Ed.) San Francisco, CA:
Harper.
Heidegger, M. (1993). The Question Concerning Technology. In Krell, D. F. (Ed.) Martin
Heidegger: Basic Writings. San Francisco, CA: Harper, pp. 307–341.
Heidegger, M. (1995). The Fundamental Concepts of Metaphysics. Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University Press.
Husserl, E. ([1910] 1965). Philosophy as Rigorous Science. In Q Lauer (Ed.) Phenomenology and
the Crisis of Philosophy. New York, NY: Harper.
Husserl, E. ([1913] 1982). Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological
Philosophy. Klein, T. E., Pohl, W. E. (Trans.) Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Husserl, E. ([1931] 1960). Cartesian Meditations. Cairns, D. (Trans). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Husserl, E. (1969). Universal Teleology: Essays. New York, NY: Telos Press.
Klages, L. (1921). Vom Wesen de Bewusztseins. Leipzig: J.A. Barth.
Klages, L. (1929–1932). Der Geist als Widersacher der Seele. (3 Volumes). Leipzig: J.A. Barth.
Klages, L. (1934). Vom Wesen des Rhythmus. Sudhoff’s Archiv für Geschichte der Medizin und
der Naturwissenschaften, 27(3/4), 223–228.
Klages, L. (1964). Ausdruckskunde. Gesammelte Werke, Volume VI. Bonn: Bouvier.
Kull, K. (1999a). Biosemiotics in the twentieth century: A view from biology. Semiotica, 127(1/4),
385–414.
Kull, K. (1999b). On the history of joining bio with semio: F.S. Rothschild and the biosemiotic
rules. Sign Systems Studies, 27, 128–138.
Kull, K. (2005). A brief history of biosemiotics. Journal of Biosemiotics, 1, 1–34.
Lieberman, P. (1984). The Biology and Evolution of Language. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

844
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Luria, A. R. (1980). Higher Cortical Functions in Man, 2nd ed. (English Trans.) New York, NY:
Basic Books.
Stauth, G. and Turner, B. S. (1992). Ludwig Klages and the origin of critical theory. Theory, Culture
and Society, 9(3), 45–63.
Klages, Ludwig. (1929). Biocentric Essays: On Truth and Actuality. Pryce, J. D. (Trans.) Available
online at: http://www.rosenoire.org/articles/biocentrism.php
Llinás, R. R. (2001). I of the Vortex: From Neurons to Self. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Major, J. C. (2010). Neuronal vs. relational man: Epistemological and semiotic approaches.
Biosemiotics, 3(1), forthcoming.
Polanyi, M. (1965). The structure of consciousness. Brain, Vol. 38, pp. 799–810.
Polanyi, M. (1968). Life’s irreducible structure. Science, 160, 1308–1312.
Powell, R. A. (1986). From semiotic of scientiﬁc mechanism to semiotic of teleology in nature.
In Deely, J. and Evans, J. (Eds.) Semiotics 1986. Lanham: University Press of America,
pp. 296–305.
Marcel Florkin (Pages 15a–15z)
Primary Literature
Florkin, M. (1949). Biochemical Evolution. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Florkin, M. (Ed.) (1960). Aspects of the origin of life. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Florkin, M. (1960). Unity and Diversity in Biochemistry; An Introduction to Chemical Biology.
Oxford: Pergamon.
Florkin, M. and Stotz, E. H. (Eds.) (1962–1979) Comprehensive Biochemistry, 32 Volumes.
Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Florkin, M. and Mason, H. S. (Eds.) (1960–1964). Comparative Biochemistry: A Comprehensive
Treatise. Seven volumes. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Florkin, M. (1966). A Molecular Approach to Phylogeny. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Florkin, M. (1972). A History of Biochemistry. American Elsevier.
Florkin, M. (1974). Concepts of molecular biosemiotics and molecular evolution. In Florkin, A. M.
and Stotz, E. H. (Eds.) Comprehensive Biochemistry, Volume 29. Amsterdam: Elsevier,
pp. 1–124.
Florkin, M. and Scheer, B. T. (Eds.) (1967–1979). Chemical Zoology. Seven volumes. New York,
NY: Academic Press.
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Barbieri, M. (Ed.) (2007). Is the cell a semiotic system? In Introduction to Biosemiotics: The New
Biological Synthesis. Berlin: Springer, pp. 179–208.
Brands, M., Arnellos, A., Spyrou, T. and Darzentas, J. (2007). A biosemiotic analysis of sero-
tonin’s complex functionality. In Witzany, G. (Ed.) Biosemiotics in Transdisciplinary Contexts.
Helsinki: Umweb, pp. 125–132.
Bruni, L. E. (2007). Cellular semiotics and signal transduction. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Introduction
to Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis. Berlin: Springer, pp. 365–408.
El-Hani, C. N., Arnellos, A. and Queiroz, J. (2007). Modeling a semiotic process in the
immune system: signal transduction in B-cell activation. Triple-C: The Journal of Cognition,
Communication, and Cooperation, 5(2), 24–36.
El-Hani, C. N., Queiroz, J. and Emmeche, C. (2005). Information and semiosis in living systems:
a semiotic approach. Semiosis, Energy, Evolution and Development Journal, 1, 60–90.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
845
El-Hani, C. N., Queiroz, J. and Emmeche, C. (2006). A semiotic analysis of the genetic information
system. Semiotica, 160(1/4), 1–68.
El-Hani, C. N., Queiroz, J. and Emmeche, C. (2008). A Peircean approach to ‘information’ and its
relationship with Bateson’s and Jablonka’s ideas, The American Journal of Semiotics, 24(1–3),
75–94.
El-Hani, C. N., Queiroz, J. and Emmeche, C. (2009). Genes, Information, and Semiosis. Tartu:
Tartu University Press.
Fox. S. W. (1979). Marcel Florkin. Biosystems, 11(2–3), 79.
Fruton, J. S. (1980). Marcel Florkin, 1900–1979: historian of biochemistry. Hist Philos Life Sci.
2(1), 167–71.
Gimona, M. (2006). Protein linguistics; A grammar for modular protein assembly? Nature Reviews
Molecular Cell Biology, 7, 68–73.
Gimona, M. (2008). Protein linguistics and the modular code of the cytoskeleton. In Barbieri, M.
(Ed.) The Codes of Life: The Rules of Macroevolution. Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 189–206.
Jaenicke, L. (1975). Book Review: Comprehensive Biochemistry: Vol. 29A: Molecular Evolution
Angewandte Chemie International Edition in English, 14/3, pp. 190–191.
Jaenicke, L. (1981). Book Review: Comprehensive Biochemistry: Section VI: A History of
Biochemistry Angewandte Chemie International Edition in English, 20(6/7), 615–616.
Ozansoy, M. and Denizhan, Y. (2009). The endomembrane system: A representation of the
extracellular medium? Biosemiotics, 2(3), 255–268.
Pattee, H. (1961). On the origin of macromolecular sequences. Biophysics, 1, 683–710.
Pattee, H. (1965). The recognition of hereditary order in primitive chemical systems. In Fox, S.
(Ed.) The Origins of Prebiological Systems. New York, NY: Academic Press, pp. 385–405.
Pattee, H. (1969a). How does a molecule become a message? In Lang, A. (Ed.) 28th Symposium
of the Society of Developmental Biology, Academic Press, New York, pp. 1–16.
Pattee, H. (1969b). Physical conditions for primitive functional hierarchies. In Whyte, L. L.,
Wilson, A. G. and Wilson, D. (Eds.) Hierarchical Structures. New York, NY: American
Elsevier, pp. 161–177.
Pattee, H. (1995). Evolving self-reference: Matter, symbols and semantic closure. Communication
and Cognition: Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 12(1–2), 9–27.
Powell, R. A. (1986). From semiotic of scientiﬁc mechanism to semiotic of teleology in nature.
In Deely, J. and Evans, J. (Eds.) Semiotics 1986. Lanham: University Press of America,
pp. 296–305.
Prodi, G. (1988a). Signs and codes in Immunology. In Sercarz, E. E., Celada, F., Mitchison, N.
A., Tada, T. (Eds.) The Semiotics of Cellular Communication in the Immune System. Berlin:
Springer, pp. 53–64.
Prodi, G. (1988b). Material basis of signiﬁcation. Semiotica, 69, 191–241.
Riofrio, W. (2008). Understanding the emergence of cellular organization. Biosemiotics, 1(3),
361–378.
Rocha, L. M. (2001). Evolution with material symbol systems. Biosystems, 60, 95–121.
Rosen, R. (1991). Life Itself: A Comprehensive Inquiry into the Nature, Origin, and Fabrication of
Life. New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Schoffeniels, E. (1980). Marcel Florkin: founding father of comparative biochemistry.
Comparative Biochemsirty and Physiology 67B, 353–358.
Salthe, S. (1985). Evolving Hierarchical Systems: Their Structure and Representation. New York,
NY: Columbia University Press.
Salthe, S. (1993). Development and Evolution: Complexity and Change in Biology. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Sercarz, E. E. (Ed.) (1988). The Semiotics of Cellular Communication in the Immune System.
Berlin; New York, NY: Springer.
Sharov, A. (2009). The role of utility and inference in the evolution of functional information.
Biosemiotics, 2(1), 101–116.

846
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Uexküll, T. von (1997). Biosemiose. In Posner, R., Robering, K., Sebeok, T. A. (Eds.) Semiotics:
A Handbook on the Sign-Theoretic Foundations of Nature and Culture Vol. 1. Berlin: Walter de
Gruyter, pp. 447–457.
Uexküll, T. von, Geigges, W. and Herrmann, J. M. (1993). Endosemiosis. Semiotica, 96(1/2), 5–51.
Gregory Bateson (Pages 16a–16z)
Primary Literature
Bateson, G. (1932). Social structure of the Iatmul people of the Sepik River. Oceania, 2, 401–453.
Bateson, G. (1941). Experiments in thinking about observed ethnological material. Philosophy of
Science, 8, 53–68.
Bateson, G. (1946). Physical thinking and social problems. Science, 103(2686), 717–718.
Bateson, G. (1947). Sex and culture. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 47, 647–660.
Bateson, G. (1958, 1936). Naven: A Survey of the Problems suggested by a Composite Picture of
the Culture of a New Guinea Tribe drawn from Three Points of View. Stanford University Press.
Bateson, G. (1960). Minimal requirements for a theory of schizophrenia. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 2, 477–491.
Bateson, G. (1963). The role of somatic change in evolution. Evolution, 17, 529–539.
Bateson, G. (1966). Problems in cetacean and other mammalian communication. In Norris, K. S.
(Ed.) Whales, Dolphins, and Porpoises. International Symposium on Cetacean Research.
Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, pp. 569–579.
Bateson, G. (1967). Cybernetic explanation. American Behavioral Scientist, 10, 6, 29–32.
Bateson, G. (1968). Redundancy and coding. In Sebeok, T. A. (Ed.) Animal Communication;
Techniques of Study and Results of Research. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press,
pp. 614–626.
Bateson, G. (1971a). The cybernetics of self: a theory of alcoholism. Psychiatry, 34, 1–18.
Bateson, G. (1971b). A re-examination of Bateson’s rule. Journal of Genetics, 60(3), 230–240.
Bateson, G. (1972). Steps to an Ecology of Mind: Collected Essays in Anthropology, Psychiatry,
Evolution, and Epistemology. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Bateson, G. (1978a). Theory vs. empiricism. In Berger, M. M. (Ed.) Beyond the Double Bind. New
York, NY: Brunner/Mazel, pp. 234–237.
Bateson, G. (1978b). The pattern which connects. CoEvolution Quarterly, 5–15.
Bateson, G. (1979). Mind and Nature: A Necessary Unity New York, NY: E. P. Dutton.
Bateson, G. (1981). Percival’s Narrative. Palo Alto: Stanford University Press.
Bateson, G. and Bateson, M. (1987). Angels Fear: Towards an Epistemology of the Sacred.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Bateson, G. and Bateson, W. (1926). On certain aberrations of the red-legged partridges alectoris
rufa and saxatilis. Journal of Genetics, 16, 101–123.
Bateson, G. and Donaldson, R. E. (1991). A Sacred Unity: Further Steps to an Ecology of Mind.
Harper Collins.
Bateson, G. and Jackson, D. (1964). Some varieties of pathogenic organization. In Disorders
of Communication. Research Publications (Association for Research in Nervous and Mental
Disease) 42, 270–283.
Bateson, G., Jackson, D., Haley, J. and Weakland, J. (1956). Toward a theory of schizophrenia.
Behavioral Science, 1, 251–264.
Bateson, G. and Mead, M. (1942). Balinese Character: A Photographic Analysis. New York
Academy of Sciences.
Ruesch, J. and Bateson, G. (1951). Communication: The Social Matrix of Psychiatry. New York,
NY: W.W. Norton.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
847
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Alexander, V. (2009). The poetics of purpose. Biosemiotics, 2, 77–100.
Arnellos, A., Spyrou, T. and Darzentas, J. (2007). Exploring creativity in the design process: a
systems-semiotic perspective. Cybernetics and Human Knowing, 14(1), 37–64.
Arnellos, A., Spyrou, T. and Darzentas, J. (2010). Towards the naturalization of agency based on
an interactivist account of autonomy. New Ideas in Psychology, forthcoming.
Ashby, W. R. (1956). An Introduction to Cybernetics. New York, NY: Chapman and Hall.
Bateson, M. C. (1972). Our Own Metaphor: A Personal Account of a Conference on Conscious
Purpose and Human Adaptation. New York, NY: Knopf.
Bateson, M. C. (1980). Six days of dying. CoEvolution Quarterly, Winter (28), 4–11.
Bateson, M. C. (1984). With a Daughter’s Eye: A Memoir of Margaret Mead and Gregory Bateson.
New York, NY: Morrow.
Bateson, M. C. (2008). Angels fear revisited. In Hoffmeyer, J. (Ed.) A Legacy for Living Systems:
Gregory Bateson as Precursor to Biosemiotics. Berlin: Springer, pp. 27–44.
Bateson, W. Gamete and Zygote. In William Bateson, F.R.S.: Naturalist, His Essays and Addresses
Together with a Short Account of His Life. Bateson, Caroline Beatrice. Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press, 1928.
Bertalanffy, L. von (1968). General Systems Theory. New York, NY: George Braziller.
Brockman, J. (Ed.) (1977). About Bateson: Essays on Gregory Bateson. New York, NY: E. P.
Dutton, 1977.
Brier, S. (2008). Bateson and Peirce on the Pattern that Connects and the Sacred. In Hoffmeyer, J.
(Ed.) A Legacy for Living Systems: Gregory Bateson as a Precursor to Biosemiotics Berlin:
Springer, 229–56.
Bruni, L. E. (2001). Biosemiotics and ecological monitoring. Sign System Studies, 29(1), 293–312.
Bruni, L. E. (2007). Cellular semiotics and signal transduction. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Introduction
to Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis. Berlin: Springer, pp. 365–408.
Bruni, L. E. (2008a). Gregory Bateson’s Relevance to Current Molecular Biology. In Hoffmeyer, J.
(Ed.) A Legacy for Living Systems: Gregory Bateson as a Precursor to Biosemiotics Berlin:
Springer, 93–120.
Bruni, L. E. (2008b). Semiotic freedom: emergence and teleology in biological and cognitive
interfaces. The American Journal of Semiotics, 24(1/3), 57–74.
Bruni, L. E. (2008c). Hierarchical categorical perception in sensing and cognitive processes.
Biosemiotics, 1(1), 113–130.
Campbell, D. T. (1974). Evolutionary Epistemology. In Schilpp, P. A. (Ed.) The Philosophy of Karl
R. Popper, LaSalle, IL: Open Court, pp. 412–463.
Deacon, T. and Sherman, J. (2008). The pattern which connects pleroma to creatura: The auto-
cell bridge from physics to life. In Hoffmeyer, J. (Ed.) A Legacy for Living Systems: Gregory
Bateson as a Precursor to Biosemiotics. Berlin: Springer, pp. 59–76.
Favareau, D. (2008). Collapsing the Wave Function of Meaning: The Epistemological Matrix of
Talk-in-Interaction. In Hoffmeyer, J. (Ed.) A Legacy forLiving Systems: Gregory Bateson as a
Precursor to Biosemiotics. Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 169–212.
Forsdyke, D. (2008). Treasure Your Exceptions: A Biography of William Bateson. Berlin: Springer.
Goodwin, B. (2008). Bateson: Biology with Meaning. In Hoffmeyer, J. (Ed.) A Legacy for Living
Systems: Gregory Bateson as a Precursor to Biosemiotics. Berlin: Springer, pp. 145–52.
Harries-Jones, P. (1995). A Recursive Vision: Ecological Understanding and Gregory Bateson.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Harries-Jones, P. (2005). Gregory Bateson and Ecological Aesthetics. Australian Humanities
Review, (35), June 2005.
Harries-Jones, P. (2008). Gregory Bateson’s ‘Uncovery’ of Ecological Aesthetics. In Hoffmeyer, J.
(Ed.) A Legacy for Living Systems. Gregory Bateson as Precursor to Biosemiotics, Dordrecht:
Springer, pp. 153–168.
Harries-Jones, P. (2009). Honeybees, communicative order, and the collapse of ecosystems.
Biosemiotics, 2(2), 193–204.

848
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Hoffmeyer, J. (2008). From Thing to Relation: Gregory Bateson’s Bioanthropology. In
Hoffmeyer, J. (Ed.) A Legacy for Living Systems. Gregory Bateson as Precursor to
Biosemiotics, Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 27–44.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2008). Bateson the Precursor. In Hoffmeyer, J. (Ed.) A Legacy for Living Systems.
Gregory Bateson as Precursor to to Biosemiotics, Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 1–13.
Lettvin, J. Y., McCulloch, W. S., Maturana, H. R. and Pitts, W. H. (1965). What the frog’s eye
tells the frog’s brain. Proceedings of the Institute of Radio Engineers 47 (1959). Reprinted in
McCulloch, Warren, S. (Ed.) Embodiments of Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 230–255.
Lipset, D. (1982). Gregory Bateson: The Legacy of a Scientist. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
Maran, T. (2008). Towards an integrated methodology of ecosemiotics: The concept of nature-text.
Sign Systems Studies, 35(1/2), pp. 269–294.
McCulloch, W. S. (1965). Embodiments of Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Nachmanovitch, S. (1982). Gregory Bateson: Old Men Ought to be Explorers CoEvolution
Quarterly. Available online at: http://freeplay.com/Top/index.m2.html
Nöth, W. (1998). Ecosemiotics. Sign Systems Studies, 26, 332–343.
Nöth, W. (1999). Ecosemiotics and the Semiotics of Nature. In Taborsky, E. (Ed.) Semiosis,
Evolution, Energy: Towards A Reconceptualization of the Sign. Aachen: Shaker, pp. 73–88.
Nöth, W. and Kull, K. (Eds.) (2001). Special Issue: The Semiotics of Nature. Sign Systems Studies
29.1.
Pias, C. (Ed.) (2003). Cybernetics: The Macy Conferences 1946–1953. Berlin: Diaphanes.
Salthe, S. (2004). The natural philosophy of ecology: Developmental systems ecology. Ecological
Complexity, 2, 1–19.
Salthe, S. and Furhman, G. (2005). The cosmic bellows: The big bang and the second law. Cosmos
and History: The Journal of Natural and Social Philosophy, 1(2), 295–318.
Shannon, C. and Weaver, W. (1949). The Mathematical Theory of Communication. Urbana:
University of Illinois Press.
Turchin, V. (1993). On Cybernetic Epistemology. Systems Research, 10(1), 3–28.
Turchin, V. (1993). The Cybernetic Ontology of Actions. Kybernetes, 22(2), 10–30.
Wheeler, W.(2009). Creative evolution: A theory of cultural sustainability. Communications,
Politics and Culture, 42(1).
Ulanowicz, R. (2008). Process Ecology: Creatura at Large in an Open Universe. In Hoffmeyer, J.
(Ed.) A Legacy for Living Systems: Gregory Bateson as a Precursor to Biosemiotics. Berlin:
Springer, pp. 121–34.
Wiener, N. (1948). Cybernetics: Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine. New
York, NY: John Wiley.
Wiener, N. (1948). The Human Use of Human Beings: Cybernetics and Society. Oxford: Da Capo
Press.
Howard Pattee (Page 17a–17z)
Primary Literature
Pattee, H. (1961). On the origin of macromolecular sequences. Biophysics, 1, 683–710.
Pattee, H. (1965a). Experimental Approaches to the Origin of Life Problem. In Nord, F. F. (Ed.)
Advances in Enzymology, Vol. 27. New York, NY: Wiley, pp. 381–415.
Pattee, H. (1965b). The recognition of hereditary order in primitive chemical systems. In Fox, S.
(Ed.) The Origins of Prebiological Systems. New York, NY: Academic Press, pp. 385–405.
Pattee, H. (1966). Physical theories, automata and the origin of life. In Pattee, H., Edelsack, E.,
Fein, L. and Callahan, A. (Eds.) Natural Automata and Useful Simulations. Washington:
Spartan Books, pp. 73–104.
Pattee, H. (1967). Quantum mechanics and the origin of life. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 17,
410–420.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
849
Pattee, H. (1968). Automata theories of hereditary tactic copolymerization. In Ketley, A. D. (Ed.)
The Stereochemistry of Macromolecules Vol. 3. New York, NY: Marcel Dekker, pp. 305–331.
Pattee, H. (1969a). The physical basis of coding and reliability in biological evolution. Waddington,
C. H. (Ed.) Towards a Theoretical Biology 1. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press,
pp. 67–93.
Pattee, H. (1969b). How does a molecule become a message? In Lang, A. (Ed.) 28th Symposium
of the Society of Developmental Biology, Academic Press, New York, pp. 1–16.
Pattee, H. (1969c). Physical conditions for primitive functional hierarchies. In Whyte, L. L.,
Wilson, A. G. and Wilson, D. (Eds.) Hierarchical Structures. New York, NY: American
Elsevier, pp. 161–177.
Pattee, H. (1970a). The problem of biological hierarchy. In Waddington, C. H. (Ed.) Towards a
Theoretical Biology 3. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, pp. 117–136.
Pattee, H. (1970b). Discussion in Origins of Life, New York Academy Science Symposium
proceedings. In Margulis, L. (Ed.) Origins of Life. New York, NY: Gordon and Breach.
Pattee, H. (1971a). The recognition of description and function in chemical reaction networks. In
Buvet, R. and Ponnamperuma, C. (Eds.) Chemical Evolution and the Origin of Life. New York,
NY: North Holland, pp. 42–50.
Pattee, H. (1971b). Can life explain quantum mechanics? In Bastin, T. (Ed.) Quantum Theory and
Beyond. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, pp. 307–319.
Pattee, H. (1972). Laws and constraints, symbols and languages. In Waddington, C. H. (Ed.)
Towards a Theoretical Biology 4. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, pp. 248–258.
Pattee, H. (Ed.) (1973). Hierarchy Theory: The Challenge of Complex Systems. New York, NY:
Braziller.
Pattee, H. (1977). Dynamic and linguistic modes of complex systems. International Journal for
General Systems, 3, 259–266.
Pattee, H. (1982a). The Need for Complementarity in Models of Cognitive Behavior. In Weimer,
W. and Palermo, D. (Eds.) Cognition and the Symbolic Process, Vol 2. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum,
pp. 21–34.
Pattee, H. (1982b). Cell psychology: An evolutionary approach to the symbol-matter problem.
Cognition and Brain Theory, 5(4), 325–341.
Pattee, H. (1986). Universal principles of measurement and language functions in evolving sys-
tems. In Casti, J. L. and Karlqvist, A. (Eds.) Complexity, Language, and Life. Berlin: Springer,
pp. 579–581.
Pattee, H. (1988). Simulations, realizations, and theories of life. In Langton, C. (Ed.) Artiﬁcial
Life: Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of Complexity. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley,
pp. 63–77.
Pattee, H. (1989). The measurement problem in artiﬁcial world models. BioSystems, 23, 281–290.
Pattee, H. (1990). Response to E. Dietrich’s Computationalism. Social Epistemology, 4(2),
176–181.
Pattee, H. (1991). Measurement-control heterarchical networks in living systems. International
Journal of General Systems, 18, 213–221.
Pattee, H. (1995). Evolving self-reference: Matter, symbols and semantic closure. Communication
and Cognition: Artiﬁcial Intelligence 12(1–2), 9–27.
Pattee, H (2001). The Physics of Symbols: Bridging the Epistemic Cut. BioSystems, 60, 5–21.
Pattee, H (2005). The physics and metaphysics of biosemiotics. Journal of Biosemiotics, 1,
281–301.
Patee, H. (2007). The Necessity of Biosemiotics: Matter-Symbol Complementarity. In Barbieri, M.
(Ed.) Introduction to Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis Berlin: Springer, pp. 115–32.
Pattee, H. (2008). Physical and functional conditions for symbols, codes, and languages.
Biosemiotics, 1(2), 147–168.
Pattee, H. (2009). Response by H. H. Pattee to Jon Umerez’s paper: “Where does Pattee’s “How
does a Molecule become a Message?” belong in the history of Biosemiotics?” Biosemiotics,
2(3), 291–302.

850
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Pattee, H., Kull, K. (2009). A biosemiotic conversation: Between physics and semiotics. Sign
Systems Studies, 37(1/2), 311–331.
Conrad, M. and Pattee, H. (1970). Evolution experiments with an artiﬁcial ecosystem. Journal of
Theoretical Biology, 28, 393–409.
Thiebaux, J. and Pattee, H. (1967). Statistical studies of protein sequences. Journal of Theoretical
Biology, 17, 121–135.
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Arnellos, A., Spyros, V., Spyrou, T. and Darzentas, J. (2006). The emergence of autonomous
representations in artiﬁcial agents. Journal of Computers, 1(6), 29–36.
Arnellos, A., Spyrou, T. and Darzentas, J. (2008). Emergence and downward causation in contem-
porary artiﬁcial agents: Implications for their autonomy and design guidelines. Cybernetics and
Human Knowing, 15(3/4), 15–41.
Bertalanffy, L. von. (1951). General system theory: A new approach to unity of science. Human
Biology, 23, 303–361.
Bertalanffy, L. von. (1968). Organismic Psychology and Systems Theory. Worcester: Clark
University Press.
Bickhard, M. (1999). Representation in Natural and Artiﬁcial Agents. In Taborsky, E. (Ed.)
Semiosis, Evolution, Energy: Towards a Reconceptualization of the Sign. (15–25). Aachen:
Shaker Verlag, pp. 15–25.
Bohr, N. (1933). Light and life. Nature, 131, 421 Reprinted in Bohr, N., Atomic Physics and Human
Knowledge, New York: John Wiley, p. 3.
Born, M.. (1969). Symbol and reality. In Physics in My Generation. New York: Springer,
pp. 132–146.
Bruni, L. E. (2007). Cellular semiotics and signal transduction. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Introduction
to Biosemiotics. The New Biological Synthesis. Berlin: Springer, pp. 365–408.
Bruni, L. E. (2008). Hierarchical categorical perception in sensing and cognitive processes.
Biosemiotics, 1(1), 113–130.
Campbell, D. T. (1974). Downward causation in hierarchically organised biological systems. In
Francisco Jose Ayala and Theodosius Dobzhansky (Eds.) Studies in the Philosophy of Biology:
Reduction and Related Problems. London: Macmillan, pp. 179–186.
Collier, J. (2004). Self-organization, individuation and identity. Revue Internationale de
Philosophie, 59, 151–172.
Collier, J. (2008). Information in biological systems. In Adriaans, P. and van Benthem, J. (Eds.)
Handbook of Philosophy of Science, Volume 8: Philosophy of Information. Amsterdam:
Elsevier.
Cariani, P. (2001). Symbols and dynamics in the brain. Biosystems, 60, 59–83.
Christiansen, P. V. (2000). Macro and Micro-Levels in Physics In Andersen, P. B., Emmeche, C.,
Finnemann, N. and Christiansen, P. V. (Eds.) Downward Causation: Minds, Bodies and Matter.
Århus: Aarhus University Press, pp. 51–62.
Clayton, P. (2004). Mind and Emergence: From Quantum to Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Collier, J. (2008). Information in biological systems. In Adriaans, P. and von Benthem, J. (Eds.)
Handbook of Philosophy of Science, Volume 8, Philosophy of Information. Elsevier.
Eden, R. L, 1951. The quantum mechanics of non-holonomic systems. Proc. Roy. Soc. (Lond.)
205A, 583–595.
El-Hani, C. N., Arnellos, A. and Queiroz, J. (2007). Modeling a semiotic process in the
immune system: Signal transduction in B-cell activation. Triple-C: The Journal of Cognition,
Communication, and Cooperation, 5(2), 24–36.
Elsasser, W. M. (1975). The Chief Abstraction of Biology. Amsterdam: North-Holland Press.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
851
Etxeberria, A. and Moreno, A. (2001). From complexity to simplicity: Nature and symbols.
Biosystems, 60, 149–157.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2001). Life and reference. Biosystems, 60, 123–130.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2009). Biosemiotics: An Investigation into the Signs of Life and the Life of Signs.
Favareau, D., Hoffmeyer, J. (Trans.) Scranton: Scranton University Press.
Hoffmeyer, J. and Emmeche, Claus (1991). Code-duality and the semiotics of nature. On Semiotic
Modeling, Anderson, M. and Merrell, F. (Eds.) Berlin, Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 117–166.
Joslyn, C. (2001). The semiotics of control and modeling relations in complex systems. Biosystems,
60, 131–148.
Kauffman, Stuart. (1993). Origins of Order: Self-organization and Selection in Evolution. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Kim, Jaegwon. (1992). ‘Downward Causation’ in Emergentism and Non-reductive Physicalism.
In Beckermann, A., Flohr, H. and Kim, J. (Eds.) Emergence or Reduction? Essays on the
Prospects of Nonreductive Physicalism. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Matsuno, K. (2006). Forming and maintaining a heat engine for quantum biology. Biosystems, 85,
23–29.
Matsuno, K. (2007). Who made the genetic codes, how and by what? In Fagot-Largeault, A.,
Torres, J. M., S. Rahman. (Eds.) The Inﬂuence of Genetics on Contemporary Thinking.
Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 33–50.
Matsuno, K. (2008). Molecular semiotics toward the emergence of life. Biosemiotics, 1, 131–144.
Neuman, Y., Arnellos, A. and Nave, O. (2008). Sign-mediated concept formation. American
Journal of Semiotics, 24(1–3), 107–124.
Oyama, S. (1985). The Ontogeny of Information: Developmental Systems and Evolution.
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Pearson, K. (1892 [1937]). The Grammar of Science. New York, NY: Everyman.
Polyani, M. (1968). Life’s Irreducible Structure. Science, 160, 1308–1312.
Prigogine, I. (1969), Structure, Dissipation and Life. Theoretical Physics and Biology. North-
Holland Publ. Company, Amsterdam.
Prigogine, Ilya, and Stengers, I. (1984). Order Out of Chaos: Man’s New Dialogue With Nature.
New York, NY: Bantam Books.
R ˛aczaszek-Leonardi, J. (2009). Symbols as constraints: the structuring role of dynamics and self-
organization in natural language. Pragmatics and Cognition, 17(3), 653–676.
Rocha, L. M. (2001). Evolution with material symbol systems. Biosystems, 60, 95–121.
Rosen, R. (1991). Life Itself: A Comprehensive Inquiry into the Nature, Origin, and Fabrication of
Life. New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Salthe, S. (1985). Evolving Hierarchical Systems: Their Structure and Representation. New York,
NY: Columbia University Press.
Salthe, S. (1993). Development and Evolution: Complexity and Change in Biology. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Schrödinger, E. (1944). What is Life? The Physical Aspect of the Living Cell. London, Cambridge
University Press.
Shannon, C. E. (1948). A mathematical theory of communication. Bell Syst Tech J 27(379–424),
623–656.
Shannon, C. E. and Weaver, W. (1949). The Mathematical Theory of Communication. Urbana:
University of Illinois Press.
Simon, H. A. (1973). The organization of complex systems. In Pattee, H. (Ed.) Hierarchy Theory:
The Challenge of Complex Systems. New York, NY: Braziller, pp. 3–27.
Umerez, J. (2001). Howard Pattee’s theoretical biology: A radical epistemological stance to
approach life, evolution and complexity. Biosystems, 60, 159–177.
Umerez, J. (2009). Where does Pattee’s “How does a Molecule become a Message?” belong in
the history of Biosemiotics? Biosemiotics, 2(3), 269–290.
von Neumann, J. (1955). The Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics. Princeton, NJ,
Princeton University Press.

852
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
von Neumann, J. (1966). Theory of Self-reproducing Automata. Edited and completed by A W
Burks, University of Illinois Press, Urbana and London, pp.74–87 and pp. 121–123.
Waddington, C. H. (1960). Evolutionary adaptation. In Tax, S. (Ed.) The Evolution of Life:
Evolution After Darwin, Volume 1. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press, pp. 381–402.
Waddington, C. H., (Ed.) (1968–72). Towards a Theoretical Biology, Volumes 1–4. Chicago, IL:
Aldine.
Weyl, H. (1949). Philosophy of Mathematics and Natural Science. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Wiener, N. (1961). Cybernetics or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine.
New York, NY: MIT Press, John Wiley, Sec. Ed. (org. 1948).
Wigner, E. P. (1960). The unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics in the natural sciences.
Communications in Pure and Applied Mathematics, 13, 1–14.
Wigner, E. P. (1961). On the impossibility of self-replication. In The Logic of Personal Knowledge.
Kegan Paul, London, p. 231–252.
Wigner, E. P. (1964). Events, laws, and invariance principles. Science, 145, 995–999.
Terrence W. Deacon (Pages 18a–18z)
Primary Literature
Deacon. T. (1976). Semiotics and cybernetics: The relevance of C. S. Peirce. In Sanity and
Signiﬁcation (an edited collection of student papers). System and Structure Study Group (Ed.)
Bellingham, WA: Fairhaven College Press.
Deacon, T. (1984). Connections of the inferior periarcuate area in the brain of Macaca fascicularis:
An experimental and comparative investigation of language circuitry and its evolution. Ph.D.
Thesis, Harvard University.
Deacon, T. (1985). Counter-current ﬂow of cortico-cortical information processing through the
laminar segregation of reciprocal connections. Society for Neuroscience, Abstracts, 11, 203.1.
Deacon, T. (1988). Human brain evolution: I. Evolution of language circuits. In Jerison, H. and
Jerison, I. (Eds.) Intelligence and evolutionary bidogy. Berlin: Springer, pp. 363–382.
Deacon, T. (1997). The Symbolic Species: The Co-evolution of Language and The Brain. New
York, NY: W.W. Norton.
Deacon, T. (1997). Evolution and intelligence: beyond the argument from design. In Scheibel, A.
and Schopf, W. (Eds.) The Origin and Evolution of Intelligence. New York, NY: Jones and
Bartlett Publishers, pp. 103–135.
Deacon, T. (2003). The heirarchic logic of emergence: Untangling the interdependence of evolution
and self-organization. In Weber, B. H. and Depew, D. J. (Eds.) Evolution and Learning: The
Baldwin Effect Reconsidered. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 273–308.
Deacon, T. (2003). Universal grammar and semiotic constraints. In Christiansen, M. and Kirby, S.,
(Eds.) Language Evolution. New York, NY: Oxford University Press, pp. 111–139.
Deacon, T. [2003]. Multilevel selection in a complex adaptive system: the problem of language
origins. In Weber, B. and Depew, D. (Eds.) Evolution and Learning: The Baldwin Effect
Reconsidered. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Deacon, T. (2006). Reciprocal linkage between self-organizing processes is sufﬁcient for self-
reproduction and evolvability. Biological Theory, 1(2) 2006, 136–149.
Deacon, T. (2006). Emergence: The Hole at the Wheel’s Hub. In Clayton, P. and Davies, P. (Eds.)
The Re-emergence of Emergence. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 111–150.
Deacon, T. (2007a). Shannon-Boltzmann-Darwin: Redeﬁning information. Cognitive Semiotics, 1,
123–148.
Deacon. T. (2007b). Towards a semiotic cognitive science: why neither the phenomenological
nor computational approaches are adequate. Conference presentation given at The Symbolics
Species Conference 2, University of Copenhagen, Nov. 22–23, 2007. Available online at
http//:symbolicspecies.com

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
853
Deacon. T. (2008). A collection of published and unpublished papers. Available online at:
www.teleodynamics.com
Deacon, T. (2010). Homunculus: Evolution, Information, and the Emergence of Consciousness
New York, NY: W.W. Norton.
Deacon, T., Pakzaban, P., Bums, L., Dinsmore, J., Isacson, O. (1994). Cytoarchitectonic develop-
ment, axon-glia relationships and long distance axon growth of porcine striatal xenografts in
rats. Experimental Neurology, 130, 151–167.
Deacon, T. and Sherman, J. (2008). The pattern which connects pleroma to creatura: The auto-
cell bridge from physics to life. In Hoffmeyer, J. (Ed.) A Legacy for Living Systems: Gregory
Bateson as a Precursor to Biosemiotics. Berlin: Springer, pp. 59–76.
Sherman, J. and Deacon, T. (2007). Teleology for the perplexed: How matter began to matter.
Zygon, 42(4), 873–901.
Weber, B. and Deacon, T. (2000). Thermodynamic cycles, developmental systems, and emergence.
Cybernetics & Human Knowing, 7(1), 21–43.
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Armstrong, E., Falk, D., (Eds.) (1982). Primate Brain Evolution: Methods and Concepts. New
York, NY: Plenum Press.
Baldwin, J. M. (1895). Consciousness and evolution. Science, 2, 219–223.
Baldwin, J. M. (1902). Development and evolution. New York, NY: Macmillan.
Bates, E., Thal, D. and Marchman, V. (1991). Symbols and syntax: A Darwinian approach to
language development. In Krasnegor, N., Rumbaugh, D. (Eds.) Biological and Behavioral
Determinants of Language Development. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Bateson, G. (1972). Steps to an Ecology of Mind. New York, NY: Ballantine.
Bellugi, U. and Klima, E. S. (1982). From gesture to sign: Deixis in a visual gestural language. In
Jarvella, R. J. and W Klein, (Eds.) Speech, Place and Action: Studies of Language in Context.
New York, NY: John Wiley, 297–313.
Bickerton, D. (1981). The Roots of Language. Ann Arbor, MI: Karoma.
Bickerton, D. (1990). Language and Species. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Calvin, W. H. (1996). The Cerebral Code. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chalmers, D. (1995). Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness Journal of Consciousness
Studies, 2(3), 200–19.
Chalmers, D. (1996). The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Changeaux, J. (1985). Neuronal Man. New York, NY: Pantheon Books.
Chomsky, N. (1972). Language and Mind. New York, NY: Harcourt Brace Jovanovitch.
Chomsky, N. (1980). Rules and Representations. New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Clark, A. (1997). Being There: Putting Brain, Body, and World Together Again. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Cowley, S. J. (2006). Language and biosemiosis: Toward unity? Semiotica, 162(1/4), 417–443.
Cowley, S. J. (2007). How human infants deal with symbol grounding. Interaction Studies, 8/1,
81–104.
Cowley, S. J. (2008). The Codes of Language: Turtles all the way up? In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) The
Codes of Life. Berlin: Springer, pp. 319–345.
Cowley, S. J. (2009). Language ﬂow: Opening the subject. Cognitive Semiotics, 4, 64–92.
Damasio, A. (1994). Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason, and The Human Brain. New York, NY:
Putnam.
Dennett, D (1991). Consciousness Explained. Boston, MA: Little, Brown.
Dennett, D. (1995). Darwin’s Dangerous Idea. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster.
Depew, D. (1996). Darwinism Evolving: Systems Dynamics and the Genealogy of Natural
Selection. Boston, MA: MIT Press.

854
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Donald, M. (1991). Origin of the Modern Mind: Three Stages in the Evolution of Culture and
Cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Edelman, G. (1987). Neural Darwinism: The Theory of Neuronal Group Selection. New York, NY:
Basic Books.
Edelman, G. and Tononi, G. (2000). A Universe of Consciousness: How Matter Becomes
Imagination. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Favareau, D. (1998). Review of The Symbolic Species: The Co-evolution of Language and the
Brain by Terrence W. Deacon. Issues in Applied Linguistics, 9(2), pp. 179–182.
Favareau, D. (2002). Constructing representema: on the neurosemiotics of self and vision.
Semiotics, Evolution, Energy and Development Journal, 2(4), 3–24.
Favareau, D. (2008). Understanding natural constructivism. Semiotica, 172(1/4), 489–528.
Favareau, D. (2009). Terrence Deacon. In Cobley, P. (Ed.) The Routledge Companion to Semiotics.
London: Taylor & Francis, pp. 201–2.
Freadman, A. (2004). The Machinery of Talk: Charles Peirce and the Sign Hypothesis. Stanford:
Stanford University Press.
Freeman, W. (2000). Neurodynamics: An Exploration in Mesoscopic Brain Dynamics. London,
New York, NY: Springer.
Gould, J. L. and Gould, C. G. (1994). The Animal Mind. New York, NY: Scientiﬁc American
Library.
Gould, S. J. (1981). The Mismeasure of Man. New York, NY: W.W. Norton.
Gould, S. J. and Vrba, E. (1982). Exaptation: A missing term in evolutionary theory. Paleobiology,
8, 4–15.
Goodwin, C. (2003). Conversational Frameworks for the Accomplishment of Meaning in Aphasia.
In Goodwin, C. (Ed.) Conversation and Brain Damage. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
pp. 90–116.
Goodwin, C. (2006). Human Sociality as Mutual Orientation in a Rich Interactive Environment.
In Enﬁeld, N. and Levinson, S. C. (Eds.) Roots of Human Sociality. London: Berg Press,
pp. 96–125.
Goodwin, C. (2007). Environmentally Coupled Gestures: Multimodal Utterances and Pointing in
Aphasia. In Duncan, S., Cassell, J. and Levy, E. (Eds.) Gesture and the Dynamic Dimensions
of Language. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, pp. 195–212.
Hauser, M. (1996). The Evolution of Communication. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2009). Biosemiotics: An Investigation into the Signs of Life and the Life of Signs.
Favareau, D., Hoffmeyer, J. (Trans.) Scranton: Scranton University Press.
Isacson, O. and Deacon, T. (1997). Neural transplantation studies reveal the brain’s capacity for
continuous reconstruction. Trends in Neuroscience, 20, 477–482.
Jackendoff, R. (1992). Languages of the Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jackendoff, R. (1994). Patterns in the Mind: Language and Human Nature. New York, NY: Basic
Books.
Kull. K., Deacon, T., Emmeche, C., Hoffmeyer, J. and Stjernfelt, F. (2009). Theses on biosemiotics:
Prolegomena to a theoretical biology. Biological Theory, 4(2), 167–173.
Lieberman, P. (1984). The Biology and Evolution of Language. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Llinás, R. R. (2001). I of the Vortex: From Neurons to Self. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Luria, A. R. (1980). Higher Cortical Functions in Man, 2nd ed. English translation. New York,
NY: Basic Books (original Russian text published by Moscow University Press, 1962).
Passingham, R. E. (1982). The Human Primate. San Francisco, CA: W. H. Freeman.
Pattee, H. (2007). The Necessity of Biosemiotics: Matter-Symbol Complementarity. In
Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Introduction to Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis. Berlin:
Springer, 115–32.
Peirce. C. S. (1955). Logic as semiotic: The theory of signs. In Buchler, J. (Ed.) The Philosophical
writings of Peirce (New York, NY: Dover Books, pp. 98–119.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
855
Penﬁeld, W. and Roberts, L. (1959). Speech and Brain Mechanisms. London: Oxford University
Press.
Penrose, R. (1989). The Emperor’s New Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pepperberg, I. (1987). Acquisition of the same/different concept by an African grey parrot Psittacus
erithacus. Animal Learning and Behavior, 15, 423–432.
Piaget, J. (1952). The Origins of Intelligence in Children. New York, NY: International Universities
Press.
Premack, D. and Premack, A. (1983). The Mind of an Ape. New York, NY: W.W. Norton.
Quine, W. V. O. (1960). Word and Object. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
R ˛aczaszek-Leonardi, J. (2009). Symbols as constraints: the structuring role of dynamics and self-
organization in natural language. Pragmatics and Cognition, 17(3), 653–676.
R ˛aczaszek-Leonardi, J., Scott-Kelso, J. A. (2008). Reconciling symbolic and dynamic aspects of
language: Toward a dynamic psycholinguistics. New Ideas in Psychology, 26(2), 193–207.
Queiroz, J. and Ribeiro, S. (2002). The biological substrate of icons, indexes and symbols in animal
communication: A neurosemiotic analysis of Vervet monkey alarm calls. In Shapiro, M. (Ed.)
The Peirce Seminar Papers 5. New York, NY: Berghahn Books, pp. 69–78.
Rumbaugh, D. (Ed.) (1977). Language Learning by a Chimpanzee: The Lana Project. New York,
NY: Academic Press.
Savage-Rumbaugh, S. (1986). Ape Language: From Conditioned Response to Symbol. New York,
NY: Columbia University Press.
Savage-Rumbaugh, S, and Lewin, R. (1994). Kanzi: The Ape at the Brink of the Human Mind. New
York, NY: John Wiley.
Schumann, J., Favareau, D., Goodwin, C., Lee, N., Mikesell, L., Tao., L. H., Veronique, D. and
Wray, A. (2006). Language evolution: What evolved? Marges Linguistique, 11, 167–199.
Schumann, J., Lee, N., Mikesell, L., Joaquin, A. D. and Mates, A. (2009). The Interactional
Instinct: The Evolution and Acquisition of Language. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Seyfarth, R., Cheney, D. and Marler, P. (1980). Monkey responses to three different alarm calls:
Evidence of predator classiﬁcation and semantic communication. Science, 210, 801–803.
Stjernfelt, F. (2000). The idea that changed the world. Cybernetics and Human Knowing, 7(1),
77–82.
Stjernfelt, F. and Schilhab, T. (Eds.) (2007). Papers from The Symbolic Species Conferences 2006
and 2007. Available online at: http://symbolicspecies.com
Tomasello, M. (1999). The cultural origins of human cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in Society. Luria, A. R. (Trans.) Cole, M., John-Steiner, V., Scribner,
S. and Souberman, E. (Eds.) Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Waddington, C. H. (1957). The Strategy of the Genes. London: Allen & Unwin.
Walker, A. (1996). The Wisdom of Bones: In Search of Human Origins. New York, NY: Alfred
Knopf.
Wilden, A. (1972). System and Structure: Essays in communication and exchange. London:
Tavistock Publications.
Jesper Hoffmeyer (Pages 19a–19z)
Primary Literature
Hoffmeyer, J. (1984). Naturen I Hovedet. Om Biologisk Videnskab. København: Rosinante.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1988). Bioinformation techniques and the view of nature. In Thill, G., Kemp, P.
(Eds.) The Triumph of Biotechnologies: The Domestication of the Human Animal. Namur:
Presse Universitaires de Namur, pp. 107–115.
Hoffmeyer, J. and Emmeche, C. (1991). Code-duality and the semiotics of nature. In Anderson, M.
and Merrell, F. (Eds.) On Semiotic Modeling, BerlinL Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 117–166.

856
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Hoffmeyer, J. (1992). Some semiotic aspects of the psycho-physical relation: The endo-
exosemiotic boundary. In Sebeok, T. A. (Ed.) Biosemiotics: The Semiotic Web. Berlin: Mouton
de Gruyter, pp. 101–124.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1996). Signs of Meaning in the Universe. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1998). Semiosis and Biohistory: A Reply. In Semiotics in the Biosphere: Reviews
and Rejoinder (Special Issue on Signs of Meaning in the Universe). Semiotica 120. (3/4),
455–482.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2000a). The Biology of Signiﬁcation. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, 43(2),
252–268.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2000b). Life and reference. Bio systems, 60(1), 8.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2001). Seeing virtuality in nature. Semiotica, 134(1–4), 18.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2002). Code Duality revisted. Semiotics, Evolution, Energy and Devlopment
Journal, 2(1), 98–117.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2002). The Central Dogma: A Joke that became real. Semiotica, 138(1/4), 1–13.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2002). Obituary: Thomas A. Sebeok. Sign Systems Studies, 30(1), 383–385.
Hoffmeyer, J. and Kull, K. (2003). Baldwin and Biosemiotics: What Intelligence is for. In Weber,
B., Depew, D. (Eds.) Evolution and Learning: The Baldwin Effect Reconsidered. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, pp. 253–272.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2005). Origin of species by natural translation. Yap, G. H. (Trans.), Chang, H. L.
(Ed.) Biosemiotics: Nature in Culture or Culture in Nature? Chung Wai Literary Monthly, 34(7),
27–44.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2006). Uexküllian Planmässigkeit, Sign Systems Studies, 32, 73–97.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2006). Genes, Development and Semiosis. In Neumann-Held, E. and Rehmann-
Sutter, C. (Eds.) Genes in Development: Re-reading the Molecular Paradigm, Durham and
London: Duke University Press, pp. 152–174.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2006). Thure von Uexküll 1908–2004, Sign Systems Studies, 33.2, 487–494.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2007). Semiogenic scaffolding in nature. International Journal of Applied
Semiotics, 5, 81–94.
Hoffmeyer, J, (Ed.) (2008). A Legacy for Living Systems: Gregory Bateson as a Precursor to
Biosemiotics. Berlin: Springer.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2008). The semiotic body. Biosemiotics, 1(2), 169–190.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2009). Biosemiotics: An Investigation into the Signs of Life and the Life of Signs.
Scranton: Scranton University Press.
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Cobley, P. (Ed.) (2006). Communication Theories. (Four Volumes). London: Routledge.
Cobley, P. (Ed.) (2008). Signiﬁers and subjects. In Petrilli, S. (Ed.) Approaches to Communication:
Trends in Global Communication Studies. Madison, WI: Atwood Publishing.
Cobley, P. (2009). Jesper Hoffmeyer. Cobley, P. (Ed.) The Routledge Companion to Semiotics.
London: Taylor & Francis, pp. 239–40.
Danesi, M. (Ed.) (2001). The Invention of Global Semiotics. Ottawa, ON: Legas.
Danesi, M. (2007). The Quest for Meaning: A Guide to Semiotic Theory and Practice. Toronto:
University of Toronto Press.
Deely, J. (1990). Basics of Semiotics. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Deely, J. (2000). A new beginning for the sciences. In Perron, P., Sbrocchi, L. G., Colilli, P.,
Danesi, M. (Eds.) Semiotics as a Bridge between the Humanities and the Sciences. Ottawa,
ON: Legas, pp. 103–116.
Deely, J. (2001). Four Ages of Understanding: The First Postmodern Survey of Philosophy from
Ancient Times to the Turn of the Twenty-First Century. Toronto: University of Toronto.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
857
Deely, J. (2002). What Distinguishes Human Understanding? South Bend, IN: St. Augustine’s
Press.
Deely, J., Petrilli, S. and Ponzio, A. (2005). The Semiotic Animal. Augusto Toronto: Legas.
Depew, D. (1996). Darwinism Evolving: Systems Dynamics and the Genealogy of Natural
Selection. Boston, MA: MIT Press.
Emmeche, C. (2002). Taking the semiotic turn, or how signiﬁcant philosophy of biology should be
done. Sats, The Nordic Journal of Philosophy, 3(1), 155–162.
Emmeche, C. (2003). Biosemiotics. In von Huyssteen, J., Vrede, W. (Eds.) Encyclopedia of Science
and Religion. New York, NY: Macmillan Reference, pp. 63–64.
Emmeche, Claus; Kull, Kalevi and Stjernfelt, Frederik (2002). Reading Hoffmeyer, Rethinking
Biology. Tartu: Tartu University Press.
Favareau, D. (2001). Beyond self and other: the neurosemiotic emergence of intersubjectivity. Sign
Systems Studies, 30(1), 57–101.
Favareau, D. (2002). Constructing representema: on the neurosemiotics of self and vision.
Semiotics, Evolution, Energy and Development Journal, 2(4), 3–24.
Favareau. D. (2008a). The IASS roundtable on biosemiotics: a discussion with some founders of
the ﬁeld (Claus Emmeche, Jesper Hoffmeyer, Kalevi Kull, Anton Markos, Frederik Stjernfelt).
The American Journal of Semiotics 24/1, 1–21.
Favareau, D. (2008b). Joining sign science with life science. The American Journal of Semiotics,
24(1–3), iii–xv.
Fernández, E. (2008). Signs and instruments: the convergence of Aristotelian and Kantian
intuitions in biosemiotics. Biosemiotics, 1(3), 347–359.
Kull, K. (1999). Biosemiotics in the twentieth century: A view from biology. Semiotica, 127(1/4),
385–414.
Kull, K., Emmeche, C. and Favareau, D. (2008). Biosemiotic questions. Biosemiotics, 1(1), 41–55.
Kull. K., Deacon, T., Emmeche, C., Hoffmeyer, J. and Stjernfelt, F. (2009). Theses on biosemiotics:
Prolegomena to a theoretical biology. Biological Theory, 4(2), 167–173.
Nöth, W. (1994). Origins of Semiosis: Sign Evolution in Nature and Culture. Berlin: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Petrilli, S. and Ponzio, A. (2005). Semiotics Unbounded: Interpretive Routes Through the Open
Network of Signs. Toronto; London: University of Toronto Press.
Posner, R., Robering, K. and Sebeok, T. A. (1997). Semiotics: A Handbook on the Sign-Theoretic
Foundations of Nature and Culture. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Stjernfelt, F. (1999). Biosemiotics and formal ontology. Semiotica, 127(1/4), pp. 537–566.
Stjernfelt, F. (2002a). Tractatus Hoffmeyerensis: Biosemiotics as expressed in 22 basic hypotheses.
Sign Systems Studies, 30(1), 337–345.
Stjernfelt, F. (2002b). Recollections. In Emmeche, C., Kull, K. and Stjernfelt, F. (Eds.) Reading
Hoffmeyer, Rethinking Biology. Tartu: Tartu University Press, pp. 57–60.
Sebeok, T. A. (2001a). Biosemiotics: its roots, proliferation, and prospects. Semiotica, 134(1), 18.
Sebeok, T. A. (2001b). Global Semiotics. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Sebeok, T. A. and Danesi, M. (2000). The Forms of Meaning: Modeling Systems Theory and
Semiotic Analysis. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Sebeok, T. A., Umiker-Sebeok, J. (Eds.) (1992). Biosemiotics: The Semiotic Web 1991. Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Schumann, J., Favareau, D., Goodwin, C., Lee, N., Mikesell, L., Tao., L. H., Veronique, D., Wray,
A.(2006). Language evolution: what evolved? Marges Linguistique, 11, 167–199.
Stjernfelt, F. (2002). Tractatus Hoffmeyerensis: Biosemiotics as expressed in 22 basic hypotheses.
Sign Systems Studies, 30(1), 337–345.
Stjernfelt, F. (2007). Diagrammatology: An Investigation on the Borderlines of Phenomenology,
Ontology, and Semiotics. Dordrecht: Springer.
Ulanowicz, R. (2008). Process Ecology: Creatura at Large in an Open Universe. In Hoffmeyer, J.
(Ed.) A Legacy for Living Systems: Gregory Bateson as a Precursor to Biosemiotics. Berlin:
Springer, pp. 121–34.

858
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Weber, B. (2009).Embracing the biosemiotic perspective. Biosemiotics, 2(3), 367–375.
Wheeler, W. (2006). The Whole Creature: Complexity, Biosemiotics and the Evolution of Culture.
London: Lawrence & Wishart.
Wheeler, W. (2009). The biosemiotic turn: Abduction, or, the nature of creative reason in nature
and culture. In Goodbody, A., Rigby, K. (Eds.) Ecocritical Theory: New European Approaches.
Charlottesville: Virginia University Press.
Vehkavaara, T. (2007). From the logic of science to the logic of the living. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.)
Introduction to Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis. Berlin: Springer, pp. 257–282.
Claus Emmeche (Pages 20a–20z)
Primary Literature
Emmeche, C. (1991). A semiotical reﬂection on biology, living signs and artiﬁcial Life. Biology
and Philosophy, 6(3), 325–340.
Emmeche, C. (1992a). Life as an abstract phenomenon: Is Artiﬁcial Life possible? In Varela, F. J.
and Bourgine, P. (Eds.) Toward a Practice of Autonomous Systems. Proceedings of the First
European Conference on Artiﬁcial Life. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 466–474.
Emmeche, C. (1992b). Modeling Life: A note on the semiotics of emergence and computation in
artiﬁcial and natural systems, in:Biosemiotics. In Sebeok, T. A. and Umiker-Sebeok, J. (Eds.)
The Semiotic Web: 1991. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 77–99.
Emmeche, C. (1994a). The Garden In The Machine: The Emerging Science of Artiﬁcial Life.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Emmeche, C. (1994b). The computational notion of life. Theoria: Segunda Epoca, 9(21), 1–30.
Emmeche, C. (1997). Aspects of complexity in life and science. Philosophica, 59, 41–68
Emmeche, C. (1998). Deﬁning life as a semiotic phenomenon. Cybernetics & Human Knowing,
5(1), 3–17.
Emmeche, C. (1999a). The Sarkar challenge to biosemiotics: Is there any information in a cell?,
Semiotica, 127(1/4), 273–293.
Emmeche, C. (1999b). The biosemiotics of emergent properties in a pluralist ontology. In Taborsky,
E. (Ed.) Semiosis, Evolution, Energy: Towards a Reconceptualization of the Sign. Aachen:
Shaker Verlag, pp. 89–108.
Emmeche, C. (2000a). Closure, Function, Emergence, Semiosis and Life: The Same Idea?
Reﬂections on the Concrete and the Abstract in Theoretical Biology. In Chandler, J. L. R. and
Van de Vijver, G. (Eds.) Closure: Emergent Organizations and Their Dynamics. New York,
NY: The New York Academy of Sciences, pp. 187–197.
Emmeche, C. (2000b). Transdisciplinarity, theory-zapping and the growth of knowledge.
Semiotica, 131(3/4), 217–228.
Emmeche, C. (2000). Downward Causation: Minds, Bodies and Matter. Århus: Aarhus University
Press, pp. 51–62.
Emmeche, C. (2001). Does a robot have an umwelt? Reﬂections on the qualitative biosemiotics of
Jakob von Uexküll. Semiotica, 134(1/4), 653–693.
Emmeche, C., Kull, K. and Stjernfelt, F. (2002). Reading Hoffmeyer, Rethinking Biology. Tartu:
Tartu University Press.
Emmeche, C. (2002). Taking the semiotic turn, or how signiﬁcant philosophy of biology should be
done. Sats, The Nordic Journal of Philosophy, 3(1), 155–162.
Emmeche, C. (2003). Biosemiotics. In von Huyssteen, J., Vrede, W. (Eds.) Encyclopedia of Science
and Religion. New York, NY: Macmillan Reference, pp. 63–64.
Emmeche, C. (2004a). Causal processes, semiosis, and consciousness. In Seibt, J. (Ed.) Process
Theories: Crossdisciplinary Studies in Dynamic Categories. Dordrecht: Kluwer, pp. 313–336.
Emmeche, C. (2004b). Constructing and explaining emergence in artiﬁcial life. In Wise, M. N.
(Ed.) Growing Explanations: Historical Perspectives on Recent Science. Durham: Duke
University Press, pp. 301–326.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
859
Emmeche, C. (2007). On the biosemiotics of embodiment and our human cyborg nature. In
Ziemke, T., Zlatev, J. and Frank, R. M. (Eds.) Body, Language and Mind. Volume 1:
Embodiment. New York, NY: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 379–410.
Emmeche, C. and Hoffmeyer, J. (1991). From language to nature: the semiotic metaphor in biology.
Semiotica, 84(1/2), 1–42.
Emmeche, C, Køppe, S. and Stjernfelt, S. (1997). Explaining emergence: Towards an ontology of
levels. Journal for General Philosophy of Science, 28, 83–119.
Emmeche, C., Kull, K, and Favareau, D. (2008). Biosemiotic questions. Biosemiotics, 1(1), 41–55.
Emmeche, C., Kull, K. and Stjernfelt, F. (2002). Reading Hoffmeyer, Rethinking Biology. Tartu:
Tartu University Press.
Andersen, P. B., Emmeche, C., Finnemann, N., Christiansen. P. V. (Eds.) (2000). Downward
Causation: Minds, Bodies and Matter. Århus: Aarhus University Press, pp. 51–62.
El-Hani, C. N. and Emmeche, C. (2000). On some theoretical grounds for an organism-centered
biology. Theory in Biosciences, 119(3/4), 234–275.
El-Hani, C. N., Queiroz, J. and Emmeche, C. (2006). A semiotic analysis of the genetic information
system. Semiotica, 160(1/4), 1–68.
El-Hani, C. N., Queiroz, J. and Emmeche, C. (2008). A Peircean approach to ‘information’ and its
relationship with Bateson’s and Jablonka’s ideas, The American Journal of Semiotics, 24(1–3),
75–94.
El-Hani, C. N., Queiroz, J. and Emmeche, C. (2009). Genes, Information, and Semiosis. Tartu:
Tartu University Press.
Kull. K., Deacon, T., Emmeche, C., Hoffmeyer, J. and Stjernfelt, F. (2009). Theses on biosemiotics:
Prolegomena to a theoretical biology. Biological Theory, 4(2), 167–173.
Queiroz, J., Emmeche, C., El-Hani, C. N. (2005). Information and semiosis in living systems: a
semiotic approach. Semiotics, Evolution, Energy, and Development, 5, 60–90.
Queiroz, J., Emmeche, C., Kull, K., El-Hani, C. N. (2009). The biosemiotic approach in biology:
Theoretical bases and applied models. In Terzis, G. and Arp, R. (Eds.) MIT Companion to
Information and the Biological Sciences. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Arnellos, A., Spyros, V., Spyrou, T., Darzentas, J. (2006). The emergence of autonomous
representations in artiﬁcial agents. Journal of Computers, 1(6), 29–36.
Arnellos, A., Spyrou, T. and Darzentas, J. (2008). Emergence and downward causation in contem-
porary artiﬁcial agents: Implications for their autonomy and design guidelines. Cybernetics and
Human Knowing, 15(3/4), 15–41.
Arnellos, A., Spyrou, T. and Darzentas, J. (2010). Towards the naturalization of agency based on
an interactivist account of autonomy. New Ideas in Psychology, forthcoming.
Brands, M., Arnellos, A., Spyrou, T. and Darzentas, J. (2007). A biosemiotic analysis of sero-
tonin’s complex functionality. In Witzany, G. (Ed.) Biosemiotics in Transdisciplinary Contexts.
Helsinki: Umweb, pp. 125–132.
Bruni, L. E. (2007). Cellular semiotics and signal transduction. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Introduction
to Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis. Berlin: Springer, pp. 365–408.
Bruni, L. E. (2008a). Semiotic freedom: emergence and teleology in biological and cognitive
interfaces. The American Journal of Semiotics, 24(1/3), 57–74.
Bruni, L. E. (2008b). Hierarchical categorical perception in sensing and cognitive processes.
Biosemiotics, 1(1), 113–130.
Callebaut, W. (1993). Taking the Naturalistic Turn, or, How Real Philosophy of Science is Done.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Cobley, P. (2009). Claus Emmeche. In Cobley, P. (Ed.) The Routledge Companion to Semiotics.
London: Taylor & Francis, p. 213.
Depew, D. (1996). Darwinism Evolving: Systems Dynamics and the Genealogy of Natural
Selection. Boston, MA: MIT Press.

860
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Deely, J. (2000). A new beginning for the sciences. In Perron, P., Sbrocchi, L. G., Colilli, P.,
Danesi, M. (Eds.) Semiotics as a Bridge between the Humanities and the Sciences. Ottawa,
ON: Legas, pp. 103–116.
Deely, J. (2001). Four Ages of Understanding: The First Postmodern Survey of Philosophy from
Ancient Times to the Turn of the Twenty-First Century. Toronto: University of Toronto.
El-Hani, C. N. (2002). On the reality of emergents. Principa, 6(1), 51–87.
El-Hani, C. N. and Pereira, A. M. (1999). In Hardcastle, V. G. (Ed.) Where Biology Meets
Psychology: Philosophical Essays. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 333–356.
El-Hani, C. N., Pihlström, S. (2002). A pragmatist realist view of emergence. Maunuscrito, 25,
105–154.
Favareau, D. (2007). How to Make Peirce’s Ideas Clear. In Witzany, G. (Ed.) Biosemiotics in
Transdisciplinary Contexts. Helsinki: Umweb, pp. 163–173.
Favareau, D. (2008). Iconic, indexical and symbolic understanding. Journal of the American
Psychoanalytic Association, 56(3), 789–801.
Favareau. D. (2008). The IASS roundtable on biosemiotics: a discussion with some founders of
the ﬁeld (Claus Emmeche, Jesper Hoffmeyer, Kalevi Kull, Anton Markos, Frederik Stjernfelt).
The American Journal of Semiotics 24/1, 1–21.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2006). Genes, Development and Semiosis. In Neumann-Held, E. and Rehmann-
Sutter, C. (Eds.) Genes in Development: Re-reading the Molecular Paradigm, Durham and
London: Duke University Press, pp. 152–174.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2007). Semiogenic scaffolding in nature. International Journal of Applied
Semiotics, 5, 81–94.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2008). The semiotic body. Biosemiotics, 1(2), 169–190.
Nöth, W. (1994). Origins of Semiosis: Sign Evolution in Nature and Culture. Berlin: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Ozansoy, M. and Denizhan, Y. (2009). The endomembrane system: A representation of the
extracellular medium? Biosemiotics, 2(3), 255–268.
Petrilli, S. and Ponzio, A. (2005). Semiotics Unbounded: Interpretive Routes Through the Open
Network of Signs. Toronto; London: University of Toronto Press.
Posner, R., Robering, K. and Sebeok, T. A. (1997). Semiotics: A Handbook on the Sign-Theoretic
Foundations of Nature and Culture. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Queiroz, J., El-Hani, C. N. (2006a). Semiosis as an emergent process. Transactions of the Charles
S. Peirce Society, 42(1), 78–116.
Queiroz, J., El-Hani, C. N. (2006b). Towards a multi-level approach to the emergence of meaning
processes in living systems. Acta Biotheoretica, 54(3), 174–206.
Queiroz, J., El-Hani, C. N. (2006c). Semiosis as an emergent process. Transactions of the Charles
S. Peirce Society, 42(1), 78–116.
Queiroz, J., El-Hani, C. N. (2006d). Towards a multi-level approach to the emergence of meaning
processes in living systems. Acta Biotheoretica, 54(3), 174–206.
Queiroz, J. and Merrell, F. (2006). Semiosis and pragmatism: Toward a dynamic concept of
meaning. Sign System Studies, 34(1), 37–66.
Queiroz, J. and Ribeiro, S. (2002). The biological substrate of icons, indexes and symbols in animal
communication: A neurosemiotic analysis of Vervet monkey alarm calls. In Shapiro, M. (Ed.)
The Peirce Seminar Papers 5. New York, NY: Berghahn Books, pp. 69–78.
Ransdell, J. (2003).The relevance of Peircean semiotic to computational intelligence augmentation.
Semiosis, Evolution, Energy, and Development Journal, 3(3), 5–36.
Santaella, L. (2005). The universality and fecundity of Peirce’s categories. Semiotica, 154(1/4),
405–414.
Santaella, L. (2003). Why there is no crisis of representation in Peirce. Semiotica, 143(1/4), 45–52.
Santaella, L. (1999). Peirce and biology. Semiotica, 127(1/4), 5–21.
Santaella, L. (1993). A Triadic Theory of Perception. In Jorna, R. (Ed.) Signs, Search and
Communication. Semiotic Aspects of Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter,
pp. 39–47.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
861
Sharov, A. (2009). The role of utility and inference in the evolution of functional information.
Biosemiotics, 2(1), 101–116.
Anton Markoš (Pages 21a–21z)
Primary Literature
Markoš, A., et al. (1993). A glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase with eubacterial features.
Journal of Molecular Evolution, 37, 631–643.
Markoš, A. (1995). The ontogeny of Gaia: the role of microorganisms in planetary information
network. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 176, 175–180.
Markoš, A., et al. (1996). Primary structure of malate dehydrogenase of the amitochondriate
eukaryote, Trichomonas vaginalis. FEMS Microbiology Letters, 135, 259–264.
Markoš, A. (2002a). Evolution, purpose, teleology. In Havel, I., Markoš, A. (Eds.) Is There a
Purpose in Nature? How to Navigate Between the Scylla of Mechanism and the Charybdis of
Teleology. Czech Republic: Vesmir, pp. 113–128.
Markoš, A. (2002b). Purpose and biology. In Havel, I., Markoš, A. (Eds.) Is There a Purpose in
Nature? How to Navigate Between the Scylla of Mechanism and the Charybdis of Teleology.
Czech Republic: Vesmir, pp. 42–64.
Markoš, A. (2002c). Readers of the Book of Life: Contextualizing Developmental Evolutionary
Biology. Oxford; New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Markoš, A. (2001). Origin and establishment of life on Earth. In UNESCO Encyclopedia of Life
Sciences, 1.1.6.1.
Markoš, A., Cvrˇcková, F. (2002). Back to the science of life. Sign System Studies, 30, 129–147.
Markoš, A. (2004). In the quest for novelty: Kauffman’s biosphere and Lotman’s semiosphere.
Sign System Studies, 32, 309–327.
Markoš, A., Cvrˇcková, F. (2004). An epigenetic machine. Sign System Studies, 30, 605–616.
Markoš, A. (Ed.) (2008). Náhoda a nitnost [Chance and necessity. Jacques Monod in the light of
our times.] Praha: Academia.
Markoš, A., Švorcová, J. (2009). Recorded versus organic memory: interaction of two worlds as
demonstrated by the chromatin dynamics. Biosemiotics, 2, 34–58.
Markoš, A., Grygar, F., Kleisner, K. and Neubauer, Z. (2007). Towards a Darwinian biosemiotics.
Life as mutual understanding. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Introduction to Biosemiotics. Dordrecht:
Springer, pp. 235–255.
Markoš, A., Grygar, F., Hajnal, L., Kleisner, K., Kratochvíl, Z. and Neubauer, Z. (2009). Life as its
Own Designer: Darwin’s ‘Origin’ and Western Thought. Dordrecht: Springer.
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Chebanov, S. V. (1994). Man as participant to natural creation: Enlogue and ideas of hermeneutics
in biology. Rivista di Biologia, 87(1), 39–55.
Coltman, R. (1998). The Language of Hermeneutics: Gadamer and Heidegger in Dialogue.
Albany: State University Press.
Cvrˇcková, F. (2002). The Darwinian purpose enters the post-genomic era: A case study. In Havel, I.,
Markoš, A. (Eds.) Is There a Purpose in Nature? How to Navigate Between the Scylla of
Mechanism and the Charybdis of Teleology. Czech Republic: Vesmir, pp. 175–184.
Cvrˇcková, F., Markoš, A. (2007). Beyond bioinformatics: can similarity be measured in the digital
worlds? In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Biosemiotics: Information, Codes and Signs in Living Systems.
New York, NY: Nova Science Publishers, pp. 65–79.
Havel, I., Markoš, A. (2002). Is There a Purpose in Nature? How to Navigate between the Scylla
of Mechanism and the Charybdis of Teleology Czech Republic: Vesmir.

862
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Favareau, D. (2007). The Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Introduction
to Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis. Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 1–68.
Favareau. D. (2008). The IASS roundtable on biosemiotics: a discussion with some founders of
the ﬁeld (Claus Emmeche, Jesper Hoffmeyer, Kalevi Kull, Anton Markos, Frederik Stjernfelt).
The American Journal of Semiotics 24/1, 1–21.
Heelan, P. A. (1983). Natural science as a hermeneutic of instrumentation. Phil Sci, 50, 181–204.
Heelan, P. A. (1997). Context, Hermeneutics, and Ontology in the Experimental Sciences. In Ginev,
D. and Cohen, R. S. (Eds.) Issues and Images in the Philosophy of Science. Dordrecht: Kluwer,
pp. 107–126.
Heelan, P. A. (1998). The scope of hermeneutics in natural science. Stud Hist Phil Sci, 29(2),
273–298.
Heidegger, M. (1962). Being and Time. London: SCM Press.
Heidegger, M. (1966). Discourse on Thinking. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Heidegger, M. (1971a). Language. Poetry, Language, Thought. San Francisco, CA: Harper,
pp. 185–208.
Heidegger, M. (1971b). The Thing. Poetry, Language, Thought. San Francisco, CA: Harper,
pp. 161–184.
Heidegger, M. (1982a). Words. On the Way to Language. San Francisco, CA: Harper, pp. 139–158.
Heidegger, M. (1982b). The Way to Language. On the Way to Language. San Francisco, CA:
Harper, pp. 57–110.
Heidegger, M. (1982c). The Nature of Language. On the Way to Language. San Francisco, CA:
Harper, pp. 111–138.
Heidegger, M. (1993a). On the Essence of Truth. In Krell, D. F. (Ed.) Martin Heidegger: Basic
Writings. San Francisco, CA: Harper, pp. 115–138.
Heidegger, M. (1993b). The Question Concerning Technology. In Krell, D. F. (Ed.) Martin
Heidegger: Basic Writings. San Francisco, CA: Harper, pp. 307–341.
Heidegger, M. (1995). The Fundamental Concepts of Metaphysics. Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University Press.
Ho, M. W. (1993). The Rainbow and the Worm. Singapore: World Scientiﬁc Press.
Hofstadter, D. (1979). Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid. Middlesex: Penguin.
Gadamer, H. G. (1975). Truth and Method. Barden, G., Cumming, J. (Trans.) London: Sheed and
Ward.
Gadamer, H. G. (1976). Philosophical Hermeneutics. Linge, D. (Trans.) Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Gadamer, H. G. (1981). Reason in the Age of Science. Lawrence, F. (Trans.) Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Gadamer, H. G. (1986). The Relevance of the Beautiful and Other Essays. Walker, N. (Trans.)
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Gadamer, H. G. (1998). Praise of Theory. Dawson, C. (Trans.) New Haven: Yale University Press,
1998.
Grondin, J. (2004). Hans-Georg Gadamer: A Biography. Weinsheimer, J. (Trans.) New Haven:
Yale University Press.
Kauffman, S. (1993). Origins of Order: Self-organization and Selection in Evolution. New York;
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kauffman, S. (1995). At Home in the Universe: The Search for Laws of Self-organization and
Complexity. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Kauffman, S. (2000). Investigations. Oxford; New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Kleisner, K. (2008). The semantic morphology of Adolf Portmann: a starting point for the
biosemiotics of organic form? Biosemiotics, 1, 207–219.
Kleisner, K. (2007). The formation of the theory of homology in biological sciences. Acta
Biotheoretica, 55, 317–340.
Kleisner, K., Markoš, A. (2005). Semetic rings: towards a new concept of mimetic resemblances.
Theory Biosci. 123, 209–222.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
863
Lotman, J. (1984 [2005]). On the Semiosphere. Clark, W. (Trans.) Sign Systems Studies, 33(1),
215–239.
Lotman, J. (1990). Universe of the Mind: A Semiotic Theory of Culture.Shukman, A. (Trans.)
London: Tauris.
Morris, C. (2003). Life’s Solution: Inevitable Humans in a Lonely Universe. Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press.
Opperdoes, F. R., Markos, A. and Steiger, R. F. (1981). Localization of malate dehydrogenase in
the mitochondrion of cultured procyclic trypomastigotes of Trypanosoma brucei. Molecular
and Biochemical Parasitology, 4, 291–309.
Portman, A. (1967). Animal Forms and Patterns. New York, NY: Schocken Books.
Rádl, E. (1930). The History of Biological Theories. London: Oxford University Press.
Rieger, T., Neubauer, Z., Blah˚ušková, A., Cvrˇcková, F. and Markoš, A. (2008). Bacterial body
plans. Colony ontogeny in Serratia marcescens. Communicative and Integrative Biology, 1,
78–87.
Sφren Brier (Pages 22a–22z)
Primary Literature
Brier, S. (1992). Information and consciousness: A critique of the mechanistic concept of
information. Cybernetics & Human Knowing, 1(2/3), 71–94.
Brier, S. (1995). Cyber-semiotics: on autopoiesis, code-duality and sign games in bio-semiotics.
Cybernetics & Human Knowing, 3(1), 3–25.
Brier, S. (1998a). The cybersemiotic explanation of the emergence of cognition: the Explanation
of cognition signiﬁcation and communication in a non-Cartesian cognitive biology. Evolution
and Cognition, 4(1), 90–105.
Brier, S. (1998b). Cybersemiotics: a transdisciplinary framework for information studies.
BioSystems, 46, 185–191.
Brier, S. (1999a). On the conﬂict between the informational and the semiotic communicational
paradigm. Proceedings from the 43rd Annual Conference of The International Society for the
Systems Sciences, 28 June–2 July, Asilomar, CA. CDROM, Article No. 99169.
Brier, S. (1999b). Biosemiotics and the foundation of cybersemiotics. Reconceptualizing the
insights of ethology, second order cybernetics and Peirce’s semiotics in biosemiotics to create
a non-Cartesian information science. Semiotica, 127(1/4), 169–198.
Brier, S. (1999c). What is a possible ontological and epistemological framework for a true universal
Information Science? The suggestion of a cybersemiotics. In Hofkirchner, W. (Ed.) The Quest
for A Uniﬁed Theory of lnformation. Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on the
Foundations of Information Science, 1996, Vienna, Austria. Amsterdam: Gordon & Breach,
pp. 79–99.
Brier, S. (2000a). On the connection between cognitive semantics and ethological concepts of
motivation: A possible bridge between embodiment in cognitive semantics and the motivation
concept in ethology. Cybernetics and Human Knowing, 7(1), 57–75.
Brier, S. (2000b). The relation between the semiotic and the informational research programs in the
quest for a united theory for information, cognition and communication, Proceedings from the
7th International Congress of the International Association for Semiotic Studies/Association
Internationale de Semiotioue (IASS-AIS): Sign Processes in Complex Systems, Dresden,
University of Technology, October 6–11, 1999. In print.
Brier, S. (2000c). Cybersemiotics as a suggestion for FIS. Proceedings of The World Congress
of the Systems Sciences and ISSS 2000, International Society for the Systems Sciences, 44 h
Annual Meeting, July 16–22, 2000, Toronto, Ontario Canada. Article No. 20150 – CD-ROM.
Brier, S. (2000d). Trans-scientiﬁc frameworks of knowing: complementarity views of the different
types of human knowledge. Yearbook Edition of Systems Research and Behavioral Science,
17(5), 433–458.

864
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Brier, S. (2001a). Cybersemiotics and umweltlehre. Semiotica: Special issue on Jakob von Uexküll
134–1/4, 779–814.
Brier, S. (2001b). Cybersemiotics, biosemiotics and ecosemiotics, In Tarasti, F. (Ed.) 1ST congress
paper, Nordic Baltic Summer Inst. for Semiotic and Structural Studies. Ecosemiotics: Studies
in Environmental Semiosis, semiotics of Biocybernetic Bodies, Human/too Human/Posthuman.
Part IV, June 12–21, 2001, in Imatra, Finland, pp. 7–26.
Brier, S. (2001c). Ecosemiotic and cybersemiotics. Sign System Studies 29.7, 107–120.
Brier, S. (Ed.) (2003). Thomas Sebeok and the biosemiotic legacy. Special Memorial Issue of
Cybernetics and Human Knowing 10.1.
Brier, S. (2008a). Cybersemiotics: Why Information Is Not Enough. Toronto: University of Toronto
Press.
Brier, S. (2008b). Bateson and Peirce on the Pattern that Connects and the Sacred. In Hoffmeyer, J.
(Ed.) A Legacy for Living Systems: Gregory Bateson as a Precursor to Biosemiotics. Berlin:
Springer, pp. 229–256.
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Bateson, G. (1972). Steps to an Ecology of Mind: Collected Essays in Anthropology, Psychiatry,
Evolution, and Epistemology. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Bateson, G. (1979). Mind and Nature: A Necessary Unity New York, NY: E. P. Dutton.
Bateson, G. and Bateson, M. (1987). Angels Fear: Towards an Epistemology of the Sacred.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Bateson, G. and Donaldson, R. E. (1991). A Sacred Unity: Further Steps to an Ecology of Mind.
Harper Collins.
Cobley, P. (2009). Cybersemiotics. In Cobley, P. (Ed.) The Routledge Companion to Semiotics.
London: Taylor & Francis, pp. 199–200.
Deely, J. (1990). Basics of Semiotics. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Deely, J. (1994). The Human Use of Signs, or: Elements of Anthroposemiosis. Savage, MD:
Rowman & Littleﬁeld Publishers.
Deely, J. (2001a). Four Ages of Understanding: The First Postmodern Survey of Philosophy from
Ancient Times to the Turn of the Twenty-First Century. Toronto: University of Toronto.
Deely, J. (2001b). Umwelt. Semiotica, 134(1–4), 125–135.
Deely, J. (2002). What Distinguishes Human Understanding? South Bend, IN: St. Augustine’s
Press.
Deely, J. (2004). Why Semiotics? Ottawa, ON: Legas.
Goodwin, C. (2006). Human Sociality as Mutual Orientation in a Rich Interactive Environment.
In Enﬁeld, N. and Levinson, S. C. (Eds.) Roots of Human Sociality. London: Berg Press,
pp. 96–125.
Hoffmeyer, J. (1996). Signs of Meaning in the Universe. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2000). The Biology of Signiﬁcation. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, 43(2),
252–268.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2002). Code Duality Revisted. Semiotics, Evolution, Energy and Devlopment
Journal, 2(1), 98–117.
Hoffmeyer, J. (2002). The Central Dogma: A Joke that Became Real Semiotica, 138(1/4), 1–13.
Hoffmeyer, J. and Kull, K. (2003). Baldwin and Biosemiotics: What Intelligence is for. In Bruce
Weber and David Depew (Eds.) Evolution and Learning. The Baldwin Effect Reconsidered.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 253–272.
Hulswit, M. (2002). From Cause to Causation: A Peircean Perspective. Berlin: Springer.
Lagerspetz, K. (2001). Jacob von Uexküll and the origins of cybernetics. Semiotica, 134(1–4),
643–651.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
865
Luhmann, N. (1985). Complexity and Meaning. In Prigogine, I. (Ed.) The Science and Praxis of
Complexity. Tokyo: United Nations University Press.
Luhmann, N. (1989). Ecological Communication. Cambridge, MA: Polity Press.
Luhmann, N. (1990). Essays on Self-reference. New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Luhmann, N. (1992). What is communication? Communication Theory, 2(3), 251–258.
Luhmann, N. (1995). Social Systems. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Luhmann, N. (1999). Sign as form. Cybernetics and Human Knowing, 6(3), 21–37.
Maturana, H. (1981). Autopoiesis. In Zeleney, M. (Ed.) Autopoiesis: A Theory of Living
Organization. New York, NY: North Holland.
Maturana, H. (1988). Reality: The search for objectivity, or: The quest for a compelling argument.
Irish Journal of Psychology, 9(1), 25–82.
Maturana, H. (2000). The nature of the laws of nature. Yearbook Edition of Systems Research and
Behavioral Science, 17(5), 459–468.
Maturana, H., Varela, F. J. ([1973] 1980). Autopoiesis and cognition: The realization of the living.
In Cohen, R. S. and Wartofsky, M. W. (Eds.) Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science,
Volume 42. Dordecht: D. Reidel.
Maturana, H. and Varela, F. J. (1986). The Tree of Knowledge: Biological Roots of Human
Understanding. London: Shambala.
Merrell, F. (1996). Signs Grow: Semiosis and Life Processes. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Merrell, F. (1997). Peirce, Signs, Meaning. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Nöth, W. (2006). Semiotic Bodies, Aesthetic Embodiments, and Cyberbodies. Kassel: Kassel
University Press.
Nöth, W. (2001). Protosemiotics and physicosemiotics. Sign System Studies, 29(1), 13–26.
Peirce. C. S. ([1866–1913] 1931–1958). The Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce.
Artshorne, H. C. and Weiss, P. (Eds.) Volumes I–VI. Burks, A. W. (Ed.) Volumes VII–VIII.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. All eight volumes in electronic document format:
Deely, J. (Ed.) Charlottesville, VA: Intelex Corporation.
Ort, N. and Peter, M. (1999). Niklas Luhmann: Sign as Form. Cybernetics and Human Knowing,
6(3), 39–46.
Rosen, R. (1991). Life Itself: A Comprehensive Inquiry into the Nature, Origin, and Fabrication of
Life. New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Salthe, S. N. (1993). Development and Evolution: Complexity and Change in Biology. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Santaella, L. (1999). Peirce and biology. Semiotica, 127(1/4), 5–21.
Santaella, L. (2001). Matter as effete mind: Peirce’s syncechistic ideas on the semiotic threshold.
Sign System Studies, 29(1), 49–62.
Santaella, L. (2005). The universality and fecundity of Peirce’s categories. Semiotica, 154(1/4),
405–414.
Santaella, L. (2003). Why there is no crisis of representation in Peirce. Semiotica, 143(1/4), 45–52.
Short, T. L. (1982). Life among the legisigns. Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society, 18(4),
285–310.
Uexküll, J. von (1926). Theoretical Biology. Mackinnon, D. L. (Trans.) London: Kegan Paul.
Uexküll, J. von ([1933] 1992). A stroll through the worlds of animals and men: A picture book of
invisible worlds. Schiller, C. H. (Trans.) Semiotica, 89(4), 319–391.
Uexküll, J. von ([1940] 1982). The theory of meaning. Stone, B., Weiner, H. (Trans.) Semiotica,
42(1), 25–87.
Uexküll, T. von, Geigges, W. and errmann, J. M. (1993). Endosemiosis. Semiotica, 96(1/2), 5–51.
Turchin, V. (1993). On Cybernetic Epistemology. Systems Research, 10(1), 3–28.
Turchin, V. (1993). The Cybernetic Ontology of Actions. Kybernetes, 22(2), 10–30.
Varela. F. J. (1975). A calculus for self-reference. International Journal for General Systems, 2,
5–24.
Varela, F. J. (1984). The Ages of Heinz von Foerster. In H von Foerster (Ed.) Observing Systems.
Seaside, CA: Intersystems Publications, pp. 3–29.

866
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Varela, F. J., Maturana, H. and Uribe, R. (1974). Autopoiesis: the organization of living systems,
its characterization and a model. Biosystems, 5, 187–196.
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E. and Rosch, E. (1992). The Embodied Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
von Foerster, H. (1979). The Cybernetics of Cybernetics. In Krippendorf, K. (Ed.) Communication
and Control in Society. New York, NY: Gordon and Breach, pp. 5–18.
von Foerster, H. (1980). Epistemology of Communication. In Woodward, K. (Ed.) The Myth of
Information. London: Routledge, pp. 33–45.
von Foerster, H. (1984). Observing Systems. Seaside, CA: Intersystems Publications.
von Foerster, H. (1988). On Constructing a Reality. In Feinstein, S. C. (Ed.) Adolescent Psychiatry,
Volume 15: Developmental and Clinical Studies. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press,
pp. 77–95.
von Foerster, H. (1991). Through the Eyes of the Other. In Steier, F. (Ed.) Research and Reﬂexivity.
London: Sage Press, pp. 63–75.
von Foerster, H. (1992). Ethics and second-order cybernetics. Cybernetics and Human Knowing,
1(1), 9–19.
von Glasersfeld, E. (1987). Construction of Knowledge. Seaside, CA: Intersystems Publications.
von Glasersfeld, E. (1991). Distinguishing the observer: An attempt at interpreting Maturana.
Methodologica, 5(8), 57–68.
von Glasersfeld, E. (1992). Why I consider myself a cybernetician. Cybernetics and Human
Knowing, 1(1), 20–32.
Wiener, N. (1948). Cybernetics: Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine. New
York, NY: John Wiley.
Wiener, N. (1948). The Human Use of Human Beings: Cybernetics and Society. Oxford: Da Capo
Press.
Wilson, E. O. (1999). Consilience: The Unity of Knowledge. New York, NY: Vintage.
Wittgenstein, L. (1958). Philosophical Investigations, 3rd ed. Anscombe, G. E. M. (Trans.) New
York, NY: MacMillan.
Günther Witzany (Pages 23a–23z)
Primary Literature
Witzany, G. (1995). From the logic of the molecular syntax to molecular pragmatism. Evolution
and Cognition, 1(2), 148–168.
Witzany, G. (1997). Semiosis and Evolution. In Rauch, I., Carr, G. (Eds.) Semiotics Around The
World: Synthesis in Diversity. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 977–980.
Witzany, G. (2000). Life: The Communicative Structure. A New Philosophy of Biology.
Norderstedt: Libri Books.
Witzany, G. (2002). Reduction of biological phenomena? Deﬁctis of systems theory and the alter-
natives. In Schmitz, W. (Ed.) Sign Processes in Complex Systems. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter,
pp. 303–307.
Witzany, G. (2006). Natural genome-editing competences of viruses. Acta Biotheoretica, 54,
235–253.
Witzany, G. (2006). From umwelt to mitwelt: natural laws versus rule-governed sign-mediated
interactions. Semiotica, 158(1/4), 1–14.
Witzany, G. (2006). Plant communication from biosemiotic perspective. Plant Signaling and
Behavior, 1(4), 169–178.
Witzany, G. (Ed.) (2007). The Agents of Genomic Creativity. Biosemiotics in Transdisciplinary
Contexts, pp. 295–301.
Witzany, G. (2006). The Logos of the Bios 1: Contributions to the Foundation of a Three-leveled
Biosemiotics. Helsinki: Umweb.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
867
Witzany, G. (2007a). The Logos of the Bios 2: Bio-Communication. Helsinki: Umweb.
Witzany, G. (Ed.) (2007b). Biosemiotics in transdiciplinary contexts. Proceedings of the Gathering
in Biosemiotics 6, Salzburg 2006. Helsinki: Umweb.
Witzany, G. (2008a). Bio-communication of bacteria and their evolutionary roots in natural genome
editing competences of viruses. The Open Evolution Journal, 2, 44–54.
Witzany, G. (2008b). The biosemiotics of plant communication. The American Journal of
Semiotics, 24, 39–56.
Witzany, G. (2008c). The viral origins of telomeres and telomerases and their important role in
eukaryogenesis and genome maintenance. Biosemiotics, 1(2), 191–206.
Witzany, G. (2009). Biocommunication and Natural Genome Editing. Dordrecht: Springer.
Witzany, G. (2009). Bacteria and viruses: communal interacting agents. In Chauhan, A., Varma, A.
(Eds.) A Textbook of Molecular Biotechnology. New Delhi: I.K. International Publishing.
Witzany, G. and Madl, P. (2009). Biocommunication of corals. International Journal of Integrative
Biology, 5(3), 152–163.
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Apel, K. O. (1981). Charles S. Peirce: From Pragmatism to Pragmaticism. Krois, J. M. (Trans.)
Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press.
Austin, J. L. (1962). How to Do Things With Words. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Austin. J. L. (1979). Philosophical Papers. Urmson, J. O. and Warnock, G. J. (Eds.) Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Baluška, F., Mancuso, S., Volkmann, D. and Barlow, P. (2004). Root apices as plant command
centres: the unique ‘brain-like’ status of the root apex transition zone. Biologia Bratislava, 59,
7–19.
Baluška, F., Volkmann, D. and Menzel, D. (2005). Plant synapses: actin-based domains for cell-to-
cell communication. Trends Plant Science, 10, 106–111.
Baluška, F., Volkmann, D. and Mancuso, S. (2006). Communication in Plants: Neuronal Aspects
of Plant Life. Berlin: Springer.
Barlow, P. W. (2007). Information in plant life and development: A biosemiotic approach. Triple-C:
The Journal of Cognition, Communication, and Cooperation, 5(2), 37–48.
Brenner, E., Stahlberg, R., Mancuso, S., Vivanco, J., Baluška, F., Van Volkenburgh, E. (2006). Plant
neurobiology: an integrated view of plant signaling. Trends in Plant Science, 11, 413–419.
Clark, E. A. (2004). History, Theory, Text: Historians and the Linguistic Turn. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Davidson, D. and Harman, G. (Eds.) (1972). Semantics of Natural Language. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Egginton, W and Sandbothe, M. (Eds.) (2004). The Pragmatic Turn in Philosophy. Contemporary
Engagements Between Analytic and Continental Thought. New York, NY: SUNY Press.
Forterre. P. (2002). The orgin of DNA genomes and DNA replication processes. Current Opinions
in Microbiology, 5, 525–532.
Forterre. P. (2005). The two ages of the RNA world, and the transition to the DNA world: A story
of viruses and cells. Biochimie, 57, 793–803.
Forterre. P. (2006). The origin of viruses and their possible roles in major evolutuionary transitions.
Virus Research, 117, 5–16.
Habermas, J. (1984). The Theory of Communicative Action, Volume 1. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
Habermas, J. (1987). The Theory of Communicative Action, Volume 2. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
Habermas, J. (1994a). Knowledge and Human Interests. Cambridge, MA: Polity Press.
Habermas, J. (1994b). Actions, speech acts, linguistically meditated interactions and the lifeworld.
Philosophical Problems Today, 1, 45–74.
Heidegger, M. (1962). Being and Time. London: SCM Press.
Grice, H. P. (1981). Presupposition and Conversational Implicature. In Cole, P. (Ed.) Radical
Pragmatics. New York, NY: Academic Press, pp. 183–198.

868
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Grice, H. P. (1989). Studies in the Way of Words. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Jablonka, E. and Lamb, M. J. (2002). The changing concept of epigenitics. In Van Speybroeck, L.,
Van de Vijver, G. and Waele, D. D. (Eds.) From Epigenesis to Epigenetics: The Genome in
Context. New York, NY: Annals of the New York Academy of Science, pp. 82–96.
Lang, J. C. and Chornesky, E. A. (1990). Competition Between Scleractinian Reef Corals: A
Review of Mechanisms and Effects. In Dubinsky, Z. (Ed.) Coral Reefs: Ecosystems of the
World. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Margulis, L. (1996). Archaeal-eubacterial mergers in the origin of eukarya. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Science, 93, 1071–1076.
Margulis, L. (2004). Serial endosymbiotic theory and composite individuality: Transition from
bacterial to eukaryotic genomes. Microbiology Today, 31, 173–2174.
Margulis, L. and Sagan, D. (1987). Microcosmos: Four Billion Years of Evolution From Our
Microbial Ancestors. Boston, MA: Allen & Unwin.
Margulis, L. and Sagan, D. (2002). Acquiring Genomes: A Theory of the Origin of Species. New
York, NY: Basic Books.
Morris, C. (1937a). Semiotic and scientiﬁc empiricism. In Logical Positivism, Pragmatism, and
Scientiﬁc Empiricism. Paris: Hermann et Cie., pp. 56–71.
Morris, C. (1937b). The concept of meaning in pragmatism and logical positivism. In Logical
Positivism, Pragmatism, and Scientiﬁc Empiricism. Paris: Hermann et Cie., pp. 22–30.
Morris, C. (1938). Foundations of the Theory of Signs. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago
Press.
Morris, C. (1946). Signs, Language and Behavior. New York, NY: Prentice-Hall.
Morris, C. (1970). The Pragmatic Movement in American Philosophy. New York, NY: George
Braziller.
Morris, C. (1971). Writings on the General Theory of Signs. Den Haag: Mouton.
Nöth, W. (1998). Ecosemiotics. Sign Systems Studies, 26, 332–343.
Nöth, W. (1999). Ecosemiotics and the Semiotics of Nature. In Taborsky, E. (Ed.) Semiosis,
Evolution, Energy: Towards A Reconceptualization of the Sign. Aachen: Shaker, pp. 73–88.
Nöth, W. and Kull, K. (Eds.) (2001). Special Issue: The Semiotics of Nature. Sign Systems Studies
29.1.
Rorty, R. (1991). Wittgenstein, Heidegger, and the Reiﬁcation of Language. Essays on Heidegger
and Others. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Schuster, S. (2005). Philosophical Counseling, Not Personal New Age Therapy. Radical
Psychology. Available online at: http://www.radpsynet.org/journal/vol4–2/philc1.html
Searle, J. R. (1969). Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language. London: Cambridge
University Press.
Searle, J. R. (1979). Expression and Meaning: Studies in the Theory of Speech Acts. Cambridge,
MA: Cambridge University Press.
Searle, J. R. (1998). Mind, Language and Society: Philosophy in the Real World. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Searle, J. R. (2002). Consciousness and Language. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Seely, T. D. (1995). The Wisdom of the Hive. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Toews, J. E. (1987). Intellectual history after the ‘linguistic turn’: The autonomy of meaning and
the irreducibility of experience. The American Historical Review 92/4, 879–907.
Trewavas, A. (2003). Aspects of plant intelligence. Annals of Botany, 93, 353–357.
Trewavas, A. (2005). Green plants as intelligent organisms. Trends in Plant Science, 10, 413–419.
Villareal, L. P. (1999). DNA virus contribution to host evolution. In Domingo, E. (Ed.) Origin and
Evolution of Viruses. London: Academic Press.
Villareal, L. P. and DeFilippis, V. R. (2000). A hypothesis for DNA viruses as the origin of
eukaryotic replication proteins. Journal of Virology, 74, 7079–7084.
Villareal, L. P. (2004). Can viruses make us human? Proceedings of the American Philosophical
Society, 148, 296–323.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
869
Villareal, L. P. (2005). Viruses and the Evolution of Life. Washington: American Society for
Microbiology Press.
Wittgenstein, L. (1958). Philosophical Investigations, 3rd ed. Anscombe, G. E. M. (Trans.) New
York, NY: MacMillan.
Wittgenstein, L. (2001). Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, 2nd ed. London: Routledge.
Marcello Barbieri (Pages 24a–24z)
Primary Literature
Barbieri, M. (1974). A criterion to evaluate three-dimensional reconstructions from projections of
unknown structures. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 48, 451–467.
Barbieri, M. (1981). The ribotype theory of the origin of life. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 91,
545–601.
Barbieri, M. (1984). Information and co-information: two distinct concepts for the reconstruction
of structures from projections. Microscopia Elettronica, 5(1), 26–42.
Barbieri, M. (1985). The Semantic Theory of Evolution. New York, NY: Harwood Academic.
Barbieri, M. (1997). Biological forms are natural conventions. Rivista di Biologia-Biology Forum,
90(3), 485–488.
Barbieri, M. (1998). The organic codes: the basic mechanism of macroevolution. Rivista di
Biologia-Biology Forum, 91(3), 481–514.
Barbieri, M. (2002a). Has biosemiotics come of age? Semiotica, 139(1/4), 283–295.
Barbieri, M. (2002b). Organic codes: metaphors or realities? Sign Systems Studies, 30(2), 743–754.
Barbieri, M. (2003a). The Organic Codes: An Introduction to Semantic Biology. Cambridge, New
York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Barbieri, M. (2003b). Biology with information and meaning. History and Philosophy of the Life
Sciences, 25, 243–254.
Barbieri, M. (2004). The deﬁnitions of information and meaning: two possible boundaries between
physics and biology. Rivista di Biologia-Biology Forum, 97(1), 91–110.
Barbieri, M. (2005). Life is artifact-making. Journal of Biosemiotics, 1, 107–134.
Barbieri, M. (2006a). Life and semiosis: the real nature of information and meaning. Semiotica,
158(1/4), 233–254.
Barbieri, M. (2006b). Semantic biology and the mind-body problem: The theory of the conven-
tional mind. Biological Theory, 1(4), 352–356.
Barbieri, M. (Ed.) (2007a). Introduction to Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis. Dordrecht:
Springer.
Barbieri, M. (2007b). Is the cell a semiotic system? In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Introduction to
Biosemiotics. Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 179–207.
Barbieri, M. (2008a). Biosemiotics: A new understanding of life. Naturwissenschaften, 95,
577–599.
Barbieri, M. (Ed.) (2008b). The Codes of Life: The Rules of Macroevolution. Dordrecht: Springer.
Barbieri, M. (2008c). Life is semiosis. Cosmos and History, 4(1–2), 29–52.
Barbieri, M. (2008d). The code model of semiosis: the ﬁrst steps towards a scientiﬁc biosemiotics.
The American Journal of Semiotics, 24(1/3), 23–37.
Barbieri, M. (2008e). The Scylla and Charybdis of biosemiotics. Biosemiotics, 1(3), 281–284.
Barbieri, M. (2008f). The Mechanisms of Evolution: Natural Selection and Natural Conventions.
In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) The Codes of Life. Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 15–35.
Barbieri, M. (2009a). Three types of semiosis. Biosemiotics, 2(1), 19–30.
Barbieri, M. (2009b). For a scientiﬁc biosemiotics. Biosemiotics, 2(2), 127–129.
Barbieri, M. (2009c). A short history of biosemiotics. Biosemiotics, 2(2), 221–245.

870
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
Artmann, S. (2009). Basic semiosis as code-based control. Biosemiotics, 2(1), 31–38.
Battail, G. (2008). Genomic error-correcting codes in the living world. Biosemiotics, 1(2),
221–238.
Beadle, G., Beadle, M.(1966). The Language of Life: An Introduction to the Science of Genetics.
New York, NY: Doubleday.
Chomsky, N. (1995). The Minimalist Program. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cowley, S. J. (2006). Language and biosemiosis: Toward unity? Semiotica, 162(1/4), 417–443.
Cowley, S. J. (2008a). Meaning in nature: Organic manufacture? Biosemiotics, 1(1), 85–98.
Cowley, S. J. (2008b). The Codes of Language: Turtles all the way up? In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) The
Codes of Life. Berlin: Springer, pp. 319–345.
Cowley, S. J. (2009). Language ﬂow: Opening the subject. Cognitive Semiotics, 4, 64–92.
Dyson, F. (1985). Origins of Life. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Eigen, M. (1971). Self-organization of matter and the evolution of biological macromolecules.
Naturwissenschaften, 58, 465–523.
Faria, M. (2007). RNA as Code Makers: A Biosemiotic View of RNAi And Cell Immunity. In
Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Introduction to Biosemiotics. Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 347–364.
Faria, M. (2008). Signal Transduction Codes and Cell Fate. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) The Codes of
Life: The Rules of Macroevolution. Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 265–283.
Favareau, D. (2006). Founding a world biosemiotics institution: The International Society for
Biosemiotic Studies. Sign System Studies, 33(2), 481–485.
Favareau, D. (2007). The Evolutionary History of Biosemiotics. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) Introduction
to Biosemiotics: The New Biological Synthesis. Berlin: Springer, pp. 1–65.
Favareau, D. (2008). Joining sign science with life science. The American Journal of Semiotics,
24(1–3), iii–xv.
Florkin, M. (1974). Concepts of molecular biosemiotics and molecular evolution. In Florkin, A. M.
and Stotz, E. H. (Eds.) Comprehensive Biochemistry, Volume 29. Amsterdam: Elsevier,
pp. 1–124.
Gabius, H-J. (2000). Biological information transfer beyond the genetic code: The sugar code.
Naturwissenschaften, 87, 108–121.
Gimona, M. (2008). Protein linguistics and the modular code of the cytoskeleton. In Barbieri, M.
(Ed.) The Codes of Life: The Rules of Macroevolution. Berlin: Springer, pp. 189–206.
Gonzalez, D. L. (2008). Error Detection and Correction Codes. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) The Codes of
Life: The Rules of Macroevolution. Berlin: Springer, pp. 379–394.
Hauser, M., Chomsky, N. and Fitch, W. T. (2002). The faculty of language: What is it, who has it,
and how did it evolve? Science, 298, 1569–1579.
Markoš, A., Švorcová, J. (2009). Recorded versus organic memory: interaction of two worlds as
demonstrated by the chromatin dynamics. Biosemiotics, 2, 34–58.
Maraldi, N. (2008). A Lipid-Based Code in Nuclear Signalling. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) The Codes of
Life: The Rules of Macroevolution. Berlin: Springer, pp. 207–22.
Maynard-Smith, J., Szathmary, E. (1995). The Major Transitions in Evolution. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Mayr, E. (1982). The Growth of Biological Thought. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Neuman, Y. (2008). The Immune Self Code: From Correspondence to Complexity. In Barbieri, M.
(Ed.) The Codes of Life: The Rules of Macroevolution. Berlin: Springer, pp. 247–64.
Pattee, H. (1968). The physical basis of coding and reliability in biological evolution. In
Waddington, C. H. (Ed.) Toward a Theoretical Biology. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press,
pp. 67–93.
Pattee, H. (2001). The physics of symbols: Bridging the epistemic cut. BioSystems, 60, 5–21.
Schrödinger, E. (1944). What is Life? Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Shannon, C. (1948). A mathematical theory of communication. Bell Systems Technical Journal,
27, 379–424, 623–656.

Commentary Bibliography and Further Readings
871
Szathmáry, E. (2008). Towards an Understanding of Language Origins. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) The
Codes of Life: The Rules of Macroevolution. Berlin: Springer, pp. 287–318.
Tomkins, M. G. (1975). The metabolic code. Science, 189, 760–763.
Trifonov, E. N. (1999). Elucidating sequence codes: Three codes for evolution. Annals of the New
York Academy of Sciences, 870, 330–338.
Trifonov, E. N. (2008). Codes of Biosequences. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) The Codes of Life: The Rules
of Macroevolution. Berlin: Springer, pp. 3–14.
Turner, B. M. (2002). Cellular memory and the histone code. Cell, 111, 285–291.
Villa, A. E. P. (2008). Neural Coding in the Neuroheuristic Perspective. In Barbieri, M. (Ed.) The
Codes of Life: The Rules of Macroevolution. Berlin: Springer, pp. 357–394.
von Neumann, J. (1966). The Theory of Self-reproducing Automata. Urbana, IL: University of
Illinois Press, pp.74–87.
Woese, C. R. (2000). Interpreting the universal phylogenetic tree. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 97, 8392–8396.
Woese, C. R. (2002). On the evolution of cells. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America, 99, 8742–8747.

Index
A
Adaptor molecules, 58, 60, 755, 760–761, 765,
773–776, 778, 791
Affordance, 89, 238, 264, 290–291
Alexander, Victoria, 55
Amino acids, 60–61, 310, 478, 480–486, 488,
490, 534, 537, 598, 603, 646–653,
674, 676, 678–680, 683–684, 690,
736, 741, 752, 759–761, 763–765,
768, 773
Anderson, Myrdene, 49–50, 55, 153, 259, 282,
377–404, 430–432, 445, 448, 585,
797, 835
Anthropomorphism, 32, 38, 56, 65,
82–83, 238, 258–259, 261, 319,
325, 370, 584, 589, 603, 614,
731–732, 754
Antigen, 296–298, 301, 311–313, 318,
328–331, 333, 633, 676
Anthroposemiosis, 81, 197–214, 226, 258,
262, 264–265, 272, 281, 284–285,
294, 299, 323, 382–383, 403,
433, 569–579
Apel, Karl-Otto, 732–733, 745
Aristotle, 3, 5–6, 9–17, 20–22, 25, 29, 44,
65, 82–83, 133–135, 137, 143,
260–261, 329, 339, 342, 425, 577,
662, 664
Arnellos, Argyris, viii, 55, 633–634
Artifact, biological, 107, 244, 378, 392, 519,
528, 532, 551, 574–576, 608, 668,
759, 766, 770–772, 784, 790–791
Artiﬁcial intelligence, vi, 34–35, 46, 48, 52,
55, 57, 87, 197, 404, 503, 519, 522,
585, 620, 632, 709
Artmann, Stefan, 55–58
Augustine, of Hippo, 7
Augustyn, Prisca, 56, 87, 339
Autopoiesis, 17, 20, 37, 40, 42, 49, 51–52, 54,
58, 60, 233, 284, 291–292, 295,
300, 315, 334, 342, 420, 698–699,
701–702, 706–707, 712, 714–715,
718–724
B
Bacon, Francis, 9, 12, 15–16, 25–26, 44, 145,
209, 470
Baer, Karl Ernst von, 29–30, 42, 62, 104, 108,
344, 417, 420–421, 423, 425–426,
436–437
Baldwin, James Mark, 121, 146, 383, 436, 469,
484, 545
Barbieri, Marcello, ix, 1, 18, 31, 41, 44–45,
58–63, 66, 88, 257, 344, 346,
419–420, 436, 467, 532, 534, 658,
732, 737, 739, 751–791
Bardini, Thierry, 55
Bateson, Gregory, viii, 47, 49, 52, 55, 344,
428, 448, 501–519, 541–542, 600,
605–606, 630, 698, 789, 791
Bateson, William, 501
Bedeutungsblindheit, 81
Bedeutungslehre, 86, 114, 263, 339, 384, 423,
427, 431
Behaviorism, 33, 38, 82, 91, 153, 163, 173,
179, 557
Bentele, Günther, 34, 432
Bertalanffy, Ludwig von, 42, 283, 390,
426–428, 522, 708
Biohermeneutics, 658–659, 732
Bioseme, 466–467, 476–478, 480–488,
785–786
Biosyntagm, 465–466, 478–479, 481,
484–485, 487–489, 491, 785
Boethius, 10, 14
Böll, Mette, 55
Bourbaki, Nicolas, 338
873

874
Index
Brain, vi–vii, 28, 51, 55, 63, 97–98, 167,
213, 233, 281, 306–309, 341,
373, 445–448, 491, 521, 529, 543,
548–549, 570–574, 578, 587
See also Neurosemiosis
Brier, Søren, 49, 51, 88, 506, 632, 697–727
Bruni, Luis Emilio, viii, 55, 506, 609, 778
Burdach, Karl Friedrich, 421
C
Cairns-Smith, Graham, 58, 397, 399, 481–482,
519
Cariani, Peter, 52, 55, 232, 523
Carnap, Rudolf, 149–150, 186–187, 243
Cartan, Henri, 338
Cassirer, Ernst, 86, 157, 229, 384, 424, 428
Catastrophe theory, 42, 49, 338–344, 346, 387
Cellular signaling, 19, 44, 60, 343, 478, 482,
485–486, 634–635, 637, 674, 676,
678, 684, 774–775, 779, 782–783
Chang, Han-liang, 38, 56
Chebanov, Sergey, 47, 56, 419, 435
Chomsky, Noam, 87, 430, 448, 604, 771
Chreod, 341–342, 347, 351, 354, 356–358,
363, 368, 371
Clark, Andy, 28, 46, 599, 620
Clever Hans, 226, 237–254, 273, 608
Coactones, 474, 489
Cobley, Paul, viii, 33, 56, 229, 379–380
Code, v, 16, 18, 31, 33, 48, 53, 58, 60–63,
120, 149, 192, 197–199, 202, 204,
210, 222, 227, 232, 260, 264, 271,
283–284, 288, 292, 302–303, 306,
315, 323–335, 346, 387, 524, 526,
529–530, 534, 537, 544, 597–598,
600–609, 620, 624, 649–650,
717, 742, 751–753, 755–757,
768–770, 772–779, 783, 785–786,
789–791
Code-Duality, 48–50, 523, 583–625, 630–631,
634, 715
Codemakers, 60, 761, 763–764, 768
Codes, analog, 505, 510, 518, 534–539,
597–598, 600–609, 620, 624,
649–650
Codes, digital, 505, 518, 534, 584, 592,
597–602, 604–609, 612, 614, 617,
619, 624–625
Codes, Organic, 58–63, 346, 751–753,
755–757, 768–783, 785–786,
790–791
Codons, 466, 478, 480, 485, 646, 648–650,
763, 765, 773
Colapietro, Vincent, 40, 378
Collier, John, 52, 55, 705
Constraints, upon dynamics, 40, 54, 260, 337,
341–343, 371, 389, 521–522, 525,
527–529, 531, 535–536, 538, 555,
574–576, 650, 707
Controls, biological, 282, 345, 395
Copymakers, 759–761, 767–768
Cowley, Stephen J, 56, 779
Creatura, 505–506, 511–513, 517
See also Pleroma
CREB and CREM, 681–683
See also Proteins, regulatory
Crick, Francis, 25, 30, 751–752
Cvrˇcková, Fatima, 53, 57, 659
Cybernetics, 42, 47, 49, 51–52, 88, 192,
228, 232, 268, 392, 428–429, 434,
446, 455, 475, 503–505, 508, 519,
521–523, 530, 537, 541–542, 630,
697–698, 700, 702–703, 705–707,
709, 714–715, 717–719, 724
Cybersemiotics, 226, 233, 698–699, 701, 704,
715–719, 722, 725
D
Damasio, Antonio, vi, 46, 447, 571, 599
Danesi, Marcel, viii, 44–45, 56, 87, 193, 282,
379, 599
Darwin, Charles, 217, 424, 476–477, 543, 587
Dawkins, Richard, 47, 431, 595, 612, 710
Deacon, Terrence, vi, 39, 52, 55, 195, 448,
506, 541–580, 700
Deely, John, vii, 4, 8, 24, 49, 56, 81, 219, 258,
260, 377–404, 432, 602, 700
Denizhen, Yagmur, viii, 55
Denotatum, 154, 170–173, 175, 177, 477
Descartes, René, 3, 8–9, 11–12, 21–24, 28–29,
31, 33, 38, 45–46, 64, 362, 377,
381, 385, 453, 504, 519, 524,
583, 590–591, 611, 629, 664, 671,
705–706, 752
Dewey, John, 150, 153, 181
Difference, as information, 113, 344, 501–518,
600–603, 670, 671, 692, 707–708
DNA, 48, 59, 63, 65, 293–294, 300, 312, 325,
330–331, 333, 337, 346, 391, 395,
425, 429, 431, 463, 468, 471, 473,
478–480, 484–486, 493, 514, 524,
534, 596–597, 599–601, 603, 605,
612–613, 619, 623–624, 631–632,
635–636, 638, 644–653, 663, 667,
670, 675, 677, 679–681, 687,
692–693, 735–736, 738–741, 752,
773, 778

Index
875
Downward causation, 17, 40, 42, 632
Dualism, 9, 15, 25, 33, 38, 59, 64, 202, 272,
325, 433–434, 524, 583, 611,
709, 717
E
Ecology, 35, 195, 274, 385–387, 389–390,
392, 394, 401, 418–420, 422,
428, 434, 501, 503, 505–506, 515,
518, 548, 593, 630, 671, 705,
725, 737
Ecosemiosis, 419, 434, 607, 700, 702,
722–723, 725
Eco, Umberto, 7, 19, 227, 229, 323, 434,
689, 716
Edelman, Gerald, vi, 46, 341, 431, 447, 692
Effector cue, 89, 94, 95
Efﬁcient causation, 50, 342, 389
Eidos, 670–672, 674, 693
El-Hani, Charbel, 629–653
Elsasser, Walter, vii, 46–47, 425, 427,
430, 519
Embryology, 18, 30, 58, 340, 347, 356, 360,
366, 591, 618, 620, 751
Emergent properties, 17, 21, 40, 54, 57, 119,
280, 339–341, 343, 421, 448, 453,
460, 474, 521, 543, 546, 571, 590,
632, 701, 706, 708, 713
Emmeche, Claus, 48–49, 51–52, 66, 88, 346,
420, 432, 435, 523, 584–585, 599,
629–653, 698, 789
Endosemiosis, 37, 44, 222, 226, 232, 258, 272,
276, 279–319, 382, 401, 432, 467,
589, 607–608, 702, 716, 722–723,
725–726, 732
Epigenesis, 29, 58, 282, 293, 340–341, 356,
358, 391, 396, 436, 465, 468,
484–486, 491–492, 617–619, 663,
667, 679, 684–685, 732, 740–741,
752, 771
Epigenetic landscape, 282, 340
Epistemic cut, 54, 521–523, 525–526, 532,
600, 607, 610–612, 789
Epitope, 297, 310–313, 326, 328,
330–333, 738
Ethology, 31, 35, 41–42, 55, 85, 231, 237, 263,
299, 384–386, 389–390, 394, 401,
420, 424, 428–429, 431, 542, 697,
720–721, 724
Evolution, 11, 18, 25, 33, 43, 59–60, 88–89,
193, 194, 204, 222, 285, 307, 326,
329, 340, 364, 369, 372, 389–396,
427, 436, 450, 454, 459–460,
465–466, 474, 490–491, 507–509,
514, 524, 529–532, 543–544, 547,
587, 607, 658–659, 687, 708, 710,
721, 751–755, 756–791
F
Faria, Marcella, 55, 778–779
Farina, Almo, 55
Favareau, Donald, 1–66, 257, 436, 584, 599,
606, 609, 629, 657, 764, 789, 797
Fernández, Eliseo, 56
Final causation, 390, 470, 578, 614
Firstness, 40–41, 126, 128, 140, 344,
401, 449–450, 541, 602, 641,
700, 702, 706–707, 714–715,
721, 726
Florkin, Marcel, 34, 387, 401, 420, 429,
463–492, 785–786
Foerster, Heinz von, 49, 698,
714–715, 721
Freud, Sigmund, 25, 314, 373, 461, 515, 517,
702, 709
Funktionskreis, 42, 285, 714–715, 721
G
Gadamer, Hans-Georg, 53, 657–661
Galen of Pergamum, 221
General Systems Theory, 42, 706, 714
Genes, 59, 110, 112, 233, 285, 294, 300, 393,
395, 424, 431, 457, 459, 467, 485
Genetic transcription, 466
Genetic translation, 466
Genidentity, 669–670, 673
Genome, 47, 395, 485, 545, 594–596, 599,
601–602, 605, 619, 624–625, 637,
660, 667, 691, 735–741, 777–778
Genotype, 30, 58–60, 275, 293, 391, 467, 594,
596, 615, 621, 623, 666–667, 669,
751–754, 757, 761–762, 786, 790
Glaserfeld, Ernst von, 49
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 86, 106, 197,
210, 271, 367
Goodwin, Charles, 56
H
Habermas, Jürgen, 733, 743
Haeckel, Ernst, 109, 389, 423, 432, 450
Haldane, J.B.S., 254, 426, 519, 753–754
Harries-Jones, Peter, 55, 502–504
Hediger, Heini, 37–38, 220, 223, 225–227,
230, 232, 237–254
Heidegger, Martin, 86, 658, 706
Hermeneutics, 10, 53, 657, 660–661, 663, 670,
672–673, 688, 732, 789

876
Index
Hoffmeyer, Jesper, vii, 34, 37, 45, 47–51, 88,
194, 280, 343, 346, 380, 419–420,
432, 435–436, 448, 506, 523, 542,
583–625, 629–630, 632, 697–698,
719, 787, 789
Hofkirchner, Wolfgang, 55
Houser, Nathan, 117, 378, 637
Hulswit, Menno, 378
Husserl, Edmund, 175, 455, 460, 706, 746
I
Iconic relations, 32, 120, 124–133, 136–138,
148, 175, 177, 178, 209, 212, 541,
549–556, 558, 563–564
Idealism, 24, 83, 377, 380–381, 706–707, 712,
715, 746
Immunosemiosis, 18, 37, 44, 49, 55, 64, 227,
285, 297, 309–311, 313, 316–318,
323–335, 431–432, 633–634,
659, 737
Indexical relations, 553, 555, 559, 562–563,
569–570
Information, problematic concepts of, 30, 35
Information theory, 30–31, 268, 428, 433,
446, 455, 463, 465, 472–473, 475,
477, 504, 508, 542, 546, 588, 603,
635–636, 705, 709, 717–719, 732,
746, 766
Innenwelt, 22, 83–85, 223, 279, 284, 384,
386, 423
Integration levels, 258, 283, 285–286, 288,
295, 298–302
Interpretant, 5, 122–123, 125–126, 128,
131–132, 134–135, 137–138, 149,
153, 155, 170–173, 180, 182, 187,
289, 291–293, 297, 300, 305–306,
313, 317–318, 326–327, 383, 404,
552–555, 594, 612, 633, 635,
637–642, 648–653, 712, 718–719,
724, 787
Intrasemiotics, 702, 722–723
J
Jablonka, Eva, 436, 624, 635–636, 639
Jakobson, Roman, 35, 39, 192, 194, 217, 219,
229, 428–429
Johannsen, Wilhelm, 29, 52, 59, 63, 596, 761
K
Kant, Immanuel, 43, 83–84, 329, 423, 549, 700
Kauffman, Stuart, vii, 14, 46, 57, 62, 339, 518,
607, 635–636, 659
Klages, Ludwig, 448–449
Kleisner, Karel, 53, 55, 658
Krampen, Martin, 49, 82, 225–226, 231–232,
257–276, 283, 291, 298–299,
377–404, 431–432, 586, 787
Kull, Kalevi, 50–51, 81, 84, 88, 196, 231, 280,
417–438, 445, 789
L
Lamarck, Jean Baptiste, 421, 591
Langer, Susanne, 181, 229
Language, attempts to train animals in the use
of, 38, 238–239, 240, 244, 247–248,
250, 560, 561–562, 564–568
Language, origin of, 39, 431, 541
Language, see Anthroposemiosis
Latour, Bruno, 21, 24, 62
Laws, natural, 203, 536, 704
Learning, 10, 61, 118, 121, 163, 229, 231,
239, 250, 275–276, 324, 432, 436,
448, 504–505, 521, 545, 547, 552,
555–558, 560–561, 564–566, 584,
587, 594, 620, 622, 671, 685, 689,
702, 709, 741, 764, 788–789
Lewontin, Richard, 46–47, 433, 519, 593, 595
Lexigrams, 561–565
Linguistic turn, 7, 708, 731, 736, 741–744, 746
Logical positivism, 149–152, 732
Lorenz, Konrad, 41, 86, 237, 304, 621–622
Lotman, Juri Mikhajloviˇc, 37–38, 191–214,
219, 222, 229, 344, 346,
417–419, 435
Luhmann, Niklas, 698–699, 719
Lymphocyte, 295–298, 301, 303, 309–313,
317–318, 331, 776
M
MacIntyre, Alisdair, 23, 63
Macroevolution, 755–756, 781–782, 791
Maran, Timo, 55
Margulis, Lynn, 53, 383, 394–396, 403, 735,
737–739
Markoš, Anton, 46, 53, 55, 57, 61, 82, 284,
293, 380, 447, 571, 657–694,
789, 791
Martinelli, Dario, 55
Materialism, 25, 33, 64–65, 324–326, 342,
575, 583, 592, 700, 702, 705,
710–712, 715, 721, 725, 732, 746
Mathematical modeling, 343, 365, 418, 437
Matsuno, Koichiro, 54–55
Maturana, Humberto, 49, 428, 698
Mayr, Ernst, 47, 390, 425–426, 429, 431,
468–469, 519
McCulloch, Warren, 502–504, 697
Mead, George Herbert, 149–150

Index
877
Mead, Margaret, 35, 218, 501–502
Meaning-blindness, see Bedeutungsblindheit
Meaning, technical term
as deﬁned by Barbieri, 768
as deﬁned by Markoš, 694, 720–721
as deﬁned by Peircean biosemioticians,
151, 699
See also Pragmatic maxim
as deﬁned by Prodi, 132–133
as deﬁned by Thom, 343–344, 368
as deﬁned by Uexküll, 92–94, 265
as deﬁned by Witzany, 733, 743
as a term rejected for use by Morris,
155, 171
Measurement, problems of, 17, 92, 141, 163,
262, 362, 515, 521, 524–526, 532,
610–611, 753, 769
Merrell, Floyd, vii, 49, 378, 585
MHC (Major Histocompatibility Complex),
293, 296–297, 333
Mind, vi–vii, 2, 5–7, 9, 15–16, 19–29, 32–33,
38, 46, 56, 59, 64, 85–86, 89, 93,
104, 111, 118, 122, 128–130, 133,
140, 142–145, 147, 149–150, 159,
178–179, 187, 191–214, 230, 233,
252, 259–260, 289–301, 313, 325,
347–348, 350–351, 354, 356–357,
362–365, 367, 424, 426–430,
432–434, 437, 447–448, 451,
453, 455–456, 475, 489, 501–502,
505–509, 511–521, 524–525, 543,
546, 548–550, 555, 557, 565–566,
569–571, 574–578, 583, 592,
595, 597, 600–601, 608, 611,
629, 637–638, 641, 648–649, 660,
697, 700, 702–714, 717, 719–726,
731–732, 744, 757–758, 763–764,
768, 772, 776, 784–786
Modeling Systems Theory(MST), 87, 193
Molecular biology, 18, 31, 34, 46, 52, 59, 64,
225, 280, 331, 370, 429, 431, 435,
464, 468, 476, 519, 521, 542–543,
583, 624, 635, 643–644, 675–676,
679, 732, 735–736, 740, 751, 761,
771, 774
Molecular evolution, 325, 328–331, 463–492
Molecular machines, 759–761, 766, 774, 790
Molecule, roles in biosemiosis, 281, 326, 432,
546, 607, 716, 718, 725
Morphology, 89, 337, 338, 342–344, 349–350,
352–357, 359–361, 363, 370, 374,
421, 630–631, 692
Morris, Charles, 35, 39, 149–187, 217,
229, 428
Moscow-Tartu semiotics, 37, 192, 418
MRNA, 478, 480, 484, 488, 490, 597, 644–652,
679–683
N
Natural convention, 58, 60, 432, 467,
752–756, 776–777, 780–781, 783,
785–786, 791
Natural selection, 43, 60, 61, 143, 204, 391,
393–397, 399–401, 425–426, 432,
436, 469, 475, 486, 492, 508, 530,
539, 543, 545, 587, 591, 594–595,
613, 618, 631, 652, 662, 672, 674,
751–752, 754–757, 770, 779–781,
783–786, 791
Necessity, physical, 60, 467, 531, 753,
755, 780
Neo-Darwinism, 249, 426, 431, 436, 442, 450,
454, 587, 618, 632, 659, 662–664,
672–673, 679
Neubauer, Zdenˇek, 53, 658, 692
Neumann, John von, 504, 521, 525,
529–533, 535–537, 610–611,
613, 664
Neuman, Yair, viii, 55
Neurosemiosis, vi–vii, 30, 55, 63–65, 97–98,
101, 129, 143, 167, 233, 257, 259,
265, 267–268, 270, 272, 283–284,
286, 299, 306–309, 314–317, 319,
326, 328–329, 332, 341, 351,
364, 373, 384–386, 393, 445–448,
451, 453–457, 459–460, 491,
512–513, 521, 524, 529, 548–549,
554, 570–574, 578, 609, 722–724,
763, 788
See also Brain
Newton, Isaac, 26, 44, 193, 209–210,
212, 713
Niche, 36, 227, 231, 260, 285, 290,
294–295, 385–386, 389, 396, 545,
593–595, 690
Nominalism, 15–17, 731
Nöth, Winfried, 229, 434, 604, 700
Novelty in evolution, 230, 330, 418, 575, 577,
624, 658, 687, 714, 720, 724, 741,
753, 757, 785
Nucleotides, 19, 30–31, 61, 63, 337, 395,
469, 478, 480, 486, 521, 531,
533, 644–645, 647–653, 666, 675,
679–680, 692, 741, 752, 754,
759–760, 763–765, 768

878
Index
O
Object of a sign, 122–123, 136, 639, 648
See also Pragmatic relations
Observer, problem of, 521, 525–527, 718, 744
Ockham, William, 15–17, 19, 24–25, 133
Odling-Smee, John, 593–594, 623
Ogden, Charles Kay, 217
Ontogenesis, 418, 457, 618, 623
Organic codes, 58–63, 346, 751–752, 755–757,
772–775, 778–783, 785–786,
790–791
Oyama, Susan, 46, 428, 619–621, 635
P
Pain, Stephen, 55
Pattee, Howard, 46–47, 49, 54, 341, 430, 447,
465, 519–539, 600, 607, 610, 630,
789, 791
Pearson, Karl, 422–423, 425, 427, 436, 474,
520–521, 732–733
Peirce, Charles Sanders, vii, viii–ix, 5, 28,
39–41, 43, 45–46, 48–49, 52,
54, 56–58, 60–62, 87, 115–148,
150–151, 153, 156, 158, 194–195,
217–218, 229, 231, 269, 291–292,
326–327, 344–345, 379–380,
382–384, 389, 401, 445, 449–450,
523, 526, 531, 541–543, 545,
549, 552–554, 584, 588–589, 598,
602, 612, 614, 624, 629, 632–635,
637–643, 647–649, 651–653,
657, 697–700, 706–708, 711–713,
716–719, 721, 726, 732, 743, 745,
787–788, 791
Petrilli, Susan, vii, 153–154, 222, 379
Pfungst, Oskar, 240, 243, 245, 252
Phenomenology, 152, 180, 446, 449, 455–456,
486, 704, 742
Phenotype, 30, 58–60, 154, 293–294, 391,
467, 485, 587, 594, 596–597,
615, 621–622, 664–669, 675, 687,
751–754, 757, 761–762, 786, 790
Physicalism, 32, 447, 712, 742, 745, 751, 757,
765–766, 771, 786, 790
Physiosemiosis, 261, 432, 602, 708, 716, 719
Phytosemiosis, 225–226, 232, 257–276, 281,
382–383, 403, 432, 586, 708,
737, 787
Plato, 5–6, 11, 19, 21, 25, 122, 171, 281, 311,
605, 671, 746
Pleroma, 505–506, 511–512
See also Creatura
Poinsot, John, 8, 19–20, 23–24, 48, 379, 384
Polymerase, 478–479, 652, 679, 686, 760,
773–774
Ponzio, Augusto, 45, 153–154, 379
Posner, Roland, 150–152, 156, 229, 378, 434,
787
Post-Darwinism, 436–438
Pragmatic maxim, 150–151
Pragmatic relations, 109, 158, 174, 185–187,
429, 454–456, 704, 732, 736
Pragmatic turn, 732–736, 741–746
Pragmatism, ix, 118–119, 146–148, 150–152,
155, 707
Pregnance, 344–346
Prigogine, Ilya, 46, 54, 339, 391, 392,
398–399, 446, 471, 705, 708–709,
713
Prodi, Giorgio, 37, 44, 115, 219–220, 223,
225–228, 230, 232, 280, 323–335,
341, 698, 787
Proteins, 59, 63, 267, 296, 300, 309, 330, 467,
469, 471, 480–481, 484, 486–487,
490, 595, 597, 601, 617, 621,
623, 635, 637, 645–652, 666–667,
674–679, 681–687, 689–691, 693,
736, 740–741, 752–757, 759–767,
769, 771, 776–777, 779, 782,
790–791
Proteins, regulatory, 466, 473, 609, 682
See also CREB and CREM
Protein synthesis, 61, 63, 226–227, 329–330,
473, 480, 490, 645–647, 650, 659,
666, 679, 684, 761–765, 774, 780
Protosemiotics, 226–227, 325, 329–330, 332,
379, 715–716, 722
Q
Qualia, 40, 89, 97–98, 707, 711–712, 714,
718, 725
Queiroz, João, 119, 629–653
R
Ransdell, Joseph, 49, 377–404, 638
Realism, 6, 11, 24, 191, 206, 327, 377,
380–381, 700, 746
Receptor cue, 94–95
Reductionism, 64–65, 385, 425, 520, 527, 553,
589, 712
Reference, hierarchal nature of, 548–569
Replicator, 595–596, 612–614, 622–624, 663,
678–679
Representamen, 122–123, 126, 128–129, 131,
637–638, 787
See also Sign vehicle
Ribotype, 58, 60, 752–754, 761–762, 786, 790

Index
879
Ribozyme, 60, 534, 646, 752, 762
RNA, 60, 373, 395, 484, 486, 490, 534,
538, 598, 600, 603, 631, 635,
638, 644–646, 648–650, 652–653,
679–681, 683–684, 686, 735–736,
739–741, 759–760, 763, 773–774,
778–779
Roepstorff, Andreas, 55
Romanes, George John, 32–33, 424
Rosen, Robert, vii, 46, 342, 427–428, 430, 522
Rothschild, Friedrich Solomon, 34, 420, 430,
445–461, 463, 467, 787
Rumbaugh, Duane and Sue Savage, 38,
238–239, 560–561, 566
Russell, Bertrand, 117, 150, 384, 426, 608, 731
S
Salient forms, 344–346
Salthe, Stanley, 52, 54–55, 378
Santaella, Lucia, 379, 638, 707
Saussure, Ferdinand de, 197–198, 231, 384,
466–467, 475–476, 478, 548, 787
Schrödinger, Erwin, vii, 469–471, 520, 527,
705, 771–772
Schumann, John, 56
Sebeok, Thomas A., 8, 34–52, 56, 60–61,
66, 81–115, 155, 191–193, 195,
217–233, 237, 239–242, 245–246,
248, 257–260, 262, 272–273, 280,
282, 289, 299, 323–324, 327, 337,
339, 343–346, 377–404, 417–420,
429–436, 445, 463, 467, 519, 523,
542, 584–586, 588–589, 632, 698,
707, 715–716, 722, 751, 786–789,
791
Secondness, 40–41, 122, 126, 128, 139–140,
143–145, 401, 450, 541, 602, 700,
702, 706–708, 712, 714–717, 719
Self, 292–299, 303–305, 308–310, 312–313,
445–461, 530–531, 575, 580
Semantic relations, 10, 158, 165, 174,
185–187, 344, 367, 379, 429, 446,
454–455, 469, 524, 532, 538, 606,
636, 691, 718, 720–721, 724, 736,
789
Semantic theory of evolution, 59–60, 346, 432,
752–753
Semiology, 228, 337, 387, 446, 475–477, 548
See also Structuralism; Saussure, Ferdinand
de
Semiosphere, 38, 193–195, 197, 201–207, 209,
211, 213, 222, 228, 346, 619
Serial Endosymbiotic Theory (SET), 735,
737–739
Shannon, Claude, 30–31, 194, 472, 504, 636,
705, 719, 766
Sharov, Alexei, 47, 56, 419, 433
Short, Thomas Lloyd, viii–ix, 119, 228
Signa data, 8, 764
Signa naturalia, 8, 15, 260, 764
Signiﬁcatum, 155, 170–171
Sign vehicle, 120, 152, 154–155, 172–174,
288, 291, 301–302, 318, 327, 346,
633, 706
See also Representamen
Sonea, Sorin, 34, 226, 233, 258, 433, 787
Stepanov, Yuri, 34, 430, 463, 787
Stjernfelt, Frederik, viii, 49, 56, 62, 339, 346,
378, 433, 608, 632
Structuralism, 192–193, 339, 344, 436, 463,
475, 663, 670, 672–673, 686–687
Symbiosis, 276, 299, 389, 394, 403–404, 432,
458, 492, 615, 617, 739, 781
Symbolic reference, 22, 28, 449, 544, 552,
559–560, 563–564, 566–569,
571–575, 700
Symbolic relations, 7, 10, 13, 15, 26,
28, 31–32, 113–114, 117, 120,
124–133, 137–138, 154, 157,
175–178, 180–185, 231, 244, 257,
274, 375, 424, 427, 430, 446,
453–456, 472, 476–477, 519–522,
524–527, 529–530, 532–533,
535–537, 541–542, 545, 549–553,
557–558, 560–569, 571, 573–579,
597, 608, 610, 613, 666, 675, 677,
683, 717, 736–737, 745, 764–765
Synechism, 118, 706, 708, 714, 717
Syntactic relations, 117, 127, 130, 186–187,
331–333, 357, 359–360, 368, 429,
431, 454–458, 463, 536, 538, 544,
561, 606, 736, 739, 742, 746
T
Taborsky, Edwina, 54–55, 58, 378, 602, 788
Talmont-Kaminski, Konrad, 56
Teleology, 385, 390, 425, 428–429, 450–451,
660
Teleonomy, 390, 429, 708
Tembrock, Günther, 297, 299, 302, 429
Text, 1, 10, 34, 43, 51, 87, 192–195, 197–201,
207, 213, 218, 221–222, 233, 257,
259, 293, 297–299, 315, 359–360,
433, 465–467, 524, 533, 538, 542,
553, 556, 560, 565, 586, 588–589,
591, 593, 608, 649, 659–660, 664,
667, 672–675, 679, 681, 687–688,
691–693, 740, 755

880
Index
Thermodynamics, 392, 470–471, 520, 525,
527, 607, 663, 691, 705, 711–712
Thirdness, 40–41, 126, 142–145, 261, 401,
450, 541, 641, 706–708, 714,
717–719
Thom, René, 46–47, 49, 60, 62, 228–229,
337–375, 387, 390, 430, 519
Thorndike, Edward, 33
Tønnessen, Morten, 55
Triadic relations, 19, 29–33, 39, 44, 48, 57–59,
61, 65, 122, 124, 133, 138–146,
152, 174, 269, 272, 291, 329,
334, 345, 379, 388–389, 526, 549,
584, 598, 602, 633, 635, 637–638,
640–642, 647, 652–653, 699,
706–708, 713, 715–720, 722, 726,
753–754, 758, 787
TRNA, 58, 466, 478, 480–484, 646–647, 753
Turovski, Aleksei, 55
U
Uexküll, Jakob von, viii, 41–43, 45, 49–50,
56–57, 81–114, 193, 222–225,
228–229, 231, 258–259, 263–266,
268–271, 275–276, 281–284, 292,
304, 307, 339, 384, 386, 417–418,
423, 430, 435–436, 586, 699, 733
Uexküll, Thure von, 44, 49–50, 220–223,
226, 230, 272, 276, 279–319, 323,
377–404, 417–418, 431–433, 435,
586, 589
Umerez, Jon, 54, 520–521, 523
Umwelt, 42–45, 49–51, 56, 81–89, 91, 93–96,
98, 100–102, 105–106, 110–111,
113–114, 193, 222–225, 227–228,
230–231, 238, 258–260, 263,
265–266, 268, 270, 272, 275–276,
281–285, 307, 339, 383–386,
389–390, 396, 402, 418, 423, 427,
436, 601, 699–700, 714, 733–734
Umweltforschung, 43, 56, 83–86, 88, 238, 427
Umweltlehre, 84–85, 88, 224–225, 258, 281,
418, 427, 699–700
V
Vakoch, Douglas A., 55
Varela, Francisco J., 49, 54, 292, 342, 392, 428,
698–699, 702, 714–715, 718–719,
723, 725
Vehkavaara, Tommi, 56–57, 615
Vernadsky, Vladimir, 37–38, 195, 201–203,
207, 222
W
Waddington, Conrad Hal, vii, 47, 54, 339–342,
396, 399, 428, 430, 446, 519, 522
Weismann, August, 426, 591
Wheeler, Wendy, 56
Wiener, Norbert, 339, 429, 455, 503–504,
698, 705
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, viii, 199, 700, 702, 715,
720, 731, 733, 742–746
Witzany, Günther, 420, 434, 436, 731–747
Y
Yerkes, Robert M., 176–177
Z
Ziemke, Tom, 42, 55, 86, 599
Zoösemiosis, 81, 232, 708

