W
Wave Function
Helge Kragh
The wave function of a quantum-mechanical system is the quantity that allows
calculation of the various outcomes of an experiment or observation involving
the system. It characterizes the system’s physical state. The wave function ψ was
introduced as a central element in Erwin Schr¨odinger’s  wave mechanics in the
spring of 1926, whereas a similar quantity did not exist in the earlier versions of
quantum mechanics due to Werner Heisenberg, Max Born, Pascual Jordan and Paul
A.M. Dirac. But it was soon demonstrated that the various versions are mathe-
matically equivalent and that the wave function can be translated into  matrix
mechanics as a state vector.
Schr¨odinger introduced in a formal way the wave function in the very beginning
of the ﬁrst communication of “Quantisierung als Eigenwertproblem,” where he just
called it “a new unknown ψ.” It appeared in his fundamental wave equation and
had to satisfy certain mathematical criteria, but its physical meaning was unclear.
What is waving? What is it waving in? It was tempting to ask such questions, but
it was soon realized that they carried no meaning. Schr¨odinger initially required ψ
to be real, but in his fourth communication he admitted that the “mechanical ﬁeld
scalar ψ” was in general a complex quantity. This alone indicated that the wave
functions could not be given a physical existence in the same sense as, say, water
waves. In addition, the wavelike processes deﬁned by ψ took place in the system’s
conﬁguration space, not in the ordinary space.
Schr¨odinger initially thought of particles as represented by  wave packets, and
then, when the idea did not work, attempted to describe the electrical charge in
terms of ψ. This interpretation, too, had to be abandoned, and later in 1926 Max
Born proposed the  probability interpretation that since then has been generally
accepted. According to Born, ψ has not itself any direct physical meaning, although
the absolute square |ψ|2 = ψ∗ψ has. The quantity represents neither a particle nor
a charge density, but a probability density: |ψ|2dV is the probability that the system
is in the state ψ and localized in the volume element dV .
Ever since the birth of wave mechanics it has been discussed which kinds of
physical systems can be assigned a wave- or ψ-function. Niels Bohr always em-
phasized that measuring apparatus and like macroscopic objects are “classical” and
cannot be described by a wave function, whereas Schr¨odinger famously assigned
a wave function to a cat locked up in a sealed box ( Schr¨odinger’s cat). Arthur
Stanley Eddington was willing even to describe the universe in terms of ψ, an idea
which later was taken up in so-called quantum cosmology by Bryce DeWitt, James
Hartle, Stephen Hawking and others.
D. Greenberger et al. (eds.), Compendium of Quantum Physics: Concepts, Experiments,
812
History and Philosophy, c⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

Wave Function Collapse
813
W
Primary Literature
1. E. Schr¨odinger: Quantisierung als Eigenwertproblem. Annalen der Physik 79, 361–376 (1926)
2. M. Born: Quantenmechanik der Stossvorg¨ange. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 38, 803–827 (1926)
3. J. B. Hartle, St. W. Hawking: The Wave Function of the Universe. Physical Review D 28,
2960–2975 (1983)
Secondary Literature
4. M. Beller: Quantum Dialogue. The Making of a Revolution (University of Chicago Press,
Chicago 1999)
Wave Function Collapse
I.-O. Stamatescu
Under “collapse of the wave function” (or “state vector reduction”) one understands
the ‘sudden’ change of the system’s state in a measurement. This change is not
reducible to classical “information gain”, but is a genuine quantum mechanical con-
cept, directly related to the concept of quantum state. It is especially relevant if we
consider that quantum mechanics describes the behaviour of individual systems. In
the following we shall ﬁrst describe the role of the collapse as a formal concept in
this context, then we shall discuss some variants of physical approaches to collapse.
We shall comment on the notion of “individual systems” in quantum mechanics at
the end of this article.
Collapse in the formalism of quantum theory. (Figure 1).
Fig. 1 Time evolution, E, of ψ and collapse, C, adapted from R. Penrose, The Road to Reality
(2005, 823)

